A DICTIONARY OF Barbarous French.

OR, A COLLECTION, By way of ALPHABET, OF Obsolete, Provincial, Mis-spelt, and
Made Words In FRENCH.

Taken out of COTGRAVE's Dictionary, With some ADDITIONS.

A Work much desired, and now performed, For the Satisfaction of such as Read
Old FRENCH.

By GVY MIEGE, AUTHOR of the New FRENCH DICTIONARY.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Thomas Basset, at the Sign of the George near
Clifford's- Inn, in Fleetstreet. 1679.

AVIS.
LE Lecteur saura que, si cet Ouvrage est de queque Utilite, on en est oblige a
queques Curieux, qui ont fait passer mon Nouveau Dictionaire pour un
Dictionaire Imparfait; and a des Envieux, qui ne l'ont pas si tot veu naitre
qu'ils ont voulu l'etoufer dans sa naissance. Les uns and les autres ont
proteste hautement, qu'il ne valoit rien; parce qu'il y manquoit ce Ramas de
Terms barbares, en quoi Cotgrave avoit si bien reussi. Et ce Prejuge a prevalu
queque tems en Angleterre d'une maniere si etrange, qu'en fin j'ai ete
contraint d'y remedier. C'est dans cette veue que j'ai entrepris cet Ouvrage,
qui n'est au fond qu'un Recueil de Cotgrave, avec queques Additions. Et c'est
en quoi je l'ai trouve d'autant plus penible and insupportable, qu'il n'est
rien de plus contraire a mon genie que de copier des Volumes. Cependant je l'ai
fait, pour fermer la bouche a ceux qui ne vouloient pas qu'un Dictionaire
Francois fut parfait sans ces Barbarismes. Il est vrai que peu de tems apres
que je l'eu entrepris, cette Erreur si commune commenca a s'evanouir, and mon
Dictionaire a etre de bon debit. Neanmoins je n'ai pas laisse que de pousser
l'Entreprise a bout, pour contenter les Curieux. Ainsi, pour dire deux mots de
cette Piece en passant, sachez, qu'outre les vieux Mots Francois, quantite de
Mots de Province, and d'autres faits a plaisir, il y a queques Terms d'Art,
des Noms de Plants, d'Animaux, etc. qui auroient pu passer dans mon Nouveau
Dictionaire, mais que j'avois rejettez comme des Noms qui sont en effet peu
conus and usitez. Et, afin que rien ne manquat a cet Ouvrage, j'avois fait
dessein d'y mettre plusieurs Mots en usage habillez a la vieille mode, qui ne
se trouvent dans le Nouveau Dictionaire que selon l'Ortografe modern. Il s'y
en est meme glisse queques uns sur ce pie la. Mais, comme je m'apperceu bien
tot que l'Affaire iroit trop loin de cette maniere, and que le Jeu ne valoit
pas la Chandelle, je coupai court la dessus. Outre que, si on veut remedier a
cet Inconvenient, il n'y a qu'a voir les Regles que j'ai donnees sur
l'Ortografe ancienne and modern dans ma nouvelle Grammaire.

A DICTIONARY OF BARBAROUS FRENCH.
A
A Achee, a doleful cry, or lamentation. Abaque, a plinth, or flat square stone
on the capitel of a pillar. Abbatial, Abbot-like. Abbay, a barking, or baying.
Abbee, a hole (or overture) for the passage of some part of a stream that is
held in by a dam, sluice, etc. Abbougrir, to hinder from growing, to keep from
rising; also, to grow crooked, or wither in the top like an ill-thriving tree,
to beggar. Abbreviateur, an abbreviator; a maker of briefs, or of writs.
Abbreviature, a breviate, a short note. Abducteur, one that leads out, or away,
a withdrawer, or puller away. Abedissimon, a Serpent of the kind of Dragons.
Abeillanne, the white muscadine-grape. Abeilland, a dorre, or drone-bee.
Abeillion, a nest (or swarm) of bees. Abequer, to feed, as birds do their
young. Abequeter, to peck at. Abeste, mounted on horseback, or that has an
horse to ride on. Abestin, perpetually burning. Abhorrer, to abhor. Abhorrant,
Abhorrent, Abhorrissant, abhorrent, averse from; also unusual, unaccustomed,
out of course. Abier, a faulcon-gentle. Abile, as Habile in the New Dictionary.
Abiler, as Habiller in the N. D. Abisme, and Abismer. V. Abyme in the N. D.
Ablation, a taking from, or away. Ablaye, whereon corn grows, or wherein it
has been sowed. Ablays, corn growing, or in sheaves. Ableret, a small
fish-net. Ablution, a washing away. Abominer, to have in abomination.
d'Abondant, moreover. Abonnasse, calmed, quieted, appeased, pacified. Abonnir,
to make good. Abonni, made good. Abordable, assable. Abordade, Abordee, an
approach, or drawing near to. d'Abordee, at first, at first sight. Aborne,
limited, bounded, or stinted, etc. Abornement, a limiting, bounding, or
stinting, etc. Aborner, to limit, bound, or stint; also to compound with, or
for; to set a certain rent on; to stand at a certain rate for; to receive (or
deliver) by former agreement any thing otherwise than in kind. Abortif,
abortive, untimely, still-born. Un oeuf abortif, an addle egg, whose shell is
not yet hard. Abouchon, grovelling, laid on his face, or on all four; also
stooping, having or holding the face downward. Abourdeler, to tell a feigned
thing. Abourjonner, to bud, sprout out, put forth. Abourne, Abournement,
Abourner. See them without u. Abouter, to draw to a head, or to bring to an
end. Abouvier, to unyoke oxen. Abradant, paring, having, seraping, raising,
wearing away. Abrier d'arbalete, the tree of a cross-bow. Abrier (a Verb) to
cover, shroud, shelter, shadow. Abroton, the herb Southernwood. Abruption,
thruption, a breaking off, or bursting asunder. Abruve, Abruver, Abruvoir. See
Abbreuver, etc. in the N. D. Abruy for Abri, a sunny place. Abscis, cut off,
divided, separated from. Absconse, hidden, or concealed. Absconsement, a hiding
or concealing. Absconser, to hide, or to conceal. Absorber, to sup (or drink)
up all, to devour, swallow, consume. Absolte, Absoulte, or Absoute, an absolute
pardon, a general absolution. Abstraction, Abstraict, abstraction, a drawing
out, or away. Abstrainder, to bind fast, to knit hard. Abuseux, full of
abuses, deceitful, guileful. Abusion, an abusing, error, or fallacy. Abutter,
to aim, or to shoot at. Acabler, to fasten with, or unto a cable. Acace, a
thorny plant. Acacie, a medicinal juice or liquor drawn from the seed of that
plant. Academie, besotted, dozed with too much study. Acalli, hardened, inured,
accustomed to, that has got a habit of. Acamuse, flatted, or beaten flat;
blunt, or flat-pointed. Acarer, to confront, to set face to face, to bring near
unto, or together. Acariastre, hair-brained, rash, furious. Acariastrete, mad
wilfulness, hair-brained fury. Acasane, loving home, ever within doors. Acaser,
to inhabit, sojourn, lodge, or dwell in; also to rent, or let out upon a yearly
rent. Accagnardement, laziness, sloth, idleness. Accagnarder, to grow lazy,
idle, or slothful. Accelerateur, a hastener, or dispatcher. Acceleration,
acceleration, or haste. Accelere, accelerated, hastened, or dispatched.
Accelerer, to accelerate, hasten, or dispatch. Acceptilation, a payment, or
verbal discharge of a Debt made from a Creditor unto a Debtor. Accession,
access, or coming unto; also accession, addition. Accessoire, cas^al,
accidental, happening by chance. Accessoirement, accidentally. Acclampe,
fastened, pinned, or pegged. Acclamper, to fasten, pin, or peg. Accodepot as
Accotepot. Accoeviller, to benum, or besot. Accoinct, Accoint, acquainted, or
familiar with; also neat, fine, or spruce. Accointable, easy to be acquainted
with. Accointance, Accointement, acquaintance, or conversation. Accointer, to
make acquainted; also to prank up. S'accointer de, to get acquainted. Accoise,
quieted, appeased, or pacified. Accoisement, a quieting, appeasing, or
pacifying. Accoiser, to quiet, appease, or pacify. Accolite, a Novice, or
young proficient; also the boy that ministers to the Priest at Mass-time.
Accommodation, an accommodating, or fitting of a thing. Accompagnable,
sociable. Accomparageant, comparing, matching with, resembling unto.
Accomparager, to compare, match, equal, confer one thing with another.
Acconditionne, given (or granted) upon condition. Acconditionner, to give (or
grant) upon condition. Acconduire, to lead, or bring to, to conduct, or to
guide unto. Acconsuyvre, to overtake, or attain unto. Accordance, an accord, or
agreement; a concord, or concordance, in Music. Accordant, agreeable,
accordant, concordant, well sitting unto. Accordement, an according,
concurring, or agreeing with; a yielding, or granting unto; also a bargaining,
or compounding for; also a reconciliation, or composition of differences; an
agreeing upon. Accorne, horned. Accort, affable, complying, courteous; also
wary, circumspect; also subtle, cunning. Accortement, assably, kindly,
courteously; warily, circumspectly; subtly, cunningly. Accortesse, Accortise,
affability, compliance, courteousness; wariness, circumspection; subtilty,
cunning. Accote, underpropped, supported, or born up, reared, or leaned
against. Accotement, an underpropping, supporting, or bearing up. Accoter, to
underprop, support, or bear up. S'accoter contre, to rear himself, or to lean
against. Accotepot, a prop (or stay) for a seething pot; a thick piecs of iron
(made somewhat like a half Moon) wherewith the one side of the pot is
supported. Accoudement, a leaning on the elbow. Accoulpe, accuse d'un crime,
blamed for, charged with a crime. Accouplable, fit to be coupled. Accouplage, a
coupling, or conjunction. Accourager, Accourage. V. Encourager in the N. D.
Accourber, Accourbir, to bow, or bend inwards. Accourement, a concourse, a
coming or running of many men together to one place. Accousine, taken (or
acknowledged) for his Cousin. Accousiner, to take (or acknowledge) for his
Cousin. Accoustement, a hearkening or listening to. Accouster, to hearken, to
listen. Accousteur, one that hearkens, or listens. Accouve, brooded,
overshadowed. Accouver, Accouveter, to brood; also, to overshadow, cover, hide.
Accravanter, Accrevanter, to overburden. Accravante, Accrevante, overburdened.
Accrazer, to crush. Accreste, proud or stately. Accrester, to grow proud, or
stately. Accresie, growth, increase. Accrever, to burst, or thrust out the guts
of. Accroissance, Accroist, growth, increase. Accrosser, to clasp, or to
grapple together. Accroue, drooping, as a bird that sits with her feathers
loose, or staring about her. Accubes, couches, or resting places, cabins to lie
or to rest in. Accueure, sick at the heart. Accumulateur, a heaper up.
Accumulation, a heaping up. Accumule, accumulated, heaped up. Accumuler, to
accumulate, to heap up. Accusant, an Accuser, or Informer against. Accusement,
an accusing, or informing against. Accuve, put into a sat. Accuver, to put into
a fat, to let stand (or let work) in a fat. Acensiver, as Acenser in the N. D.
Acerbite, sharpness, or sowrness. Acertene, certified. Acertenement, a
certifying. Acertener, to certify. Acertes, of a certain; also heartily,
affectionately, without feigning. Acetabule, an ancient measure, containing
about six spoonfuls of liquid things, and two ounces and a half of dry; or
(according to our weight) an ounce three quarters; two carats, twelve grains,
and a half. Aceteuse, the herb sorrel. Aceteux, sharp, sowrish. Acetosite,
sharpness, sowrness. Achaneri, cankred. Achantique, mastic achantique, a sweet
tasting mastick or gum, bred on the top of the calthrop or starthistle.
Achasser, to drive, or chase toward. Achate, the precious stone Achates.
Acheme, decked, trimmed, or attired. Achemer, Achemmer, to deck, trim, or
attire. Achemeresse, Achemmeresse, an attire-woman. Achemes, Achesmes, attires,
deckings, ornaments for women. Achenal, a channel. Acher, to set the teeth on
edge. Acheramin, a kind of smallage, or crow-foot resembling smallage.
Acheteresse, a woman that buys or purchases. Achetiver, as Chetiver; also, to
inthral, or captivate. Achevement, an ending, or bringing to perfection.
Achoise, an occasion, an opportunity. Achoison, the same; also, election, or
choice; also, an accusation. Achoisonner, to accuse, to pick a quarrel against.
Achommer, to rest, or make holyday; also to stay, or attend. Achon, a kind of
long axe. Achope, stumbled at, or on. Achoper, to stumble at, or in. Aciever,
to temper with steel. Acne, a witless and graceless fellow. Acoint, Acointer.
See Accoint. Aconduire. See Acconduire. Aconsuyvre. Seek Acconsuyvre. Acope, a
Medicine compounded of beating and mollifying Simples. Acore, the sweet cane.
Acorne. See Accorne. Acort. See Accort. Acoter. See Accoter. Acouardir, to make
coward. Acoup, quickly. A-coup-venant, the name of a fair ruddy apple. Acouter.
See Accouter. Acquerement, a purchasing. Acquereur, a purchaser; also a
challenger or claimer of one that pretends a title unto land. Acqueste,
purchased, acquired. Acquesteresse, a woman that purchases. Acquesteur,
Acquisiteur, a purchaser, acquirer. Acquester, to purchase, to acquire.
Acquoisir, to pacify. Acravanter. See Accravanter. Acrediter. See Accrediter
in the N. D. Acrester, Acreste. See Accrester. Acreu. See Accreu in the N. D.
Acroamatique, musical, harmonious. Acroc, any thing to hang another thing on.
Acromion, the shoulder-pitch, or point, wherewith the hinder and fore-parts of
the neck are joined together. Acrotaires. See Acroteres in the N.D. Actifs, an
Order of Friars, that wear tawny habits, and seed on nothing but roots.
Actourne, an Attorney. Actournee, a Warrant, or Letter of Attorney. Acuite,
sharpness, or keenness. Acure, Oiseau acure, that has had casting given her.
Acutelle, the herb Camocks, rest-harrow, petty-whin, ground-furs. Adage, an
adage, or proverb. Adagial, proverbial, full of adages. Adante. See Adente.
Adaptation, an adapting, or sitting of one thing to another. Adarce, a salt
foam that cleaves unto reeds and other marsh-herbs in drought and dry weather.
Adaye, provoked, urged, or incensed. Adayement, a provoking, urging, incensing.
Adayer, to provoke, urge, or incense. Adayeur, a provoker, a quarrelsome man.
Adcensement. V. Acensement in the N. D. Addente. V. Adente. Additament,
increase, or addition. Addomestique, tamed. Addomestiquer, to tame. Addorse.
See Addosse in the N.D. Addouez homme a homme, scuffled together. Adduire, to
bring forth, or to bring unto. Adebtz, a kind of Seignoral Duty within the
Jurisdiction of S. Omer. Adelantade, a Lord Deputy, President, or a Lieutenant
for a Prince in a Country. Adenere, prized, valued, rated, set to sale for
money. Adenerer, to prize, value, rate; to make money of, to set to sale for
money. Adenes, little kernels in the mouth or throat, and diseasing either of
them. Ades, presently. Adeser, to touch, or handle slightly. Pic. Adestre,
quick, ready, nimble; also apt for any thing he undertakes; also comely,
graceful. Adestrer, to make quick, ready, or nimble; to make fit, able, or apt
for; also to follow the humor of. Adeuille, Adeulle, heavy, sad, or mournful.
s'Adeuloir, to moan, to mourn. Adex. V. Adebtz. Adextre, as Adestre.
Adfiliation, adoption. Adfilie, adopted. Adglutinatif, glewy, clammy.
Adglutine, glued, or fastened with glue. Adglutinement, a gluing, or fastening
with glue. Adglutiner, to glue, or fasten with glue. Adheritance, a possission,
a Livery and seisin. Adherite, inseisined, put into possession of.
Adheritement, a giving possession, a making of Livery and Seisin unto.
Adheriter, to make Livery and Seisin of an Inheritance, to put into possession.
Adhesion, an adhering, cleaving, or sticking fast unto. Adhorer, to come at a
good hour. Adjancer, Adjance, Adjancement. V. Agencer in the N. D. Adjour, a
Commission of summons, or adjournment; also the report or the return thereof
made by the Sergeant or Summoner. Adipeux, full of fat; also breeding fatness.
Adire, a difference. Adire, wandering, or going out of the way; also forsook,
left, abandoned. Adirer, to wander, or go out of the way; also to forsake, or
bid farewell to. Adisme, tythed, on which a tithe is set. Adismer, to tithe, or
to set a tithe on. Adjudicataire, he to whom a thing is adjudged, or delivered
by Judgment. Adjudication, an adjudging, or delivering of a thing by Judgment.
Adjurateur, an adjuror, or earnest swearer; also one that exacts an oath.
Adjuration, an adjuration, or earnest swearing unto; also the exaction of an
oath from others. Adjutoire, the upper bone of the arm toward the shoulder.
Admener, as Amener in the N. D. Admignoter. V. Amignoter. Adminicule, an aid,
help, or support. Administratoire, administering unto. Admissible, fit to be
admitted, or allowed. Admoneste, admonished. Admonestement, an admonishing, or
admonition. Admonester, to admonish. Admonesteur, an admonisher. Adnection, an
annexing to. Adnuicter. V. Annuicter. Adobber. V. Adouber in the N. D.
Adolescent, a youth, or a young man. s'Adolorer, to grieve, or to take grief.
Adombre, adumbrated, or shadowed. Adombrement, a shadowing. Adombrer, to
adumbrate, to shadow. Adomestiquer, to tame. Adonc, then, at that time. Adot, a
blow, or thump; also trouble, or business; also a kind of fish. Adoulcir. V.
Addoucir in the N.D. s'Adouloir, s'Adoulourer, to grief. Adpropriance, as
Appropriance. Adquiescer, Adquiescement. V. Acquiescer in the N. D. Adscrire,
to ascribe, to attribute; also to inroll, or reckon among others. Adscrit,
ascribed, attributed; enrolled, or reckoned among others. Adsigne. V. Assign,
in the N. D. Advaluation, a valuing, rating, or setting a price on. Advalue,
valued, rated. Advaluer, to value, rate, set a price on. Adveille, sad, heavy;
also watchful, wakeful. Advenamment, handsomely, decently, gracefully. Adventif,
Biens adventiss, Goods coming or given by chance, casualties, windfals unlooked
for. Advere. V. Avere. Advestir, to invest, or give possession of. Advesture,
an investure, a delivering over; also fruit hanging by the root, or standing on
the ground; as Advesture de bled, corn standing. Advisager, Advisage. V.
Envisager in the N. D. Advisement, heed, wariness. Advisement, advisedly,
warily. Adulateur, a flatterer, or cogger. Adulation, flattery, cogging.
Adulatoire, adulatory. Adulte, grown to full age. Adulterer, to commit
adultery. Advocasse, pleaded for. Advocasseau, a Pettifogger. Advocasser, to
play the Advocate. Advocasserie, a pleading, or playing the Advocate.
Advocatie, the duty or place of Advocate; also the countenance or support of a
great person in a suit. Advoerie, Advoeson, Advoison, guard, protection,
defense. Advole, fled unto. Advolement, Advolee, a flying unto. Advoler, to
fly unto. Advouaison, an advowing, or avouching, a taking into protection.
Aduouateur, an advower, avoucher; also one that acknowledges and challenges his
beast, taken damage fesant. Advouerie, Advorie, defense, protection, patronage.
Adure, hardened, stiffened, or made strong. Adurer, to harden, stiffen, or make
strong. Aeditue, a Churchwarden, or Sexton; the Officer who is to look unto a
Church and the Churchgoods. Aemorrhoides, for Hemorrhoides, the hemorrhoids.
Aere, airy; also aired. Aereux, airy, full of air. Aerolle, a blister, a wheal.
Aeromantie, divination by the air. Aerugineux, full of (or like unto)
verdigrease. Afaner, to get hardly, or with much toil. Affaconner. See
Affassonner. Affadi, made or grown unsavory. Affadir, to make taste less, or
unsavory. Affadissement, unsavouriness. Affaicter. See Affaiter in the N. D.
Affaireux, busy. Affaireusement, very busily. Affamement, a starving, or
famishing. Affan, extreme toil, or grief. Affassonner, to form, or to fashion.
Affeager, to create a tenure in Feesimple. Affene, fed, or inseamed with hay,
stall-fed. Affener, to feed, or inseam with hay, to stall-feed. Afferant,
becoming; also concerning or belonging to. Affermable, to be let out; also
affirmable. Afferme, Affermement, a farming, or letting out. Affertile, made
fertile. Affertiler, to make fertile. Affesse, sit, or settled on the top of.
s'Affesser, to sit, or settle it self on the top of. s'Affessir, to grow weary,
lumpish, or heavy. Affetardi, made (or become) dull, or lazy. Affetardir, to
make dull, or lazy. Affeubler, Affeublage. See Affublage, Affubler in the N. D.
Affeurre, foddered with straw. Affeurrer, to fodder with straw. Afficter, to
annex, or give for a time. Affie, assured, or confirmed. Affiement, an
assurance, or confirmation. Affier, to assure, or give his word for. Affiert,
(a Verb Impersonal) it becomes; also it concerns, or belongs to. Affieux,
a good fellow, a boon-companion. Affiliation, adoption. Affilie, adopted.
Affilier, to adopt. Affiloire, a whet-stone. Affin, that. See Afin in the N. D.
Affin, a Kinsman, or Allie. Affiniter, to ally. s'Afflaquir, to wax flaggy.
Afflat, a blowing in. Afflater, to flatter. Affleurir l'eau, to go close by the
water. Afflictif, sad, grievous. Affloui, blurred, also blunted. Afflouir, to
blur, also to blunt. Afflux, affluence. Affoiblement, a weakening.
Affoisonement, increase. Affole, foiled, wounded, or bruised. Affolement,
Affolure, a foil, bruise, or wound. Affoler, to foil, wound, or bruise.
Affoncer, to sink in. Affonde, sunk down to the bottom. Affonder, s'Affonder,
to sink, or to go down to the bottom. Affor, Afforage, a piercing or broaching
of wine, etc. Afforage, pierced or set abroach; also rated, licensed. Afforer,
to pierce a vessel of wine; also to take a rate from the Magistrate, and a
license of the Landlord, for the retail thereof. Affouchie, put into (laid
among) fearn. Affouler. See Affoler. Affourager, Affourrer. See Affeurrer.
Affrequane, a Tigre. Affres, fright. Affrete, fastened, clasped. Affrioler. Se
Affriander in the N.D. Affrodille. See Afrodille in the N.D. Affronitre. See
Afronitre. Affublage. See Affublement in the N. D. Affuir, to fly unto for
help. Affuler, as Affubler. Afiliation. See Adfiliation. Afrodisiace, a kind
of stone, or mineral, of a whitish color mingled with red. Afrolitre,
Afronitre, a kind of light, brittle, and purple-coloured nitre. Afusele,
fashioned as a spindle. Afuselement, a fashioning of things like spindles.
Afuseler, to fashion, or make small toward the end, like a spindle. Afyer. See
Tromper in the N. D. Aga, here. Agace, urged, provoked; set on edge; blunted.
Agacement, an urging, or provoking; a setting of the teeth on edge; a blunting
of weapons, or the like. Agacer, to urge, or to provoke; also, to set the teeth
on edge; also, to blunt a weapon, or the like. Agache. V. Agasse. Agaillarde,
grown jocose, or merry. s'Agaillarder, to grow jocose, or merry. Agalloche, the
sweet wood called Lignum Aloes. Agamber, to step, or stride over. Aganni,
faded, withered, or consumed. Agannir, to fade, wither, or consume. Agart. See
Hagard in the N. D. Agasse, a mag-pie. Agasser. See Agacer. Agassin, a corn in
the feet or toes; also, the lowest bud or branch of a vine. Agay, the marrow of
fowl. Agember. V. Agamber. Agenouillon, kneeling, or upon his knees. Agesimos,
a wondering voice, or exclamation. Aggere, a heap of stones, earth, or turffs; a
bulwark, fort, or blockhouse; a causey, bank, or dam. Agglue, glued. Aggluer,
to glue. Agglutinatif, proper to glue together. Agglutinement, a gluing
together. Agglutiner, to glue. Aggraffe, as Agrafe, a clasp. Aggravanter, to
aggravate. Aggravante, aggravated. s'Aggraver, to be gravelled. Aggresse,
assaulted, or set on. Aggressement, an assaulting, or setting on. Aggresser, to
assault, or set on. Aggripper, to catch hold. Agiar, a bearing-cloth for a
child. Agiers, the ways or turnings of a house or place. Agiographe, a holy
writing, holy writ. Agios, sacred, holy. Agiotare, a holy man. Agnafile. V.
Aquafile. Agnelette, Agneliere, the coif or biggin of a womb-lodged Infant, the
child's shirt. Agnelin, lambs fur, budge. Agobilles, trifles, trash, trumpery.
Agonarque, a Master of the Revels. Agoranome, the Clark or Comptroller of a
Market. Agoubilles. See Agobilles. Agoue, half-choaked. Agoure de lin, the weed
dodder. Agouster, to have a smack or taste of, to give a taste, or season any
thing. Agoutter, to drop, as rain from an house-cave. Agouttis, the droppings
of a house. Agrailir. V. Agreslir. Agraphiner, to take hold of. Agree,
willingly, with a good will. Agreablete, agreeableness. Agreation, an
agreement. Agrener. See Aggrener in the N. D. Agrerer, to choose, or lay out his
part of the fruits of his land let out to parts. Agreslir, to make thin, or
lean. Agreste, sour; also rude, or clownish. Agricole, a husbandman, a
ploughman. Agrier, as Terrage. Agrimenseur, a Surveyor of land. Agriote, the
sharp or tart cherry. Agriotat, the syrrop or juice of that cherry. Agrippine,
leacherous stuff. s'Agrouper, a horse to knit and gather himself close
together, as if he would yerk out behind. Agu. V. Aigu in the N. D. Aguafile,
a kind of Moorish Trumpet. Aguelette, a thin soft skin or shirt, wherein a
child is wrapped in the matrix, besides the afterbirth which is more gross.
Aguement, sharply. Aguerriment, martial order, warlike discipline. Aguigner, to
leer, to aim at. Aguillade, Aguillar, a kind of fish called Thornhound.
Aguillanneuf. See Auguillanneuf. Aguille, and its Derivatives. V. Aiguille in
the N. D. Aguiser, and its Derivatives. V. Aiguiser in the N. D. Aguyon, a
gentle wind (called so among British and Norman Mariners.) Agyos. V. Agios.
Ahan, a loud, painful, and short expression of toil or vexation. Ahane, toiled;
ploughed. Ahanable, as terre ahanable, land that requires much labor. Ahaner,
Ahanner, to sigh out; also to labor, or to toil; also to plough. Ahanneux,
toilsome. Ahen, Ahenner. See Ahan, Ahanner. Ahennage, ploughing. Aherdre, to
snatch, or pluck, Ahocquer. See Accrocher in the N. D. Ahonti, made ashamed.
Ahontir, to make ashamed. Ahutir, to fright, to scare. Ajetter un Oiseau, to
cast, or whistle off a hawk, to let her go. Aiglantier, as Eglantier, sweet
briar. Aiglas, Eaglets, young Eagles. Aiglesse, a hen-eagle. Aigneau, and
Aignelet, as Agneau, Agnelet in the N. D. Aigneaux, manacles. Aigneler, to
lamb. Aignelette, Aigneliere, as Agneliere. Aignelin, white budge, white lamb.
Aigras, verjuice. Aigrebelheur, the name of an apple. Aigre-douce, a
Sevil-orange, an Orange that is between sweet and sour. Aigre-sin, a certain
Turkish coin; also the Liver-fish. Aigrun, any thing that exasperates a disease
or sore. Aigue, water; also a mare. Aigue marine, Seawater, green color.
Aigueux, waterish, or full of water. Aiguier, a sink. Aiguillat. as Aguillade.
Aiguille, like a needle, or full of needles. Aigument, sharply. Ailasse, a
great wing. Ailees, donner les ailees a un Cheval, to give a horse the head.
Ailer, to give wings unto, to set wings upon. Aileures, comings, or carlings,
two beams that run along the hatches of a ship, and with the Traversins make a
long square hole. Aillade, garlick-sauce; also the smell of garlic. Ailler, a
Quail-net. Ailloignon, great garlic. Ailporreau, great mountain-garlick.
Aimantin, adamantine, like an adamant, or lodestone. Aime-bal, a lover of
dancing. Aime-carnage, bloudy-minded. Aime-esbats, gamesome, sportful.
Aime-humains, gentle, sociable. Aime-loix, just, a lover of Justice. Aime-lyre,
harp-loving. Aime-maistre, obsequious, dutiful. Aime-Mars, martial, warlike.
Aime-noise, a contentious brabler. Aime-nouveaute, a lover of new things.
Aime-paix, a peace-lover. Aime-pleurs, given to weeping; also cruel, pitiless.
Aime-silence, a lover of silence. Aime-tout, most kind, most loving. Ain. See
Haim. Aincois, Ains, but, but rather, before ere, or ere. Ainsne. See Aine in
the N. D. Ajolie, pranked, or set out. Ajolier, to prank, or to set out.
Ajoliver, to be merry, to make much of himself; also to prank, or trick up
himself. Ajourner, se fair jour, to be near day. Ajous, surze, gorse. Air,
choler, anger. Air, angry. Araigne (or Aragne) a spider. Aireau, a plough.
Airee, a floor full, a bed full of. Airer, to airy, to make a nest, or airy.
Aireste. See Arete in the N. D. Airon, a hern, or heron. Airure, the earing, or
plowing of land. Aisance, ease, facility. Aisances, Aisemens, a privy, a house
of office. Aiscette, a little plaining axe. Aiser, to take ease, to live at
ease. Aisle, Aisne, and their Derivatives. V. Aile, Aine. Aisneage, eldership.
Aissade, an Instrument wherewith Gardeners open or break up the ground.
Aisseliere, Aissellaire, the vein which passes along the arm-hole. Aisseuil.
V. Aissieu in the N. D. Aissi, Aissil, a shingle of wood. Aistres. See Agiers.
Aitiologie, a showing of a reason or cause. Alabandique, pierre alabandique, a
kind of black stone mingled with purple. Alachi, slackened, hung flagging;
decayed, or grown feeble. Alachir, to slacken, to hang flagging downward; also
to decay, to grow feeble. Alachissement, a slackening, or slackness; a decay,
or failing in vigor. Alaigrete, mirth. Alaine (for Halene) breath. Alainer la
langue, to hold out the tongue, as a bird or beast that in extremity of heat
breathes for air. Alaire. See Allaire. Alampers, a kind of peach. Alan. See
Allan. Alangouri, languishing, pining away. s'Alangourir, to languish, to pine
away. Alanter. See Allenter. Alaterne, barren privet. Albacore, a certain fish
in the Indian Sea. Albassan, a kind of white and hard stone, whereof lime may
be made. Albastrin, white as alabaster. Albe, as Able. Albereau, a very hard
white freestone, that resembles the Albassan. Albergame, the amorous apple,
the golden apple. Albergation, an alienation in see-farm, and for a fine or
income. Alberge, a kind of small peach. Alberger, a kind of small peach tree.
Alberger, to alien in fee-farm. Albugine, a whitish film in or over the eye.
Albugineux, whitish, like the white of an egg. Alcali, sell alcali, salt
calcinated, then beaten to powder, and set on a piece of glass in a moist
cellar. Alchange, the herb Alcakengy, or winter-cherry. Alcharade, a scorpion.
Rab. Alchechange, or Alchequange, as Alchange. Alchermes, a grain wherewith
crimsons are died. Alchimille, Lions foot, Lady's mantle, great sanicle, (an
herb.) Alcibienne, vipers-herb, snakes bugloss. Alcofribas, a greedy glutton.
Alcret, as Halecret, a Corslet. Alebastre (for Albatre) alabaster. Alebastrin,
of alabaster. Alebrenne, a salamandar. Alebromantie, divination by barley-meal
mixed with wheat. Alectoire, the Cock-stone (a chrystal-coloured stone, as big
as a bean, found in the gizern or maw of some cocks.) Alectorophoneme, the
crowing of a cock. Alegerir, to lighten, or make light. Aleine, Aleiner. See
Halene in the N. D. Alemelle. V. Alumelle. Alenois, cresson Alenois,
garden-cress. Aleron, a little wing; also a twig, or sprig. Alesnes, cockle,
corn-rose, wild nigella. Aleve, the wild Pine Tree. Aleuf, see Aleu in the N.
D. Alexitere, a preservation against poison. Algame, mixtion of gold and
quicksilver. Algarie, a Catheter; a kind of Instrument wherewith Surgeons
provoke urine. Alge. See Algue in the N. D. Algesie, the Lote, or Nettle-tree.
Algorisme, the art or use of Ciphers, or of numbering by Ciphers. Fol
d'algorisme, a fool by figure, an Ass in grain. Algousant, a Lieutenant.
Alhatrat, a Serpent whose biting wounds, but poisons not. Alhidade. See
Alidade. Aliage. See Alliage in the N. D. Aliayre. See Alliaire. Aliboron, a
busie-body. Alicacubut. V. Alchange. Alicte, bedrid. Alictement, a lying sick
in bed. s'Alicter, to lie bedrid. Alie, Alier, as Allie, Allier in the N.D.
Alier tremaille, a trammel net, or double net. Alimente, sed, nourished.
Alimenter, to feed, to nourish. Alimenteux, nourishing. Alimonner, to put into
the thill of a cart. Alipte, he that in old time anointed Wrestlers before they
exercised. Aliqualement, indifferently, so so. Alis, solid, compacted, hard
wrought, laid close together. Alise, or Alize, the sweet berry of the
Lote-tree. Alite, for allite, bedred, so sick as to keep his bed. Alkali, as
Alcali. Alkerenge. See Alchange. Alkermes, a Confection made of the decoction
and infusion of silk into the juice of the grain Chermes (a Sovereign Remedy
for all swoundings.) Allagant, washing, watering. Allaire, a little walk or
alley in a Wood; or a tree growing therein. Allambre, copper. Allan, a kind of
big, strong, thick-headed, and short-snouted dog. Allanguir, to make languish
or pine away. Allant, a crafty cheating fellow. s'Alaschir. V. s'Alachir.
Allaye, allayed. Allayer, to allay, to mix gold or silver with baser metals.
Allege. See Alliage in the N.D. Allebouter. See Haleboter. Allebrent. See
Albren in the N. D. Alleche, allured, or drawn on. Allecher, to allure, to draw
on. Allecter, to wamble, as a queasy stomach. Allege, ease; also a
lighter-boat. Allegiance, ease. Allegoriser, to use Allegories. Alleinee,
Allenee, a breath, air, or puff. Allelyon, Allerion, a bird (in Blazon) wanting
beak, feet, and legs. Alleran. See Alezan in the N. D. Alles, as ils curent
alles, they had a reputation, or they passed currently. Alleud, Alleuf, and
Alleut. See Aleu in the N. D. Alleure, for Allure, pace, going. Alleutier, a
freeholder. Alleyer, a Merchant to declare upon his oath to a Toll-gatherer,
what and how much ware he carries along with him. Alliaire, an herb called Jack
of the edge. Allicher, and its derivatives. See Allecher. Allignee, a Vine
coupled with an Elm-tree. Allitti, bedrid. Allochons d'un rouet, the teeth of a
wheel in a clock, etc. Allode. See Aleu in the N. D. Allodial. See under Aleu
in the N. D. Alloigne, driven, chased. Alloigner, to drive far from, to chase.
Allotement, a parting, or dividing. Allotir, to part, or to divide. Alloue, a
Seneschals Lieutenant. Allouer, to allow; also to impute. Allouvi, as hungry as
a wolf; also fleshed or cruel as a wolf. Alloyandier, a roster of short ribs of
beef. Alloye. Seek Allaye. Allumelle. See Alumelle. Allumement, a lighting, a
kindling. Allume-sang, bloud-inflaming. Allumetier, a maker or seller of
matches for tinder-boxes. Alluvion, an increase of waters. Alluz, all out, or a
brimmer drunk up. Almadie, or Almande, a little boat made of the bark of a
tree, such as are in use among the savages of Africa and India. Almandine, a
course kind of Ruby. Alme, fair, clear, or calm; also nourishing. Alme-beau,
goodly. Almoire. See Armoire in the N.D. Almucantaraths, certain Circles in an
Astrolabe, denoting the heights that are above our Hemisphere. Alocation, a
placing, or setting in a place. Alode, Alodial. See Aleu in the N. D. Aloe, a
lark. Alogique, unreasonable, inconsiderate. Aloine. See Alvine. Alonges, hawk
l^n^s. Alongeail, Alongissement, a lengthening, or drawing out in length.
Aloser, to color (or cloak) a matter. Aloud. See Aleu in the N.D. Alouer. See
Allouer. Alourdi, dulled. Alourdir, to dull. s'Alouser, s'Alozer, to praise
himself. Aloyne. V. Alvine. Alpestre, hilly, mountainous. Alphe, a morphew, or
staining of the skin. Alphitomancie, divination by barley-meal. Alphonsin, a
coin of gold, worth about 1 shill. sterling. Alquequinges. See Alchange.
Alteratif, thirst-increasing. Altercation. See Conteste in the N. D. Altere, a
poise of lead which Rope-dancers hold in their hands for a counterpoise; also a
piece of lead to lift up for exercise. Alteres, vehement passions of the mind,
strong conceits, ecstasies. Alternation, an interchange, or succession by turns.
Alterquer. See Contester in the N. D. Altitonant, thundering from above.
Alveole, the hollow part of the jaw wherein a tooth is fastened. Alvette. See
Gargatte. Alvine, wormwood. Alvincux, bitter as wormwood. Alumelle, the blade
of a sword or knife. Alute, bedawbed, or besmeared. Aluyne, wormwood. Alys,
smooth, sleek, polished. Alysson, the herb mad-wort, moon-wort, or heal-dog.
Alzan. See Alezan in the N. D. Alzatin, the fat call wherein the bowels are
lapt. Amadees, a certain Order of Gray Friars. Amadis, a neat Speaker. Amadite,
quaint, prankt with fine words. Amadoue, flattered, coxed. Amadouement, a
flattering, or coxing. Ama lover, to flatter, to coxe. Amadoueur, a flaterer, a
coxer. Amafrose, blindness, caused by the obturation of the Optic sinew.
Amainer, to strike sail. s'Amaisonner, to lodge, or harbor himself.
s'Amalader, to fall sick. Amalgame, a mixture, or incorporation of quicksilver
with other metals. Amalgamer, to mix, or incorporate. Amanche. See Emmanche in
the N. D. Amande, mingled (...) seasoned with almonds. Amandin, a kind of
reddish marble. Amanite, the name of a wholesome toad-stool. Amanoter, to
manacle. Amanote, manacled. Amantele, covered with a cloak. Amaphrose. See
Amafrose. Amareur, Amaritude, bitterness. Amarri, the womb of a woman. Amase,
Amasement, a Message, or Tenement. Amase, housed, or having a Tenement on it.
Amassement, a heaping, or gathering together. Amasse-miel, that gets honey.
Amasseresse, a woman that heaps up. Amastine, grown dogged. s'Amastiner, to
become dogged. Amati, trained up unto; also quelled, abated, allayd. Amatir, to
train up unto. Amaurote, a Moor. Amaze. See Amase. Ambages, Ambagoye, a going
about the b^sh in speaking. Ambagieux, full of idle circumstances. Amballage,
as Emballage in the N. D. Ambarvales, Rogation, or Gangweeks. Ambe, with,
together with. Ambezas, a ^bes ac^. Ambi, a wooden instrument of two pieces,
used for the putting of a shoulder into joint. Ambier, to go, to go about; also
to bribe for an Office. Ambler, to am^le, to pace. Ambligone, a blunt angle, or
a triangle. Am^iopie, da^^ess, or dimness of sight. Amboucho^^^er. See
Emboucholler. Ambulatif, ever walking, or stirring. Ameiller, to milk, or to
suck. Amelette, a little pretty soul. Ameliorer, to better, mend, improve.
Ameliore, bettered, mended, improved. Ameliorement, a bettering, mending, or
improving. Amelot, a kind of small bitter-sweet apple. Amenage, carriage.
Amendable, finable, that may be fined. Amendaye, a Grove (or Orchard) of
Almond-trees. Amendeur, a mender, or amender. Amenee, the circuit of a Bailiff,
wherein he may arrest, summon, or adjourn; also an arrest, summons, or
adjournment. Amenement, a leading, or bringing unto. Ameneur, a bringer or
fetcher unto; also a kind of Sergeant or Bailiff in some parts of France,
belonging to particular Lords. Amenite, delightfulness, pleasantness. Ameos,
herb-William, bull-wort, Bishops-weed. Ameret, cider made of bitter apples.
Ameril. See Emeril in the N. D. Amerine, Abraham's balm, Park-leaves. Amertumer,
to make bitter. Amesnage, managed. Amesnager, to manage an estate. Amesson (for
Hamecon) a bait. Amessures, Cas d'amessures, the reviling, striking, or
fetching blood of a man; or the suspicion of an offense, whose punishment is
but pecuniary. s'Amesurer, to live within compass. Amete, bounded, limited;
measured out. Ametiste (for amathyste) an amathyst. Amette, a little soul.
Amettre. See Admettre in the N.D. Ameubler, Ameublir, to furnish. Ameuri,
ripened, or made ripe. Ameurie, to ripen, or to make ripe. Ameute, Chasse
amentee, a close running or hunting of dogs together. Ameuter, to hold up the
dogs in hunting close together; to run and hunt very close together; to agree.
Amezeau, a pipe of wood through which the Seawater (whereof Salt is made)
passes. Amiablete, friendliness. Amidonner, to starch. Amieller, to sweeten;
also to draw on by any sweet means. Amielleure, an Ointment of the thickness
and color of honey. Amiette, ones little love, or sweetheart. Amignarder,
Amignoter. See Mignarder in the N. D. Amiot, a little friend; also a kind of
Pear whereof Perry is made. Amission, loss. Ammaires, or Ammarres. See Amare in
the N. D. Ammenteler. See Ementeler. Ammeubler, to furnish. Ammi. See Ameos.
s'Ammignonner, to grow pretty; also to set out himself. Ammitonne, lapt in fur
like a Cat. Ammodite, a creeping Vermin like a Viper, but of a sandy color,
and full of black spots. Amnestie, for Amnistie, Amnisty. Amnie. See
Aguellette. Amobilie, made movable. Amobilier, to make movable. Amoitir, to
moisten. Amolir, to remove with much ado; also to depart, or go away.
Amollissable, apt to be mollisi'd. Amomite, encens amomite, a whitish kind of
Incense, which in handling becomes soft as Mastick. Amomon. See Amome in the
N.D. Amonestement, admonition. Amoraye, a Coin used at Ferara, and worth 12
quadrins. Amorceure, a bait. Amorcher, to prime a gun. Amortissable,
quenchable, extinguishable. Amoureau, a little Love; also the little God of
Love. Amourescher, to woo. Amoustille, sweetened with Must. Amoustiller, to
sweeten with Must or new sweet wine. Amparlier, a Pleader. Ampes, raspises.
Ampeser. See Empeser in the N. D. Amphiblistroide, the fifth thin membrane of
the eye, bringing inward light into the christaline-humour. Amphibole,
ambiguous, doubtful. Amphibolie, Amphi^ologie, a doubtful or double meaning in
one or many words. Amphisbeine, the Amphisbena, a swall spotted and worm-like
Serpent, that has a head at both ends, bites, and goes both ways. Amphitrite,
the Sea, Amphore, an ancient measure of about 36 quarts. Amphytane, a square
and golden-colour stone, of the nature of a Lodestone. Ampliateur, an
amplifier. Ampois, starch. See Empois in the N. D. Amprise, an enterprise.
Amputer, to pare away. Amulette, a counter-charm. Amuletier, a counter-charmer,
a wizard. Amurer, to wall up. Amuse-sol, one that with vain prattling or toying
holds fond people at gaze. Amuseller, for Emmuseller, to mussle. Amusoire, a
thing to wonder at, a gazing-stock. Amusse, for Aumusse, a fur worn by Canons.
Amute. See Ameute. Amygdales, kernels rising in the neck or under the root of
the tongue; also almonds. Anacampserote, an herb whose touch renews decayed
love between man and man. Anacarde, the East-Indian fruit called Anacardium, or
bean of Malaca. Anacardin, of anacardium. Anacophalaeose, recapitulation.
Anachorete, the Hermit called an Anchorite. Ana^ile. See Agnasile. Anagal, the
herb Pimpernel. Anagnoste, a Reader. Anagrammatiser, to make anagraws.
Anagrammatisme, a making of anagrams. Anagyre, the Plant called Bea^trisoly.
Analemme, an instrument whereby the course and ^^ation of the Sun is found.
Analogiser, to compare one thing with another. Anange, fatal. Anaphore, a^
ascension of the Planets from the East by daily course of the Fir^a^ent; also a
Figure called Repetition, when two Verses begin with o^^ word. Anapotique, a
kind of circular Dial for Winter. Anaquil. See Anasile. Anarche, Anarchique,
without Government. Anastomose, the communication of veins without arteries,
whereby they help one another. Anate, a duck, or drake. Anathematisation, an
extreme cursing. Ancelle, a handmaid, a maidservant. Ancholie, the Columbine
herb or flower. Anchraige, anchorage. Anchuses, wild bugloss, orchanet.
Ancoigner. See Encoigner. Ancoigneure, as Encongnure, an angle, or corner.
Ancon, a long and heavy axe, in former times used amongst soldiers. Ancrier,
an inkhorn. Ancrier, (adj.) yielding ink. Ancrouelle, a shrike. Andoille, as
Andouille in the N. D. Andoillois, of links, or chitterlings. Andrin, an
ill-savoured black color of a horse. Androgine, made of both sexes. Anelet.
See Annelet. Anematiser, to anathematize. Anemophylace, an Observer of heavenly
Rules. Anestie, the season. Anette, a Duck. Aneurisme, a soft swelling.
Aneurissement, an ulcer, or ul^ration in the skin of a sinew. Anforge, a
leathern wallet. Anfractueux, f^ll of turnings. Anfractuosite, a turning (or
winding) about. Angar, an open shead or br^^l, wherein husbandmen set their
ploughs, etc. out of the Sun and Weather. Angarie, personal service or
drudgery; that whi h a man is forced to perform in his own person. Angarie,
tolled, or put to any drudgery. Angarier, to toil, or to compel unto any
drudgery. Angele, a she-Angel, a woman-Angel. Angelet, Angelette, Angelot, a
little (or pretty) Angel. Angine, the squi^sy. Anglantine, a ^eglanti^^, or
sweet-briar; also a certain witty Game where in only Po^ts content, and to the
best do^^ a Silver Eglantine, to the second a Marigold is given. Angler, to
shut up in a corner. Anglet, an angle, a corner. Angleuk, full of angles, or
like an angle. Anglois, (in this sense) a Creditor that pretends he has much
money owing, which is never like to be paid him. Anglue, for Englue, covered
with bird-lime. Angoisse, grieved, filled with anguish. Angoisser, to fill with
anguish, to grieve. Angoisseusement, with great anguish. Angoisseusete, much
anguish. Angoisseux, full of anguish. Angonailes, Angonnages, po^^y sores.
Angoue, as Agoue. Angoule-vent, a swallow-wind. Angourie, the great long
pompio^^. Angousle, a locust, or grasshopper. Angue, the herb wall-wort.
Anguillade, a lash, or blow with an eels skin. Anguillette, a grig, or little
eel. Anguilliere, a pond, or place to keep eels in. Anguillonneux, a crafty
fellow, a sly man. Anguleux, as Angleux. Angurie, as Angourie. Anguste,
straight, narrow, s^ant. Angustie, straightness, narrowness, scant^ss. Anheler,
to breath on; also, to fetch wind, or draw breath with difficulty; also, to be
very greedy of. Anhele, br^^thed or; drawn (as the breath) with difficulty;
much longed for. Anhelit, difficult breathing. Any, for Anis, the herb anis,
and an^se^d. Anichiler, for Annihiler, to annihilate. Aniler, to abate; (...),
to darken. Animadversion, an animadversion; also a r^proof. Anime, ^n easy
kind of Armor; also, the name of an ^^^i- Indian Gum. Animelles, the stories
of (...). etc. Animeusement. (...). Animeus, (...), resol^^. Anir, an Indian
herb us^d (...) Dyers. Ani^^, (...) with (...) ^creased, or multiplied. Aniser,
to season with anis-seed; also to increase, or multiply. Aniveller, to measure
by plumb-line, or plumb-rule. Anize. See Anise. Anneantir. See Aneantir in the
N. D. Annele, decked with rings; also, made into curls like a ring. Anneler, to
deck with rings; also to curl like a ring. Annelet, a little ring. Annicher, to
put into a nest. Annicheur, a putter of things into nests. Annichiler, to
annihilate. Annion, Privilege d'annion, a years Protection granted by the
Prince or Magistrate unto a Debtor. Annombre, annumerated. Annombrer, to
annumerate. Annonce-salut, health-declaring. Annonchali, grown careless of
himself. s'Annonchalir, to grow careless of himself. Annone, a kind of Indian
fruit; also the corn whereof brown bread is made for the people. Annotation,
annotation, mark, or observation. Annotation de biens, a seizure of the Goods
of Offenders, that appear not in person or by Attorney, within a year after
they have been summoned. Annote, noted, marked, or observed. Annoter, to note,
mark, or observe. Annulaire, (a Subst.) the Chancellor of France. Termed so in
old time, when the Kings Signet was his great Seal. Annulaire, (an Adj.)
annular, round like a ring. Doigt annulaire, the ring-finger. Anoirci,
blackened. Anoircir, to blacken. Anombrer. See Annombrer. Anonces, Banes of
matrimony. Anonchallanti, Anonchaly, neglected. Anonciade, Order de
l'Anonciade, an Order of Knighthood instituted in the year 1350, by a Duke of
Savoy. Annorexie, Anorexie, impatiency; also queasiness of stomach. Anoue,
almost choked by letting down too great a morsel. Anouer, almost to choke
himself with greedy eating. Ansaret, a certain bitter gum. Anse, eared, that
has an ear or handle. Ansee, a kind of basket having two handles or ears, to
be carried between two. Ansere, as Anse. Ansette, a little handle or ear of a
pot, etc. Ansouple, as Ensouple. Ansule, a little handle. Ante, an Aunt; also
the jaumb of a door. Antecesseurs, Ancestors. Anteins, the sail-yard. Anten,
the last year. Antenais, shoots or sprigs of a years growth. Antenois, a hog, a
year-old sheep, a lamb of the last year. Anthere, the yellow tuft in the middle
of a rose. Anthosal, made of rosemary. Anthracite, a precious stone, wherein
there seem to be flames or sparks of fire. Anthromantie, Divination by the
raising of dead men. Anthropopathie, humane (or man's) passion. Antiboree, a
North-Dial. Antibust, Ceinct a Pantibust, girt loosely, carelessly; also girt
backwards. Anticipant, (subst.) an anticipator. Antidore, a requital, one good
turn for another. Antidotaire, serving for a counter-poison. Antidote,
furnished with (or preserved by) antidotes. Antidoter, to furnish with (or
preserve by) antidotes. Antifortunal, a cross fortune. Antille, a wooden latch
of a door, or the ring that serves both to lift up the latch, and pull the door
to. Antinomie, contrariety (or opposition) of two Laws. Antinormies, enormous
contrarieties. Antipelargie, the reciprocal love of Children to their Parents;
any requital, or mutual kindness. Antiphones, the reciprocal voices or answers
of two companies that sing by turns, as in a Quire. Antiphonnier, the Book of
Anthems in a Cathedral Church. Antipodium, a surplusage, or overplus.
Antiporte, an outward gate, or a gate that is just opposite unto another.
Antiquaille, an Antic, an ancient Monument. Antiquaire (Adj.) old, ancient,
stale. Antiquement, anciently, after the old manner. Antistrophe, an
Antistrophe, or alternal conversion of two things which be somewhat alike.
Antonnoir, for Entonnoir, a funnel. Antonomasie. See Antonomase in the N. D.
Antonomarie, excellent. Antorc, yellow Monks-hood, Aconits mithridate. Antrac,
a Carbuncle (stone or sore.) Anubet, the name of a cidar-apple. Anuicter, to
defer, or keep until night. S'anuicter, to wax night. Anulaire, as Annulaire.
Anuller (for Annuller) to null. Anuot, a blind-worm. Any (for Anis) the herb
Anis, or Anis-seed. Aorner, Aornement. See Orner, Ornement in the N. D.
Aorolat, as Rolat. Aorte, artere aorte, the mother of arteries. Aouille,
cloyed. Aourser, to burn at the bottom of a pot. Aouste, reaped; ripened.
Aouster, to reap; also to ripen. Aousteron, a reaper. Aousteux, full ripe, as
most fruit is in August. Aparier, for Apparier, to match, to couple. Apast, for
Appats, baits, temptations. Apedeftes, ignorant people. Apensement, purpose, or
intent. Apenser, to purpose, or intend. S'apenser, to bethink himself. Apentis,
for Appantis, an addition to a house. Apercher, to perch. Apert, apparent,
plain, manifest. Apert (the Verb) as Appert. Apertement, apparently, plainly,
openly. Apertise. See Appertise. Aphorretique, unsettled in opinion. Aphronitre,
saltpeter. Aphyer, as Afyer. Apier, a place where bees are kept and tended.
Apile, well-set. Apistole, baited, cozened; also made a cuckold. Apistoler, to
bait, to cozen; also to cuckold one. Apitoyer, to take pity of. Aplanoyer,
Aplanir, for Applanir, to even, to level. Aplegement, as Appleigement. Aplet, a
kind of great draw-net. s'Aplomber, to fall down plumb. Apointir, for
Appointir, to sharpen a thing at the point. Apollinaire, henbane.
s'Apoltronner, to grow coward, or lazy. Aponeurose, the sinewy separation of
the muscles. Apophyse, a process in Anatomy. Aporetique, ever doubting.
Apostater, Apostatizer, to play the Apostate. Aposteme, an impostume.
Apostemer, to swell into an impostume. Aposter, for Apposter, to suborn, to get
false Witnesses. Apostil, Apostile, for Apostille, a postscript. Apostoles,
Letters missive from a Prince; also Writs of appeal sent from the Judge
appealed from to him that is appealed unto. Apostolizer, to play the Apostle.
Apotherapie, pastime, recreation. Apothecaire, for Apoticaire, an Apothecary.
Apothecairaisse, of an Apothecary, or Apothecary-like. Apoue, satiated, so full
as he can eat no more. s'Appaillarder, to turn Whoremonger. Appali, made, or
grown pale. Appalir, to make pale; to wax pale. Appane, that has had a
portion. Appaner, Appanner, to give a younger son his portion. Appaouvrir, for
Appauvrir, to impoverish. Apparage, fitly matched, well paired. Apparcevoir,
for Appercevoir, to perceive. Appareillement, a preparing, or providing for.
Appareilleuse, an Attire-woman; also a Bawd. Apparenter aucun, to challenge or
acknowledge one for a Kinsman. s'Apparesser, s'Apparessir, to grow idle, or
lazy. Apparsondir, for Approsondir, to dig further, to search the bottom.
Appariation, a matching; also a perpetual Association or Correspondency of
Jurisdiction between the King and a Lord Spiritual or Temporal, or between a
Lord Spiritual and a Lord Temporal. Apparietaire, as Apparitoire. Apparissant,
appearing. Appariteur, an Apparitor; also a Hangman. Apparitoire, Palitory of
the Wall. Apparoissance, appearance; also an eminency, or standing above
others. Appastele, fed with the hand. Appasteler, to feed with the hand.
Appasteux, full of allurements. Appeau, for Appel, an appeal; also a challenge.
Appeaux, Chimes, or the chiming of bells. Appellement, a calling. Appelleur, a
caller. Appelourde, falsifi'd; cheated; soiled, or stained. Appelourder, to
falsify; also to cheat; also to soil, or stain. Appendicule, a little
appendix. Appenne, for Appanage, that has an Estate as it were to use only.
Appenser, as Apenser. Appercevance, an inkling of a matter. Appert, expert,
ready, nimble. Appertement, expertly, readily, nimbly. Appertise, expertness,
readiness, nimbleness. Appetence, appetency, appetite. Appetit, for echalote,
shalot. Appieceter, to piece, or patch. Appigres, the nets, hooks, etc. used by
fishermen. Appiler, to pile, or heap together. Applaner (for Applanir) to
level. Applausement, applause. Applege, Appleige, Applegement, a bill of
complaint for land; also a giving bond for a thing. Appleger, Appleiger, to
complain; also to become pledge, to enter into bond for. Appleger son march,
to warrant the things he sells. s'Appleiger, to put into the Court a bill of
Complaint for land. Applomme de sommeil, fast asleep. Applommer de sommeil, to
cast into a heavy sleep. Appoinct, opportunity. s'Appointiser, to grow sharp at
the end. Appoissonne, stored, or furnished, with fish. Appoissonnement, a
storing, or furnishing, with fish. Appoissonner, to store, or furnish, with
fish. Apportement, a carrying or bringing to; also a drawing near to the shore.
Apportionner, to give a portion. Appostile, an answer unto a Petition, set down
in the margent thereof. Appostiler, to answer a Petition, in the margent
thereof. Appreci, price, rate, or value set on things. Apprimer, to encourage
one about a thing, which before he durst not meddle with. Apprins, learned.
Approbatif, approving. Approchement, an approaching. Approfite, made profit of,
profited by, received or gathered as the revenue or fruits of an Inheritance.
Approfitement, a bringing of profit unto, a receiving or gathering of the
revenue or profits of an Inheritance. Approfiter, to make profit of; to bring
profit unto; to receive the profits or revenues of an Inheriritance.
Appropriance, appropriation. Appropriement, a fitting, conforming,
accommodating. Approsse, de gross approsse, violently, vehemently, with great
strength. s'Approvisionner, to provide himself of necessaries. Approuvement,
approbation. Appuie-pot, any thing that stays a pot on the fire. Appure,
purified, clarifi'd, cleared, discharged. Appurement, a purifying, or
clarifying, a clearing, a discharging. Appurer, to purify, to clarify.
Appurer un compte, to clear an account. Appurer une debte, to discharge a debt.
Appurer une amend, to rate an amercement. Appuyal, a leaning-stock. Appuye, an
open and out-standing Terrace or Gallery sit on the outside with rails to lean
upon. Apres-disnees, the fees accruing unto Judges and their Assistants by
giving of afternoon-Orders; or the afternoon-sittings or hearings; or the
Affairs transacted in the afternoon. Apres-germain, Cousin apres-germain, a
Cousin-germane removed. Aprique, sunny, that lies open to the Sun. Aprisonner,
to take prisoner. Apron, as Aspron. Apt, apt, sit, satable. Aptitude,
aptitude, aptness, sutableness. Aquatil, watery, lying in the water. Aquiescer,
for Acquiescer, to acquiesce. Aquilon, the North Wind. Aquilonel, Aquilonien,
Northerly. Aquoest (a Gase. word) this. Arable, arable. Aracte, the
blood-sucking Serpent. Aragnoide, a membrane of the eye. Aragon, a sort of
Ointment good against Cramps and Convulsions. Araigne, Araignee, for Aragnee, a
spider. Araigneux, full of spiders, or cobwebs; also feeding on spiders; whence
souris araigneuse, a shrewwouse. Araignier, of (or like) a spider, or cobweb.
Arain, for Airain, brass. Araire, a Plough. Araisonner, as Arraisonner. Aramme,
a Fine set on a Plaintiffs or Defendants head, for not appearing. Aransor, a
red herring. Araroye, a round and skree^-like Ornament of feathers worn by the
West-Indian Savages at their backs. Arasser, See Traier in the N.D.
Arbalestrage, the shooting in a Crossbow. Arban, a days work in every week due
by soul Vassals that hold by Villanage unto their Lords. Arbausier, for
Arboisier, an a^buttree. Arbaux, as Herbaux. Arbenne, a kind of white
Partridge. Arbitrateur, Arbitrator, Vmpire. Arbitre, arbitrated. Arbitrer, to
arbitrate. Arborise, a kind of white freestone. Arboriser, to study the nature
of trees. Arbouce, Arbouse, for Arboise, an arbut, or strawberry. Arbosier, for
Arboisier, an arbuttree. Arboutan, for Arc boutant, a buttress. Arbreau, a
shrub. Arbret, a little tree. Arbriet, the tiller of a cross-bow. Arbrisselet,
a little shrub. Arbuste, a shrub; also a Grove of trees that are lopt and cut.
Arbuster, to plant a Ground with thick ranks of shrubs. Arbustif, shrubby; also
running or growing up by the side of a shrub. Arcanne, red-oker. Arcasse, the
Counter in the poop of a ship. Arcelet, as Harcelet. Archade, for Arcade, an
arch. Archediacre, for Archidiacre, an Archdeacon. Archediacone,
Arch-deaconry. Archee, a bow-shoot, as far as a bow will carry. Archelette, a
little arch, or ark; also a woman's car-wire. Archenocher, a chief Mariner.
Archepretre, for Archipretre, a chief Priest. Archerie, a Match of shooting;
also a Ground to shoot in. Archerot, a little Archer, a young Bow-man.
Archiatre, a principal Physician. Archier, for Archer, an Archer, or Bowman.
Archimandrite, a General or Governor of Hermits. Archimarmitonerastique, an
Abbeyl^bber. Architecte, contrived, built, set up. Architecter, to contrive,
oversee, or set up a building. Architectonique, belonging to Architecture.
Archool, dust. Archure, a mill-hoop, or mill-^ase. Arcoir, yester^ight. Arcon,
(s.) a burning, or setting on fire. Arconneux, Arconner, of, or belonging to a
saddle-bow; also sit to hang, or to be carried at a saddle-bow. Arcotie,
benumming, stupifying. Arcou, a kind of latten, or copper, whereof Kettles are
made. Arcture, the star Boots, which follows Charles's-wain. Arcuer, to
arch, bow, or bend. Arcure, an arching, or bowing. Ardans, S. Hermes fires.
Ardentement, ardently. Ardid, as Ardit, a farthing. Ardille, clay, or mould.
Ardille, done over with clay. Ardiller, to do over with clay. Ardillier, as
Terre ardilliere, tough earth, or clay, whereof brick and tile may be made.
Ardit, a farthing. Ardoir, to burn, or be on fire; to be eager in a business;
to desire servently; to inflame, or set on fire. Ardoise, covered with states;
of state. Ardoiseux, full of slates. Ardoisin, of slate. Ardoue, a little brook
running along a field. Ardre, as Ardoir. Ardu, hard, difficult. Ardy, as Ardit,
a farthing. Arechal, for Archal, wire, copperwire. Areille, for Oreille, an
ear. Arene, sand, gravel. Areneux, sandy. Arenger, (for Ranger) to set in
order. Areniere, a sand (or gravel) pit. Arentelles, gossymere; the long,
white, and cobweb-like exhalation that flies in the air, in Sunny and Summer
days. Arenuleux, full of sand, or gravel. Arer, to plough. Arere, a plough.
Ares-metys, presently, by and by. Areste d'une espee, the crest of a sword, a
sharp rising in the middle thereof. Aresteux, full of small bones, as a fish.
Areteuse, the herb Sorrel. Arex, presently, by and by. Arfie, a horn-fish.
Argolice, a raddish-root. Argalie, a Surgions syringe. Arganete, a Wire-drawers
bench. Argatile, a kind of Titmouse. Arge, a lightning which blasteth and
makes black. Argentangine, the silver Squinsy. Argenteux, full of silver.
Argentiere, the place wherein metals are tried, before Coin be made of them.
Argerite, the silver-coloured foam of tried lead. Argilier, the Pontic Acatia,
(a thorny shrub.) Argiliere, a clay-pit, Argillette, fine clay, or mould.
Arglantier, for Eglantier, an Eglantine-tree. Argolet, a light horseman. Argot,
etc. See Ergot in the N.D. Argoteuse, a scold. Argouil, a ring of iron.
Argousin, the Lieutenant of a Galley. Argu, la test pleine d'argu, the head
full of proclamations. Argue, argued; chidden, provoked. Arguer, to argue; to
chide, to provoke. Arguer, an arguer. Arguillonneux, litigious, contentious.
Arguties, quirks, subtleties. Argyrite. See Argerite. Ari, dried up. Aridelle,
a jade, a skeleton. Arietant, leaping, or fighting as a ram. Arignee (for
Aragnee,) a spider. Arigot, see Argot in the N.D. Aristocratiquement,
Aristocratically. Armaire, for Armoire, a cup-board. Armaison, as, ceci est
plus d'armaison que cela, this is stronger than that. Armelin, an ermin.
Armeries, as Armoires. Armeurerie, Armor. Armilles, the Iron-rings, or braces,
wherein the gudgeons of a (wheels) spindle turn; also certain little round
members in Pillars, etc. Arminette, for Erminete, a Joyners hollow axe.
Armoire, bearing arms. Armoires, the flowers called sweet John's, or sweet
Williams. Armoirie, an Arsenal, a storehouse for Arms. Armoise, the herb
called Mugwort, or Mothwort. Armoisin, taffata. Armonie, for Harmony, harmony.
Armorial, belonging unto armor. Armorier, an Armourer. Armottes, a broth or
pap made of meal sleeped in li^^^ur, and sodden till it be think. Armoux, choux
armoux, a kind of green col^worts, whose l^a^es are of an oval form. Armoyer,
to tip (or deck) the haft of a knife, or handle of a sword with any work.
Armoyse. See Armoise. Arneat, a shrike. Arne, weak-backed. Arnement, a weakening
of the back. Arner, to weaken the back. Arnoglosse, plantain. Arolle, See
Arrolle. Aromat, aromatical. Aromatic rozat, a certain sweet powder, good for
the stomach and heart. Aromaticite, sweet savor, pleasant smell or taste, as
of spices. Aromatize, perfumed, or sweetened with spices. Aromatizer, to
perfume, or sweeten with spices. Aron, the herb aron, calves-foot. Aronde, a
trunk to shoot in. Arondeau, arondelet, a young swallow. Aroy, a plough.
Arpailleur, a seller of old trinkets, or of old iron; also, a siner of morals.
Arpentement, a surveying, a measuring of land, Arpilleux, ravenous, devouring.
Arquebouse, for Arquebuse, an harquebuse. Arquemie, for Alchimie, Alcumy.
Arquer, to arch, bow, or bend. Arrabler, to snatch away, to get by hook or by
crook. d'Arrache-pied, continually, immediately, without intermission.
Arrachis. Set Arrachement in the N. D. Arraisonne, talked, or discoursed with.
Arraisonnement, a talking or discoursing with. Arraisonner, to talk, or
discourse with. Arramir, to swear. Arrape, snatched away. Arraper, to snatch
away. Arrasade, a salamander. Arre, tart, or a choking, as a wild pear.
Arrecer. See Arresser. Arreche, a fish-bone. Arreement, good a^a^, order,
equipage; also, a giving of money in earnest. Arrene. See Arne. Arrer. See
Arrher in the N. D. Arrerager, to come into a^^ars. Arrerailles, co^n sowed
late in the year. Arres, for Arrhe, an earnest. Arressement, the rising, or
stiffness of the yard. Arresser, to stand, as a man's yard. Arreste, for Arete,
a fish-bone. Arrestement, a stopping, or staying. Arreste-nes, ship-staying.
Arrhemens, earnest. Arrierage, for Arrerage, arr^ars. Arriere, come or cast
behind. Arriere-chambre, a back-chamber. Arriere-coin, a back-corner.
Arriere-cour, a back-yard. Arriere-demande, slightly demanded, slowly asked.
Arriere-foin, after-grass. Arriere-fosse, a back-ditch, or dike. Arriere-main,
a blow given backward. Arriere-ouvert, wide open. Arriere-poincte,
back-^it^hed. Arriere-poincter, to back-stitch. Arrierer, to go backward, also
to set back. Arriere-taille, a second or later tax. Arriere-vasseur, an
Vnder-villain. Arigateur, a Waggoner. Arriger, s'arriger, to rise, or stand up
stiff, as a man's yard. Arrivement, an arriving, or coming to. Arrobe, a measure
coming to 25 pound. s'Arroger, to presume, to ascribe too much unto himself.
Arrolle, at work, set to work. s'Arroller, to fall to work, to set himself to
it. Arroiie. See Arrobe. Arrouler, to roll, to tumble. Arrouter, to put into
the way. S'arrouter, to meet together. Arroy, array. Arroye, arrayed. Arroyer,
to array. Arrudir, to make rude. Arruner, to put in order. Arry avaunt, on
before, away there hoe. Ars, the breast, or brisket of a horse. Ars, brule,
burnt, consumed with heat or fire. Ar^cide, a pricy murderer. Arseirole, a
pear-like fruit, that comes of a hawthorn grafted on a qui^ce. Arsel, See
Arzel. Arson, for Arcon, a saddle-bow. Artail, for Orteuil, a toe. Artemon, the
mi^^en Mast or Sail of a ship. Arterial, of, or belonging to Arteries.
Arteriotomie, an incision of Arteries. Arthetiques, Cowslips. Arthritique, Ive
arthritique, herb I^y. Arthrodie, an half conjunction of two bones, the head of
the one being but half lodged in the cavity of the other. Artialiser, to make
an art of. Artichauliere, a be^l, or plot set with a^ticlokes. Articulaire,
belonging to a joint. Articulation, a growing or shooting up from joint to
joint; also the hurting, or bursting of young joints. Artien, an Artist.
Artiere, a small fish called Sharpling, Stickling, or Stickle-back. Artifier,
to make by art or craft. Artiller, to furnish with artillery. Artillier, a
Bowyer, or Bow-maker. Artimon. See Trinquet in the N. D. Artiron, for Artison,
a greenish worm, cleaving in great numbers to the leaves of Coleworts and other
plants; also a kind of moth. Artisonne, moth-eaten, worm-eaten. Artoir, the
great toe. Artre, moth; also a Kings-fisher. Artre grise des bois, a woodlouse.
Artrose, a natural and movable connection of bones. Artuson. See Artiron. Arzel,
a horse with a white foot on the right or further side. Asare, the herb
fole-foot, haslewort. Asarole, See Azarole. Asbetir, a kind of flax that will
not be b^rnt, and yields cloth which fire scours better than water. Ascalabe,
Ascalave, Ascalavette, the starry lizard. Ascaride, a small round worm which is
in the bowels. Ascavante, thoroughly instructed, made skilful in. Ascavanter, to
instruct thoroughly, to make skilful in. Ascavoir, to wit, that is to say.
Asche, and Aschee. See Ache, Achee in the N. D. Ascite, a kind of Dropsy.
Ascles, shivers, or splinters of wood. Ascouter (for Ecouter) to hear.
Aserches, wild prick-madam, stone-crop, worm-glass. Asereiner, to clear, or
cheer up. Asgrandissement, for Aggrandissement, an enlarging, or making bigger;
also preferment, advancement. Asinin, ass-like, of or belonging to an Ass.
Asme, Asmatique, V. Asthme, Astmmatique in the N. D. Asnee, an ass-load of.
Asne-feuille, a kind of Origan, which Asses love exceeding well. Asnesque,
ass-like, sottish, dull, ignorant, blockish. Asnichon, a young ass. Asnier (a
Verb) to ride an ass. Asnonner, to fool, or bring forth an ass. Asoter, Asote.
See Assoter. Aspalathe, a kind of shrub whose aromatical wood is used by
Perfumers. Asparge (for asperge) sparragrass. Asperer, to sharpen, to
exasperate. Asperge, besprinkled. Aspergement, a besprinkling. Asperger, to
besprinkle. Asperger, an holy water sprinkle. Aspergiere, a bed of
sparra-grass. Aspergule, Aspertule, claver, goose-grass. Asperse, besprinkled.
Asphalte (for bitume) bitumen. Asperelle, for Aprelle, an herb called
horse-tail. Aspresse (for aprete) sharpness, eagerness, tartness. Asprir, to
sharpen, aggravate, exasperate. Asprissement, a sharpening, etc. Assagi, become
wise. Assagir, to make wise. Assagissement, a becoming wise. Assaieret,
pillules d'assaieret, a sort of pills. Assassinement, a murdering of one.
Assation, a rosting, a concocting by an outward dry heat. Assavanter. See
Ascavanter. Assavoir, for savoir, to wit, viz. Assauvagi, made wild.
Assauvagir, to make wild. Ass, the ancient Romans As, a copper-coyn worth
somewhat more than a penny sterling. Asse-douce, the sweet gum that issues from
the sacrificed or cut stalks and roots of the African and Cyrenian Laserwort.
Assecher, as Asseicher, to dry. Assediacre, an Archdeacon. Assee, a wood-cock.
Asseeur (for Asseyeur) a Cessor in matter of Taxes, etc. Asseiche, dry.
Asseicher, to dry. Asseller, to go to the stool. Assemblement, Assemblure, a
joining of things together. Assence, assent, consent. Ascensement, Ascenseur.
See Acensement, Acenseur in the N.D. Assene, or Assenne, an assignation, or
laying out of a dower or jointure for a widow or wife. Assene and adois, a
portion or gift bestowed by a father on his younger sons, or on his daughters,
for their preferment. Assens, a certain profit made of Forests and high-grown
Woods, as the pawnage, mastage, etc. Assentation, flattery. Assentatoire,
flattering. Assenti, agreed to; also scented. Assentir, to agree to; also to
take the wind or scent of. Asseral, a kind of Turkish drug. Assere (for acere)
tempered with steel. Assermente, sworn, put to his oath. Assermenter, to put to
an oath. Assertivement, affirmatively, resolutely, as one that will stand to
what he says. Asservagi, made a slave. Asservagir, to make a slave.
Asservissage, Asservissement, thraldom, slavery. Assessoriat, the Place, or
Office of a Judge lateral. Asseule, forsook, or left alone. Asseuler, to
forsake, or leave alone. Asseur (for asseure) sure, secure. Asseurement,
Asseurete, the peace or good behavior granted unto against another, who, if he
break it, commits felony (by some Customs in France;) also protection,
safeguard, or safe conduct. Assiduellement, for Assidument, continually.
Assiement, a sitting. Assier (for acier) steel. Assignal, Land assigned or laid
out unto a woman for her Jointure or Dower, and which she injoyeth until she
have levied as much as she brought with her. Assignal de rent, rents assigned
unto a woman for the same purpose. Assignat, an assignation, or appointment; an
allotment; also a day or place appointed. Assillonnement, a making of balks in
ploughing. Assillonner, to balk, or plough up in balks. Assimenter, to cement.
Assimilation, a comparing, or likening. Assimilativement, by comparison.
Assimile, compared, likened. Assimiler, to compare, to liken. Assis (a Subst.)
assesments, or impositions. Assode, decayed with sickness, also weary of his
life, or careless of himself. Assole, sunned, seasoned, or dried in the Sun;
also settled (as a horse) upon all his feet. Assoler, to s^^, to season or dry
in the Sun. S'assoler, to settle himself upon all his feet. Assommeiller, to
cast into a slumber. Assommeresse, main assommeresse, a deadly heavy hand, that
fells down whatever it strikes. Assopir, Assopi, Assopissement. See Assoupir,
etc. in the N. D. Assorbir, to drink, or to soak up. Assote, besotted, doting
on. L'Assotee de quecun, a man's Sweetheart or Mistress on whom the fool dotes.
Assoter, Assotter, Assotir, to besot, to make dote on. Assoubjecter, to make
subject, or bring under. Assouchement, a genealogy, stock, progeny. Assoupli,
suppled, or made soft. Assouplir, to supple, or to make soft. Assourdi, made,
or grown deaf. Assourdir, to make deaf. Assourdissement, a making deaf.
Assouvagir, to assuage. Assubjecter, as Assoubjecter. Assuefaction, an
accustoming to a thing. Assumpter, to take up into a high place. Assus, on,
upon. Ast, arms d'ast, weapons to be cast as darts. Astace, a lobstir.
Astalabore. See Ascalabe. Astelles. See Attelles. Astellier, a stall. Asterion,
a fish, whose coat is set with star-like spots. Asterique, starry, star-like,
of or belonging to a star. Asthamatic, pursie, short-winded. Astheme,
pursiness, short-wind. Astillier, a Workhouse for Masons, a Carpenters Yard.
Astipulateur, a Record, or Witness; also one that makes an agreement with
another; also a help, or assistant. Astivite, craft in buying and selling.
Astour. See Atour in the N. D. Astragalomantie, divination by hacckle-bones.
Astraict. See Abstraict. Astranti, the herb Master-wort. Astrapade (for
Estrapade) the strappado. Astreinct, forced, compelled, or constrained; also
costive, or bellybound. Astreindre, to force, compel, or constrain; also to
bind, or make costive. Astrelabe (for Astrolabe) an Astrolabe. Astrologier
(for Astrologue) an Astrologer. Astronomien (for Astronome) an Astronomer.
Astrucier, one that keeps or catches Ostridges. Astruser, to press (or keep)
down. Astuce, craft, subtlety, cunning. Astur, crafty, subtle, cunning. Asur,
etc. See Azur in the N. D. Asymbole, scot-free. Atabal. See Attabale. Artant,
forthwith. Ataraxie, resolution, constancy; also tranquillity, or quietness of
mind. A-tard, late, slowly. Atastre, the plain part or face of an Architrave;
also a large fillet, or bend in a pillar, etc. Atedier. See Attedier. Atelles.
See Attelles. Atermoyer, etc. See Attermoyer. Aterrer, etc. See Atterrer in the
N. D. Athanasie, for Atanasie, the herb tansy. Athaner, to kill. Atheiste (for
Athee) an atheist. Atheisterie, Atheism. Atheronne, a kind of impostume.
Athle, a wretched fellow. Athletique, Champion-like, or belonging to a
Champion. Atiffer, as Attiffer in the N. D. Ativelles, trinkets. Atizer, for
Attiser, to stir the fire. Atourneresse, as Attourneresse. Atout, with,
together with. Atrabiliaire, for Atrabilaire, subject to melancholy. Atrainer,
to trail, or drag along. Atre, a hearth. Atrebiliaire, as Atrabilaire.
s'Atrister, for s'Attrister, to be grieved. Atrophe, that is in a consumption,
or to whom meat does little or no good. Atrophie, a kind of consumption.
s'Atrophier, to consume, or pine away. Atruander, as Attruander. Atlens,
bounds, limits. Attabale, a kind of brazen drum used by the Moorish horsemen.
Attainct, Attaincte, Attaindre. See Atteint, Atteinte, Atteindre in the N. D.
Attalenter, as Entalenter. Attavanat, a horse that is flea-bitten only in the
flank or in the neck. Attain, pettishness. Attayneux, pettish. Attediation, a
wearying, or cloying. Attedie, wearied, cloyed. Attedier, to weary, cloy, or
trouble with too much of one thing. Attelements, harness for draughthorses or
oxen. Attelier, a workhouse, or shop for an Artificer. Attelle, a splent, or
stick to make a splent of. Attelles, the haumes of a draughthorses collar, the
two flat sticks that encompass it. Attenance, a dependency upon, or a belonging
unto. Attendant, an attendant. Attendant que, whilst that. Attendue, an
attendance, or attending. Attenir, to keep back, to detain. S'attenir a, to
hang upon. Attenu, bound, or beholden unto. Attenuri, made thin, or slender.
Atterissement. See Atterrissement. Attermoye, that has a time granted for the
payment of a debt. Attermoyement, the granting of a time for the payment of a
sum. Attermoyer, to grant a term for the payment of a debt. Atterrasseur, an
overthrower, an oppressor. s'Atterrir, to rot on the earth, to become as earth,
to fall unto the earth. Atterrissement, an overthrowing to the earth, a
covering with earth. Atteyner un chien sur queleun, to turn a dog upon one.
Attiffets, attires. Attiler, to deck. Attiltrer. See Attitrer in the N.D.
Attine, provoked; also fastened on. Attiner, to provoke, urge, or incense; also
to fasten on. Attinte, decked, or trimmed up. Attinter, to deck, or trim up.
Attiques, little notes, or tickets. Attirantons, an Artificers tools.
Attirement, a drawing to. Attise-feu, Attise-querelle, a firebrand of
contention, a raiser of sedition. Attisonne, stirred, as the fire; also
scorched, or half-burnt. Attisonner (for attiser) to stir the fire. Attorne,
attired, decked, or set out. Attorner, to attire, deck, or set out. Attouche, a
gentle touch; also a glance at, o^ short mention of. Attoucher, to handle
gently, to mention briefly. Attour, for Atour, Women's attire. Attoure, attired,
dressed, set out. Attourne, attired; also atturned as a Tenant. Attournement,
an attiring, decking, or dressing; also the Atturnment of a Tenant. Attourner,
to attire, deck, or dress; also to atturn, as a Tenant. Attourneresse, a
waiting woman. Attourneur, a waiting-man. Attrabilaire, for Atrabilaire,
subject to melancholy. Attrahiere, escheatage, or an escheat. Attraiement, an
attracting, or drawing unto. Attraire, to attract, or to draw unto. Attrament,
ink, or bleach for Shoomakers. Attraperie, Attrapoire, a catching.
Attrayamment, attractively, inticingly. Attrayeres, escheats. Attrectation, a
soft and often handling. Attrempe, tempered, moderated, of a temperate or
stayed humor; mixed, seasoned; soaked in moisture. Attrempement, a temper, or
moderation, even-measure, stayed behavior; also a soaking in liquor.
Attrempement, temperately, moderately, staydly, soberly. Attremper, to temper,
moderate, use a ^^st and even measure; also to mix, or season; also to soak in
moisture. Attributif, attributive. Attriste-coeur, that grieves the heart.
Attrit, rubbed, ^^etted, wasted, worn away. Attrition, a rubbing, fretting, or
wearing out. s'Attruander, to loyter, to grow an idle tr^ant. Atu^re a une
opinion, obstinate in a^ opinion. Avachi, slackened, or gr^wn slaggy.
s'Avachir, to slack^n, to grow slaggy. Avail, a wild ^oar. Availlon, a kind of
shell-fi h. Aval^^^e, (...); gone; si upon it. Avallage, (...) a small wing
dow^; also the fall of a river; also a Porters hire for the laying of wine down
into a cellar. Avallanche, a great falling, or sinking down, as of earth.
Avallasse, an inundation; also a swallowing Gulf. Avaller, etc. See Avaler in
the N. D. Avalloire, Avallouere, a hole, or trap-door, to let a thing down by
into a lower room. Avalluer, etc. See Evaluer in the N. D. Avanceur, an
advancer. Avanchaye, a Grove of Oziers, or such like trees. Avanger, to
suffice, or to serve the turn; to furnish thoroughly, to bear the whole charge
of. Avaunt, (for Avent) the time of Advent, which is about a month before
Christmas. Avant-chien, the lesser Dog Star, which appears when the Dog Days
begin. Avant-conce^, fore-conceived. Avant-courement, a fore-running.
Avant-coureux (for Avant-coureur) forerunner. Avant-coureux (Adj.)
fore-running. Avant-joueur, he that begins the Game or Comedy. Avant-juge. See
Prejuge in the N. D. Avant-logis, a room or lodging in the forepart of a house
standing alone; an outward gate with lodgings in it; also a Courtyard, or
coming in; and a Court, Porch, or Portal before a house. Avant-main, the
forepart of the hand, or that part which is between the wrist and knuckles; or
beforehand. Avant-parleur, a fore-speaker, or one that is too forward to
speak. Avant-pas, the start, or an advantage in a ra^e or cours^. Avant-penser,
to premeditate, or bethink himself beforehand. Avant-perse, the greatest kind
of Apri^^ck; or as, Avant-pesche, the hasty Peach. Avant-pied, the part of the
foot next to the ^^^s. Avant-poignet, so much of the hand as is between the
wri^t and k^^^kl^s. Avant-propos, a Pro^^^^^. Avant-promenoir, a (...) Walk
before the d^^r of a ^reat (...). Ava^^, d^^^ of wares or m^rch^^d^^^; leaking
of wi^es; also (...) charges of the carriage, or measuring thereof; also the
vails of a Cook, etc. Avau l'eau, down the water. Aubain, a foreiner, and
properly such a one as is born in a Country so near ours as notice may
conveniently be taken of his original and name. Therein differing from Espour,
who comes one knows not whence. Aubainete, Aubanite, Escheatage. Aubeau, the
white poplar-tree. Aubee, the pith of wood and timber. Aubeine, a kind of
grape; also Escheatage. Aubel, as Aubeau. Aubelieve, a huffler. Aubenable,
subject unto Escheatage. Aubenage. See Aubain in the N. D. Auber, to flit, or
to remove from place to place. Auberet, for Aubereau, a kind of Eagle.
Auberge, lodged, harbored. Aubergeon. See Haubergeon. Aubert, coin, money.
Aubes, the short boards which are set into the outside of a watermills wh el.
Aubespin (for Aubepine,) the white-thorn, or ^aw-thorn. Aubicon, a kind of
great fig. Aubier, the pith of timber, or that part of it which is subject unto
worm-^ating. Aubin, as Aubier; also the white of an egg. Aubinage, as Aubaine
in the N. D. Aubour, as Aubier. Aubourt, a kind of tr e. Aubun d'oeut, the
white of an egg. Aueaigne, dogs ^ather well-dressed. Auche, a round hasp of
iro^, wherein the barrel of a windlace t^^^^^. Aucunessois, sometimes, now and
(...). Audience, came to a hearing. Auditif, of a ^^aring pr^^^^ty. Audro^^^,
wit^, or toward; also (...) i^, directly upon, all a^^^ (...). Ave, (...),
lean, with^^red. Aveill^, for Abeille, (...) ^oney-bee. Aven, wealth, go^ds,
^i^i^^s. Avenage, a quantity of oats p^id (...) a lord i^ li^n or a (...) (...)
duty; (...), (...); a^^^ as Au^^^^ (...) N. D. Ave^^aire, a (...), a strange^.
Avenat, oat-meal. Avene (for avoine,) oats. Aveneri, oaten-straw, or stubble.
Aveneray, Aveneron, wild oats. Aveneux, strangers, foreiners. Avenger, as
Avanger. Avenier, belonging to oats, or feeding on oats. Averement, an
averring, or avouching; also a searching, or sifting out; also a just
estimation of things. Averlan, a good fellow, or merry companion. Averne, hell,
or the pit of hell. Avernal, hellish. Averon, as Aveneron. Averroncation, a
weeding; a putting away of evil; also an appeasing. Averronquer, to weed; to
put away evils; also to appease. Avertin, frensy, lunacy; also stubborness, or
wilfulness. s'Avertiner, to become frantic or lunatic; also to grow stubborn,
or wilful. Avertineux, frantic, lunatic; also stubborn, or wilful.
Avesprement, a drawing toward night. Avesprir, to grow toward night. Avet, a
sir-tree. Avette, a little be. Aveuement, a view. Avenglete, blindness.
Avenglette, a avenglettes, blindly, blindfold. Aufuege, a kind of pale, red
wheat. Augee, a trough (or manger) full. Auget, a little trough, or manger.
Augibis, a kind of grape. Augmentatif, augmentative. Augue, wall-wort.
Augurement, a divining. Au-guy-l'an-neuf. The voice of countrey-people begging
New-years-Gifts in Christmas. s'Aviander, to feed, or victual himself.
Avictuaille, furnished with victuals. Avictuaillement, a furnishing with
victuals. Avictuailler, to furnish with victuals. Avier, to set in the way;
also as ^viver. Avigouri, grow^ lusty. Avilener, to disgrace, or do a villainy
unto. Aviler, as Avilir, in the N. D. Avilissement, an imbasing, or
disesteeming. Avillonne, affronted, troubled, molested; also environed.
Avillonner, to affront, trouble, or molest. Aviner un vaisseau, to season, or
to fill a vessel with wine. Avine, seasoned or filled with wine; also turned
into the nature of wine; also that has drunk too much wine, or that is given
to drinking of wine; also tasting like wine. Avironner, to row with oars.
Avisement, heed, forecast, wariness. Avision nocturne, a night-dream, or
vision. Avitin, as Biens Avitins, heirlooms, Goods that come by Inheritance.
Avive, quickened, revived. Aviver, Avivre, to quicken, to revive. Aulbespin,
for Aubepine, the white thorn. Aulbin, and Aulbinage, as Aubin, Aubinage.
Aulmosne, given in alms. Aulnee, helicampane, s^abwort. Aulonnes, the canvas
whereof sails for ships are made. Aulonnier, a kind of strawberry-tree. Aulx
(for ail,) garlic. Aulx-oignon, great garlic. Aulx (for autres,) others.
Aumaille, great cattle. Aumoire (for armoire,) a cup-board. Aumonner, Aumosner,
to bestow in alms. Aumosne, bestowed in alms. Aumosner, to bestow in alms.
Aumosnerie, an Almshouse. Aumosnier, (Adj.) charitable. Aumosniere, an
alms-purse. Auner, (for unir) to make one, or to join into one. Aunir, to
close, or shut up. Aunon, a si h called Keeling. Aunoye (for Aunaye,) an
alder-grove. Avoie, or Avoye, a sloe-worm, or blind-worm. Avoi^e, advowed,
avouched. Auque, a g^^^. Aure, a (...) air. Aureill^ (for ore^le) an ^ar.
Aureillons, the ^^^mps. Aurelles, ^^ll-berries. Aure^le (for ^areole,) sparge,
or little law^d, Auriflamme, as O^flamme in the N. D. Aurillage, an Imposition
laid (in some parts of France) upon the P^ofits made of Bees. Auriol, Auriou,
the greatest kind of the fish Turdus. Auripeaux, the mumps. Aurislage, as
Aurillage. Aureosne (for aurone) the herb Southernwood. Auron, wild (or barren)
oats. Auron, as Aureosne. Aurorin, of, or belonging to the morning; also early.
Austerons, Reapers; also the fruits of August, or harvest, corn. Austour (for
Autour,) the Goshawk. Austral, Southerly. Austre, Austrie, South Wind. Austrin,
of the South, warm as the South. Autan, a Southern wind. Authenriquer, to make
authentic. Authrice, a woman-Author. Autins, as Utins, in the N. D.
Autographe, written with his own hand. Autom, Autumn (for automne,) Autumn.
Automnal, Automnel, Autumnal, of Autumn. Auvernas, a kind of black grapes.
Auviez, a kind of wild pine. Avulse, plucked away. Auxerrois. See Megle.
Auxiliateur, a helper. Axillaire, of, or belonging to the arm-hole.
Axionomantie, divination by a hatchet and Jeat burnt. Axonne, Axunge, fat of
swine. Aygue, water. Ayguer, a sink. Ayguiere (for aiguiere,) an ewer. Aymact
(for aimant,) a lodestone. Aymer (for aimer,) to love. Aynets, little rods or
twigs wherein herrings are threaded, and laid on hardles to be redded. Air,
aired. Aysement, a ^akes or prity. Aysle (for aile,) a wing. Az. See As in the
N. D. Azagaye, as Zagaye. Azarole, a kind of medlar-tree. Azaron, a kind of
herb. Azime, unleavened.
B
BAbat, a panting, or often beating. Babaye, as fair la babaye, to g^pe, o^
make a mo^th at. Babbiner, as Babiner. Bab^ure, butter-milk. Babillerie,
prating, ^^t ^ri^^. Babine, the lip of a beast. Babiner, to play with the lips,
to prattle, or to talk hard. Baboles, (for babioles) gewgaws. Babort, the
larboord of a ship. Babote; a little black caterpiller. Babou, as fair la
babou, to bob, or to make a mow at. Babouiner, to play the monkey. Babouinerie,
apish tricks. Babouleur, a babbler, a tale-teller. Babovye, a fib, a tale.
Baboyer, to blabber with the lips; also to tell tales. Bacbue, a bottle.
Baccal, a wesel. Baccar, the herb Haslewort. Bacces, berries. Bacchanaleries,
Bacchanales, Bacchannals, or Bacchus his feasts. Bacchanaliser, to play mad
pranks. Bacchanalisante, Bacchanete, a maddish woman. Bacche, a kind of wild
pear. Bacchique, belonging to Bacchus. Baccle, bolted on the inside. Baccler,
to bolt on the inside. Baccoler, to play at titter-totter, to heave often up
and down. Bacees. See Brisees in the N.D. Bacelle, as Chasteleine. Bachat, (for
Bassa) a Turkish Bassa. Bachelerie, Batchelorship. Bachelette, a marriageable
maid. Bachelier (Adj.) belonging to a Bachelor. Bacheval^ur^ux, as
Chevaleureux. Bachot, a small ferry-boat. Bachoue, a kind of basket. Bacille,
the herb Sampire. Bacinet. See Bassinet in the N.D. Bacle, and Bacler. See
Baccle, Baccler. Bacon, bacon. Bacquaige (for bagage) baggage. Bacquet (for
baquet) a pail, a milk-pail. Bacqueter, to drain any water with pails.
Bacquier, a slye-fed hog. Bacul (for bacule) a crupper. Baculer, to beat one
upon the back. Badauderie, Badaudise, silliness. Bade, a cry, as of bounds.
Badecoquille, a small shellfish. Badelaire, a short and broad back-sword.
Badelori, a silly man. Badelorie, besotted. Badigoines, the hanging lips of
beasts. Badinement, foolishly, apishly. Baditin, the water-lilly, or
water-rose. Baffouer, Baffouement. See them with a single f in the N. D.
Baffray, Baffroy, a Beacon. Bagagier, a Carrier of soldiers baggage. Bagasse,
a Baggage, or a Queen. Bagatelleries, idle tricks. Bagateur, a maker of playing
cards. Bagatin, a sort of brass coin. Baglon, a gag. Bagnoire (for baignoir) a
bathing-tub. Bagnolet, a wooden dish. Bagois, gibridge. Bagos, a pimp. Bague,
adorned with jewels. Baguenauder, to trifle out the time. Baguenaudeur, a
trifler, a loyterer. Baguenaudier, the Sene-shrub. Baguer, to adorn with
jewels. Baguette, commanded, or beaten with a stick. Baguetter, to command like
a Steward; also to strike with a stick or switch. Baguetteux, full of switches.
Baguier, the male bay tree. Bahutier (Adj.) of, or belonging to a trunk.
Baignerie, a Bath, a private room to bathe in. Baigneur, a bather. Baigneux,
that uses much bathing. Baignolet, as Bagnolet. Bail (for bay,) bay. Bail,
Bailiff, Sergeant, a Jailer. Bailif. See Baillif in the N. D. Baillarge, a
kind of small barley. Baille, a Steward, a Solicitor; also an ordinary
Bailiff. Baillet, a pale-red; also a horse that has a white spot or star in
his forehead. Baillet, (Adj.) a pale-red. Baillette, a lease, or grant; also a
little waterfowl. Bailleures, sweepings. Bailli. See Baillif in the N. D.
Bailliager, belonging to a Bailiff. Baillie, Jurisdiction; also a Baylywick.
Baillisseur, Baillistre, a Guardian. Baillistrerie, Guardianship. Bailliveau,
as Baliveau in the N.D. Baillot, a trough. Bailly, as Baillif in the N. D.
Baimaux (for Baliveaux) standers, or trees left for increase. Baiocque, a sort
of coin. Bair, a kind of ^urr. Bairer, (for baiser) to kiss. Baise-nue, high,
tall, or reaching to the clouds. Baiseret, a little kiss. Baisler, (for
baailler) to gape. Baisse de marest, a low bottom, turns into a marsh, bog,
or quagmire. Baistieres, the lees of wine, also the dregs of any liquour.
Balade, a ballet. Balafreux, a cutter, a swaggerer. Balafrure, a slashing.
Balaine, (for balene) a whale. Balan, an acorn, or any thing like it.
Balanceur, a weigher of things in a balance. Balanceux, belonging to a
balance, also full of balances. Balancier (Adj.) of, or belonging to a
balance. Balancieur, as Balanceur; also the Officer that weighs money as soon
as it is coined. Balane. See Balan. Balauste, the blossom of the wild
Pomgranate-tree. Balayeuse, a drudge, or sweeping Wench. Balbucie, a
stuttering, or stammering. Baldachin, Baldaquin, a Cloth of State.
Balenchoueres, a Game called titter-totter. Baler, to dance. Balestrier,
cross-bow like, of a cross-bow. Balet, a beesom, or broom. Balevolter,
Balevoter, to wag, as a streamer in the wind. Baley, (for balay) a broom.
Balievre, the chaps of a man or beast. Baligaut, a great lobcock. Balise,
Balisse, a beacon, or a mark set up for the direction of Sailors in a navigable
river. Balite, an ancient Engine, whereout stones are thrown. Balivaginer, to
prattle, to use too many words. Baliverner, to tell idle tales. Balladin (for
baladin) a great dancer. Balladiner, to dance much. Balladinerie, sprightly
dancing. Balle. See Bale in the N. D. Balls, twelve gross. Ballet, a cape of a
cloak; also a dancing. Balletrou, a sweep-hole. Ballier, and its Derivatives.
See Balayer, etc. in the N. D. Balliverne (for baliverne,) a tale. Ballizer une
Riviere, to scowr, or cleanse a River. Ballocher, to totter, as one that goes
on a rope. Ballon (for balon) a bale. Ballot (for balot) the same. Ballote,
Balloter, Ballotement. See them with a single I in the N. D. Ballouetter. See
baloter in the N.D. Balluque, gold or^, or gold unfined; also a vessel
whereinto gold is poured. Ballustres (for balustres,) ballisters. Balm (for
baume) balsam. Balm, a cave, or den. Baloste, a course bed, or mattress; also
the chass of oats or barley. Baloie (for balaye) swept. Balong (for barlong)
more long than broad. Balongue, a trough, or vessel, etc. which is much more
long than broad. Balorde. See Balourde. Balorderie, sottishness, blockishness.
Balotade, a bouncing. Balousse. See Baloffe. Balourde, sottish, blockish,
foolish. Baloyer (for balayer) to sweep. Balroter, to froth in bubbles.
Balsamine, the balsam-apple. Balsane, as balzane. Balser, to bound. Balthee, a
belt. Balzan, a horse that has a white leg or foot. Balzane, the white of a
horses leg or foot, or a white spot or mark in any part of his body.
Bambelotier, as Bimblotier. Bancage, the Circuit of a Country within which the
Inhabitants are bound to repair to a certain Mill, Oven, Wine Press, etc.
paying a fee for their several uses unto the Lord thereof; also the Royalty or
Privilege of having such a Mill, etc. also the re^eaue or benefit made of it.
Bancelle, a little bench, seat, or bank. Bandage, a swath-band; also the gaffle
of a cross-bow; also a truckle for a pully; also a bending as of a bow. Bandie,
as Bancage; also a Privilege of some Lords to forbid all their Tenants to sell
their Wines for 40 days together, that in the mean while they may the better
vent their own. Bandier, the Lord or owner of the aforesaid Royalty. Bandiment,
as Ban in the N. D. Bandon, leave, liberty, free scope to do a thing. A bandon,
at rovers, at random. Prinse de betes a bandon, the suffering other men's cattle
for hire to graze all over his pastures. Bandouillier (for Bandolier) a robber.
Banie, Banissement, banishment; also confiscation. Banir (for bannir) to
banish. Bannage, Bannal, Bannalite. See them with a single n in the N.D. Banne,
a hamper, or great basket. Bannee, as Bancage. Bannerie, low Jurisdiction.
Droict de bannerie, the same Royalty as Bancage. Bannerole (for banderole) a
little stag or streamer. Banners, Ground-keepers. Banneux, of, or belonging to
a hamper. Bannie, Bannier. See Banie, Banier, under Ban in the N. D. Bannon,
Banon, the season wherein the Cattle belonging to a whole Town is turned out
into, or may feed all over common Pastures. Cela est en banon, that is common,
or for every body's use. Banoyement, a proclaiming, or publishing by sound of
trumpet, etc. Banquage, as Bancage. Banquerotier (for Banqueroucier) a
bankrupt. Banqueterie, a banqueting, or feasting. Banqueteux, of, or belonging
to bankets. Banquier (for Banal.) See Banal under Ban in the N. D. Bans, the
banes of matrimony. Baptismal, of, or belonging to baptism. Baptistaire, or
Baptistere. See Batistaire under Bateme in the N. D. Baque, a berry.
Baquelette, a young wench. Baqueter, as Bacqueter. Bar, the fish called a base.
Baradon, a drone, or dorr-bee. Baragant (for barracan) barracan. Barat, truck,
exchange; also cheat. Baratelle, as Cagnole. Barater, to truck; also to cheat.
Barateur, a trucker, or barterer; also a cheater. Barateux, Baratier, cheating,
deceitful. Barathre, an abyss. Baratte, a churn. Barbacane, a casemate.
Barbaian, the great horn-owl. Barbaresque, like a barbarous fellow.
Barbaresquement, barbarously, rudely. Barbarin, a small river-barbel; also the
sea-barbel. Barbarine, a piece of coin. Barbasse, a goat-like beard. Barbasse,
as un boue barbasse, a bearded goat. Barbaude, beer, Brewers liquor.
Barbaudier, a Brewer. Barbecane, as Barbacane. Barbel (for barbean) a
barbel-fish. Barbele, bearded. Barbelotte, a land-toad. Barbelu (for barbu)
bearded. Barber, to barb, shave or trim. Se barber, to get a beard. Barberie,
barbing, also a Barbers shop; also the name of an apple. Barberies, feathered
Gillovers. Barberiot, a kind of apple. Barbes, pushes, or little bladders under
the tongues of Cattle. Barber (Adj.) rough, or shag-haired, like a water-dog.
Barbeter (for barboter) to make a noise as a seething pot, also to m^mble or
mutter words between the teeth. Barbette, a small beard; also a water-bitch.
Barbidant, part of a woman's etc. Barbiere, a Barbers wife. Barbillon, a little
barbel; also the beard of an ear of corn; also the less sin of a fish.
Barbillons, the frounce, a disease bred in the tongues of hawks by a cold
rh^^^n. Barbillonne, bearded. Un dard barbillonne, a dart that has a forked or
bearded head. Barbin, a little beard. Barboire, a mask, or mummery; also a
vizard. Barbolle, part of a woman's etc. Barbon (for barbot) a barbel-fish.
Barbot, Barbotage, the wallowing of a s^^thing pot. Barbote, an eel-powt.
Barbotin, bearded. Barbotte, the chin-piece of an helmet. Barbouillage,
Barbouillement, a blotting, a besmearing. Barbouilleries, trash, riff-raff.
Barbu-marses, starch-corn. Barbute, a riding-hood; also the beaver of an
helmet, also a man of arms. Barbuteur, a Sycophant, a secret Tale-teller. Barc,
a kind of smooth red earth, whereof vessels were made in old time. Barce, as
Berche. Barchaux, great barks, or boats. Barche, a little bark. Bardachiser, to
bugger. Bardacocule, as Bardococule. Barde, (for sot) sottish, dull-witted.
Bardelle, the canvas saddle wherewith Colts are backed. Bardeure, the trapping
of a horse. Bardococulage, a being covered all over with Monkish habit.
Bardococule, dressed like a Monk. Bardou, a sot, or blockhead. Baretter, to
churn. Barge, a fowl that has no spleen; also the bank of a river or water.
Barguignard, (for barguigneur) a haggler. Barguigne, a haggling. Baricquer, to
bray like an elephant. Baril, (for barril) a barrel. Barillet, a little barrel.
Barillier, a maker of barrels; also an Officer that looks to the Vessels of a
great man's Cellar. Bariner, to churn butter. Bariquade, (for barricade) a
barricado. Barique, barricadoed. Barique. See Barrique in the N.D. Bariquelle,
a little boat. Bariteau, a sieve made of hair. Baritonner, to wag, or dangle up
and down; also to bray like an Elephant. Barizel, a Leader of Catchpoles, an
ordinary Provost-Marshal. Barlonguer, to make (to grow) more long than broad.
Barlue, (for berlue) dimness of sight. Barme, the bank of a river, etc. Barnag,
all the train and baggage attending a great person in his Journey. Barnez, the
Nobility, or Barons. Baron (for male,) of the male kind; also manly, hardy,
strong. Barone (for Baronne) a Baroness. Barquette, a little bark. Barrage, a
barricado; also a passage-toll. Barragouin. See Baragouin in the N. D.
Barragouiner, to speak a strange dialect. Barrate, churned, or tossed as butter
is in the churning. Barraut, a little barrel. Barretade, the putting off of the
hat or cap by way of salutation. Barrette, a cap, or bonnet. Barrez, the
Carmes, or white Friars. Barricave (for Baricave) a low bottom. Barriquade,
(for barricade) a barricade. Barriqueau, half a barrel. Barriquer, to
barricado. Barrit, the braving of an Elephant. Barroir, a turrel, wherewith
Coopers make holes for the bar-pins of a piece of cask. Barrot, half a barrel.
Barroyer, to use delays in a Lawsuit. Barroyements, delays in Law. Barry, a
barrel; also a kind of fire-work. Basaner, to make of a swarthy complexion.
Basanne, as Bazane. Basard, a Marketplace. Basauchieux, Lawyers Clarks.
Baschat, a Tarkish Bassa. Baschelier, as Bachelier in the N. D. Bascle, as
Ba^le. Bascule, Basculle, a scoop; also as Bacule. Basculer, to sit upon his
tail; also as Baccoler. Baselie (for basilie,) a Cockatrice. Basenne, as
Baze^e. Basenne (for basane,) sunburned. Basennier, a seller or dresser of
colored sheepskins. Basilaire, as Os basilaire, the cuneal or fundamental
bone of the head. Basique, belonging to the basis. Basme, (for baume) balsam.
Basoche, the whole company of Lawyers Clarks in the Palace of Paris, having
among them a King, and their peculiar Laws; also a certain Court, wherein Wives
that beat their Husbands are censured. Basochiens, Revellers, or Associates
unto that Company, who for the most part are very unruly; or such as belong
unto the Court aforesaid. Basse, (for base) a basis. Les basses de la Mer, the
shallows of the Sea. Bassecule, as Bascule. Basse-dunse, a measure. Bassement,
basely, poorly. Bassenne, the mizzen-sail of a ship. Basse-taille, raised (or
imbossed) Imagery. Bassete, baseness, abjection. Basseur, humbleness,
lowliness. Bassier, Bassiere, the tub that receives tap-droppings; or a tub to
put lees of wine in. Bassieres, the lees of wine. Bassille, crestmarine.
Bassine, a deep, or bason-like and footless Posnet, used most by Confectioners.
Bassinement, a warming with a warming-pan. Bassinet, (for petit bassin) a
little basin. Bastage, a certain Toll exacted by some Country-Lords, for every
horse that passes by them sadled with a pack-saddle. Bastance, what is enough.
Bastardage, bastardy. Bastardaille, a crew of bastards. Bastard, a
demy-cannon, or demy-culverin, a smaller piece of any kind. Baste, (a Subst.)
an odd trick, a shrewd turn; also the skirt of a doublet. Basteler, to juggle,
or tumble; also to play the fool or buffoon. Bastelerie, Basteliere, juggling,
or tumbling, puppet-playing. Bastelet, a little boat. Bastier, a maker of
pack-saddles; also a base lubberly fellow. Bastier, (Adj.) sadled with (or
usually bearing) a pack-saddle. Bastilde, a fortress. Bastillon, a little
fortress. Bastine, the skirt of a doublet or coat; also a pad; also as
bardelle; also a pack-saddle. Bastionner, to fortify with bastions.
Bastissage, a framing, or building. Bastonnade, banged, cudgelled. Bastonneau,
Bastonnet, a little staff, or cudgel. Bastonnee, the stroke of a pump in a
ship. Bastonnement, a beating, or cudgelling. Bastonnier, a Staff-bearer, or
Verger; also the Carrier of the Crucifix in Processions; also a great man in
any Company. Basty, a Territory (or Demesne) belonging to a place. Basty (for
bati) built. Bat, a stroke, or beating. Batable, beatable. Batail (for battant)
de cloche, a bell-clapper. Batalogie, obscene discourse. Batant, tout batant,
just now; as je vien de la encores tout batant, I come from thence but even
now. Or else it is thus rendered; as il les chassa tout batant, he pursued them
very hard; il les a mean batant jusques aux ports de la Ville, he pursued them
even unto the Gates of the Town. Batans de poisson, the gills of a fish.
Bat-beure, a churn-staff. Bate, (for batoir) a rammer, a paving beetle.
Batelage, juggling. Batelee, a boat full of. Bateleresque, juggling, or
Juggler-like. Batemare, a wag-tail. Batiture de fer, the scales that fly from
iron in the hammering thereof. Batsain, a rude alarm given to a whole Country
by ringing and beating of pots, kettles, basins, etc. Battans. See Batans.
Batte, the bolster of a saddle. Les battes d'une port, the piece of wood that
runs all along upon the edge of a lock-side of a door or gate. Batte-eul, a
great linen Vail, such as Nuns wear. Batteler, as Basteler. Battelerie, as
Bastelerie. Battellessisuie, the little yellow water-wagtail. Battequeue, the
same. Battue, a beating, or stroke with the feet, in a settled and proportioned
time, (a term of horsemanship.) Bature, a stripe, a stroke. Battus, as Batus.
Batue, as Battue. Bature, as Batture. Batus, an Order of Friars, who in their
nightly Processions whip their own backs extremely. Bau, as le Navire a tant de
pieds de bau, the ship is so many foot broad. Bau de bite, the forepike, the
part of a Ship, wherein the Bits are placed. Bavarder, to drivel, also to
prattle. Bavasse, an idle tale. Bavasser, to tattle. Baubance, as Bobance.
Baube, a prattler. Bauboyant, faultering. Baue, or Bauch, a sot, an ass.
Baucal, or Baucale. See Bocal in the N. D. Bauche, a row of stones or bricks in
building. Baucher, to lay even; also to square timber. Baucheron, a Squarer of
timber. Bauci, the root of a parship or carrot. Baud, bold, saucy. Baude-bite,
as Bau. Baudement, merrily, jollily. Baudere, beaver. Baudet, an ass. Baudiner,
two to ride upon an ass or horse; also to teach something unskilfully, to do
any thing like an ass. Baudir, to cheer up. Baudouinage, Ass-lechery.
Baudouiner, to engender like an Ass. Baudrayer, and Baudrier. V. Baudroyer in
the N. D. Baudroy, a ravenous and ugly fish called the Sea-toad. Bauds, a kind
of white hounds. Bauduffle, the great rush wherewith poor houses are thatched;
also litter, or bedunged straw. Baverole, Baverotte, a bib. Bavesche, the
socket of a candle-stick. Baveur, as Bavard in the N. D. Baveuse, a certain
fish without seal, that covers her self when she lists with her own foam.
Baveusement, foamingly. Bauffrer, to devour, or eat greedily. Bauffreur, a
devourer. Bauffreure, a devouring, or greedy feeding. Bauffroy, a watchtower.
Baug^art, a scoundrel, a scurty or beastly companion. Baviere, (for baveret) a
bib. Baviere d'un armet, the b^^^r of an helmet. Bauldrier, to dress or carry
leather. Bauldrieur, a leather-dresser. Bauldroy, as Baudroy. Bavois, a table
or paper containing the estimate of the Rights of Scigneuriage, Foiblage, and
Brassage, according to the several rates of gold, silver, and b^llion then
current, or made current by the Kings Ordinances. Bavoler, to wag, or fly low,
like a gnat in wintertime. Bavolet, (for volant) a shittle-cock. Bavolete,
giddy-headed, shittle-brain'd. Bavon, a bib. Bavouer, as bavois. Bauracineux,
salt, or clammy. Baus, as Bauds; also the beams or floor-timber of a ship; the
great pieces of timber that lie from side to side within the hold. Bausonins,
streamers in ships. Baut, jocund, merry. Bayard, bay; also a greedy beholder,
or one that stares at a thing. Bayart, a basket or dosser used for the carrying
of earth, and fastened for the same purpose about the neck with two leathern
thongs. Baybaye, a scornful mow made. Baye, (for un conte) a sib. Bayer, to
gape, to gaze. Bayeul, (for bahu) a trunk. Bayeure, a gaping or gazing. Bail.
See Baillif in the N. D. Bazane, sheeps leather dressed like Spanish-leather,
and colored red, green, or yellow, etc. Bazaner, as Basaner. Bazanne, as
Bazane. Bazaveresque, a sort of pear. Baze (for base) basis. Bazenne, as
bazane. Bazette, toil bazette, linen cloth which is but half white. Bazilles,
crest-marine. Bazoche, as Besoche. Beat, happy, blessed, holy, sacred.
Beatiles, Beatilles, toys, trumpery; also women of a low stature. Beau-regard,
a Summer House. Beauvois, the name of a fruitful red Vine. Becasseau, Becasson,
a snipe. Beccane, a kind of black grape. Beccard, the female Salmon. Beccasse
(for becasse,) a woodcock. Beccasseau, Beccasson, Beccassine, for becassine, a
snipe. Beccu, beaked, having a beak; sharp or hooked as a birds bill. Beccusse,
an uproar. Becdasse, a wood-cock. Becdoye, a dolphin. Bechebois, a wood-pecker.
Bechet, a pike-fish. Bechevet, a test bechevet, the play with pins called
heads and points; also the lying of two in a bed, the one right, the other with
his head at his feet. Becheur, a digger. Bechique, a medicine for the cough.
Bechistre, a tempest, or storm. Bechu, as Beccu. Bechus, a deformed thing in
the Sea, that is neither fish nor plant, yet seems to move of it self. Becquade,
a b^ck. Becque, a ditch or trench made upon the highway; also a spade. Becque,
beaked (in Heraldry.) Becquebo, a wood-pecker, or highaw. Becquee, a bill, (or
a beak) full. Becquefigue (for becfigue) gnat-snapper. Becquer, Becqueter, (for
bequeter) to peck. Becquet, as Bequet. Becquillon, a little beak, or bill.
Becu, as Beccu. Bedacier, of, or belonging to a Beadle, Beadle-like. Bedaine, a
short bar of steel or iron; also a forked arrow for a crossbow; also ill luck;
also a fat guts or gorbelly; also the belly. Bedat, an enclosed wood. Bedaud, a
darling, or favorite. Bedegar, our Ladies thistle. Bedengue, a certain apple
that yields most excellent Cider. Bedier, a sot, a coxcomb. Bedon, a tabret,
also the belly. Bedondaine, that part of the belly which is between the navel
and privities. Bedonal, Bedonau, a young brock or badger, also a sea-gull.
Bedone, a badger. Bedonner, to play upon the taber. Be, the bleating of sheep;
also a hole in a wall, or the like. Beement, a gaping. Been, an Arabian plant.
Beer, to gape. Beffleries, tricks, gulleries. Begauder, to loyter. Begude, a
cottage. Begue (for mouette) a sea-mew. Beguet, a Sergeant or Officer that
executes the Orders given, and Commissions sent out by the public Magistrate.
Beguiner, to put on a biggin. Beguines, an Order of old Nuns. Beguoyement (for
begayement) stuttering. Behen. See Been. Behistre, a ^^rrible storm.
Behistreux, t^mp^st^^^s, stormy. Behourd, a Just or T^urney of many together
with la^es and battle axes; also a bustling voise. Behourdir, to just together
with ^^^ces, etc. to make a bustling ^^ise. Behourdis, a bustling, or
blustering. F^u de behourdi^, a bone-fire. Bejaunage, simplicity, want of
experience. Bejaune, a novice, an ignorant fellow. Payer son bejaune, to pay
his welcome (a fee exacted by Scholars of such as are newly admitted into their
Society.) Bejaunerie, Bejaunise, as Bejaunage. Beille, as Begue. Beillottes,
acorns. Beisle, the Vnder-hatches of a ship. Belaud, as Bedaud. Beler, Beleter
(for Beeler) to bleat like a sheep. Beliard (for belier) a ram. Belie, a kind
of red in Heraldry. Belin, a ram. Mascher en belin, to mumble as one that wants
teeth. Beline, rammed, also co^ened. Beliner, to ram, also to co^en. Belinge,
as Tiretame in the N.D. Belistraille, Belitraille, a ras^ally ^r^e. Belistreau,
Belitreau, a young rascal. Belistrement, rascally. Belistrer, Belitrer, to play
the rascal. Belistrerie, Belitrerie, rascalliness; also a thing of little or no
worth. Bellistresse, a base Queen. Bellastre, pretty fair. Bellateur, a
professed Soldier. Bellatrice, a Virago. Belleque, a coot. Bellette (for
belette) a weesel. Bellettement, prettily, also fair and softly. Belle-videre,
the flower called blue-bells. Bellic, as Belic. Bellin, as Belin.
Belliqu^usement, martially. Bellirie, a round mirabolan-plani. Bellistrandie,
roguery. Bellistrandier, a needy rogue. Belloce, a wild plum. Bellocier, a wild
plum-tree. Bellot, pretty. Bellotte, for belette, a weesel. Beluge, as belugue.
Belvedere, the name of a shrub. Belugue, a spark of fire. Belusteau, Beluteau,
a boulting-cloth. Belutage, Belutement, a sisting of meal. Beluter, to sift;
also to swi^e. Belzoin (for benjoin) benjamin. Ben, the oily acorn. Benarie, a
goat-snapper. Bend, Bendelette, Bender. See Band, Bandelette, and Bander, in
the N. D. Been, a measure of coals worth about three sous. Benedict, blessed,
happy. Beneficial, belonging to a Benefice. Beneficience, beneficence. Benest,
or Benet, a (simple or silly) fellow. Benestier (for benaitier) a
holy-water-pot. Benevole, kind, or friendly. Benisson, a blessing. Benistre,
to bless. Benne, a hamper; also a great sack for corn or coals; also the head
or horns of a stag. Bennel, a tumbrel, or dung-cart. Bennerie, low
Jurisdiction. Benoict, as Benet. Benoicte, herb avens. Benoist, as Benet.
Benoistier (for benaitier) a holy-water-pot. Benzoin (for benjoin) benjamin.
Beque, a sea-cob, or sea-gull. Bequebo, a wood-pecker, or high^w. Bequee (for
bechee) a heak full. Bequenauld, a pratile-basket, a prating boy. Bequenaulde,
a prattling girl. Bequer, as Becquer. Bequeru, a Weevels, a little black and
corn-devouring vermin. Bequerut, a kind of olive. Bequet, the pike-fish; also
the name of a sowrish apple. Bequet de Mer, a dainty, little, and longnosed
rock-fish. Bequillon, a little bill of a bird. Bequu, as Bechu. Ber, a Baron;
also a cradle. Berangene, a kind of fruit like a pea^, growing near the ground
as a mellon. Berberris, the barbary-tree. Berche, the piece of Ordnance called
a Base. Bercherie, a store of Bases in a ship. Berchot, the little wren, our
Lady's ben. Berdin, the shellfish called a Lemp^t. Beree, a chassinch.
Bergama^que, as il boucle sa femme a la Bergamasque, he buckles up his wife as
the Italian Bergamasks. Berrerette, a drink made of old hard wine and ^on^^.
Bergerolle, Bergerotte, a young Sh^pherd^^. Ber^^hot, as Berchot. Bericles, a
pair of spectacles. Berille, as Beril in the N. D. Berlaffe, a slash, or a deep
cu^. Berlaffer, to slash, or wound extremely. Berlaffe, slashed. Berlin, as
Berdin. Berlingasse, Berlingue, a piece of coin worth about six pence sterling.
Berlong, for Barlong, more long than broad. Berlue, p^rblinde. Berluement,
purblindness, or dimness of sight. Berluquer, to trifle out the time. Bernadet,
a kind of dog-fish. Bernage, carriage; also nobleness, gallantness of humor;
also meslin, or several sorts of corn mingled. Bernagoe, a Carpenters wimble.
Bernaque, the fowl called a Barnacle. Berne, a sieve, or van; also a great
kettle; also a kind of Moorish garment, or such a Mantle as Irish Gentlewomen
wear. Bernie, rug, also a mantle thereof. Berretin, a little cap. Berrouette
(for brouette) a wheelbarrow. Bers, as Ber, Bers de chariot, the sides, racks,
or rails of a Cart. Bersaut, a Quintain for Country-Youths to run at. Berser,
Berse, Bersean. See Bercer, Berce, Berceau in the N. D. Bertonneau, a Bret, or
Turbot. Bertouder, Bertouser, as Bertauder in the N. D. Bervl. See Beril in the
N. D. Besacier, a bag-bearer. Besanner, to give leather a grain in dressing, or
to dress a sheeps skin like Spanish leather; also as Bazaner. Besas, amb^sas.
Besch, a South-west-wind. Beschage, an opening, or digging up of the ground.
Besche-bois, a wood-pecker. Beschevet, as Bechevet. Bescau, the side of a loaf
which in the Oven cleaves to another loaf. Besiale, as Champ besiale, a Common.
Besicles, a pair of spectacles. Besiclier, a Spectacle-maker. Besier, the herb
Orage. Besle, as Beisle. Besmus, a sot. Besoche, as Bezoche. Besongner (for
travailler) to work. Besongnette, a little work. Besot, the last, or youngest
child one has. Besquee, as Bequee. Besse, a shovel headed with iron, or as
besche. Bessieres, the tiltings of low-running wine, etc. Besson, twin.
Besteau, a bell-clapper. Bestelette, a little beast. Bestement, beastly.
Besterie, sottishness. Bestial (for betail, or bestiaux) cattle. Bestion, a
little beast. Besto^quer, to stab. Bestourner, to amaze. Besycles, a pair of
spectacles. Besyclier, a Spectacle-maker. Besyn, fuddled. Beat, as Betty.
Betelle, a kind of herb. Betosne (for betoine) betony. Betourne, dizzie, or
giddy in the head. Bettes, sipping, quassing; as entrer en bettes, to grow
merry, or mellow in drinking. Bettescher, to tackle a ship; also to set out any
thing. Beturre, a sink-hole. Beuffroy, a watchtower. Beur, as Moyne beur, a
lubberly Monk, or a quaffing Monk. Beuratte, a churn. Beuree, the name of a
pear. Beurichon, a when. Beurrette, a churn. Beurrier (Adj.) of, or belonging
to butter. Un pot beurrier, a butter-pot. Beuvailler, to q^ast. Beuvande, small
wine, servants wine. Beuver^au, a sipp^r. Beuveron, a drench for a horse.
Beuveter (for beuvoter) to sip. Beuvet^e, as Buvette. Beuvoire de Venus, the
Fallers thistle. Beuvrage, beverage. Bezanne, as Bezane. Bezarder, to die.
Bezer, a cow to run up and down, holding up her tail, when the brizze does
sting her. Beset, as aller a S. Bezet, to run up and down like one that has a
bri^^e in his tail. Bezeche (for hoyau) a mattock. Bezele, the name of a fish.
Biains, as Bians. Biaisement, astop^, b^as-wis^. Biaiscure, s^o^ent^. Bians,
days works both of m^n and beasts due unto Landlords by all Tenants (who are no
Gentlemen) within the County of Poictou. Biaque, ^^r^se, or white lead,
wherewith women paint. Biarn, a white cloth of course wool, with interwoven
streaks of blew, whereof the Country People about Languedoe make cloaks. Biaut,
a kind of British course garment, or jacket, worn loose over the apparel.
Bibaille, a present, fairing, or new years gift. Bibelots, buckle-bones, or the
play at huckle-bones. Bibet, a gnat. Bibette, a wheal, or blister. Bibliopole,
for Libraire, a Bookseller. Biblot, as Bibelot, or a small square piece in
checquer-work, or whereof checker-work is made. Bibul, the stalk of great
hemlocks, us d by the Country People of some places, instead of a Kan or Pot to
drink in. Bibule, blotting, or brown paper. Bibus, as une affair de bibus, ou
de neant, a thing of no concernment, an insignificant thing. Bicarne, the great
verjuice-grape. Bichard, a binde-calf, or a red-deer-calf. Bichecoter, to
leacher it. Bichecoterie, a leacherous trick. Bichet, a measure for corn.
Bicherte de Lion, the half of the bichet, about a bushel of Paris. Bicheteau,
Bichot, a little ^i^de-calf; also a measure for corn used in Burgundy, and
containing a^ ^ut sive of their bushels. Bichoterie, as Bichecoterie. Bicle, as
Bigle. Bicorne, Bicornu, having two ^orns. Bicque, a Goat, or as biche.
Bidaulx, Bidaux, cowardly stragglers after an Army. Bidente, that has two
teeth. Bidon, a great cage, or open basket, to keep or feed poultry in.
Bidonne, a kind of Sea-purslan. Biece, a spade. Biecer. to dig. Biendisance,
eloquence. Bien-en-allee, a farewell. Bienh^ure, happy, prospero^s. Bienh^urer,
to make happy, or prosperous. Bienh^urete, happiness, prosperity. Bienseamment,
decently. Bienveigner, Bienvienner, to welcome. Bienvenement, a welcome.
Bien-voulu, well-beloved. Bienvueillant, a well-wisher. Bies, (for biais) byas.
Bife, Biffe, a counterfeit jewel, also a fool that would seem wise. Bifer. See
Biffer in the N. D. Bifement, Biffeure, Bifferie, a rasing, defacing, or
blotting out. Biforme, that is of two several forms or shapes. Biformite,
double form. Bifourche, consisting of two forked parts. Bifourcation, a forked
form. Bifre, (for bievre) a beaver. Bigarruge, motley color. Bigaut, a fool,
an ass. Bigearrement, fantastically. Bigearrer, Bigearrure, Bigerrerie. See
Bigarrer, and Bigarrure in the N. D. Biglement, squintingly, askew. Biglesse, a
squinting wench. Bigne, a swelling after a knock. Bignoter, as Binoter.
Bigorne, a Smiths anvil. Bigorneau, Bigornet, a periwincle, or as Nerite.
Bigotage, Bigotation, Bigotie, Bigotise, superstitious devotion; also
hypocrisy. Bigotte, as chausses a la bigotte, close breeches tied below the
knee. Bigotte, turned superstitious, or hypocrite. Bigotter, to make
superstitious, or to fill with hypocrisy. Biguarruge, as Bigarruge. Bihay,
byas. Bihayser, to byas. Bihore, a word wherewith French Carters hasten on
their horses. Bihoreau, a kind of little heron. Bijon, liquid ro^en. Billard
(Adj.) as pie billard, a splay foo^. Billardier, that goes in at the knees.
Bille-barre, cross-barred. Bille-boquet, a Gardeners line to measure beds and
borders withal; also a bob. Biller, to play at billiards; also to soften the
(...) of a boat to the wood which rans cross the hams of the horses that are to
a^aw it. Billeron. See Maille. B^llette, a ^ill^t of wood; also a lit^^^ ^owl,
^^^ewhat longer than an ordinary one; also a passage-toll. Bille-vezees, trash,
trifles. Billion, a million of millions. Billos, certain Imposts leavied upon
Wines. Bimauve, the white mallow. Bimbelote, furnished with paultry ware.
Bimblotier, a paultry Pedlar. Binage, as Binement in the N. D. Bineur, a
labourer, a digger. Bingu, troubled, molested. Binoire, as Bisnoire. Binotage,
Binotement, Binotir, the second digging of soil. Binoter, to dig land the
second time. Bios, God. Bipartient, parting, or dividing into two. Bipedal,
double footed; also two foot long or wide. Biquoquet, the peak of a Ladies
mourning-hood. Birer, as Virer. Birrasque, a high-going Sea, or a tempest at
sea. Bisacquier, a bag-bearer. Bisague (for besague) a twibil. Bisantin, as
Besant in the N. D. Bisarme, as Guisarme. Bis-biane, wheaten bread. Biscantin,
drink made of bullace. Biscapit, a double employment of one sum in an account.
Biscaye, a vantage at Tennis. Bischard, a sawn, or hinde-calf. Bischet, as
Bichet. Bisclant, Biscle, squinting, looking askew. Biscoter, to swive.
Biscuteau, fine biscuit bread. Biseau, such a slopeness as is in the point of an
iron leaver, etc. Bisete, wrought or stripped with plate, as some kind of stuffs
be. Bisette, plate of gold, silver, or copper, wherewith some stuffs are
striped. Bisexte. See Bissexte in the N.D. Bisneur, as Bineur. Bisnoire, a
forked mattock, or pick-axe. Bison, a kind of wild Ox. Bisongne, as Bison; also
a rascally fellow; also a raw soldier. Bisouart, a pa^ltry Pedlar. Bisse, an
adder. Bissestre, ill luck. Bislin^s, spruce terms, fine words. Bissole, as
Bizole. Bis^arde, a bird called Bustard. Bistorie, a kind of launcet. Bistorie,
Bistorin, crooked, awry. Bistortier, a rolling-pin, or pestle of wood. Bite,
beets. Prendre, du potage de la bite, to do that a maid should not do. Bites,
the bits, two great wooden pegs whereto the cable is fastened when an anchor is
let fall. Bituminer, to mingle with bitumen. Bivet, fair bivet, to make an end
of a candle stick with a drop of tallow upon the edge of a candlestick.
Bizarderies, fantastical tricks. Bizarreure, diversity of colors or fashions
in one subject. Bize, for Bise, the North Wind. Bizeau, as Biseau. Bizet, as
Biset in the N. D. Bladier, a Merchant of corn. Bladier (Adj.) of, or belonging
to corn. Blaffastre, somewhat pale. Blaier, Seigneur Blaier, the Landlord that
may amerce all such Foreiners as turn their Cattle into the veins pastures, or
wast grounds belonging unto his Lordship, which without his permission (paid
for) they ought not to have done. Blaime (for pale) pale. Blaimeur, paleness.
Blaimir, to grow pale. Blairie, Droit de Blairie, a Lords power to fine, etc.
as you have it in the word Blaier. Pais de blairie, a Country plentiful of
corn. Blanc-doux, a white sweeting. Blanchard, an Order of Friars going in
white sheets, and wearing neither hats nor shoes. Blancheastre, (for
blanchatre) whitish. Blanche-puce, Blanch pute, the Sea-ground-pine (a whitish
herb.) Blanche-putain, the herb rank-goat, or stinking motherwort.
Blanche-queue, the ravenous Kite, called a Kingtail. Blanchet, a wast-coat, a
blanket for a bed; also the apple called a White-sweeting. Blanchet, (for
blanchatre) whitish. Blanchette, fine white flour of wheat. Blanchiment, a
whiting, or whitening. Blanes-ma^^^^^, w^it^ Cloaks, an Order of begging
Friars. Blancuier, a bird like a Whittail. Blande, a Salamander. Blandices,
flatterings, allurements. Blandi, flattered, or soothed up. Blandir, to
flatter, or sooth up. Blandissant, pleasing, flattering. Blandissement,
blandishment, flattering, or soothing up. Blandisseur, a flatterer. Blandureau,
a kind of white apple. Blanquet, a sort of the best white wine in Languedoc.
Blanquette, a delicate white Summer-pear. Blareau (for blereau) a badger.
Blasser, to foment, moisten, or bathe gently with the hand a hurt (especially
about a horse.) Blatir, to gather up, draw, or shrink in himself. Blattaire, an
herb called Mothmulleyn. Blatte, a moth, a beetle, a kind of red wheat, a
silkworm, a weesel. Blattier, a Merchant of corn. Blavee, corn-land.
Blavelles, Blavcoles, Blaves, blew-bottles. Blavier, of, or belonging to corn.
Blaureau (for blereau) a badger. Blayer. See Blaier. Blayeries, a corn-Ground,
or corn-Country; also the feeding of cattle upon Corn-lands; also the season
(from the Annunciation to the end of harvest) wherein cattle may in some places
be turned by some privileged persons into common corn-grounds. Blece-esprit,
wounding the spirit. Bleecure (for blessure) wound. Bleche, Blecque,
over-mellow. Pomme blecque, an apple that is too ripe, or too mellow. Bledier,
of, or belonging to corn. Terre-blediere, Corn-ground. Blemy, grown pale.
Blesme, as bleme, pale. Blesmet, somewhat pale. Blesmir, to grow pale. Blesmi,
grown pale. Blesmissement, Blesmisseure, paleness. Blessable, that may be
wounded. Blet, a block-head. Blete, a turf, or peat. Blette, as poire blette,
an over-ripe pear. Blisires, as Belistres; also the herb called Bleets.
Bloccageux, Bloccailleux, full of rubbish, etc. Blocul, the chiefest pole that
upholds a Tent; also a blockhouse. Blondir, Blondoyer, to grow light, or
flaxen. Blondore, of a golden yellow. Blondoyement, a making, or becoming light
yellow. Blondurel, as Blandureau. Bloquaille, for Blocaille, shards, rubbish.
Bloquil, as Blocul in the first sense. Blosse, as poire blosse, an over-mellow
pear. Blot, for Bloc, a block. Bloti, squat, hidden, or kept close. Blotir, to
squat, also to hide, or keep close. Blotte, as Bloutre. Blotter, to blot, to
stain. Blouse, a close Tennis-court. Bloutte, a clod of earth. Bloutte, full of
clods. Blouttoir, a Rowler. Bluard, bluish. Blute, the blew-bottle. Bluteau, a
boulting cloth. Bluterie, a boulting, also a boulting-tub. Bluttage, Blutement,
a boulting of meal. Bluttis, a boulting-tub, or a room to boult meal in. Bo,
word. Boage, a place in Abbeys full of drawers, wherein they lay up Copes, etc.
Bobance, Bobans, riot, luxury; also pride, insolency. Bobelin, a patch, or
piece set on a shoe or garment. Bobeline, an old patched shoe or garment.
Bobeliner, to patch, or to cobble. Bobelineur, a patcher, or cobbler.
Bobulaire, big, huge, unweildy like an Ox. Bobulaires, toys. Bocageux, full of
groves. Boccabreve, a kind of apple. Boccanner, as Boucaner. Boccasin, for
Bocassin, a kind of fine buckram. Boce, for Bosse, a bunch. Bochaise, a wild
chestnut. Bocie, a Limbeck. Boclus, as Bouclus. Bocon, as Boucon. Bocque, a kind
of fish, also a slace. Bocquer, to bull, or jurr. Bocquet, a grove. Bode, a
young bull. Boesseau, (for boisseau) a bushel. Boesselet, a little bushel.
Boetouyer, to halt, or be lame. Boettelette, a little box. Bohade, as Bouade.
Bohourd, as Behourd. Bohourder, as Behourder. Bohu, empty, vacant. Boicheron, a
wood-cleaver, or wood-seller. Boie, a kind of great water-snake, that uses to
sack whole herds of Kine. Boiffer, to slubber over things in haste. Boiffeur,
one that slubbers over things in haste. Boileau, Boilesve, an ordinary drinker
of water. Boiler, to will. Boise, a log, also a brace of timber. Boise, woody.
Boisse, hasted, or trimmed with box. Boissel d'osier, a weel, or weer of
os^er-twigs. Boisselet, a small French bushel. Boisselier, a maker, or seller
of bushel-measures. Boissiere, a plot of box-trees. Boissonnerie, excessive
drinking. Boiste, for Boete, a box. Boistellette, a little box. Boistement,
lamely. Boistusant, limping, halting. Boite (for boete) a box. Boitouser, to
limp, to halt. Boitte (for boete) a box. Boitte (for bote) de foin, a bottle of
hay. Boivin, a wine-drinker. Bolar, a kind of asp-resembling tree. Bole
d'Armenie, bole-armenie. Bolet, Bolete, a little mushroom, or toadstool.
Bolieme, a lip, or chap. Boline, a rope used when a ship sails with a
side-wind, or goes near a wind. Boliner, to lay tack aboard. Bolleau (for
bouleau) the birch-tree. Bollettes de Cypres, Cyprus nuts, or clogs. Bolouet, a
bulwark. Bolus, a morsel, or mouthful; also clay which has no mineral
substance in it. Bombance, as Bobance. Bombarde (for Bombe) a murdering piece.
Bombarder, to discharge a murdering piece. Bombardier, a discharger of
murdering pieces. Bombycine, the worse kind of the Levant-Manna. Bonace,
(Adj.) calm, quiet. Bonadies, good morrow. Bonasse (for bonace) a calm.
Bondelle, a fish much like a great smelt. Bondener, to argue; also to grumble.
Bondonne, stopped up with a bung. Bondonner, to stop up with a bung. Bondree, a
kind of short-winged Eagle. Bone, for Borne, bound, limit. Bon-enten-tu, a
nimble wit. Bon-Henry, the wild sorrel. Bonhort, as Behourd. Bonifie, made
good, or rich. Bonifier, to make good; also to make rich or wealthy. Boniton, a
sort of fish. Bonnage, as Bornage. Bonnaire, bountiful, sincere. Bonnairete,
bountifulness, sincerity. Bonnairement, bountifully, sincerely. Bonne, (for
borne) bound, limit. Bonnes-dames, the herb Orage, or Golden-herb; also Beet.
Bonneter, to pull off his cap to one. Bonneton, a little cap. Bonniere, a
measure of Land not much differing from the Arpent. Bons-hommes, (for Minimes)
an Order of Friars. Booie, the water-serpent Boas. Boolingue, as Boulingue.
Boot, a Northern star. Boque, as Bocque. Boquet, a Grove of trees. Borax, for
Borras, Borax, a green Mineral. Borborigme, the rumbling of the guts; also the
murmuring noise of running waters. Bordage, edge, side, or brim; also
Villenage. Droict de bordage, the drudgery, or base services reserved by some
Lords, upon the letting of their Cottages or small Tenements; which cannot be
given, sold, nor engaged by the poor slaves that have taken them. Board, a
scattered house in the Country, a farm, or farm-house; also a stalk of pilled
hemp. Bordeau, (for bordel) a bawdy house. Bordeler, to haunt bawdy-houses.
Bordelier, a wencher, a whoremonger. Bordeliere, the name of a fish that
resembles a Bream, and has neither teeth nor tongue. Bordelois, the name of a
very great grape. Bordereau, a ticket, a bill, an account. Bordeux, full of
hems, edges, etc. Bordieux, small Tenements, little Cottages. Bordonne, as
Bourdonne. Boree, the North-east wind. Borgner, to wink with one eye and look
with another. Borgnesse, a woman that has but one eye. Borgnet, almost blind
of one eye. Borgnoyer, to want an eye, to look or see but with one eye, to wink
with one eye. Borgue, a weel for fish. Borlet, for Bourlet, a roll of cloth.
Bornage, bounds, or limits. Droict de bornage, the Royalty of laying out bounds
for other men's Lands. Bornal de miel, a honeycomb. Bornion a miel, a
honeycomb, or bees-nest full of honey. Borrache, a Spanish leather-bottle.
Borrais (for borras) Borax. Borrasque (for bourasque) a storm. Borret, a beast
about a year old. Borrette, a heifer about a year old. Borriere, as vache
borriere, a Cow that has a Calf running after her. Borrugat, the name of a
Seafish. Bortiere, the female-salmon. Bos, wood. Bose, the name of an apple,
also wood. Boscal, a little Wood. Boscale, Champ boscale, a piece of ground or
Common (without any House upon it) wherein diverse have certain and several
parts. Bosne (for borne) bounds, limits. Bosne, bounded, limited. Bosquillon, a
Wood-seller, or a Wood-cleaver. Bosse, swoollen, knobby. Bosseler, to bruise,
or make a dint in a vessel of metal or piece of plate. Bosselure, such a kind
of bruise. Bossetier, a Stud-maker. Bossetiere, a lettle bunch or knob; a
little heap, rising, or swelling of earth; a boss set on a book; a stud on any
part of a horses furniture. Bossis, high grounds, or little hills raised by the
hands of men. Bossuer, to make crooked; also to swell or puff up unevenly. Bot,
a wooden shoe, or patten; also an ill-favored big piece of any thing.
Botaige, Temps de botaige, the time from the ninth of October to the last of
November. Botanique, of, or belonging to herbs. Botanomantie, divination by the
virtue of herbs. Botargues, the hard rows of the Murene, or of a kind of Mullet
salted, and then dried, and eaten, to provoke drinking. Boteau, a bottle of
hay, etc. Bothoral, full of wheals. Botineur, a buskin-maker; also one that
continually wears boots or buskins. Bortyte, Cadmia in grape-like clusters
gathered from the roofs of copper-houses, or over the furnaces wherein copper
is ordinarily melted or made. Botte, Botter, and Botte. See them with a single
t in the N.D. Botteler (for boteler) du foin, to make bottles of hay. Botterol,
a Toad. Bou, a boying, or bubbling. Bouade, the Work of two Oxen, or Use of a
small Cart due certain days in Summer by Tenants (that hold by Socage or
Villenage) unto their Landlords, for the laboring and dressing of their
Vineyards. Bouban, and Boubance. See Bobance. Boubax, the name of a kind of
Olives. Boucal, a Weesel, also a vent for the fire or heat of a furnace.
Boucan, a he-Goat. Boucaner, to do like a Goat. Boucane, ridden by a Goat.
Boucanier, out of date, out of season. Bouccalart, plain Chamlet. Bouchard, a
kind of great-eared brown Wheat. Boucharde, a Masons hammer, or pick, pointed
at both ends like a diamond. Bouchasses, wild or bastard Chestnuts. Bouchelette,
a little mouth. Boucheron, a faggot-maker. Bouchet, a kind of broth for a sick
body; also a drink made of water sweetened with Sugar and Cinnamon. Bouchette, a
little mouth. Bouchimbarbe, Goats beard (an herb.) Bouchonnet, a little wisp,
or stopple. Bouconneux, full of stopples, wisps of straw, bunches, clusters.
Bouclas, Birch. Bouclette, a small buckle. Bouclure, a buckling; also a
swelling, or bearing out in the middle; also a buffetting. Bouclus, trenches,
or ditches. Boucon, bit, morsel, mouthful. Bailler le boucon, to poison.
Bouconnier, a poysonner, one that gives a poisoned bit. Boucque (for bouche)
the mouth. Boucquine, a rammish, or lascivious queen. Bouc-souffle (for
boursouffle) swollen, or puffed up with wind. Boudinal, of, or belonging to a
pudding. Boudine, the navel. Boudree, as Bondree. Boue de fer, the small flakes
that fly from a hot iron when it is beaten. Bouee, a buoy for an anchor. Bouer,
to heal, to mattar. Bouerande, the weed Cammock. Bouette, as Bonnette; also a
little box; also a wheel-barrow. Boueur, a Scavenger. Boufage, as Bouffage.
Boufement, puffingly. Boufeux, a great eater. Bouffage, cheek-puffing meat.
Bouffanes, puffs in a garment, etc. Bouffant, puffing up. Bouffard, often
puffing, also swelling with anger. Bouffe, the part of our cheeks which we puff
up in blowing or feeding, a swollen or swelling cheek. Bouffe, puffed, blown, or
swollen up. Bouffement, a puffing, blowing, or swelling up. Bouffement,
puffingly. Bouffer, to puff, blow, or swell up. Bouffer de courroux, to swell
with anger. Bouffeux, a great eater. Bouffine, greedily eaten. Bouffir, as
Bouffer. Bouffissure, a swelling or puffing up; also a kind of dropsy.
Bouffon, Bouffonner, Bouffonnerie. See them with a single f in the N. D.
Bouffonesque, Buffoon-like. Bouffonneur, a Buffoon. Bouffron, a Cutle-fish.
Boug, the little and venomous green frog, or hedge-toad. Boug coupe, a
tortoise. Bouge, valise, a budget, or wallet. Bougeon, a bolt, or arrow with a
great bead. Bougie, seared with a wax-candle. Bougier, to sear with a
wax-candle. Bougiron, Bougironner, and Bougironne. See Bougeron, etc. in the N.
D. Bougnette, the fork-fish. Bougoir, a sort of candlestick. Bougonner, to
bungle. Bougonneur, a bungler. Bougrande, Cammock. Bougrin, buggering, or fit
for buggery. Chausses a la bougrine, strait Venetians without codpieces.
Bougrisque, buggering, committing Sodomy. Bouhourd, as Behourd. Bouhourdi
premier and second, the first and second Sunday in Lent. Bouillonneux, boiling,
or bubbling; also dirty; also full of puffs. Bouillu, for Bouilli, boiled.
Boujon, a boult, an arrow with a great or broad head. Boujotte, a pigeon-hole
in a dove-coat. Bouissiere, a plot of ground stored with Box. Boular, the
little round nest of a Martin, Titmouse, etc. Boulay, a Birch-tree. Bouldure
d'un moulin, the conduit of a Mill, wherein the wheel goes. Boulenge, baked, or
made into bread. Boulenger, (a Verb) to bake, or make into bread. Bouler, to
bowl. Boulerot, a kind of Gudgeon that lives continually in mud. Boulesche, a
great fish-net. Boulette, a little bowl. Boulever, Bouleverd, Boulevert, a
balwark. Bouleverse, an over-turning. Boulge, as Bouge. Boulie, (for bouillie)
pap. Boulieux, of, or belonging to pap. Boulime, Boulimie, a canine appetite.
Boulin, a pigeon-hole in the Dove-coat. Boulinage, a laying of tack aboard, or
sailing with a side-wind. Boullause, a pout, an eel-pout. Bouller, to cozen,
also to box. Boullon, as Boulon. Boullonne, puffed, or drawn out with puffs.
Bouloers (or Bouloirs) d'un vis, the circles or circling of a scrue. Bouloire,
a Bowling-alley. Boulon, a great peg of wood wherewith Carpenters join great
pieces of timber together. Boulon de fer, a great pin of iron, such as
Tradesmen shut in their shop-windows withal. Boulouer, a Bulwark. Boulture, a
boiling, seething, or bubbling. Boune, for Borne, bound, limit. Bouquanier, as
Boucanier. Bouque, for bouquet, a nosegay. Bouque d'Ange, conserve of
Lettice-stalks. Bouquer, to kiss another man's thumb; to take or give a kiss;
also to strike sail, or to pay custom. Bouquetier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to
nosegays, or nosegay-like. Bouquetiere, a woman-seller of nosegays. Bourache,
as Borrache; also a little candle-case; also an engine (like a candle-case)
wherewith fish is caught. Bourachon, a small leather-bottle; also a
candle-case; also a drunkard, or toss-bottle. Bouras, the tow of hemp, the
coursest part of any such like stuff. Bourasse, a leather-bottle. Bourbe, for
bourbier, dirt, mire. Bourbelier, the breast, or essay of a wild swine.
Bourbeter, to wallow in the dirt, also to mutter. Bourbeteux, full of mud or
dirt, also loving dirt or mud. Bourbetre, a small fresh-water-fish, that
altogether lives on, and lies in mud. Bourbetter, Boubetteux, as Bourbeter,
Bourbeteux. Bourblier, as Bourbelier. Bourboulene, the name of a Vine.
Bourcier, for Boursier, a Purse-keeper. Bourdaine, a kind of hedge-tree,
exceedingly loved by stags. Bourdant, feasting, passing the time. Bourde,
gravelled as a Cart, etc. Bourdelage, a Tenure in the Dominion of Nevers,
whereby the Tenant is bound to pay unto his Landlord a yearly Rent in money,
corn, and feathers, or in any two of them; which if he omit three years
together, he forfeits his estate. Bourdelois, a certain Vine or Grape that
yields very sour wine, and therefore it is usually set about Arbours, more for
the shadow than for the fruit it yields. Bourdelasier, full of jests, or tales.
Bourder, to tell tales, to sell a bargain to one. Bourdereau, as Bordereau.
Bourdeur, a tale-teller, a jester, a guller. Bourdican, a begging Friar.
Bourdonnasses, a fashion of great hollow lances used in old time.
Bourdonnesque, drone-like. Bourdonneur, a hummer, or buzzer; also a player upon
a bag-pipe. Bourdonniere, the gudgeon that is in the top of a bar or hinge-band
of a gate. Boureler, etc. See Bourreler under Bourre in the N. D. Bouret, a
kind of shellfish. Bourgage, a Township, or Boroughship, the Inhabitants of
Houses in Lands belonging to a Town or Borough; also an estate or tenure in
Bourgage, held either of the King, or of other Lords of the Borough, and
subject to no other than the customary rents and services thereof. Bourgalois,
a Spanish coin worth about 18 d. sterling. Bourgamaistre, (for Bourgmestre) a
Burgomaster. Bourgeonneux, full of buds, richly set with pimples. Bourget, a
round stool. Bourgrain, buckram. Bourguignotte, a burganet, or Spanish murrion.
Bourjassotte, the name of a certain fish. Bourjon, Bourjonner, as Bourgeon,
Bourgeonner in the N. D. Bourlesque, (for burlesque) burlesk, merry. Bournage,
as Bornage. Bournal, and Bournois, as Bornal. Bourrabaquin, a great carousing
glass. Bourrachiere, as Corneille bourrachiere, a roysten crow. Bourrachon, a
toss-pot. Bourrade, a storm, or tempest; also the cuffing or ruffling of a bird
by a hawk; also the tossing or muzzling of a hare by a greyhound before he bear
her. Bourranfle, puffed up. Bourraquin, as Bourrabaquin, or a Spanish
leather-bottle. Bourras, (for borras) borax; also silkrash; also course canvas.
Bourrasser, to bastinado. Bourre, (for canard) a Duck. Bourree, a faggot of
twigs, a bundle of any such like stuff. Bourrelet, (for bourlet) a wreath, or
roll of cloth. Bourrelier, tormenting, torturing. Bourrette, the uppermost part
of the clue or ball of silk yielded by the silkworm, the coursest of silk.
Bourreux, full of flocks, etc. Bourriquet, a kind of tumbrel or dung-cart;
also as Bourrique, an ass. Bourroche (for bourrache) borage. Bours de Chevres,
stables for goats. Boursal, a younger Brother. Boursal, (Adj.) of a younger
brother. Fief boursal, the portion belonging to a younger brother.
Boursalement, by the title of Youngership, different from that of the elder
Brother, who is to do homage unto the Lord for the whole Inheritance.
Boursavit, a purse for a man's yard; also a kind of big leathern purse.
Boursaul, the cane-willow. Boursaux, younger brethren. Bourse, put up in a
purse; also bulching, or bearing out, as a full purse. Bourseau, a little
blister. Bourselle, a Mariners Compass. Bourser, to put up in a purse.
Bourseron, a little purse. Bourseteux, Bourseaux, purse-like; full of purses;
belonging to a purse. Boursicouter, to make a purse. Boursiller, the same; also
to put his hand into ones purse. Boursillon, a little purse. Boursoufflade,
idle vanity. Boursouffleure, any swelling, puffing, or blowing up. Bousant,
Bousat, a buzzard, or bald kite. Bouscheron, a faggot-maker. Bouse, Bousee de
vache, a cowturd. Bouset, petit bouset, a little odious fellow, a paltry crop
of a cowturd. Bousfler, to puff up, or blow wind into. Bousilles, stuff to daub
with. Bousiller, a dawber. Bousin, a soft and mouldring substance that cleaves
to the outside of freestone in quarries. Bousinier, as pierres bousinieres,
soft and mouldring stones, apt to melt away in water, or by weather. Boussade,
the rot, or plague among sheep. Bousse, a bunch, the bunch of a Camels back.
Boussin, a bit, or morsel. Boussu, for bossu, crooked. Boustargues, as
Botargues. Boutage, Droict de boutage, a certain Duty or Fee exacted by the
Lord of Breci (a Member of Bourges) for the wine retailed within his
Jurisdiction. Boutant, thrusting forward; also budding, or putting forth.
Boutant, a buttress, or shore-post. Boutargues, as Botargues. Bouse, thrust
forward, also budded or put forth. Boute-cul, a new Monk, or Friar. Boutee, a
thrust, a jert, a violent attempt; also a budding. Boutefoire, a certain
shitten yew game. Bouteillerie, a cupboard, or table to set bottles on.
Bouteillette, a small bottle, or bubble. Bouteilliere, a tympany. Boutement, a
thrusting forward. Bouter, for mettre, to put. Bouterolle, the chape of a
scabbard. Bouteuffle, a bubble. Bouticle, for boutique, a shop; also a well, or
lepe, for fish. Bouticlier, a shopkeeper, or he that looks to a shop.
Boutiffle, a bubble of water. Boutignan, the name of a kind of Olive.
Boutillier, as Bouteiller in the N. D. Boutine, the navel. Boutis, the rooting
of a wild boar; also as boutement. Boutoir, a Farriers buttress. Boutonnerie, a
buttoning, or clasping; also a budding, or sprouting out; also a cauterizing.
Boutonneur, a buttoner, or an instrument wherewith buttons are pulled through
their over-strait holes. Boutouer, the snout of a wild swine. Bouts, a great
bottle, or as Oudre. Boutrice, an ashler, or binding-stone in building.
Boutton, for bouton, button. Boutture, as Bouture under Bout in the N. D.
Bouvaux, a kind of figs. Bouveau, Bouvelle, a bullock. Bouvi, as qui sent le
bouvi, smelling like an Ox. Bouviere, a river-fish. Bouvine, all kind of oxen.
Bouyau, for boyau, gut, bowel. Bouys, for bouis, the box-tree. Bouze, as bouse.
Bouzine, a rustical Trumpet or wind-Instrument, made of pitched bark. Boy, an
Executioner. Bozel, a thick or great boultel commonly in or near unto the basis
of a pillar. Bozine, as Bouzine. Bracal, for Brassal, an Archers brace, or
bracer. Bracats, vambraces, an armor for the arms. Brace, for Brass, a fadom.
Brachial, Brachieux, of, or belonging to the arm. Brachialement, with main
force of arms. Braconnier, a hunter. Bradypepsie, slow concoction. Bragard,
flaunting, pert, braggadochio-like. Bragardement, flauntingly, pertly,
braggingly. Bragarder, to flaunt it, to swagger. Bragardise, flaunting, proud
vanity, swaggering. Bragmarder, to be leacherous. Brague, a kind of mortaise,
or joining of pieces together. Braguer, to brag, to swagger. Braguerie,
bragging, swaggering. Bragues, short and close linnen-breeches worn next unto
the thighs. Braguesques, large Venecians having Cod-peeces, and gathered, or
full of stuff at the knees. Braguette, a cod-piece. Bonnet a quatre braguettes,
a apiece cap. Bragueur, as Bragard. Brahiers, linnen-breeches. Brailler,
to make a great noise, to cry out. Brain, the branch of a tree. Braisillonner,
to roast upon quick coals. Braismer, for bramer, to roar. Braisset, the green
toad. Branc d'acier, a cuttelas. Brancal, and Brancas, as Brancar in the N. D.
Brance, bearded red wheat. Branchet, as Espervier branchet, a brancher, or
young hawk, newly come out of the nest. Branchette, a little branch.
Branchiere, a Passage-toll, so called, because the little log that is a sign
thereof hangs on the branch of a Tree. Branchieres, the out-places, or parts of
the highway wherein the said logs or billets have been a long time hung up.
Branchillon, a little branch. Branchue, a kind of Cray-fish. Branchure, a
branch. Brand, as Branc. Brandes, healthy grounds. Brandif, brandishing, lusty.
Il mangea un gigot de mouton tout brandif, he eat a whole leg of mutton.
Brandilloir, Brandilloire, a swing. Brandonner, to seize land by pitching down
into it a staff topped with straw. Brane, boeuf brane, a kind of wild Ox in
Languedoc and Provence fit only for the Shambles. Branglage, a kind of Toll or
Tax. Branquar, as Brancar in the N. D. also the edge of the Deck of a ship.
Branque ursine, an herb called Brankursine, or Bears breech. Branquetter, as
Bransquetter. Branseat, spoil, ravage. Bransloire, a swing, a brandling.
Bransquetter, to ravage, or ransack. Braque, for Brac, a little hound.
Braquemar, ou Braquemard, a wood-knife, hanger, whineyard. Braser, to slope the
edge of a stone, as Masons do in windows, etc. for the gaining of light.
Brasille, broyled. Brasiller, Brasillonner, to broyl upon quick coals, or hot
embers. Brassage, the fee which the Masters of the Mint have out of every sort
of money coined. Brassart, and Brassat, as Brassal in the N. D. Brassier, a
Brazier; also a sling; also a cudgel; also the tab that receives the droppings
of a tap; also a laboring man. Brassiere, a woman's or a child's wastcoat; also
the doublet some women wear in childbed; also the arm or branch of a river;
also a brace; one of the staves whereby men turn the beam of a Crane, etc.
Brassin, a brewing. Brassique, Colewort. Brater un Chariot, to turn, set, or
bend a cart on the right or left hand. Bravache, a swaggerer. Bravacherie, a
swaggering. Brave (a Subst.) the reward or prize for him that has done best in
Plays or Games. Braveux, he that gives the prize. Brayant, Brayart, braying, or
crying like an Ass. Brayer, Brayement. See Broyer, broyement in the N. D.
Brayere, a flax-wise. Brayetter la chemise, to put his shirt between the legs.
La Langue me brayette, my tongue trips, or faulters. Brayeul, the parts or
feathers about the hawks fundament, called the brail in a short-winged, and the
panel in a long-winged hawk. Breant, the bird called a Siskin. Brebiail,
Brebiaille, sheep, ews. Brebiette, a little sheep, or ew. Breborions, old
dunsical books; also charms against the toothache, etc. Breche, having a breach
made in it. Brechedent, one that wants diverse teeth, or as Breschedent.
Brechet, the brisket. Brecheure d'une Riviere, a breach in a River. Bredaille,
a great paunch, or belly. Bredailler, a gor-belly, fat-guts. Brediner, to
pronounce imperfectly. Bredouillard, one that speaks or pronounces imperfectly.
Bredouille, a lurch at Cards or Tables. Ma p^tite bredouille, my little rogue.
Bredouiller, to speak, or pronounce imperfectly. Brehaigne, a barren woman or
female, or (adjectively) barren. Brei, as Bret. Breil de forest, a thick-grown
wood, or corner of a forest, wherein wild beasts use to lurk. Breits, for
Bray, a kind of shippitch. Brelate, slashed. Brelm, Brelandier. See Berlan,
Berlandier in the N. D. Brelengue, Brelingue, a piece of coin worth about 8
pence sterling. Breller, to bat-fowl, to catch birds by bat-fowling, also to
twinkle, or glitter. Brelles, cives. Brelue, for Berlue, dimness of sight.
Bremant, as il n'a enfant ne bremant, he has neither child nor chick to care
for. Bremer, for Bramer, to cry out like a Heart. Bremme (for brame) a bream.
Bren, a turd. Brenasserie, shitten stuff. Breneux, beshitten. Bresche, the name
of a very hard and sundry-coloured marble. Bresche, as Breche. Breschedent, as
Brechedent; also an Ironical allusion to President. Bresille, made red as
Brasil-wood. Boeuf bresille, Martlemas-beef. Bresin, the hook of a Crane, and
in a ship the Cane-hook. Bressaudes, the crispy mammocks that remain of fri'd
hogs grease. Bressaux, a kind of fine cakes, or wafers, or as Pain de Quinque.
Bresse, a brush; also a thin leaf or cake of wax, etc. Bresseron, the
Sow-thistle. Bressille des yeux, the twinkling of the eyes. Bressiller, to
twinkle with the eyes. Bret, a little Engine (made of two sticks joined
together) wherewith Fowlers catch small birds whilst they wonder at an Owl
that is set of purpose to amaze them; also as Bray in the N. D. Etre, ou parler
bret, to stammer. Bretauder, for Bertauder, to curtail. Breteler, to brabble.
Breteleur, a brabbler. Breteque, Bretesche, Bretesque, and Brethecque, a
public place in a Town wherein Outcries and Proclamations are ordinarily
made; also a port, or portal of defense, in the rampire or wall of a Town.
Bretonner, to speak thick and short; also to stammer. Brette, notched like a
Saw. Brettesse, the Battlements of a wall. Brettesse, furnished with
Battlements. Bretteure, a notching. Bretueil, the iron piece called a fowler,
or port-piece. Brevade, Brevetade, as Brevet under Brief in the N. D. Breveter,
to abbreviate, to reduce into briefs or breviates. Breuil, as Breil. Breulet,
as Bret. Breusse, a bowl of tin. Breuste, broosed, or knapped off. Breuvoer,
liquor, or any liquid stuff that is fit to be made into drink. Breze, for
braise, a burning coal. Brezil, for bresil, the wood Brazil. Breziller, as
Bressiller. Bribe, a piece of bread given to a beggar. Briber, to beg his
bread; to eat greedily; to run up and down. Bribeur, a beggar, a greedy eater;
a goer up and down. Bribonner, to mumble up his Prayers. Briborions, Prayers
mumbled up. Bric, as Prendre au bric, to take advantage of a word spoken by
another, also to give a dead list. Brichet, as Brechet. Bricot, the stump of a
shrub, or little tree; an up-sticking stub of a latecut shrub or tree.
Bricoteau, a quoit of stone. Bridaveaux, hollow, round, and wreathed cracknels
of fine flour, sugar, salt, and yolks of eggs incorporated together with water
and white wind. Bridoye, a goose-bridler (a Nickname for a Lawyer.) Brief, for
brevet, a brief. Brief (an Adv.) in short. Briemart, poor folks drink (made of
bran, leaven, and water.) Briere, as Bruyere in the N. D. Brifaut, Brifeau, a
greedy eater. Brifec, a morsel eaten greedily. Brifer, to eat greedily.
Brigader, to keep company together. Brigaille, a notable smell-smock. Brigande,
for brigade, a great body of horsemen. Brigandeau, Brigandereau, a little
Robber. Briganderie, a robbing and killing. Brigandin, for Brigantin, the
Brigantine Vessel. Brigandine, an ancient armor so called. Brigant, for
brigand, a highwayrobber. Brignon, the name of an excellent plum. Briguerie, an
underhand suing for an Office; also a wrangling, or contending; also a
sharking, or robbing. Briguet, a mongrel; also one that is nobly born but of
one side. Brihat, one that is hot and loud. Bril, a sparkle, a glittering.
Brillonner, for briller, to sparkle, or glitter. Brimbalatoire, as
Brimballatoire. Brimbaler, sonner trop fort les cloches, to set the bells
agate. Brimbale, tumbled headlong, shaken, swagged. Brimbales, the bells worn
by Carthorses. Brimballatoire, swagging, or shaking ill-favouredly.
Brimballotier, Brimbeur, Brimblotier, a paultry Pedlar, one that has naught
but trash to sell; also a spangle-maker. Brimborions, as Breborions; also the
knacks or bawbles wherewith fools caps, etc. are garnished. Il dit ses
brimborions (for breviaire) he mumbles up his prayers. Brimboter, to mumble.
Brindell^s de balay, the sprigs or twigs of a beesom. Bringue, a drinking to.
Bringuenarder, to swive. Bringuenarilles, wide nostrils. Bringuenaudee, a
common whore. Brioche, a brake for hemp; also a roll or bun of spiced bread.
Brioler, to glide, or slide on the ice. Brionie, Briony, white vine. Briquer,
to lay bricks, or to build with bricks. Briquerie, a brick-kiln. Briquet, as
Briguet; also a young hare. Briquettes, little toys. Briqueux, full of bricks,
or fit for bricks. Briquier, a brick-maker, a brickseller. Brisable, apt to be
broke. Brische, a bush made of lime-twigs, and a stale hung at it to draw birds
unto it. Briscoter, to leacher. Brise, a piece of ground that is new broke up
for tillage, and has lai^ long untilled. Brise-grain, corn-breaking.
Brisement, a breaking. Brise-ponts, bridge-breaking (said of a River.)
Brise-tour, tower-breaking. Brisette, a little scale or husk, a little splint
or shiver broken off any thing. Briseur, a breaker. Briseux, breaking,
crushing. Brisgoter, as Briscoter. Brisseures, broken pieces. Brit, as Bric.
Brive, a bridge. Britascher, as j'ai oui britascher d'une tell chose, I have
heard some such muttering. Briz, as Bris under Briser in the N. D. Brize, for
bize, the North Wind. Brizer, for Briser, to bruise, to break. Brocar, for
Brocatel, Satin purfled with gold; also a cutting jest. Brocarde, jeared,
derided. Brocarder, to jear, to deride. Brocarderie, a jearing, or deriding.
Brocardeur, a jearer, or derider. Brocelles, for Brossailles, thick bushes.
Brochant, broaching. Brochard, as Brocar; also a peg of wood. Brochereux,
little pickerels. Brocheton, a small pike. Brochoir, a Farriers shooing hammer.
Broad, broth, pottage, brue; also a Sunburned wench. Pain de broad, brown
bread; Langage broad, a loose or an effeminate language. Brodes, a leather
cloak or mantle. Brodeure (for broderie) imbrodery. Brodier, the arse, or bum.
Broisse, for brosse, a brush. Brommart, drowsy. Bronchique, as muscle
bronchique, one of the four Muscles which open the Larinx. Brondes, green
boughs, brouze-wood, or brouzing for cattle. Bronze, covered with grass.
Bronzer, to cover with grass. Brossailleux, full of little bushes. Brossettes,
brushes. Brot, a drinking Jack; a flagon, or great tankard. Un brot de vigne,
the bud of a Vine. Brotonne, male Southernwood. Brouailles, washing of dishes;
also guts and garbage of fowl; any such outcast trash. Brouaz, as Brouhaha.
Broudier, as Brodier. Broue, a little white cloud. Brouee, a mist, or fog; also
a bluster, hurry, or hurly-burly. Brouer, a mist, or fog. Brouetteur, one that
works with a wheel-barrow. Brouffer, to snurt with the nose, like a horse.
Brouhaha, Brouhou, a bluster, hurry, hurly-barly. Brouil, for Brou, the outward
husk of a green walnut. Brouillar, Brouillas, a mist, or fog. Brouillasser,
Brouillasseur. See Brouiller, and Brouillon in the N.D. Brouilleur, for
Brouillon, a trouble-house. Brouillis, for brouillerie, confusion. Brouine,
blasted, or burnt with mists. Brouir, to rustle, or bluster; also to humme.
Brouissement, a rustling, or blustering; also a humming. Brouser, for Brouter,
to brouze.. Broussaille, as Brossailles in the N. D. Broussin, a bunch, or
knurr in a tree. Broute, the root of the box-tree seasoned and fit for use.
Brouteur, a brouzer; also as Brouetteur. Broutement, Brouteure, a brouzing.
Broutilles, beggars scraps. Broutique, a Monkey. Broutonner, for boutonner, to
bud. Brouy, burned, parched with heat. Brouyr, to burn, or parch with heat.
Bruchet, the craw-bone, or merry-thought of a bird. Bruel, Brueil, the brail,
or panel of a hawk. Bruge-espine, buck-thorn. Brugier, to bellow, or make a
hideous noise. Brugne, a fashion of Corselet, or Brigandine used in old time.
Bruiement, Bruiment, a rumbling, rustling, or blustering. Bruine, blasted and
burned with mist; also hoary. Bruinement, a blasting or burning with hot mists;
also a glazing over. Bruiner, to blast or burn with hot mists; also to glaze,
or set a hoary gloss on. Bruineux, full of hot blasting mists. Brule-langue, as
Brusle-langue. Brumal, of, or belonging to winter, or winter-like. Bruman, a
son-in-law, the husband of a daughter. Brumbay, brown bay, or dark bay. Brume,
the shortest day in the year; also the midst of winter; also winter. Brumestre,
the name of a kind of Vine. Bruncher, Brunchement. See Broncher, Bronchement
in the N. D. Bruneau, clos bruneau, the bum, the ars^. Brun-fauve,
Deer-coloured. Bruni d'un Cerf, the burnishing of a Stags head. Brunie, as
Brugne. Brus^able, apt to be burnt. Brusle-ser, iron-burning (a Nickname for
Smiths.) Brusle-grain, corn-burning. Brusle-langue, tongue-scorching,
tongue-inflaming. Brusquet, as vin brusquet, brisk, or sharp wine. Brute-bonne,
the name of a pear. Brutesse, brutality. Bruthier, a buzzard. Brutif, clownish,
also rash, heedless. Parler brutif, to falter in his speech. Brutivement,
clownishly, rudely; also rashly, heedlesly; also faulteringly. Bruy, as Brouy.
Bruyement, as Bruiement. Bruyereux, full of heath. Bruyne, as Bruine. Bryonie,
as brionie. Buanderie, a Laundry. Bubailler, to gape, to yawn. Bubbe, a wheal,
or blister. Bubelette, Bubette, a red pimple on the nose, etc. Buberiges, dogs
leeks, or the herb that bears the purple starry Jacint. Bubon, a great bunch, a
plague sore, or a pockie-sore. Buc, a busk. Bucail, Buccail, the course grain
called French-wheat. Buccinateur, a Trumpetter. Buccine, a Cornet, or Trumpet
for the Wars; also the horn of a Cow-herd or Swine-herd; also the shellfish
called Venus-shell. Bucheronner, to cleave, or cut down wood; to make faggots,
etc. Bucine, as Buccine. Buclandere, a Billander. Bucolie, Herd-man-like.
Bucoliquement, Hard-man-like. Bucquer, as Buquer; also to but, or jurr. Buee, a
buck of clothes. Buer, to wash a buck, to scowr with lie. Buffe, a cuff, or box
on the ear. Buffelin, buff-like; of, or belonging to a buffle. Buffer, to puff,
or blow hard; also to spout water on. Buffete, wrought rough or shag like buff;
buffeted, cuffed; deaded as wine that has taken wind, or has been mingled
with water. Buffeter, to make rough or shag like buff; also to buffet, or cuff;
also to mar a vessel of wine by often tasting it before it is broached, or to
fill it up with water after much wine has been taken out of it. Buffeteurs de
vin, such as steal wine out of the Vessels they have in charge, and afterward
fill them up with water. Buffetolt, the fish called a Lump, Padle, or Sea-owl.
Buffler, to deceive. Buffroy, a beacon, or watchtower. Bufon, a toad. Bugie,
the bark of a barbary-tree. Bugle, middle Consound, or middle Comfrey.
Buglement, a lowing, or bellowing. Bugler, to low, or bellow. Bugleux, full of
bellowing, often or much lowing. Buglesat, of bugloss, made of bugloss.
Bugnets, for bignets, fritters. Bugrande, Bugrane, Bugrate, Bugrunde,
Rest-harrow, Cammock. Buie, a water-pot, or pitcher. Buire, an oyl-glass, viol,
or cruze. Buirette, a cruet, or little viol, or a cider-jugg. Buisart,
Buissart, a buzzard. Buisine, Buissine, a little pipe, a water-pipe.
Buissonnages, bushes, or bushy grounds. Buissonne, hid amongst bushes.
Buissonner, to lie in wait for among bushes. Buissonnet, a little bush.
Buissonneux, bushy, or full of bushes. Buissonnier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to
bushes; frequenting or haunting bushes; living or lurking among bushes. Fair
l'eschole buissonniere, to play the truant. Buissonniere, a bushy ground. Bule,
a blister, or bubble. Buler, as Bugler; also to send a Bull, as Popes do; to
execute or excommunicate by Bull. Buletin, as Bulletin. Buliste, of, or
belonging to a bull; a writer, or maker of bulls. Bullage, the s^aling of
cloth, the marking thereof with a seal of lead. Bulle, sealed with lead, as a
Bull; also that has obtained the Popes Bull for some particular advancement or
privilege to himself. Bulletean, a boulter, or boulting-cloth. Bulleter, to
boult. Bulletin, a T^cket, a Cocket. Bulletins are among the Gray-Friars such
as have been reformed by the Pope's bulls. Bullette, as Bulletin. Bullettes,
such bubbles or bobs of glass as women wear for pendants at their ears.
Bulliste, as Buliste. Bullonner, to run, boil, or burst out in great abundance.
Bullot, a certain great, yellow, and sour apple. Buon, the beak of an ewer or
pot, the mouth of a cruet, viol, etc. also a little oyl-pot. Bupreste, the
venomous black fly, called a long-leg, or wag-leg. Buquer, to knock, or to rap
at a door. Bur, as Bureau in the N. D. Burail, Burat, silk-rash, or any kind
of stuff that is half silk and half woosted. Burate, that which remains in a
Churh after the butter is taken out; also as Burail. Bureau, (Adj.) dark brown.
Burette, boulted. Burez, for Buret, the Burret-fish. Burgan, a snail-like
shellfish. Burgrave, the Captain or Governor of a Fortress. Burguespine, for
Bourguepine, way-thorn. Burineur, a Graver. Buriot, a young duckling newly
crept out of the shell. Burler, to howl; also to jest with. Burn, the solitary
place or corner wherein an Owl sits in the daytime. Burnie, as main burnie,
ward, custody. Buron, a poor cottage. Burre, for beurre, butter. Burre,
buttered. Burrer, to butter. Burrier, a seller of butter; also a great eater of
butter, a butter-box. Bursauli, Cane-withy, with the yellowish bark.
Buschailles, small twigs or sprigs. Buschetter, to gather sticks for the fire.
Buschettes, Buschilles, small twigs or sprigs. Buschoier, as Buschetter.
Busine, the pipe of a Cistern or Conduit; also a bag-pipe. Busquer, chercher
fortune, to seek his fortune. Bu^sirt, a sort of Wine-vessel. Busse de raisins,
a great Vessel, wherein raisins be put or transported. Bust, as Buste.
Bustarin, a great Lubber. Buste, the whole bulk of a man from his face to his
middle; also a Tomb, or Sepulcher. Bustofer, a great Loggerhead. Bustuaire,
burnt as a dead body, or expecting the sacrifice of men's bodies. Buteux, of, or
belonging to a butt, full of butts. Butinement, a making spoil of. Butineur, a
preyer, a pillager. Butineux, full of prey, spoil, booty. Butoesne, for
betoine, Betony. Butte, for Bute, a butt. Buttel, for Hot, a sort of basket,
called a Dosser. Buvable, fit to be drunk of. Buvage, liquor. Buveau, a bevel.
Buvereau, a Sipper. Buveter, to sip. Buvetier, an Officer that gathers money
for the Judges Collations. Buvette, small houshold-wine. Buvettes, sippings,
tipplings; and particularly the Judges Drinkings or Collations. Buvetter, as
Buveter, to sip. Buvotter, for Beuvoter, the same. Buxolle, for Boussole, a
Mariners Compass. Buydon, a Poulterers Cage or Coop, where he feeds his
chickens and other fowl in. Buy, as Buie. Buyele, as Buxolle. Buyer, a
Box-tree. Buyrette, as Burete under Bure in the N. D. Buys, for bouis, Box.
Buyser, to bore, or make holes into. Buyse, bored, that has holes made into
it. Buysine, as Buisine. Buy^ronne, a furnace to melt and fine s^^^n in.
Buysart, Buzart, (for Buzard) a Buzzard. Buzine, as Busine. Bible, for bible,
the Bible. Byrrasque, for Bourrasque, a storm. Byze, for bize, the North Wind.
C
CAbab, the chucking of a Partridge. Cababezance, loaded with bags and wallets,
also commented on. Cabacet, as Cabasset. Cabal, the money, or merchandise,
which one takes of another, to yield him part of the gain that is made thereof.
Cabalanizer, to drink like a horse. Cabalin, of, or belonging to a horse.
Cabaliste, a Cabalist, a Professor of the Jewish Traditions. Cabalistique, of,
or belonging to the Jewish Cabal or Traditions. Caban, a gabardine, or
felt-cloak. Cabaretrer, to frequent alehouses, or the like. Cabasse, put, or
packed up in a frail. Cabasseau, as Cabeseau. Cabasser, to fill a frail with
raisins. Cabasset, a slight helmet. Cabasset de papier, a long hood or miter
of paper. Cabasson, the name of a fish. Cabat, and Cabau, as Cabal. Cabeillau,
fresh Cod. Cabecon, as Cavesson in the N.D. Cabestant, the Capitane of a ship.
Cabiland, for Cabillau, fresh Cod. Cabirotade, as Capirotade. Cabirots, the
spawn of Sturgeons spread upon bread, and eaten with vinegar, oil, and pepper.
Cable, for abbatis, a wind-fall, a tree overthrown by wind or tempestuous
weather. Caboche, the head. Cabochard, Cabochenu, Cabocheux, heady, or
obstinate. Cabot, Cabote, the gull-fish, or mull-head. Cabre, a Goat. Cabril, a
young Kid. Cabriole, for capriole, a caper in dancing. Cabrioter, to caper, to
cut a caper. Cabrol, an issue made of a fistula. Cabrole, the name of a fish.
Cabree, headed like a Cabbidge. Caburlaut, as Cabot. Cabus, as laictue cabusse,
headed-Lettice. Cabusser, to grow to a head, like a Cabbidge. Cacasangue, the
bloody flux. Cacassement de poule, the cackling of a hen. Cacasser, to ch^^^ as
a Partridge. Cache, as Chasse in the N. D. also a hiding-hole or corner.
Cachebugade, Ethiopian Hartwort, or Seseli. Cache-col, an ancient velvet
attire, or ornament for the neck. Cachectique, in a Consumption, pining away.
Cachelaid, Cachelet, a mask, or muffler. Cache-maille, a money-box. Cachement,
a hiding, or concealing. Cachement, closely, privately. Cachemi-tula, a Play
wherein one must keep a thing privately delivered him, and another find out
the keeper among many others; which if he do, he is rewarded, otherwise
punished. Cache-museau, a kind of flawn; also a mufler, or mask, for the face.
Cache-nez, a mask, or muffler. Cachercau, as Chartulaire. Cacheur, a hider, or
concealer. Cachexie, an indisposition of the body. Cachile, Sea-rocket.
Cachoire, as Chassoire. Cachotte, for Cachette, a secret place. Cachotte, laid
in the hole of a prison. Cachry, Rosemary-seed. Cacidoine, for calcedoine,
Chalcedony, a kind of Onyx-stone. Cacochymie, evil digestion. Cacoethe, an
incurable bile, or sore. Cacologie, evil speech, slander, detraction.
Cacquetoire, as Caquetoire. Cad d'eau, a great fall, or shower of rain.
Cadalice, a bedstead. Cadarce, the tow, or co^^sist part of silk. Cadavreux,
carcass-like, rotten. Cade, the crimzon, or prickly cedar. Cadel, a castling, a
star^^ling, one that has much need of pampering. Cadele, pampered, made much
of. Lettres cadelees, capital or (...)-Lett^s. Cadeler, to pamper; also to
write a Text-hand, or make great Letters. Cadene, an iron-chain. Cadmie,
Cadonia. Cadrilles, a Troop of Horsemen. Caducite, frailty, weakness. Cafard,
an hypocrite. Cafarde, as a la cafarde, hypocritically. Cafarder, to pretend
devotion, to play the hypocrite. Cafardie, Casardise, hypocrisy, outward
holiness. Cafas, a kind of course Taffata. Cafetin, as suere cafetin, refined
sugar. Cafezate, the name of a most venomous and malignant Serpent. Caffard, as
cafard, an hypocrite; also a beetle that flies by night. Caffardise,
hypocrisy. Cagade, an idle boasting. Cagarel, Cagaret, the Cackerel-fish.
Cagarole de Mer, a Periwinkle. Cagasangue, as Cacasangue. Cageois, a
Country-clown, or Boor. Cagerotte, a Chesford, or Cheesfat (of wicker.)
Cagnard, Cagnardier, etc. See Caignard, etc. Cagnasque, as parler cagnasque, to
speak doggery. Cagnasse, a great Bitch. Cagne, a Bitch. Cagnole, the
Mallet-fish. Cagnot, a little Dog; also a kind of little Dog-fish that hates
men extremely. Cagot, for bigot, a superstitious man. Cagouille, a dew-Snail.
Cagoulle, a Monks hood, or cowl. Caguemaille, Cagueraffe, a greedy wretch, a
ravenous oppressor. Cahier, for Cayer, a sheet (or more) of a written book.
Cahot, the jogg of a Coach in a rough and uneven way. Cahoter, to jog as a
Coach. Cahuaille, a company of Owls. Cahuet, Cahuot, as Cahot. Cahutelle, a
little Cottage. Caiche, a man's yard. Caignard, Caignardier, a lazy rogue.
Caignarder, to play the lazy rogue. Caignardiere, a lazy queen. Caignart, as
Caignard; also a nasty place or corner wherein Beggars lie in the Sun and lowse
themselves. Caigne, a Bitch; also Gods me, or the like Inter^ection of wonder.
Caignon, the hinder part of the r^^k. Caignot, as Cagnot. Cailhete, a Corkacy.
Caillat, Caillebotes, c^^dy of milk. Caillel oteux, full of (...). Licus
cailleboteux, craggy, sto^^, or rockie places. Caillement, a c^rding. Cailles,
round Beads wherewith Frenchmen play at Trou-madame. Cailleteau, a little
flint-stone. Caillette, a fool, a natural; also a Rams cod; also the outward
skin of the cods; also a small bead. Cailloeux, as Cailloreux. Caillon, a
congealed lump of phlegm, blood, etc. Caillore, curded, or cardled. Caillorer,
to curd, or curdle. Caillorosat, a Lording-apple; also a green and great Pear
of a pleasant taste. Cailloreux, as Cailloueux. Caillouet, the name of a very
sweet Pear. Cailloueux, full of small, hard, and sharp stones. Caimand, a
Beggar. Caimander, to beg from door to door. Caimanderie, Caimandise,
beggarliness. Caion, a young, or little Hog. Caique, a kind of ship. Caire, the
look of ones face. Cairin, a Turkie-carpet, such as is brought from Caire in
Egypt. Caisne, a Bitch. Caissans, the side-teeth, called the Grinders. Calage,
the Caulking of a Ship; also Oakam, or the Tow wherewith it is caulked.
Calabasse, a bottle made of an emptied Gourd. Calamar, a Pennar; also the
Calamary, or Sleeve-fish. Calame, a Cane, or Reed; Wheaten, or Oaten-straw;
Pipe, or Flute, etc. Calament, for calamente, Calamint. Calaminaire, as Pierre
calaminaire. See Calamine in the N. D. Calamistrer, to curl the hair. Calamite
(Adp.) of, or belonging to Reeds, or kept in Reeds. Calamiteux, miserable,
poor, unfortunate. Calamiteusement, wretchedly, poorly, miserably. Calande, a
We^^^, or Mite. Calandre, as Calendre in the N. D. Calangement, an accusation,
or ch^r^e. Calanger, to accuse of, to charge with. Calar, as Caler; also to be
silent, (...) talking, desist from babbling. Calathe, a basket, or hamper; also
a Vessel to bring milk or cheese to Market in; also a cup for sacrifice.
Calcante, Vitriol. Calcinatoire, calcinatory, or calcinating. Calcioler, to
stand much on a matter, or to urge a thing often. Calcite, as Chalcite.
Calcitrer, to kick, or fling; to be stubborn, obstinate, disobedient. Calcul,
for gravelle, the gravel. Calculateur, a reckoner. Calculatoire, calculatory.
Calculement, a reckoning, or calculating. Calderon, a kind of long and round
Whale. Cale, a sorry kind of cap. Calebasse, as Calabasse. Calendrine, a
Sleek-stone. Calenge, a claim; also a challenge; also a charge, or accusation;
also an arrest; also a seizure of, or complaint against beasts that are found
damage sesant. Calenge, claimed; challenged; accused of, or charged with;
arrested; seized. Calenger, to claim; to challenge; to accuse of, or charge
with; to arrest; to seize. Calengie, as Calenge. Calepinages, Dictionaries.
Calepiner, to interpret, or translate exactly, or word by word. Calepinerie, a
precise interpretation of every single word. Calesson, for Calcon, a pair of
drawers. Calfactif, apt to heat or warm. Calfat, an Officer in a Gally that
looks to the caulking thereof. Calfater, to caulk a ship. Calfaterie, the
caulking of a ship. Calfateur, as Calfat. Calfatin, the servant of a Caulker of
a Galley. Calfourchons, a calfourchons, astraddie. Calfreter, for Calf^utrer,
to caulk a ship. Calibistris, the privy parts. se Calibrer a quelcun, to equal
himself to one. Calicules, little cups or goblets; also the rough shells of
Chestnuts; also the parings of a corn or kernel; also little skins upon any
tender part of the body. Calidite, heat. Caliges, flockings; also an armor for
the legs; also breeches. Fair caliges, ou caligas, to bewray his hose.
Caligineux, dark. Caliginosite, darkness. Calimini, a calimini, hugger-mugger,
secretly. Calin, a beggarly rogue, or lazy vagabond. Calinaire, a Sweetheart.
Caliot, the name of a Pear. Callabasse, as Calabasse. Callafater, to caulk a
ship. Calland, a Customer. Callate, a stoping piece of ground, the descent of a
hill. Call, for Cale, the hold of a ship. Callebasse, as Calabasse.
Callebotes, Curds. Calleboute, curded. Calle-feutre, caulked. Caller, as Caler;
also to kittle. Calls, Corns in the feet or toes. Calleux, thick-skinned.
Callibordes, Crutches. Callifourchons, as Calfourchons. Calique, the name of a
fish. Calmar, as Calamar. Calmement, calmly, quietly. Caloches, for galoches,
Galoshes. Calomnieux, slandering. Caloniere, a Pot-gun made of a quill or
elder-stick. Calosite, for callosite, callosity. Calquas, a Quiver. Calsons,
for calcons, wearing-drawers. Calvainier, Calvanier, a Hireling for the time of
Harvest. Calvaire, for crane, the skull. Calvatre, laid all-along on his back.
Calvan, pomme de calvan, a certain Apple that has a blackish rind. Caly, a
kind of herb. Calyce, for Calice, a Chalice. Camamine, the herb Cameline.
Camar, for Camard, flat-nosed. Camarine, the name of a stinking herb that
provokes vomit. Camarre, a Martingale for a horse. Cambouy, Camboy, the gome,
the black and ovly grease of a wrought Cart-wheel. Cambre, or Cambre, arched.
Cambrer, to arch. Cameau, for Chameau, Camel. Camelin, as alier le Camelin, to
pace like a Camel. S^^ce Cameline, a certain dainty Italian Sauce. se
Cameloter, to become waved like Chamlet. Camerade, for Camarade, a Camarad.
Cameraire, a Chamberlain, a Groom of the Chamber. Cameriste, a Chamber-fellow.
Camessine, a kind of Pear. Camiete, the name of a certain sweet Apple. Camille,
a Messenger. Camin, way. Caminee, chimney. Camion, the pin wherewith women pin
in their ruffs, etc. also a kind of little Cart; also a small muse-role for a
horse. Camorre, a kind of cavesson. Camote, the name of an Indian root, which
roasted is very good meat. Camouard, an ugly flat-nosed fellow. Camoufflet, a
smoakie paper held under the nose of a sleeper. Campal, of, or belonging to a
Camp. Campane, a Bell; also the herb Elicampane; also an Alembick, or the upper
part thereof, which resembles a Bell. Campanel, a Bell-bit. Campanette,
Hedge-bells; also the Peach-bell, or Steeple-bell-floor. Campanotte jaulne, the
yellow Daffodil. Campart, as Champart. Campeger, Campiger, to incamp. Camphrer,
to mingle with Camphire. Campole, the name of a certain white grape. Campoles,
the tendrels, or twining sprigs of plants. Campos, leave to play, or a
vacation-time for Scholars. Camuser, to make flat-nosed. Camuserie, the being
flat-nosed. Camuset, somewhat flat-nosed. Camusette, a little flat-nosed Elf.
Canabasser, to canvas, to sift out. Canabasserie, Canabassement, a canvassing,
or sifting out. Canabel, a kind of earth which (as Arabians report) falls with
rain from the Sky. Canadelle, the smallest of Rock-fishes. Canaliere, the name
of a pear. Canart, for canard, a Drake. Cancelaresque, Chancery-like, of, or
belonging to Chancery. Cancele, cancelled. Canceler, to cancel, blot, or put
out. Cancelation, a cancelling. Cancelle, a kind of Cray-fish. Canceller, as
Canceler. Candelabre, a great Candlestick. Candelette, a Suppository. Candide,
white, fair; also prosperous, happy; also courteous, fair-conditioned; also
upright, sincere, innocent. Candidement, uprightly, sincerely. Canebasse, as
Calabasse. Canellere, a Reed-plot. Canelle, for robinet, a cock, or tap.
Canelle, of Cinnamon, of a Cinnamon-colour; also made of, or seasoned with
Cinnamon. Canelline, a little hollow rod. Canepetiere, a kind of land-fowl
resembling a Bustard. Il fait de la canepetiere, he cowardly hides himself in
every hole. Canepin, the thin inner-rind of the bark of the Linden, and the
outward of the coat of a Birchtree, written on in old time instead of Paper;
also the outward thin and white pilling of a dressed Sheeps-skin. Canepineuse,
the bark of a Sugarcane. Caner, to squirt. Canet, a young Duck, or a wild Duck.
Caneter, to waddle, or go like a Duck; also to breed young Ducks. Canetier, of
a Duck, like a Duck, catching Ducks, feeding or preying on Ducks. Canetille,
purled. Caneton, Canette, a Duckling; also a little Can or Cruse; also the
quill of a Spinning-wheel. Canjar, Caniard, a Sea-cob, a Sea-gull. Canichon, a
Duckling. Canide, the name of a bird. Canif, for ganif, a penknife. Canin,
dogged, or dog-like. Convulsion canine, the cramp of the mouth. Canisse, a
little table or hurdle of reeds, whereon fruits are dried, or Silkworms fed.
Canivet, a little penknife. Cannamelle, the Sweet-cane, or Sugar-cane. Canneau
du col, the nape of the neck. Cannelle, for canelle, Cinnamon. Canne-petiere,
as Canepetiere. Cannetille, for Canetille, purl. Cannisade, a cage, or basket
of reeds. Cannisse, as Canisse. Cannoniquement, canonically. Cannule, a little
Cane, Reed, Pipe, or hollow straw. Cannule, hollowed like a Reed, or Cane, also
channelled. Canolle, a Hawks narel, one of the little holes whereat she draws
in and lets out her breath. Canoniste, a Practicer in the Canon Law. Canore,
shrill, harmonious, melodious. Canteau, for Chanteau, a corner-piece. Canthare,
a duskie and muddy Seafish that never changes her mate; also a great jug, or
as Cantharide, for Cantaride, a fly called Cantharides. Cantharidise, a
Confection of Cantharides. Canthenot, a certain tawny and unsavory Seafish.
Canthonniere, Cantonniere, a common Whore. Canton, for coin de rue, a corner,
or cross-way in a street. se Cantonner, se mettre en un coin, to go aside from
the rest. Canule, a little Cane, reed, or Pipe. Canus, the name of a Seafish.
Caparis, the Caper-tree, or shrub. Capdastre, a Subsidy-book. Cup-deseadre, a
Corporal. Capdeul, a Gentleman's chief house, falling (almost every where) unto
the share of the eldest Heir. Capeau, for chapeau, a hat. Capeau carnu, ou
charnu, the Sea-nettle. Capeer, as Cappeer. Capel, a hat, a little hat.
Capelan, a Chaplain; also a kind of Cod-fish. Capelettes, the heads of cloves.
Capelin, as Capeline in the N. D. Capellan, as Capelan. Capeluchon, a capuch,
or hood. Caperasson, as Caparasson in the N. D. Capesolde, Capesoulde, a
Gentleman of good entertainment. Caphard, and its derivatives. See Casard, etc.
Capheran, a kind of course Tassata; also a long cassock of the same.
Capietrement, privily, closely. Capifou, a Play not much unlike
Hide-man-blinde. Capilaire, Capillaire, hairy; or belonging to hair.
Capilament, a hair, or flaw in a stone, etc. Capiscos, Schoolmasters.
Capitanerie, the Place of a Captain. Capitainesse, as Capitanesse in the N. D.
Capitalite, a capital offense. Capitation, Pole Money. Capitau, a Captain, or
Commander. Capite, a Cabin in a ship; also a little Summer House. Capitel, a
strong compounded Lie, whereof Cauters and other violent remedies are made. se
Capitonner de, to cover his head with. Capitoul. So they call in Toulouse
twelve principal Magistrates, whereof the first is to be a Gentleman of that
Province, the rest Lawyers and substantial Merchants. Capitouls d' Orleans, the
Sheriffs of Orleans. Capitulairement, capitally; also in Chapter, or with full
consent of the Chapter. Capitulant, having a voice in Chapters; also
capitulating. Capituleur, he that capitulates. Capnomantie, divination by smoke
rising from an Altar, whereon Incense or Poppy-seed is burnt. Capolie, the name
of an Indian fruit much like a Cherry. Cappe, as Cape in the N. D. Cappe,
hooded. Cappeer, a ship to lie a try; also to go very near the wind. Cappet, a
hat. Cappette, a little hood; or a cloak having a capuch instead of a cape.
Cappitrement, as Capietrement. Cappot, a course Country-cloak. Cappres, for
capres, Capers. Capprier, for caprier, a Caper-shrub. Capriere, a Caper-plot.
Caprifice, a wild Fig Tree. Caprimulge, a Goat-milker, an unluckie Night-bird
that sucks Goats, and mortifies their udders. Caprin, le caprin, the kind or
nature of Goats; also Goats flesh. Caprin (Adj.) of a Goat, or like a Goat.
Capriot, a caper in dancing. Caprioter, to caper, to cut a caper. Capse, a
case, box, or chest. Capsetin, a little case, box, or chest. Capsoos, the
Rights and Royalties belonging to the Lord of a place. Capsule, as Capsetin. La
Capsule du coeur, the Pericardium wherein the heart lies. Captieusement,
captiously. Capucinage, the order, profession, or life of a Capucin. Capulaire,
a coffin for a corpse. Caputions, Monks, or Capucine-Friars. Caqueduc, a miser,
a penny-father. Caquerel, a sprat, a pickled herring, or as Cagarel.
Caqueroles, the shells of Snails, Periwincles, and such like. Caquerolerie, a
shore full of little shells. Caquerotier, a catcher, or eater of shellfish.
Caquesangue, the bloody flux. Caquetard, for caqueteur, a prattler.
Caquetereau, a prattle-basket. Caquetiere, Caqueteuse, a prattling housewife.
Caquetoire, a Mill, Oven, or the like, where women meet and prattle together.
Caquettement, a prattling. Ca-queue, the herb horse-tail. Caquots, white
Lepers. Car, for chariot, a cart. Carabasse, as Calabasse in the N. D. also a
Girt, Grampel, Pungar-fish. Carabasse, much used or carried up and down as a
Gourd-bottle is. Carabe, a Corracle, or little round Skiff made of Ozier-twigs
woven together and covered with raw hides; also yellow amber. Carabin, for
Carabine, a Carabine. Carabinage, an assault made by Carabines. Caracol, for
limacon, a snail. Caractere, characterised, stamped with a peculiar mark.
Caracterer, to make characters; also to stamp with a peculiar mark. Caraffe,
passage or toll-money paid to the Arabian Boothalers, by such as travel without
a strong Caravan toward the Holy Land, etc. Caramot, Caramote, a prawn.
Carance, want, or lack of. Carance de biens, a Testimonial under several men's
hands, that such an one has no Goods nor Chattels in such a place. Carasse, a
great face. Carathement, a charming of a man's childgetter. Caravelle, a Carvel
(the little Ship so called.) Caravellon, a small Carvel. Caravene, a little
Boat made like a Trough, and most commonly of one piece. Caraviree, a wry-faced
wench, or one that makes ill-favored wry faces. Carbassat, Wet-sucket, made of
the upper part of the long white Pompion cut into slices. Carbasse, the
Pungar-fish. Carbau, the Cabot-fish. Carboucle, a carbuncle. Carcaillon, a
mite, or weevil. Carcamousse, the battering engine called a Ram. Carcant, for
Carcan, a carknet, or collar of Gold. Carchiophe, an artichoke. Carcinome, a
canker. Carcois, for Carquois, a Quiver. Cardaire, a kind of Thornback.
Cardamome, grain of Paradise, also Ethiopian pepper. Cardanalize, as
Cardinalise. Cardier, a Card-maker. Cardinale, a kind of Artillery for
shipping, less than the Culverine, and devised at first by the Cardinal of
Lorrain. Cardons, the stalks of artichoke, or of the white thistle, buried in
the ground, or otherwise used, to get them a whiteness. Care, as Ableret. Care,
a disease that benums the head, and makes the whole body more senseless than an
Apoplexy; or a sleepiness joined with weakness of the brain, senses, and
motion. Also the look, countenance, or aspect of one. Carence, as Carance.
Caret, fill de caret, pack-thread. Carfou, a peal of one bell, and about 8 or 9
a clock at night; also a place where two ways meet together. Cargade,
Cargaison, the fraught, or lading of a ship. Cargue, a charge, or onset.
Carguer, to charge; also to lade; also to lean all on one side. Carriage,
carriage, baggage; all the necessary provision of an Army. Caribe, the most
biting kind of Indian pepper. Caribot, a lunchion, or big piece of bread, etc.
Carry, rottenness, or putrefaction in wood, or any thing else; a worm in wood.
se Carier, to rot, putrify, corrupt. Carieux, rotten, putrified, worm-eaten.
Carine, for carene, the keel of a ship. Cariol, Cariole, the root of a horses
tail, or the bone thereof; the rump-bone. Cariophillate, herb Avens, Bennet, or
blessed. Carisi, the name of a pear, also the perry made thereof. Carize,
Kersie. Carler, for Carreler, to pave with bricks. Carlin, the name of a Coin.
Carlonne, as vivre a la carlonne, to deal plainly. Carlure, for Carrelure, a
pavement with bricks. Carmaignole, for Cornoille, a cornil. Carme, a verse,
also a charm, also the horn-beam or yoke-tree; also a white Friar, as in the N.
D. Carmelitain, an Order of white Friars. Carminatif, wind-dissolving; also
flesh-taming, lust-abating. Carminificateur, a maker of Verses. Carnagier, for
carnacier, a great flesh-eater. Carnallage, for carnage, slaughter; also
flesh-time, the season wherein it is lawful to eat flesh. Carnaller, to kill, or
slay, especially beasts found damage-feasant (which the party damaged in some
places and cases may lawfully do) and eat, or sell their flesh. Carnasseries,
fleshy matters. Carnassier, for potele, plump, fleshy. Carnavalee, a Carnaval
Wench. Carne, an edge, or corner. Carne de testons, a quartern of Testons,
consisting of four, or of forty. Carneau, (for creneau) a battlement of a wall.
Carnele, having battlements. Carnelle, the stamp of a piece of coin. Carneller,
to stamp a piece of coin. Carner, a piece of a written book. Carniforme, like
flesh. Carnu, for charnu, fleshy. Carobe, as Carrobe. Carocher, a Coachman.
Carolle, a kind of Dance; also a Carrol, or Christmas song. Caroller, to
dance, to revel it, to sing carrols. Carooler, to inrol. Caroside, a branch of
the great artery. Carous, as Carousse in the N. D. Carousser, to quass. Carozze
for Carosse, a Coach. Carpase, the name of a plant, whose juice being drunk
causes sleep, and in sleeping strangleth. Carpe, for poignet, the wrist.
Carpeau, a young Carp. Carpendu, for Capendu, a Short-start, the name of an
apple. Carpie, the Yoke-elm. Carpion, Carpionne, a kind of Trout. Carpir, as
Charpir in the N. D. Carpobalsame, the fruit of the balsam-tree. Carpot, part
of the fruit or profit of a Vineyard, yielded as a Rent by the Tenant unto the
Lord thereof. Carquasse, a carcass. Carquois, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a
Quiver. Carracon, Carraquon, a small (but strong) Carrick. Carrat de bois a
bastir, a certain quantity of timber. Carre, edge, or corner. Carrobe,
Carob-bean, St. John's bread. Carroce, Carroche, a Coach. Carrocier, Carrochier,
Carrossier, a Coachman. Carron, a brick. Carronner, to make a brick-floor.
Carroube, as Carobe. Carroubier, the Carob-tree, or Bean-tree. Carrouselle, a
little hollow reed. Carrozze, a Coach. Carrozzier, a Coachman. Carrube, as
Carrobe; also a small weight (among Mintmen and Goldsmiths) making but the 24th
part of an ounce. Cartable, a Paper-book. Cartame, bastard Saffron. Cartasonne,
the Indian and black-horned Unicorn. Cartee, for cartel, a challenge to fight,
in writing. Cartaranche, a certain Salt-measure. Carthame, as Cartame.
Carthellages, square pieces of freestone. Cartibe, a square table of stone,
but somewhat more long than broad. Cartisannier, a maker of playing cards.
Cartoche, for Cartouche, a Cartridge. Cartophilaces, Law Books, ancient
Records; also the room, chest, or press wherein such Writings are kept.
Cartousle, a shrub bearing a mushrom-like fruit; also the fruit it self.
Cartuche, for Cartouche, a Cartridge. Cartulaire, a Paper-book. Juges
Cartulaires, Judges that give their Sentences in writing. Carvi, Carway-seed.
Carymari carymara, a hurly-burley. Caryote, a Date. Cas, for casse, hollow, or
broken-sounded. Casal, a Mannor-house, a great house; also a Village, or
Hamlet. Casard, one that never stirs out of doors. Cascaret, a furious tide, as
sometimes there is between Bourdeaux and Rochel. Cascavelle, a Country-song.
Caseiforme, made round and flat like a cheese. Casever, Casier, a cheese-fat.
Casette, a little cottage. Casine, the same. Casois, a Countrey-clown. Casole,
a posnet; also a narrow-mouthed pot, somewhat like a perfuming pot. Casquet, a
little cask. Cassable, frail, brittle. Cassard, a chest-like cover; also a
buzzard. Cassaudes, Daizies, or Bruise-wort. Casse, for caisse, a box, or case;
also a coffin, a dripping pan, an open-mouthed pan or vessel of earth, etc. fit
to boil things, or set plants in; also the hollow part of the sole of a horses
foot. Casse-loix, a breaker of Laws. Casse-moeurs, rude, savage, uncivil.
Casse-pot, a kind of sport in tossing of earthen pots. Casserie, a breaking,
or quashing; a discharging, infringing, or cancelling. Casserins, drawers in a
press or cabinet. Cassidonie, for Cassidoine, Cassidony. Cassier, the tree that
bears the fruit Cassia. Cassignon, a pump, or thin-soled shoe. Cassoire, a
whip. Cassole, Cassolle, a box for Perfumes, etc. Casson, a great chest.
Cassure, for blessure, a bruise. Castadour, a Pioneer. Castagnole, a
chesnut-colour'd Seafish. Castagnon. See Roquan. Castaign (Adj.) of a
chesnut-colour. Castaigne, a scallop-like piece of iron in the midst or mout^
of an old-fa^hioned bit. Castaloigne, a Spanish coverlet, or rug. Cast, for
chaste, chaste, honest. Castillan, a Spanish weight. Castillaniser, to imitate
Spanish fashions or humors. Castille, for querelle, jarr, contention.
Castillier, the wild goosberry-shrub. Caston, the bea^il of a ring. Castoreum,
as Castoree in the N. D. Castrametation, the pitching, or measuring out of a
Camp. Castromantie, as Gastromantie. Catachrese, the abuse, or necessary use of
one word for lack of another more proper. Catachrestique, used (though
improper) for want of that which would be more proper. Catadoupes, Catadupes,
the falls of Nilus. Cataglottiser, to kiss with the tongue. Cataglottisme, a
kiss with the tongue. Catagmatique, of, or belonging to broken bones, or
breaking of bones; also healing, or closing such breaches. Catalepsie, a
disease coming of the brain distempered with dryness and cold. Catalongne, a
white Spanish rug. Cataminy, women's flowers. Catapuce grande, the herb Kick, or
Tick; Catapuce petite, garden-Spurge. Catapulte, a sling, or warlike engine,
whereout great arrows or darts were shot. Catarre, for Catherre, a catharr, or
a rheum. Catarre, Catarreux, for Catherreux, rheumatick, troubled with a rheum.
Catastre, as Cadastre. Cateclisme, a deluge, or inundation. Catefique, sad,
heavy, sorrowful. Categide, an airy inflammation. Catel, a chattel; or a thing
which (though of it self it be immovable) is divided and held as moveable; or
as Cateud. Catelongne, Catelonne, as Catalongne. Catepleure, a cross-sail.
Caterolle, a rabbets nest. Caterve, a crew. Cateud, a chattel; or not only a
moveable (which may follow a body, and be removed from place to place) but also
any immovable that is no inheritance. Cate^l, as Catel. Cathartique, a purging
Medicine. Cathechiser, for catechiser, to catechize. Cathedrant, sitting as
Judge or Moderator. Cathedratique, a certain see or duty belonging to a Bishop,
when he is first invested into his See. Cathegorie, for categorie, category.
Cathelane, the name of a plum. Cathene, a chain. Mat de cathene, a furious or
enraged fool. Catheretique, eating, or gnawing away superfluous flesh or skin.
Catherinaire, the herb tobacco. Catherine, the bramble-berry, black-berry.
Catherinettes, certain pretty flowers less than pinks, growing in clusters, or
many together on one stalk. Cathet, perpendicular. Catheux, a kind of
movables, although they adhere to the soil, or be fastened to a house.
Catholicon, a Composition in Physic, so termed, because it purges all kind of
humors. Catholizer, to become a Catholic, to carry himself like one.
Catholisation, the being, or becoming a Catholic. Catilinisme, conspiracy.
Catinimi, in hugger-mugger. Catoblepe, a kind of Basilisk, which with her
sight kills a mile off. Catoire, a bee-hive. Catonien, grave, grim, or severe.
Catopromantie, divination by a looking-glass. Catouiller, for chatouiller, to
tickie. Cattle, as Catel. Cavailler, as Cavaller. Cavain, a hole, cave, or
hollow place. Cavalcador, a horseman. Cavaler, as Cavaller. Cavalet, a long
hollow stick through which they use in some places to blow the fire, instead of
bellows. Cavalin, a little horse. Cavalle, ridden, traveled on, toyled; also
staulked, or dogged. Cavaller, to ride; also to toil, or use like a horse; also
to staulk, or dog. Cavallet des planches, the highest or most raised part of
Garden-beds. Cavallette, a kind of locust. Cavallin, Cavalet, as Cavalin.
Caubare, a sandy-coloured and very venomous Serpent. Caucheaux, Taxes paid
toward the maintaining of common Banks or Causeys. Cauche-poulet,
Cauche-vieille, as Cauchemar in the N. D. Caucher, to hatch, or sit on; to
tread a hen; to put on stockings. Cauciage, as Caucheaux. Caudelee, a cawdle.
Cauderet, a hot bath. Caudice, the stock, stump, or body of a tree. Cave, a
Chough, or Jack-daw. Cave, made hollow. Caveau, a little cave. Cavechure, a
halter. Cavedal, the principal sum lent out to use. Cavelade, a kind of
ray-fish of a very hard substance. Cavelot, a prop. Cavement, a making hollow.
Cavenne de Berger, a Shepherds cottage. Caver, to make hollow. Cavereau,
Caverneau, a little cave. Caverneux, full of caves; also dwelling in caves.
Cavesanne, a false rein to lead a horse by. Cavesche, the head. Cavesne,
frowardly. Cavesot, a pole-head, or bull-head; the little black vermin whereof
toads and frogs do come. Cavessanne, as Cavesanne. Cavessine, a martingal for a
horse. Cavette, a little cellar, a little cave or hole under ground. Cauette, a
Chough, or Jack-daw. Caveure, a hole, a making hollow. Cauhare, as Caubare.
Cavier, Seigneur Cavier, a Lord having low Jurisdiction over his Tenants.
Cavillateur, a caviller, a wrangler. Cavillation, a cavil, or cavilling.
Cavillatoire, cavilling, wrangling. Caviller, to cavil, or to wrangle.
Cavillon, a kind of little mullet. Cavin, a hollow way, or dry brook. Cavine,
the bottom of the mouth wherein the root of the tongue is. Caul, the stem of
an herb; also the herb Colewort. Caulebasse, as Calabasse in the N. D.
Caulodis, Cabbidges. Cault, Caumas, hot. Caune, the name of a kind of Vine.
Caune, a certain fish not much unlike a Perch. Cauny, out of countenance.
Cauque, a tent for a wound. Cauque, tented as a wound; trodden as a hen.
Cauquemare, as Cauchemar in the N. D. Cauquer, to tent a wound; also to tread a
hen, as a cock does. Cauquier, as Cauquer. Causaian, a litigious person.
Causateur, a party in a Suit, or in Law. Causativement, litigiously; also
causatively, or for a cause. Causeresse, a prattling huswife; a scold. Causse
d'un Aisement, the bottom of a Jakes. Caut, crafty, sly, cunning. Cautelle,
craftiness. Cauteller, to overreach, to cozen. Cautement, craftily, s^ily,
cunningly. Cautesse, craft. Cautionnage, bayling, suretiship. Cautionneur, a
bail, or surety. Cauvette, a Chough, or Jack-daw. Cay, as Quay in the N. D.
also a semicolon. Caymander, Caymanderie. See Caimander, Caimanderie. Caymant,
a beggar; also a certain great Lizard that lives in hot rivers. Cayreux,
worm-eaten, or moth-eaten. Caysieron, Casson, a wooden ch^st. Cazole, as
Casole. Cazot, a cottage. Cebo, an ill-favored starveling. Ceciliane, the
water-chain of a bit. Cecilie, the s^oe-worm. Cecine, Martlemas beef. Cecite,
blindness. Cedrelate, the great cedar. Cedriac, a kind of Po^^e-citron.
Cedride, the fr^it or berry of the low Cedar. Cedrie, the ^ozen or pitch that
issues from the great cedar. Cedrin, a bird called Siskin. Cegue, for cigue,
H^mlock. Cein^^, for ceinture, a girdle, a string. Ceinctes, the thick ledges
that compass the outsides of a ship. Ceincture, girt. Ceincturer, to gird.
Ceincturette, a little girdle. Ceisan, a Vassal. Celade, a Headpiece. Cele, a
kind of Preserve. Celebrite, famousness, honor, glory. Celement, secretly,
privily. Celerier, the Yeoman of a Cellar. Celerin, the name of a Seafish.
Celerite, celerity. Celestiel, heavenly. Celeume, the shout or noise that
Mariners make when they weigh anchor, or do any Office in the ship with joined
strength. Celiac, flux celiac, a continual thin flux with pain in the belly.
Celiaque, troubled with belly-ake and a continual flux. Celibe, single,
unmarri'd. Celidoine, for Chelidoine, the herb Celandine. Celier, for Cellier,
a Cellar. Celique, for celeste, heavenly. Celivage, bending toward Heaven.
Celle, the house, or mansion of, and a community of goods among Villains, or
persons of a servile condition. Celoce, a kind of swift brigantine. Celsitude,
Highness. Cement, for Ciment, a kind of mortar made of lime and sand.
Cemiterre, for Cimeterre, a Simitar. Cenacle, as Senacle. Cencer, as Censer.
Cenchre, Cenchrite, Cenchryne, a g^^^nish Snake, whose sting causes a L^thargy.
Cencive, as Cens in the N. D. Also an Inheritance hold by, or subject unto
Cens; also the title of, or a tenure by Cens. Cendroye, burnt into ashes.
Cendroyer, to burn into ashes. Cenglade, a lash. Cenotaphe, a tomb. Censcable,
as Censable in the N. D. Censer, to reckon, esteem, a^^ ^^t a^^ng (...); to
(...), tell, or master; to tax, or to ^alue. Cen^ve, as Ceneive. Censivement,
by the title of Cens. Censivier, a Farmer, or Fee-farmer. Censorin, ce^^orious.
Centa^ree, the herb Cent^ry. Centesimer, to count, o^ evil o^t by hundreds.
Centidoine, for Centinodi^, Knot-g^a^. Centine d'une roue, the box (or bol^) of
the nave of a wheel. Centoire, as Centauree. Centon, Rapsody. Centonifique,
confusedly heaping, or hudling many things together. Cep, Stocks for
Malefactors. Cepee, an herb like Brook-lime, or water-Pimpernel. Cephale, the
Pollard-fish. Cephalee, a great head-ake. Cephalonomantie, divination by an
Asses head broyled on coals. Cepier, a Jailer; one that looks to the Stocks.
Cepride, Balm. Ceramite, Potters earth; also a precious stone of the color of
a tile. Ceranvienne, a certain precious stone that is always very moist, and
seems to sweat. Ceraste, the name of a most venomous serpent. Cerat, a plaster
made of wax, gums, and certain oils. Ceraunobule, thundering with bulls, as the
Pope. Cerceau, a circle, ring, or hoop; a round, or a round compass; also the
Sarcel-feather of a Hawks wing. Cercele, compassed with a round, or circle.
Cerceler, Cerceller, to compass with a round or circle. Cercerelle, for
Crecerelle, a Rattle for children; also a sort of Hawk. Cerche, a search, or
inquiry. Cerche ralongee, the Instrument wherewith Masons round and fashion
Pillars. Cerchesi, as Scr^isi. Cerchement, a searching, or inquiring after.
Cercle, compassed about. Cerclet, a little circle; also a small wreath of
Ozier-twigs to set under a dish on a table. Cerelet a feu, a Fire-work made
like a wreath. Cerclou^re, a pair of weeding-tangs. Cercot, a safeguard.
Cerebelle, for cervelle, the hinder part of the head wherein the memory is
lo^ged. Cere^rin, ^eady, rash, gl^dy-brained. Cerelle, a kind of Perry.
Ceremoniou^ement, as Cerimoniousement. Cerfo^cite, as Serfonet^o. Cerfouir, to
dig the ground about the roots of trees; or as Sarfouir. Cerimonie, for
ceremony, ceremony. Ceremonialement, ceremonially, reverently. Cerimonieux,
for ceremonieux, ceremonious. Cerimonieusement, ceremoniously. Cerin, as Serin
in the N. D. Cerin-perse, a bright sky-colour. Cerisee, the revenue that comes
in, or profit that is made by cherries. Cerism, the bird called Siskin. Cerne,
Cerneau, a circle, a round. Cerner, to compass with a circle, to make a round.
Cernoir, a kind of tool to pick out withal the kernels of walnuts being yet in
the shale. Ceroesne, Ceroine, any ointment or plaster whereof rozen or wax are
the principal ingredients. Ceromantie, divination by wax put into water. Cerot,
a searcloth, or plaster made of wax, gum, etc. Cerouenne, as Ceroesne.
Cerquemage, Cerquemanage, an assignment of bounds between private men's Lands,
as also in Commons, Highways, Rivers, etc. Cerquemane, bounded, limited.
Cerquemanement, as Cerquemanage. Cerquemaner, to lay out the bounds.
Cerquemaneurs, certain sworn Officers who have authority to set or plack up
meers and bounds between several men's possessions, and to examine and reform
encroachments made upon highways, commons, rivers, etc. Cerresine, gum, or
liquour becoming like rozen or gum. Certain (a Subst.) certainty, or certain
truth. Tesmoin de certain, a Witness that assures or says he knows all he says.
Certainete, certainty. Certeau a deux testes, the name of a sort of pear.
Certificateur, a certifier, also an Informer, or notice-giver. Certification, a
certification; also a certificate. Certiore, c rtified, informed. Cerve, a
Hind. Cervelin, hair-i^^^ted. Cervelliere, a ^^^ll, or sallet of iron.
Cervical, belonging to the nape, or hinder part of the n^^k. Cervines^ine, the
shrub Way-thorn, Buck-thorn, Laxative-ram. Ceruseux, full of ceruse. Ces, (a
Subst.) a stay, ceasing, or forbearing; also a putting to silence, or
forbidding to proceed. Cesolfie, sad, pensive, or perplexed. Cessement,
ceasing. Cessible, yeeldable, resignable. Cessionaire, one that gives up his
goods, thereby to be put out of the reach or danger of Creditors; and, though
he loses his credit thereby, yet he is not held so base as a Bankrupt.
Cessioner, to eat between meals. Cest, Ceste, as Cet, Cette, in the N. D.
Ceston, a studded Girdle, which in old time the Bridegroom put about his Bride
as soon as they were married, and took off when they went to bed together.
Cestrin, a kind of yellow stone, whereof Beads are made. Cestuy, he. Cestuy
ci, this. Cestuy la, that. Cesue, for seve, the sap of trees. Cesure, a
cutting, section, division. Cetace, poisson cetace, a fish of the kind of
Whales. Cete, for cette, the feminine of cet, this, or that. Cethin, a kind of
wood that corrupts not. Cetier, as Setier in the N. D. Ceton, a rowel for a
bruised or impostumed horse. Cetuy, as Cestuy. Ceucheter, to whisper in the
ear. Ceve, a whet-stone. Ceves, Cevotes, chives, chibols. Chabins, the sheep of
Berry, whose wool is very thick, and as long as goats-hair. Chable, for cable,
a cable. Chabre, the Pungar-fish. Chabrer, as Cabrer in the N. D. Chase,
Chacer, Chaceur. See Chasse, Chasser, Chasseur in the N. D. Chacie,
Chacicusete, as Chassie in the N. D. Chacieux, as Chassieux in the N.D.
Chacunerie, every ones own. Chacun a sa chacunerie, every one to his own home,
or about his own business. Chaffauld, for Echafaud, a Scaffold. Chaffaulder, to
set up scaffolds; also to set upon scaffolds. Chaffourre, dis^^^^d, bes^^^ar^d.
Chaffourrer, to d^^^ are, to besmear. Chagrigner, for Ch^^^iner, to vex.
Chagrineux, sad, in troubles. Chahuant, as Chathuant, under Chat in the N. D.
Chair-bouille, a sodden fellow, or one whose flesh does look as if it had been
sodden. Chaircuicterie, or Chaircuiterie, the Market or place where bacon or
any kind of hogs-flesh may be had ready boiled. Chaircuictier, a Cook that
sells all kind of hogs-flesh ready boiled; also a bungler. Chaircute, cut, or
hacked. Chaircuter a coups d'espees, to cut, or hack. Chair, for chaise, a
chair. Chaise, for chair, a pulpit. Chaiz, low Warehouses or Cellars to lay
merchandise in. Chalamine, as Calamine in the N. D. Chalan, a wood-boat, or
barge. Chalanger, as Calenger. Chalant, from Chaloir, caring for. Chalcide, a
kind of spotted Lizard. Chalcite, the recrement of brass, cleaving to the
sides of the furnaces wherein it is purified. Chalemelle, Chalemie, a little
pipe made of a reed, or of a wheaten or oaten straw. Chalemeller, to play on a
little pipe. Chalenee, a boat full. Chalenger, as Calenger. Chalibe, steeled,
done over with steel; wherein steel is quenched; belonging unto steel. Chaline,
a little thunder in a morning; also drought. Chalissier, a maker of Bedsteds.
Challer, a hare to breed young; also to shale, or unsh^l ^^ts. se Chaloir de,
to ^a^e for. Chalon, as Chalan; also a kind of fish-net. Chaloppes, the
shalings of nuts. Chalu^, a kind^ of Ma^^t. Chalumeux, knotty as a reed.
Cham^^ille, Spu^g^-time. Chamelleon, as Cameleon in the N. D. Chamara^,
Water-g^r^^nder. Chamarrier, the name of an Office. Cham^ellage, Cham^ellenage,
a duty a fine paid or course unto a Lord upon e^^ry change of T^nant; also a
V^^ d^^ unto the chief Usher of the Chamber of Accounts, upon every Homage made
by one of the Kings Tenants. Chamber, for chanvre, Hemp. Chambree, a Chamber
full of. Chambrerie, Chamberlainship. Chambreux, that keeps much in his
chamber. Chambrier, a Chamberlain in an Abbey or Inn; also a Princes
Chamberlain. Chambrille, full of Chambers. Chambrillon, a little chamber; also
a young Chambermaid. Chame, a kind of Cockle. Chamedree, Germander. Chamelee,
a shrub called Widow-wall. Chameleon, as Cameleon in the N. D. Chamelier, a
Camel-keeper, or driver. Chamion, a little dray without wheels. Champaigne, for
Campaign, fields. Champayage, a running, or grazing of cattle in the fields.
Champayer, Champeyer, to reside, or continue among fields; also to wander in,
or walk over the fields; to carry abroad into the fields; to feed in fields; to
turn cattle into the fields. Champi, base born; also consening, cheating; also
seeming, but not being honest. Champicerie, tour de champicerie, a cheating
trick. Champleure, as Chantepleure. Champoyer, as Champayer. Chanci, musty.
Chancisseure, a musty taste. Chandeleux, full of candles, belonging to candles.
Chandelier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a candle or candlestick. Chanes, le
grand Chanes, Mayweed. Chanfron, the name of an Italian Coin. Chancinerie, for
Chanoinie, Prebend hip. Chansi Chansisseure. See Chanci, Chanciss^ure.
Chansonet, a Canary-bird. Chansonn^ur, Chansonier, always singing of Songs.
Chanstie, as Chantier in the N. D. Chantepleure, a watering-pot; the cock of a
distern; a device for the emptying of a water-vessel. Chantepou^t, the lesser
C^^tory. Chanter^me, a great song, or hedge-toad. Chanterie, a singing; also a
Chantery; the place or office of a Chanter. Chanterre, a paultry Poet.
Chantillonne, sung merrily. Chantillonner, Chantonner, to sing merrily.
Chantourne, turned in and out. Chantournement, a turning in and out.
Chantourner, to turn in and out, like a small stream in a plain field.
Chantrerie, as Chanterie. Chanvreux, full of hemp. Chanvrier, for cheneviere, a
hemp-close. Chapel, a hat, a garland. Chapel de roses, a slight portion.
Chapelainie, Chaplainship; also the charge of a Chapel. Chapeler, for Chapler,
to chip bread. Chapelier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to hats. Chapeline, as
Capeline in the N.D. Chapelis, as Chapplis. Chapelures, for chaplures,
chippings of bread. Chaperonner, Chaperonnier, to uncover his head before one;
also to put a hood on. Chaperonniere, a poor Hat. Chapitreur de soin, a
scar-crow, one that threatens much and does but little. Chaplis,
bread-chippings; also rags of stones, that fly from them in the hewing.
Chapoter, for Chipoter, to haggle. Chapel, as Chapel. Chappier, a Cope-maker.
Chappins, a kind of high slippers for low women. Chappler, as Chapler in the
N. D. Chapplis, as Chaplis. Chappon, for Chapon, a Capon. Chappoter, for
Chipoter, to haggle. Chappron, for Chaperon, a hood. Chappronner, as
Chaperonner. Chappronnier, as faulcon bon Chappronnier, a ^awk that takes the
hood gently. Chappuis, as Chapuis. Chapron, for Chaperon, a hood. Chaptel, a
least of a beast, and of the whole increase thereof, or a beast let out to the
halves. Chaptels deniers, the principal sum and charges a Purchaser has paid
and been at for land, which the next of Kin offers to redeem. Chap^is, a
Carpenter. Chapuiser, to work Carpenters-work. Characie, Garden-spurge.
Charadrien, a Bird which earnestly beholding one that is sick of the Jaundice,
or beheld by him, heals him. Charanson, Charanton, a Mite, or Weevil.
Charansonne, eaten up by weevils. Charaveau, a Beetle. Charbonnee, a Carbonado.
Charbonnerie, for Mine de charbon, a Coal-pit, or Mine. Charbonnesque,
coal-like. Charbonneux, full of coals. Charbot, a Beetle. Charcuter, for gater
une besongne, to spoil a piece of work. Chardonnereau, the bar of a door.
Chardonnette, for Chardonnerette, the thistly Artichoke; also a kind of sauce
for Kid. Formage a la chardonnette, cheese whose milk was curded with the juice
of the wild Artichoke; or a Lenten cheese made of eggs and the spawn of fishes,
and curded with the juice of the Thistle. Chardrier, a Gold-finch. Charee, as
Charree. Charesse, Charesser, as Caresse, Caresser in the N. D. Chareti,
Charetin, a Waggon-house, a hovel to set carts under. Charette, for Charrete, a
Cart. Charevastre, a Buck-cloth. Chargais, the name of a bird. Chargeant,
facheux, heavy, or troublesome. Chargnure, for Charnure, fleshiness. Chariage,
and Charier. See Charriage, and Charrier, under Char in the N. D. Chariotte, a
small Chariot for children; also a kind of Litter. Charitatif, charitable.
Charlaide, stout, valiant, warlike. Charlataner, Charlater, to play the
Mountebank. Charlaterie, consening, or cheating. Charlot, a Cur^w. Charmean, a
little yoak-tree. Charme-coeur, ravishing, heart-charming. Charme-p^ine,
pain-charming. Charmeresse, an Inchanteress. Charme-soing, Charme-soucy,
care-charming. Charm^^sement, charmingly. Charmoye, a grove of Yoaks, or of
Horn-beam trees. Charnage, flesh-time; also flesh, or flesh-meat. Charnalite,
fleshliness, sensuality. Charnaut, flesh-time. Charnie, a prop, stay, or pole
to support a Vine. Charnie, a Plain, Down, open, or uninclosed Ground.
Charniere, a binge; also a knuckle, or turning joint; also a certain device
whereby a wooden-leg or arm is made to move. La charniere des genoux, the
whirl-bone of the knees. Charongneux, full of Carrion. Charongnier, feeding on
Carrion. Charopper, to boil one sort of liquor nine or ten times over.
Charpentailler, to cut, or hew, as a Carpenter does timber. Charpentaire, the
Sea-onion. Charpi, Charpie, Charpy, for Charpis, Lint, or Tinder. Charrau, a
Cart-way. Charree, Buck-ashes, the ashes whereof Lie has been made. Charreton,
a little Chariot. Charriere, for Carriere, a carreer. Charroton, for
Charretier, a Carman. Charroyer, for Charrier, to carry in a Cart. Charruage,
the Plough-gears; also tilled, or plowed land. Charrue, ploughed. Charruer, to
plough. Charte, for Carte, a Card. Charte, for Chartre, a Charter. Charte,
having a Charter, holding, or held by Charter. Charte, for cherte, dearness.
Chartee, for charretee, a Cart-load. Chartepartie, a bill of lading. Charterie,
a Carters trick; also a Hovel to set Carts under. Chartil, Chartin, the frame
of a Cart or Wagon without the wheels. Charton, a Carrier. Chartrier, a
Jailer; also a Prisoner. Chaseret, a Cheesefat. Chasereux, belonging to the
Cheesefat. Chasier, a Cheese-press. Chasiere, a Cheese-^eck. Chaslict, for
chalit, a Trundle-bed. Chasmate, a Chas^mate in fortification. Chassable,
chastable sit to be chased. Chasse-bosse, Herb-willow. Chasse-corneille, a kind
of small Fowling-piece. Chasse-crainte, fear expelling. Chasse-diable, S. John's
grass. Chasse-erreur, error expelling. Chasse-fievre, Germander. Chasse-mal,
mischief expelling. Chasse-masse, a fire-lock, or horse-mans piece that goes
off by a fire-lock. Chasse-monstre, Monster-pursuing. Chasse-mort, death
expelling. Chasse-nue, Skie-clearing. Chasse-ordure, cleansing, purging.
Chasse-pape, as Chasse-messe. Chasse-peine, pain-expelling. Chasse-peste,
plague-expelling; also the Herb-willow. Chasse-poulx, Bears-foot. Chasse-rage,
Dittany, Dittander, Pepper-wort. Chasse-rat, the name of a Serpent that
commonly feeds on Rats. Chasseresse, a woman-^unter. Chasseret, a little
hunter. Chasserie, hunting, chasing. Chasserot, much given to hunting.
Chasseroton, a small chest. Chasseton, a Scritch-owl; also a little chest of
wood. Chassieusete, blear-eyedness. Chassisse, as fenestre chassissee, a window
covered with paper instead of glass. Chassitier, a maker of paper-windows, or
of frames for paper or linnen-windows. Chassoire, a Carters whip. Chassot, the
Bull-head-fish. Chastel, for Chateau, a Castle. Chaste^lenie, Chastellerie, as
Chatelainie in the N. D. Chastenereie, a plot of ground full of Chesnut-trees.
Chastiable, fit to be chastised. Chastieur, a chastiser. Chasti-villain, a
whip, or cadgel for a knave; also a Castle, or Citadel, in or near a good
Town. Chastrable, fit to be gelt. Chastrement, a Gelding. Chat-chasteil, ou
chateil, a defensive Engine of War, somewhat resembling the Roman Testudo.
Chatel, a Chattel, or moveable. Chatemiterie, hypocrisy. Chatemitiquement,
hypocritically. Chatepeleuse, a Mite, or Weevil. Chat-fourre, a Lawyer, or
Petti-fogger, who commonly wears a Gown lined with wild Cats-skin.
Chat-garanier, a Pole-cat, a kind of wild Cat that haunts Warrens. Chatillons,
small fresh water Lampreys. Chatonner, to kittle. Chatonnie, a waggish trick; a
knavish or unhappy prank; also the art of pilfering. Chatouille, a certain fish
very full of small bones. Chatouilloir, any ticklish part of the body,
especially the side. Chatrin, a Jailer. Chat-rocher, a kind of Dog-fish.
Chattement, a ki^ling, a breeding or bringing forth of young Cats.
Chattemiterie, as Chatemiterie. Chatas, a kind of Vine. Chauans, little Owls.
Chavassme, a certain measure or quantity of land, in length 120 foot, and in
breadth 30. Chauce, for Chausses, breeches. Chauceaux, as Caucheaux. Chaucee,
for Chaussee, a Causey. Chauchage, as Chaussage. Chauche, crowded in. Chaucher,
to crowd a thing in. Chauche-mare, as Cauchemar in the N. D. Chaude (Subst.) a
fierce onset, a violent assault. A la chaude, in anger. Chaudeau, a Caudle, or
warm broth. Chaude-colle, leacherousness. Chauderonnerie, flesh or fish that is
ordinarily boiled in Cauldrons or Kettles. Chaudet, a warm place. Chaudot, a
heat, or hot thing. Chauffe-dos, a kind of low chimney having but a hole
instead of a fannel for the voiding of s^oak. Chauffe-pied, a Foot-stove, a
little and low Stove that serves to keep the feet warm. Chaufferette,
Chauffette, a Chasingdi^h. Chauffour, as Chausour, under Chaux in the N. D.
Chauffourer, as Chaffourrer. Chaufrain, as Chanfrein in the N.D. Chauguette, a
Watchtower. Chauliere, a plot or bed of Cabbidges in a Garden. Chaulmage, the
cutting or mowing of straw or stubble. Chaulmer, to pick, or gather up straw;
also to cut or mow stubble. Chaulmeur, a gatherer of straw; a cutter or mower
of stubble. Chaulsepot, a certain little bird. Chaumeny, musty. Chaumer, as
Chaulmer, and as Chommer. Chaumes, Lay-lands. Chaumier, of straw. Chaumin, made
of, or covered with stubble. Chaumine, a thatched house. Chaumouflet, Bumbast
put into a cornet of paper, then kindled, and the smoke thereof put into the
nostrils of a sleeper. Chaussage, shoe-money, expense in shoes; also hosen, or
shoes. Chaussepot, as Chaulsepot. Chaussetier, a Hose-maker. Chauver, to make
bald. Chauver des oreilles, to clap down the ^ars. Chauvesourissier, the
bat-wing-bone in the lower part of the head. Chauvir, Chauvisser, to grow bald.
Chaziere, as Chasiere. Cheant, falling down. Cheau, a Whelp, or Cub. Chebule,
the biggest kind of the M^^^olan-plum. Chedins, the head-men of the Pari^h.
Chef ^ciet, the Treasurer, or Keeper of the Ves^ry. Chef gros, Shoomakers
thread. Ches mois, a chief Mannor-house. Cheintre, a baulk or swath of grass, a
long ^^de^^, or highway. Ch^g^^, as Chef gros. Chell^^dre, as Chelydre.
Che^li^^, a R^^^^ Chelsydre, Chelydre, a most venomous and stinking Serpent.
Chemage, the passage-toll that is paid at Sc^. Ch^me, as ancient measure holding
about t^^ ^^^^f^ls. Ch^mer, to de^^e^^, or be (as the M^^) in the wai^; to
pine, or f^ll away. Chem^^^^, to w^^^^^r. Che^^er, the (...) or chief H^ir in a
D^s^^^nt, who is to do homage sor^ whole land that is descended. Ch^min^ux, a
great walker; also (...) to a way, or to a chim^^y; (...) fall of (...) us.
C^em^^^^r, (...) or b^^r ging to a (...). Ch^mi^^^t, whi^ (...). Ch^^^^ (...)
or g^^^r. C^^^^^ (...) de cl^^ant, (...) cer^ (...) whereon Ca^^ls us^ (...).
Ch^^^^^ (...) Saffron. Ch^^^ (...), a chain; also a (...) w^rk. Ch^^^ (...) of
a certain (...) Chene^i, H^^^ (...). Chenevilles, the broken stalks of Hemp.
Chenevette, for Chenevote, a stalk of Hemp. Chenillaux, young Caterpillars.
Chenille, of, or belonging to Caterpillars; Caterpillar-like; full of, or
wrought with Caterpillars. Taffetas chenille, a kind of striped Tassata.
Chenillier, an Instrument wherewith Gardeners pull down Caterpillars. Chenin
(Adj.) dog-like, of or belonging to a dog. Chenu, gray-haired. Cheoir, to fall.
Chepage, a Jailer, or Gaolership. Chepier, a Jailer. Chercee, a kind of
earth-alpick. Cherchage, a seeking for. Chercuictier, as Chaircuictier. Cherer,
to cheer, to cherish. Cherete, for cherte, dearness. Cherseuil, for cerfeuil,
Chervil. Chermaye, a wood of scarlet oaks; also as Charmoye. Cherme, the
Scarlet-oak. Chermes, the Scarlet-b^rry. Chermine, the fruit or berry of the
scarlet oak. Cherpi, for charpis, lint, tinder. Cherquemmage, as Cherquemanage.
Cherree, buck-ashes. Chersydre, the Land-adder. Chesaux, the rubbish of decayed
houses; also mansions, houses. Chesmer, as Chemer. Chesneau, a water-snake,
mortal enemy to oaks; also a young oak. Chesnereau, a little young oak.
Chesnette, for Chainette, a little chain; also the has G^rmander. Chesneux, of
Oak, or f^ll of Oaks. Chesnon, the Ch^^. Chest^ete, mis^ry, wret^^ed^^ss,
poorn^^s; also k^^^ry, shr^wdn^^^. Chestreux, poor, (...). Chestron, as
Che^ron. Chetdeux, g^^^^ f^ll^^g. Ch^te, the height^ (...) of a Ship, from t^^
(...) D^^k to the (...). Chetiver, to bring to wa^^. Chetivete, as Chestivete.
Chetivoison, poverty. Chetron, (...) till of a Ch^^^. Cheu, fall^^. Chevage, a
w^r^ duty paid to the Kings (...), (...) ^y Ba^tard, etc. Cheval^r, to (...);
also to (...); (...) of ca^^^ip to lap out ^^g (...) an^^^^r. Chevaleresque,
Knightly, of, or belonging to a Knight. Chevalereux, valiant, courageous.
Chevalere usement, valiantly, courageously. Chevalet, or petit cheval, a little
horse. Chevaleter, as Chevaler. Chevaleureux, as Chevalereux. Chevalin, of, or
belonging to a horse. Chevaline, the Herb called Horsetail, or Shave-grass. La
Chevaline, horseflesh, or the kind of ho^s^s. Chevalet, a little horse; also
a tressel of wood; also a sort of coin. Chevance, wealth. Chevauchable, easy
to be rid on. Chevauchee, a riding on horseback; also a Princes Progress; a
Judges Cheuit, etc. also a furnishing of horses to ride on. Chevauchement, a
riding. Chevaucher, for voyager a cheval, to ride a horse. Chevaucheur, for
Cavalier, a horseman. Chevauchons, a chevauchons, astraddle. Chevecerie, as
Chevecherie. Cheveche, an Owl, the rough-footed short-tailed Owl. Chevecher,
Chevechier, Chevecier, a S^xton. Chevecherie, the V^stry, or Treasury of a
Church. Chevedage, a dwelling house. Cheveil, Chevel, chief, principal. Lieu
chevel, a Mannor-house, or chief house; Fief chevel, a noble Inheritance held
in capite, and capabl^ of J^risdicti^^. Cheveler, to sprig, or spriggle; to put
forth a small or hairy (...). Cheveliere, a hair-la^^; also a dressing of ^air.
Chevelite, a S^^ker, a small imp of a plant spr^nging from the root th^r^of, or
o^ it s^ly rooted. Chevesche, as Cheveche. Chevesne, the Ch^^i^, or P^llard-fi
h. Chevestre, a (...), or ^alter for a cow, cal^, etc. Chevestreux, blading, or
s^raini g the head. Cheve^ain, a Captain, a Commander. Cheve^ier, as Chevecher.
Che^^, (...) Ch^^i^ (...) ^. D. Chevi, (...) with r^^^^i^^d. Chevillage, a
^^ggi^g. Chevilleur, a pegger; also a Sorcerer that holding his finger in a
hole, and muttering certain superstitious Words, will hinder a man from pissing
until his finger be removed. Cheviniau, a Chevin. Chevir, to compass, prevail
with, reclaim. Ils ne pouvoyent tous chevir en la maison, there was not room
enough for them all in the house. Chevissance, an agreement, or composition
made. Chevolee, a sprig of a plant; also a fiber, or hair-like thread growing
unto the root of a plant. Chevoler, to put forth sprigs. Chevre-pied,
goat-footed. Chevrette, a little Goat; a wild Goat; a great Prawn; a little
and low andiron; a small piece of Ordnance. Chevrie, a Bag-pipe. Chevrier, a
Goat-herd. Chevrin, Goat-like; of, or belonging to a Goat. Cheurme, as Chiorme
in the N. D. Chevron, for Chevreau, a Kid. Chevronde, as Severonde in the N. D.
Chevronneau, Chevronnet, a small rafter. Chevrot, a Kid. Chevrotter, for
Chevreter, to kid. Chevrottement, the breeding, or bringing forth of Kids.
Cheusson, a Mite, or Weevil. Chezal, Chezeau, a chief Mansion, or Mannor-house.
Chi, as Ci in the N. D. Chiabrena, a shitten-come-shite. Chiappon, a kind of
port in the mouth of a Bit. Chiard, a shitten fellow. Chiasse, dross. Chiasser,
to shite; also to be too curious. Chic, de chic a chic, from little to little.
Chicambault, the luff-block in a ship. Chicancus, Chicanous, for Chicaneur, a
wrangler. Chichard, for Chiche, a penny-father. Chicharou, bastard Mackarel.
Chiche-face, Chiche-maille, a penny-father. Chicheron, the Nipple of ones
breast. Chichoree, for Chicoree, Succory. Chicot, a stub, or slump. Chicotin,
Chicotrin, the herb Orpin. Chief, for chef, chief, principal. Chien-cerf, a
Hart-hound. Chienesse, Dogs, the kind or nature of dogs, a breed of dogs.
Chien-lict, a shite-a-bed. Chienner, to whelp. Chiennesse, as Chienesse.
Chiennet, a little dog. Chieneter, as Chienner. Chienneterie, doggishness, the
kind or nature of dogs. Chiennetier, a Dog-keeper, one that looks unto Hounds.
Chiennette, a young, or little bitch. Chien-rage, Dogs-bane. Chietins, as
Theatins. Chisse, an old rag, an off-cast piece of stuff. Chiffetier, a seller
of old stuff. Chifflement, a whistling. Chigros, as Chef gros. Chil, as Chyle
in the N. D. Chilagogue, a Choler-purging Medicine. Chilifier, to concoct,
digest, or turn into a milky or white juice. Chiller, as Ciller in the N. D.
Chilleure, a seeling, or sowing up of the eyes. Chilonique, a la Chilonique,
briefly. Chimage, as Chemage. Chimagree, as Cimagree in the N. D. Chimerie, for
Chimerique, chimerical. Chimolie, terre chimolie, a kind of earth that is good
against burning and hot Impostumes. Chinchille, the name of an Indian and
Squirrel-like beast. Chine, a red and spungeous Indian root, good against the
Gout. Chinfreneau, a knock, or thump. Chinon, as Chignon in the N. D. Chinquer,
to quaff, or drink extremely. Chiole, whelped. Chiot, a whelp, or little dog.
Chipault, ragged. Chipouton, a penny-father. Chippe, a ship, or bark; also an
old clout, rag, or patch. Chiquaner, for Chicaner, to wrangle. Chicanique,
litigious, pettyfogger-like. Chiquanourris, Chiquanoris, crafty pleaders, or
pettyfoggers. Chique, as Chiche. Chiquenaude, fillipped. Chiquenauder, to
fillip. Chiquenie, as Squenie. Chiquete, cut, or hacked. Chiqueter, to cut, or
hack. Chiqueteur, a cutter, or hacker. Chiqueture, a cutting, cut, or gash.
Chiquot, a scale in the root or end of a nail; also a sprig, or shoot of a
tree; also the stump of a tooth. Chiquoter, to sift, search, or seek out; also
to hack with a knife, etc. Chiragre, the Gout in the hands. Chiroacte, nimble
of hand. Chiroaine, as Ciroesne. Chirographaire, Creancier chirographaire, a
Creditor that has a Note under the Debtors hand. Chiron, for Ciron, a
hand-worm. Chirurgial, belonging to Surgery. Chocailler, as Chocquailler.
Chochepierre, a kind of Bull-finch. Chocquailler, to drink much. Choenes, the
lines, or chains, and rods wherewith Surveyors measure Land. Choerin, a
Barrow-pig. Choier, as Choyer. Choine, Choisne, a loaf of white bread. Choison,
opportunity, occasion; also plenty. Cholagague, the thin or small gut wherein
the Chylus thickening begins to rest. Chole, Cholere, as Colere in the N. D.
Cholere, Cholerique, and Cholereux. See Colerique in the N. D. Cholique, as
Colique in the N. D. Choliqueux, troubled with the Colic. Chomer, as Chommer
in the N. D. Chommable, Jour chommable, a Play-day, a Holy Day. Chommage, a
resting, or ceasing from work. Chondrille, Gum-succory. Choner, as Chommer, or
Chopiner in the N. D. Chonquetage, a View taken of the Kings Woodsales.
Chopinette, a small cup. Choquar, a Chough. Choriage, a keeper of Players
Garments. Chore, a Company of Singers, or Dancers; any Company; the Chorus
between every Act in a Tragedy. Choreal, frequenting, or belonging to a Quire.
Chorer, a Barrow-pig, a young hog. Choriaux, Quirtsters. Chorion, the
after-burden. Choriste, a Singing-man in a Quire. Chorme, as Chiorme in the N.
D. Chouan, a Pollard, or Chevin-finch. Chouart, flying out. Chouchette, a
Chough. Choue, disappointed. Choul, for chou, Colewort. Chouquet, a block.
Chouguette, a Chough. Chourme, as Chiorme in the N. D. Chouzer, to swive.
Choyer, to have a great care of. Chraies, choak-pears. Chran, the name of a
fish. Chras, as Chraies. Chresme, as Chreme in the N. D. Chresmer, to anoint
with holy oil. Chrestienne, christened. Chrestiennement, (Subst.) a
christening. Chrestienner, to christen. Chrisocolle, Gold-sodder.
Christe-marine, Crest-marine. Christianize, made a Christian. Christodin, a new
Christian. Chronique, (Adj.) temporal, or returning at a certain time.
Chroniste, Chronologiste, a Chronicler. Chrysocolle, as Chrisocolle.
Chrysocome, Gold-flower. Chrysogone, Gold-producing. Chrysolaine, Orache.
Chrysopase, Chrysopatie, a green precious stone that has a golden luster.
Chuat, a whelp. Chucheter, Chuchoter, to whisper. Chupper, to suck up. Churl,
the white field-onion, or star of Bethlehem. Chur, fallen. Churquette, a
mouse-trap. Chylose, a digestion of sap or (...). Chymique, for Chymiste, a
Chemist. Chymistique, Chymistical. Chyst, a membrane. Ciane, bright blue of
color. Ciathe, the name of a measure and weight. Ciboile, as Ciboire in the N.
D. Cicatrice, Cicatricer, as Cicatrise, Cicatriser in the N. D. Cicatrisatif,
cicatrizing. Cices, Ciches, as Chiches in the N. D. Cicharou, as Chicharou.
Cicle, as Sicle or Cycle in the N. D. Cic^^^^, or Cicoigne, for Cigogne, a
Stork. Cicogn^au, Cicoig^eau, a young Stork. Cicotrin, the herb Orpin; also a
kind of fine scarce. Cicotrine, or Cicrotine, very finely searced. Cicutuaire,
wild Chervil. Cidrage, Peachwort. Cie, for Sie, a Saw. Cielin, heavenly; also
belonging to the firmament; or to a canopy, testern, or upper cieling. Cier,
for sier, to saw. Cieure, for sieure, saw-dust. Cigaler, to chirp. Cignean,
Swan-like, of a Swan. Cil, for celui, he. Cilindre, as Cylindre in the N. D.
Cillier, as Ciller in the N. D. Cimaise, as Cymaise in the N. D. Cimasulte,
carving that resembles rolling waves. Cimet, for Cime, the top of a tree or a
hill. Cimettes, as Cymettes. Cimitiere, for Cimetiere, a Churchyard.
Cimmerique, as Tenebres Cimmeriques, Cymmerian (or continual) darkness. Terre
Cimolee, Cimolie, or Cimolienne, Fullers earth. Cin de bois, a knot in wood.
Cinabre, for Cinnabre, Cinoper. Cinabrin, red, ruddy, as vermilion.
Cincinatule, one that continually curls his hair. Cincture, or Cindre, for
C^inture, a girdle. Cindre, girt, spotted. Cindrer, to gird, also to spot.
Cinefaction, a burning unto ashes. Cinit, a Siskin. Cinnabrise, mingled, or
colored with cinoper. Cinname, sweetened with cinnamon, or sweet as cinnamon.
Cinnamome, as Cinname in the N. D. Cinquaine, the name of a certain Vi^e that
th^ives not in a moist soil. Cinquener, to yield five for one. Cinturin, for
Ceinturon, a waste-belt. Cion, a storm; also as Scion. Cipres, for Cypres, the
Cyprus-tree. Cipsule, as Capsule. Circee, a kind of Night-shads.
Circombilivagination, a wheeling about. Circombilivaginer, to wheel about.
Circongirer, the same. Circonjacent, lying about. Circuir, to incompass.
Circuition, a circuition. Circuition de paroles, a circumlocution. Circularite,
roundness. Circulateur, a Jugler. Circulatoire, circulatory. Circule,
circulated. Circuler, to circulate. Cirette, the name of a pear. Cireux, of
wax, full of wax. Cirine, as Cyrine. Ciroesnes, as Ciroines in the N. D.
Cironnier, as main cironniere, a hand troubled with worms. Cirre, a lock of
curled hair. Cirsotomie, the cutting or opening of the corrupt veins called
Varices. Cisaille, the clipping of coin presently after the stamp. Cisailles,
Garden-sheers, any great sheers. Cise, carved, wrought with a chisel. Ciselet,
a little chisel. Cisellage, a clipping with sheers or cizars. Cisteaux, for
Citeaux, an Order of White Friars. Cisternin, of, or belonging to a cestern.
Cisternon, a little cestern. Cistophore, an ancient coin, worth about two pence
farthing. Cistre, as Sistre in the N. D. Cisure, as Scissure. Citadin, a
Citizen, or Freeman in a City. Cirouart, as Zedoare. Citoyennerie, Citizenship.
Citrin, of a citron, citron-like, pale-yellow as a citron. Citrinite,
pale-yellowness. Citronne, the herb Sweet-balm. Citronnelle, a kind of small
balm. Citronnier, (Adj.) as Citrin. Citrulle, for citrouille, a gourd. Civade,
a shrimp; also oats, or provender for horses. Civadier, the fourth part of a
Quarteron. Civadiere, the Sprit-sail of a ship. Cive, a kind of black sauce
for a Hare. Cive, a Scallion, or unset Leek. Civelle, a small Lamprey. Civets,
a kind of sauce. Civettien, perfumed with, or smelling of civet. Civois, a bed
of scallions, or of unset leeks. Civot, as Cive- Cizaille, as Cisaille.
Cizailler, Cizaille, Cizeler, Cizeleure. See them with an s, instead of z, in
the N. D. Cizellage, as Cisellage. Clabaud, a came for a bound; also the
harking of a Cur. Clabauderie, a barking, or bawling. Clabosser, to horse, or
t^ss up and down; also to be dash with dirt. Clac, any thing that makes a
clacking or clattering noise; the ^^acket that frights away birds from
fruit trees, etc. Clache, a certain engine wherewith small birds are caught.
Claguet, the name of an apple. Claigner, as Cligner in the N. D. Claim, a
public demand or claim; also a Bill of complaint put or preferred into a
Court. Clain, as Claim; also an Arrest or Seizure of a Debtors Goods upon
execution; also a fine of twenty pence due unto Justice for the seizure of
beasts Damage sesant; also a penalty inflicted on the Party that yields by
confession in Court, before the Suit come to contestation. Clair-coulant,
running clear. Clairins, a certain Order of Cordeliers, or Gray-Friars.
Claironner, to sound a Clarion; also to squeak, to speak shrill. Clamable,
Claimable, challengeable. Clamant, a clai^er, a challenger; also a Creditor
that seizes b^ Debtors Goods upon Execution. Clamant, (Adj.) crying out; also
claiming, or challenging. Clame, a Fine levied in some places upon such as
d^fer the payment of their debts; also the fine paid unto Justice, or a Lord
having Jurisdiction, for the seizure of beasts found Damage-sesant. Clamme, a
Pilgrims cloak. Clamporte, as Cloporte in the N.D. Clanche, the ^atch of a
door. Clangueur, a shrill noise, or s^^^aking. Clang^eux, shrill, s^eaking.
Clanponniere, as Clapponiere. Clapoir, Clapoire, a clap. Claponice, Claponier,
as Clapponiere. Clappeter, to clap one with his hand. Clapp^nie^, the
^^ckle-bone of a (...). Cla^re-^^^r, a la^^ ro^, one that will ^at^er star^e
with cold and longer, than work to get heat or (...). Claquer, Claqueter les
dents, to k^a^h the teeth. Claquettement, Claquetis, a clattering. Claquette,
for Cliquette, a Lazer 's clicket or clapper. Clare, Claret, somewhat clear.
Clas, a k^ell, or woeful noise. Clavaller, to strengthen the young shoots or
slips of a Vine against the fury of strong winds. Clavandier, a Key-bearer;
also the chain whereon women use to wear their keys. Clavarins, an Order of
black Friars which wore two great paper-keys upon their habits. Cla^dication,
Claudition, a halting. Clavelade, a thornback. Clavele, Clavelle, nailed, or
fastened with nails; also ^us^^fied with the scab, as a sheep. Claveler,
Claveller, to nail fast. Clavet, for Claveau, the scab amongst sheep. Clavette,
the Craw-bone; also a Spring-pin; the little pi^ce of iron wherewith Tradesmen
keep in the iron-pins of their shop-windows; also the forelock of the carriage
of Cannon, or that which fastens it. Clavette du pied, the ^^^l, or hinder-bone
of the foot. Claveure, a keyhole, or all that part of a lock wherein the key
^a^^s or plays; also a chi^k. Clavicules, the channel-bones, neck-bones, or
craw-bones. Claviere, a woman that has charge of all the keys in a house.
Clavin, a little grapple, or book like a claw. Claune, a Pool, or Pond.
Claustier, for Claustral, of, or belonging to a Cloister, living in a Cloister.
Claustile, a little clause. Claver, to shut up with hurdles. Cl^e, walled,
hurdled. Cleigner, for Cligner, to wink. Clematide, Clematite, a kind of the
b^th Ha^^^wort. Cleps^dre, as hourglass. Cleps^drie, a limited running of sand
in an hourglass. Cler, for Clair, (...) Clercelier^, a kind^ of (...) ribbon;
also a string wherewith wo^^n ^^ng their keys to their girdles. Clear, a kind
(...) ^d Hy^^^ra^. Clerement, for clairement (...). Cleres-voyes, lattices, or
secret holes to spy out at. Clergeau, Clergeon, a petty Clark, an under-Clark,
or young Clark. Clergesse, a learred woman. Clergy, Clarkship, learning.
Clerical, of, or belonging to the Clergy. Clericalement, Priest-like. Clerte,
for Clarte, clearness. Clesche, as Clisse. Clide, an ancient warlike engine,
whereby they used of old to hurl a great number of stones. Clie, for Claye, a
hurdle. Clientelle, defense, protection; also a store of Clients. Clifoire, a
Plaisterers Tray. Clignemusset, the play called Hideman-blind. Clignetter,
Clignotter, to wink often. Clignottement, a frequent winking. Climactere, for
Climacterique, Climacterical. Climacterie de 63 ans, the climacterical or
dangerous year of 63. Climatere, as Climactere. Climee, brass-^^r. Clincaille,
money, coin. Cline-mucette, as Clignemusset. Clinique, one that is bedrid.
Clinquaille, as Clincaille. Clinqueillerie, a ringing of much money, or of many
pans and skellets together; also coin. Clinquet, as Cliquet; also a certain
trick in wrestling. Cliquaille, as Clin^^il^e. Cliquefoire, a sp^i^t. Cliquer,
for Cliqueter, to clack. Cliquer, the knocker of a door; also a L^^^rs ^li^ket.
Clis^e, a little wreath of wicker to set under a dish on the table; also a
wattl^, or hurdle. Treillis de cli^^e, a gr^te o^ wick^r. Cli^^e, made of
wicker. Clitie, or de clitie, a Marigold. Clitori^, a w^rna is privit^^^.
Cliver, to (...) o^twa^d, as t^^ (...). Clocheme^^, a ^alti^g. Clocherie, a
r^^gi^^, or peal of ^^ll^. Clochetier, a Bell-(...). Clochier, for Cl^^her, a
(...), also a Pari^^, (...) and (...) a Bi^h^p^ick, (...) Di^^^^s. Cl^^er, as
Cl^i^^^^. Cl^i^^, (...). Cl^^^^^^x, (...) to mud-walls, hedges, or Enclosures.
Cloistral, for Claustral, Monastical. Clomassoles, the defense which a horse
makes with his Nether-lip or gums against his bit. Clonisse, the Cockle called
Palour. Cloper, Clopiner, Cloquer, for Clocher, to hal^. Closcuau, the
nest-cockle, the last-hatched bird in a nest. Closerie, an Enclosure. Closier,
a hedger, an incloser. Clostier, as Claustier. Clot, as jouer au clot, to play
at hide and find. Clouage, a nailing. Clouelouquer, as Clousser. Cloue, a
block. Clouement, a nailing. Clouestre, a Cloister. Clouet, a little nail, a
tack-nail. Cloueure, a nailing. Clouir, to open and produce young ones, as eggs
that have been sitten on their full time. Clouisse, as Pelarde. Clouiser, for
Closser, to cluck like a hen. Clousseuse, a clucking hen. Cloye, for Claye, a
hurdle. Clucher, for Closser, to cluck. Clye, for Claye, a hurdle. Clypsedre,
as Clepsydre, an hourglass. Clysterise, applied as a Glister, or made into a
Glister. Clysteriser, to apply a Glister, also to make or put a thing into a
Glister. Clytoris, as Clitoris. Coac, the croaking of frogs. Coacervation, a
heaping together. Coadunation, a joining together. Coagulation, a coagulation.
Coaguler, to coagulate. Coaille, course wool. Coaine, for Coenne, the skin of
bacon. Coalescer, to grow together again. Coarcter, to restrain, or bring
within a narrow compass. Coarcte, restrained, or brought within a narrow
compass. Coat, the nest-cockle of birds. Coaugmente, increased together.
Coaxer, for Coasser, to croak as a frog. Cobbir, to bruise, or break into
pieces. Cobeter, or Cobter une cloche, to toll a bell. Cocard as Coquart.
Cocarde, as Coquarde. Cocardean, as Coquardean. Coccoguide, the black
Cameleon-thistle. Coche, notched. Cochelin, a kind of Cake full of not^hes.
Cochepierre, a bird like a Bull-finch. Cochet, a Cockerel, or Cock-chick.
Cochevis, the copped Lark. Cochier, for Cocher, a Coachman. Cochin, for Cochon,
a pig. Cochonnet, a pretty big pig. Cochonniere, a Sow, a Sow-pig. Cocles, the
wind-flower. Cocluchon, as Coqueluchon in the N. D. Cocodrille, for Crocodile,
a Crocodile. Cocuage, cuckoldship. Cocue, Hemlock, Herb-bennet. Cocuye, as
Cucuye. Cocytide, homme cocytide, a hellish fellow, as cruel as the Devil.
Codicile, a Cedicii, or bill annexed. Codicilaire, or Codicillaire, one that is
instituted into a Benefice, etc. by Codicil. Codignat, for Codignae, Marmalade.
Coegal, coequal. Coeliaque, as Celiaque. Coelibat, for Celibat, the state of a
Bachelor. Coeneux, dirty. Coepeller, to chip wood. Coeque, a copartner.
Coertion, or Coerction, coercion, restraint. Coeste, Coeston, a very thick and
great Glove used by the ancient Grecians in their Theatre-Combats. Coetive,
cherished, or kept warm. Coetivement, a cherishing, or keeping warm. Coetiver,
to cherish, to keep warm. Coeval, coetaneous, or equal in age. Coeuret, a
little heart. Coeur-sailli, faint-hearted. Coserruminer, to soder iron with
other metals. Coffre, put into a chest or cosser; also laid up in prison.
Coffrer, to put into a chest or coffer. Coffrer aulcun en prison, to lay one up
in prison. Coffrier, for Coffretier, a Trunkmaker. Cogitation, cogitation,
thought. Cogiter, to cogitate, to think. Cognaciere, a Quince-tree. Cognation,
cognation, affinity. Cognil, Cognoil, the bastard Tunnys^h, or a fish like unto
a Mackerel, but greater and thicker. Cognoscitive, the faculty of knowing, or
discerning. Coheir, the female Oak. Coherence, coherency. Cohertion, as
Coertion. Cohibe, restrained, curbed, kept in. Cohiber, to restrain, curb, or
keep in. Cohorte, a company of Soldiers. Cohourde, a Gourd. Cohue, a Hall to
plead in, a Sessions House. Coi, for Coy, quiet, still. Coiaux, rafters (in
building.) Coiche, the feathering of an arrow. Coignacier, the great
Quince-tree. Coignasse, the greatest kind of Quince. Coignaufond, leachery,
venery. Coigne, wedged, driven, or knocked in, stamped, coined. Coigneau,
privet, or primprint. Coigne-festu, an idle fellow; or one that will neither do
good himself, nor suffer others to do any. Coigner, to wedge, or fasten with a
wedge; to drive hard, or knock fast in; to stamp or coin. Coigner les larmes,
to hold in his tears by force. Coignet, a little wedge; also a little corner.
Coigniaux, a kind of small and bright green vermin. Coignoir, a wedging tool,
a wedger. se Coincher, as se Conchier. Coin, the skin of bacon. Coingne, as
Coigne. Coinquination, a defiling. Coinquine, defiled. Coinquiner, to defile.
Coint, quaint. Cointelligent, holding correspondency with. Cointement,
quaintly. Cointise, quaintness. Coipeau, a chip. Coiraux, fat Oxen. Coisne, as
Coin. Coissin, for coussin, a cushion; also a pillow. Coiti, Coitis, Coitte,
for Coitre, a tick. Coitte-pointe, a quilted covering for a bed. Colac, the
Shad-fish. Colaphiser, to box. Colatoire du nez, the spungy bone through which
the snivel passes from the brain into the nostrils. Colature, a straining;
also the thing strained. Cole, a stormy gale of wind. Cole, for colere, anger,
choler. Colet, for Collet, a collar. Coliart, a kind of Ray-fish. Coliaux, the
name of a kind of Olives. Colier, for Collier, a neck-lace. Colimbades,
Colimbales, small pickled Olives. Colin, gros colin, bran, also dogs meat made
of it. Coline, for Colline, a little hill. Colique, (Adj.) of, or belonging to
the Chollick. Coliqueux, subject to the Chollick. Colitor, the name of a
certain Vine. Collane, a Neck-lace. Collateralite, collaterality. Collaudation,
a mutual commendation. Collaude, commended with others. Collauder, to commend
with others. Colle, for Colline, a little hill; also anger. Collectage, a
collecting, or gathering together. Collectanes, a certain Order of Franciscan
Friars. Collee, a taking (or embracing) of one about the neck; also a thump, or
blow in the neck. Collerage, a pecuniary Duty exacted in some places for the
Collers worn by wine-drawing horses or men. Collerette de semme, a small
neck-ruff. Colles, cross-walls of stone, etc. in some Vineyards. Colletages,
Taxes and Subsidies levi'd of the people. Colleter, as Coleter. Colletier, a
Jerkin-maker. Colleure, a glewing. Colleux, glewy. Colligance, a binding
together. Collige, gathered, brought, united together. Colligence, a gathering,
bringing, or uniting together; also as Colligance. Colliger, to gather, bring,
or unite together. Collin, a gray and long-beaked River-fowl; also as Colin.
Colliquatif, subject to the Chollick. Colliquation, a melting, resolving, or
diss^^^^g; a Consumption of the radical humor, or substance of the body.
Collique passion, the Chollick. Colliqueux, sick of the Chollick. Collision,
collision, a knocking, or beating together. Collitigant, wrangling, or going to
law together. Collizee, as Colisee in the N. D. Collobe, a kind of sleeveless
upper garment in fashion among the old Romans. Colloir, Colloire, a Cullander.
Collyre, a liquid medicine for the eyes; also a kind of Samian earth, whereof
among other things Eye-medicines are made. Colobe, as Collobe; also a furrehood
or tippet worn by Graduate Priests. Colocasie, the Priests pintle; also the
root of the Egyptian bean. Colocinthe, for Coloquinthe, the plant called
Coloquintida. Colom, the name of a great gut. Colomb, a dove, or pidgeon.
Colombage, board-work on the outside of walls, etc. Colombain, Dove-like.
Colombeau, Colombelle, a little young Pidgeon. Colombine, a whitish and spungy
stone found in leaden mines; also a delicate Italian pear. Colomneux, full of
pillars, or columns. Colonnation, a making of pillars. Colonnel, for Colonel, a
Colonel. Colophone, the herb Scammony, also as Resine Colophonienne, clarified,
or hard rozen. Coloration, a coloring, a shadowing. Colossal, Colossien,
Colossus-like, huge, or mighty. Colostration, the indisposition of
Infant-stomacks by the sucking of be. Colporter, to carry upon the neck or
shoulders. Columb, as Colomb. Columelle, the uvula, or a spungious flesh
resembling a Cocks spur, and hanging down in the bottom of thereof of the
mouth; also the swelling thereof. Colure, for Encoulure, the neck of a horse.
Colymbades, as Colimbades. Combateur, a fighter. Comb, a narrow Valley or
Passage between two hills, wherein commonly Thieves do lurk. Combiberon, a
fellow-drunkard. Combinage, a coupling, or joining of pairs. Combleau, the
breeching, a great cable used about the carriage of a piece of Ordnance.
Comblette, the cleft or division of a red Deers foot. Combre, for Cambre,
arched. Combrecelle, or Combresselle, a tumbling trick wherein the heels are
cast over the head; also a reciprocation of Venery. Comestible, eatable, sit to
be eaten. Comet^ux, like unto a Comet, full of Comets. Comic, for Comique,
comical. Comin, the herb Cummin. Command, command, power, authority; also a
Mandamus, or an Injunction for Possession, etc. also an Injoyner, Commander.
Command, as Commend in the N. D. also the main Cable of a Ship; also a thing
left in trast with another. Droict de Command, a Duty taken yearly by some
Lords of every one of their Widows (that holds by Villenage) in acknowledgement
and preservation of the right of their Authority over them. Commanderesse, a
woman that commands; also Command, Rule, or Authority. Comme, for Gomme, Gum.
Commedial, a merry discourse. Commemorable, memorable. Commemorer, to
commemorate, to remember. Commendaces, Funeral-Orations. Commenderesse, as
Commanderesse. Commensalite, a constant eating together at one Table.
Commensuration, a joynt-measuring. Comment, for Commentaire, a Comment.
Commente, commented, expounded. Commenter, to comment, to expound. Commerage,
gossipping. Commerer, to gossip. Commesurable, measurable together, or with one
and the same measure. Commin, Cummin. Commination, commination. Commine,
threatened extremely. Comminer, to threaten extremely. Comminue, l^st^ned;
beaten, or broken (...) ^all pl^ces. Comminuer, to lessen; also to beat, or
break into small pieces. Commise, a forfeiture. Droict de Commise, the right or
power a Landlord has to seize the Land held by his Vassal or Tenant who
disadvows him, gives him the lie, or commits felony. Commissure, a seam in a
bone, as in the scull; also any near closing, or joining of things together.
Commistion, a mixing, or mingling of several things together. Commodat, a loan,
or lending. Commoderation du Corpse, a good disposition of the whole body.
Commoditer, to thrive, to grow rich. Commourans, dying together. Commourir, to
die together. Commouvoir, to trouble, or to disturb. Commue, exchanged.
Commuer, to exchange. Communal, a Common. Commutatif, exchanging one for
another. Compacte, compacted, well-set. Compacture, a substantial joining of
all the parts of a thing together. Compagn, for Compagnon, Companion.
Compagnable, sociable. Compagnonne, associated. Compagnonner, to associate.
Compaing, for Compagnon, Companion. Companage, all kind of food except bread
and drink. Comparage, compared. Comparager, to compare. Comparence, an
appearing. Comparent, an appearer. Comparer, (Sub^.) le comparer du Corpse, the
price of a man's life, or the buying of a thing with the loss thereof.
Compar^onnier, Compartisant, Copart^^^. Comparuit, an Order or Testimonial,
signifying the appearance of a party. Comparation, for Comparition, appearance.
Compassionnaire, having compassi^^^. Compassionner, to take compassion.
Compatibilite, compatibility. Compensible, able to make amends for. Compe^^^
une cho^^ par une a^tre, to make up a thing by another. Comperage, the being a
Gossip; also a gossipping. Compermutant, a barterer. Compermutation, a truck,
or exchange. Compermute, exchanged. Competer, to be sufficient for; to belong
to; also to sue for the same thing that another does. Compilation, a
compilation; also a rapsody. Compisse, all bepissed. Compisser, to piss every
where, or to bepiss every place he comes in. Compite, a cross-way.
Complaignant, a Complainer. Complante, planted, or stored with young plants.
Complanter, to plant a Vineyard; also to lay out, or deliver over, a Lords part
or share in the fruits of a Vineyard, let by him unto parts or halves; or to
let a Vineyard in a manner. Complanterie, a letting out of a Vineyard to
halves, or for part of the fruit thereof; also the part or portion due unto the
Landlord. Complication, a complication, or folding together. Complique, folded
together. Comploteux, given to plots. Comportement, carriage, behavior.
Compossesseur, a Joynt-possessor. Composte, pickled. Composter, to pickle.
Comprehension, a comprehension; also an apprehension, or understanding of.
Comprer, to buy. Comprins, for compris, comprehended, apprehended.
Compromissaire, he unto whom a Controversy is compromitted. Comptable,
accountable. Comptereau, a book of accounts. Compulse, compelled. Compulser, to
compel. Compulsoire, a compelling, or com^^^sion; also an instrument or means
of compulsion; also a Commission in^^yning a Register, Notary, or Clerk, to
deliver the Contracts, Pleadings, Acts, Orders, or Judgment which a Suitor has
n^ed (...). Compunction, for Componction, com^^nction. Compurgateur, a
Compurgator, one that by ^ath ^stis^es the innocence, ^^port, or ^at^ of
another. Computiste, a Calculator, or Reckoner. Conare, a Kernel like a
Pineapple, that sticks to the outside of the Brain. Concasse, bruised in
pieces. Concasser, to bruise in pieces. Concathenation, Concathenature,
concatenation. Concathene, concatenated. Concathener, to concatenate, to link
or chain together. Concave, made concave or hollow. Concentrique, having one
and the same center. Concept, for Conception, conception. Conceptacle, any
hollow thing apt to receive, hold, or contain. Concerner, to concern.
Conchambrier, a Chamber-fellow. Conche, a shell; also a kind of open vessel
like a basin; also order, equipage, or furniture. Conches, certain receptacles
for Seawater. Conchier, to beshite. Conchylion, as Conchyle in the N. D.
Conciliabule, a Conventicle. Conciliateur, a reconciler. Conciliation, a
reconcilement. Concilipete, one that is going toward a general Council.
Concion, a Congregation; also the speech delivered unto them. Concitateur, a
raiser, or inciter. Concitation, a raising, or incitation. Concite, raised,
incited. Conciter, to raise, to incite. Concombriere, a bed of cucumbers.
Concomitance, concomitancy, fellowship. Concorder, to pacify; also to live in
concord. Concree, created together; also congealed, or thickened. Concreer, to
create together. Se concreer, to thicken. Concret, a conjunction. Also
(Adj^^tively) concrete, thickened, or compared together. Concretion, a
compaction. Concubin, a man unlawfully kept and used by a woman. Conculcation,
a treading under foot. Conculque, trodden under foot. Conculquer, to tread
under foot. Concusieur, an Extorsioner. Concusierer, to u^^ ext^^sio^^. Conde,
a Butler, or a Yeoman of the Larder. Condemnade, a kind of Card-play, like
unto Lansquenet. Condemner, and its Derivatives. See Condamner, etc. in the
N.D. Condensity, condensity, thickness. Condignac, for Codignac, Marmalade of
Quinces. Condign, condign, well-worthy. Condignement, worthily. Condile, as
Condyle. Condisciple, a fellow-disciple. Conditionaire, conditional. Condol, a
ridge, or raising of earth. Condoloir, as Condouloir. Condonne, forgiven.
Condonner, to forgive. Condore, the name of a great and ravenous Indian bird.
Condot, as Condol. Condouloir, to condole. Conduiseur, a Conducter. Condyle,
the out-swelling or knots of the thigh, anckle, elbow, and knuckle-bones; also
a blow with the fist. Condylome, an excrescence of flesh in the fundament, or
in a woman's privity's. Conestablie, as Connetablie in the N. D. Confanon, as
Gonsanon in the N.D. Confanonier, a Standard Bearer. Confanons, the wild Poppy.
Confermer, for Confirmer, to confirm. Confessionaire, of, or belonging to
auricular Confession. Confessionat, an act of Confession tending to Absolution.
Confez, confessed. Confidentiaire, Confidentionnaire, treacherous,
faith-breaking. Confiez de Cour, as Plairs de la Cour. Configuration, a
likeness, or resemblance of figures. Confin, (Adj.) Consinant, near neighbor,
confining, or adjoining to. Confis, for Confit, pickled, preserved. Confise,
Confiscation. Confissable, fit to be preserved. Confler, as Gonfler. Confluer,
to run or flow together. Conformateur, a Conformer. Conformation, a conforming.
Confort, comfort. Confortatif, comfortable. Conforte, comforted. Conforte-main,
a helping hand; also the strengthening and confirmation of an inferior person.
Conforter, to comfort. Confute, confuted. Confuter, to confute. Congeable,
dismissable, dischargeable. Domaine congeable, a Demesne held at will.
Congemination, an often repeating. Congenere, engendered together. Congiaire, a
dole, or liberal gift of money, or victuals to the people. Congie, a Vessel
among the ancient Romans, containing very near a Gallon. Conglutination, a
conglutination. Conglutine, conglutinated. Conglutiner, to conglutinate.
Congnoistre, for Conoitre, to know. Congree, congealed, or thickened.
Congreement, a congealing, or thickening. se Congreer, to congeal, or to
thicken. Congregable, that may be congregated, or congealed. Congrege,
congregated, congealed. Congreger, to congregate. Il se congrege en pierre
precieuse, it grows or congeals into a precious stone. Congression, company,
assembly, meeting. Conjectural, which may be guessed at by conjecture.
Conjecturalement, by guess, or conjecture. Coniguer, to scratch, or claw.
Conil, a Rabbet. Conillart, a certain very tender and delicate pear. Coniller,
to lurk in corners. Conilliere, a Coney-hole. Conjouissance, Conjouissement, a
rejoicing with. se Conjoyr, to rejoice with one. Conjoyssement, as
Conjouissance. Conise, Flea-bane. Conjuger, to play the part of a husband.
Conjunction, for Conjonction, conjunction. Conjuncture, for Conjoncture, a
conjuncture. Conjurateur, a Conspirator. Conjure, for Conjuration, Conspiracy.
Connaturel, connatural. Connexe, knit, or joined together. Connil, as Conil, a
Rabbit. Connille, a Doe-coney. Conniller, as Coniller. Connilleur, a Coward.
Connin, as Connil. Conniniere, a Warren of Coneys. Connoistre, Connoissance, as
Conoitre, Conoissance in the N. D. Connon, a long Dray or Cart, having at the
fore-end a pulley for the drawing up of a loading. Conoeidal, Cone-like, broad
and round at the bottom, and sharp at the top. Conopee, a Canopy. Conquasser,
as Concasser. Conque, as Conclie. Conquerable, subduable. Conquereur, for
Conquerant, a Conqueror. Conquerre, for Conquerir, to conquer. Conquest, an
Estate or Purchase compassed by a man's own industry; also a thing got wherein
another is to have a share. Conqueste, conquered. Conquester, to conquer.
Conroy, stuff through tawed or curry'd. Consalme de Mer, the great
horse-muscle. Consanguin, consanguineous. Consaul, for Conseil, counsel.
Conscachance, a full knowledge or notice of. Conscachant, fully acquainted
with, or privy unto. Conscinomantie, Divination by a sieve and a pair of
sheers. Consecution, a consequence. Conseigneur, a fellow Lord. Conseillerie,
Counsellorship. Consemblable, very like unto. Ses Consemblables, his fellows.
Consequemment, consequently. Consequentieux, most important, or of great
consequence. Consequutif, for Consecutif, consecutive. Conserte, a Conference.
Conserte, ordained. Consertion, a joining, or intermingling. Conservatoire, the
Office of a Conservator, his Court, or the Room wherein he uses to keep it.
Conserve-sante, health-preserving. Consideratif, considerate. Consierge, as
Concierge, in the N. D. Consilles, two conduits or pipes in the throat.
Consimilitude, likeness. Consin, a mite, or weevel. Consistory, censured, or
determined of in Consistory. Consistorier, to censure, or determine of in
Consistory. Consonance, harmony. Consonant, harmonious. Consoner, to agree, or
sound alike. Consorte, wife, bedfellow. Consoulde, and Consourde, for
Consolde, the herb Consound. Conspection, a conspection. Il Conste, it is
clear, plain, or certain. Constitueur, he that constitutes or appoints.
Constupre, constuprated, ravished, or deflowred. Constuprer, to constuprate,
ravish, or deflowr a Virgin. Consubstantial, of the same substance.
Consubstantialite, consubstantiality. Consuivre, as Consuyvre. Consultatif,
consulting. Qui a voix consultative, that has power to give his advice, but
not to determine. Consulteur, an adviser. Consumption, for Consomption,
consumption. Consuyvre, to overtake, to get, or obtain. Consyre, for Consire,
the herb Comfrey. Contadin, a Countryman, a Clown. Conte, for Comte, an Earl.
Conte, for Comte, an Earldom. Contemn, contemned, scorned, despised.
Contemnement, a contemning, scorning, despising. Contemner, to contemn, scorn,
or despise. Contemneur, a contemner, scorner, despiser. Contempere, tempered,
qualified. Contemperer, to temper, to qualify. Contemplatiss, certain Friars
of St. Mary Maudlins Order, who seed on all sorts of flesh, and wear black
upper-habits, and white under-ones. Contemplement, a contemplating.
Contempleur, for Contemplateur, a Contemplator. Contempt, contempt, scorn,
despite. Contenancer, to countenance. Contendre, to contend, or to strive.
Contenue, capacity. Contereau, as Comptereau. Conterolle, as Contre-rolle, in
the N. D. Contesse, for Comtesse, a Countess. Contestablement, by way of
contestation. Contexte, a context; the form or style of a Process, Book, or
Discourse. Contigue, contiguous unto. Contin, mon Contin, my Countryman.
Continemment, continently, soberly, chastely; also sparingly, abstemiously.
Continue, continuance. Continuite, continuation, intireness. Contractation, a
contracting. Contracte, a Contract, or bargain. Contracture, contraction, or
shrinking. Contrahant, contracting, or making a contract. Contraignable,
constrainable. Contraigneur, a constrainer. Contrainctement, forcibly.
Contraste, contended against. Contraster, to contend against. Contradveu,
Contre-adveu, an Answer or Opposition to a Bill of Complaint for possession of
Movables. Contre-advoue, owned, or claimed by several Parties. Contr'amour, a
holy and honest love Contr'anime, animated, or encouraged against.
Contr'antidote, a counter-antidote. Contr'applegement, an Answer to a Bill of
complaint for the possession of an Immovable. Contre-bas, downward.
Contrebase, a counter-base, the lower part of a basis. Contrebondir, to
rebound. Contre-boutant, as Contrefort in the N. D. Contre-boute, supported,
born up. Contre-bouter, to support, or bear up. Contre-carre, a resistance, or
opposition; an arguing against; also comparison, or equality. Contre-changer,
to counterchange. Contre-chanter, to answer in the same note or tune.
Contre-charger, to interchange burdens or accusations. Contrechifre, a
countercypher, a note explanatory of particular ciphers, or as le chifre d'un
Prince. Contrechifrer, to answer ciphers with ciphers; also to expound ciphers;
also to requite private affection in private fashion. Contrecourber, to bend
one from another, as Wrestlers do their backs. Contre-cueur, as Contrecoeur in
the N. D. Contredigue, fortified against banks and ditches. Contrediguer, to
set up banks against banks. Contredise, and Contredite, for Contradiction,
contradiction. Contr'effort, a counter-effort. Contr'elider, to counter-strike.
Contr'eschanger, as Contrechanger. Contr'escrire, to confute, or write against;
also to copy, or write out. Contr'escript, confuted, or written against; also
copied, or writ out. Contr'escript, (a Subst.) a confutation; a copy.
Contr'essay, a second essay. Contr'estang, a Pool-dam, a back-pool, or
counter-pond; a great ditch, or hollow-ground, whereinto the water of a Pond
that is to be fished is let. Contr'estre, to be against. Contre-sente, the
bruize or craze of a bone, in another or opposite part to the place where the
blow that caused it was given; which happens especially in the Scull.
Contreferme, an affirmation of that whereof another affirms the contrary.
Contreferme, the contrary whereof is affirmed or avouched. Contrefermer, to
oppose an affirmation unto an affirmation. Contreseu, an iron-back or plate for
the back of a chimney. Contreflate, whose flattery is answered with flattery.
Contreflater, to flatter as fast as another. Contrefortuner, to arm against the
injuries of fortune. Contrefrontail, the brow-piece, or upmost post of a door.
Contre-gage, a counter-gage, or counter-pawn. Contrehastier, a Rack to turn
spits on. Contrehaulte, as Hautecontre in the N. D. Contrejoueur, a
counter-player. Contre-lettre, a counter-letter, or counter-ward; a private
release in discharge of a bond passed; or a private discharge of a duty or
service acknowledged before a public Notary. Contrelouer, to return praise
with praise. Contrelutte, wrestled, or contended against. Contrelutter, to
wrestle, or contend against. Contremanche, a false-sleeve, half-sleeve.
Contremand, Contremandement, a countermand, or countermanding. Contremarque, a
countermark. Contremejane, the second (or after) mizen of a ship. Contrementir,
to set one lie against another. Contremettre, to oppose, or set against.
Contremonte, got up against. Contremonter, to go up against. Contremunir, to
fortify against. Contre-offrir, to change his offer. Contre-ouvrier, one that
works against another. Contrepan, a pawn, especially of an immovable.
Contrepane, pawned, engaged. Contrepaner, to pawn an immovable. Contrepense,
thought otherwise of than before; disliked, or distrusted. Contrepenser, to
think otherwise than he has done; to dislike, or distrust. Contrepenseur, one
that is of another mind than before. Contrepeter, to answer one crack with
another. Contrepicque, counter-nipped. Contrepicquer, to give one prick for
another, to return gird for gird. Contre-pleige, a Counter-surety, one that is
bound to save a Surety harmless. Contre-pleigement, a counter-bond.
Contre-pleiger, to save a Surety harmless by counter-bond, etc. Contreplie,
bent, bowed, or folded back. Contreplier, to bend, bow, or fold back.
Contrepoinct, back-stitch; or as Contre point in the N. D. A contrepoinct,
crossly. Contrepoinctier, for Contrepointeur, a Quilter, or Counterpoint-maker.
Contrepois, for Contrepoids, counterpoise. Contreporteur, a paultry Pedlar that
carries his shop before him. Contrequarre, as Contrecarre. Contrequerant, a
Rival, or Competitor. Contre-quictance, a Counter-acquittance. Contre-replique,
replied against. Contre-repliquer, to reply against. Contrerolleur, for
Controleur, a Controuler. Contre-sanglot, a girth-leather. Contrescedule, as
Contrecedule in the N. D. Contreschanger, as Contrechanger. Contreseel, for
Contreseau, a Counter-seal. Contresign, for Contreseing, a subscription joined
to another. Contresommer, to revoke a Summons. Contresonner, to sound contrary.
Contresoufle, blown two contrary ways. Contretaluer, to oppose bank to bank, or
causey to causey. Contre-temperament, a contrary temper. Fair un
contre-temperament a la nature, to alter nature. Contre-teneur, the
countertenor-part in Music. Contretenir, to hold against, or to debate for a
thing against another. Contretenon, a stop in a Watch, or Clock. Contretenu,
held against; also claimed, challenged. Contreteste, as fair contreteste, to
make head against. Contre-trahison, a treason against treason. Contretrancher,
to fortify against an Enemy entrenched. Contre-traversant, counter-crossing.
Contreval, downward; also down. Contrevenge, full revenged. Contrevenger, to
revenge one blow, or injury with another. Contreventer, to hold against the
wind. Contrevention, for Contravention, the breaking of his agreement.
Contre-vitre, a counter-window. Contreuve, a tale invented. Contribuable,
liable to contribution. Contributeur, a Contributer. Contr'imiter, to imitate,
or counterfeit. Contr'invective, an answer to an invective. Contriste, grieved,
afflicted. Contrister, to make sorrowful. Controlle, as Contre-rolle in the N.
D. Contr'ongle, the water-claw of dogs, etc. Contr'ouverture, a
counter-opening. Contr'ouvrir, to open against. Contumacer, to be rebellious;
also to proceed against one for contempt or rebellion. Contumax, refractory,
rebellious, contemptuous. Contumely, contumely, slander, or scandalous rebuke.
Contumelieusement, contumeliously, reproachfully, in despightful terms.
Contumelieux, contumelious, outrageous, or injurious in words. Contundre, to
braise, or stamp in pieces. Contuteur, a joint Tutor, or Guardian. Convalide,
restored unto health. Convalider, to restore unto health. Convassal, a
fellow-Vassal. Convenance, covenanted. Convenancer, to covenant. Convenant, a
Covenant. Convenant, for convenable, convenient, fit. Conventione, for
Conventionel, done by agreement. Conventrels, an Order of Friars. Convereau, a
fi^h somewhat resembling, but lesser than the Alose. Converse, a Nun that
formerly has been of loose behavior. Convert, a Proselyte. Convertissement, a
converting, turning, or changing. Convertoir, part of the head, or chapter of a
Ionian pillar. Convexion, for Convexite, convexity. Convi, a feast. Convice, a
reproach, or railing word. Conviement, an inviting, or bidding unto a feast. Il
Convient, it behooves. Convitieux, railing, reproachful, reviling. Convoitement,
for Convoitise, lust. Convoye, convoyed. Convoyer, to convoy. Conyle, great
Chervil. Conyse, Flea-bane, or Flea-wort. Copeaux, chipt. Copelle, for
Coupelle, a Goldsmiths Coppel. Copelle, tested, melted, or fined, as silver in
a Test, or Coppel. Copet, as Couperet. Cophin, a basket. Copieusement,
copiously, abundantly, plentifully. Copieux, copious, abundant, plentiful; also
a well-spoken person. Copiosite, copiousness, abundance, plenty. Coppe, a
measure, the half of a Burgundian bushel. Coppeau, for Coupeau, chip. Copper,
for couper, to cut. Coppeter, to ring all in, to ring the last peal. Coppier,
to rouse and stretch out himself. Coppon, a peck. Cops, a certain fish like
unto a Sturg^on. Copte, tolled. Copter, to toll a bell. Copuland, a coupling,
or joining together. Copulasse, an Exercise in Schools, when Scholars dispute,
and he that has done best is placed highest. Copule, a conjunction, a joining,
or coupling together. Coqu, for Cocu, a Cuckold. Coquage, Cuckoldry. Coquar, an
egg, or egg-shell; or as Coquard, a proud Coxcomb. Coquarde, bonnet a la
coquarde, a Spanish Cap used by the best sort of men; also any Cap, or Bonnet
worn proudly or pertly on the one side. Coquardeau, a proud ass, one that has
more wealth than wit. Coquardise, fond pride. Coquart (Adj.) foolishly proud.
Coquasse, a Kettle, or Chaser. Coquassier, a seller of Egg-shells; also a maker
or seller of Kettles, or Chasers. Coquatris, a Kockatrice. Coquefredouille, a
Milk-sop. Coquelicon; Cock-crowing. Coqueline, dandled, made a wanton of.
Coquelinement, a dandling, or cockering. Coqueliner un enfant, to dandle a
child, to make a wanton of it. Coqueluchonne, that wears a hood, or a Spanish
Capuch. Coquemare, the Nightmare. Coqueplumer, a proud Coxcomb, a Skare-crow.
Coquer, to play the cock, to tread hens like a cock. Se coquer contre, to run
his head against. Coquerelles, Coquerettes, Coquerez, for Coquerets, the herb
Alcakengy. Coqueret, the name of an apple. Coques, Cockles. Coquete, cackled,
or clucked; also swaggered. Coqueter, a Cock to call his hens, or to cluck as a
Cock among hens; also to swagger like a Cock on his hung-hill. Coquetier, a
seller of Eggs. Coquillade, a little fish living among rocks. Coquillard, as
Coquardeau; also a small Vessel whereon they serve rear-eggs unto the table.
Coquillard (Adj.) full of shells. Coquille, set thick with shells; also made
like a shell. Coquiller, to set thick with shells; or to fashion a thing like a
shell. Coquilleux, full of shells. Coquillier, having, or bearing a shell; of,
or belonging to a shell. Coquilliere, a woman that makes biggins and caps.
Coquillon, a little shell; also a little hood; also a fools hood; or a hooded
fool. Coquin, (Adj.) beggarly; also roguish. Coquineau, a beggarly rascal.
Coquiner, to beg. Coquiol, for Coquiole, degenerate barley. Coquu, for Cocu, a
cuckold. Coralin, of corral, like to corral. Corapei, a Princes Cloth of State.
Corbat pescheret, a Cormorant. Corbature, as Courbature. Corbeilleux, full of
baskets. Corbieu, Gogs heart. Corbigeau, a Cormorant. Corbillat, a young Raven.
Corbillon, for Corbeillon, a little basket. Corbinerie, a stealing. Corbinet,
the croaking of Ravens or Crows. Corcalihat, the cry of quails. Corcesque, a
kind of broad-headed javelin, or dart. Corchiere, the battlement of a wall;
also as Coursie. Cordace, a kind of Country-dance. Cordaille de Navire,
tackling. Cordee, a string full of; also a rank or file. Cordeleux, full of
cords. Cordeliere, a Gray-Friars Girdle. Cordeur de Terres, a Surveyor of
lands. Cordiale, the herb Mother-wor^. Cordialeuse, hearty. Cordiaque, cordial.
Cordilles, the young s^y of Tunny. Cordonne, twisted; made as, or into a cord.
Cordonner, to twist; also to make as, or into, a cord. Cordouan, Cordwan
leather. Cordouannier, for Cordonnier, a Shoemaker. Cordouannerie, a Shoomakers
trade; also a Shoomakers row or street. Cordueil, hearts grief. Cordule, a
small kind of Lizard. Core, the broad piece that is between the Cross-bars of
the Hilt of a Sword. Corgeal, choking. Corial, a Quirister. Corias, as hard as
leather. Corions de souliers, the latchets of shoots. Corman, for Cormorant, a
Cormorant. Cornabon, a musical cornet. Cornage, hornage; also a yearly Duty of
Corn exacted by the Lord Chastelain of Berri, in the Jurisdiction of Bourges,
upon every Ox that labors in the winter-corn-ground, which is within his
Territory. Cornalique, Cuckold-like. Cornardise, cuckoldry. Corn, horny,
having horns. Corne-boeuf, the herb senugreek. Cornee de l'oeil, the horny
tunicle, wherein the apple of the eye is placed. Cornelle, as Corneole.
Cornemuseur, a bag-piper. Corneole, willow-herb, water-willow. Corne-pied,
horn-sooted. Corneteux, used in cupping. Corneur, a winder of a horn. Cornice,
for Corniche, cornish. Cornichet, the Sleeve, or Calamary fish. Cornier, as
Cornillier; also a horner. Cornier, (Adj.) angular. Cornillat, a little young
Crow. Cornille, jurred, or butted with horns. Corniller, to jurr, or butt with
the horns. Cornillier, for Cornoiller, the Cornil-tree. Corniole, part of a
Stags throat^, or as Gargatre. Cornoalle, for Cornoille, the Cornil-fruit.
Cornoallier, the Cornil-tree. Cornuchet, a little Cornet. Coronal, of, or
belonging to a Crown, or Crown-like. Coronne, for Couronne, a Crown. Corp, a
blackish Seafish. Corpaut, a pot. Corporail, as Corporal, in the N.D.
Corporance, Corporence, a man's presence, or constitution of body. Corporu,
corpulent, big-bodied. Corpset, a little body; also a pair of women's bodies.
Corratage, Corraterie, as Courratage. Corratier, as Courratier. Corraye, for
Courroie, a thong. Corregiose, as Corrigiole. Correlaire, for Corollaire, a
Corollary. Corrente, a Strait of the Sea where commonly it runs violently.
Corret, an agnail, or little corn upon a toe. Corriasse, as Corias. Corrigiole,
Swines-grass, Birds-tongue. Corrion, a strap. Corrobore, corroborated.
Corroborer, to corroborate. Corrode, worn, or fretted away. Corroder, to wear,
or fret away. Corrompable, corruptible. Corrompeur, a corrupter. Corromperesse,
a woman that corrupts. Corrompure, a corrupting, or corruption. Corrose,
corroded, fretted away. Corrosion, corrosion, or fretting away. Corrosivete,
corrosiveness. Corroye, for Courroie, a thong. Corrude, mountain-sparagrass.
Corrugation, a frowning, or wrinkling of the skin. Corruptelle, corruption,
depravation. Corruptement, corruptly. Corser, to embrace, take, or hold by the
body; to catch, take, or lay hold of the body. Corsesque, a kind of
broad-headed Javelin. Corsu, corpalent, big-bodied. Corsyre, a kind of herb.
Cortine, for Courtine, a Curtain, (in Fort^^^cation.) Corveable, liable unto
base and personal ser^ices; of whom a Landlord may exact certain days work in
the year. Corybanter, madly to run up and down, playing on a Cymbal; also to
sl^^p with (...) eyes. Cor^mi e, an I^^-b^rry. Coscosions, Co^coton^, Curds.
Coscote, spotted, or pounced. Cosmovague, a wanderer, or traveller throughout
the world. Cossats de febves, pois, etc. the husks, or cods of beans, etc.
Cossi, the warbling note of a Swallow. Cossonnerie, a Market for Fowl or
Venison. Cossot, for Cosson, a mite, or weevil. Cossu, codded, husked. Cost,
Costamer, Costmary. Costal, belonging to the sides or ribs. Costau, for coteau,
a little hill. Costereauls, a nickname given unto certain footmen that served
the Kings of England in their French Wars; or as Cotereaux. Costie, on a side,
of the one side; also tainted, or bruised (being applied unto fruit.) Costier,
sideling, of, or on a side; a costiere, aside, sideways. Costin, huile costin,
an Oil made of Costus, a medicinable root. Coston, the stalk of an herb; also
the root Costus. Cosee, a Coot, or Moor-hen. Coter, to quote. Cotereaux, as
Costerauls; Or a certain Crew of peasantly Outlaws, who in old time did much
mischief to the Nobility and Clergy. Coterie, company, society; or as Cotterie.
Cothurne, shod with high-soled buskins. Cotice, as Cottice in the N. D.
Cotignac, for Codignac, Marmalade. Cotile, as Cotyle. Cotine, Venice-Sumach.
Cotis, spar-ribs of Pork. Cotivet, the upper part of a hens or capons neck.
Coton, as Coston. Cotouere, as Cottoire. Cotte (for Cote) de maille, a coat of
mail. Cotte, coated. Cotte-maille, armed with a coat of mail. Cotte,
underpropped. Cotter, for appuyer, to underprop. Cottereux, as Cotereaux.
Cotterie, a servile Tenure, not held in Fee, and yielding only Rent. Cottier,
as Roturier in the N. D. Cottierement, ignobly, s rvilely. Cottir, to knock
heads together, to crush, or bruise. Cottite, a particular man's rate, part, or
portion of an Assessment. Cottizer, Cottization, as Cotiser, Cotisation, in the
N. D. Cottoire de Perles, a chain of Pearls. Cotton, for Coton, cotton.
Cottonneux, full of cotton, soft as cotton. Cotonniere, the herb Chass-weed, or
Cotton-weed. Cottonere, as Cottoire. Coturnique, in buskins. Cotyle, an ancient
measure, containing about 24 spoonfuls. Cotyledons, the mouths or ends of the
menstrual veins, whereby the superfluous blood of all the body falls into the
Womb, and gives nourishment unto the Child there, if there be any. Cou, a
Whetstone. Couane, all foamy, or frothy. Couanne, the skin of bacon. Couarder,
to play the coward. Couat, the underling, or starveling of any beast or bird.
Couble, as Chevaux de couble, pairs, or couples of horses. Coubte, for could,
the elbow. Couchable, sit to be lien on. Couchement, a lying, or laying down.
Couche-m'-icy, the weed called Dodder. Coucheur, a layer down; also a
bedfellow. Couchille, the Scarlet-oak. Couchine, the name of a certain apple.
Coucon, the little bottom or clue of silk spun by the Silkworm. Coucourbe,
Coucourde, a round Gourd; also a kind of large Stillatory; or as Courge.
Coucourelle, the name of a certain fig. Could, standing elbow-wise. Coudeer, to
jog with the elbow. Coudepied, the instep. Coudiere, any thing to lean upon
with his elbows. Coudoyer, as Coudeer. Coudraye, as Couldraye. Coudre, a
Filherd, Hasel, or Smallnut-tree; also their fruit. Coudre, tanned. Coudrer, to
tan. Coudroir, a Tan-pit. Coue, for queue, a tail. Coue, tail d, having a tail.
Covet, the name of a certain apple. Couets, two ropes belongi^g to the
mizzen-sail of a ship. Couette, a tick to lie or sit on. Coufler, to swell, or
be puffed up. Cougourde, Congourle, Couhourde, a bottle-gourd, the round-gourd
whereof bottles are made. Couillage, a Tribute paid in times past by Priests
for Licenses to keep Wenches. Couillards, as Clide; or certain round and
ringing pieces of iron, which in old time they used to shoot out of ships.
Couillatris, well-hanged between the legs. Couillebarbe, the name of a
cidar-apple. Couilleu, stoned, or that wants not his stones. Couinne, the skin
of bacon. Couionnade, as Coyonnade. Coulac, the shad-fish. Coulagion, the
running of a sore, etc. Coulans d'un Jardinier, a Gardiner's lines, wherewith
he measures out his beds and plots. Coulant de riviere, the stream of a river.
Couldier, a dwarf. Couldoye, a couldoye, made with an nut-neck like an elbow-
Couldrasse, a hedge-toad, a land-toad. Couldray, Couldraye, a plot of small
nut-trees. Couldre, as Coudre. Couldrer, as Coudrer. Couldroir, as Coudroir.
Coulee, a running of liquor. Coule-sang, a certain Viper by whom a man being
bitten, he bleeds to death. Coulet, for Collet, a collar. Couletage, Droict de
Couletage, a penny, or half-penny-toll collected and taken of all Wares, or
Merchandise bought and sold. Couleuree, the Herb Briony. Coulevriner, as
Couleuvriner. Couleuvre, Couleuvrin, made after the fashion of an Adder.
Couleuvreau, a young Adder. Couleuvriner, to squat, lurk, or lie close; also to
glide along. Coulier, for Collier, chollar. Coullebobes, the herb Alcakengy.
Coullon, as Coulon. Couloir (Adj.) Callander-like. Coulomb, as Coulon.
Coulombier, a Pigeo^-ho^s. Coulomne, for Colomne, a pillar. Coulon, a Do^^, a
Pigeon. Coulonere, a Culla^der; also a channel, gutter, or any such hollow
along which melted things are to run. Coulouoir, a sliding blow. Couloure,
colored. Coulourer, for Colorer, to color. Coulpe, misdeed, fault, offense.
Coulper, to blame, to tax, or find fault with. Coultel, a knife. Coulure, a
gentle running, or sliding along; a leaking; a straining. Counil, a Coney, or
Rabbet. Counille, a Doe-coney. Counilleau, a young Rabbet. Counin, as Counil.
Coupant, a spade, or such another earth-cutting Instument of husbandry. Coupau,
a Cuckold; also a green Goose. Coupe-bourse, a Cutpurse. Coupement, a cutting.
Coupe-oreille, a knife wherewith the ears of Rogues and petty Thieves are cut
off. Coupe-queue, as deux mots a coupe-queue, two words and there is an end.
Couperet, a Butchers knife, or cleaver. Coupet, top, or crest. Coupeuse, a
woman that reaps, or cuts Grapes in the time of Vintage. Coupeux, cutting, sit
to cut. Denis coupeuses, the fore-teeth. Coupier, a Cup Bearer. Couplot de
bois, the foot of a serve, etc. Coupon, a great cup, or bowl; also a tray of
wood; also a cut of. Coup-orbe, red pimples on the face. Couppe, for Coupe, a
cup. Couppebourse, as Coupebourse. Couppelettes de gland, Acorn-cups.
Coupperer, as Couperet. Couppier, as Coupier. Couppon, as Coupon. Courance, a
squirt. Courans, as Coulans. Courbasse, crook-shouldered. Cour-baston, a short
cadgel. Courbatu, worn out, or grown crooked with toyling and moyling; also
foundered. Courbature, the foundering of a horse. Courbe, a crooked, or bowing
piece of timber. Courbes d'une Voulte, the arching of a Vault. Courbee, as
Corvee in the N. D. Courbe-espine, the name of an apple. Courcaillee de
cailles, the calling of Quails. Courcie, the Coursey, part of a Galley. Courde,
a Gourd. Courdier, a Gourd-plant. Courement, a running. Courin, for Cousin,
Cosen. Courle, a Pumpkin. Courlis, a Curlew. Courmaran, a Cormorant. Couroye,
for Conroye, a thong. Couroyer, to tan leather. Courpendu, as Capendu in the N.
D. Courquaillet, a Quail-pipe. Courracteur, as Courratier. Courran, as
Courreau. Courratage, Courraterie, brokage; horse-coursing; busy dealing, or
intermeddling between party and party. Courratier, a Broker; also a Messenger,
or Foot-post. Courratier de chevaux, a Horse-courser. Courreau d'une huisserie,
the bolt, or bar of a door. Courretage, as Courratage. Courretier, as
Courratier. Courroucement, Courrouceusement, angrily. Courroyer, for Conroyer,
to dress leather. Coursable, current. Coursaire, for Corsaire, a Corsair.
Courserot, a little Corsair; also a little Courser, or horse of service.
Coursey, as Courson. Coursie, as Coureie. Coursier (Adj.) belonging, or like
unto a Courser. Coursiere, the Grating in a Man of War. Coursis, swist.
Courson, a young Vine-branch, or shoot reserved for store. Coursouer, as
Escoursouer. Court, for Cour, Court. Cour, for Court, short. Court-baston, as
Cour-baston. Court-d'aleaume, the name of a bitter-sweet apple. Courtes-fes^es,
a short-arse. Court-festu, drawing of cats. Courtil, a back-yard, or garden.
Courtilliere, a kind of palmer. Courtinages, curtains. Courtineau, a little
curtain. Courtisanie, Courtship. Courtisanne, for Courtisane, a Lady.
Courtisanneau, a petty Courtier. Courtisanner, to play the Courtier. Courve,
for Courbe, bent, or bowed. Courver, to bend, or bow. Couse, a jest. Cousiner,
to claim kindred for advantage. Cousinette, the name of an Apple. Coussegail,
meslin, corn mingled. Cousser, to butt, or jurr, as Rams do. Cousseur, a
butter, a jurrer. Coussi, the name of a small black grape. Coussineux, stored
with cushions; soft as a cushion. Cousson, the gusset of a shirt or smock; also
a mite, or weevil. Coust, Coustange, cost, charge, expense. Coustangueux,
costly, chargeable. Coustau, as Cotau, a little hill. Coustelet, a little
knife. Cousteleux, full of knives. Coustement, costs, and charges.
Couste-pointe, for Courte-pointe, a counterpoint. Cousteux, costly. Coustier,
wide; also as Cottier. Coustil, as Coutil. Coustilier, Coustillier, an
Armor-bearer unto a Knight; also a Groom of a stable. Coustre, as Coultre.
Coustumerie, a Custome-levying or taking; also a place where Custom is due.
Coustumier, a customary Tenant, a Copyholder. Coustumier (Adj.) customary,
usual. Bourse coustumiere, a purchase of lana made, or price given for a
purchase by a Yeoman or Roturier. Pais Coustumier, a Country governed by
particular Customs. Quint Coustumier, the Portion of younger Brethren left by
their father, being (by the custom of diverse places) a fifth part only divided
among them. Coustumierement, customarily, usually. Coustumiers, old and
experienced Lawyers, able to inform the Court what the Law and local Customs
are in any case. Cousturiere, for Lingere, a Seamster. Cousturiers, certain
long Muscles in the outward part of the thigh, which they make pliable to cross
one leg over another. Cousyre, Comfrey. Coutau, for Cotau, a little hill.
Coute. See Coutes. Coutelasse sur le visage, a flesh over the face with a
cuttelas. Coutelasse, slashed, or cut with a cuttelas. Coutelasser, to slash,
or cut with a cuttelas. Couteleu, the Pyrot, or hag-fish. Coutes, the seams, or
distances that are between plank and plank in a ship. Coutil, a flock-bed.
Coutillade, a cut made by an edge-tool. Couton, a faggot-stick, or the thick
stalk of cabbage, etc. Coutonner, to cudgel, to bast. Coutre, for Coteret, a
faggot made of great sticks. Coutrepoincter, as Contrepointer, in the N. D.
Couvade, as ouvee, in the N. D. Couvaison, a brooding. Couve-cendre, a lazy
houswife. Couveleque, the lid of a pot. Couveresse, a sitting hen. Couvertoir,
a trick, or engine wherewith waterfowl is caught. Couvi, oeuf couvi, an addle
egg. Couvine, the canning carriage of a business. Couvoir, a hens nest, also
the top of a bed in a garden. Couvoiter, for Convoiter, to covet. Couvrailles,
gossymear. Couvre-coeur, the Pericardium. Couvrement, the act of covering.
Couvre-ordure, gold; also a woman's mask. Couvre-rive, covering the bank.
Couyol, as Coyon. Coy, a sink. Coyau, a returned (or hip) rafter. Coyed, as
Cayer, in the N. D. Coyement, quietly. Coymeux, a kind of Cherries. Coyon, a
coward. Coyonnade, Coyonnerie, a cowardly trick. Coypelle, chipped, cut as a
stick. Coypeller, to chip, to cut a stick. Coyraul, as Coiraux. Coyte, (...).
Coytes. ta^^, great ropes used about the Main-sail of a ship. Coytis, ti k,
be^-ti k. Coyts, as Coites. Crabbat, comely. Crabron, a^ (...). Crac, a crack,
or thing that cracks. Crachard, for crac^ it, spittle. Crache-en-ruelle, (...)
spawling fellow. Crache-sil, (...)-pinning, as a ^pi^er. Crage, chalk. Craies,
choak-pears. Crailler, as Croailler. Craine, for crane, the scull. Crainser, to
shrink, also to crackle. Cramaillere, for Cremaliere, a pot-hook. Cramas,
stones torn from rocks by tempest, etc. Crampelle, the name of a fish.
Cramponnet, a little cramp-iron. Cranequin, the gaffle of a cross-bow; also as
Crennequin. Cranequinier, a cross-bow-man; or as Crennequinier; also an
inferior Officer, that had of old the care of warlike Engines. Crannequin, as
Crancquin. Crapaudaille, a pack of rogues. Crapaudeau, Crapaudon, a little
toad. Crappe, the crab-fish called a Pungar. Crapule, drunken surfeiting.
Craquant, Craquetant, cracking. Craquetis, an often cracking. Cras, chalk,
Crasseusement, slovenly, greasily. Crassi, a certain Indian coin. Crassitie,
crassitude, grosness. Cravant, a kind of goose. Cravante, overwhelmed.
Cravanter, to overwhelm. Craye, chalked. Crayement, a chalking. Crayer, to
chalk. Creable, for croyable, credible. Creac, Creal, a Sturgeon. Creac de
buse, a Scate-fish. Creancer, to promise; also to taste another man's meat or
drink. Credence, for creance, faith, belief. Credible, for croyable, credible.
Crediteur, for Creancier, a Creditor. Credos, as qui fait credos charge son
dos, he that lends often loo^^th. Cree, chalk. Creiche, for Creche, a rack, a
^a^ger. Cremaillee, (...) Cremaliere) a pot-^ange^. Cre^^t, ^earing, dreading.
Crema^cres, ^o ^inews o^ Muscles, where by t^^ cods (...). Cremeau, as Cresmeau.
Cremeu, (...). Cremillee, Cremillere, a pot hang r. Cremer, to pear, to dr^ad.
Cren, Crene, a snip in a knife, tool, etc. also a (...) the nib of a pe^.
Crene, snipped, notched, indented. Creneau, for recoin, a nook, or corner.
Creneleure, a making into Battlements. Crenequin, as Cranequin, or Crennequin.
Creneure, a nicking, notching, indenting. Crenne, as Cren. Crennequin, as
Cranequin; also a kind of horse-mans headpiece like a Helmet. Crennequinier,
as Cranequinier. Crenquinier, a Sergeant, or Officer that can serve Executions.
Crenure, as Creneure, and as Cren. Crepature, a cracking asunder. Crepelu, as
Crespelu. Crepets, or Crepez, Fritters, also Wafers. Crepille, frizzed, curled.
Crepiller, to frizzle, or curl. Crepissage, a pargetting. Crepitation, a
rattling noise. Creppe, for crepe, crape. Crepusculin, of the twilight.
Crescent, an half moon. Creseau, Kersie. Creseul, a Crucible. Cresme, as
Chresme in the N. D. Cresmeau, as Chremeau in the N. D. Cresnette, a Penknife.
Crespe, Cipres, also Cobweb-lawn. Crespe de chaperon, the crepine of a French
hood. Crespe, crisped, crisp. Crespelet, a little crisp. Crespelure, a c^^ling,
o^ ru^fling. Crespement, cripingly. Cresper, to crack, or screek; also to crash
between the teeth; to crisp; to sleek. Crespiller, Crespillonner, to crisp.
Crespille, Crespillonne, crisped. Crespinette, a kind of Knot-grass. Crespon, a
curled lock. Cresserelle, as Crecerelle in the N. D. Cressiner, to crack.
Cressonadiere, Cressonnerie, a bed of Cresses. Cresteaux, Battlements.
Crestele, having Battlements. Crete, gay, spruce, or neat. Cretisme, a lying.
Cretonart, the drug termed Zedoary. Cretons, crispy pieces or mammocks of Lard.
Crevace, for crevasse, chinked. Crevailles, bursting. Crevelle, imbattled.
Crevette, a Shrimp, or Prawn. Creveure, a chink. Crezion, a Crucible. Criage, a
crying, the Cryers Office, or his fee. Criaillement, a bawling. Criblage, a
sifting. Cribleux, full of holes as a sive. Cride, a public Crier. Cridons,
certain thick hairs of a pins length. Cry, a cry, a Cryers fee, a Crier.
Crignon, a field-Cricket, or Grasshopper. Criminalite, a criminal action.
Crimination, a charging with a crime. Criminatoire, criminal. Crimineux, full
of crimes. Crineux, hairy. Criniere, a hair-cloth; a hood for a horse; an
armor for the neck or mane of a horse; a lock of hair. Crinon, Cricket.
Cripaulme, Motherwort. Criquebilles, the privy parts. Criquemelette, a hussing
wench. Criquer, for Criqueter, to give a crack. Criquement, a rattling, or
bustling. Crissant, cra^hing. Cristalin, of, or belonging to Crystal, or
Chrystal-like. Critiqueur, a Critic. Croac, the croaking of Ravens, Frogs, or
Toads. Croaceux, croaking as a Raven, etc. Croailler, Croaillement, and
Croaillerie. See Croasser, and Croassement in the N. D. Croailleur, a croaker.
Croailleux, often croaking. Croaquer, to croak as a Raven. Croasseur, one that
croaks like a Raven, or Toad. Croce, for Cross, a Crosier. Crocer, to play at
Cricket. Crocette, a Vine-slip. Croceux, as Croaceux. Croche, hooked.
Crochement des dents, the outward bending of the teeth. Crocheterie, a picking
of locks. Crocheton, a silver coin so called. Crochue, a Quaver in Music.
Crochuement, as Crochement. Crociteur a pick-lock. Crocodilee, a M dicine made
of some parts of a Crocodile. Crocomagnie, an Ointment made of Saffron, also
the dregs of Saffron-oyl. Crocquer, as Croquer. Crocqueter, as Croqueter.
Crocute, a kind of Monster. Croie, for craie, Chalk. Croier, as Croyer.
Croisadeur, that makes the sign of the cross. Croiseau, a stock-dove. Croiset,
for Creuset, a Crucible. Croisette, a little cross. Croiseur, one that sets or
marks a cross on any thing. Croisi, as Croiseau. Croisie, a cross, a crossing,
or marking with a cross. Croissance, growth, increase. Croisset, a green frog.
Croissette, as Crocette. Croissir, to crack. Croist, growth, increase. Croizer,
for Croiser, to cross. Crolant, as bois crolant d'un Ladre, a Lazers-clack, or
clicket. Cronique, as Chronique in the N. D. Crope, Croppe, the top of a hill.
Croppiere, for croupiere, a crupper. Croque, cracked, snatched. Croque-jarret,
one that goes in with his hams. Croque-lardon, a smell-feast. Croque-mouche, a
fly-catcher. Croque-noisette, a nut-cracker. Croque-notaire, a Protonotary.
Croque-quenouille, he that is beaten by his wife with a distaff. Croquer, to
crack; to catch, or snatch. Croqueter, to pick out the best bits; also to feed
greedily. Croqueterie, gormandizing. Croqueteur, a gormandizer, a greedy
feeder. Cross, deep holes dug into the earth to preserve corn in. Crosilles,
the shells which Pilgrims near about their hats. Crosle, shaken. Crosler, to
shake, or quake. Croslier, shaking, quaking. Crosliere, a quag^^ire. Croslir,
to gnash. Crosser, to play at Cricket. Crossette, as Crocette. Crostes, as
crottes. Crot, a grot. Crotaphiques, the two muscles of the Temples.
Crotenotaire, as Croquenotaire. Crotes, as Crottes. Crotesque, as Grotesque in
the N. D. Croton, as Crotton. Crotpescheret, a kind of black Osprey. Crotton, a
deep hole, a filthy dungeon. Crouacement, Crouas, the croaking of Ravens. Croue
d'un Pressoir, the uppermost board of a Press, and the hole thereof whereinto
the Vice-pin enters. Crouillet, the latch of a door. Croule-Univers, all
shaking. Croulier, as prez crousier, quagmire-like, shaking under ones feet.
Crouliere, a quagmire. Croupant, creoching. Eau croupante, puddle-water.
Crousille, the shellfish called a Scallop. Crousiller enter les dents, to
crash between the teeth. Crousteau, a great crust, or great scab. Crousleleve,
bescabbed, full of the pox. Crousteleveure, scabbiness, pockiness. Croustelles,
Croustellettes, little crusts, or scabs. Crouster, to crust, or scab.
Crousteux, crusty. Croustons, sharp flinty stones. Crouteleve, as Crousteleve.
Croye, chalked. Croyer, to chalk. Croyeux, chalkie. Crucher, to crouch; also to
make hollow like a pitcher. Crucheter, to whisper. Cruchette, a little pitcher.
Crucial, cross-like. Crucie, tortured, tormented. Crucier, to torture, to
torment. Crucifiement, a crucifying. Crucifix, for Crucify, crucified.
Crucigeres, Cross-bearers. Cruelise, cruelly used. Cruente, le flux cruente,
the bloody flux. Crujon, Cruon, any round thing, as a man's scull. Crural, of,
or belonging to the thigh. Cruzol, Cruzeul, a Founders mould. Crytoportique, a
secret walk, or vault under ground. Crysolyte, for Crysolite, a Chrysolite.
Crystalin, for crystal, Crystal. Cubaseau, the little Sea-nettle. Cubebes,
Cubebs, an Aromatical and Indian fruit. Cubiculaire, a Groom of the Chamber.
Cubiculaire (Adj.) of, or belonging to the Chamber. Cubital, of, or belonging
to a cubit. Cucube, nightshade. Cucurbite, a Gourd. Cucurbitin, of, or
belonging to Gourds. Cucuye, the name of a bird. Cueillement, Cueilleure, a
gathering. Cuens, an Earl. Cueur, for coeur, the heart. Cueurs, the
heart-resembling cherries. Cueut, a whetstone. Cueux de plomb, a sow of lead.
Cuferin, a horses running at the nose. Cuide, thought. Cuider, to think.
Cuidance, Cuider, thinking. Cuidereau, a Braggadochio. Cuideur, a thinker.
Cuidrelles, as Cuydrelles. Cuigner, to hold open with wedges. Cuignet, a little
corner; also a little wedge. Cuilier, for cueiller, a spoon. Cuiliere, a ladle.
Cuin, a wedge. Cuirace, for Cuirasse, armor. Cuirain, leathern-stuff.
Cuirasseux, thick and stiff as a hide. Cuirassine, a slight armor. Cuirie, a
leathern Jerkin. Cuissant, for cuisant, smarting. Cuisinal, of, or belonging to
a kitchen. Cuisinement, a dressing of meat. Cuisineux, fit for Cookery,
belonging to the kitchen. Cuissal, for Cuissar, an armor for the thigh.
Cuissedame, the name of a kind of pear. Cuisselette, Cuissette, a little thigh.
Cuisse-ne, thigh-born. Cuissier, of, or belonging to the thigh. Cuissinet, for
coussinet, a little cushion. Cuissots, tasses, armor for the thighs. Cuite, a
seething, or baking. Cuivreux, full of copper. Culace, Culason, for Culasse,
the breech of a gun. Culant, setting on his tail. Culasse, foiled, thrown down.
Culasseur, one that foils, or sets another on his tail. Culeron, the hinder
part of the buttocks of a horse. Culetage, Culetis, a leacherous motion of the
backside. Culeter, to stir the buttocks up and down. Culette, for Culasse, the
breech of a gun. Culier, of, or belonging to the arse. Culiere, a crupper for a
horse. Culinaire, of, or belonging to a kitchen. Cul-leve, level-coyl. Cullot,
as Culot; also a cushion made to ride post on. Culpe d'un artichau, the pulp or
substance of an Artichoke. Cul-pele, bald-arst. Culrage, as curage. Culte
(Adj.) elaborate. Cultellaire, of a knife, like a knife. Cultivage,
Cultivation, Cultivement, tillage. Cultiveur, a labourer. Cume (for cuve) de
pressoir, the trough which receives the liquor expressed. Cumulativement,
abundantly, by heaps. Cumule, heaped up. Cumuler, to heap up. Cunctation,
delay. Cuneiforme, wedge-like. Cuniculeux, full of inward holes, or by-corners.
Cunilage, Winter-savoury. Cunoet, a Kennet-apple. Cupide, desirous, greedy.
Cupule, the cup of an acorn. Curage, the herb Arsesmart. Curailles de maison,
the sweepings of a house. Curarion, cure. Cure, for soin, care, heed, or
regard. Curestable, a Groom. Curette, a Surgeons Probe. Cureures, as Curailles.
Curial, of, or belonging to a Court. Curialiste, a Courtier. Curialite,
courtship. Curie, a Tribe, or Ward in a City. Curin, a thin (or small) skin.
Curoir, as Curette. Curtille, a kind of Vermin. Curtin, the name of an apple.
Cuscoamy, Cuscouil, well hanged, well stoned. Cuscute, a kind of worm; also the
weed Dodder. Cusins, Win-berries. Cussonne, worm-eaten. Custode (for Gardien) a
Guardian. Custode de lit, a bed-curtain. Cutane, skinny, or of the skin.
Cuticulaire, full of Pores for sweat to come out at. Cuvee, a tub full of.
Cuvelier, a Tub-maker. Cuviel, Cuvier, a Bathing-tub; also a Dying-fat, or
lead. Cuviere, a Cestern to cool drinking-pots in Summer. Cuyderolles,
Cuydrelles, Crow-flowers. Cuyrassine, as Cuirassine. Cuyvre, for cuivre,
copper. Cuyvreux, full of copper. Cyane, Azure. Cyathe, a kind of measure.
Cyboide, Os Cyboide, a certain bone in the instep. Cyclamine, the herb
Hogs-bread; the wild Vine; Wood-nightshade. Cyclopique, one-eyed. Cycogne, for
Cigogne, a Stork. Cycogneau, a young Stork. Cyerce, the North Wind. Cygnean,
like a Swan, of, or belonging to a Swan. Cygneur, a Swan-keeper. Cymace, Cymas,
as Cymaise in the N. D. Cymacion, Cymat, a small Ogee in building. Cymettes.
See Cyme in the N. D. Cymier, as Cimier in the N. D. Cymiti^re, for Cimetiere,
a Churchyard. Cynabre, for Cinnabre, Cinoper. Cynamolge, an Arabian bird that
used to suck bitches. Cynanthropie, a sort of Frenzy. Cynie, for Cynique, a
Cynick. Cyniphe, a Gnat, or Dog-fly. Cyniphe, dogged. Cynocephale, a Baboon.
Cyntre, as Cintre in the N. D. Cyon, a Whirlwind. Cypere, a kind of Reed.
Cypressier, of, or belonging to a Cypras-tree- Cyre, as Sire in the N. D.
Cyron, for ciron, a ha^d-worm. Cyronne, a Sear-cloth. Cys^mbre, water-mint.
Cystique, the name of a v^in. Cythariser, to sing, or whizze as the wind.
Cyvade, a Shrimp, or Prawn.
D
DAbblee, as Dablee. Dabbordee, at first sight. Dablee, a crop of corn,
corn-growing. Daces, tolls. Dacier, a Toll-gatherer. Dacque, the name of a
weed. Dacte, for datte, a Date. Dactier, for datier, the Palm, or Date-tree.
Dactilaire, of, or belonging to a Date; also Date-like. Dactilomantie,
singer-magick. Dactylogie, speech made with the fingers. Dadee, childish toy.
Demon, for Demon, a Devil. Dagard, a young male Deer. Dagasse, a great dagger.
Dagobert, the name of a pear. Dagorie, the name of an apple. Dagorne, decrepit.
Dague, for epee, a sword, Daguenet, Daguette, a little dagger. Daguer, to stab
with a dagger. Dail, a sith to mow with. Daille, the name of a Shellfish.
Dain, for Daim, a Deer. Dain (Adj.) dainty. Dainceau, as Dainteau. Daine,
Daing, the name of a Seafish. Dainteau, a young Fallow-deer. Daintiers, the
doucets of a Deer. Daisselle, made of, or covered with boards. Dalader, a kind
of fruitless privet. Daldre, Dale, the name of a Flemish Coin. Dalle, a sink.
Damage, damage, hurt. Damaisine, a Dams^n. Damasceure, Damasquinage,
Damask-work. Damastic, a kind of Varnish. Dameret, as Damoiseau in the N. D.
Damoisel, a young Gentleman. Damoiselet, Gentlewoman-like. Damoiselette, a
little Gentlewoman. Damoiselle, for Demoiselle, a Gentlewoman. Dam^on, the name
of an apple. Da^din, a M^ac^ck. Dandiner, to gape and look like an Ass.
Dandrilles. See Dendrille. Dansement, Danserie, a dancing. Danseresse, a
woman-dancer. Danspied, the hollow part of the sole of the foot. Dante, the
name of an Indian beast. Daphnomantie, divination by a Laurel or Bay Tree.
Dapifer, the great Master or Steward of the Kings house. Darceau, as Derceau.
Dardanaire, Dardanier, an Ingrosser of any Commodity. Darde, the name of a
boyish play. Darderesse, a woman that casts a dart. Darde-tonnerre,
thunder-shooting. Dardeur, a thrower of a dart. Dardiller, to shake like a dart
cast with violence. Dare, a huge big belly. Darioles, a kind of small Pasties.
Dariolette, a Bawd, or carrier of Love-messages. Darne, a slice. Dassez, fully,
enough. Date, piss, urine. Datil, a Date. Dation, a gift, or giving. Dauber, as
Dober, to beat. Davesnes, Horse-plums. Davier, a pinser to draw out teeth
withal; also a kind of pick-lock. Davoines, as Davesnes. Daurade, for Dorade,
the Guilthead. Dauree, as Doree. Dausse d'ail, a clove of Garlic. se Dausser,
to be divided into several parts or cloves, like a head of Garlic. Daymon, for
Demon, a Devil. Day, as Ders. Dealbatoire, whitening. Deambulatif, and
Deambulatoire, as Ambulatif. Debaccher, Debaquer, to take on like a drunken
man. Debagouler, to utter madly. Debail, a Guardian. Debardeur, a Lighter-man.
Debatable, subject to opposition. Debatement, a debating. Debateur, a debater,
contender. Debatis, the unquiet flattering of a Hawk. Debauchement, as
Desbauchement. Debelle, conq^^^ed, sab^^^d. Debeller, to conq^^r, o^ subdue.
De^endade, for Debandade. c^^s^sion, want of order. Debexiller, to break into
pieces. Debiffe, razed, or scraped out; split asunder. Debiffer, to raze, or
scrape out. Se debiffer, to split asunder. Debilitation, a weakening. Debiller,
to unlose the rope of a boat, etc. Debitage, retailage. Debite, Debitement, for
Debit, sale. Deblee, as Desblee. Debleure, corn-standing. Deboire, an
after-tast, which an unsavory thing leaves behind in the mouth. Deboite, for
Deboete, put out of joint. Debonnairement, graciously. Debonnairete,
graciousness. Debosquer, to rush out of a wood. Debourrer, as Desbourrer.
Deboute, rejected. Deboutement, a rejecting. Debouter, to reject. Debrade,
unarmed. Debraguetter, to unty the Codpiece. Debranchi, lopped. Debranchir, to
lop a tree. Debrigande, stripped naked. Debrise, split asunder; also nimbly
footed in dancing. Debrisement, Debrissure, for Debris, wrack. Debriser, to
split asunder. Debteur, for Debiteur, a debtor. Decadenasser, to undo a
padlock; also to resolve a riddle. Decal d'argent, want of allay in silver.
Decaller, to slacken, or grow soft. Decaptive, set at liberty. Decaptiver, to
set at liberty. Decartele, quartered. Decempedal, ten foot long. Decence,
decency. Decentement, decently. Deceptif, deceitful. Deception, deceit.
Decercle, uncircled. Decercler, to uncircle. Decevable, deceivable, also
deceitful. Decevance, deceit. Decevant, Deceveur, a deceiver. Dechassement, a
driving away. Decheant, decaying. Decidu, fallen off. Decimable, tythable.
Decimal, of, or belonging to tithes. Decimesire, of ten months. Decis^^re, a^t
to decide. Declavete, unpegged. Declaveter, to unpeg. Declinement, for Declin,
a declining. Decliquer, to rap out. Declive, steep. Declos, wide open.
Decognoistre, not to know. Decompter, for deconter, to discount. Decore,
handsome, comely. Decorement, decoration. Decoucher, as Descoucher.
Decoulourement, a discoloring. Decoulourer, for decolorer, to discolor.
Decourir, to run down; also to purge downwards. Decouronne, uncrowned.
Decouronner, to uncrown. Decouru, run down; also purged downwards.
Decoustemens, costs and charges. Decramponne, unhooked. Decramponner, to
unhook. Decrasse, scowred. Decrasser, to scower. Decrepite, for decrepit,
decrepite, very old. Decrepiteux, the same. Decretaliarche, an absolute
Commander. Decretant, the Creditor, at whose suit the Debtors goods are decreed
to be sold. Decretation, an Order passed in Court for the sale of a Debtors
goods, or a proceeding thereby. Decroire, not to believe. Decrustation, a
paring off of the crust. Decruste, bared of crust. Decruster, to pare off the
crust. Decuisant, boiling or seething very much. Decuit, boiled or sodden very
much; also unsodden, made raw again. Deculpe, discharged of blame. Deculper, to
discharge of blame. Decumane, as big as ten. Decuple, ten times as much.
Decurie, a band of ten Senators, or Soldiers. Dedale, intricate, or maze-like.
Dedens, for Dedans, in, within. Dedicasse, and Dedication, for Dedicace, a
Dedication. Deduite, a deduction. Defaillance, fainted. Defaille, Defaillement,
a default, defect, or sailing; a pining away. Defaitte, as Defaite, in the N.
D. Defane, unwithered. Defarde, whose painting is wiped off. Defarder, to wipe
off painting. Defascher, to appease. Defaucille, put out of joint. Defauciller,
to put out of joint. Defaux, the ground or pasture wherein a beast should not
be. Defection, defection, or revolt. Defectuosite, defect. Defedation, a
defiling. Defense, for Defense, defense. Defendo, the name of a Play.
Defensable, Defensible, defensible. Defensif, a kind of medicine. Defensoire,
defensory. Defeque, purified. Defequer, to purify. Defermer, to open.
Deferrure, an unshooing of an horse. Defeuble, unmuffled. Defeubler, to
unmufflle. Deffaicte, as Defaite in the N. D. Deffaire, and Deffait, as
Defaire, and Defait in the N. D. Deffalquer, for Defalquer, to defaulk.
Deffascher, to appease. Deffaveur, Deffavoriser, as Defaveur and Defavoriser in
the N. D. Deffectueux, for Defectueux, defective. Deffene, hay-fed.
Deffensatrice, a defendress. Defferme, open. Deffermer, to open. Defferrer, as
Deferrer in the N. D. Deffier, Deffiance, as Defier, Defiance in the N. D.
Deffiamment, diffidently. Deffiler, Deffile. See them with a single f in the N.
D. Deffileure, an untwisting. Deffleurer, as Defleurer in the N. D. Defformite,
for difformite, difformity. Deffortune, misfortune. Deffortune, unfortunate.
Deffouir, to dig up. Deffrayer, for Defrayer, to defray. Deffriche, as Defriche
in the N. D. Deffroncer, as Defronser in the N. D. Deffrongner, to unwrinkle.
Deffroque, as Defroque in the N. D. Deffuler, as Defubler. Defiche, unfastened.
Deficher, to unfasten. Defiement, a challenging to fight. Defilocher,
Defiloter, to ravel. Define, pined, or wasted away. Definement, a pining, or
wasting away. Le definement du monde, the latter end of the world. Definer, to
pine, or waste away. Deflame, quenched. Deflamer, to quench. se Deflicher, to
pluck arrows out of his body. Defloration, the change from a flourishing color
to the contrary. se Deflorer, to shed or let fall its flowers. Defluer, to
flow. Deforcer, to dispossess, to disseise. Deforce, dispossessed, disseised.
Deforme, defaced, disfigured. Deformation, a defacing, a disfiguring. Deformer,
to deface, or disfigure. Defortifie, razed, unfortifi'd. Defortifier, to raze a
fortification. Defoule, trampled on. Defoulement, a trampling on. Defouler, to
trample on. Defraudateur, a defrauder. Defraude, defrauded. Defraudement, a
defrauding. Defrauder, to defraud. Defreloque, tattered. Defreloquer, to make
tatters of. Defrichage, as Defrichement in the N. D. Defrichis, grubbings. se
Defriper, to scrub with the shoulders. Defroisse, crushed in pieces.
Defroisser, to crush in pieces. Defroque, spoil, booty. Defroy, a defraying.
Defueiller, as Defeuiller in the N. D. Defunctoirement, by descent, or
succession after the decease of another. Degaerie, the Office or Circuit of an
Vnder-Bayliff. Degalico, waxen poor, gone down the wind. Degan, a kind of
Vnder-Bayliff. Degasouiller, to sing or warble fast and confusedly. Degaste,
destroyed, ruined, ravaged. Degastement, a destroying, ruining, or ravaging.
Degaster, to destroy, ruin, or ravage. Deglouti, devoured. Degloutir, to
devour. Deglution, a devouring. Degodalie, skittish. Degonde, lift off the
hinges. Degonder, to lift, or heave off the hinges. Degourt, jocund, merry.
Degracie, out of favor. Degradement, a degrading. Degrave, ungravelled.
Degraver, to ungravel. Degresseur, for Degraisseur, a scowrer of greasy
things. Degroumele, unclotted. Degroumeler, to unclot a thing that is cluttered.
Deguener, for Degainer, to draw his sword. Deguerpi, abandoned. Deguerpir, to
abandon. Deguerpissement, an abandoning. Deguerpisseur, that abandons any
thing. Deguestre, sloven. Degun, any one. Dehache, hacked. Dehacher, to hack.
Dehait, merry, pleasant. Dehaite, as Dehayte. Dehale, lean, ill-favored.
Dehayte, loathed as meat, also out of tune. Dehayter, to loath meat, to be out
of tune. Dehinch, away hence. Dehonte, shameless. Dehotte, drawn out of the
mire. Dehotter, to draw out of the mire. Dehouse, dispatched, rid out of the
way; also unbooted. Dehousse, uncovered; also unrugged. Deject, Dejecte,
dejected, or cast down. Dejecter, to deject. Se dejecter, to stand on terms.
Dejectement, a dejecting; also a contemptible repulse. Deillavier, to starve,
to bereave of life. Delacher, to let go. Delateur, an Informer. Delation, an
Information. Delave, washed away. Delayement, a delaying. Delection, delight.
Delecter, to delight. Delez, hard by. Delicatete, delicacy. se Delicter, to
cleave asunder. Delineature, delineation. Deliniment, a smoothing. Delinquer,
to commit a fault. Deliot, sodden pot herbs. Delirement, a doting, or raving.
Delirer, to dote, to rave. Delitescence, a lurking, or absconding. Delivre,
afterbirth. A delivre, loosely, freely. Delivreur, a deliverer. Deloche, put
out of joint. Delocher, to put out of joint. Deloisir, a deloisir, at leisure.
Delouer, as Deslouer. Deltoide, the name of a muscle. Deluge, overslowing.
Delurer, to pick. Deluter, to take the dirt off. Demachoire, unjawed.
Demachoirer, to tear a jaw from. Demacque, spit out of the mouth. Demacquer, to
spit out of the mouth. Demainier, an Owner of a Demain. Demaisonne, turned out
of a house. Demaisonner, to turn out of a house. Demanche, unhafted.
Demange-chair, setting an itch on the flesh. Demangement, Demangerie, an
itching. Demangeson, Demangeure (for demangeaison) itch. Demantibule, unjawed.
Demaquer, as Demacquer. Demence, madness. Demene (Subst.) a practice. Demenee,
a stir, or jog. Demenement, a stirring, or jogging. Demener devil, to lament,
or to mourn. Demener joye, to rejoice. Demener merchandise, to trade. Demener
un process, to follow a suit. se Dementer, to bewail himself. Se dementer de, to
medd^^ with. Demeriter, to deserve punishment. Demeurance, a staying, mansion,
or dwelling. Demi-ceinct, Demicinct, a half-girdle. Demi-ceinctier,
Demicinctier, a maker of half-girdles. Demi-espineux, the name of a muscle.
Demi-frere, a half-brother. Demigraine, m^gram. Demi-lict, brotherhood, or
sisterhood on the one side only. Demi-membraneux, half-skinny. Demince,
minced, cut small. Demi-nerveux, half-s^^^wy. Demi-saut, a half-leap.
Demi-s^ur, a half-si ter. Demisphere, an Hemisphere. Democratiquement,
popularly; also scoffingly. Demonachation, an abandoning, or depriving of
Monkish profession. Demoniaque (Adj.) devilish, hellish. Demonstrance,
demonstration. Demoule, unmoulded. Demouler, to unmould. Demoure, and Demourer,
as Demeure, and Demeurer in the N. D. Demourance, as Demeurance. Demousse, rid
(or bared) of moss. Demousser, to rid (or bare) of moss. Demusser, to uncover
the eyes. Demy-ceinct, as Demi-ceinct. Demyon, the quarter of a French pint.
Demy-teste, a steel-cap. Denaire, the number of ten, or a tenth. Dendrille, the
rag wherewith a leaking tub is stopped; also a man's privities. Deneanti,
abased. Deneantir, to abase. Deneantise, extreme baseness, or vil^ness.
Denegation, a denying. Deneree, Ware, Merchandise. Denerver, to weaken.
Deniement, a denial. Denomme, denominated. Denommer, to denominate.
Denouncement, a denouncing. Dense, thick. Dentade, a bit of the teeth.
Dentaire, a kind of Sanicle. Dental, for Dente, toothed. Dentateur, a
Tooth-drawer. Dentee, as Dentade. Dentele (Su^rt.) a kind of mischievous
Dog-fish. Dentelet, a little tooth; also a meal. Denteliz, teeth, or a
tooth-like notching in Imagery. etc. Dentier, the part of an Helmet that covers
the teeth. Dentir, to breed young teeth. Denudation, a ^^ving bar^.
Deoppila^^^, ^pening. Depais^re, to ^^ed. Depar^^^^r, to agree. Deparler, to
di^prai^^. Deparque, broke out of a Park, got away. se Deparquer. to ^ak out of
a Park, to (...). Departeur, a divid^^. Depar^e. for depart^^ (...).
Departiment, Departissement, as Departement in the N. D. Depassionner, to be
angry. Depelle, flayed. Depenaille, as Despenaille. Deperdition, utter ruin.
Deperi, undone. Deperir, to be undone, to perish. Deperissant, perishing. Depie
de fief, an aliening part of an Inheritance. Depile, bald. Depitonne, as
Despitonne. Deplaye, extremely wounded. Deplayer, to wound extremely. Deplicer,
for Deplisser, to undo the plaits. Deplumation, an unfeathering; also an
inflamed and hard thickness of the eyelids. Depoche, pulled out of a pocket.
Depocher, to pull out of a pocket. Depopuler, Depopule. See Depeupler, Depeuple
in the N. D. Depourprer, to unpurple, or make pale. Deppie, as Depie.
Depredation, depredation. Deprede, ravaged. Depreder, to ravage. Depri, as
Depry. Depriant (a Subst.) a purchaser that upon request agrees with the Lord
Censuel for his Lods and Ventes. Deprier, to pray earnestly. Depry, such an
agreement. Deps, a kind of Royalty. Depuration, a clarifying. Depure,
clarifi'd. Depurer, to clarify. Depurgatoire, purging. Derbro, the name of a
Seafish. Derceau, a little Dace, or Dare-fish. Derete, disintangled. Deris,
for derision, derision. Derme, the skin which covers the extreme parts of the
body. Derne, a slice. Dernieram, lateward, backward. Deroche, sala from a rock.
Derogant, Derogeant, derogating f^o^^. Deroguer, for deroger, to derogate.
Derompenient, a breaking in pieces. Derompre, to break in pieces. Derompu,
broke in pieces. Derrain, Derrainer, Derrenier, for dernier, last. Derree, for
denree, war^. Derrider, as Derider in the N. D. Ders, a Cloth of State, a
Cano^y. Derselet, a little Canopy, or Cloth of State. Dertre, for Dartre, a
Tetter, or Ring-worm. Desabiller, Desabille. See Deshabiller, Deshabille in the
N. D. Desaccointe, grown a stranger to one. Desaccointer, to break
acquaintance. Desaccommode, disaccommodated. Desaccommoder, to disaccommodate.
Desaccordance, a discording. Desaccostable, unaccostable. Desaccroche,
unhooked. Desaccrocher, to unhook. Desacre, unhallowed. Desacrer, to unhallow.
Desadjuste, disordered. Desadjuster, to disorder. Desadmonneste, dissuaded.
Desadmonnester, to dissuade. Desadvenant, a portion of an Inheritance left a
Vassal, but not sufficient for the Homage due unto the Lord.
Desadventageusement, disadvantageously. Desadventure, misfortune. Desadvest, a
dispossession. Desadvestir, to dispossess. Desadvise, inconsiderate. Desaffame,
whose hunger is satisfied. Desaffamer, to satisfy hunger. Desaffleure, whose
flourishing is hindered. Desaffleurer, to pluck the flowers from, to hinder the
flourishing of. Desaffuble, unmuffled. Desaffubler, to unmuffle. Desage, under
age. Desagence, disordered. Desageneement, a disordering. Desageneer, to
disorder. Desagenouille, got up from kneeling. se Desagenouiller, to get up
from kneeling. Desajancer, as Desageneer. Desaiguilleter, to undo points.
Desaime, fallen into the dislike of. Desaimer, to des^t from l^^ing. Desairer,
to spoil and destroy an A^^y of Hawks. Desaise, a being ill at ^as, a disease.
Desaise, ill at ease, di eased. Desaisme, as Dessisme. Desalier, to (...).
Desamasse, (...). Desamasser. t fall down a ^^ap. Desanger, to extirpate, or
destroy t^^ ^a^. of. Desange, extirpated. Desanime, deprived of life.
Desanimer, to deprive of life. Desantourat, deflowred as a Virgin.
Desapareille, disordered. Desapareiller, to disorder. Desapareilleur, a
disorderer. Desaparie, uncoupled. Desaparier, to uncouple. Desapetissance, a
distaste, or loathing of meats. Desapetisser, to take away the appetite.
Desapetisse, loathed as meat. Desapointer, as Desappointer in the N. D.
Desappetit, want of appetite. Desarester, to take the bones out of fish.
Desarnacher, as Desharnacher in the N. D. Desarranger, to disorder.
Desarrengement, a disordering. Desarresser, to cool ones courage. Desarroye,
routed. Desarroyer, to rout. Desassemble, separated. Desassembler, to separate.
Desasseure, put in fear. Desasseurer, to put in fear. Desassiege, delivered
from siege. Desassieger, to raise a siege. Desassocie, parted from the company
of. Desassocier, to dissolve society. Desastre, unfortunate. Desastreusement,
fatally. Desastreux, ominous, fatal. Desattise, put out, as a kindled
firebrand. Desattiser, to put out a firebrand. Desavance, hindered. Desavancer,
to hinder. Desavantage, indamaged. Desavantager, to indamage. Desaube, off the
hinges. Desaventureux, unhappy, unfortunate. Desaugmenter, to decrease.
Desavie, bereft of life. Desavier, to bereave of life. Desbandage, a
disbanding. Desbandee, a la desbandee, out of their ranks. Desbarate,
disordered. Desbarbouille, rid of spots. Desbarbouiller, to make clear from
spots. Desbardeur, a Lighter-man. Desbasti, pulled down. Desbastiment, a
pulling down of buildings. Desbastir, to pull down a building. Desbastonne,
disarmed. Desbastonner, to disarm. Desbauchement, a deboshing. Desbaudi, made
sad, or ashamed. Desbaudir, to make sad, or ashamed. Desbauger, to rowse a wild
Boar from the place he lies in. Desbelle, subdued. Desbeller, to subdue.
Desbendade, an unbending. Desbender, for debander, to unbend. Desbiffer, as
Debiffer. Desblaver, to reap corn. Desblaye, rid from. Desblayer, to rid from.
Desblee, hinderance, damage; also corn. Desbleer, Desbleyer, as Desblayer.
Desbleure, hay, or stubble. Desblouque, unblocked. Desblouquer, to unblock.
Desboeture, a putting out of joint. Desboire, as Deboire. Desboiste, Desboite,
unboxed; put out of joint. Desboistement, the being out of joint. Desboister,
Desboiter, to unbox; to put out of joint. Desbord, an overflowing. Desborne,
whose bounds are laid open. Desbornement, a laying open of bounds. Desborner,
to lay open the bounds. Desbort, as Desbord. Desbossue, made flat. Desbossuer,
to make flat. Desbourbe, drawn out of the mire. Desbourber, to draw out of the
mire. Desbourgeonner, to pluck, or nip off young buds. Desbourrer, to fly out.
Desbours, a disbursement. Desboutonnement, an unbuttoning. Desbraguetter, as
Debraguetter. Desbranchir, as Debranchir. Desbraquer, to dismount artillery.
Desbride, an ear-wire. Desbrigandiner, to deprive of a brigandine. Desbriser,
as Debriser. Desbrodequine, whose buskins are drawn off. Desbrodequiner, to
draw buskins off. Desbuissonne, driven out of a thicket. Desbuissonner, to
drive out of a thicket. Descache, disclosed. Descacher, to disclose. Descaille,
uncurded. Descailler, to uncurd. Descalenge, unapprehended; also discharged.
Descapuchonne, uncovered. Descapuchonner, to uncover. Descendement, a
descending. Descendue, race, progeny. Descensoire, apt to descend. Desceptre,
deprived of a Scepter. Desceptrer, to deprive of a Scepter. Desceu, as Insceu
in the N. D. Deschambre, separated. Deschambrer, to separate people that lived
in a chamber. Deschampe, got out of the fold. Deschamper, to get out of the
fold. Deschant, descant. Deschante, descanted. Deschanter, to descant.
Deschargement, a discharging, or unloading. Deschargeoir, a sluice, or
waterpassage. Descharges, costs and charges in a Suit. Descharongne, torn in
pieces. Descharongnement, a tearing in pieces. Descharongner, to tear flesh in
pieces. Descharpi, got rid of. Descharper, Descharpir, to take off the nap of
cloth. Je ne me puis descharpir de luy, I cannot rid my self of him. Deschaud,
and Deschault, as Dechaux, in the N. D. Deschaussoir, a Surgeons tool.
Descheance, decay, waste. Deschevale, unhorsed. Deschevaler, to unhorse.
Deschevance, pillaged. Deschevancer, to pillage. Deschevauche, unhorsed.
Deschevaucher, to unhorse. Deschevestre, loosed. Deschevestrer, to take off the
halter. Deschiquetement, a cutting, or slitting. Deschiqueter, as Eschiqueter.
Deschute, a lapse, or fall. Descigler, as Deciller in the N. D. Descimenter, to
lose its mortar. Descirer, Descire, as Dechirer, Dechire in the N. D.
Desclavete, dismounted. Desclaveter un Canon, to dismount a Cannon. Descliquer,
to rap out. Desclos, unclosed. Descogneu, not known. Descognoissance, a not
knowing. Descognoistre, not to know. Descolle, beheaded. Descoller, to behead.
se Descombatre de, to rid his hands of. Descombre, ^leared of encumbrances;
also warranted. Descombrement, a clearing of encumbrances; also a warranting
(in Law.) Descombrer, to clear of encumbrances; also to warrant (in Law.)
Descompt, for deconte, a discount. Descompter, to discount. Desconfiture, an
overthrow. Desconfiz, defeated, discomfited. Desconsort, discomfort.
Desconseilleur, an adviser to the contrary. Desconsole, discomforted.
Desconsoler, to discomfort. Desconvenue, sorrow, trouble. Descordele,
untwisted. Descordeler, Descorder, to untwist. Descouche, put out of his
lodging; also got up. Descoucher, to put one out of his lodging. Se descoucher,
to get up. Descoulourer, Descouloure, Descoulourement. See Decolorer, etc. in
the N. D. Descoulper, to discharge. Descoulpe, discharged. Descourable,
slippery, slitting. Descourtoisie, discourtesy. Descouseur, an unsower.
Descousu, for decousu, unsowed. Descousure, an unsowing, Descouvrement, a
discovering. Descouvreur, a discoverer. Descri, Descrier, Descrie. See them
without s in the N. D. Descriement, a crying down. Descrit de monoie, the
calling in of money. Descroire, to give no credit to. Descroise, uncrossed.
Descroi^er, to uncross. Descroule, shaked asunder. Descrouler, to shake
asunder. Descrovant, distrusting. Descuire, to leave off ^^ething. Descuve, tak
n out of ^ tab. Descuver, to take out of a tub. Desdaignable, contemptible.
Desdaignement, a disdaining. Desdaigneur, a disdainer. Desdamer, to deprive a
Lady of her title; also to take a Queen at Draughts. Desdette, rid out of debt.
Desdetter, to rid out of debt. Desdict, recanted. Desdommage, or Dedommagement
in the N. D. Desdormi, awaked. Desdormir, to awake. Desdormissement, an
awaking. Desdouble, unlined. Desdoubler, to unlive. Desdouloir, to leave off
sorrow. Desduite, a discourse. Desembarasse, disintangled. Desembarrasser, to
disintangle. Desembellir, to disfigure. Desembroche, unspitted. Desembrocher,
to pull off the spit. Desembusche, got out from among bushes. Desembucher,
(Subst.) that part of a thicket, whereout wild beasts use to go into the
Plains. se Desembuscher, to rush up from among bushes. Desemmure, taken out of
a wall; unwalled. Desemmurer, to take a thing out of a wall; also to unwal.
Desempacquete, unpacked. Desempacqueter, to unpack. Desemparable, abandonable.
Desempartement, a separation. Desempenne, unfeathered. Desempenner, to
unfeather. Desempesche, cleared. Desempescher, to make a clear riddance.
Desempestre, disintangled. Desempestrer, to disintangle. Desempli, emptied.
Desemplir, to empty. Desemplume, plumed. Desemplumer, to pluck the feathers
off. Desemprisonne, set at liberty, Desemprisonner, to set at liberty.
Desenchaine, unchained. Desenchainer, to unchain. Desencloue, unnailed.
Desenclouer, to unnail. Desencorde, unstrung. Desencoulpe, discharged from
blame. Desencoulper, to discharge from blame. Desendette, rid out of debt.
Desendetter, to bring out of debt. Desendormi, awaked. Desendormir, to awake.
Desendormissement, an awaking. Desenduire, to undawb. Desenforge, disinforged.
Desenfourne, drawn out of an oven. Desenfourner, to draw out of an oven. se
Desenfrongner, to leave frowning. Desengeance, the race whereof is
extingui^hed. Desengeancer, to extinguish the race of. Desenger, to pluck up by
the root. Desengigne, disinchanted. Desengourdi, unbenummed. Desengrosser, to
miscarry (meant of a woman with child.) Desenhorte, dehorted, or dissuaded.
Desenhorter, to dehort, to dissuade. Desenhorteur, a dehorter, disswader.
Desennuyance, pastime. Desenroule, unrolled. Desenrouler, to unrol. Desentasse,
unheaped. Desentasser, to unheap. Desenterre, unburied. Desenterrer, to unbury.
Desentortille, untwislen. Desentourner, to turn, or wind off. Desentraille,
bowelled. Desentrailler, to bowel. Desenveloper, to unsold. Desequipper un
Navire, to unrig a ship. Deserte, for merit, merit. Deservice, an ill office.
Deservi, deserved. Deservir, to deserve. Desesperable, despairable.
Desesperade, a kind of mournful Song. Jouer a la desesperade, to throw at all.
Desesperance, despair. Desesperement, desperately. Desestime, disesteemed.
Desestimer, to disesteem. Desestousse, unstuffed. Desestousser, to unstuff.
Desfacer, for Effacer, to blot out. Desfacher, to appease. Desfacile, put out
of joint. Desfaire, Desfaict, Desfaicte, as Defaire, Defait, Defaite in the N.
D. Desfaroucher, to tame. Desfasche, appeased, quieted. Desfascher, to appease,
to quiet. Desfermer, as Deformer. Desferre, cast clothes; also an intangl d
business. Ces gens sont de fascheuse desferre, these men are hard to be
pleased. Desferre-cheval, the small Pulse called Horse-shooe. Desfiche,
unfastened. Desficher, to unfasten. Desfiement, a defying, also a distrusting.
Desfinance, drained of treasure. Desflamme, quenched, put out. Desflammer, to
put out the flame. Desfoncer, Desfonce. See Defonser in the N. D. Desfortune,
misfortune. Desfortune, unfortunate. Desfoui, dug out. Desfouir, to dig out.
Desfrais, defraying. Desfroisse, crushed in pieces. Desfrongner, as
Desenfrongner. Desfroy, a defraying, or bearing of charges. Desfuite, an
excuse, an evasion. Desfule, uncapped. se Desfuler, to put off his cap.
Desgageur, a disengager, or redeemer. Desgaine, Desgainade, a drawing out of a
weapon. Il y marcha bien d'une autre desgaine, he went about it with another
manner of resolution. Desgainee, and Desgainement, as Desgaine. Desgarote,
unfettered. Desgaste, made havoc of. Desgaster, to make havoc of.
Desgaste-pares, Park-wasting. Desgester un lievre, to put a Hare off her form.
Desglace, thawed. Desglacer, to thaw. Desglouti, swallowed down. Desgloutir, to
swallow down. Desgofiller, to rob. Desgonder, as Degonder. Desgouler, to spue.
Desgoustement, a distasting. Desgouziller, to swallow down. D^sgozille, whose
t^roat is cut. Desgrapher, as Desagraser in the N. D. Desgravir, to fetch, or
throw down a climbing thing. Desgresser, Desgresse. See Degraisser in the N. D.
Desgrosser, Desgrosse. See Degrossir, Degrossi in the N. D. Desguerper, to
quit. Desguerpissement, a quitting. Desguerpisseur, that quits. Desguerpy,
quit, left, abandoned. Desguilleter, to unty, or undo points; also to take
points from. Desguillete, untrussed. Desguinde, let down. Desguinder, to let
down. Desguiseure, as Deguisement in the N. D. Deshabite, disinhabited.
Deshabiter, to disinhabit. Deshaict, or Deshait, sadness. Deshaite, sad; also
crazy. Deshaitement, sadness; also crasiness. Deshale de famine, worn away
through hunger. Deshanche, whose hips are out of joint. Deshancher, to put the
hips out of joint. Deshante, disused, or not haunted. Deshanter, to leave the
company of. Desheaulme, bereaved of his helmet. Desheaulmer, to take a helmet
off. Desheritance, a disseisin. Deshingande, lift off the hinges. Deshingander,
to lift off the hinges. Deshonoration, Deshonorement, a dishonouring. Deshonte,
shameless. Deshontement, shamelesly. Deshouse, whose boots are pulled off.
Deshouser, to pull off boots. Deshousse, whose horse-cloth is taken off.
Desiccation, a drying up. Desidence, idleness. Desidieux, idle. Designatif,
designative. Desinence, an end, or close. Desinfecter, to take off the
infection. Desing, for Dessein, design. Desinteresser, to save harmless, to rid
from all interest in. se Desjouer, for quitter le jeu, to leave off playing.
Desjousse, unbusked. Deslache, let go. Deslacher, to let go. Deslaicte, milked;
also weaned. Deslaicter, to milk; also to wean. Deslaine, fleeced. Deslainer,
to fleece. Deslaitter, as Deslaicter. Deslascher, as Deslacher. Deslate,
unlathed. Deslater, to unlath. Deslave, washed away. Deslavement, a washing
away. Deslaver, to wash away. Deslaye, softened, soaked. Deslayer, Desleer, to
soften, to soak. Desleement, a softning, a soaking. Desloquete, ragged, torn,
tattered. Desloqueter, to tear unto rags. Desloue, dispraised. Deslouer, to
dispraise. Desloueure, the putting of a thing out of its place. Desloyal,
unfaithful. Desloyalement, unfaithfully. Desloyaute, disloyalty. Desmache,
unchawed. Desmacher, to unchaw. Desmaconne, pulled down. Desmaconner, to pull
down stonework. Desmaille, cut in pieces as a coat of mail. Desmailler, to cut
in pieces a coat of mail. Desmaillure, a cutting of mail in pieces.
Desmaisonne, turned out of the house. Desmaisonner, to turn out of the house.
Desmanchement, an unhasting. Desmandibuler, to break the jaws of. Desmandibule,
unjawed. Desmarche, stepped back. Desmarcher, to step, or go back.
Desmelancolie, cheered up. Desmelancolier, to cheer up. Desmenacer, to revoke a
threat. Desmenter, as Dementer. Desmenture, a shrinking. Desmeslement, an
opening, or clearing. Desmesurement, exceeding greatness. Desmeu, removed.
Desmoelle, deprived of marrow, weakened. Desmoeller, to take away the marrow;
also to weaken. Desmorche, without powder in the touchhole. Desmouvoir, to
remove. Desmuni, unfurnished. Desmunir, to unfurnish. Desnaturer, to make
unnatural; to weaken nature; to renounce his natural Prince or Country.
Desnerve, weakened. Desnerver, to weaken. Desniaiseur, a cheater. Desnigrement,
Desnigration, a discrediting. Desnoueure, as Denouement in the N. D.
Desolement, a desolating. Desolement, desolately. Desordonnance, disorder,
confusion. Desordonner, to bring disorder. Desores, from henceforth. Desourat,
deflowred before her time. Desourdi, unwoven. Desourdir, to unweave.
Despaisement, the driving one out of his Country; also a leaving of rude
Country-fashions. Despaistre, to feed, to graze. Despampe, bared as a Vine of
leaves. Despamper, Despamprer, to pull the lea^es off a Vine. Desparage,
disparaged. Desparager, to disparage. Despece, cut in pieces. Despecement, a
cutting in pieces. Despecer, to cut in pieces. Despenaille, tattered. Despence,
etc. See Depense in the N. D. Despencerie, a Larder. Despendeur, a lavisher.
Despendeux, wastful. Despendre, (a Subst.) spending. Despendre, (a Verb.) to
spend. Despendu, spent. Despensaire, as Depensaire. Desperche, unpearched.
Despercher, to throw off a perch. Desperonne, deprived of spurs. Desperonner,
to deprive of spurs. Despersuade, dissuaded. Despersuader, to dissuade. Despie,
as Depie. Despieca, long ago. Despiece, torn in pieces. Despiecement, a tearing
in pieces. Despiecer, to tear in pieces. Despiteusement, despitefully.
Despitonne, coy, squeamish. Desplaisance, grief; also a displeasure, or
ill-turn. Desplanche, unfloored. Desplancher, to unfloor. Desplisser, for
deplisser, to unplait. Desplisseure, an unplaiting. Desplume, plumed.
Desplumer, to pull off the feathers. Despluvie, high-ridged. Despocher, as
Depocher. Despoisse, unpitched. Despoisser, to unpitch. Despote, a Sovereign
Lord. Despoulser, to thrust out. Despourpre, whose purple hue is lost. se
Despourprer, to lose its purple hue. Desprier, to desire to the contrary.
Despris, disesteem, contempt. Desprisable, contemptible. Desprise, disesteemed.
Desprisement, a disesteeming. Despriser, to disesteem. Despriseresse, a
disdainful woman. Despriseur, a disesteemer. Desprisonne, got out of prison.
Desprisonner, to get out of prison. Desprouveu, unprovided. Despu^elage,
Lespucellement, a deflowring of a Virgin. Despume, skimmed. Despumer, to skim.
Desracher, to pluck off, or tear away. Desraison, unreasonableness.
Desraisonne, bereft of reason. Desrame, without boughs. Desramer, to bare of
boughs. Destraye, disordered. Desrene, a proof of the denial of a fact.
Desrener, to make good the denial of a fact. Desrete, unsnared. Desreter, to
unsnare. Desreume, whose rheum is dried up. Desreumer, to dry up the rheum.
Desridant, smoothing, slackening. Desrivement, an unrivetting. Desrobbement,
stealth. Desroche, beaten out of a rock; also thrown down a rock. Desrocher, to
beat out of a rock; also to throw down a rock. Desroller, to open a roll.
Desrondir, to bring out of roundness. Desroque, overthrown in wrestling.
Desroquer, to overthrow in wrestling. Desrote, untied, unbound. Desrougi,
decayed in redness. Desrougir, to lose his redness. Desroule, laid open,
unfolded. Desrouler, to lay open, to unfold. Desroute, for deroute, a rout.
Desroute, routed. Desrouteement, clean awry. Desrouter, to put by, to rout.
Desroy, disorder, disarray. Desroye, disordered. Desroyer, to disorder.
Desruer, to mistake one street for another. Desrumer, as Desreumer. Desrune,
disordered. Desruner, to disorder. Dessacre, profaned, unhallowed. Dessacrer,
to profane, to unhallow. Dessaisine, a disseisin, or dispossession.
Dessaisonne, unkindly. Dessarrier, a woman to cast her child. Dessauvage,
tamed. Dessauvager, to tame. Desseigne, designed. Desseigner, to design.
Desseiller, as Desiller in the N. D. Desseing, for dessein, design. Dessemble,
disjoined. Dessembler, to disjoyn. Dessengler, as Decengler in the N. D.
Dessente, the gout proceeding from a rheum. Desserpilleur, a highway man.
Desserre, a sudden opening; a releasing. Desserte, as Dessert in the N. D.
Desservice, disservice. Desserviteur, a table-attendant. Desseveli, unburied.
Dessevelir, to unbury. Dessevre, parted. Dessevrer, to part. Dessiccatif, for
Desiccatif, desiccative. Dessiege, freed from a siege. Dessieger, to raise a
siege. Dessing, for Dessein, a design. Dessoive, whose thirst is quenched. se
Dessoiver, to quench his thirst. Dessole, unsoled. Dessoler, to unsole.
Dessonger, to awake out of a dream starting. Dessorcele, unbewitched.
Dessorceler, to unbewitch. Dessote, unbesotted. Dessoter, to unbesot.
Dessoulde, en dessoulde, straggling. Dessoulde, unsodered. Dessoulder, to
unsoder. Dessous-mis, the name of a Muscle. Dessuetude, disuse. Dessus-mis, put
over, set above. Destacher, for oter une tache, to take off a spot. Destaille,
hacked; also retailed. Destailler, to hack; also to sell by retail. Destaindre,
as Desteindre. Destampe, unpropped. Destamper, to unprop. Desteinct, stained;
also put out. Desteindre, to slain; also to put out a light. Desteler, as
Desatteler in the N. D. Destenture, a letting, or taking down. Destiltre,
Destistre, to unweave. Destituable, destituable. Destombi, unbenummed.
Destombir, to unbenum. Destonnement, a jar in sound. Destonner, to change a
tune. Destordement, a wringing. Destortille, unwrapped. Destortiller, to
unwrap. Destortoire, as Destournoire. Destoupe, unstopped. Destouper, to
unstop. Destourbe, disturbed. Destourbement, disturbance. Destourber, to
disturb. Destourbeur, a Disturber. Destourbier, a disturbance. Destournoire,
Destourtoire, a hunting pole. Destrabord, starboard, the right side of a ship.
Destrainct, strained; also straightened. Destraincte, a distress; a restraint.
Destraincte d'amour, an extremity of passion in love. Destraindre, to strain,
also to straiten. Destranche, hacked asunder. Destranchement, a hacking
asunder. Destrancher, to hack asunder. Destrape, stamped with the feet; also
rid from intanglements. Destraper, to slamp with the feet; also to clear the
feet from the things intangling them. Destrave, unshackled. Destraver, to
unshackle. Destrempis, as Destrempement, a sleeping in water. Destrencher, as
Destrancher. Destriar, a steed, a great horse. Destroquer, to untruck.
Destrousse, spoil, booty. Destroussement, flatly, plainly. Destrousseur de
gens, a robber. Destruiseur, a destroyer. Desvalize, robbed. Desvalizement, a
robbing. Dezvalizer, to rob one of his Cloakhag. Desveine, bereft of all his
veins, or blood. Desveiner, to deprive one of his veins. Desvely, changed
through sickness. Desverdiat, defloured as a Virgin. Desvesti, uncloathed;
dispossessed. Desvestir, to uncloath; to dispossess. Desvie, misled; also dead.
Desvier, to mislead; also to die. Desvisage, deformed. Desvisager, to deform.
Desultoire, Chevaux desultoires, two horses from the one whereof an active
rider leaps upon the other in a full career; also led horses kept fresh for
Soldiers use. Desumbre, unshaded. Desumbrer, to unshade. Desusage, disuse.
Desusitation, a disusing. Desusite, disused. Desusiter, to disuse. Desyvre,
unsuddled. Desyvrer, to unsuddle. Det, a Die (to play with). Detaille, cut into
pieces; also sold by retail. Detailler, to cut into pieces; also to sell by
retail. Detailleur, a retailer. Detalente, unwilling. Detapper, to unbung.
Detenue, for detention, detention. Detergent, cleansing, scowring.
Deterioration, a making worse. Deteriore, made worse. Deteriorer, to make
worse. Determinance, an Order, a Decree; a determination of a matter already
debated. Detersif, cleansing, scowring. Detire, stretched out hard. Detirer, to
stretch out hard. Detomber, to take out of a tomb. Detouille disintricated.
Detouiller, to disintricate. Detracteur, a slanderer. Detraction, slander.
Detraquer quelcun, le debaucher, to take one off from his work. Detrave, out of
order. Detrencher, as Destrancher. Detrichouere, as Dextrochere; also the fold
of leather wherewith Yarn-winders preserve their fingers from scars; also the
sharp iron wherein the quill or spindle of a wheel does twirl. Detrimenteux,
hurtful. Detriste, comforted, cheared up. Detrister, to drive away sadness.
Deturper, to defile. Devallant, tumbling down. Devallee, a low ground.
Devallement, a tumbling down. Devancier (Adj.) fore-running, preceding.
Devanteau, Devantel, Devantier, an apron. Deues a vetando, Privileges of
forbidding others to fish or gather sticks in his waters or woods. Deveiner, as
Desveiner. Devely, changed, or altered. Devergonde, shameless. Devertaper, to
open, or unbung. Divest, a disadvesture, or as Dessaisine. Devestir, to put
himself out of possession of. Devestu, put out of possession of. Devexite, a
bending downwards. Devideau, a little pair of Yarn-windles. Devideresse, a
woman that winds Yarn. Devidet, as Devideau. Devidoire, for devidoir, a pair of
Yarn-windles. Devier, as Desvier. Devinailles, Devinaises, Divinations
Devinance, Devinement, a divining. Devineresse, a woman that foretells things to
come. Devineur, a Diviner, Southsayer. Devis, talk, discourse. Devisager, as
Desvisager. Devise, talked, discoursed, devised. Deviser, to talk, to
discourse; also to devise. Deument, for deuement, duly. Devolut, as Devolutaire
in the N. D. Devolutif, devolutive, ready, or like to devolve. Devolution, a
devolution, or falling into lapse. Devotionne, devoted, affected unto. Devoute,
unvaulted. Devouter, to unvault. Deusdet, as Mass d'armes in the N. D. Deuvet,
for duvet, soft down. Dextre (Adj.) dexterous. Dextrier, as Destrier.
Dextrochere, the right arm (from the elbow to the wrist) whereon there hangs a
Maniple fringed at the bottom, and charged all over with Ermines. Dez en dez,
by and by. Diabete, a continual and immoderate voiding of urine, accompanied
with extreme thirst. Diablerie, devilishness; also a devilish Crew. Diableteau,
a little (or young) devil. Diableusement, devilishly. Diacartami, a kind of
purging composition. Diacatholicon, a composition purging all kind of humors.
Diaciminon, a composition made of Simples fit to dissolve windiness in the
stomach. Diaconal, of, or belonging to a Deacon. Diaconie, Deaconry, the place
of a Deacon. Diagalange, a Salve made of Galingale. Diagonal, extending from
one corner to another. Diagonalement, from corner to corner. Diagone, as
Diagonal. Diagrede, an ointment made of the gum Diagredi. Diagredi, a strong
purging gu^ destilled from the root of the (...) S^ammony. Diagredie, mixed with
Scammony prepared. Diaire, a Journal. Diaire, (Adj.) of one day. Diale, the
devil. Diallement, devilishly. Dialthee, the name of an Ointment. Diamantin, of
a Diamond, as hard as a Diamond. Diamargariton, an Electuary made of Pearls.
Diambre, a confection of Amber, etc. Diamerdis, a confection of Turds, Pilgrims
salve; also a shitten fellow. Diametraler, to answer diametrally. Diammour, the
devil. Diamouron, syrrup of Mulberries. Diamoschum, a kind of cordial powder.
Dianier, consecrated to Diana, or that has vowed chastity. Dianisum, an
Electuary made of Anniseeds and other things good to break wind. Diantre, the
Devil, the God of darkness. Diapason, a Diapason in Music; a Gage to measure
Casks with. Diapente, a Powder or Composition wherein there are five Simples
equally incorporated. Diaphaner, to make transparent. Diaphenicum, a kind of
purging Electuary. Diapre, diapered, diversifi'd with sundry figures. Diaprer,
to diaper, to diversifie with flourishes. Diaprerie, Diapreure, flourishing in
work, or flourisht work. Diarrhoetique, that has got a task. Diarrodon, a kind
of pain-abating Syrrup. Diarthrose, a connection of bones that evidently move
together. Diasene, Diasenne, a purging Composition made of Seen, or Trisoly.
Diaspertisant, Diaspermatisant, sowing of seed. Diastole, the dilatation of the
heart. Diatipose, a double description, or figuring. Diatolique, continual,
without intermission. Diaule, a measure containing two furlongs. Dicaster, the
Judges of the ancient Thelans. Dictam, Dictamon, for dictame, Dittander.
Diesble, devil. Diese, a sharp in Music. Dietique, of, or belonging to Diet;
prescribing a diet. Dieutelet, a little God. Diffame, infamy, reproach.
Differante, differed, or disagreed from; at variance with; also diversified.
Differanter, to differ, or disagree from; to be at variance with. Differenter,
as Differanter. Difficulter, to make difficult; also to make bones of.
Difficulteux, difficult, full of difficulties. Diffinitivement, definitively.
Difflation, a blowing, or breathing. Diffusement, diffusedly. Digame, one that
has two Wives together; also one that has had two Wives. Digastrique, having
two bellies. Digitation, the form of the fingers of both hands joined together;
or the manner of their so joining. Digitte, a numeral figure. Digonner, to dig.
Dilaceration, a tearing asunder. Dilacere, torn asunder. Dilacerer, to tear
asunder. Dilapide, dilapidated, ruined. Dilapider, to dilapidate; also to rid
of stones. Dilatable, dilatable. Dilayement, delay. Diligente, hastened,
forwarded. Diligenter, to hasten, to forward. Dille, the quill or faucet of a
hogshead, etc. Dillon, a quinsel, for a horse. Dilucide, clear, bright.
Dilucide, dilucidated, cleared. Dilucider, to dilucidate, to clear. Dimenche,
for dimanche, Sunday. Dimencheret, a holy-day-servant. Dinanderie, broken ware,
Tinkers work; also the place where such stuff is sold or made. Dinandier, a
Copper-smith, or Brasier. Dinarchie, the joint Government of two Princes.
Dindar, Dindon, a Turky-Cock. Dintiers, the dowcets or cods of a Deer. Diole,
the Devil. Dipsade, a Snake, whose biting brings with it a mortal dryness.
Dipsode, a thirsty fellow. Diptam, Diptame, the herb Dittany. Dique, for digue,
a bank. Directer, to direct; also to acknowledge from whence a good comes.
Direption, rapine. Disceptateur, a contender, a stickler. Disceptatrice, a
woman that debates a matter. Discepte, disputed, debated. Discepter, to
dispute, to debate. Discole, unruly. Discommodation, damage, hurt, hinderance.
Discommode, discommodated, hurt, indamaged, hindered. Discommoder, to
discommodate, hurt, indamage, or hinder. Disconcerte, disordered, confused.
Discontinuement, by stops. Disconvenance, a disagreeing with. Disconvenir, to
disagree with. Discord, for discord, discord. Discordamment, jarringly.
Discorder, to jarr, to disagree. Discoste, distant, remote. se Discoster de, to
rid himself of. Discourtois, uncourteous. Discourtoisement, uncourteously.
Discourtoisie, discourtesy. Discrasie, pulled, haled; of an ill complexion.
Discrepance, difference. Discrepant, different. Discrucie, extremely afflicted.
Discrucier, to vex, or afflict extremely. Discuteur, a discusser, examiner,
debater; also a valuer or praiser of goods. Discution, for discussion,
discussion. Diseaux de gerbes, sheafs of corn set ten and ten in a heap.
Disenier, as Dixainier in the N. D. Disentourner, to turn off. Disferre, an
horse-shooe of two pieces joined together at the top with an iron pin.
Disgregation, a dispersing. Disgrege, dispersed, scattered. Disgreger, to
disperse, to scatter. Disjoinctif, disjunctive. Disjoinction, disjunction.
Disjoindre, to disjoyn. Dislayer, for delayer, to delay. Dismages, Tythings, or
matters belonging to Tithes. Dismier, a Tyther. Disparagement, disparagement.
Disparate, error; also a senseless and uncivil thing. Disparer, Disparoir, to
disappear. Disparoissance, a disappearing. Disparution, a disparition.
Dispathie, an antipathy. Dispensaire, a Book that teaches how to make all
Physical Compositions. Dispositeur, a disposer. Disposte, sound, healthful.
Dispostement, lustily. Disputaille, idly debated. Disputailler, to debate idly.
Disputation, a disputation. Disquisition, inquiry. Disruption, a bursting, or
breaking asunder. Disseiche, dried up. Disseicher, to dry up. Disseillonner, to
open the eyes. Dissemele, unsoled. Dissemeler, to unsole, or put the soles off
a shoe. Dissentiment, dissent, disagreement, Dissension, for dissension,
dissension. Dissimulateur, a dissembler. Dissimulatrice, a woman-dissembler.
Dissimulement, dissemblingly. Dissipendre, to dissipate. Dissociable,
unsociable. Dissociation, a dissociation, or separation of fellowship.
Dissocie, dissociated. Dissoluement, for dissolument, dissolutely. Dissonant,
dissonant, discording, disagreeing. Dissuetude, disuse. Distillable,
distillable. Distillement, distillation. Distract, any distraction, or division
of a Contract, Right, or Act. District, a District, the Liberties or Precincts
of a place. Distroict, as District. Distroict de Moulin, as Banlieue de Moulin.
Ditateur, an inricher. Dite, a sa dite, at his nod, after his will and
pleasure. Ditellet, a small Treatise. Divague, straying, wandering. Divague,
strayed, wandered about. Divaguer, to stray, or wander about. Divinance, a
divining, or foretelling. Divisement, separately, distinctly. Diurne, diurnal,
daily. Diuturne, of long continuance. Divulgateur, a divulger. Divulsion,
divulsion. Dixain, as Dizain. Dixenier, as Dixainier in the N. D. Dixme,
Dixmer, as Dime, Dimer in the N. D. Dixneusiesme, as Dixneuvieme, nineteenth.
Dizain, a tenth; also a Stanza of ten Verses; a pair of beads containing ten
pieces; a French penny. Dizaine, as Dixaine in the N. D. Dizeaux, as Diseaux.
Doanne, for Douane, a Custom House. Dobbe, a tub. Docilise, made tractable.
Dociliser, to make tractable. Doctorande, Doctors Commencement. Doctorie, a
Doctors degree, Doctorship. Doctrinable, apt to learn. Document, document,
precept. Dodacaedre, a Geometrical figure of 12 faces. Dodechedron, a
twelve-corner'd figure. Dodeline, rocked, dandled, lolled. Dodelinement, a
rocking, dandling, or lolling. Dodeliner, to rock, dandle, or loll. Dodeliner
de la test, to carry his head unsteadily. Dodelineur, the rocker of a cradle.
Dodelineux, a rocker; also one that nods much; also a fawning companion.
Dodentral, as Dodrental. Dodine, as Dodelinement. Canards a la dodine, Ducks
with French onion-sauce. Dodiner, as Dodeliner. Dodineux, as Dodelineux. Dodo;
as apres bu dodo, after drink sleep. Dodrental, nine ounces heavy; nine inches,
or a full span long. Dodu, a fat-chops, or chuff. Dodu, (Adj.) fat, plump.
Doet, a brook, or spring. Dogguin, a filthy great old Cur. Dogmatiste, a forger
of new Sects or Opinions. Doigtier, a thimble. Doil, a Pipe-staff; also any
Vessel or Cask of a reasonable big size. Doile, and Doille, as Douille. Doire,
for Douaire, a dowry. Dol, deceit, guile. Dole, planed, or hewed smooth.
Doleance, moaning, lamentation. Dolent, sorrowful, heavy. Dolentement,
sorrowfully, heavily. Doler, to plane, or hew smooth. Doleur, for douleur,
sorrow, grief. Doleux, deceitful. Doliman, as Dolyman. Doloir, to grieve, to
moan. Dolouere, as Doloire in the N. D. Doloureusement, heavily, sorrowfully;
also grievously, till it ache again. Doloureux, woeful, sorrowful; also painful.
Parties doloureuses, tender parts that cannot endure to be touched. Dolousant,
lamenting, moaning. Dolouser, to lament, to moan. Dolyman, a Turkish gown.
Domanial, of, or belonging to a Lordship. Domestiquement, domestically,
privately. Domestique, tamed, civilized. Domestiquer, to tame, to civilize.
Domicilie, dwelling in a place. Domicilier, a Housekeeper. se Domicilier, to
go to keep house. Dominatrice, a Commanderess. Domineur, as Dominateur, a
Ruler, or Governor. Domino, a kind of hood worn by Canons; a fashion of Vail
used by some women that mourn. Dominorie, domineered over. Dominorier, to
domineer. Dominotier, a maker of the hood called Domino. Dommageablement,
hurtfully, with damage. Dommas, the Priest, or Canon, who by turn is to wear a
Cope for a week together. Dompte-venin, Tetter-wort. Dompte-villain, a good
cudgel. Dompture, a taming, reclaiming. Donaison, a free gift, or deed of gift.
Dondaine, the name of a warlike Engine whereout great round stones were shot;
also the burden of a Song. Dondon, a short and fat woman. Dongeon, as Donjon, a
Dungeon. Donnee, a gift. Donne-iardon, a jearer. Donnement, a giving, or
bestowing. Donq, Donques, for Donc, then, therefore. Dontement, a taming.
Donte-mer, Sea-taming. Donte-orgueil, pride-taming. Donteresse, she that tames
or subdues. Donteur, a tamer. Donzelle, an Eel-powt. Dorcade, a Rot-buck.
Doree, the Dorce, or St. Peter's fish. Dorelle, bitter Vetch. Dorelot, a
darling. Dorelote, for Dorlote, cockered, dandled. Doreloter, for Dorloter, to
cocker, to dandle. Doreloteur, for Dorloteur, a Cockerer, a Dandler. Doverin,
gilt-work; also a gilding. Doriphage, a devourer of gifts, or bribes. Dorlot, a
Jewel. Dormailler, to slumber. Dormart, a slug-a-bed. Dormeveille, a being
between asleep and awake; or a counterfeiting of sleep. Dormilieuse, as
Dormilleuse. Dormille, the sickness of Silkworms, during which they sleep;
also a kind of small Lamprey. Dormilleuse, the Cramp-fish. Dormilleux,
sluggish, sleepy. un Dormir, a nap, a sleep. Dormitoire, a sleep-procuring
medicine. Dorque, a kind of great and round earthen Vessel; also a great fish
that is enemy to the Whale. Dorsal, of, or belonging to the back. Dortuit,
sleepy, drousie. Dosse d'ail, a clove of Garlic. Dosse, indorsed. Dosserasse,
a buttress, or supporter to bear up the great beam of a wall. Do, for Dot,
dowry. Dotal, given in dowry; of, or belonging to dowry. Dotateur, an indower.
Dotter, for radoter, to dote. Douanne, for Douane, a Custom-house. Douannier,
an Officer of the Custom-house. Doube, rigged, or trimmed up, as a ship.
Douber, to rig, or trim a ship. Doublage, a relief. Doubleau, a semicircle;
also a double quarter of timber. Doubleau (Adj.) somewhat double, almost
twofold. Double-marcheur, the little, spotted, and worm-like Serpent
Amphisbana, supposed by some Authors to have a head at both ends, and so to go
both ways. Doublement (a Subst.) a doubling, a making twofold, or twice as
much. Double-testu, as Double-marcheur. Double-vaisseau, a cauldron, or kittle
full of boiling water. Doublier, a stately table-cloth of damask, diaper, etc.
hanging to the ground on both sides of the board. Doubtable, dreadful; also
uncertain. Doubtance, fear; also doubt, suspicion. Doubtement, a doubting,
suspecting, fearing. Doucelet, a little sweet. Doucente, the name of a thick,
ruddy, and sappy apple. Doucereux, full of sweetness. Doucettement, sweetly.
Doucin, as Doussin. Dove, a Castle-ditch, or Town-ditch (with water in it).
Douelle, a Pipe-staff; also the strickle used in measuring of Corn. Douen
d'antan, hence over a year. Doves, as Douves. Douet, a Brook, or Spring.
Douette, a longues douettes, in long rows, files, ranks. Douge, small, fine,
little, slender. Douger, to trip, as a horse that stumbleth not outright.
Douillettement, daintily, tenderly, delicately. Douit, as Douet, a Brook.
Doulcin, as Doussin. Douleine, for doucine, a kind of plain. Doulouere, a
plaining-ax. Douloureusement, painfully. se Doulouser, to lament. Dour, a hands
breadth. Dourde, knocked, mawled, thumped. Dourder, to knock, mawl, or thump.
Dourdier, a slouch. Dousil, a spigot. Doussaine, a certain musical Instrument.
Dousse, indorsed. Dousser, to indorse. Dousseresse, as Dosserasse. Doussier, an
indorsement. Doussin, the Sea-urchin. Doutance, as Doubtance. Douvelle, a
Ci^ter. Doux-amer, bitter-sweet. Doux-auvesque, Doux-balon, Doux-bellieur three
sorts of apples. Doux-glissant, gently gliding. Doux de la Land, Doux-martin,
Doux-veret, three sorts of apples. Douzain, a french penny; also a dozen.
Douze-doigtier, the name of a small gut, or entral. Douzil, a spiggot. Doyenne,
a Deanery, or Deanship. Doyge, as Douge. Drache, the little stalk whereby a
Grape cleaves to the bunch. Dragacanth, Dragagant, Gum-dragagant. Drageon, a
Vine-branch, twig, or sprig. Drageries, Comfets, Sweetmeats. Dragme, for
drachme, a dram. Dragoir, for drageoir, a Comset-box. Dragonceau, a young (or
little) Dragon. Dragoncelle, as Dragontee. Dragonne, Dragony. Dragonneau, a
young, or little Dragon. Dragontee, Dragon-wort. Draguinage, a kind of
gibridge. Dramant, a miser. Drame, as drachme, a dram. Drame, pinched,
miserably used. Dramer, to pinch. Drapelet, a little linen clout. Drappeux,
full of cloth, or fit to make cloth. Drappier (Adj.) of, or belonging to cloth;
also fit to make cloth. Drove, Spanish (or Babylonian) cresses. Dravee, all
kind of Pulse. Draule, as Drole, a wag. Draulerie, as Drolerie, waggery. Drege,
a kind of Fish-net. Dreloter, as Dorloter, to cocker. Dresseur, a raiser, or
erecter. Dressiere, a direct way. Dressouir, a Setting-iron, or Poaking-stick
for Ruff-bands; a standing thing. Dridiller, to gingle, as a Hawks bells.
Drillant, twinkling, sparkling. Driller, to twinkle, or sparkle. Drilles, rags,
tatters. Drilleux, ragged, tattered. Drogue, mingled with drugs. Drogueman, an
Interpreter. Droguement, a drenching, or ministering of Drugs. Droguer, to drug,
or mingle with Drugs. Droguerie, the season of fishing for Herrings, and other
such fish, to be salted and barrelled up. Drogueries, Drugs; also trash.
Drogueur, as Droguiste, a Druggist. Droicture, Right, Reason, Justice.
Droicture, that has paid his relief, and all other the Duties of Tenancy.
Droicturer, a new Tenant or Vassal to do his Lord all right, and pay him all
the rights belonging to him. Droicturier, just, upright; also severe, strict,
according to the letter of the Law; also direct, or next. Droicturier Seigneur,
a man's true, right, or lawful Lord. Droicturierement, justly, uprightly.
Droisser, as Dresser, to direct; erect, instruct. Droitier, right-handed; also
as Droicturier. Drolatique, waggish, roguish. Droler, to play the wag; also to
beat soundly. Dromant, a small and swift Vessel used by Pirates. Droman, as
Dromant. Droninae, a spade. Drones, knocks, thumps. Dropace, a depilatory, an
ointment to take away hair. Druement, thick, many together. Druge,
Swines-bread. Druge, wet, thoroughly moistened. Drugeon, a little branch, twig,
or sprig. Drugeonnement, a putting forth of small branches or twigs.
Drugeonner, to put forth twigs. Drugeonneux, full of small branches or twigs.
Druger, to wet thoroughly. Druguement, an Interpreter. Drulle, as Drylle.
Dryinade, as Chelydre. Drylle, the maste, or acorn of the female oak.
Dubitation, doubtfulness. Ducat, for Duche, a Dukedom, a Duchy, Ducteur, a
leader. Ductile, easy to be hammered, or beaten into thin plates. Duelle, the
third part of an ounce. Duisable, Duisant, Duisible, sit, convenient. Duisson,
an accustoming, using, or inuring; a making fit for. Duit, accustomed, used,
inured; also convenient, fitting. Duiter, to make fit for his purpose. Dumette,
downy, of down, soft as (or stuffed with) down. Dun, a hill, or rock. Duner, to
plain, as a horse that neither halteth outright, nor sets his foot hard on the
ground. Dunne, for Dune, a Down. Dunette, a thrush; also a little Down, or
sandy hill. Duodene, as Douze-doigtier. Duplication, as Duplique in the N. D.
Duplicite, a double mind. Duppe, for Dupe, a coxcomb, sot, or fool. Durable,
durable, lasting. Duracines, Peaches, Plums, or Cherries, whose pulp cleaves
fast unto their stones; also such as are of a hard or firm pulp, and thereby
long-lasting. Duraines, Dureines, as Duracines. Duresse, for Durete, hardness.
Duret, somewhat hard; sturdy. Dure-teste, a kind of spotted and hard-headed
Spider. Duvette, as Dumette. Duyere, a Cony-hole. Dyafane, as Diafane,
transparent. Dynanderie, brazen ware. Dynarchie, the joint rule of two Princes.
Dyscole, wayward, froward. Dyscrasie, as Discrasie. Dysopie, vicious, or
excessive shamefacedness. Dysurie, difficulty of voiding urine.
E
EAge, for age, age. Eage, aged, old. Eale, the name of a blackish Ethiopian
beast. Eard, the black Poplar-tree. Eaue, for eau, water. Eavier, for evier, a
sink, or gutter, for voiding of soul water. Eaulice, the herb Helicampane.
Eaurolle, a wheal, or blister. Eauvier, as Eavier. Ebe, the ^bbing of water.
Ebeste, beastly, blockish. Ebouiller, as Esbouiller. Ebouller, to throw, or
tumble down. Eboulu, as Esboulu. Ebreche, that has lost diverse teeth. Ebriete,
drunkenness. Ebriosite, continual drunkenness. Ebulition, as Ebullition,
ebullition. Eburnin, of, or belonging to ivory. Ecamoter, to change, or alter.
Ecarbote, stirred, or scattered, as the fire; also bruised, as an apple.
Ecarboter le feu, to stir up, or scatter the fire. Ecarboter une pomme, to
bruise an apple. Ecardan, nice, dainty. Ecclise, for Eglise, a Church.
Ecclisse, as Eclisse, a cheese-fat. Ecclisser, as Esclisser. Ecentrique,
without center, out of the center; also without measure, whereof no measure can
be taken. s'Echauder, to grow too hot, to be scalded. Echelette, a little
ladder. Echevement, as Eschevement. Echidne, a viper, or hydra; any kind of
Serpent. Eclipsement, an eclipsing, or lessening. Ecloe, lant, piss, urine.
Eclyptique, as Ecliptique in the N. D. Ecollete, as Escoulete. Ecoue,
curtailed. Ecouer, to curtail. Ecphrase, a plain declaration, or exposition.
Ecrete, uncrested. Ecrioches, crutches. Ecstatique, in an ecstasy. Eculee, a
dish-full. Edent, grovelling on his face, or on his teeth. Edificateur, an
edifier. Eduction, eduction. Esaiste, topped. Esaister, to top (or cut off the
top of) a plant. Esemeridiaire, continuing but one day. Effable, which may be
uttered in words. Effacement, a razing, or blotting out. Effare, scared,
amazed. Effarer, to scare, or amaze. Effassure, for Effaceure, a razing, or
blotting out. Effemination, effeminacy. Effeminement, effeminately. Effere,
wild; also proud. Effiance, betrothed. Efficacieusement, efficaciously.
Efficacieux, effectual, forcible. Effigial, representing, resembling; also
belonging to an Image. Effile, unwound, loosened. Effiler, to unwind, to
loosen. Efflanche, swayed in the back. Efflanque, as Esflanque. Efflorescence,
the outward skin or rind of any thing. Effonce, whose bottom is beaten out.
Effoncer, to beat out the bottom of a vessel. Effondement, profusely,
exceedingly. Effondre, howelled; burst open. Chemin effondre, a way full of
holes. Effondrer, to draw the guts or garbage out of. Effondrer^un cheval, to
strike a horse through the belly. Effondrer un huis, to burst open a door.
Effondrer un vaisseau, to beat out the bottom of a vessel. Effondrisse, the
grounds of any liquor. Efforcement, endeavor. Efforcement, earnestly, with
tooth and nail. Efforcillons, a disease in a Hawks tongue. Effray, as Effroi,
fright, terror. Effrayable, fearful, dreadful. Effrayablement, in a fearful
and terrible manner. Effreinte, a default of hounds. Effrenation, unruliness,
rashness. Effrenement, rashly. Effrener, to unbridle, to turn loose. Effrite,
frighted. Effriter, to fright. Effroidi, cooled. Effroidir, to cool.
Effrondille, the grounds of any liquor. Effrontement, impudency. Effroue,
crummed. Effrouer, to crum. Effroyant, hideous, terrible. Effroye, frighted.
Effroyer, to fright. Effruicte, whose fruit is gathered. Effruicter, to take or
gather the fruit of. Effueille, for efeuille, bared of leaves. Effueillement, a
baring of leaves. Effueiller, to bare of leaves. Effueilleur, a pruner of
trees, a puller of leaves from trees. Effusement, profusely, out of measure.
Efiele, without spleen or gall. Egale-nuicts, nights equalling. Egalizement, as
Equalizement. Egalizer, as Equalizer. Egaronne, trodden, as a shoe, down at
the heels. Egaronner un soulier, to tread a shoe down at the heels. Egasse,
set an edge, as a tooth. Egau, the less kind of the bastard-Mackarel. Egelfin,
the Haddock. Egener le labeur, to run through their work. Egestion, a casting
out of excrements. Egipanes, Satyrs. Egiptiaque, l'Onguent Eg. a certain Salve,
or Ointment, of a cleansing faculty. Egosse, husk. s'Egouffrer, to sink down.
Egousser, to shale. Egozille, whose throat is cut; also vomited, or spued out.
Egoziller, to cut the throat of; to vomit, or spue out. Egrefin, a kind of
Haddock. Egrege, excellent. Egrome, uncreamed, fleeted as milk. Egrette, a fowl
that resembles an Heron. Egruge, crummed. Egruger, to crum. Egrumer, to pluck
from the cluster. Egrun, any thing that exasperates a disease or sore. Egual,
for Egal, equal. Egualle, equalled, matched. Egualement, equally, alike.
Egualer, to equal, to make like. Egualize, equalled, made even with.
Egualizement, an equalling, or a making even. Egualizer, to equal, to make
even. Eguillat, a kind of dog-fish. Eguillon, for aiguillon, a sting.
Eguilloner, to sting. Eguiser, for aiguiser, to sharpen. Egyptelle, a kind of
white stone with black and red veins. Egyptiac, a kind of salve. Ehance, as
Ehanche. Ehanche, whose hip is out of joint. Ehancher, to put the bip out of
joint. Ejaculation, ejaculation. Ejaculatoire, ejaculatory. Ejarte, cut off by
the hams; also without garters. Ejarter, to cut off at the hams. Eine, the
groin. Elaboratoire, a Workhouse. Elabore, as Elaboure. Elabouration,
elaboration. Elaboure, elaborated. Elabourer, to elaborate. Elambique,
distilled. Elambiquer, to distill. Elangore, languishing. Elarme, that can weep
no more. Elatine, the herb Speedwell. Elation, loftiness; also a raising up.
Elebore, for ellebore, Hellebore. Electre, Amber whereof beads and bracelets
are made; also a mixture of Gold, Copper, and a fifth part of Silver.
Elegiaque, belonging to an Elegy, mournful. Elemi, Elemmy, a kind of Gum, or
Rosin. Elenchie, Union elenchie, a Pendant-pearl of the fashion of an egg.
Eleomeli, a sweet and fat liquor issuing from the old trunks of certain trees
in Syria. Elephangines, certain Pills good to strengthen the stomach, and to
help digestion. Elephanteau, a young Elephant. Elephantin, of, or belonging to
an Elephant. Elephantique, infected with a Leprosy. Elevatoire, the Instrument
wherewith Surgeons lift up the broken parts of the Scull, and draw out bullets,
etc. Eleveur, a raiser, or lifter up. Elice, the Sign in Heaven called Charles
wain. Elicie, a fiery vapor drawn from the Clouds. Eligible, eligible. Elimine,
put out of doors; also divulged, published. Eliminer, to put out of doors; also
to divulge, to publish. Elingue, a Sling. Eliser la monnoye, to clip money.
Elixe, quintessence. Elleborine, wild white Ellebore. Ellee, as bailler les
ellees a un cheval, to give a horse the head. Ellend, as Eland, an Elk.
Elocher, to loosen, or make loose. Elocquer, to shake off. Eloise, a lightning;
also a little space of time. Elope, a kind of Seafish. Elopien, a kind of
harmless Serpent. Elourde, dulled, amazed, astonished. Elourder, to dull,
amaze, or astonish. Eloyse, as Eloise. Elucidation, elucidation, or clear
exposition. Elucide, cleared, or made clear. Elucider, to clear, or to make
clear. Elue, the wild Pine Tree. Emaceration, Emaciation, an emaceration, or
falling away in flesh. Emacie, leanness. Emacie, made, or grown lean. Emane,
proceeded, issued; also published, spread abroad. Emaner, to proceed; also to
publish, or to spread abroad. Emant, as aimant, the Loadstone. Emantellement, a
mantle; also a covering with a mantle. Emanuer, to manumit. Emarge, noted, or
quoted in the margin. Ematite, the Bloud-stone. Embabille, well-spoken, that
has his tongue at command. Embabionne, as Embabouine, gulled, deceived.
s'Embadurnoser, to anoint himself. Embague, enriched with Jewels. Embaguer, to
enrich with Jewels. Embaillonne, gagged. Embaillonner, to gag. Embarbouille,
besmeared. Embarbouiller, to besmear. Embarrassement, a cumber. Embarasseur, a
cumbersome fellow. Embarre, beaten in, bruised. Embarrer, to beat inward, to
bruise; also to rail, or set bars on. Embarrer son espee en un arbre, to fasten
his sword in a tree. Embarrure, a bruising, or beating inward. Embas, below.
Embaser, to give a basis, or bottom unto. Embasme, imbalmed. Embasmer, to
imbalm. Embassade, Embassadeur. See Ambassade, Ambassadeur in the N. D.
Embassement, as Soubassement in the N. D. Embastonne, armed with weapons; also
cudgelled. Embastonner, to arm with weapons; to cudgel. Embatage, the laying of
streaks about a wheel. Embatonner, as Embastonner. Embattage, as Embatage.
Embattes, the Easterly winds which commonly reign about the Dog Days. Embavete,
ou Embaviete, that has a bib on. Embaumement, an imbalming. Embecque,
instructed beforehand. Embecquer, to instruct one beforehand. Embellissage, an
imbellishing. Emberni, clad in rug. Embernir, to cover with, or to clad in rug.
Embesongne, busi'd, employed. Embesongnement, a busying, or employing; also a
business, or busy work. Embesongner, to busy, employ, set on work. Embeurre,
buttered. Embeurrer, to butter. Embezars, Ambesas. Emblave, sown with corn;
also whose corn is got up a pretty height above ground. Emblavence de bled,
corn sprung a pretty height above ground; or the springing up of corn.
Emblaver, to sow the ground with corn. Emblaveures, corn, whether growing, or
in sheaves. Emblayement, a cumber. Emble, stolen. Je me suis emble de la troop,
I flunk out of the company. Emble-coeur, heart-stealing. Emblemature, a making
of Emblems. Embler, to steal. Emblesne, a Cataplasm, or Poultis. Embleures,
corn standing. Emblic, a kind of round Mirabolan. Emblocquer, to swive.
Embobeline, botched; also beguiled. Embobeliner, to botch; to beguile.
Emboetture, a putting in a box. Emboir, to soke, or drink up; also to imbue, to
moisten. Emboistement, as Emboetement in the N. D. Emboister, as Emboeter in
the N. D. Emboisture, as Emboetement in the N. D. also the ring or plate of
iron, etc. that keeps the box of a wheel from wearing. Emboite, Emboitement,
Emboiter. See Emboeter, etc. in the N.D. Emboiture, as Emboetement in the N. D.
Embolismal, added as a day unto a year; or increased as the year by so many
days. Embolisme, an addition as of a day or more unto a year. Embosque, wooded.
Embosquer une terre, to plant, or set wood. S'embosquer, to shroud himself in a
wood. Embosser, to swell, or rise in bunches. Embottele, made in bundles, or
bottles. Embotteler, to make up in bundles, or bottles. Embouchoir, a
Boot-last, or Boot-tree; also a horn to drench a horse with, or any thing
serving to convey a thing into the mouth. Embouchonne, stopped with a stopple;
also having a bush (as a Tavern) hanging before it. Embouchouer, as Embouchoir.
Embouquete, trimmed with Nose-gaies. Embourbement, Embourbeure, a bemudding; a
beraying with, or sticking fast, in mud. Embouscher en la Mer, to run into the
Sea. Embouse, bedunged, berayed with Cows ordure. Emboute, plated, stiffened;
or as Embouti, stretched out; also raised, imbossed. Emboutir, to stretch out;
also to raise, or imboss. Emboutissement, a stretching out; a raising or
imbossing. Emboutissements de soye, Silk-thrums. Emboutoir, as Boutoir.
Embouze, as Embouse. Emboysture, as Emboiture. Embrabile, broad-headed.
Embraceler, to furnish with bracelets. Embrase, as Braise in the N. D.
Embrasee, an arm full, or fadom. Embrassele, furnished with a Bracelet.
Embrasse-tout, all embracing. Embraze, for Embrase, burned. Embreuve,
moistened. Embreuver, to moisten. Embride, bridled, kept in. Embrider, to
bridle, to keep in. Embrocation, a gentle bathing of the head, or any other
part, with a liquor falling from aloft upon it in the manner of rain.
Embrocheure, a spitting, or broaching. Embronche, amazed with a blow, whose
head hangs down after a blow received. Embroncher, to hold down the head; also
to hide the face. Embroque, gently bathed. Embroquer, gently to bathe. Embroue,
dirty'd, soyled. Embrouillasser, as Embrouiller in the N. D. Embrouillement, a
pestering, or intangling. Embrouilleur, a pesterer or intangler. s'Embruer, to
bedabble himself. Embrunche, wainscoted, seeled. Embruncher, to wainscot.
Embruni, made (or grown) brown. Embrunir, to make (or to grow) brown. Embu, for
imbu, imbued. Embuffle, deceived, led by the nose. Embuffler, to deceive, to
lead by the nose. Emburelucoque, pestered. Emburelucoquer, to pester. Embut, a
funnet; also a pipe to suck with. Emedulle, whereout the marrow is taken.
Emeduller, to take out the marrow. Emembre, dismembered. Emendateur, a mender,
an amender. Emendation, a mending, or amending. Emendartice, a woman that mends
or reforms any thing. Emende, for Amend, fine, penalty. Emende, mended,
amended. Emender, to mend, or amend. Emerillonne, narrowly watched.
Emerillonner, to watch narrowly. Emerillonner a feu and a sang, to prosecute
with fire and sword. Emute, (for Mute) de Chiens, a cry of hounds. Emicycle,
for hemicycle, a semicircle. Emine, a kind of measure. Emissole, a kind of
Dog-fish. Emmaigri, made lean, fallen away. Emmaigrir, to make lean. S'emmaigrir,
to fall away, to grow lean. Emmaigrissant, making lean. Emmaisonne, furnished
with a house. Emmaisonner, to house, to put into (or furnish with) a house.
Emmaistrise, made Master. Emmaladi, made, or grown sick. Emmaladir, to make
sick. Emmalice, spiteful. Emmalissant, growing malicious. Emmancheure, a
setting on of a have, or handle; also the upper part of a sleeve. Emmanchoir,
the hole of a hatchet whereinto the handle is put. Emmanne. full of manna.
Emmanote, manacled. Emmanoter, to manacle. Emmantele, covered with a cloak.
Emmarote, wearing a fools babble. Emmarre, cast into the Sea. Emmarrer, to cast
into the Sea. Emmartele, put into a jealousy. Emmarteler, to put into a
jealousy. Emmasse, heaped up. Emmati, allayed, mortified. Emmatir, to allay,
to mortify. Emmatrele, hoarse. Emmatricole, matriculated. Emmaye, decked with
May-flowers. Emmayer, to deck with May-flowers. Emmeche, furnished with match;
also snuffed. Emmecher, to furnish with match; also to snuff. Emmelie, a quiet
kind of Dance. Emmeliore, bettered, improved. Emmeliorer, to better, to
improve. Emmentele, as Emmantele. Emmenteler, to cover with a cloak. Emmenuise,
made small. Emmenuiser, to make small. Emmerde, berayd with ordure. Emmerder,
to beray with ordure. S'Emmesler, to meddle with. Emmesnager, to set a house in
good order. Emmeuble, furnished with movables. Emmeublement, furniture, or a
furnishing with movables. Emmeubler sa maison, to furnish his house. Emmeurer,
as Emmurer. Emmi, through, in the midst of. Emmiellement, an inducement.
Emmielleure, a sweetning with honey. Emminer, to put into a mine. Emmitoufle,
muffled. S'Emmitoufler, to muffle. Emmitre, Crowned with a Miter. Emmitrer, to
Crown with a Miter. Emmoeller, as Esmoeller. Emmoncele, heaped up. Emmonceler,
to heap up. Emmont, upward. Emmorionne, covered with a murrion or headpiece.
Emmorisque, Moorish, or Moor-like. Emmortaise, joined, or closed by mortaise.
Emmortaiser, to join or close by mortaise. Emmoufle, wrapped up warm. Emmoufler,
to wrap up warm. Emmure, walled about. Emmurer, to wall about. Emmusque,
perfumed with Musk. Emmusquer, to perfume with Musk. Emolli, mollify'd,
softened. Emollient, mollifying, softning. Emollir, to mollify, to soften.
Emorcer, Emorcher, for amorcer, to bait. Emouce, Emoucer. see Emousse, Emousser
in the N. D. Emouchail, a fly-flap. Emoucher, as Esmoucher. Emouchon, a
holy water sprinkle. Emouvant, moving, stirring up. Empacque, wilful,
obstinate. Empacte, compacted, close together. Empacter, to compact. Empaille,
filled with straw. Empaindre, violently to set upon. Empaint, violently set on.
Empainte, a violent onset. Empaletoque, muffled up. Empalin, a span. Empalme,
struck with the palm of the hand. Empalmer, to strike with the palm of the
hand. Empampre, decked with vine-branches. Empanage, as Appanage in the N.D.
Empanere, put into wicker-baskets. Empanerer, to put into wicker-baskets.
Empanne, feathered. Empantoufle, wearing slippers. Livre empantoufle, a Book
with a thick cover. Emparage, that has his due part, or portion. Emparche, put
into a pound. Emparement, a seizing, or laying hold on. Emparence, defense.
Emparenter, to join in Kindred. Emparfume, perfumed. Emparfumer, to perfume.
Emparle, homme bien emparle, a well spoken man. Emparle-silence, a speaking by
signs. Emparlier, a Counselor, Barrester. Empas, shackles. Empaste, crusted,
or baked hard; made into past. Empastele, crammed with rolls of past.
Empastement, a pasting, a making of dough into paste. Empaster, to knead.
Empatement, as Empiettement. Empatenostre, laden with Beads. Empatronne,
seized on. S'Empatronner de, to seize on. Empatte, as Espate. Empattement, as
Espatement. Empaulme, taken hold of. Empaulmer, to lay hold on. Empavoise,
shielded. S'Empavoiser, to cover himself with a shield. Empayser, to grow
natural to; to thrive. Empeigne, fastened with the teeth of a comb; also
scratched with a comb. Empeigner, to comb, or to scratch with a comb. Empeigner
le bout d'une douve, to pin the bar of a piece of cask. Empeinte, de cette
empeinte, at this push. Empannache, as Empanache, set out with feathers.
Empennon, the feather of an arrow. Emperier, Imperial. Emperiere, an Empress.
Emperle, set thick with pearls. Emperler, to set thick with Pearls. Emperruque,
that wears a Perwig. Empesche-maison, a trouble-house. Empeste, infected with
the plague. Empester, to infect with the plague. Empestre, an encumbrance.
Empestre, pestered. Empestrement, a pestering. Empestrer, to pester.
Empetuosite, impetuosity. Emphyteosien, as Emphyteote in the N. D. Emphyteuse,
as Emphyteose, in the N. D. Emphyteutique, Seigneur Emphyteutique, a Lord that
raises or improves his rents. Empiece, not of a great while. Empiege, ensnared.
Empieme, as Empyeme. Empienne, as Empeigne, the upper leather of a shoe.
Empierre, turned into stone. Empierrement, a turning into stone. Empierrer, to
turn into stone. Empietement, an usurpation of another man's right. Empietement
d'une montagne, the foot of a hill. Empiette, as Empiete in the N. D.
Empiettement, Empieture, as Empietement. Empille, heaped on. Empiller, to heap
on. Empine, turned into a pine tree. Empirance, an impairing; also allay in
coin. D'Empire, a l'empire, worse and worse. Empireume, a mark of fire, or
burning. Empistole, armed with a pistol. Empistoler, to arm with pistols.
Emplace, placed, settled. Emplacement d'une Ville, the seat of a Town. Emplacer,
to place, to settle. Emplage, a filling. Emplaide, sued. Emplaider, to sue.
Emplastration, a laying of plaster; a grafting by inoculation; the applying of
a salve or plaster. Emplastrure, a plaistering. Emplastreux, full of
plasters, also belonging to, or serving for a plaster. Emplatement, a
flatting; also a flat, or broad part of. Emplier, as Employer, to employ.
Emploicte, for Employ, an Employ; also trade or traffic. Merchandise
d'emploicte, ware that sells well. Emploicter, to trade. Emploite, as
Emploicte. Emplomber, to lead. Emplotonne, made into a bottom, conglomerated.
Emplotonner, to make into bottoms. Employement, an employing. Emplumasse, set
out with feathers. Emply, for Emploi, an Employ. Empoche, put into a pocket.
Empocher, to put into a pocket. Empoignure, a handle. Empoinctant, pointing on.
Empoincter, as Empointer. Empoint, as bien empoint de fair, likely to do. Mal
empoint, in ill plight. Empointer, to point on. Empointer les doigts sur le
Luth, to singer a Lute. Empoisonneresse, a she-poysoner. Empoissonne, filled,
served, or furnished with fish. Empoissonnement, a storing of a pond with fish.
Empoissonner, to store with fish. Empor, a Mart-town. Empoudre, filled with
dust. Empoudrer, to fill with dust. Empoule, as ampoule, a blister. Empoule,
blistered. Empoulement, swellingly. Empoulure, a blistered part of the body.
Empouppant, blowing as wind in the poop of a ship. Empouppe, blown forward by a
wind in the poop; also hit in the poop. Empoupper, to blow in the poop of a
ship, to set forward as a full wind does a ship; also to hit the poop.
Empraignant, imprinting. Emprainte, for Empreinte, an imprinting. Empree,
turned into a Meadow. Empreer, to make a Meadow of. Empreignee, with child.
Empreinct, the Palsy. Empreincte (Adj.) full, with young. Emprendre, to
undertake. Empres, hard by. Empreut, one. Emp^is, undertaken. Emprise, an
undertaking. Emprunele, belonging to the apple of an eye. Emption, a buying, a
purchasing. Empunaisi, filled with stench. Empunaisir, to fill with stench.
Empute, accused, complained of. Emputement, an imputation, aspersion. Emputer,
to accuse, or complain of. Emputeur, a secret accuser, an informer. Empyeme, an
inward collection of corrupt matter in any part of the body, but especially
between the breast and lungs. Empyreume, a dry and accidental heat. Emuctoire,
as Emonctoire. Emulgeant, milking; or as Emulgent. Emulgence, a milking, or
stroaking. Emulgent, as Vein emulgente, one of the two main branches of the
hollow Vein. Emut, as Esmeut. Emutissement, the muting, or droppings of birds.
Emyne, a kind of measure. Enacquer, to pick a bone. Enaigri, sharpened,
exasperated. Enaigrir, to make, or grow sharp; to anger, to exasperate.
Enamere, made bitter. Enamerer, to make bitter. Enamoure, inamoured.
s'Enamourer de, to fall in love with. s'Enarbrer, a horse to rise so high that
he is like to fall backward. Enarche, arched, covered with an arch. Enarcher,
to arch, or cover with an arch. Enarmee, the handles of a shield. Enarthrose, a
full and perfect uniting of bones. Enase, nose-less. Enaser, to cut off ones
nose. Enaspri, sharpened, exasperated. Enasprir, to sharpen, to exasperate.
Encacque, put into a cag. Encacquer, to put into a cag, or little barrel.
Encadene, chained. Encadener, to chain, or to lie in a chain. Encage, put into
a cage, or prison. Encager, to put into a cage, or prison. s'Encaillouir, to
become as bard as a flint. Encaisse, put into a case, or chest. Encaisser, to
put into a case, or chest. Encaloche, that wears high wooden shoes. Encaly,
hardened, as the skin of a toyling hand. Encant, as Encan in the N. D. Encape,
covered with a hood, or cloak. Encapeline, wearing a little, flat,
narrow-brimmed hat; or armed with a scull of iron. Encapeluchonne, wearing a
Cowl, as a Monk. Encaper, to cover with a hood or cloak. Encapitonner, to hood,
or cover the head. Encapuchonne, as Encapeluchonne. Encapuchonner, to hood with
a capuch. Encarene, laid on the side as a ship. Encarener une Nef, to carry in
a ship, to lay her on her side. Encarne, incarnated, made fleshy, or fat.
Encarner, to incarnate, to make fleshy, or fat. Encarre, gravelled, or as
Encarene. Encarrer, to level at, or as Acarer. Encasse, put into a case, or
chest. Encasser, to put into a case, or chest. Encastelle, narrow-heeled, as a
horse. s'Encasteller, to grow narrow-heeled. Encastelure, a vicious or painful
narrowness in a horses heel; a growing narrow-heeled. Encastillement, an
inchacement. Encauche, entangled. Encauste, enamel, or varnish. Encaustique,
enamelled, varnished, wrought with fire. Encelle, as Enselle. Encensier, a star
in heaven placed under the sting of the Scorpion. Encensier, (Adj.) perfuming
with incense. Encentrer, to graft. Encepe, set in the stocks; also laden with
irons. Enceper, to set in the stocks. Encercle, incircled, encompassed, bound
about with hoops. Encercler, to incircle, to incompass, to bind about with
hoops. Encernant, invironing, incompassing. Encerne, environed, encompassed.
Enchafouine, out of tune. Enchagrine, vexed. Enchagriner, to vex. Enchainement,
a binding with chains. Enchalasse, propped, as a vine. Enchalasser une vigne,
to prop, or underset a vine. Enchambre, lodged in a chamber; also mortaised,
enclosed within. Enchampre, a chizel; a cutting, carving, or graving tool.
Enchancre, cankered. Enchancrer, to canker. Enchante-coeur, heart-charming.
Enchanteries, enchantments. Enchanteusement, inchantingly. Enchapele, crowned
with Garlands; also covered with a hat. Enchapeler, to crown with Garlands;
also to set a hat on the head. Enchapement d'une cheminee, the broad top of a
chimney. Enchaperonnement, a covering with a hood; also the out-jutting of a
Roof. Enchappe, wearing a Cope. Enchappeler, as Enchapeler. Encharactere,
written, or printed in Characters. Encharacterer, to write, or print in
Characters. Encharboute, rumpled, confused. Enchardonne, weeded, rid of
thistles. Enchardonner, to weed out thistles. Encharge, charged, enjoined; also
overcharged. Encharger, to charge, or give in charge. Encharger l'estomac, to
cloy his stomach. Femme qui encharge, a woman that grows big on it. Encharne,
whereon flesh is bred. Encharne au coeur, rooted in the heart. Encharnele,
propped, as a Vine. Encharneler une Vigne, to prop, or underset a Vine.
Encharner, to flesh, to breed flesh on. Enchassille de Menuiserie, set in a
Wainscot-frame. Press enchassillee, a Printers Press with a Tympan.
Enchassiller, to set in. Enchatonner, to inchace. Enchaucie, chased, pursued.
Enchaulme, thatched. Enchaulmer, to thatch. Enchausseure, a shooing; also the
measure of a foot taken to make a shoe by. Enche, as Anche. Encheinure, as
Enchainure in the N. D. Encheminer, to set in the way. Enchemise, covered with
a shirt, or smock. Enchenard, part of a woman's etc. Enchepe, set in the stocks.
Encheper, to set in the stocks. Encheriment, a raising of a price, a raising in
price. Encherner, to flesh. Encherre, as Encherir in the N. D. Enchesneure, a
chaining; also a course of things linked together. Enchet, a falling, or
dropping in. Enchevalle, set with one foot over another. Enchevaller, to set
one foot over another. Enchevestre, tied in a halter; also entangled.
Enchevestrement, a tying in a halter; also a being entangled. Enchevestrer, to
tie in a halter; also to entangle. Enchevestrure, as Enchevestrement.
Enchevestrure de cheminee, the mantle-tree of a chimney. Encheux, as Aincois.
Enchiffre, set down in Ciphers. Enchiffrene, whose nose is stopped with a cold.
Enchiffrer, to cipher. Encire, waxed, made of wax. Encirer, to wax, to make of
wax. Encis, the murdering of a great-belly'd woman, or of the Infant within
her belly. Encise, cut up, or into. Enciser, to make an incision. Enclaveure,
as Enclavement in the N. D. Enclin, for Inclination, inclination. Encliner, to
incline; also to decline. S'encliner, to bow down. Enclostre, shut up in a
Cloister. Enclostrer, to shut up in a Cloister. Enclosture, an enclosure, a
Close. Enclotir, to drive a Fox or Coney into an earth, or berry. Encloucher,
to tell one what he shall say. Encloyer, to cloy. Enclumeau, a little Anvil.
Encoche, a notch. Encocheure, a notching. Encoeur, as Encueur. Encoigne, thrust
into a corner; made corner-wise; also wedged in. Encoigneure, as Encongnure in
the N. D. Encoleure, as Encoulure in the N. D. Encolle, having a fair, stiff,
and big neck; also put about the neck. Long encolle, necked like a Crane.
Encoller, to put about the neck. Encollure, as Encoulure in the N. D. Encolore,
colored all over. Encombre, as Encombrier; also rubbi^h. Encombre, encumbered,
pestered. Encombrement, an incumbring, or pestering; also an annoyance, or
encumbrance. Encombrer, to incumber, to pester. Encombrer le marriage de sa
femme, to alien his Wives land. Encombrier, a cumber, an encumbrance; a
mischief, or misfortune. Encomiastique, praising, commending. Encommence,
begun. Encommencer, to begin. Encommenceur, a beginner. Enconche, trimmed,
dressed. Encontenance, that has put a good face on the matter. Encontenancer, to
put a good face on the matter. Encontre, incountred, or met with. Encontrer, to
encounter. Enconvenance, covenanted. Enconvenancer, to covenant. Encoqueluche,
hooded; also sick of the disease called Coqueluchoe. Encoqueluchonne, wearing a
hood, or Spanish Capuch. Encoquille, as Poisson encoquille, a Shellfish.
Encorbellement, a shouldering or supporting by Corbels, or Brackets. Encorde,
bound with cords. Encordele, corded, made up with cords; also entangled
therewith. Encordeler, to cord, to make up with cords; also to entangle with
cords. Encordonne, twisted of many strings. Encordonner, to twist of many
strings. Encoremes, the signs of urine (especially those that swim on the top
thereof). Encornal, the hounds of a Mast. Encorne, horned; also put into a
horn. Encorner, to trim with horns; also to put into a horn. Encornete, put
into a horn, or cornet. Encorneter, to put into a horn, or cornet. Encornure, a
trimming with horn; also the horns of a beast. Encorny, hard and smooth as
horn. Encoronne, crowned. Encoronner, to crown. Encotonne, stuffed with Cotton.
Encotonner, to stuff with Cotton. Encouarde, made cowardly. Encouarder, to make
a coward. Encouardi, grown cowardly. Encouardir, to grow cowardly. Encoulpe,
accused. Encoulper, to accuse. Encoulpeur, an accuser. Encoultre, furnished
with a culter. Encoultrer, to furnish with a culter. Encourement, a punishment,
a penalty incurred. Encourraye, bound (or furnished) with leathern thongs.
Encourayer, to bind (or furnish) with leathern thongs. Encourtine, covered
with (or shadowed by) a curtain, hid behind a curtain. Encourtiner, to draw a
curtain over, to cover with (to shadow by) a curtain, to hide behind a
curtain. Encoutelasse, armed with a cuttelas. Encoutelasser, to arm (or
furnish) with a cuttelas. Encrasse, grown thick with filth and ordure.
Encrasser, to make thick with filth and ordure. Encrene, notched, indented.
Encresme, full of cream, made of cream. Encresmer, to fill, or furnish with
cream. Encrete, bitterness, also blackness. Encreuse, hollowed; also laid up in
holes. Encreuser, to hollow; also to lay up in holes. Encrier, an Ink-maker.
Encrier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to Ink. Encrou, as Escrou. Encroue, lodged, as
a cudgel in a tree, hanging on, or ledged in. Encrouer, to lodge as a cudgel in
a tree, to hang on, or ledge in. Encrouste, pargetted; becrusted, or whereon a
scab is set. Encroustement, a pargetting, a bringing of a scab on. Encrouster,
to parget; to bring a scab on. Encruche, put into an earthen pot, also as
Encroue. Encrucher, to put into an earthen pot. Encrudi, made, or become raw.
Encrudir, to make, or become raw. Encueur, the Scithy (a disease of horses and
other cattle.) Encuict, raw, undigested; also hardened through heat. Encuirasse,
grown hard, or stiff; also bound hard. Encuirasser, to harden, or stiffen; also
to bind hard. Encule, set upon the tail; also set aslope, or with an imbowed
bottom. Encuse, accused, detected. Encusement, an accusation, or detection.
Encuser, to accuse, to detect. Encuseur, an accuser, a detecter. Encuve, put
into a fat, or tub. Encuver, to put into a fat, or tub. Encyliglotte, the
tongue-string. Encyrer, as Inciser in the N. D. Enda, in faith, in truth.
Endaims, as Andaims. Endamoiselle, effeminated; also attired in a Gentlewomans
apparel. Endare, he went his way. Endaze, earnest in a business. Endebtement, a
being indebted; a bringing into debt. Endelechie, assiduity. Endemene, wanton,
waggish, lascivious. Endementiers, in the mean while. Endente, indented.
Endenter, to indent. Endernier, the last, or the latter-end. Endesve, mad.
Endesver, to rage, to be mad. Endiabler, to possess with a devil. Endiamente,
set with Diamonds. Endicte, indicted, accused. Endictement, an indictment, or
accusation. Endicter, to indict, or accuse. Endicteur, an indicter, accuser,
informer. Endimanche, attired for Holydays. Endite, as Endicte; also
demonstrated, pointed at with a finger. Endizeler les gerbes, to shock up
sheaves of corn, to make them up in (ten-sheaved) half-thraves. Endoctrinable,
fit to be taught. Endoctrine, taught, instructed. Endoctrinement, an
instruction. Endoctriner, to teach, to instruct. Endoille, as Andouille in the
N. D. Endore, gilt all over; beset, or adorned with gold. Endorer, to gild all
over; to beset or adorn with gold. Endormant, the Serpent Cenchris, whose
stinging breeds a continual sleeping. Endormie, the herb henbane or poppy.
Endormisson de members, numness. Endos, for Endossement, an indorsing. Endose,
that has his share or portion of; whose part is limited or prescribed unto
him. Endosseure, the back-part of any thing; also an indorsement. Endouaire,
endowed, endued with. Endouairer, to indow, to indue with. Endoulouri, grieved,
pained. Endoute, doubtful Endroict, (Adj.) direct. Endue, skilful. Enduisement,
a plaistering, dawbing. Enduiseur, a plaisterer, a dawber. Enduit, (Subst.) or
Enduite, plaster; a bed or lay of plaster. Endurable, sufferable, indurable.
Endurant, suffering, enduring. Endurement, an enduring; also lasting.
Enduvetter, to fill, or stuff with down. Eneaue, watered; seasoned with, or
turned into water. Eneauer, to turn into water; to mingle, or season with
water. Enenda, in faith, in truth. Enervation, enervation. Enerve, enervated,
weakened. Enerver, to enervate, to weaken. Enfaisse, made up into a bundle.
Enfaisser, to make up into a bundle. Enfaistau, a Ridge-tile. Enfaiste, roofed.
Enfaisture, a ridge, or ridging. Enfanchonnets, grandchildren. Enfancon, a
little infant. Enfange, bemired. Enfangement, a bemiring. Enfanger, to bemire.
Enfanson, a little infant. Enfantiere, femme enfantiere, a childe-bearing
woman. Enfantil, childish. Enfantilement, childishly. Enfantillage,
childishness. Enfantiller, to play like a child. Enfantinement, childishly.
Enfardele, made up into a bundle. Enfardeler, to make up into a bundle.
Enfeconder, to make fruitful. Enfelonni, grown cruel. s'Enfelonnir, to grow
cruel. Enferger, to fetter. Enferges, Shackles, Fetters. Enferme, infirm, weak.
Enfermement, a shutting, or locking up. Enfermerie, an Hospital; a Cloister.
Enfermier, an Overseer of the Sick in Hospitals; also the Porter of a Cloister.
Enfestau, a Ridge-tile. Enfeste, kept Holy Day. Maison enfestee, a house with a
roof tiled. Enfester, to keep Holy Day. Enfester un edifice, to tile a house.
Enfeuille, covered with leaves. s'Enfeuiller, to cover himself with leaves.
Enfielle, made bitter as gall; filled, or mingled with gall. Enfieller, to make
bitter; to fill, or mingle with gall. Enfieri, grown proud. s'Enfierir, to grow
proud. Enfievre, put into an ague. Enfievrer, to put into an ague. Enfinceux,
wanton, lascivious. Enfistule, that has a fistula. Enflambant, inflaming.
Enflambe, inflamed. Enflambement, an inflaming. Enflamber, to inflame.
S'enflamber de courroux, to chafe. Enfle-boeuf, the Ox-fly, or long-legged
beetle. Enflecheures, the ratlings, the cordy steps whereby Mariners climb up
to the top of a Mast. Enflement, a swelling. Enflement, swellingly. Enflescher,
to pierce with arrows. Enfleure, as Enflure, a swelling. Enfleurer, Enfleurir,
Enfleuronnier, to spread with flowers. Enfoiri, beshit. Enfoirir, to beshit.
Enfolastre, doting on. Enfondrant, sinking, overwhelming; also yielding as a
soft thing to the violence of a hard. Enfondre, sunk, overwhelmed; also
extremely dinted, or beaten far in. Enfondrer, to sink, to overwhelm. Enfondrer
un chemin, to make a deep way. Enfondrer un harnois, to make a great dint in an
armor. Enfondu, wringing-wet. Enforce, strengthened. s'Enforcer, as alors
s'enforca la feste, then did the feast increase. Enforci, enforced,
strengthened. Enforcir, to enforce, to strengthen. S'enforcir, to grow strong,
to pick up his crumbs. Inform, formed, fashioned. Enformer, to form, to
fashion. Enforti, strengthened, fastened; also thickened as cloth is by fulling.
Enfoue, turned into fire. Enfouer, to turn into fire. Enfourche, forked.
Enfourchir, to besork; also to bestride. Enfourchure, as Fourchure in the N. D.
Enfractueux, intricate, perplexed. Enfractuosite, intricacy. Enfrainct,
infringed, violated, broken. Enfrange, edged with fringe. Enfranger, to edge
(or set) with fringe. Enfriche, overgrown with weeds, etc. s'Enfricher, to be
overgrown with weeds, etc. s'Enfroidurer, to take cold. Enfroque, covered with
a Monks hood or cowl. Enfroquer, to cover with a cowl; to make, or institute a
Monk. Enfruite, stored with fruit. Enfruiter, to store with fruit. Enfueille,
stuck with leaves. Enfueiller, to stick with leaves. S'enfueiller, to hide
himself among leaves. Enfume, smoaked; smoaky-coloured. Enfume, (Subst.) a
dusky Seafish, that lives upon slime and ordure. Enfumement, a smoking.
Enfumer, to smoke. Enfurie, enraged, stark mad. Enfuste, put into a cask.
Engage, a pawn, a pledge, an engagement. Engageur, a pawner, an ingager.
Engageure, a pawning, an ingageing. Engaigne, a slight, or craft. Engaigne, as
Engigne; also egged, urged, provoked. Engaigner to cozen, gull, or deceive; to
charm; to egg, or to set on. Engain, anger; also a cousening trick.
Engane-pastre, a water-wagtail. Enganer, to deceive; a nurse to conceal her
being with child. Engante, furnished with gloves. Mittaines engantees, mittains
like gloves. Engarber, as Encontenancer; also to cover. Engarde, kept from,
hindered. Engarder, to keep from, to hinder. Engarder la hardiesse de, to curb
the boldness of. Engastrimyte, that speaks out of the belly, as one that is
possessed seems to do. Engauche, as Encauche. Enge, as Engeance. Enge, stored
with the kind of; also increased. Engeance, a breed, or generation.
Engeancement, a breeding, increasing. Engeancer, to breed, to increase. Engele,
frozen, congealed. Engeler, to freeze, to congeal. Engeleure, a Chilblain.
Engendreure, Engendrure, begetting, procreation. Enger, to produce, or make to
grow; to store or fill with the increase or kind of; also to increase. Engerbe,
bound up together in a sheaf. Engerber, to bind up in a sheaf. Engeronne,
dandled on (or hugged in) the lap. Engeronner, to dandle upon the lap. Engigne,
charmed, bewitched; also cousened. Engigner, to charm, to bewitch; also to
cosen. Engigneur, a charmer; also a cheat. Engine, as Engigne. Enginer, as
Engigner. Enginier, a maker of Engines. Engiponne, muffled up; also ragged, or
in rags. Englace, grown cold as ice. s'Englacer, to wax as cold as ice.
Englantine, an eglantine. Engle, for angle, an angle. Englentier, a sweet-briar
tree. Engler, to shut up in a corner. Englet, as Anglet. Englobe, contained
within the compass of. Englober, to contain or to comprehend within the
circumference of. Englobure, an inglobing; also a globe-like circumference or
compass. Englume, for Enclume, an anvil. Engolse, swallowed up in a gulf.
Engolfer, to swallow up. Engonce, set fast in; straightened, wanting liberty.
Engorgement, a pouring down the throat, a swallowing up, as of a River by the
Sea; also a choking. Engorgeur, a glutton. Engorgeux, greedy. Engoue, choked,
stifled. Engouer, to choke, or stifle. Engouleur, a glutton. Engoulphe, as
Engolfe. Engourmele, curdled thick. Engouste, put in taste, brought unto a
stomach; also inchased. Engraississant, for engraissant, fattening. Engraiz, as
Engrais, in the N. D. Engrand, longing much. Engrange, put into a barn.
Engrangement, an inning of corn, a putting on it up in a barn. Engranger, to inn
corn. Engraveur, an Ingraver. Engravcure, an ingraving. s'Engreger, to grow
worse, to become sover. Engreigne, as pore engreigne, a measeld hog. Engresse,
ingrailed, or invecked, (in Heraldy.) Engressure, an ingrailling, or invecking,
a kind of small indenting in a Coat of Arms. Engressement, for Engraissement, a
fattening of cattle. Engriner, to grow greater. Engroigne, sullen, frowning.
Engroin, sallenness. Engroissi, made, or grown big. Engrommele, curdled thick,
gathered into knobs or knots. Engroue, choked up, as the course of a
water-mill, by weeds. Enguine, deceived. Enguiner, to deceive. Enguiponne, as
Engiponne. Enguerlande, wearing a garland. Enguerlander, to crown with a
garland. Engyronner, to inviron, or to incompass. Engys, for aupres, near, hard
by. Enhaillonne, tattered, ragged. Enhair, to hate. Enhanne, toyled hard.
Enhanner, to toys hard. Enhante, having a staff or handle put to it. Enhanter
une pique, to put the staff into the head of a pike. Enharnache, harnassed.
Enharnachement, harnass; also the harnassing of a horse. Enharnacher un cheval,
to harnass a horse, to put on all his furniture. Enharnichement, as
Enharnachement. Enhaste, put upon a spit. Enhaster, to put on the spit.
Enhault, for en haut, above. Enhaze, very busy. Il est tout enhaze a pluvoir,
it is set to rain. Enherbe, bewitched, or poisoned with herbs. Enherbement, a
bewitching, or poisoning with herbs. Enherber, to bewitch, or poison with
herbs. Enheriter, to make one his heir. Enheude, fettered. Enheuder, to fetter.
Enhorner, to tip with horn. Enhort, exhortation. Enhorte, exhorted.
Enhortement, an exhorting. Enhorter, to exhort. Enhorteur, an exhorter. Enhui,
to day. Enhuile, oyled, anointed. Enhuiler, to oil, to anoint. Enhuiler un
homme qui meurt, to minister the extreme Unction to a dying man. Enhydrer, to
breed many mischiefs by the cutting off of one. Enhydride, an Adder, or
water-Snake. Enjable, whose head is fitted for the Crows. Enjabler, to make the
head of a cask fit for the Crows. s'Enjalouser, to grow jealous. Enjambe, strid
over; also incroached on. Enjambee, a stride, or as much ground as one can
stride over. Enjambement, a striding over; an incroaching upon. Enjambeure,
Enjambure, a stride. Enjaveliner, to arm, or strike, with a Javeline. Enjauler,
Enjauleur. See Enjoler, Enjoleur in the N. D. Enjauleuse, an enticing huswife.
s'Enjaunir, to wax yellow. Enjeoller, for enjoler, to deceive one with fair
words. En-j^u, a stake at play. Enig, with. Enigmatique, enigmatical, ob^^ure.
Enjobeline, fooled, abused. Enjobeliner, to fool, to abuse. Enjoinct, for
Enjoint, enjoined. Enjoincte, bas enjoincte, low-joynted. Enjoliveure, an
attiring, an attire. Enjonche, strewed, or set out with green Rushes, fresh
Herbs, etc. Enjoncher, to strew, or set out with green Rushes, fresh Herbs,
etc. Enjoyallier, to deck, or adorn with Jewels. Enjuvence, made young, or
youthful. Enjuvencer, to make youthful. Enixe, earnest, endeavoring, or
laboring hard. Enlace, Enlacer, as Enlasse, Enlacer in the N. D. Enlaidi,
grown ugly. Enlaidir, to make ugly. Enlaidissement, a disfiguring, or making
ugly. Enlanguage, bien enlanguage, a well-spoken man. Enlie, bound together.
Enlier, to bind together. Enlignage, bien enlignage, of good kindred. Enlisse,
smoothed, sleeked. Enlisser, to smooth, to sleek. Enlisseure, a smoothing, or
sleeking. Enlourdi, grown dull, sottish. Ennasin, belonging to the nose.
Ennasse, caught, as fish in a wheel. s'Ennasser, to be caught, as fish in a
wheel. Ennaze, put on the nose. Ennazer, to put on the nose. Enneige, full of
snow. Ennele, as Jambes ennelees, Baker-legs. Ennicroche, an intricacy.
Ennicroche, perplexed. Ennielle, blasted, as Corn, etc. s'Ennieller, Corn,
Vines, or Fruits to be blasted. Ennoirci, blacked, grown (or made) black.
Ennoircir, to black, or make black; to grow black. Ennombre, number out,
enumerated; told (counted) over. Ennombrer, to enumerate, or number out; to
tell (or count) over. Ennosse, almost choked with a bone. Ennoue, tied up, or
on a knot. Ennouer, to tie on a knot. Ennoye, the name of a venomous worm.
Ennuage, overclouded. Ennuager, to overcloud. s'Ennuer, to grow cloudy.
Ennuicte, benighted, turned into night. Ennuicter, to benight, to turn into
night. Ennuicti, benighted. Enny, as Ennoye. Enombrage, overshadowed.
Enombrager, to overshadow. Enombre, as Enombrage. Enombrer, as Enombrager.
Enonde, waved, wrought like waves. Enordi, defiled, polluted. Enordir, to
defile, to pollute. Enormissime, most enormous, or heinous. Enortie, netled,
stung with nettles. Enortier, to nettle, or sting with nettles. Enosse, even
choked with a bone; also settled in the bones. Enoysele, fleshed upon birds,
as a Hawk. Enperruque, as Emperruque. Enquaisse, put up into a chest.
Enquaisser, to put up into a chest. Enquant, as Inquant. Enquantelle, well
piked. Enquenouiller de filace, to draw a Distaff. Enquerquenner, to yoke
Swine. s'Enguester, for s'Enquerir, to inquire. Enracinable, sit to take root.
Enracinement, a rooting, or taking root. Enragement, madly. Enrailler, to
stare. Enrame, set thick with boughs; also got upon a bough. Enramement, a
laying, or spreading of boughs; a climbing on boughs. Enramer, to spread
boughs. S'enramer, to climb upon boughs. Enranci, grown musty. Enrancir, to
grow musty. Enraque, bemired. Enrasse, stark mad. Enraye, stayed, or held back,
as a wheel by a trigger. Enrayer une roue, to stay, or hold a wheel back with a
trigger. Enrayoir, the wheel-gate, or beam that stops the course of a
Water-mill; also a trigger for a wheel. Enregistrable, fit to be registered.
Enrence, grown musty. Enrethe, caught in a net. Enrether, to catch in a net.
Enrichisseure, an enriching. Enrime, as Enrheume, hoarse. Enrimer, to get the
rheum. Enroche, made rockie. Enrocher, to make rockie. Enrocheur, a
Wine-porter. Enroidi, grown stiff, become obstinate. s'Enroidir, to grow stiff,
to become obstinate. Enrollement, for Enrolement, an inrolling, or listing.
Enrotule, enrolled. Enrotuler, to inrol. Enrouement, hoarsely. Enroueure,
hoarseness. Enroule, for enrole, enrolled, listed. Enrouler, to inrol, to list.
Enrouiller les yeux, to stare, to gaze. Enroupie, snotty. Enrouse, watered.
Enrouser, to water. Enruche, put into hives. Enrucher, to put into a hive.
s'Enruisseler, to divide it self into little streams. Ens, in, within. Ensable,
filled, or covered with sand; run on the sands. Ensabler, to fill, or to cover
with sand; also to run on the sands. Ensablonner, to fill with gravel. Ensache,
put into a bag. Ensacher, to put into a bag. Ensafrane, seasoned with Saffron.
Ensafraner, to season with Saffron; or to paint over with Saffron. Ensagi,
grown wise. Ensagir, to grow wise. Ensaisine, fully seized, put into full
possession of. Ensaisinement, an inseisining, a putting into possession.
Ensaisiner, to give seisin, to put into full possession. Ensali, fouled,
defiled. Ensalir, to foul, to defile. Ensalissement, a fouling, a defiling.
Ensaque, put into a sack. Ensaquer, to put into a sack. Ensavonne, washed with
soap. Ensavonner, to wash with soap. Ensceptre, wearing a Scepter.
Enscophionne, wearing a Coif. Enseigneurie, made Lord. Ensel, Sword-like, of a
Sword. Enselle, saddled. Enseller un cheval, to saddle a horse. Ensemblement,
together. Ensemencement, a sowing. Ensement, likewise. Ensepulture, buried.
Ensepulturer, to bury. Enserpente, covered with serpents. Enserrement, a
shutting fast up. Ensoigne, an Essoin, a lawful excuse for an absent or
impotent person. Ensoigner, to essoin, to excuse an absent, or discharge an
impotent person. Ensoing, as Ensoigne. Ensoitte, hogs bristles. Ensoitter, to
dress or furnish with hogs bristles. Ensongnie, Ensonie, as Ensoigne.
Ensorcelerie, witchcraft. Ensorceleur, a witch. Ensouffie, blown; also blowing.
Ensoulfre, Eusoulfrer. See Ensouffre, Ensouffrer in the N. D. Ensouple a
Weavers Yarn-beam. Ensoupleau, a Weavers Cloth-beam. Enstocatte, a field
enclosed with pikes, and appointed for a single Combat. Ensuaire, wound up in a
sheet. Ensuairer, to wind a coarse in a sheet; also to wipe with a
handkerchief. Ensuble, as Ensouple. Ensucere, sugared. Ensucerer, to season
with sugar. Ensue, sowed up. Ensuer, to sow up, or as Ensuerer, to wind a
coarse in a sheet. Ensuyvant, following. Entablature, as Entablement in the N.
D. Entable, boarded. Entache, spotted, stained, tainted. Entacher, to spot,
stain, or taint. Entacher une besongne, to undertake a piece of work.
Entacheure, a spot; also a spotting, staining, or tainting. Entail, a mortaise,
or incutting. Entailleur, a graver. Entalente, longing after. Mal entalente
envers, ill affected to. Entalenter, to breed a longing. Entelechie, absolute
perfection, or efficacy; perfect motion, or essence; force moving of it self;
also as Endelechie. Entellectual, for Intellectuel, intellectual. Entendeur, an
understander. Entendible, intelligible. Entendiblement, intelligibly; plainly;
also learnedly. Entendoire, understanding. Entend-trois, an equivocation of
doubtful or double meaning. Il fait de l'entend-trois, be answers of purpose
from the purpose. Entendu que, seeing, or considering that. Entenne, for
antenne, a sail-yard. Ententif, attentive, diligent. Ententivement,
attentively, carefully. Entenu, beholden. Enteprinse, for Entreprise, an
enterprise. Enterrage, an interring, or burying. Enterreur, a burier.
Entesteure, a breeding, or bringing of the headache. Enteyser son are jusques a
l'oreille, to draw his bow up to the ear. Enthrone, placed in a throne.
Enthroner, to place in a throne. Enthusiasme, as Entousiasme in the N. D.
Enthyrse, decked with ivy. Entiche, tainted, corrupted. Entierce, sequestered
into a third hand. Entiercement, a sequestring, or sequestration. Entiercer, to
sequester, or put into a third hand. Entierete, intireness; also constancy, or
obstinacy in an opinion. Entimbraille, Entimbre, that bears a flourish hanging
from the top of his helmet. Entiquer, to cleave, or stick fast like a tick.
Entoile, made of, or furnished with linen or canvas; also entangled, or caught
in toyls. Entoiler, to make of, or furnish with linen; also to entangle, or
catch in toyls; to compass or hem in with toyls. Entoise, bent, as a bow; lift
up, as a sword ready to strike. Entoiser un are, to bend a bow. Entoiser une
espee, to lift up a sword with an intention to strike. Entombe, interred.
Entomber, to interr. Entombi, henummed. Entommeure, as Entoumeure; also a
funnel. Enton, a little graft. Entonnage, tunnage. Entonnele, tunned, put into
a cask. Entonnelement, a tunning, or putting of liquour into a cask.
Entonneler, to tun by a funnel. Entorce, for Entorse, a strain. Entorce, as
Jambe entorce, a crooked leg. Entorecure, as Entorseure. Entorne, rounded;
compassed about with. Entors, for entorse, a strain. Entorse, strained.
Entorser, to strain. Entorseure, a straining. Entortillonne, Entortillonner, as
Entortille, Entortiller in the N. D. Entouille, bewrayed, or defiled; also
pestered, incumbered, hindered. Entouillement, a filthy encumbrance.
Entouiller, to bewray, or defile; also to pester, to incumber. Entoumeure, a
gobbet, a great bit. Entourelle, begirt with turrets. Entourement, Entoureure,
a surrounding. Entourne, environed; also wound about. Entourner, to inviron;
also to wind about. s'Entourner, to turn round. Entournoy, a funnel.
Entournure, a round, a circle. Entourtillant, wreathing, rolling about with.
Entourtille, as Entortille in the N. D. Entourtillon, a wreath, a roll.
Entourtillure, a wreathing, a rolling about with. Entourure, a Compass, any
thing that compasses and incloseth another. Entracasse, half broken. Entract,
the greenish salve called Trait. Entrage, for Entree, a fee or custom due at
the entering of Merchandise into a place; also a fine paid for a Lease.
Entrait, a short piece of timber indented within another place, thereby to hold
it the faster. Entrange, as Entrage. Entrape, any thing that catches or hinders
a man as he goes. Entrape, pestered, troubled. Entraper, to pester, to trouble.
Entraverser, to cross over. Entravestissement, an intervesting, or
intervesture; a mutual possession, or joint possessing of. Entravestissement de
sang, is between such as are joined by marriage, where the survivor has all,
or the most p^rt of that which was jointly possessed. Entraveur, a setterer, a
shackler. s'Entr'accointer, to grow a^quainted together. s'Entr'accoller, to
embrace each other. s'Entr'accompagner, to keep company together.
s'Entr'accrocher, to lay fast hold one of another. s'Entr'accuser, to accuse
one another. s'Entr'advertir, to hold intelligence together. s'Entr'affoler, to
hurt one another. s'Entr'aguiser, to sharpen each the other. s'Entr'aimans,
mutual friends, loving one another. s'Entr'appeler, to call one another.
s'Entr'approcher, to draw near one another. Entr'arrache, plucked up here and
there, rooted out from between. Entr'arracher, to pluck up here and there, to
root out from between. s'Entr'assener des espees, to strike (or hit) one
another with their Swords. Entr'attacher, to tie fast together. Entr'avoir, to
have, or possess one another. Entrebaall, a chink, or cleft. Entrebasti, built
betwixt. Entrebastir, to build betwixt. Entrebayement, a chink, or cleft.
Entrebecqueter, to peck at one another. Entrebeu, half drunk. s'Entreblesser,
to hurt, or wound each other. Entreboyau, a thick and fat skin that fastens
Bowels to the back, and each of them to the other. s'Entrebrecher, to break, or
make breaches into one another. Entrebrise, half broken; also distinct,
distinguished; also uneven, as a thing that is half burst. s'Entrebrouiller, to
trouble one another. Entrebruire, to make a humming noise. s'Entrebrusler, to
burn each other. s'Entrecaresser, to interchange kindnesses. Entrecasse, half
broken. Entrecasser, almost to break. s'Entrecassier les dents, to bruise the
teeth by gnashing them hard one against another. s'Entreceder, to yield one to
the other. s'Entreceler, to hide, or conceal one another. Entre-cep, the
distance between stock and stock. s'Entrecercher, to look for one another.
Entrecesse, intermission, ceasing. s'Entrechamailler, to slash one another.
Entrechange, interchanged. s'Entrechanger, to interchange; almost to change.
Maveue m'entrechange, my sight grows dim. s'Entrecharger, to charge one
another. Entrechasse, a cross caper. Entrechaucher, to tread upon, to trample
amongst. s'Entrecherir, as s'Entrecaresser. Entrechevaucher, to ride betwixt.
s'Entrechoisir, to choose out one another. Entrecler, somewhat light.
Entrecolomne, the space between pillars. Entrecolomnement, a leaving of space
between pillar and pillar. s'Entrecommuniquer, to communicate one with another.
s'Entreconvier, to invite one another. s'Entrecosser, to jut or but together,
as Rams. s'Entrecoudoyer, to justle one another with the elbow. Entrecoule, run
in between. Entrecouler, to glide, or run between. Entrecoupeure, an half
cutting, a cutting off in the midst. Entrecourir, to run on both sides, jointly
to run. s'Entrecourir, to encounter, to run one upon another. s'Entrecraindre,
to stand in fear of one another. Entrecroise, crossed over. Entrecroisement, a
crossing over. s'Entrecroiser, to lie cross one another. Entrecroisure, a
double cross, or intercrossing. Entrecueilli, gathered from among.
Entrecueillir, to gather from among. Entrecuisses, the cods of a wild Boar.
s'Entredebuoir, to owe one another. s'Entredefendre, to defend one another.
s'Entredemander, to ask one another. Entredent, the space that is between two
teeth. s'Entredepecer, to pull one another in pieces. s'Entredesfaire, to undo
one another. Entredeu, interchangeably due. s'Entrediffamer, to disgrace one
another. s'Entredire injures, to revile one another. Entrediscerner, to know
one from another. s'Entredommager, to wrong each other. Entredonne, exchanged.
s'Entredonner, to exchange. s'Entredonner courage, to encourage one another.
Entredormir, to slumber. Entredoubte, somewhat doubted of. Entredoubter,
somewhat to doubt of. s'Entr'embrasser, to hug one another. s'Entr'empoigner,
to catch hold of one another. s'Entr'encourager, to encourage one another.
s'Entr'entendre, to play booty together. Entr'eselos, half hatched.
Entr'escrire, to interline. Entr'escrit, interlined. s'Entr'essayer, to try one
another. s'Entrefaire grandefeste, to make very much of one another.
s'Entrefascher, to fall out one with the other. Entrefendre, to part in halves.
Entrefendu, parted in halves. Entreferir, to strike at one another; also to
interfere, as a Horse Entrefessier, the space between the Buttocks.
Entrefesson, the space between the Privities and the Fundament. Entrefileures
de drap, the space between thread and thread. s'Entreflatter, to sooth each
other. s'Entrefondre, to run over head and cars into. Entrefosse, the space
that is between ditch and ditch. s'Entrefouetter, to whip each other.
Entrefouir, to dig between. Entrefouler, to trample in the midst of.
s'Entrefrapper, to strike each other. Entrefrize, curled one within another.
Entrefrizer, to curl the Hair, etc. s'Entrefroisser, to crush one another in
pieces. s'Entrefrotter, to rub one against another; to interfere.
Entrefrotture, a rubbing one against another; a horses interfering.
s'Entregaller, to scratch one another. Entregente, that carries himself
handsomely. s'Entregenter, to know well how to carry himself in all companies.
s'Entregratter, to scratch each other. s'Entregronder, to grumble one at
another. s'Entreguerroyer, to make wars one upon another. s'Entrehanter, to
converse much together. s'Entrehapper, to catch hold of one another.
s'Entreharceler, to harry one another. Entreheurt, Entreheurtis, an intershock.
s'Entrehucher, to whoop at one another. Entreiamber, to cross legs. Entreject,
a casting, or putting between. Entrejectant, thrusting, or casting between.
Entreillize, cross barred. Entrejoindre, to join together. S'entrejoindre, to
embrace each other. s'Entrejouer, to play (or sport) one with another.
Entrelaisse, left off, discontinued. Entrelaisser, to leave off, to
discontinue. Entrelardement, an interlading. Entrelas, a knot hard to be
loosed, an intricate business; also an interlacing. Entrelasseure, an
interlacing. Toicts ornez d'entrelasseures, Roofs decked with interlaced frets.
Entrelassis, an interlacing. Entrelie, tied together, hound between. Entrelier,
to tie together, to bind between. Entreligne, an interline, or interlining.
Entreligne, interlined. Entreligner, to interline. Entrelire, to read together.
s'Entrelouer, to commend one another. Entreluicter, to wrestle one with
another. Entroluire, to give a glimpse, to shine between. Entrelunaires, as
Jours entrelunaires, the days wherein neither the old nor new Moon is seen.
Entremander, to send between party and party. Entrement, an entering, or
entrance. s'Entremeurir, to wax half ripe. s'Entremignarder, to cocker one
another. s'Entremocquer, to deride one another. s'Entremouiller, to wet one
another. Entremoyen, a distance, an intermedium. s'Entr'empescher, to hinder
one another. Entremutiner, to set together by the ears. Entremuye de moulin, a
Mill-hopper. Entremy, par entremy, amongst, or in the midst of. Entrenaistre,
to be born between, or among. s'Entrenavrer, to wound each other. Entrenoue,
knotted between; also swum between. Entrenouer, to tie knots between; also to
swim between. s'Entrenuire, to prejudice one another. s'Entr'injurier, to
revile one another. s'Entr'obliger, to bind themselves one to the other.
s'Entr'occir, to kill each other. Entr'oeil, the space between the Eyes.
Entr'oublie, forgotten in the mean while. Entr'oublier, to forget in the mean
while. S'entr'oublier, to forget each other. s'Entrepardonner, to forgive one
another. Entreparlement, an interrupting. Entreparler, to interrupt one that
speaks. Entrepas, a fast walk, a rack. Entrepend, part of a woman's etc.
s'Entrepigner, to go together by the ears. Entreplanter, to plant or set
between. Entreplie, folded between. Entriplier, to fold between.
s'Entrepoindre, to prick one another. Entrepos, an interposition. Entreposer,
to interpose. Entreposition, interposition. Entrepresse, crowded in another.
Entrepresser, to crowd in another. S'entrepresser, to thrust hard one another.
s'Entrepresser, to lend one to another. Entreprins, Entreprinse, as Entrepris,
Entreprise in the N. D. s'Entrepromettre une chose, to promise a thing on^ to
another. s'Entreprouver, to try one another. s'Entrequerir, to seek each other.
Entrer, (Subst.) an entry, or going into. Entreracle, scraped about.
Entreracler, to scrape about. s'Entreregretter, passionately to wish for one
another. s'Entrerencontrer, to meet one another. Entrerompant, interrupting,
stopping. Entrerompre, to interrupt, to stop. Entrerougir, to blush a little.
Entreroule, rolled between, rolled now and then. Entrerouler, to roll between.
s'Entreruer de pierres, to pelt one another with Stones. s'Entresaisir bras a
bras, to seize one another by the Arms. Entrescieures, frequent (but distant)
cuts or entries made by a Saw. s'Entresecourir, to assist one another.
s'Entresembler, to resemble one another. Entreseme, sowed between. Entresemer,
to sow here and there. Entreserre, closed in, or between. Entreserrer, to close
in, or between. Entresolive, a space between two Rasters. s'Entresouffrir, to
endure each other. s'Entresouvenir de, to remember one another of; also half to
remember. Entrespace, a space between. s'Entrespier, to spy one another
doings. s'Entresuir, as s'Entresuivre in the N. D. s'Entresurprendre, to
surprise one another. Entresuytte, s'Entresuyvre. See Entresuite, Entresuivre
in the N. D. Entretache, spatted here and there. s'Entretaster, to feel one
another. Entretenement, coherency; also wages, or entertainment. Entretenement
de voix san; respirer, the holding of a note. Entretisseure, the woof of cloth.
Entretistre, to weave between. Entretoise, a cross quarter of timber.
Entretortille, entangled. Entretortiller, to entangle. Entretouille, entangled.
Entretouiller, to entangle. s'Entretrouver, to find each other. Entreveche,
entangled, intricated. Entrevecher, to entangle, to intricate. Entreveille,
half awake. Entreveiller, to be waking now and then. Entrever, to understand.
Entreverdir, Entreverdoyer, to be greenish. s'Entreverser, to overturn (or
overthrow) one another. Entrevesche, Entrevescher, as Entreveche, Entrevecher.
Entrevise, viewed now and then. Entreviser, to view now and then. Entrevisite,
visited now and then. Entrevisiter, to visit now and then. Entrevomi, vomited
now and then. Entrevomir, to vomit now and then. Entroupele, flocked together.
Entroupeler, Entrouper, to flock together. Entuile, tiled. Entuiler, to tile.
Envahie, an invasion. Envain, as Envent. Envaissele, put into a vessel. Un bell
esprit envaissele, a good potwit. Envase, as Envaissele. Envaser, to put into a
vessel. Envasquine, in a long Spanish, or old-fashioned Vardingale.
Enucleation, an explanation. Envelopement, obscurely, intricately. Envelopoir,
any thing that serves to wrap another in. Enveloute, clothed with Velvet.
Envent, a short blind Serpent which is thought to sleep all Winter.
Envergongne, put out of countenance. Enverme, grown full of worms. Envermer, to
fill with, or grow full of worms. Enverre, displeased with. Enverse, inverted,
turned upside-downward, or the inside outward; also turned in and out.
Enverser, to invert; to turn upside downward, or the inside outward; also to
turn in and out. Envictailler, Envictuailler, to victual. Envieillir, to grow
old. Envieillissement, a growing old. Envier (au jeu) to vie. Envieusement,
enviously, spitefully. Envieux (Subst.) a Sloe-worm. Envinaigre, seasoned with
Vinegar. Envinaigrer, to season with Vinegar. Envine, stored, or seasoned with
Wine. Envirolle, whose top, end, or tip is bound about with a ring or hoop of
iron, etc. Envis, unwillingly. Envitaillement, a providing of victuals.
Enule-campane, the herb called Helicampany. Enunciation, enunciation. Envoisme,
full of neighbors. Envoulte, charmed in his chief member. Envoute, vaulted,
arched. Envoutement, a distasting. Envoye, as Ennoye. Envoyriner, to glaze a
window. Envoyseure, mockery. Eolipyles, a kind of hollow brazen bowls.
Epaigneul, for Epagneu, a Spaniel. Epalouir, to melt, or swelter with extreme
heat. Epanalepse, the name of a Rhetorical figure. Epanode, a several rehearsal
of two things which at first were spoken of jointly. Epanons d'un dard, the
feathers of a Dart. Enanter, for epouvanter, to dismay. Epatique, for
hepatique, the herb Trinity, or noble Agrimony. Epaular, an O^k, a great
Seafish mortal enemy to the Whale. Epe, instead of. Epeiche, a Speight.
Epelan, a Smelt. Eperge, a Brush. Ephebe, a marriageable youth. Ephectique, one
that after long study is more doubtful than he was at first. Ephemerique, that
lasts but a day. Ephimeris, a Journal. Epicaie, equity. Epicaizer, to judge
according to equity. Epiche, a Speight. Epidimial, for Epidemique, epidemical.
Epiece, rent in pieces. Epiecer, to pull in pieces. Epigastre, all the outward
part of the belly from the bulk to the privities. Epigastrique, belonging to
that part of the belly. Epiglottide, the cover-weesel, or stop of the throat.
Epigrammatiste, a writer of Epigrams. Epigrer, as Escacher. Epilemie, a Song of
the Superscription of a thing. Epilence, a kind of falling-evil in a Hawk.
Epinarde, a little fish. Epinices, Songs of Triumph after a Victory. Epinoche,
as Espinoche. Epinyctide, a wheal that rises on the skin by night. Epiphore, a
rheumatick-dropping of the eyes; also violent impression. Epiphyse, an addition
(or appendix) to a bone. Episemaisie, a signification of the mind by the
countenance or gesture. Epistemon, a Teacher. Epistrophe, the ending of two
verses with one word. Epistyle, a little pillar set upon a greater; also an
Architrave. Epitasse d'une Tragedy, the busiest part of a Tragedy. Epitheme, a
liquid and outward Medicine. Epitheme, batbed, moistened. Epithemer, or
Epithimer, to bathe, or to moisten. Epithin, the weed Dodder. Epitoge, a long
Cloak, or Cassock worn loose over other apparel; also a Graduats hood. Epitome,
an Epitomy, or Abridgment. Epizeuxe, the name of a Rhetorical figure. Epotique,
drunken. Eprenas, a kind of bloody flux. Eptasyllable, of seven syllables.
Epulotique, skin-breeding. Equable, even, alike. Equalize, equalled, matched,
compared. Equaliser, to equal, to match, to compare. Equalite, equality,
comparison. Equalizer, as Equaliser. Equanimite, equanimity. Equarri, Equarrir.
See Equarre, Equarrer in the N. D. Equarrissement, a measuring, or squaring out
by a Squire. Equestre, of, or belonging to horsemen, Knights, or Gentlemen.
Equibiens, the Halses, or two holes in the prow of a Ship, through which the
Anchor-cables pass. Equidiametral, equidiametral. Equidistamment, of equal
distance asunder. Equidistance, an even distance asunder. Equidistant, equally
distant one from the other. Equilance, the hole wherein the tongue of a
Balance plays. Equilibre, weighed in equal balances. Equilibrer, to weigh in
equal balances. Equinancie, the Squinsie. Equiparable, fit to be compared, or
equalled unto. Equiparaison, likeness, resemblance, comparison. Equipare,
matched, equalled, resembled, likened. Equiparer, to match, or make equal, to
compare, to liken. Equipolence, equality in value. Equipoler, to be of equal
value. Equipolle, countervailed. Equipoller, to countervail, to be of equal
value. Equippee, equipage; also a sudden prank, a digression. Les equippees
d'un Lievre, the outright course of a Hare. Equitation, a riding on horseback.
Eraige, an Airy of Hawks, or as Herage. Eraigne, as Eraige. Eraille, Erailler.
See Esraille, Esrailler. Erain, for airain, brass. Eramme, a Fine set on a
parties head for want of due appearance. Eraser, as Ecraser in the N. D.
Erater, to take the Milt out. Erchat, yellow wyre. Erculisse, Liquorice.
Erectif, erective, setting bolt-upright. Eremodicie, forsaken, given over.
Ereole, a small weight of two grains. Ergalie, the framing of Vessels and
Furnaces for Extractions, etc. Ergastule, a Bridewel. Ergate, a Windbeam, or
drawbeam; also a rack for a Cross-bow. Ergoteure, as Ergoture. Ergotique,
sophistical, full of quiddity's. Ergotisme, Sophistry. Ergotiste, a cavilling
Sophister. Ergoture, as Ergot in the N. D. also an arming, or furnishing with
spurs or dew-claws; also Sophistry. Erigoteures, the spurs of a Cock. Ermaire,
as Armoire, a Cupboard. Erme, as Terres ermes, Land that lies waste and
untilled. Ermine, surred with Ermines. Erminer, to sur with Ermines. Erminette,
a little plaining ax. Ermitage, Ermite, as Hermitage, Hermit in the N. D.
Erne, as Esrene. Erner, to break, or bruise the reins; to crush, or weaken the
back. Erode, gnawn off, or about. Eroder, to gnaw off, or about; to eat into;
also to drive from field to field, from hill to hill. Erogene, the name of a
love-procuring herb. Eron, a Heron. Erosion, a gnawing or eating into.
Erraille, spread wide open, set far asunder. Oeil erraille, a staring eye.
Errailler, to spread wide open; to stare with the eyes; to straddle with the
legs or thighs. Erramme, as Eramme. Erramment, out of hand; also at random.
Errandonner, to fly away at random. Errate, unlimited; nimble, or light.
Errater, to take out a man's milt, thereby to make him the nimbler. Erratique,
as fiebvres erratiques, Agues whose fits hold no certain time of return.
Errement, as Arrement; also a patch, tract, or way. Errhine, a tent-like
medicine put into the nose. Erronnee, the herb Centory. Erronneement,
erroneously. Erubescence, blushing. Eruce, the herb Rocket; also the
Canker-worm. Eruce, nibbled finely. Eructation, a belching, or breaking of
wind. Erugineux, of the color of Verdigrease, rusty, cankered, corrupted.
Eruite, weakened. Erysimon, Winter-cresses. Erysipele, a painful and hot
swelling or impostumation. Es vous, for voici, behold. Esbaaille, cloven,
riven, set wide asunder. Esbahi, amazed. A l'esbahi, amazedly. s'Esbahir, to
wonder. Esbahissement, a marvelling. Esbahy, as Esbahi. Esbailleure, a gaping.
Esbalancon, a horses disordered leap out of time and measure. Esbannoy,
Esbanoy, pastime, sport, recreation. Esbanoie, Esbanoye, the same. s'Esbanoyer,
to recreate himself. Esbarbement, a barbing. Esbarber, as Ebarber in the N. D.
Esbarluer, as Esberluer. Esbase, driven out of his basis. Esbaser, to drive out
of its basis. S'esbaser, to slip from its basis, or foundation. Esbatement, a
sporting. Esbaudi, cheerful, merry. Esbaudir, to cheer up, to make merry; also
to rouse up from sleep. Esberge, a lodging, an Inn. Esberge, lodged, harbored.
Esbergement, as Esberge. Esberger, to lodge, to harbor. Esberger en soy une
fault, to be guilty of a fault; also to take a fault upon himself. Esberlue,
dazzled. Esberluer, to dazzle. Esblare, ghastly, or pale of countenance.
Esblouisson, a mist cast before the eyes. Esblouisson de la tete, giddiness of
the brain. Esboche, Esbocher, as Ebauche, Ebaucher in the N. D. Esboire, to
soak in, to drink up. Esboitement, a lameness, or laming. Esbouffer, to burst
out into laughter. S'esbouffer a parler, to burst out in speech. Esboufle,
spouted upon. Esboufler, to spout upon. Esbouilli, thoroughly boiled;
overboyled, decayed in boiling, almost dried up with boiling. Esbouillir, to
boil thoroughly, to overboyl, to boil almost dry; also to work as new beer, etc.
Esbouillue, stuff over-boyled. Esbouli, Esboulu, as Esbouilli. Esbourjonnage, a
pruning of Vines. Esbourjonner, etc. See Ebourgeonner in the N. D. Esbourre,
cleansed, winnowed. Esbourrer, to cleanse, to winnow. Esbouiy, dazzled.
Esbraille, unbraced, loosely dressed. Esbranche, as Esbranchement. Esbrandi,
^^st violently upon. Quand le feu est esbrandi en plusieurs maisons, when fire
has violently seized on many horses. Esbranlement, a shaking, or jogging.
Esbranle-rocher, rock-shaking. Esbreche, broken, or whereinto a breach is made.
Esbrecher, to break, or make a breach into. Esbrillade, a jerk given a horse
with the bit or bridle. Esbroue, hard rubbed (in the washing.) Esbrouement, a
rubbing hard. Esbrouer, to rub hard. Esbrouer des narines, to short.
Esbroueure, as Esbrouement. Esbruche, scattered, dispersed. Esbrucher, to
scatter, to disperse. Esbu, soaked in, drunk up. Esbucheter, to gather up
sticks. Esburre, unbuttered, or from which batter has been taken. Laict
esburre, butter-milk. Esburrer, to take butter from, to make butter-milk of.
Escabreux, rough, rugged. Escache, as Ecache, a scatch. Escache, crushed, or
squeezed hard together. Escachement, a crushing, or squeezing hard together.
Escacher, to crush, or squeez hard together. Escacheur, a crusher, or squeezer
of things hard together. Escachure, a crushing, or squeezing of things hard
together. Escaffette, a kind of great and long muscled shell wherewith some
women skin their milk. Escaffignon, a Sock; also a pump, or a close and
single-sol'd shoo of thin leather. Escaigne de fill, ou de soye, a skain of
thread, etc. Escaillement, a scaling, or shaling. Escailleur, a scaler, or
shaler. Escailleure, a scaling, or shaling. Escailleures de pierres, shards.
Escailleux, full of scales. Escaillon, an Horses tush, or tusk. Escalbotte,
pilled, unhusked. Escalbotter, to pill, as pease do in boiling. Escale, as
Ecaille, scaled. Escalle, for Scalle. Escalle, scaled, or taken by scalado.
Escaller, to scale the walls of a town. Escalonnier, as dents escalonnieres, a
horses tusks, or tushes. Escalque, an Usher, or Sewer. Escalventre, whose guts
are squashed out. Escalventrer, to tread out the guts. Escamme, Escamne, a
form, or bench; also a step to get up higher. Escamote, disguised. Escamoter,
to disguise. Escampe, a scaping, or flying away. Escandal, a sounding-plummet.
Escandille, scantled, made according to a pattern or scantling. Escanne,
stifled. Escantuole, the Pump of a ship; also a sounding-plummet. Escaper, for
echaper, to escape. Escapelin, a remnant of a piece of stuff. Escappe, a small
square-edged circle or fillet in a pillar, etc. also the body of a pillar.
Escarade, the opening of the nether part of the branch of a Horses hit.
Escaras, as Echalas in the N. D. Escarbelotte, a small beetle. Escarbillat,
lively, sprightly; also hair-braind, fantastical. Escarboter le feu, to stir up
the fire. Escarbotte, as Escarbot, a Beetle. Escarbouele, as Ecarboucle, a
carbuncle. Escarbouille, crushed, squeezed. Escarbouiller, to crush, to
squeeze. Escarbouiller la cervelle, to beat out the brains. Escarde, carded.
Escarder, to card, as wool. Escardes, cards for wool. Escardeur, a carder.
Escardeure, a carding. Escare, a fish that chews his meat; also a scar.
Escarlatin, of scarlet, or of a scarlet hu^. Rose escarlatine, a damask Rose.
Escarotique, Scar-breeding. Escaroufle, scratched, torn. Escaroufler, to
scratch off, to tear. Escarpoulette, a kind of swing. Escarque, as Escalque.
Escarquiller, to set wide open. Escarrabillade, as Escarbillat. Escarre, a
Scar. Escarure, a woman's square. Escas, the tenth penny of the value of
Movables, wherein a Forreiner succeeds a Freeman. Escassable, as Meubles
escassables, Movables subject unto Escas. Escavessade, a jerk with the cord of
a cavesson. Esceer, to cut, or slive; also to pill. Escelles, the arm-holes.
Escerveler, to take the brains out of; also to dash the brains out.
Escervellement, a braining. Eschabouille, scorched, overheated. Eschafaude,
made into a scaffold; also presented on a scaffold; carried from scaffold to
scaffold; set on the pillory. Eschafauder, Eschafaulder, to build scaffolds; to
present on a scaffold; to set on the pillory; also to devise or practice
villainy. Eschafaudis, Eschafaut, as Eschafaud, a scaffold; also a pillory.
Eschaffaudage, for echafaudage, a setting up of scaffolds. Eschalasseau, a
short stake. Eschalassier (Adj.) bearing store of props or stakes, of, or
belonging thereto. Eschalier, for Escalier, a staircase. Eschallat, for
Echalas, a stake. Eschalle, a little ringing-bell. Eschallier, a staircase.
Eschallon, a great ladder. Eschalon, for echelon, a ladder-step. Eschalote, for
echalote, shalot. Eschambouillure, as Eschaubouillure. Eschampe, Eschamper. See
Escampe, Escamper in the N. D. Eschampre, as Enchampre. Eschandille, a pattern.
Eschandille, as Eschantille. Eschandillon, for echantillon, a pattern.
Eschange, exchanged, trucked. Eschanger, to exchange, to truck. Eschansonner,
to do as the Cup Bearer. Eschanteler, to break into cantles; to cut off the
corners or edges of. Eschantille, curtailed, cut or broken into corners, or
cantles. Eschantillonner, to take (or cut) off a pattern. Eschapeler, to chip.
Eschappe (a Subst.) an escape, an evasion. Eschaque, scurf, scales, or dandriff
in the head. Eschar, as Eschars. Escharalle, a dead and stinking flesh which
breeds about wounds. Escharas, for Echalas, a stake. Escharaveau, as Charaveau.
Escharbot, for Escarbot, a beetle. Escharboter, as Escarboter. Escharcement,
niggardly, miserably. Escharcete, niggardliness; also baseness, or want of due
alloy in Coin. Escharcette, as Escharcete in the last sense. Escharde, a
splinter; also a scraggy girl that looks as if she were starved. Eschardonner,
to weed, or pluck up thistles. Eschardonneur, a weeder of thistles.
Eschardonneuse, a woman that weeds, or plucks up thistles. Eschare, a scar.
Escharfaud, or Escharfaut, a scaffold. Escharfaude, as Eschafaude. Eschargotte,
pruned as a tree, picked round about. Eschargotter, to prune a tree, to pick
any thing round about. Escharne, fleshless, deprived of flesh. Escharotique,
breeding scars or scabs. Escharpe, for Echarpe, a scarf. Escarpeux, flaunting
it with many scarfs about him. Escharre, a scar. Eschars, saving, sparing,
hard. Escharsement, as Escharcement. Escharsete, as Escharcete. Eschat, Droicts
des Eschats and Tavernes, a certain Duty or Imposition upon Wine sold by retail
and in Taverns. Eschasses, for Echasses, stilts. Eschasseur, Eschassier, one
that goes upon stilts. Eschaubouillant, scalding hot. Eschaubouille, blistered;
or having the Shingles. Eschaubouillure, a blister; an Inflammation called the
Shingles. Eschauboule, as Eschaubouille. Eschauboulure, as Eschauboulure.
Eschaubourre, troubled, in an agony. Eschauder, to scald. Eschaudure, a
scalding. Eschaufaison, a warming, or making hot; also an heat; or a disease
that comes of immoderate heat. Eschaufeture, as Eschaufaison. Eschauffadasse, a
burnt Whore. Eschauffader, as Eschafauder. Eschauffaison, as Eschaufaison.
Eschaufferette, Eschauffette, a Chasing-dish. Eschauffeture, Eschauffure, a
chasing. Eschauguette, a Watchtower, or Beacon. Eschauguette, watched in a
Beacon, or high Tower; beheld from high, or afar off. Eschauguetter, to watch
at a Beacon, or in a high Tower; to see far about; to stand Sentry.
Eschauguetteur, a Sentinel in a high Tower or Beacon; also a Scout. Eschays,
aller eschays, to straddle. Escheable, escheatable. Escheance, an Escheat.
Eschec, for Echee, Chess. Eschef, a fall, wasting, or diminution. Escheler, for
Echeler, to scale. Eschelette, for Squelette, a Skeleton; also a Wall-pecker;
also the little stalk of a Grape. Eschellage, as Eschellement. Eschelle,
scaled. Eschellement, a scaling, or getting upon by a ladder. Escheller, for
Echeler, to scale, to climb up a ladder. Eschellette, a little ladder.
Eschelleur, a climbing by a ladder. Eschemeau, the bed of a Vine, the ridge
wherein it stands. Eschemer, to swarm, or breed young, as Bees. Eschenal, a
gutter, or channel. Eschenille, rid from Caterpillars. Escheniller, to rid of
Caterpillars. Escheque, checkered. Escheque-mat, for Echee and mat, a
Checkmate, at Chess. Eschequier, for Echiquier, a Chess-board. Escherpillerie,
robbing on the Highway. Eschervi, the Skirret-root. Eschet, an Escheat, or
thing fallen to. Escheve, eschewed, shunned. Eschevement, an eschewing, or
shunning. Eschever, to shun, to eschew. Eschevissement, as Eschevement.
Escheute, as Echeute, an Escheat. Eschez, as Echees, Chess. Eschif, greedy,
ravenous. Eschiffeur, a Cutter, or Pinker. Eschiffle, split, riven. Eschiffler
une branche d'arbre, to split, or half break off a branch. Eschimeau, as
Eschemeau. Eschinal, the head of a sink covered with a grate. Eschine, for
Echine, the chine, the backbone. Eschine, broken-backed. Eschinee de pore, a
chine of Pork. Eschiner, to break the back of. Eschineux, of a great and strong
back. Eschinon, the chine, or upper part of the back between the shoulders.
Eschiquette, checkie. Eschiquote, pruned. Eschiquoter, to prune a tree.
Eschoette, an Escheat. Eschoite, an Escheat. Eschoitter, to succeed another.
Escholage, as Escolage. Escholastre, as Escolastre. Eschope, Eschoppe, a little
and low shop. Fair essay a l'eschoppe, to lay a small and thin piece of
silver, etc. upon a hot burning coal, thereby to try the value and alloy of it.
Esciemment, wittingly, of set purpose. Escime, topped. Escimer, to top, to cut
off the tops or heads of. Esclaboche, bespotted, besprinkled with water or
dirt. Esclabocher, Esclaboter, to bespot with water or dirt. Esclaffer de rire,
to burst out into laughter. Esclaire-tout, all-seeing, all-lighting,
all-observing. Esclaireur, an observer, or overseer of others; also an
assistant unto a Plaintiff or Accuser. Esclame, lank. Esclandreux, scandalous.
Esclandrir, to slander. Esclappe, corpulency, fatness. Esclate, a Sling; also a
kind of disease among children. Esclature, a flashing, or glittering; also a
Splitting, or bursting into splinters. Esclau, for Esclave, a slave. Esclaver,
to bring unto slavery. Esclavine, lank-body'd; also a Sea-gown. Esclayer, to
make way through hurdles. Escleche, a dismembring, or separation; also a part
or piece dismembered, or separated from. Escleche, dismembered. Escler, for
Eclair, a lightning. Esclerci, Esclercir, Esclercissement. See Eclairci,
Eclaircir, Eclaircissement. Esclere, or Esclerre, the herb Celandine.
Esclerement, clearly, plainly. Esclesche, as Escleche. Esclichoir, a squirt, or
stringe. Esclische, as Escleche. Esclische, as Escleche, dismembered.
Esclischement, a dismembring, or dividing of an entire thing. Esclisse, as
Eclisse, a Cheese-fat; also a hurdle. Esclisse, squirted; also made up of
ozier, or wicker-twigs; also bound up in splents. Esclisser, to squirt; to make
up with ozier, or wicker twigs; also to bind up in splents. Esclistre,
lightning. Esclope, Escloppe, maimed, lame. Esclopper, to maim, to lame.
Esclot, a wooden shoe; also a reed, or cane to suck with; a rest in Music; a
Galley-slave. Esclotouere, a Clap-net. Esclou, the print of a horses foot.
Escloy, piss, lant, urine. Escluine, as Esclamme. Esclusant, stopping, as by a
sluice. Escodilles, the bulbed roots of Daffodils. Escoffier, a Shoemaker.
Escoffraye, Escoffrer, a Shoomakers stall. Escofion, a Coyf, or Cawl.
Escofraye, as Escoffraye. Escogriffe, a lusk, a great slouch. Escoinson, a
scunch, the back-part of the jaumb of a window. Escolage, School-hire.
Escolastre, the Rector, or Overseer of a School; also an unlearned, or mean
Scholar. Escolastrerie, a Rectorship, or Government of a School; also mean
Scholarship. Escollete, whose collar is taken off. Escolleter, to take off the
collar from a garment. Escolte, as Escoulete. Escome, the blade, or broad end
of an Oar. Escome, the Pit-fish, or Sea-pike. Esconduire, to send away with a
denial. Esconduit, sent away with a denial. Esconjure, driven away by entreaty,
or by conjuring. Esconjurer, to dri^e away by entreaty, or conjuring. Esconse,
hidden, concealed. Esconsement, a concealing. Esconsement de Soleil, the
Sunsetting. Esconser, to hide, to conceal. Escopetade, the shot of a small
piece. Escopetin, as Squiopetin. Escorce, barked, pilled, pared. Escorcee,
Escorcement, a barking, pilling, or paring; also the pilled, or unrinded part
of a plant. Escorcer, to bark, pill, or pare. Escorcesque, as Corcesque.
Escorceur, a Barker of trees. Escorche-cul, flaying of the buttocks.
Escorcheter, to flay. Escorchouer, a flaying of beasts. Escorcu, having a bark.
Escorgee, for Ecourgee, a whip. Escorne, shame, disgrace, scorn. Escorne, that
has lost his horns; out of countenance; also whose corners are broken, or cut
off; defaced, ruined, scorned, disgraced. Arbre escorne, a tree whose branches
are lopt off. Dez escornez, ground dice, blunt cornered dice. Escornement,
depriving of horns; a disgracing. Escorner, to deprive of horns; to take from
one a thing which is (or he thinks is) an ornament and grace unto him; to break
off the corners of a square thing; to lop trees; to ruin, deface, or disgrace
any thing. Escornicher, as Escorner, Escorcher. Escornizer, as Escorner.
Escort, discreet, wary. Escosse, for gousse, the husk of a Bean, or the like.
Escosse, unhusked, shaled. Escosser, to unhusk, to shale. Escotte, that is
within a shot, or has paid a shot. Escotter, every one to pay his shot, or to
contribute something toward it. Escouarde, as Escouade, a parcel of Soldiers.
Un Cap d'Escouarde, a Corporal. Escoube, a Brush; also a maukin for an oven.
Escoude, deprived of his support, of the stay whereon he leaned, of the means
whereon he relied. Escoue, curtailed; also wagged, or shaken up and down.
Escouer, to curtail; also to wag, or shake up and down. Escouette, a
Plaisterers whiting brush. Escouettes, sheats. Look Escoutes. Escouille, gelt.
Escouillement, a gelding. Escouiller, to geld. Escouillon, a wisp, or
dish-clout; a mankin, or drag, to cleanse and sweep an oven. Escouillure, a
Gelding. Escouisson, as Escoinson. Escoluable, drainable, easy to be dried or
consumed; soon gone. Escoulant, as Escoulement, a drain, or strainer; also a
sloping place, down which a thing easily glides, or is apt to run. Escoulure, a
strainer. Escoullement, Escouller, as Escoulement, Escouler in the N. D.
Escoupelle, topped, or whose top is cut off. Escoupeller, to top, or cut off
the top of a tree. Escourgeon, Starch-corn, a kind of base wheat, which being
ground yields very white meal, but light, and little nourishing. Escourre, to
thrash; also to beat or shake dusty clothes, etc. Escoursouer, the dale of a
ships pump, whereby the water is passed out. Escourte, curtailed, shortened,
cut, or chopped off. Escourter, to curtail, shorten, cut, or chop off.
Escousse, a shaking, or jogging; also a swing. It is also the Feminine of
Escoux. Escoutement, a hearkening, or listening. Escouteur, an hearer,
hearkener, or listener. Escoutillon, a Scuttle. Escouvelle, a Brush.
Escouvillon, as Escouillon. Escouvillonner, to sponge a Piece, to cleanse her
before and after she is discharged. Escoux, shaken, jogged, swinged. Paille
escousse, wherein no Corn is lest. Escrageant, crushing, or squeezing out.
Escrage, crushed, or squeezed out. Escrager, to crush, or squeez out of.
Escraigne, a little hovel made of poles set round with their ends meeting at
the top, and covered thick with turves, sods, dung, etc. Escrain, as Ecrin, a
casket, or little box. s'Escravanter, to burst, or split himself. Escriere, pie
escriere, a shrike. Escraze, for ecrase, crushed. Ecrein, for ecran, screen.
Escrete, unchalked, or deprived of chalkie whiteness. Escreve, split asunder.
l'Escrever du jour ou de la nuict, the dawning of the day, the twilight.
s'Escrever, to split asunder. Escrevisser, to go backward. Escri, Escriement,
an outcry, or acclamation. Escrimerie, as Escrime, fencing. Escrin, as Ecrin, a
casket. Escriner, to pull off the hair. Escrinier, a Joyner, a Cabinet-maker.
Escrivaille, scribled. Escrivaillerie, scribbling. Escrivailleur, a scribler.
Escrivainerie, Scrivenership. Escrivisse, for Ecrevisse, a Cray-fish. Escrober,
to jog, as a Cart in an uneven way. Escroe, as Ecroue, a scrowl. Escrotter, to
gnaw. Escrou, as Ecroue in the N. D. Escrouelle, troubled with the Kings evil.
Escroupionne, whose crupper is broken, rumpless. Escroustement, an uncrusting.
Escru, drap escru, undressed cloth. Escudes, Escudettes, Penny-grass.
Escuellette, a little dish. Escueuil, as Ecueil in the N. D. Escuisant,
smarting, itching. Escuisse, whose hip or thigh is out of joint. Escuisser, to
put the hip or thigh out of joint. Escule, whose tail is burst, heel trodden
down. Esculee, a dish full of. Esculer, to burst the tail off. Esculer une
aiguille, to break a needles eye. Esculer ses fouliers, to tread his shoes
down at the heels. Escumement, a foaming; a skimming; a scowring of the Seas.
Escumeux, frothy, foamy. Escumier, of foam, or froth. Escurage, a scowring.
Escure, scowred. Escurer, to scower. Escureur, a Scowrer; also a Squirrel.
Escurs, cives, or chives. Escussonnable, fit to be grafted en ecusion.
Escussonne, defended or covered with a Scutcheon, or Shield. Escussonner, to
defend, or cover with a Scutcheon, or Shield; also as Enter en ecusson.
Escuyere, a woman-Es^uire; a Gentlewoman that attends on a Knight as his
Esquire. Escuyrie, as Ecurie in the N. D. Esfarouche, Esfarouchement,
Esfaroucher. See them with an f, instead of s, in the N. D. Esfile, as Effile.
Esflanque, swayed in the back; also lean, shrunk in the flank, that has no
belly at all. Esflanque en cheval de postillon, as lean as a Post-horse.
Esflanquer, to sway in the back; to make lean, thin-flanked, or small-belly'd.
Esflorer, to deprive of flowers. Esfoire, berayed. Esfrontement, as
Effrontement, impudently. Esgail, a fine morning-frost, that shines like glass.
Esgargate de crier, whose throat is almost burst with crying. Esgaronne,
trodden down, as a shoe at the heel. Esgaronner un soulier, to tread a shoe
down at the heel. Esgarouille, as yeux esgarouillez, wide-staring, or gloring
eyes. s'Esgaudir, to rejoice, to be merry. Esgere, ploughed, or broken up, as
land for fallows. Esgerer, to plough, or break up land for fallows. Esgomme,
ungummed, whose gum is taken away. Esgommer, to ungum, to take away the gum.
Esgorgete, whose throat is cut; also bare-neckt. Esgorgeter, to cut ones
throat; also to go bare-necked, or to fold down the collar of a Garment,
thereby to bare or discover the neck or bosom. Esgosille, whose throat is cut.
Esgosillement, a throat-cutting. Esgosiller, to cut the throat of. Esgosse, a
husk. Esgoue, cloyed, over-fall. Esgouer, to cloy. Esgousser, to hale.
Esgoutement, a draining by dropping. Esgouteur, a drainer, or drier up by
drops. Esgoutille, a little hole or gullet through which water can do little
more than drop. Esgoutoir, a drain, channel, or sink. Esgrailler, to straddle
with the feet or legs. Esgrainer, as Egrener, to shake corn out of its ear.
Esgraphe, loosed, pulled asunder. Esgrapher, to loose, to pull asunder.
Esgratignement, a scratching. Esgrette, as Aigrette in the N. D. Esgruge,
grated small; also crummed, or broken into small pieces. Esgrugeoir, a little
grater. Esgruger, to grate small; also to break unto crumbs. Esgrume, Esgrumele,
unclustered, taken from its cluster. Esgrumeler, to uncluster; to take asunder
things that hang loose together. Esgrume, to pluck grapes from their cluster.
Esgrune, crumbled, broken small. Esgruner, to crumble, to break small. Esgual,
for Egal, equal. Esgualation, an equalling, levelling, or making like. Esguale,
Esgualer. See Eguale, Egualer. Esgue, an ill-favored mare. Esguere, Esguerer,
as Egare, Egarer in the N. D. Esgueuler, to cut the throat. Esgueule, for
Egorge, whose throat is cut. Esguille, of a needle, full of needles, wrought
with the needle, pricked with needles. Eshanche, whose hip or haunch is out of
joint. Eshancher, to put a haunch or hip out of joint. Eshancheure, a putting
of the hip or haunch out of joint. Esherbe, weeded. Esherbement, a weeding.
Esherber, to weed. Eshonte, shameless, brazen-faced. Eshontement, shamelesness.
Eshontement, shamelesly, impudently. s'Eshonter, to be shameless, or
bra^en-faced. Esjette, ejected, cast out, or lanched forth. Esjetter, to eject,
cast out, or lanch forth. Esjune, kept fasting, starved. Esjuner, to keep
fasting, to starve. s'Esjouir, to rejoice. Esjouissance, joy, or mirth.
s'Esjourner, for Sejourner, to sojourn. Eslague, pruned, as a tree. Eslaguer,
to prune. mslaguoir, a pruning-tool. Eslainde, an engine wherewith great stones
are lifted up. Eslangoure, Eslangui, languishing, fallen into languishment.
Eslave, washed away, washed over. Eslaver, to wash away, or over. Eslay, a
career, or course o^ horsback. Esle, for aile, a wing. Eslevable, fit to be
elevated, raised, advanced; fit to be bred, or brought up. Eslevement, a
lifting up; an advancing, or promoting; a swelling, or puffing up; a breeding,
or bringing up. Esleveur, a lifter up, a^ advancer, a bringer up. Esleveure, a
lifting up, a rising, or swelling up in height, an imbossing, a bunch, a thing
risen, swollen, or puffed up. Esligible, eligible, fit to be elected. Eslinge,
slender, lank. Esloche, shaken, jogged. Eslochement, a shaking, or jogging.
Eslocher, to shake, or jog. Esloingne, Esloingnement, Esloingner, as Eloigne,
Eloignement, Eloigner in the N. D. Eslourdement, a dullness, an amazement.
Esmane, Esmaner, as Emane, Emaner. Esmarmele, crushed in pieces. Esmarmeler, to
crush in pieces. Esmay, trouble, cark, or care. s'Esmayer, to be careful, sad,
pensive. Esme, an aim, or level taken; also a purpose, or intention. Esmenuise,
made, or broken small. Esmenuiser, to make, or break small. Esmer, to aim, or
level at; to make an offer to strike; to purpose, or intend. Esmerauldin, like,
or belonging to an emrald. Esmerillonner, as Emerillonner. Esmerveillable,
mavelous, or wonderful. Esmerveillement, a marvelling, or wondering. Esmery,
for Emeri, an emeril-stone. Esmesche, snuffed. Esmescher, to snuff. Esmiable,
apt to be crumbled. Esmiettement, Esmieure, a crumbling. Esminage, a measure
containing about half a bushel. Esminal, another measure, being the half of the
bichot. Esminotte, a measure of about two bushels. Esmoignonne, cut off at the
stump, made a stump of. Esmoignonner, to cut off at the stump, to make a stump
of. Esmonde real, osmond royal, male fern. Esmondement, a picking, purging, or
pruning. Esmont, for Emcut, the mute, or dropping of a bird. Esmorce,
touch-powder; also a tickling; also the ordure that cleaves to an unwiped or
ill-wiped arse. Esmorcelle, piecemealed. Esmorceller, to piecemeal. Esmotelle,
whose clods are broken; also consumed, or eaten. Esmoteler, to break clods;
also to consume, or eat. Esmouce, Esmoucer, as Emousse, Emousser in the N. D.
Esmouchail, as Esmouchoir. Esmouche, rid of flies. Esmouche-lourdaut, a
deceiver of simple people. Esmoucher, to rid of flies, to drive them away.
Esmouchete, fly-blown; also pinked, or set with little tufts. Esmouchette, the
round tuft or head of herbs, wherein their seed is contained. Esmouchettes, for
Mouchettes, Snuffers. Esmouchoir, a fly-flap. Esmouelle, for emoelle, deprived
of marrow. Esmoulage, a grinding, whetting, sharpening. Esmoulendier, a
sheer-grinder. Esmouvement, a moving or stirring up; an agitation, wagging, or
shaking up and down. Esmouveur, a mover, or stirrer up. Esmoy, cark, care, or
trouble. s'Esmoyer de, earnestly to ask, or enquire of. Esmunde, Esmunder,
Esmundeur, as Emonde, Emonder, Emondeur in the N. D. Esmutir, Esmutissement, as
Emutir, Emeut in the N. D. Esmyne, a kind of measure. Esor, as Oyseaux esors,
wild, unmade, or ill-manned Hawks. Espade, a broad short Sword. Espagnolade, a
Spanish trick, blow, bob. Espagnole, made Spanish, or Spaniard-like.
Espagnollette, a band-supporter of wyre in works done over with silk.
Espagnoliser, to play the Spaniard. Espagnotter, to woo, to court. Espaillier,
as Espalier in the N. D. Espaix, for Espaisseur, thickness, grosness. Espale,
scattered abroad with a shovel. Espaler, Espaller, to scatter (or to spread)
abroad with a shovel. Espalme, pitched over as a ship. Espame, the cramp.
Espame, troubled with a cramp, or convulsion, fallen into a swoon; also weakened,
or made lean with fasting. Espamer, to cause the cramp, or a convulsion-sit; to
weaken, or make lean. Espampe, as roses espampees, roses fully blown.
Espamprement, the pruning of a Vine. Espan, for empan, a span. Espandable,
which may be shed, spilled, or poured out. Espandement, a shedding, spilling,
or pouring out; also a spreading. Espani, blown, spread abroad. Espanir, to
blow, or spread, as a blooming flower. Espanite, as Espavite. Espapillotte,
bespangled; bespotted. Espapillotter, to bespangle; to bespot. Esparcet, a kind
of thick grass, or pulse. Esparcete, Pellitory of the wall. Esparcetiere, a
plot, or close sowed with Esparcet. Espardement, a scattering, or dispersing.
Espardre, to scatter, to disperse. Esparer, to sting with the heels. Le ciel
commence a s'esparer, the sky begins to break. Esparges, for asperges,
Sparragrass. Esparre, the bar of iron that is nailed on a door, and turns at
the end on the hinge. Esparsement, scatteringly, here and there. Espartant,
scattering, dispersing. Espartille, dispersed, divided by partitions, infused
by small parcels. Espartir, to scatter, disperse, part, or divide. Esparvain, a
spavin in the leg of a horse, etc. Esparvier, as Epervier, a Spar-hawk. Espase,
a sword. Espase, broad-footed, well underlaid, well spread, or well grounded.
Esparement, the broad foot, or footing; the groundwork or foundation of.
s'Espater, to be broad-footed, or well underlaid; to spread, or bear a good
breadth at the bottom, and thereby to be well-grounded or fixed. Espatte, as
Espate. Espattement, as Espatement. Espave, a stray, a beast unowned; any thing
whose original or owner is not known; a Stranger born in a far Country. Espave
and effreinte des Chiens, a foul default of dogs, having utterly lost both
sight and scent of the Game which they hunted. Espave, (Adj.) masterless, or
without owner; also foreign, far-born, of unknown birth or beginning. Espavent,
a spavin in a horse. Espavite, the right a soverain Lord has to the Lands or
Goods of Strangers dying within his Dominions; or the being a stranger, as
Espave. Espaulart, a Sea Monster, enemy to Whales. Espaulee, as par espaulees,
by fits, now and then. Espauletee, as Espaulee. Refaire une muraille par
espauletees, to repair a Wall by parcels, without taking any of it down.
Espaulette, a little shoulder; also the wing of a gown, doublet, etc. also a
buttress, or shouldering-piece. Massonnerie a espaulettes, uneven work in
walls, etc. Espaulier, belonging to, or serving for the Shoulder. Espaulu,
broad-shouldered. Espaulure, a bursting, or unjoynting of the shoulder.
Espausmer, to swoon. Espausmure, a swooning, or falling into a trance.
Espautre, beaten, thrashed. Espautrer, to beat, to thrash. Espe, as Empan, a
span. Especial, as par especial, especially. Espectative, as estre a
l'espectative, to stand waiting. Espelement, a spelling. Espeller, as Epeler,
to spell. Espeluche, Plush. Espenaille, torn, all to tatters. Espendre, as
Epandre in the N. D. Espeoir, for Esperance, hope. Esperable, fit to be hoped
for, hopeful. Esperit, as Esprit in the N. D. Esperlucat, a lock, or bush of
curled hair; also a neat or spruce companion. Esperonnade, Esperonnement, a
spurring, a prick with a Spar. Esperruque, that wears long locks, or curled
hair. Espervain, a splint in a horses leg. Espessement, thickly, close
together. Espesseur, Espessi, Espessir, Espessissement. See Epaisseur, Epaissi,
Epaississement in the N. D. Espessissiure, for Epaisseur, thickness. Espeure,
frightened. Espeurer, to frighten. Espez, for Epais, thick. Espicenaire, of
both Sexes. Espiceur, a taker, or taxer of fees. Epsy, for Espion, a spy.
Espies, ambushes, way-layings. Espiece, piece-mealed, cut (broken, or torn) in
pieces. Espiecer, to cut, break, or tear in pieces. Espiement, a spying.
Espierrement, a ridding from stones. Espierreur, a stone-picker, a
stone-gatherer. Espieur, a spier, marker, observer. Espieur des chemins, a
highway-robber. Espinal, a thorny grove, or plot. Espinarde, a Stickle-back.
Espinaye, a thorny plot, bramble-bush. Espince, a pinching, nipping, or
pricking. Espincetres, a pair of pincers. Espine, pricked with a thorn.
Espinee, the chine, or backbone of a Pork. Espinelle, a kind of Ruby. Espiner,
to prick, as a thorn. s'Espiner, to prick himself; to entangle himself amongst
briars and thorns. Espinees, splints in a horses legs. Espingarderie, the
Harquebuzery, or a Troop of Harquebusiers. Espingardier, an Harquebuzier.
Espingardine, a small piece. Espingle, pinned, or furnished with pins.
Espingler, to pin, or furnish with pins. Espingleur, a pin-maker. Espinglon, a
little pin. Espinguer, to spring, or leap sprightly. Espinoche, a Stickle-back
or Shaftling. Espinoye, a thicket, or ground full of thorns. Espinse, as
Espince. Espionne, spied, watched. Espionnement, a spying, or watching.
Espionner, to spy, or watch. Espionneur, a spy. Espis, the two utmost and
fattest pieces of a side of Pork. Esplan, for Eperlan, a Smelt. Esplanade, a
levelling of ways. Esplanade, levelled. Esplanader, to level. Esplanaderaye, a
plain way, or strand. Esplane, made plane, levelled. Esplaner, to make plane,
to level. Espleure, full of tears. Espleurer, to weep bitterly, to weep his
eyes dry. Esplingue, for Epingle, a pin. Esplinguette, a small pin. Esploucher,
as Eplucher in the N.D. Esploure, Esplourer, as Espleure, Espleurer. Esploye,
displayed. Aigle esployee, a spread Eagle. Esplugebant, a kind of River-fowl.
Esplume, bared of feathers. Espluquer, as Eplucher in the N. D. Espluye,
sprinkled, or spattered upon. Espluyer, to sprinkle, or spatter upon.
Espoictrine, as Espoitrine. Espoinconner, as Espoindre. Espoinct, pricked,
spurred, urged. Espoincte, unpointed, blunted. Espoincter, to unpoint, or
blunt. Espoindre, to prick, or spur; to urge. Espointement, an unpointing, a
blunting, a breaking the point of. Espointement de questions, a pacifying of
quarrels, a resolution of questions. Espointer, as Espoincter. Espoir, hope.
Espois d'un Cerf, the top of a red Dears head; of a fallow the spellers.
Espois, for Espais, thick. Espoisser, to thicken. Espoitrine, open-breasted.
Espoitrinement, a going open breasted. Esponce d'heritage, a quitting an Estate
in land. Esponce, quitted, given over. Esponcer, to quit, or give over.
Esponcion, as Esponce. Espongieux, for Spongieux, spongy. Esporle, a Vassals
acknowledgment of the Services and Duty's which he ows unto his Lord. Esporler,
a Vassal to acknowledge the Duty's and Services he ows to his Lord. Esporte, a
hand-basket. Espoudre, dusted; cleansed of dust. Espoudrer, to dust; to wipe
the dust off. Espoventable, Espoventablement, Espoventail. See Epouvantable,
Epouvantablement, Epouvantail in the N. D. Espoventaire, for Epouvantail, a
scarecrow. Espovente, Espovente, Espoventer. See Epouvante, Epouvante,
Epouvanter in the N. D. Espoventement, for Epouvante, fright. Espouille,
loused, rid of lice. Espouiller, to louse, or rid of lice. Espouilleresse, a
woman that kills lice. Espouse, a disease in a horse. Espoys, as Espois.
Espremason, the bloody flux, with a painful wringing of the bowels. Espreu,
tout a espreu, expressly, of set purpose. Esprevains, a splint, or spavin in a
horses leg. Espringalle, an ancient Engine of war whereout stones, pieces of
iron, and great arrows were shot at the walls of a besieged town. Espringeller,
to leap, spring, bound, or spurt. Espringarde, as Espringalle. Espronnade, as
Esperonnade. Espuce, flead, rid of fleas. Espucer, Espuceter, to flea, or to
kill fleas. Espuisoir, any thing that serves to drain or empty a thing of
moisture; the hollow shovel wherewith watermen lade their leakie boats.
Espulcer, as Espucer. Espuration, the running of a sore; also a cleansing, or
clarifying; also a straining of liquor from. Espurge, purged out, cleansed;
also pruned. Espurger, to purge, clean, or cleanse; also to prune trees.
Esquadre, Esquadron, as Escadre, Escadron in the N. D. Esquaille, Esquailler,
as Ecaille, Ecailler in the N. D. Esqualie, levelled, or made even. Esqualier,
to level, or make even. Esqualle, Esqualler, as Ecaille, Ecailler in the N. D.
Esquarcelle, a leathern pouch. Esquarre, a square, or squareness. Esquarrir, as
Esquarrer, to square. Esquarrisscur, a squarer of stones, or timber.
Esquarrisscure, Esquarrure, a squaring; also squareness. Esquartele,
Esquarteler, as Ecartele, Ecarteler in the N. D. Esquartelement, Esquarteleure,
Esquartellement, a quartering, dismembering, or tearing in pieces. Esquarter,
for Ecarter, to scatter; also to empty quart-pots. Esquene, broken-backed.
Esquener, to break the back of. Esqueue, curtailed, or without tail.
Esqueuilles, dregs, oven-sweepings. Esqueuillon, as Escouillon, or a sponge, or
scowrer for a piece of Ordnance. Esqucure, out of heart, much fallen away.
Esquiavine, a beating of a stubborn and untoward ^ade. Esquiche, the first rude
or slight draught of a model of Platform for a building. Esquiche, imbossed;
rudely done, or slightly drawn. Esquicher, to imboss; to make a slight draught
of a Model or Platform. Esquiffon, a little Skiff. Esquignon, a sescue.
Esquignonne, cut, or broke off as a lump; also cut, or broke into lumps.
Esquignonner, to cut, or break off a lump; also to cut, or break into lumps.
Esquilleux, splinty, full of little splints or scales. Esquine, bois d'esquine,
the knotty and medicinal root of an Indian Bull-rush. Esquirener, to break the
back. Esquoue, as Escoue. Esracine, rooted up, or plucked up by the root.
Esraciner, to root up, or pluck up by the root. Esrafflade, a scratch, or
scratching. Esraffle, scraped, scratched. Esraffler, to scrape, or scratch.
Esraille, spread, or set wide open; staring, stradling; also frayed. Oeil
esraille, an eye whose lower lid is reversed. Esraillement, a spreading abroad,
or setting wide open; a staring, stradling, fraying. Esrailler, to spread, or
set wide open; to stare, to straddle, to fray as in starching. Esrene,
broken-backed, unfit for Venerious acts. Esrener, to break, or crush the reins.
Essaimer, to swarm as bees. Essais de fourrage, scatterings, or leavings of
sodder. Essange, wet, as linen before it be laid in the bucking-tub. Essanger,
to wet linen before it be laid in the bucking-tub. Essarde, dry, thirsty. Soif
essardee, an extreme thirst. Essargeter, as Essarter. Essart, a glade in a
wood; also a piece of untilled ground. Essaur, as Essor in the N. D. Essayerie,
a trying house. Essedaires, a kind of Warriers in old time, who marched in
wagons, but fought on foot, and hard laid to retired again to their wagons.
Esseille, wasted, consumed. Esseiller, to waste, or consume. Essein, as Essaim,
a swarm. Esseiner, to swarm, as Bees. Esseme, ins^amed, unfattened; also
swarmed. Essemement, an inseaming, or unfattening; also a swarming. Essemer, to
inseam, to unfatten; also to swarm. Essencie, made, or become of one essence
with. Essencier, to make, or become of one essence with. Essende, a shingle of
wood. Essentie, as Essencie. Essentier, as Essencier. Esseppe, whose stock is
cut. Essepper, to cut the stock of. Essette, a Coopers chipping-ax. Esseule,
left all alone, abandoned, forsaken. Essenoucre, a common sink, or sewer.
Essil, a shingle, or thin board of wood, such as we cover houses with.
Essiller, to lavish, or spend wastfully. Essilliere, the clout that is laid
between the legs of an Infant. Essoin, as Essaim, a swarm of bees. Essoine, as
Exoine; also want of ability in Soldiers to defend or besiege a place.
Essoiner, to swarm, as bees. Essois, axel-trees of carts, etc. Essongne, Droict
d'Essongne, a Duty or Fine payable (in Brittany) by the Heir or Successor of a
deceased Tenant unto the Lord, under whose Censive he held, and enjoyed land at
the time of his death. Essonier, to essoin, to excuse, or discharge an absent
or impotent person, etc. Essorbe, supped up. Essorber, to sup up. Essort, as
Essor, the open air. Essoyne, weakened, disabled, made impotent; also essoined,
whose absence is excused by reason of his impotency. Essoyner, to weaken, to
disable; also to essoin, or excuse. Essucce, drawn dry, soaked, drained.
Essuccer, to suck up, to draw dry, to drain. Essue, as Essuit. Essueil, the
threshold of a door. Essuiau, or Essuyau, a dish-clout. Essuit, wiped clean.
Essuler, to exile, or banish. Establage, stabling for horses; also a fee due
for their standing in an Inn, etc. also as Estallage, stallage. Establement,
stabling, or standing for horses. Estagues, the ties, two ropes serving to
horse up the sail. Establi, Establir, and Establier, a stall. Establies,
Companies, Squadrons, or Battalions of Soldiers. Establisseur, an establisher.
Estacher, to fasten, to tie. Estacquer, to mark for his own, to set his mark
upon. Estaffillade, as Estafilade in the N. D. Estager, Estagier, a Vassal,
Subject, or Inhabitant; one that has a house or dwelling under a Lord.
Estagne, guelt, or lopped, as a tree. Estagner, to gueld trees, to lop or cut
off their branches. Estagues, the ties, two ropes serving to hoise up the sail.
Estaie, Estaier, as Etaie, Etaier in the N. D. Estail, as Etal, a stall. Il
leur tient estail, he holds them tack. Estaille, handsomely clipped, or shorn; so
cut as he looks as a Lion. Estailleures de pierres, shards of stones.
Estaillier, a Stall-man, he that looks to the stall, and there exposes his ware
to show and sale. Estails, ties; the strings or ropes of sails. Estaimme, as
Etame, tinned. Estaimmer, for Etamer, to tin. Estain, for Etaim, tin. Estainct,
for Ereint, extinguished, quenched, put out; spent, consumed. Estaignier, a
Pewterer, a Tinner. Estainier, of, or belonging to tin or pewter. Estalier, as
Estaillier. Estallage, as Etalage, the laying out of Wares upon a stall.
Estalle, Estaller, as Etale, Etaler in the N. D. Estallement, the stall of a
shop; also as Estallage. Estallier, as Estaillier. Estallon, Estallonne,
Estallonnement, Estallonner, as Etalon, Etalonne, Etalonnement, Etalonner in
the N. D. Estallonnage, or Estalonage, as Etalonnement in the N. D. Estambor,
the stern-post in a ship. Estambres, the partnours in a ship. Estame, woosted,
or as Estamet. Estame, (an Adj.) tinned, or done over with tin; glazed, made
smooth, and stick, as an earthen vessel. Estamet, cloth-rash. Estameure, a
tinning. Estamier, a Tinner, a Pewterer. Estamine, strained. Estaminer, to
^train. Estamineux, using a strainer; also fit to make a strainer of. Estampe,
supported with trestles. Estampeau, a trestle. Estamper, to support with
trestles; also to brui^ apples. Estamperche, a great upright beam in buiding; a
principal post. Estancer, as Etanconner, to prop, to underprop. Estanceure, an
underpropping. Estanche, a stanching. Pierre d'estanche, a bloud-stone.
Estanson, Estansonne, and Estansonner, as Etancon, Etanconne, and Etanconner in
the N. D. Estanterol, part of a ship near unto the stern. Estaphe, a stirrup
for a saddle. Estaphisagrie, louse-wort. Estappe, as Etape in the N. D.
Estaques, Olive-plants, or suckers. Estarneur, for Eterneur, to sneeze. Estase,
for Extase, extasis. Estasques, as Estaques. Estaudeau, as Hestoudeau. Estaudi,
sheltered under a stall. Estaudir, to shelter under a stall. Estaudy, a
scaffold, in building; also a stall before a shop; also a defense of boards
used in approaches, or (...) the entering of a breach. Estay, the stay, a rope
fastened to the top of the mainmast, and holding it steady when the mainsail
is hoised up. Esteindement, for Eteignement, an extinguishing, quenching, or
putting out. Esteindible, extinguishable. Esteinte, an extinguishment.
Gambadans a esteinte de chandelle, till the candle went out. Estel, for Etal, a
stall. Estele, for Eroile, starry, or full of stars; also having (as an horse)
a star in the forehead. Esteler, to set thick with stars. Esteler les chevaux.
See Atteler in the N. D. Estelin, for Estellin. Estellage, stallage; also as
Attelage in the N. D. Estelle, a rod, or stick; also a little star, and the
vowel of a spur. Esteller, as Etaler in the N. D. Estellin, a Goldsmiths
weight, containing 28 grains or the 20th part of an ounce. Estellon, or
Estelon, as Etalon in the N. D. Estelloner, as Estalonner in the N. D.
Estenche, as Estanche. Estencher, for Etancher, to stanch, or to stop blood.
Estendement, Estendure, an extending, or stretching out. Ester, to stand, or
continue in, to stick unto. Esterdre le bestiail, to litter cattle. Esterlin,
as Estellin, or a penny sterling. Esterni, strewed, spread, laid along.
Esternir, to strew, spread, lay along. Esternissement, a strewing, spreading,
or laying along. Esteste, Estester, as Eteste, Etester. Estcule, for Eteuil,
stubble. Estier, as Setier in the N. D. Estincellement, a sparkling, or
twinkling. Estincelletre, a little sparkle, a small twinkling. Estiomene, S.
Anthony's fire (a painful swelling full of heat and redness.) Estiomener, to
cut off the member so inflamed, or infected. Estire, the iron tool wherewith a
Currier drains the skins he receives from the Tanpit; some call it a Sle^ker.
Estire, stretched, set on the tenter-hooks. Estirement, a stretching, or
setting on the tenter-hooks. Estirer, to stretch, to set on the tenter-hooks.
Estival, of, or belonging to summer. Estivalet, a buskin, or summer-boot.
Estive, the loading of a ship; also the hold wherein most of the lading is
contained. Estive, laden, or laden (as a ship.) Estiveler, as Etiveler.
Estiver, to summer, to pass the summer in. Estivet, a little summer. L'estivet
de S. Martin, the latter end of autumn. Estocage, a lineage, or the chief stem
of a lineage. Estoccader, to give the stoccado, to thrust through. Estoccage, 4
d. upon the sale of an Inheritance, due in some places unto the Landlord, and
to be paid him in lieu of a Relief the same day it is sold. Estocquer, as
Estoccader, or as Estoquer. Estoeuf, for Eteuf, a ball. Estoeuvier, of or
belonging to a Tennis-ball. Estofferie, the art of ingraving. Estoffeur, a
graver. Estoille, the lizard Stellio, whose neck is full of star-like spots.
Estoille, for Etoile, a Star. Estoillee, the herb Lions-foot, Ladies-mantle,
great Sani^l^. Estoiller, to set with stars. Estoilleux, starry, full of stars.
Estoillette, a kind of rich sur. Estoillins, an Order of Friars that wear
stars on the breasts of their gowns. Estole, a stole (for the neck of a
Priest.) Estomaque, angry at. s'Estomaquer, to take pet, to be angry with.
Estomisseur, as un vieil estomisseur de sacre, an old bangling or buzzing
Saker. Estommi, benumbed. Estophe, for Etoffe, stuff. Estoquant, giving the
stockado unto; also reviling, railing at. Estocque, thrust, stabbed into; also
reviled, or railed at. Estoquer, to thrust, or give the stockado unto; to
revile, or rail at. Estorce, for Entorse, a strain; also a bad part, an unhappy
turn played. Estorcir, Estordre, to wring, wrest, or pull out by force. Estore,
built, erected; also furnished, stored. Tenir a Cour feste haute and estoree,
to keep at Court a plentiful feast. Estorer, to build, or raise up; also to
store, or furnish. Estorse, as Estorce. Estorsement, a wringing, or extorting.
Estouble, stubble, or straw growing. Estoubles, stubble-ground. Estouffement, a
stifling, smothering, choking. Estouillon, a fan to gather wind withal.
Estoupade, stoppage, or stopping. Estoupade des reins, a kernel about the
reins. Estoupe, stopped. Estoupement, a stopping. Estouper, to stop, to make
up. Estoupeux, full of tow. Estoupillon, a stopple. Estouppade, as Estoupade;
or a tent, or stopple of tow. Estour, a sight, shock, or encounter.
Estourbillon, a Whirlwind. Estourdie, for Etourdissement, dizziness. Estrace,
raw silk. Estradiot, a light horse. Estradiote, as chevaucher a l'estradiote,
to ride long, or with long stirrups. Estragon, the herb Tarragon. Estraigne,
wrung. Estraigner, to wring, or gripe with the fist. Trop embrasser and peu
estraigner, to have too many irons in the fire at once. Estrain, Straw, Litter,
fodder of Straw or Stubble. De grand train sur l'estrain, from keeping a great
train into the straw, that is unto beggary. Estraincte, as Estreinte.
Estraindre, as Etreindre, to bind hard. Estraine, for Etrene, a
new-years-gift; a handsel. Estrainte, as Estreinte; also a kind of close
buckle or clasp for Cloaks, etc. Estraieres, as Estrayeres, or as Espaves.
Estraiure, an Escheat, or Perquisite. Estrancher, for Trancher, to cut.
Estrange, estranged, alienated, grown out of acquaintance. Estrangement, an
estranging, or alienating; a shunning of company; a quitting of all usual
fashions. Estranger, (a Verb) to estrange, to alienate, to separate from.
S'estranger de, to shun, or to avoid, to withdraw his mind from. Estrangete,
strangeness; a strange act or accident; also rudeness, frowardness. Estrangier,
for Etranger, a stranger. Estrangle-leopard, Libbards bane. Estrangle-loup,
Wolves bane. Estranguillon, as poire d'estranguillon, a choak-pear. Estrapasse,
harried, over-toiled. Estrapasser, to harry, to overtoil. Estraper, as
Estrapper. Estrapoire, as Estrappoire. Estrappade, as Estrapade, the strapado.
Estrappe, mowed, or cut down, as stubble. Estrapper, as Etrapper, to mow, or
cut down stubble. Estrappoire, as Etrape, a kind of little and long handled
Cickle, wherewith stubble is cut down. Estrasse, as Estrace. Estrassier, one
that cards or spins ruffled silk. Estrave, the stem, or stem-post of a ship.
Estrave, unshackled. Estraver, to unshackle, to free or deliver from shackles.
Estrayer, as Espave. Estrayeres, Escheats, the goods of strangers dead without
Frenchborn issue, and of bastards dead intestate, or without issue.
Estrecisson, a straightness, a contraction. Estree, a house, or place of abode.
Estreignement, a straining, wringing, or squeezing. Estreiller, for Etriller,
to carry. Estreinte,, a straining; a strain; a silver girdle for women; or as
Estrainte. Estreintif, a restringent and binding medicine or plaster.
Estrelin, an Easterling, one of the east parts, or of the Hanse-towns of
Germany; also a drunken swaggerer. Estrelin, for Sterlin, Sterling. Livre
estrelin, a pound sterling. Estrelures, as Estrayers. Estrette, a wring, or
pinch; a violent onset on an enemy; also a kind of punishment. Estrez, a cross
of G^^les in Heraldry. Estribort, the star-board, or the right side of a ship.
Estricque, pranked up, spruce. Estricquoyes, iron-pincers. Estrie, a kind of
bread or paste of fine flower kneaded with water, white wind, the yolk of eggs,
salt, and sugar. Estrie, as un homme bien estrie, a man well soaked, or drawn
dry by wenching. Estrief, one of the three little bones that be seated far
within the ear, and serve as instruments of hearing. Estrier, for Etrieu, a
stirrup. Estrier, (a Verb) to drain, or draw dry. Estrif, strife, debate.
Estrilloir, that which is wrapped about thread in winding, to keep the fingers
from being cut therewith. Estrindore, a kind of british dance. Estripe,
unripped, unbowelled. Estrique, pulled on as a boot, etc. also as Estricque.
Estriquer, to pull on boots, or boot-hose; also to force a wild beast into the
plain. S'estriquer, to prank up himself. Estriver, to be contentious, to
strive, to contend; also to put his foot into the stirrup. Il estrive trop, he
puts his foot too far into the stirrup. Estriveur, a contentions person.
Estriveux, contentious. Estroicissement, for Etrecissement, a straitness.
Estroisseur, straitness. Estroissi, as etreci, straightened. Estroissir, as
etrecir, to straiten. Estron, a turd. Estronconne, cut off by the trunk.
Estronconner, to cut off by the trunk. Estropiat, lame, cripple. Estrouble, as
Estouble, stubble. Estudie, for Etude, a Study. Esturgeon, for Etourgeon, a
Sturgeon. Estuvier, (Adj.) of or belonging to a stews. Estuye, put into a case.
Estuyer, to put into a case. Estyrole, the looseness, or pilling of the skin
about the root of the nails. Esvachir, to flag, to slack^n, or grow loose.
Esvanide, weak, or faint. Esvase, Esvaser, as Evase, Evaser. Esvasement,
Esvasure, as Evasement. Esveilleur, a waker. Esvent, the vent of a wine-vessel.
Esventelles, the sails of a windmil. Esventeur, a fanner, or winnower of corn;
also a vent-giver. Esventile, fanned, winnowed. Esventiler, to fan, to winnow.
Esventoir, Esventoire, a fan, a flyflap. Esventoise, a vent in a cask, etc.
Esvere, wormed, as a dog. Esverer, to worm a dog. Esveux, waterish, full of
water. Esvisage, pulled by, or scratched on the face. Esvisager, to pull by, or
scratch on the face. Esule, the herb Esula. Esvole, bra^en-faced; also
shallow-brained, or hair-brained. Esvolement, impudently; also lightly, rashly.
Esurial, fasting, meat forbearing. Eterni, thrown, or stuck down, laid stat
along. Eternize, Eternizer, as Eternise, Eterniser in the N. D. Etesies, the
East-winds which commonly blow in the Dog Days. Etestement, an heading, or
lopping of trees. Ethere, airy, of air. Ethologie, a moral, an interlude of a
moral subject. Etiquet, as Etiquete in the N. D. Etiquete, noted, titled; also
lodged by ticket. Etiqueter, to note, to title; also to lodge by ticket.
Etiqueter les Tesmoings, to deliver a Breviate concerning the Witnesses names,
and the points whereon they are to be examined. Etiquetier, an Harbinger.
Etirement, as Estirement. Etiveler, to whistle, or whoop, as an hunter.
Etmoide, Os etmoide, the bone whereof the top of the nose is made. Etrichoir,
as Estrilloir. Etriquet, and Ettiqueter, as Etiquet, Etiqueter. Etymologiser,
to interpret words truly. Evacuatif, evacuative, purgative. Evade, evaded,
escaped. Evader, to escape, to give the slip. Evagation, a wandering, or
straying abroad. Evaguer, to wander, stray, or rove. Evanide, as Esvanide,
weak, faint. Evaporall, an hole, pipe, or place to breath out at. Evare,
frightened, scared. Evarer, to frighten, to scare. Evase, wide open, wide
spread. Evasement, a wide opening, or wide spreading; also the wide, open, and
hollow circumference of a thing. Evaser, to widen, to gape, to set wide open;
also as Esbaser. Eucharistique, belonging to the Eucharist. Eudemon, ones good
Angel. Eve, wall-wort. Eve, for eau, water. Eve, watered, moistened, or mingled
with water. Evendique, claimed, or challenged; recovered by claim or challenge.
Event, as Esvent, vent. Poulce and event, a thumbs breadth given between every
ill in the measuring of cloth. Eventation, eventing; also the opening of a
vein. Ever, to water, to moisten, or mingle with water. Everdume, whose fresh
taste (and sharpness) is decayed; also drained of juice. Everdumer, to wring or
squeez the green juice out of herbs, to take off their greeness, freshness, or
sharpness. Evergongne, impudent, shameless. Everseur, a subverter, in
overthrower. Eversion, a s^bverting, or overthrowing. Everti, subverted,
overthrown. Evertir, to subvert, to overthrow. Evertisseur, as Everseur.
Evertuement, lastily, effectually, with all ones endeavor. Evesse, marred,
spoiled, ruined, undone. Eveux, waterish, full of water. Euf, for oeuf, an egg.
Eviere, an ower, or laver. Evieux, as Eveux. Terre evieuse, soil full of
springs. Evig, without. Evire, without strength, force, or ^igour. Eviscere,
bowelled. Eviscerer, to bowel, to draw out the bowels or guts of. Evitation,
Evitement, an esch^wing, hunning, or avoiding. Euloge, a praise, or
benediction; also a testimonial given of ones praise; an Epitaph; a last Will.
Evohe, the cry of mad men; or the ordinary acclamation of Bacchus his mad
Priests. Evonyme, spindle-tree, prick-timber-tree. Eupatoire, Liver-wort.
Euphorbe, the poisonous gummy thistle Euphorbium; also the causlick and
congealed sap or juice thereof. Euphraise, Eyebright. Euphrosine, the same;
also bugloss. Eur, and Eureux, as Heur, Heureux, in the N. D. Eustagues, Ropes
in a ship called the Ties. Evulsion, an evulsion, pulling up, or drawing out.
Euvre, for oeuvre, work. Exacerbation, an exasperating. Exacerbe, exasperated.
s'Exacerber, to be exasperated, or very angry. Exact, exacted, extorted.
Exacter, to exact, to extort. Exagitation, a stirring up, a tossing. Exagite,
tossed, vexed, molested; also debated, or discussed thoroughly. Exagiter, to
toss, ^^x^ or mol^st; to debate, or discuss thoroughly. Exagon^, ^x^^o^^^^d.
Exalumin^ux, as p^^l^s exalumin^^^^, bright, shining, orient P^^^^.
Exa^^^ation, for Examen, examination, (...) after. Exangue, blo^dle^s;
timoro^^s, fearful; pale. Exanthemes, the small pox; also wheals on the skin.
Exarcat, the chief place or dignity under the Emperor, the Lieutenancy of the
Empire. Exarche, a Vice-Emperour, or Lieutenant of the Empire. Exasperation,
exasperation, provocation. Exaspere, exasperated, provoked. Exasperer, to
exasperate, to provoke. Exaulce, exalted, extolled; also perfectly heard and to
the purpose. Exaulcement, an exalting, or extolling; also a perfect and
effectual hearing. Exaulcer, to exalt, or extol; also to hear perfectly and
effectually. Exauthoration, a degradation. Exauthore, exauthorissd, put from
authority. Exauthorer, to exauthorise. Excalfactif, heating, warming.
Excandescence, an inclination or promptness unto anger; an anger soon taken,
soon come and gone. Excavation, a making hollow. Excede, exceeded. Exceder, to
exceed. Excentrique, disclosed, laid open. Excentriquer, to disclose, or lay
open. Excessivete, excessiveness. Exciper, for Excepter, to except. Excision, a
razing down. Excluse, for Ecluse, a sluice. Excogite, excogitated, earnestly
considered of. Excogiter, to excogitate, or earnestly to consider of. Excole,
trimmed up. Excommange, excommunication. Excoriation, an excoriation, or
fleaing. Excorie, excoriated, or fleaed. Excorier, to excoriate, to flea.
Excortiquer, as Excorcer, to pill, or take off the rind from. Excrementeux,
full of excrements. Excrescence, excrescency, (as a wart, wen, etc.) Excretion,
the voiding of the superfluities and excrements of the body. Excroissance, as
Excrescence. Excrucie, excruciated, tormented. Excrucier, to excruciate, to
torment. Excusation, an excusing. Ex^cre, execrated, abhorred. Execrer, to
execrate, to abhor. Exemptible, free, quit; also that may be removed with ease.
Exentere, bowelled. Exenterer, to bowel, to take out the entrails. Exequant,
finishing, performing, executing; also prosecuting, pursuing; also expressing,
declaring. Exeques, funerals, or funeral solemnities. Exerceur, an exerciser, a
practiser. s'Exercitant, practicing, exercising. Exercitation, a practicing, or
exercising. Exercite, practiced, exercised, of good experience in. s'Exerciter,
to practice, to exercise. Exfoliatif, as trepane exfoliatif, that go's no
farther than the superficies of the scull. Exfoliation d'os,, an opening or
taking up of the only superficies of a bone. Exhalation, for Exhalaison,
exhalation. Exhaulse, exalted, raised. Exhaulser, to exalt, to raise. Exherbe,
clean-weeded, bared of grass. Exherber, to weed out herbs, grass, or weeds.
Exheredation, a disinheriting. Exhilare, exhilarated, rejoiced. Exhilarer, to
exhilarate, to rejoice. Exiber, for Exhiber, to exhibit. Exiguer, to give up a
beast kept unto halves; to part the profit that has been made or increase that
has come thereof. Exile, thin, slender, small. Exime, lean, drained, drawn
dry; also exempted, freed, discharged from. Eximer, as Essimer; also to exempt,
free, or discharge from. Exinane, emptyed, evacuated. Exinanition, emptiness,
evacuation. Existime, as estime, esteemed. Exitial, deadly. Exiture, an egress;
also a ripe impostume. Exoine, an essoin, or excuse. Exoine, essoined, excused
for his a^sence by reason of sickness, or other lawful impediment, alleged and
deposed by another. Exoineur, an Essoiner, or as Exoniateur, Exoinie, as
Exoine. Exolution, a faintness, or looseness in all the parts of the body.
Exoniateur, an Essoiner, an Attorney, etc. who s^lk ^^^tly excuses the absence
of another by swearing or affirming that he is sick, or not able to appear.
Exonie, essoyned, or excused; saved harmless. Exonier, to essoyn, to excuse one
from appearing in Court, or going to Wars, by oath that he is impotent, etc.
also, to save harmless. Exorable, easy to be entreated. Exostose, a swelling
of the bones. Exotique, foreign, outlandish. Expatriation, a banishment, or
being out of his own Country. Expatrie, banished, or absent from his own
Country. Expectatif, expecting. Expectation, expectation. Experiment,
experiment, trial. Expertise, expertness, skilfulness. Expile, fleeced, robbed.
Explanade, a plain passage, an easy way. Explanade, levelled. Explanader, to
level. Explaner, to explain. Explaude, exploded. Explauder, to explode.
Expletif, filling, making up; fulfilling, perfecting. Expletivement,
completely, perfectly. Expliqueur, an explainer, expounder. Exploder, to
explode. Exploictable, seisable, liable unto an execution or seizure.
Exploictation de biens, an execution of goods, or a seizure of them by the
King, a Court, or Landlord. Exploicteur, a doer of an exploit. Sergent
Exploicteur, the ordinary Sergeant for Seisures, Executions, etc. Exploitable,
as Exploictable. Exploration, a search. Explore, searched. Explorer, to search.
Expoliateur, a robber. Expolie, robbed. Expolier, to rob. Expoly, polished
polite, neat. Exponce, Exponction, as Esponse. Exposeur, an exposer; also an
expositor. Exprobation, an upbraiding, or twitting in the teeth. Exproprie,
deprived of all propriety in. Expugnable, which may be got by force.
Expugnateur, a subduer of Towns, etc. Expugnation, a subduing of Towns, etc.
Expugne, won by assault, overcome with violence. Expugner, to conquer, or
overcome. Expulse, expelled, thrust out by force. Expulser, to expel, or thrust
out. Expulseur, an expeller. Exquisement, exquisitely, exactly, curiously.
Exsiccatif, exsiccative, of a drying property. Exficcation, a dryness, or
drying up of. Extenseur, an extender. Extensible, extensible, which may be
extended, or drawn out in length. Extention, for Extension, extension.
Exterieurete, Exteriorite, outwardness. Extinction, an extinction, or
abolishing. Extipiscine, southsaying by the inspection of the entrals of
beasts. Extiture, a show, or standing forth. Extorque, extorted. Extorquer, to
extort, to exact. Extorqueur, an extorter; an exacter. Extrajudiciaire,
extrajudicial, done out of Court. Extraiures, as Estrayeres. Extraneiser, to
drive, or banish into a foreign Country. Extravagation, extravagancy.
Extrayeur de process, an abridger of Cases, a breviate-maker. Extrinseque,
extrinsecal, outward. Extrinsequement, extrinsecally, outwardly. Extumescence,
a swelling. Exture, as Extiture. Exuberance, exuberancy, abundance, great
store, or plenty. Exuberant, exuberant, plentiful. Exuberer, to abound, to be
plentiful. Exulceration, an exalceration. Exulceratoire, exulcerating, eating
into the flesh. Exuler, to banish, or to be banished. Exuperance, as
Exuberance. Exustion, exustion, parching, or burning.
F
FAbagine, Judas-tree, the Tree wherein it is thought he hanged himself. Fabal,
the shalings of Beans. Fabloyer, to tell tales. Fabre, a forge. Fabregue, a
kind of herb. Fabrie, as fabrice. Fabrice, fabric; the reparation, or
maintenance of a Parish Church; also the state, or the estate of the Parish it
self. Fabricier, a Churchwarden. Fabril, of stone or timber, of or belonging
to the craft of a Smith, Mason, or Carpenter. Fabriqueur, as Fabricier.
Fabuliste, a tale-teller. Fabulosite, tale-telling. Facade, of a beautiful
front. Facecie, as facetie. Facendes, businesses. Facet, a Primmer, or Grammar
for a young Scholar. Facetie, merry conceit. Facetieusement, merrily and
wittily. Facetieux, facetious, wittily pleasant. Faciate, a forepart, or
forefront. Faciendaire, one that is employed in a business for another.
Faciendes, as facendes, businesses. Facond, eloquent, well-spoken. Faconde,
eloquence. Facondement, eloquently. Faconnement, a fashioning, or shaping.
Faconnier, a Cloth-worker. Facque, a little pocket; also as Faquin.
Factionnaire, factious, mutinous. Factiste, a Play-maker. Facturerie, for
factorerie, a factory. Facultez, wealth, riches. Fadas, sottish, foolish.
Fadeseries, Fadeurs, for fadaises, trifles, silly things. Fadoche, the name of
a certain pear. Fadrin, the Masters Mate in a Ship, the Officer that has the
command of slaves in a Galley. Fafelu, Faffelu, puffed up, fat-cheeked.
Fafiloches, ravellings of linen or cloth. Fagotage, faggot-making, an heaping
together. Fagoteur, a faggot-maker. Fagoue, a certain kernel under the
Kannel-bone; also the fag-piece, or kernelly part next unto the neck of a Boar.
Fagoule, a Grampel, a Purgar. Faguenat, a filthy rammish smell. Fagule, as
fagoule. Faictis, made according to; also neat, or well-made. Faictissement,
neatly, handsomely. Faicture, facture. Faillance, a defection, failing,
decaying. Faille, fail; Sans faille, without fail. Also a round and oat-bearing
Vail worn by Nuns and Widows of the better sort. Faillite, a failing, or want;
a deceiving, or disappointing; wasting; fainting. Payer ses Creanciers en
faillites, to pay his Creditors in Papers. Fainct, for seint, feigned,
counterfeited. Faindre, for feindre, to feign. Feign, a Beech-tree; also a
Beech-mast, or Buck-mast; the fruit of the Beech-tree. Faineance, for
faineantise, idleness. Fainin, a kind of Coin. Faintement, feignedly. Faintise,
for feintise, a feigning, or dissembling. Fais, a bundle, a burden, or load.
Faisances, as Corvees, in the N. D. Faisanne, a Pheasant-hen. Faisanneau, for
faisandeau, a young Pheasant. Faisannier, a keeper, or breeder of Pheasants.
Faisant, for faisan, a Pheasant. Faisible, for faisable, feasible. Faisseau,
for faisceau, a bundle. Faisselle, a Cheese-fat. Faisser, as Enfaisser.
Faissine, a bundle, or faggot. Faist, for faite, top, ridge, or roof. Faitard,
lazy, idle, cowardly, faint-hearted. Faitardement, lazily; also
faint-heartedly. Faitardise, sloth, laziness; also faint-heartedness. Faitifs,
Faitis, and Faitisse, as Faictis. Faitneantise, for faineantise, idleness.
Faizander, as faisander in the N. D. or else to dress a Pullet or Capon like a
Pheasant. Fall, a Player, or Playing-ring, in a bit. Faldes, a pair of Bases to
ride with. Fallacieux, false, deceitful. Fallere, trapped. Fallevuches, the
sparkles arising from Furnaces wherein metals are melted. Fallope, as Faloppe.
Faloise, for falaise, a bank, down, or hill by the Seaside. Faloppe, the Chit,
Meadow-lark, or H^ath-lark. Falotement, good fellow like. Falotier, of, or
belonging to a Cresset-light. Falouidin, as Falourdin. Falourde, a great
faggot. Falourdin, a heavy sot. Falouze, Hearts fodder, or Hearts eye.
Falsifiable, which may be falsified. Falvise, a kind of Serpent. Fame, fame,
renown. Fame, of good report, or reputation. Fameilleusement, greedily,
hungrily. Fameilleux, hungry, starved. Famelie, Famelique, pinched with hunger.
Famfreluches, as fanfreluches. Familiarement, for familierement, familiarly.
Familiarizer aucun, to grow familiar with one. Famuse, as Cenchre. Fam, a Fawn,
or Hind-calf. Fandesteuf, as Faudeteul. Fan^gue, a measure that contains about
as much as the French bushel. Fanessant, withering, fading. Fanfrelucher, to
swive; also to trifle it. Fanfreluches, loose threads in rags and torn clothes;
any such trash; or as finfreluches. Fanfreluches antidotees, sopperies. Fangas,
a heap of mud, or dirt. Fangeas, Fangeat, a dirty, or muddy slough on the
highway. se Fanir, to wither, to fade. Fan, as feign, Beech-mast. Fanner, for
faonner, to fawn. Fantasiant, fancying, imagining; feigning. Fantasy, as
fantaisie in the N. D. Fantas^e, fancied, imagined, feigned; also affected.
Fantasier, to fancy, to imagine, to think of; to affect. Fantasine, for
fantome, a Vision, an Apparition. Fantasquement, fantastically. Fantassin
(Adj.) of, or b^longing to a Foot-souldier. Fantastiquer, to conceive, imagine,
or devise; to affect fantastically; to fill with (or feed on) idle fancies.
Fantastiqueries, fantastical tricks. Fantosmeries, strange fancies, extravagant
conceits, castles in the air. Fanuise, as Cenchre. Faonnement, a fawning.
Faque, a pocket, a fatchel. Faquinage, portage, the fee or furniture belonging
to the Porter. Far, an high Tower, or Beacon at the mouth of an Haven, wherein
continual lights are kept a nights for the direction of Seafaring people^; a
Lanthorn on a Watchtower by the Seaside. Farain, pain farain, a kind of great
and very yellow houshold-bread of the better sort. Faras, a great confused
heap; also a mixture of sundry Grains together, called Bolymong. Farasse, a
Cresset, also course Tow. se Farcer de, to deride at. Farcereau, a maker of
Plays; a deviser of Jests; an inventer of Lies. Farcerie, a playing, or
jesting; an acting, or making of Plays; a counterfeiting. Farcesque,
counterf^it, Player-like. Farci (Subst.) an Haggas-pudding. Farciere, one of
the three skins that wrap an Infant in the womb. Farcineux, bescabbed.
Farcisscure, a stuffing, or cramming. Fardeler, to pack up into bundles.
Fardelet, a little bundle. Fardement, a painting with paint. Fare, as far.
Farfadet, a little spirit, a young hobgoblin. Farfanterie, as Forsanterie.
Farfelu, short and thick, as thick as long. Farfonte, a Wren. Fariboles, idle
discourses, tales of a tub. Farigoulier, the Lote-tree. Farineux, done over
with meal; also dry as meal. Farline, an Irish rag. Farne, a kind of Oak.
Faron, the week of a Link, or Torch. Farouchete, b^come wild and cruel.
Farrage, a mixture of Grains and Seeds sowed together for Winter-forrage, or
^^dder. Farragiere, a piece of ground sowed with the winnowings of Corn, or
with course Corn and Pulse mingled all together. Far, as foarre.
Fascheusement, unpleasingly; angrily. Fascinateur, a charmer, an inchanter.
Fascination, a charm, or enchantment. Fascine, charmed, bewitched; disfigured,
or transformed by enchantments. Fasciner, to charm, to bewitch, to disfigure,
or transform by enchantments. Fasque, laden. Fassade, for facade, the front of
a building. Fasse, a Weel, or a Bow-net. Fassine, for fascine, a faggot.
Fastide, tedious, loathsome. Fastidiosite, a loathing, or abhorring. Fatalizer,
to destinate, appoint, or design to an inevitable issue. Fatidio, Fatidique,
pr^saging, foretelling. Fatidiquement, prophetically. Fatigable, fatigable,
also tiresome. Fatigation, a wearying, or tiring. Fatraille, tra h, trumpery.
Fatrasse, patched, botched; confusedly put together; also vain, idle; made, or
consisting of trash. Fatrassier, trifling, vain; confused, huddled together.
Fatrer, to botch, patch, or bungle up a thing. Fatrin, as fatraille.
Fatrouiller, to play the fop, to busy hims lf about idle things; also as
fatrer, to botch. Fatrouilleur, a trifler; also a bungler. Fatuite,
foolishness, ^^tti^hne s. Favade, bean-straw, or a bean-stalk. Faval, the
^^lings of beans. Favas, as faval; also a bean-^l^^^, a b^^^-^^raw. Fauce-soy,
a ^^ith-b^^ak r. Fauce^l, a lit^^^ (...). Faucer, to st^^^d, as a crook^d
blade. Fau^ha^e, a mowing, or the ^ire of a (...) Fau^^^, (...). Fauch^^o^ a
^owi^g, or a g^od (...) t^ ^^^w i^. Fau^^^^ a (...) to^ to mow with. Fau^hon, a
ha^g^r. Faueillon, a (...) s^^k^^. Faudesteul, and Faudeteul, as Fauldetueil.
Faudiere, the skirt-piece of an armor. Faudrinier, as Fourdrinier. Faverots, a
kind of small beans, or as Faverottes, earth-nuts. Faviere, a bean-plot.
Faulce, for fauce, a sith. Faulce, as fausse in the N. D. Faulde, lap.
Fauldetueil, for fauteuil, a great elbow-chair. Fauldiere, as faudiere. Fauls,
for faux, false. Faulsaire, faul^e, faulse-braye. See them with a^ s ins^^ad of
(...) t^^ N. D. Faulsee, a breach; also a striking, or charging through and
through. Faulse-foy, a faith-breaker. Faulsement, for faulsement, falsely.
Faulser, faulser, and faulse, as fausser, fausset, fausse, under faux in the N.
D. Faulseteux, most false, full of lies. Faultif, faulty, apt to do amiss.
Faultrage, as Fautrage. Faulveret, as Fauvete in the N. D. Favorit, for favori,
a Favorite. Favorite, a She-favorite, a Princes Mistress. Favot de sebves, a
bean-stalk. Fauperdrieux, a kind of Hawk. Fauquet, a shaling
wry-legged-fellow. Fausonnerie, a forging, or falsifying of evidences, a false
counterf^^ting of another man's hand. Faussee, as faulsee. Fausterne, the round
Birthwort. Fauteur, a favo^rer, f^rtherer, helper; a p^^taker, a companion.
Fautier, faulty, blameworthy. Fautrace, as Droict de fautrage, a certain
unaliena^^^ fee due upon ea^^ hea^ of ^att^^ that ra^s (...) M^ad^ws or
Pastur^^ of a M^^^or. I (...) whereof a (...) ^^i^t^ined to k^^p (...) g ^d
order, and to lo k (...) b^a ^s at fir^^ put i^ (...) after ^^anged. Fauveau, a
d^n ^or^^; also a P^^^^n, or fork-fi^h; also ((...)) dark, yellow, d^^^,
somewhat fallow. Faux-^^rcher, (...), or go awry: to s^ip, or ^^^bl^.
Faux-marc^^r^, a (...) got by a ship, or (...). Faux oiseau, as fouperdrieux;
or any hawk in general. Fauxperdriau, as fauperdrieux. Fayant, a Beech-tree.
Fayerie, as fe^rie; also a fan^y, illusion, or vision of Fairies. Fayfort, a
warranting of the goodness, and sufficienty of sale-ware. Faymidroict, base or
low Jurisdiction. Fays, as fais. Fay^se, a swath-band for a child. Faziols,
french-beans. Fe, for soi, Faith. Fe Dieu, Gods me. Feable, as feal.
Feablement, as fealement. Feage, Fee-simple; or an Inheritance or house held in
Fee-simple. Feal, trusty, loyal. Fealement, trustily, loyally. Feaulte, fealty,
loyalty. Feaute, the sam^. Febe, a secret story, a thing hidden. Feeble, for
foible, weak. Febri^itant, sick of an ague, or fever. Febrifique, aguish,
feverish. Febril, of, or belonging to an agu^, or ^^^er. Febveux, full of (or
yielding) beans. Febvre, a blacksmith. Fecal, dreggy, ^nsettled. Fece, lees,
dregs, or grounds. Feconder, to make fertile, or fruitful. Fecot, the youngling
of an ew (or of any other such beast) newly ^ome out of ^^r b^lly. Fecture, the
fri^hing, o^ making up of. F^^ulent, thi^^, m^ddy, dreggy. Fee, a Fairy. Fee,
fatal; (...) bewitched. Feerie, fatality, destiny. Feign, for foin, ^ay. Feine,
b^^ch-mast* also a kind of Cider-appl^. Feintement, (...), ^ai^^^ly. Felerin,
Fla^^^^, or a (...) like it. Felice, happy; also fertile, ^r^itful. F^lle, a
kind of ^h^-^^t. ^^le, (A^i.) (...). ^^l^ure, as (...). ^^l^u^, (...). ^ll^^,
as f^lin. Fellon, Fello^^e, as fel^^* felony in the N. D. Felogne, Selandine
the greater. Felonnement, feloniously, cruelly. Felure, a flaw, or small crack.
Femelin, womanish, effeminate. Femellette, a little Female creature. Femier, a
Bailiff, or overseer of the husbandry in a Gentleman's house. Femmette, a little
woman, or wife. Femois, a kind of fish-net. Fenasse, as Sainct-foin. Fenault,
an hay-loft. Fendant, a great flash, or cut. Fendasse, a cleft, or chink.
Fendement, a cleaving. Fendille, cloven, broke into small chinks. Fendiller, to
cleave, to break in small chinks. Fendu, (Subst.) the slit of a thing.
Fenerateur, an Usurer. Feneration, usury. Feneratoire, usurious. Fenestrage,
windows; the fashion, or contrivement thereof. Fenestre, windowed, having
windows. Fenestrelle, a little window. Fenestrier, belonging to a window; also
placed in, or looking out at a window. Feneur, a hay-maker. Feneux, full of
hay. Feniste, a little Shad-fish. Fenier, as Fenil, a hay-loft. Fenne,
withered, faded. Fenoil, for fenou, fennel. Fenons, outward splints (made of
sticks about a finger thick; first wrapped in hay or straw, then within a piece
of linen.) Fenugrec, the herb, or seed Fennigreek. Feodalite, the estate of a
Feodal or chief. Feed, infeoffed. Fere, a wild beast. Fereules, the thing
whereon Images or Pageants are carried; also coffins. Fereluche, as freluche, a
moat. Feri, hit, struck, wounded, hurt. Feriage, as Feage. Ferial, of, or
belonging to a holy day; idle, ^^^^ing, vacant; jocund, merry, pleasant; also
ridiculous. Feriat, a vacation-time, an idle (or a play) day. Ferm. wild,
savage, cruel. Fermail, the clasp of a book, etc. Fermaille, a small clasp, or
buckle. Fermailles, for fiancailles, a formal betrothing of a couple before
their full marriage. Fermaille, clasped, buckled; also garnished, or set thick
with small buckles. Fermailler, to buckle, to clasp; also to set or garnish
with small buckles. Fermailler, (a Subst.) a buckle-maker, or clasp-maker.
Fermailler, a small buckle or clasp; also a carkanet, or border of gold, such
as Gentlewomen wear about their heads or hoods; also an enchanted image,
collar, or chain worn about the neck, as a preservative against poison,
witchcruft, wounds, etc. Fermance, a certain Officer within the Jurisdiction of
La Solle. Fermant, (Subst.) a buckle, hasp, or clasp; also a shutter; any thing
that surely binds or fastens. Fermative, an affirmation, or protestation of
right unto a thing in controversy, made before a Judge by him that pretends
it. Fermeille, as fermaille. Fermeillet, as fermaillet. Fermement, (Subst.) a
shutting, locking, closing, or making up. Ferment, as fermant. Fermesse, for
fermete, stedfastness, constancy. Fermeture, Fermeure, a shutting, locking,
closing, or making up. Fermier, (Adj.) farming. Sergent fermier, that has
farmed his place (which by law he should not do.) Fermoirs, the clasps of a
book; or as fremoirs. Fernel, a certain beam in the prow of a Ship. Feronnier,
an Iron-monger. Ferrage, the shooing of horses; also any work, or working in
Iron. Droict de ferrage, a Privilege whereby some special Officers and
followers of Court claim to have their horses shod at the Kings charge; also a
certain fee due to the cutters of the Mint. Ferrailleries, iron-work,
implements, or tools. Ferran, as Aguillade. Ferrandier, a dresser of hemp.
Ferrasse, the Fork-fish; also course tow. Ferrat, shod (as a horse) with iron.
Ferrementiporte, a wandering Priest that ever carries about him the Ornaments or
implements belonging to the Mass, called, ferremens de la Mess; also a carrier
of tools, or heads of Spears, or blades of Weapons. Ferret, the tag of a point.
Ferreur, a flax-comb, or hatchel of Iron. Ferreux, of Iron, as hard as Iron.
Ferriere, a kind of big Dutch leathern bottles; also a place to keep Iron in;
a pouch to put horsenails in etc. a kind of adamant. Ferronnier, for ferron,
an Ironmonger, one that sells unwrought Iron in bars, etc. Ferruginosite, rust
of Iron. Ferrumination, a sodering, or fastening together, properly in matters
of Iron. Fers, for fer, Iron. Fertilize, made fertile. Fertilizer, to make
fertile. Ferve, par ferve, according to, after the rate of. Fervement,
fervently, ardently. Fervesti, Fervestu, clad in, or armed with Iron. Ferulace,
round; also of the kind of the herb Ferula. Ferules, splents for broken legs,
arms, fingers, etc. Ferun, rankness, rammishness; extreme or strong
unfavouriness. Ferure, a stroke, or hit; a striking, or hitting. Fesse, crazed.
Fesseau, for faisceau, a bundle. Fesse-breviaire, a Priest that quickly whips
over, or mumbles up, his breviary; any one that says over his ordinary prayers
too fast. Fesse-cul, a pedantical Whip-arse. Fessee, a lash on the breech.
Fesse-Matthieu, an Usurer. Fesse-pain, a great bread-eater. Fesse-pinte, a
good fellow, one that can drink lustily. Fesse-tondue, a hawdy companion; a
small-smock. Fesseur, a whipper. Fessier, belonging to the breech, or buttocks.
Fessisier, to play tricks with the buttocks. Fessu, well breeched, great
buttock'd. Fest, for faite, top, or ridge. Gibet a fest, a Gibbet that has a
topping or chaplet made over it. Festard, and Festardise, as fetard, fetardise.
Feste, for faite, the ridge, or top of a house. Feste, festival, kept holy.
Fester, to feast it, to keep holy day. Festide, for facherie, grief, or
trouble. Festier, for fetoyer, to treat, or entertain his friends. Festiere,
for faitiere, a ridge-tile, or (being turned) a gutter-tile. Festinant, a
feaster, a feast-maker. Festination, speed, haste. Festoyement, a feasting, or
banqueting. Festuser, as Fetuser. Fetard, lazy, dull, faint-hearted.
Fetardise, laziness, dullness, faintheartedness. Feteur, stink. Fetide,
stinking. Fetisse, as liqueurs fetisses, made, or compounded liquours. Feton,
as feston in the N. D. Fetuse, touched, or wiped over with a fescue; also
tickled by such a touching. Fetuser, to touch, or wipe over with a fescue; also
to tickle by touching with a fescue. Feuage, for fouage, chimney-tax. Feuchere,
Feuchiere, fern. Feverondes, the eaves of an house. Feugiere, for fougere,
fern. Feugiere de chesnes, the herb Oakfern. Feuillee, as fueillee. Feuillure,
as fueillure. Feultre, made of felt, covered with felt. Feultrer, to make of,
or cover with felt. Feulu, for feuillu, full of leaves. Feur, the cost and
charge a husbandman is at in the tilling and reaping of his ground; also a
fair; a rate or price set on a thing. Fevre, a Blacksmith. Feurmariage, as
formariage in the N. D. Feurolles, night-fires. Feustre, for feutre, felt.
Feutraict, drawn out of his Country; also wine, corn, etc. take the (...).
Feutre, wrought thick as ^^lt; also stuffed, or ^^istened with felt. Feutre
d'herbe, (...) thick, or overgrown with g^^ss. Feytura^e, a charm, or
enchantment. Fez, a (...). Fiable, a^ feable, tru^^. Fia^ce, for confiat^
(...). Fia^^^^ls^, for F^^nc^^^es, a formal but (...) of a Couple before their
(...) marriage. Fia^, trust. Fibreux, full of hair-like threads, or strings.
Fichement, a fixing, or fastening. Fichement, fixedly. Fiche-pain, an ear-wig.
Fichet, as arbre de fichet, a tree that is come of a twig or tender scion
planted. Ficheur, a fixer, or fastener. Fiche^re, a fixing, or fastening.
Fichu, absurd. Ficotte, as par ma ficotte, by my feckins. Ficte, a little
Shad-fish. Fictil, made of earth. Fidejusseur, a Surety. Fidelium, the last
Prayer that is said for the dead. Il pass plusieurs chooses par un fidelium, he
huddles up many things under one. Fidicule, the Harp of Heaven, a company of
stars which resemble an Harp. Fiduciale, the index or hand of an Astrolabe.
Fiebvrette, a slight ague. Fied, and Fieffe, for fief, a Fief. Fiefferme, a
fee-farm. Fiefve, for fieffe, infeoffed. Fiefvement, a feoffement, or an
infeoffing. Fieller, to make bitter. Fielleux, fall of bitterness, as bitter as
gall. Fiens, for fiente, dung, ordure. Fiente, dunged; also beshit. Fienter, to
dung. Fienteux, full of dung, or ordure. Fientifie, beshitten. Fieret, somewhat
lofty, a little fierce. Fierete, Fierettement, as fierte, fierement in the N.
D. Fier-humble, a stout heart humbled. il Fierta, it is like unto, or agrees
well with. Fieul, for fills, son. Figon, a lover of figs. Figueraye, Figuerie,
Figuiere, a ground f^ll of fig trees. Figurement, a figuring, shaping, or
forming. Figurine, a pretty little image, or figure. Filace, as filasse in the
N. D. Filacier, ready, or easy to in ^pun. Filamenieux, fall of filaments.
Filandier, a man that Spins. Filandiere, a spi^^^^r, a flax-woman; also a ki^^
of small boat. Fila^^^e, full of small threads or s^^^s. Filandrerie, spinstry,
spinning. Filant, a Congar. File, for filets, a net. Filee, a kind of Eagle.
File-habits, cloaths-spinning. Fileret, as filleret. Filerie, a spinning, or
spinstry; also a friendly meeting between the young men and maids of a
Countrey-Town, where they play at many sorts of active Games, while these both
spin and look on. Fileul, for filleul, a God-son. Fil-gros, shoomakers thread.
Filiastre, a Son-in-Law, a step-son. Filiation, the being or estate of a son.
Filipende, Filipendule, filipendula, Dropwort, red Saxifrage. Fillains, the
tackling of a ship. Fillandrerie, as filandrerie. Fillasse, as filasse in the
N. D. La fillasse de nostre Dame, the small and tender strings of a Cobweb.
Fillastre, a Son-in-law, or step-son. Fille-femme, one that goes for a maid,
but is none; a cracked piece; also one that has got a clap. Filleret, maidenly,
eff^minate. Fillerie, as filerie. Fillet, a watering bit for a horse. Fillette,
a young girl; also a small wine-vessel. Filliastre, as fillastre. Filliere, as
filiere in the N. D. Filloche, a little thread. Fillol, for filleul, a God-son.
Fillole, a buddy knob in a Vine, like a wart. Fillot, for filleul, a God-son.
Filoire, a spinster. Filon, a vein of metal in a Mine. Filoselle, ferret-silk.
Fimport, a c^urse in Law, binding a Plaintiff to s^tch in, and make join in
suit with him, all such as can pretend any right or interest in the thing which
he means to recover. Fimporter, a Plaintiff to do as aforesaid. Finablement,
for finalement, finally. Finage, the smallest tackling of a ship. Finages, the
utmost limits or liberties, the utmost bou^^ds or borders of a Country or City.
Finaison, as quand argent saut finaison nulle, (...) gain, or satisfaction,
without money. Fine de poules, ^^as d^ng, or ordare. Fine, for sini, ended,
finished. Finement, (Subst.) an ending, or finishing; in end, or conclusion.
Finer, for sinir, to end, or to finish. Finerot, as chemin finerot, a way that
is about 18 foot broad. Fingard, lazy, idle. Finiteur, the circumference of a
Pillar from the top to the bottom thereof. Finoinct, a kind of pear. Fins, for
confius, borders, frontiers. Fiole, for phiole, a glass-bottle. Fiquatelle, a
woman's privity's. Fique, par ma fique, by my feckins. Fiquer, for ficher, to
fasten. Firm, for ferme, firm. Firmete, for fermete, firmness. Frealins,
children, or freed men, maintained or nourished in the Kings house, or upon h^^
land. Fiscellette, small pack-thread. Fiscelle, fuzelly, in haraldry. Fisq, as
Fisque in the N. D. Fissaigne, a certain tumbling trick. Fissau, a Fitch, or
Fulmart. Fissaye, a quick and violent dance much used by the French. Fisselle,
for fiscelle, pack-thread. Fissure, a cleft, or chink. Fissure, cleft, chinked.
Fisticin, of fistick nuts. Fistique, the fistique nut. Fistonneau, a little
Kna^e. Fistuleux, full of fistula's, or of holes like a sponge. Fivatier, a
Copyholder, or customary Tenant, properly the Vassal or Tenant of a Lord
Cavier. Fivele, a huckle. Fizain, spindle-tree, pri k-timber. Fizelle, as
fiselle. Flabellation, a fanning, or giving wind unto. Flabelle, fanned, that
has wind given to it. Flaccide, flaggy, limber, hanging loose. Flacconner, to
^^y the pot, to drink hard. Flache, as flaccide. Flacquer, to mak^ a thing to
s^^^. Fla^^a, (...) Flagellation, a whipping, or lashing. Flagell^ w^^^^d,
^^hed. Flageller, (...). Flageo^, (...). Fla^^ (...) ^^gcoler en (...) to
^^itter. Fla^ (...) a wi^^^r; also (...) (...), ^^s stag, or slower de (...).
Flagorner, to tell tales. Flagorneur, a tale-teller, a pick-thank, a secret
accuser. Flagrance d'un delict, the plain apparency, or pa^^ableness, of an
offense; the crying of a sin. Flagrant, flaming, burning. Prendre au faict
flagrant, to apprehend upon the deed doing, or presently after. Flaine, a tick
for a bed. Flair, scent, smell. Flairement; a scenting, or smelling. Flaireur,
a scenter, or smeller. Flaironne, scented, smelt, vented. Flaironner, to scent,
smell, or vent. Flaistri, Flaistrir, Flaistrissure. See fletri, fletrir,
fletrissure in the N. D. Flaitrir, as ^aistrir. Flaman, Flambant, a kind of
Sea-fowl, of the bigness of a Stork, and indifferent good meat. Flambant,
(Adj.) flaming. Flambe, flame, a great blaze of fire; also the blue flower de
lace. Flambelet, a small link. Flambillon, a small flame, light, or link.
Flambo, a kind of long, slender, and flame-coloured Seafish. Flamboyantement,
radiantly. Flamiche, a kind of better bread than ordinary; also a kind of
cake. Flamman, as flaman. Flammeche, as Flammesche, a spark. Flammette, a
little flame; the herb Crowfoot; a kind of la^^^t. Flammie, the Office, or
Dignity of a Pagan Archpriest. Flamme-vome, flame-vomiting. Flammuche, as
flamiche. Flammuie, the herb called upright Clamberer, or upright Virgins
bower; also the herb Spear-wort, or Spear-crowfoot. Fl^n^^^ a ar^^g^^-horses
drawing (...), these that run along his (...) (...), ^^e-lang^^, ar^^^r for
(...) th^cks or (...)of a barb^d (...). Fla^here, (...) or (...) building. F^ a
(...), or little custard. (...). (...) or ^^tes of (...), read, to be (...).
Fl^ (...) stag^^. Flasche, as flache. Flasconner, as flaconner. Flasquet, a
little flask. Flassade, the covering of a bed; also the daintiest kind of Ray,
or smooth Thornback. Flastereau, a kind of flat Naveau. Flastrer, as Flastrir.
Flastri, marked, burnt, or branded with an hot iron. Flastrir, to mark, burn,
or brand with an hot iron. Flatant, Flatard, flattering, or sawning on.
Flatelet, an Hallibut-fi^h. Flatement, a flattering, or fawning on. Flatereau,
one that flatters a little. Flateresse, a flattering, or coxing woman.
Flateusement, slatteringly, fawningly. Flatre, branded in the forehead, bored
through the ear, marked for a knave. Flatrer, to brand, burn, or mark with a
hot iron. Flatri, as flatre. Flatrissement, a branding, burning, or marking
with a hot iron; a public mark, or disgrace. Flatti, heaten, or made flat.
Flattir, to heat, or mak^ flat. Flatucux, Flatulent, flatulent, windy, full of
windy humors. Flatuosite, windiness, fullness of wind. Flavelle, trifling.
Flayau, a slail (to thrash with.) Fleble, for foible, feeble, or weak.
Flecheurs, bowers, the muscles that serve to bow the joints of the fingers.
Flechissure, a bending, or bowing; also crookedness. Flection, the same.
Flegart, a common place, or way. Flegmon, a hot and (...) ^welling or
inflammation of blood. Fleichade, a wound or ^rick of an arrow. Fleiche, for
fleche, an (...). Fleschier, an Archer. Fletan, as flettan. Flet^let, a^
Hall^b^^-fi^h. Flettan, the greate^t k^^^ of Salt-fish. Fl^^te, a ^ighter, a
small or (...) a sl^^nder. Fleve, weak. Flemattique, for flegmatique,
phlegmatic. Fleume, for phlegm, phlegm. Fleurage, a heap of flowers. Fleurant,
smelling, or casting a scent. Fleuree, sroth, or scum. Fleureter, lightly to
pass over; to vent, or wind; also to sneak, or cave-drop it. Fleuretis de
paroles, an idle flourish of words. Fleurette, for petite fleur, a little
flower. Fleuretter, as fleureter. Fleureux, stored with choice of flowers; also
fragrant, sweet smelling. Fleurin, for florin, a Low Country Coin worth about
11 s. sterling. Fleuronne, flourishing; set thick with flowers. Fleuronner, to
blossom. Fleurtis, a flourish, or flouri hing. Fleurtis des oysillous, the
warbling of little birds. Fleuter, and Fleuteur, as fluter, fluteur in the N.
D. Fleuteuse, a woman that plays on a Flute. Fleutrer, as flatrer. Flexir, to
bend. Flexueux, full of crankles, that has many turnings and windings.
Flexuosite, a crooked turning, an often winding in and out. Flez, a Flounder.
Fly, a jerk, a twang; a shaft, or arrow. Flin, a Thunder-stone, wherewith
Cutlers surbish their blades; or as Esmeril. Flion, the name of a fish not much
unlike a Cockle. Flique de lard, a slitch of bacon. Flis, a slight-shaft.
Flisquant, whisking, twanging. Flo, the high water mark at Sea. A ^lo, floating
or swimming on the Sea. Chooses du flo, Goods that lie floating or swimming on
the top of the water. Floccard, a fashion of head-attire put on by the
betrothed Maidens of Lions, and left off when they have been married a twelve
month. Floche, as flosche. Flocquars, tass ls, puffs, or tufts, as of Sarcenet
that is drawn out of, or cut under a^^ther staff. Flocquer, to pull out, as
Sarcenet in a breech ^ut after the Swisse fashion; to hang forth loose, or to
sit flagging, as an over-wide garment. Flocquoir, a squirt. Floflotement, a
floating, or surging; a bubling, or tempestuous noise. Flofloter, to float,
surge, or wave up and down; to make a bubling, or tempestuous noise. Flon,
Flondelaict, flawn. Floquer, as flocquer. Floquet de poil, a lock of hair.
Gentil floquet, a spruce youth. Florable, the herb Cheese-runnel, or Maids
hair. Floraux, as Jeux floraux, a witty and pleasant Contention among French
Poets; a silver Eglantin^ being the reward or prize for the best doer, and a
Marigold for the next. Floree, the blue s^um of Woad boiling in the Dyers lead;
which sleeted off and dried unto powder, serves Painters and Sick-dyers for
diverse uses. Floret, for fleuret, a soil, a sword with the edge rebated. Flori,
bloomed, blossomed. Floride, lively, lusty, flourishing. Flosche, staggy, weak,
or soft, as a boneless lump of flesh. Soye flosche, Sleave-silk. Flo^age, a
floating, or swimming on the top of. Le premier ^lotage d'un Navire, the
launching of a new Ship. Flotelant, floating, s^^ging. Floton, a ta^^, or lock
of. Flottage, (...) flotage. Flouin, a B^^k of s^^ 4 for 5. tun. Flo^^ for
fleur, flower. Flourir, for fleurir, to blossom. Fluctio^^, for fluxion, a
running of liquor, (...). Fluctuation, a ^^^ging, floating, or swimming; a
doubting, or wa^^ing. Fluctuer, to float, sarg^, or wave up and down; to be
tossed, or dispu^^ted; to be at no certainty. Fluer, to flow, (...), or gilde.
Flueurs de femine, a woman's flowers. Fluid^ment, slowingly, glibly smoothly
long; also moi^tly, t^inly, we^^ly. Fluste^^, a little Flute, or Pipe.
Fluste-^ergiere, Water-plantane. Fluviatile, of, or belonging to a river,
^^ream, or water. Fluxible, Fluxil, flowing, slitting, running. Fo^rre, str^w;
also litter, or sed^^r. Foarreux, f^ll of straw. Focile, the arm from the elbow
to the wrist, the leg or shank from the knee to the ankle. Fodine, a quarry, a
mine; a place or pit whereout any thing is dug. Foetide, stinking. Foeu, for
feu, fire. Fogat, an Engine to catch fish with. Foguer, to grumble; powt, lowr.
Fogon, as fougon. Foiblage de poids, want of weight, scant weight. Foignasse,
Snail-claver. Foigne, a long staff that has at one end a square casting-net,
used most by Sea-fishermen. Foigner, to grumble, or be offended at; also to
dissemble. Foine, as fo^^inne, a Pole-cat; also a Pigeon-house that has one
entry on the top without other hole or window for light or air; also as feign,
Be^ch-mast. Foinil, for senil, a Hay-lost. Foirard, a shitten fellow; also a
kind of white Vine or Grape of no great worth, and apt to loosen the belly.
Foirelle, French (or Garden) Mercury. Foirer, to squi^t, to shite thin; also to
beray with squirting. Foiret, as forc^. Foirolle, as foirelle. Foi^ du corpse,
the waste, or middle. Foisonner, to abound. Foisonneux, abundant, plentiful.
Foite-cul, a pedant, a whip-arse. Foiter, for fouetter, to whip. Folatrie,
wantonness, foppery, soolery. Foleton, petit-folet, a little fop. Folier, to
^lay the fool. Follasses, Beets. Follastrerie, Follet, as folatrerie, folet in
the N. D. Follettes, Orage, golden herb. Follicule, a little bag, or sack; also
an husk, peel, or skin enclosing seed. Follier, as solier. Folliner, to play
the wanton. Fonceau, a little bottom, hole, hollow (or deep) place. Fonceau
d'un Canon, the big or broad end of a Cannon-bit. Fondalite, right of, or
interest in the soil. Fondamment, fondeement, extremely. Pleurer fondeement, to
melt into tears, to weep extremely. Fondegue, a Merchants Warehouse, or
Storehouse. Fondelfe, a kind of Engine for battery, used in old time. Fondier,
a slinger, one that throws stones out of a sling. Fondileures, rises, or choans
in a woman's overful breasts. Fondrailles, the grounds, lees, or dregs of
liquor. Fondreau, as fondrillon. Fondree, as fondrailles. Fondrillon, a bottom
to wind silk, thread, or yarn on; also a knot tangled in thread. Fondroyer, to
hang down to the ground. Fondure, a founding, melting, or casting of metals,
etc. Fonge, a Mushroom, or Teads-stool. Fongeux, spungy, light, or full of
holes as a sponge. Fongnement, a frowning, a discontented grumbling. Fongner,
to frown; also to grumble. Fons, as fonts in the N. D. Font, for fontaine, a
spring, a fountain. Fontaigner, of, or belonging to a fountain. Fontaigneux,
full of springs, or fountains. Fontainer, as fontaigner. Fontanel, as vein
fontanelle, the principal vein in the thigh of a horse. Fontanelle, a running
sore, an issue. Fontenelle, Fontenette, Fontenil, Fontenille, a little spring,
or fountain; also an issue. Fontenelle de la test, the upper part of the head
forward. Foradjour, as Adjour. Forage, as Droict de forage, four pots of wine
upon every piece sold by retail, due unto the Lord of the Jurisdiction wherein
it is sold. In some Places it is also two pots upon every piece that is sold in
gross. Forans, a certain Receptacle for Seawater (whereof salt is made)
conveyed into it out of others by a wooden pipe or trunk. Forbatu, thoroughly
beaten, swinged out of doors. Forbe, for fourbe, a cousening trick. Forbeu,
mellow, cup-shotte^. Cheval forbeu, a horse that has drank, being too hot, and
is thereby foundered. se Forboire, to furfeit with drinking, to take a dram too
much; also to founder, as a horse, by drinking when he is very hot. Forbour,
for faubourg, a suburb. Forcable, forceable, that may be forced. Forcement, a
forcing, or compelling; also a bursting open, or breaking through. Forcenant,
as Chien forcenant, a hot dog after his game. Forcenement, madness, fury.
Forcener, to be mad, or furious. Forcenerie, as forcenement. Forceur, a forcer,
a violent subduer, conqueror, or overcomer. Forchaffer, to shoot awry, as a bow
that is stronger of one side than of another. Forchemine, wandered, gone out of
the way. Forcheminer, to wander, to straggle. Forchette, for fourchette, a
fork. Forcommand, a putting out of possession by order or command of a Court.
Forcommande, outed, put out of possession. Forconseille, ill-advised.
Forconseiller, to give ill advice. Forconte, a misreckoning. Forconte,
misreckoned. Forconter, to misreckon. Fore, bored. Forer, to bore. Fores, de
fores, without, forth of. Forestain, woody. Forsan, a knave, rogue, or rascal.
Forfanter, to play the rogue. Forsanterie, roguery; also a crew of Rogues.
Forgas, a seizure, or sale of goods, upon execution. Temps de forgas, certain
days after the open sale of goods in execution given to prove the Execution
wrongful, and recover them with costs; or to satisfy his Creditor; or to have
his goods again for the money which was bid for them; which time if he neglect,
they are gone for ever. Forgetture, as forjet in the N. D. Forhu, the hooping
of huntsmen at the death of their chase. Forhuer, to whoop, shout, or hollow.
Foriboles, as fariboles. Forissir de raison, to exceed the limits of reason.
Forissu, sprung, or issued out of. Forjur, a release, or discharge.
Forjurement, the same. Forliner, for forligner, to jut (or lean) out. Formage,
for fromage, cheese. Formaillet, an enchanted Image, as fermaillet. Formarcher,
as fauxmarcher. Formelier, a last-maker. Formelize, formed, whereunto form is
given. Formelizer, to form, to give form unto. Formene, disquieted, vexed,
tormented. Formener, to vex, disquiet, or torment. Forment, for froment, wheat.
Formentin, of wheat. Formerets, the small branches of a Vault in the ends or
inside thereof. Formi, for fourmi, an ant. Formiant, as pouls formiant, a pulse
that beats very fast, but weakly. Formie, for fourmi, an ant. Formiere,
Formiliere, an ants hole, or nest. Formillement, as fourmillement in the N. D.
Formilles, as Herpes. Formillon, a small black spider like an ant, and spotted
on the back with little star-like specks. Formion, a small ant, or pismire.
Formoret, a kind of strong lie, whereof soap is made. Formort, formorture, an
escheat falling to a man by the death of another. Formosite, beauty,
comeliness. Formoture, as formort. Fornage, as fournage. Fornaise, for
fournaise, a furnace. Forniquer, to play the fornicator. Forparler, to speak
ill. se Forpasser d'un pas, to go a step further than he needs. Forpie, the
mouth, or middle of an opened pair of sheers. Forage, as forage. Forregardant,
outlooking, or looking awry. Forsage, overweight in money. Forsaire, for
forcat, a Galley-slave. Forsene, for forcene, mad. Fortelet, Fortet, a little
strong. Fortifiable, which may be fortified. Fortifiement, a fortifying, or
strengthening. Fortraction, a withdrawing; a lurching, or purloyning.
Fortunable, unfortunate. Fortunal, fortune; also a great and sudden tempest at
Sea. Fortunement, fortunately, happily. Fortuner, to make fortunate. Fossaille,
ditched in. Fossailler, to ditch in. Fossal, a ditch. Fosselu, dimpled.
Fossetteux, full of little pits or pock-holes. Fossile, grand fossile, the
bigger of the two bones in the leg. Petite fossile, the less. Fossile, (Adj.)
which is, or may be dug. Fossoir, a mattock. Fossourer, for fossoyer, to
dig. Fossoye, a certain Garment used in old time. Fossoyement, Fossoyeure, a
digging. Foterle, Foterne, Sarasins birth-wort, or heart-wort. Fotu, a
fomentation, or medicine applied to warm or comfort a diseased part. Fou, for
hetre, a beech-tree. Fouaille, the reward which hunters give their dogs at the
death of a wild swine. Fouailler, the sindging, or dressing of a wild swine.
Fouant, a musk-cat, or a pole-cat. Fouarre, as foarre. Fouasse, for fouace, a
bun, or cake hastily baked. Fouassier, a maker of such cakes. Foueque, for
foulque, a fen-duck. Foucees, Kids, the smallest sort of baven. Fouere, the
squirt. Fouettable, worthy to be whipped. Fouettade, Fouettement, a lashing, or
whipping. Fouerreux, fit to be whipped. Foufoulet, as jouer an foufoulet, to
play the whore. Fougade, a mine, an up-blowing fire-work, or wilde-fire; a
sudden fury, or impetuous passion. Fougasse, as fouasse. Fougeraye, a ferny
plot of ground. Fougon d'un navire, the Cook-room of a ship. Fougoux, for
fougueux, furious. Fouir, for foyer, a hearth. Fouier, for fouiller, to search,
or feel all over. Fouigner, as foigner. Fouillard, a leavy bough, or branch.
Fouille-merde, a beetle. Fouillouse, a bag, or scrip. Fouisseure, a digging.
Foulage, as foulement in the N. D. Foulere, a fen-duck. Foulee, the slot of a
Stag; the fuse of a Buck, their foyling. Fouliere, as foulerie in the N. D.
Foulis, as foulement in the N. D. Foullage, full age, money paid for the
thickning of cloth at a fulling-mill. Foulle, fouller, foullon, foullure. See
them with a single l in the N. D. Foullonne, thickened, or fulled. Foullonner,
to full, or thicken cloth in a mill. Foullouaire, or Fouloire, the round
trough, wherein the wheel of a press often turning, or the treader often
stamping, crushes the stuff that is in it. Foulz, certain pieces of Venison cut
out from between the neck and the essay of a Deer, that part of the side which
is next to the neck. Foupi, rumpled. Foupier, for fripier, a broker. Foupir, to
rumple. Fouquer, to lay hold o^. Fouquer, a Game wherein one setting a staff
against his nose r^ns tilting at a candle. Fourbouilly, boiled or stewed meat,
with broth or pottage. Fourbure, the foundering of a horse. Four, a fork, or
any thing that makes a sharp angle; also forkedness. Fourcelle, the
breast-blade, or heart-blade; also the channel (or crow) bone. Fourchage, a
branch of a family. Fourche, for fourchu, forked. Fourche-fiere, a
quarter-staff. Fourche-fiere a trois points, a trout-spear. Fourchelle, a
little fork. Fourchement, fork-wise, also crookedly. Fourcheon, a forket.
Fourcheran, drageon fourcheran, the vine-sprig that shoots out between two
branches. Fourcheu, for fourchu, forked. Fourchier, a cord untwi^^ed in the
midst, and used as a sling. Fourchier a trois dents, a trout-spear, or
eel-spear. Fourchument, as fourchement. Fourdrines, Slo^s; also wild or
mountain-plumbs. Fourdrinier, the black thorn that bears sloes; also the wild
or mountain plumb-tree. Fourgangnement, a recovering of, or a re-entring into
land, for non-payment of rent. Fourgangner, to re-enter into land, for
non-payment of rent. Fourmage, for fromage, cheese. Fourmageon, a little
cheese. Fourmagere, and Fourmagerie, as Fromagere, and fromagerie in the N. D.
Fourmageur, Fourmagier, for fromager, a Cheese-monger. Fourmageux, full of
cheese. Fourman, wheaten. Form, a kind of net for waterfowl. Fourment, for
froment, Wheat. Fourmentee, Furmety, boiled wheat. Fourmenter, to bring forth
wheat. Fourmentier, yielding wheat, or of wheat. Fourmiant, soft, and gentle.
Fourmier, for fourmiller, to swarm as Ants. Fourmiere, for fourmillere, an Ants
hole, or nest. Fourmion, a little Ant. Fournaille, baked. Fournailler, to bake.
Fournaisier, belonging to a furnace. Fourni, or Fournil, a Bake-house.
Fournille, baked. Fourniller, to bake. Fourniller, (Adj.) haunting the
Bake-house. Fournissement, a furnishing. Fournoye, baked. Fournoyer, to bake.
Fourquat, a kind of Plough. Fourque, for fourche, a fork, a pair of gallows.
Fourquier, a Brewers stirrer. Fourrager, for fourragement, a forraging. Fourre,
(Subst.) a kind of fishnet stretched out with hoops in the form of a
Whale-bone-sleeve. Fourrie, pillage, forage. Fourriere, a close cillar to lay
wine or oil in. Fourrons, a nickname given by those of Thoulouse to the
Sergeants or Attendants of the Captain of the watch. Fourser, to spawn, as
Carps in a pond. Fousser, to dig, to turn up a Vineyard somewhat before the
vines begin to bud. Foussette, as fossette in the N. D. Fousteau, Fouteau, a
B^^ch-tree. Foutoir, a battering ^am; also a rammer, or a rammer-head for a
piece of Ordnance. Fouton, a Snipe. Foutouer, as foutoir. Fouyasse, as fouasse.
Fouyer, for foyer, a hearth. Le fouyer d'une arquebuse, the firepan of a Gun.
Fouyer de galere, the Cook-room in a Galley. Fouynne, as fouinne. Fousil, as
fusil in the N. D. Foy, as le soy du corpse, the middle, or waste. Foyes, the
slot of a Stag, the view of a Buck, the footing of either. Foyne, Beech-mass.
Foynne, as fouinne. Frac, as on ne trouve chez luy ni sric ni frac, there is
nothing to be got in his house. Fracteur, a breaker; also a Bankrupt. Fracture,
burst, broken. Fragate, for fregate, a Frigate. Fragrant, fragrant, odoriferous.
En fragrant delict, while the offense is fresh in memory, or presently after
the committing thereof. Fraille, frail, brittle. Fraille, crumbled in pieces.
Frailler, to crumble in pieces. Fraire, to surfeit; to fill full; also to
swell. le Frais d'un homme, the fresh or new steps of a man. Fraise, pain
fraise, a kind of panado. Fraisier, a strawberry-plant. Frasle, broken, burst.
Fraisle, as frail, frail. Fraisler, to break, to burst into many small pieces.
Fraislure, frailty, brittleness. Fraisturement, in a frail manner. Fraisne, for
frene, an Ah-tree. Fraize, febves fraizees, shaled beans. Fralater, Fralate.
See frelater, frelate in the N. D. Fralatement, a racking of Wine, a drawing it
off the lees. Franc-estu, the Garden-globe, (the name of an apple.)
Franc-gontier, a good rich Y^oman. Franche-mariette, the name of an apple.
Franchemulle d'un mouton, a s^eeps ^awl. Francier, to speak fine and eloquent
French. Francisque, a kind of ax, and sword. Francoly, Francoule, as Francolin
in the N. D. Francquiesine, a certain free Tenure or Manor differing from a
Fief, and conserring on such as hold by it many privileges. Francsoreau, the
name of a Pear. Franctopin, a clown, or churl. Frangible, apt to be broke.
Frapart, Frappart, a knocker, striker, beater. Frapperie, a knocking, or
beating; also knocking staff. Frappe-teste, a Spider whose sting is near, or in
her head. Frarachage, as fraresche. Frarachaux, coheirs, partners in an
Inheritance, or succession. Frarager, as frarescher. Fraresche, partition of
lands amongst coheirs. Frarescher, to part land, or a succession, as brethren
or coheirs. Frarescheur, a partner, or coheir. Frareusete, the custom, course,
or title of partition among Coheirs. Frareux, parted, or partable among
copartners. Frarieparage, fraternity, brotherhood. Frasque, a mockery; also an
odd trick. Frater, a Friar; also a Surgeon. Fraterniser, to agree, as
Brothers. Fratesque, Frier-like; of or belonging to a Friar; also hypocritical,
s^perstitious. Fratre, a Friar, a Brother, a Consederate. Fratrisseau, a
nouice, a young and unexperienced Friar. Fraudateur, as fraudeur. Fraudation, a
defrauding, deceiving, beguiling. Fraudeur, a d^frauder, deceiver, or beguiler.
Fraudulement, Fraudulentement, fraudulently. Fraux, commons, common-grounds; or
as fros. Frax, a kind of ravenous fish. Fraxinelle, bastard-dittany. Fray, a
Friar; also, as fraye, the spawn of fish. Frayable, as chemin frayable, a
beaten way. Frayeux, fearful, dreadful. Frayoire, the rack-staff, or nog of a
mill. Frayouer, for frayeure, a Deers barnishing of his head. Fredaine, a
roguish prank. Fredinfredailler, to leacher. Fredonneux, full of quavering.
Fredonnise, quavered. Fredonniser, to quaver. Fregolier, the lote-tree, or
nettle-tree. Freguereul, the little fish called a Minnow. Frelan,
Butchers-broom, (a shrub.) Frelaut, a good fellow. Freloque, a tatter that
hangs down trailing from a Garment. Frelore, undone, forlorn, lost. Frelot, as
frelaut. Freluche, a moat, a small straw, or lint. Freluquer, a French
halfpenny; also a pretty d^^pper fellow. Frelus, as frelore, or overthrown
horse and foot. Fremiller, for fourmiller, to swarm. Fremoirs, the clasps of a
Book; also a Joyners straight chizels. Frenasie, Frenatique, as frenzy,
frenetique in the N. D. Frenouiller, to rake, to pudder in. Frerage, as
fraresche. Frere-lay, a Servant, or Houshold-officer in an Abbey or Convent.
Frerer, to swell, also to itch. Frerescheur, as frarescheur. Frereux, as Cousin
frereux, Consin-germane by the brothers side. Frerie, a Fri^r^. Frerot, a
shaving, or shifting fellow. Fres, for frais, char^^, ^^st, expense. Fres, for
frais, (Adj.) fresh, new, cool. Fretange, one hog, or more, due unto the Master
of the Waters and F^rc^ of Au^igny (and elsewhere) by the Farmers of the
Ma^^age and Br^^sage thereof. Freseades, refreshments, or things refreshing.
Freschedent, a Glutton or greedy fellow. Freschin, a certain bitter-sweet
apple; also rankness; the small or scant of ^^rmines, foxes, polecats, etc.
Fresillon, Privet. Freslonne, stung with Hornets. Fresnaye, a gro^e, or wood of
Ash-trees. Fresnier, Fresnin, of, or belonging to Ash. Fresnoy, as fresnaye.
Fresqu^de, as fres^ades. Fres^^rades, compliments of outward courtesy in
matters of entertainment or salutation; idle gestures, actions to no purpose;
also a horses lifting up of his legs. Fretail de perles, ragged pearls, pearls
of small value. Fretaille, out, hacked, notched. Chemise fretaillee de filets,
a shirt or smock wrought in frets about the skirts. Fretel, a kind of whistle
which the Sow-gelders of France usually carry about them. Fretoure, for fret, a
fraughting, loading, or farnishing of an hired ship. Fretille, straw.
Fretillard, Fretilleur, a wanton companion; also a busi^-body. Fretillon, a
little nimble Dwarf, or hop on my thumb; a Jack-stickler. Fretinfretailler, as
fredinfredailler. Fretrots, a S^if of Religious men and women in^^^uous, as the
Adamits, by night, and suppressed in the year 1310. Frez, for fraicheur, cool,
or coolr^^s. Frez, for frais, (Adj.) fresh, new, or cool. Freze, for fraise, a
ruff; also a ^^^es-chaldern. Freze, set as a r^ss, ruffled. Febves frezees,
shaled beans. Frezillon, as fresillon, Pri^^t. Friable, ^asie to be broken, or
bruised. Friandeau, a little pick-morsel. Friander, to feed daintily. Fribours,
a kind of counterfeit dou^^^. The Huguenots ha^^ also (...) ^rmed so by such
as accounted them counterfeit st^ff. Fry, See frac. Fricandeux, short,
s^^^^less, and dainty puddings, made of good fl^h and h^rbs chopped together,
then rolled up into the form of ^^^^ri g^, etc. and so boiled. Friction,
^ication, rubbing, or frigging. Frid. as frit. Fries, the view, or footing of a
(...). Friez, as friche in the N. D. Fri^^ler, to feed curiously, to pick but
the best ^its. Fri^alet, a dainty mouthed youth, a pi k-^orsel. Frigalleries
^^inties, ^ick^^sh-mors^^. Frigoide, (...) Tym^. Friller, (...) cold. Frime, as
il n'en fit point de frime, he seemed not to be moved at it. Bled frime, black
wheat, cow (or ox) wheat. Fringant, fine, spruce. Fringoter, to quaver; or as
fringotter. Fringoteries, frets, cranklings. Fringotter, to fret, or work frets
in Gold, Silver, etc. Fringue, fair la fringue, to frig. Fringuer, the same;
also to be fine, or spruce, to wash a glass. Fringuereau, a fine fellow, a
sp^^^e companion; also a lascivious person. Fringuerie, sprucen^ss; wa^tonness.
Frinson, as Pinson. Friole, consumed, devoured. Frioler, to consume, or devour
with a noise, as fire does stubble; also to brav^ it. Friolet, a lickorous boy.
Frioller, as frioler. Fripaille, foiled, or ^^r^ with wearing or handling;
ragged, or full of jags. Frippe-sauce, a li^k^^ish fellow. Frippe-lippe, the
same. Fripponiere, a ^^^ing Sl^t. Friquandeux, as fricandeux. Friquenelles,
small chitterlings; also a company of rogues, rascals, ^hagrags, and ignorant
clowns. Friscades, as frescades. Frisotte, ^^^^d. Frisquaire, Frisque, frisk,
li^^ly, brisk. Frissement d'un traict, the wh^^ing sound of (...) thing ^^row.
Frissure. as frizure. Frisure, a ^ght hurt, a s^ratch. Friteau, (...). Fritou,
a (...) of Shell-fi^h of a spa^^s l^^^th, and somewhat like a M^^llet. Friture,
a saying. Frivol^ment, (...), to (...) purpose. Frivus^ule, a (...), or (...).
Frizailles, (...) of seis^. Frize, frize, ^rizer, frizon, frizure. See them
with (...) of (...) the N. D. Frizoter, to (...). From, a C^^^^^^. Frodiere,
(...). Frodilie, as Aphrodille. Froidelet, (...) ^^^sh. Froidelettement,
^^lushly. Froidilleux, ^^^lly. Froidure, coldness, winter-weather. Froidureux,
^ery chill, very cold. Froislon, for frelon, a hornet. Froissis, a ^rushing, or
breaking in pieces; also a h^stling, or knocking of armed bodies one against
another; also fallow ground, plowed lands. Les froissis de^ Causes, the
conflict of adverse All^gations or Pleadings. Froissure, as froissis; or a
crash, or breach. Fromentin, of, or belonging to w^^^t. Froncis, ^^^eit, fold,
or gathering. Le sroncis du sourcil, the kritting of the eye-braws. Fronde,
cast, hurled, as from a sling. Frondelee, the cast, or shot of; also a rap, or
blow, from a sting. D'une mesme frondelee, at once, at one (...), with one
stone. Frondelet, ^^baked meat somewhat resembling a flawn. Frondillon, as
fondrillon. Frondoyer, to bring forth leaves, or leaved branches. Fron^al,
(Adj.) of, or belonging to the forehead. Frontiger, to front, or accost; also
to dwell on the frontiers of. Frontoyant, fronting, affronting, near unto a
front. Frontoyer, to front, to affront, or he near unto a front. Froqueur, a
mender of highways. Fros, as froe; also all kind of common waters. Frotis, a
common place, or void ground in a Town. Frorte, as frete in the N. D.
Frotte-botte, a maker of boots clean, a b^se dr^dge. Frottee, Frottis, for
frotement, a rubbing. Frottoir, a rubbing cloth; also a rubbing, or friction.
Frou, a public and common place (...) for every man to resort u^^o, (...) make
use of; a waste ground. Frouelle, an ag^el, pin, or warnel in the (...) Frouer,
to crum, or break small. Frou^ent, for froment, wh^^t. Frou^ente, a kind of
sweet and ^^^^ing ^^ite gra^^. Froumente, farmety. Froumenteux, full of w^eat.
Froye, ra^^ed, fr^tted. Froyement, a rabbing, a fretting. Froyer, to (...), to
f^^t. Froyer, (Subst.) a rubber; also a rasp. Fructueux, fruitful. Fructuosite,
fruitfulness. Fructure, fruition, enjoyment, possession. Fruir, to enjoy.
Fruition, fruition, possession. Frumentau, the wild Malberry. Frumenteau, a
kind of white Vine. Frumentee, as froumentee. Frumentelle, a certain pear good
to be dried. Frustratoirement, in vain, to no purpose. Fryez, the view, or
footing of a Deer. Fuchiere, as feuchiere. Fueillade, a green arbor. Fueillage,
as feuillage in the N. D. Fueillame, a bunch of leaves. Fueillants, an Order of
begging Friars wearing habits of a brownish color. Fueillar, a green branch or
bough; also a close thief. Fueille, for seuille, a leaf. Fueillee, a green
arbor. Fueiller, to bear leaves, to wax green with leaves. Fueiller, fueillete,
fueilleter, as feuillet, feuillete, feuilleter in the N. D. Fueillette, a
Wine-vessel, or measure containing about eleven and an half of our Gallons.
Fueilleux, for feuillu, full of leaves. Fueillir, as fueiller. Fueillu, for
feuillu, full of leaves. Fueillu, (Subst.) a kind of round, red, and very
sweet apple. Fueillure, plenty of leaves; also leaf-work. Fuiroles, as furoles.
Fuitif, for fugitif, a f^gitive. Fulei, supported, upheld. Fulcir, to support,
to uphold. Fuligine, soot, smoakiness. Fuligineux, sooty, smoaky. Fulmination,
a thunder-striking. Fulminatoire, fulminatory, thundering. Fumage, a dunging,
manuring, or fattening with dung. Fumat,, a Ray, or Seate-fish. Fumeau, a
smoking stick. Fumelle, for femelle, female. Fumement, as fumage; also a
smoking; a hanging in the smoke. Fumeron, a little dunghill, a small heap of
dung. Fumeusement, smeakily. Fumier, (Adj.) of dung. Fumiere, for fumee, smoke.
Fumigation, a smoking, or persuming with smoke. Funain, as mettre un navire en
funain, to more a ship, to tie her under a lee-shore. Funambule, a Rope-dancer.
Function, for fonction, function. Fundigue, a Warehouse, or Storehouse.
Fundique, the same. Funebrement, mournfully; after the manner of a funeral.
Funge, a Mushroom, or Toadstool. Fungosite, spunginess, lightness, hollowness.
Fungueux, spungy, light, or hollow. Fur, as au fur de, proportionably,
according to, after the rate of. Furain, as funain. Furas, as fatras in the N.
D. Furculaire, as Os furculaires, the points of the forepart of the shoulders
meeting a little below the neck. Furemplage, as fur. Furfure, branny, scaly
like bran. Furfures, dandriff. Furgon, for fourgon, a fire-fork. Furial,
^aging, furious, mad. Furibond, the same. Furiole, as furole. Furlu^que,
searched, f^rreted, hunted out. Furole, S. Helmes fire. Furt, theft. Furuneule,
a fellon, a whitlaw. Fusain, spindle-tree, prick-timber. Fusele, span upon a
spindle, made like a spindle. Fuselier, a spindle-maker. Fusier, as fusain.
Fusiller, to search every corner. Fusque, dusky, brown, dark. Fustaillier, a
Cooper, or Cask-maker. Fuste, fusty, tasting of the cask; also branchless, or
without boughs, as a tree; also rifled, ransacked. Fustee, bois de suftee,
branchless wood, naked, or powled trees. Fuster, to stock a tree, to bare it of
its branches; also to ravage, ransack, or rifle. Fusterne, the upper part of a
fir tree, full of joints or knots. Fustier, any Artificer that works in wood.
Fustigation, a whipping, or scourging; also a basting with a cudgel. Fustiger,
Fustiguer, to whip, to bang. Futile, vain, foolish, unprofitable. Fuye, a
pidgeon-house; also a flight of pigeons. Fuyeur, a flyer, a coward, a
runaway. Fuzain, as fusain. Fuze, fuzee, fuzer, fuzil, fuzilier. See them with
s instead of z in the N. D.
G
GAbarrier, a lighter-man. Gabellage, an imposing, or paying of Custom.
Gabeloux, a scoffing knave. Gaber, to deride; also to cheat. Gaberies, Gabes,
jeers. Gabet, a white leper. Gabeur, a jeerer, a cheat. Gabgregeux, rogues,
rascals, base fellows. Gabian, as Gavian. Gabinet, for Cabinet, a Cabinet.
Gabors, the ribs, or knees of a Ship. Gabot, as Gabet; also a red fish; also as
Gavot. Gaboux, apt to seer. Gades, red Gooseberries. Gadille, as Gadrille.
Gadiller, to paddle, jog, or stir up and down. Gadouard, a Jakes-farmer,
Tomturd; also a Sca^enger. Gadoue, dung, ordare. Gadriers, as gades, red
Gooseberries. Gadrille, a Robin-red-breast. Gadriller, a wench to play the rig.
Gadrouillette, a feigned word appliable to any cattle. Gaffe, an iron-book
wherewith Seamen pull great fishes into their ships. Gagerie, a distraining, a
distress. Gages, a kind of artificial stone. Gagnole, a kind of hornbeak
fish. Gagrille, a Robin-red-breast. Gahets, a generation of poor, irreligious,
and very laborious Lepers in Gascony. Gaian, the name of a fish. Gaiderope, an
unsavory and ill-tasting Oyster. Gage-plege, a kind of Jurisdiction or Court
in Normandy, wherein the Parties must bind themselves by pawns or sureties, to
continue or make good their Suits. Gagier, a Churchwarden. Gagnable, to be
got, or won; also commodious, profitable. Terres gagnables, rich, or fruitful
ground. Gagnaux, prez gagnaux, fertile meadows which yield a double crop, or
may be twice mowed. Gaigne, for gain, gain, profit. Gaigne, Gaigne-denier,
Gaigne-pain, Gaigner. See them without i in the N. D. Gaigne-journee, a
day-labourer. Gaignerie, a tilled ground; also tillage; or the profit that is
made of it, or the beasts that be used therein. Gaigneur, a gainer, getter, or
winner. Gaillard (Subst.) the Round-house, or hinder-castle of a Ship.
Gaillardet, as guaillardet. Gaillardete, for gaillardise, cheerfulness; also a
piece of folly, or indiscretion. Gaille, as perdrix gaille, the French
Partridge. Gaimaux, Gainaux, as Gagnaux. Gainette, a little sheath. Gaings, the
fruits growing on, or coming of tilled grounds. Gaiosle, Gaiole, as Gayole.
Gaioler, to prattle, or twattle. Gaion, a Jay. Gajure, for gageure, a wager.
Gaiz, fords, or shallow places. Gal, a Cock; also a Derce, or Goldfish.
Galactite, pierre galactite, the milk-stone. Galaffre, a ravenous feeder.
Galaffrerie, a ravenous feeding. Galange, Galangue, English Galingale, or its
Aromatical root. Galaxie, the milkie way in the Firmament. Galbe, a W^n; the
forepart of a doublet; comeliness, gracefulness. Galbe, bien galbe, comely,
graceful, having a good garb. Galbuge, for grabuge, Garboil. Gale-bon-temps, a
merry Grig, a Good Fellow. Galee, the top, or scuttle of a Galley. Gale-fesson,
a scabbed arse. Galefrete, rigged, or trimmed up, as a Ship. Galefreter, to
trim, to rig up, a Ship. Galefretier, rigger, trimmer, mender of Ships; or as
Galefrotier, an idle vagabond, a poor scabby knave. Galemar, a pennar.
Galemment, for galamment, gallantly, bravely. Galeote, a kind of Lizard that is
an enemy unto all Serpents. Galerand, the fowl termed a Bittor. Galerien (Adj.)
of, or belonging to a Galley. Galerite, the Meadow-lark. Galerneux,
North-westerly. Galetage, Garrets, or Garret-work. Galier, a Jade, a dull
horse. Galiffre, a greedy feeder. Galiffre, greedily eaten. Galiffrer, to eat
greedily. Galimachue, Galimassue, a Club. Galingal, Galingale. Galin-galois,
Galin-galon, a merry scab, a Whores son. Gallangue, as Galangue; also the
Sea-toad. Gallant, gallanterie, gallantise. See them with a single l in the N.
D. Galle, rubbed, scratched; also entertained with variety of sport. Gallee,
for galere, a Galley. Gallemar, as galemar. Galler, to gall, fret, itch; also
to rub, or scratch; also to be merry, or to make merry. Galler le bon temps, to
pass the time merrily away. Gallerand, a Bittor. Gallere, Gallerie, and
Gallerien. See them with a single l in the N. D. Gallet, the shoulder-piece, or
point; the hinder and upper part of the neck; in a horse, the Withers.
Gallette, for galete, a kind of wreathed Cake. Galleverdine, a gaberdine, a
long coat of course stuff. Gallicelle, as Biaut, or Sequenie. Gallico, na^ping,
unprovided. Gallie, gar^, or gracefulness. Gallien, a Galley-slate. Gallier, a
scurvy fellow, a shifting companion. Gallimart, a case for pens. Galline, a
Gurnard. Gallochier, a Foot-messenger. Gallon, brawn, hardness of the flesh or
skin. Les gallons de cheveux, hard curled locks. Gallopins, as Galopins.
Galoche (m.) as Galochier. Galocher, to behave himself rudely or clowni^hly; to
trot or wander indiscreetly up and down. Galochier, a maker of wooden shoes.
Galochier (Adj.) base, mean, poor; also clownish, rude, rustical. Galoise, a
scabby queen. Galopade, a gal^oping. Galopins, Vnder-cooks, or Scullions in a
Monastery. Galvardine, a Gaberdine. Galvol, a Shittlecock. Gambage, Droict de
gambage, a see or duty of four pottles upon every brewing, paid unto diverse
Lords within the County of Boulonois. Gambayer, to wag the legs in sitting, as
children use to do. Gambe, for jambe, a leg, or shank. Le plus en gambe, the
best footman. Gambeson, a fashion of long horsemans coat. See Gobisson. Gambi,
bent, crooked, bowed. Gambier, to go; also as Gambayer. Gambiller, as Gambier.
Gambir, to bend. Gambre, the Sea-cr^visse. Gamella, a wooden bowl. Gammare, a
Lobster. Gamme, a chime. Ganabin, the North Wind. Ganche, let fall (as in a
strappado) on sharp stakes pointed with iron, and thereon languishing until he
die. Gandalin, a bawd. Gandole, for gondole, a Gondola. Ganglion, a watery
impostumation in the throat. Gangules, kernels, or wartles in the throat.
Ganivet, a little Penknife. Ganivetier, a Penknife maker. Gantelee, the herb
called Fox-gloves, or our Ladies gloves. Gantes, for Jantes, the selles of a
Cart-wheel. Gaquiere, land which lies lay. Gar, un regard a gar, s^aint look.
Garagnon, a Stallion. Garantage, a warranting. Garavelle, the rame of a pear.
Garb, a garb, comeliness, or good fashion. Garber, to spruce it, to set forth.
Garbot, a kind of fi^h. Garbouil, Garburge, garboil, hurly-burly. Garchote, a
waterfowl. Garconne, ridden by boys. Garconner, to play the boy; also to
defile a woman. Garconniere, a leachero^s qu^an. Garde-corps, a Yeoman of the
Guard. Garde-main, a strong glove for a Mason or Stone-cutter to work with.
Gardemaneur, a Creditor, or any other placed by order of Law in a Debtors
house; the which he may keep until he be satisfied, or have security for
satisfaction. Garde-nappe, a wicker wreath set under a dish at meal-times to
save the table-cloth from s^iling. Garde-poing, a vamplate. Garde-porte, a
piece of Tapstry hung before an open door, a door-piece. Garde-serre, the rest
of the lock of a Harquebuse. Gardin, for Jardin, a Garden. Gardouche, a
storehouse, or garner. Gardouer, a little pond. Gare, Terre garee, old fallow
ground. Garenciere, a plot of ground sowed with Madder. Garendie, for garantie,
warranty. Garenne, made into a Warren; made private, or kept from common use.
Garenneux, loving, or living in Warrens. Garent, Garenti, Garentie, Garentir,
Garentissement. See them with an a instead of e in the N. D. Garentage,
warranty. Garentigionne, Instrument garentigionne, an authentical Instrument
made by a Notary public, and signifying that execution is ready to come out
against a confessing and almost condemned Debtor. It Is also a kind of enrolled
Bond, whereby both a man's body is subject unto arrest, and (...) goods to
execution. Garentisseur, for Garant, a Warranter. Garenty, for garanti, one
that is warranted. Garer, to beware. Garet, for gueret, new-broken land, or
fallow. Gargamelle, the throat. Garganton, a great gl^tton, one that wastes h^s
substance on good cheer. Gargantua, great throat. Gargarcon, the forepart of
the throat. Gargassane, (...) windpipe. Gargate, the same; or the throat-pipe.
Gargatte, the ^vula, a little piece of spongious flesh like a Cocks spur, and
hanging down in the roof of the mouth. Gargouille, the weesel, or weason of the
throat; also the mouth of a spout representing a Serpent, or the antic face of
some ugly Creature; also a gutter, a bubble, the joint of a flat hinge.
Gargouillis, a gargling, or gargling noise. Gargoule, as gargouille.
Garguesquers, a fashion of strait Venetians without codpieces. Garguette, as
gargatte. Garguille, an odd man. Garguillon, the throat-pipe, whereby meat
passes into the stomach or ^raw of birds, Ga^ieur, a warranter. Garignon, a
buckle bone. Garigues, as guarigues. Gariment, warranty. Tenir en gariment, to
hold part of a fief otherwise than by succession, and upon covenant to pay or
yield for it some duty which is noble, and no way rorutier. Garine, the shrub
Cistus, or Holly-rose. Garingal, as galingal. Garinnon, as garignon. Gariosile,
aromatique garlofile, a certain Composition (wherein there are Ch^^^^) good for
the passions of the h art. Garioller, to whistle, chirp, or warble, as birds.
Garyophyllate, herb Avens, Bennet, or blessed. Gariot, the windpipe of a horse
or other beast. Garipot, the wild Pi^e, or Pit^h-tree. Garlande, for
guirlande, a garland. Garlet, a little Plaice. Garniche, a frock for a Carter.
Garniment, for garnement, a rascal. Garnis, a kind of engine, to catch fish
with. Garnissement, a garnishing, trimming, adorning; a taking to pawn, or in
mortgage; the giving of assurance or security for a debt, etc. Garon, pickle of
fish; also the little Anchove-like fish. Garou, wild, savage, cruel. Garouage,
as aller en garouage, a married man to go a caterwawling, or steal abroad by
night a wenching. Garoupe, the shrub called Spurge-alive, and Widow-wail.
Garous, look to your selves. Garoute, a Carrot-root. Garrau, as garrot.
Garrigues, as Guarrigues. Garrobe, the Carob-bean-cod. Garrobier, the Plant
that bears Carobs. Garrot, Garrote, Garroter. See them with a single r in the
N. D. Garrotement, the winding up of a^cord with a cudgel; also a binding, or
tying hard with cords. Garrulite, chattering, twattling. Gars, a lad, a boy.
Aller a gars, a wench to hunt after lads. Garscher, to chap, as the hands or
lips do in a sharp wind. Garsette, a young lass, a young whore.
Garson-fillette, an Hermaphrodite. Garsonnaille, a true of lads, a troop of
boys. Garsonner, to use boyish tricks. Garsonner la femme d'autruy, to lie with
another man's wife. Garsonner, a little boy. Garsotte, a ^eal. Garsouiller la
femme d'autruy, to lie with another man's wife. Garuche, a torturing Wheel.
Garvences, fitches, chichlings. Garum, pickle of salt fish. Garzignole, the
name of a pear. Gaschettes, pour tenir les doigts fermes, splints for broken,
or crooked fingers. Gascheux, flashy. Gasconner, to steal, or pilfer. Gason,
Gasouillement, Gasouiller. See them with a z instead of s in the N. D. Gasse,
the weed Darn^l. Gast, waste. Gaste-bois, an unskilful Carpenter. Gastelet, a
little cake; also (...) name of a C^^ler-ap^^^. Gastelier, a maker, or seller
of cakes. Gastement, a spoiling. Gaste-museau, a lenten loaf. Gaste-pave, a
rambler, (...) that does nothing but tr^t up and down the Town. Gaster,
(Subst.) the belly. Gasteresse, a woman that wastes. Gaste-sante, unwholesom.
Gasteur, a spoyler. Gastier, an Officer appointed by Justice to guard and watch
the fruits of Vineyards, etc. and to keep them from being imbe^eled or spoiled
by men or beasts. Gastine, a waste, a desert, a rock or sandy ground; also a
Commons; a kind of earth found in Mines of Iron, and helping to melt it.
Gastis, waste, spoil, or a trespass done in grounds by a strangers beasts.
Gastre, vein gastre, the third branch of the trunk of the Port-vein, issuing
side-ways out of the right side thereof, and spreading abroad in the bottom of
the Ventricle. Gastrimythe, a belly-god. Gastrique, the second branch of the
trunk of the Port-vein. Gastrolatre, a belly-god, one that makes a God of his
belly. Gastromantie, divination by the belly. Gastroraphie, the stitching up of
a rent or divided belly. Gastrotomie, the section or cutting up of the belly.
Gare, a bowl, or maz^r. Gathe, a little Shad-fish. Gatte, the top of the
Mainmast. Gattouiller, for chatouiller, to tickle. Gau, as geau. Gavache, a
Country-clown. Gavache, (Adj.) ^^aggy, limber; also clownish; also licentious,
s^^s^al, gl^ttonish. Gavar, splay-(...). Gaubison, as gobisson. Gauche, a blow
with the left hand. Gauche, (Adj.) awry, crooked. Gauchier, for gaucher,
left handed. Gaude. See Gaudez. Gaude, t^^ ^^a^k of a certain plant wherewith
Dyers make their cloths yellow, and afterward (adding Wood) green; also a
small shower of rain. Gaudeamus, a ^^^i^ent. Gaudebillaux, the fat tripes of
stall^d oxen. Gaudees, babbling prayers, or as gaudez. Gaudence, a (...) in an
Inh^ritance, (...) to ni^e (...), and so forward for (...). Gauderon, and its
(...). See Goderon in the N. D. Gaudez, Prayers beginning with a Gaudete.
Gaudi, scoffed, jeered. Gaudine, a pleasant Lass, a gamesome Wench. Gaudinette,
a young merry Lass. Gaudipise, a codpiece. Gaudipise, wearing a codpiece.
Gaudir, to play the good fellow, to be merry. Se gaudir de queleun, to jeer
one. Gaudissant, being merry with, jesting. Gaudisserie, a merriment, a
jesting. Gaudisseur, a pleasant fellow, a jeerer; also a drunken good fellow.
Gave, the gorge or craw of a bird. Gaveau, a hole, or little pit to keep fish
in. Gavereau, a kind of Sea-fowl. Gauffre, as gaftre. Gauffreure, the printing
of a garment; also a setting out with p^ffs. Gauffrier, a Wafer-print. Gauge,
as Jauge in the N. D. Gaugo, as gogo. Gavian, a Sea-mew. Gavier, the throat.
Gaulde, as gaude. Gaul, beaten with a cudgel; also r^bbed. Gaulee, a
cudgelling; also a heating down of fruit, or the h^rting of trees thereby.
Gauler, to cudgel; to beat dow^ with poles; to rob. Gau^eur, an ^^learned, or
Country-S^^^^or, that measures land only by the Pol^. Gaulge, Gaulger,
Gaulgeur. See Jauge, jauger, jaugeur in the N. D. Gaulti^r, a rak^-^^ll, a mad
wag; also a cox^^^^. Gaultiere, a (...). Gavot, a little Seafish. Ga^ote, a
kind of brawl, da^^^d commonly by one a^^ne. Gaupe, a wa^^; also as gaul^iere.
Une la^^e gaupe, an ugly filt^y (...). Gauque, as cauque, a (...) for a wo^^d.
Gaunrier, as gorrier, arrogant, pr^^^, (...). Gau^se, (for cote) d'ail, a clo^^
of (...). Gautier, as toil gautier, a kind of Sea^^^^ ^^^h. Gautte, a
^^^d-fish. G^^^, (...), a Jay. Hur le gay, (...). Gayable, for gueable,
fordable. Gayae, lignum vitae, pock-wood, guiacum. Gaye, jet. Gaye, for guee,
waded over. Gayer, for gue, a ford, or wadable passage over a river. Gayer, for
gu^er, to wade. Gayer, jet. Gayetier, one that makes all manner of small toys
in jet; also one that carries people over a ford on his shoulders. Gaymaux, as
Guimaux. Gayole, a cage; also a prison. Gayole d'un moulin, the trundle, or a
pair of trundle-heads. Gayoler, as Gaioler. Gayon, a kind of small fish.
Gayve, wained; left, forsaken. Gayver, to wai^; to leave, to forsake. Gayves,
chooses gayves, things forsaken, miscarried, or lost; which not being justly
claimed in a year and a day, may be lawfully retained by the finder, or by the
Lord of the Manor wherein they were found. Gazaille, a Commons, or common
field, wherein the Inhabitants of several Parishes have distinct parts. Gazeau,
for gazon, a green turf. Gazel, Gazelle, a kind of wild Goat. Gazonne, covered
with green ^^^f. Gazouillard, Gazouilleux, singing, (...) chirping as a bird.
Gazouillis, a singing, or chirping. Gazouillis de fontaines, the warning of
Fountains. G^^ ^a^^. G^^^^, (...). Geallove, a m^^sure containing ab^^^ 12 of
o^r quarts. G^^^^orie, Giant^^, t^^ generation of Giants. Geantin, (S^^s^.) a
young Giant. Geantiser, (...) it a^ Gi^^^. Geau, (...) Cock. Gect, for (...),
(...) a Mariners (...), or w^lt; a (...) Count^^. Gectons, (...). Gede, (...).
Gehainer, (...). Gehenn^^^, (...). Gehi, (...). Gehir, (...). G^i^^l^, (...) to
^^^plain. Geine, Geine, Geiner, as gene, gene, gener in the N. D. Geisses, a
kind of flat or square pease. Gel, for gelee, frost. Gelais, arbaleste a
gelais, a Stonebow. Gelamine, a kind of Mineral-earth. Gelasin, a wrimple in
the face, or a dimple in the cheek of one that laughs. Gelatine, an excellent
white broth made of the fish Maigre. Gelenaibin, honey mixed with roses. Geleur,
a freezer. Geline, a hen. Gelinette, a little hen. Gelineux, of, or belonging
to hens. Gelinier, a Hen-house. Gelure, Ice, Frost; also a freezing. Gembette,
as Jambette. Geme, tar, or pitch. Gemeau, for Jumeau, a twin. Gemelier, double,
twin-like. Gemelle, a she-twin. Gemine, iterated, doubled. Geminer, to iterate,
to double. Gemissable, lamentable. Gemme, a Gem, a Jewel, a precious stone,
also pitch. Gemme, as couleur gemmee, a Pearl, or Peacock-colour. Gemmeux, full
of Gems, or Jewels, rich, precious. Genaux, casters of Nativities. Gendresse, a
daughter-in-law (by the marriage of a Son.) la Generale, an Admiral-Galley, or
ship. Genere, engendered, begotten, made, framed. Generer, to beget, to
engender, to make, or frame. Genesie, generation, rativity; also a kind of
herb of sundry colors. Genestaye, a broom-close. Genesteux, full of broom.
Genestier, of, or belonging to broom. Genestriere, a ground full of broom, or
iunip^r. Genethliaque, birth, nativity. Genethliatique, a caster of nativities.
Genette, for genet, a Genet, or spanish horse; also a bit for a genet; als^ a
kind of weesel. Gengive, for geneive, a gum. Genial, genial, belonging to luck,
or ^^^e, or to a man's nature, disposition, inclination. Geniculiere, the herb
Solomon-seal, white-root, or white-wort. Genillette, a hen. Genin, a Wittal.
Genne, Genner, as gene, gener in the N. D. Genoillet, Genoilliere, as
geniculiere. Genouillet, a little knee. Gensemy, for jasmin, jasmine. Gent,
(Adj) neat, fine, or spruce; also pliant, soft, easy. Gent corpse, a little
man. Gente, as Jante in the N. D. Gentement, neatly, finely, sprucely; also
softly, easily. Gentienne, for gentiane, the Gentian, bitter-wort, or
fell-wort. Gentisame, a Gentlewoman. Gentilhommeau, a Gentleman of low degree.
Gentiliser, to live as the heathen. Gentilisme, Paganism. Gentilite, the same.
Gentillastre, a mean Gentleman; one that pretends to be a Gentleman and is
none. Gentillastrete, mean gentry; usurped, or new gentry. Gentillement, for
gentiment, prettily, quaintly, neatly. Gentre, as Jantre. Genuflexion, a
bowing, or bending of the knee. Geomantie, divination by points and circles
made on the earth. Geometrien, for Geometre, a Geometrician. Geraffe, as
giraffe. Geratien, a kind of blackish stone. Gerbe, bound up (as Corn) into
sheaves; also a great Garner to keep salt in. Gerbee, a shock, half thrave, or
heap of sheaves; also a bundle of straw. Gerber des javelles, to sheave up
Corn. Gerber des tonneaux, to range, or set Wine-vessels one upon another.
Gerbiere, a ri^k, or stack of corn. Gerce, Gercer, Gerceure, as gerse, gerser,
gersure in the N. D. Gere, the H^brew-half-penny, somewhat more than our penny.
Gere, done, performed, managed; also carried. Gerer, to do, perform, or manage;
also to carry. Gerfault, for gerfau, a Ger-saul^^^. German, (Subst.) the name
of an apple. Germeux, sprouting, budding; full of young sprigs, or buds; full
of seed. Germination, a budding, or putting forth. Geron, for giron, lap, or
bosom. Gerre, the small, or white cackerel-fish. Gesante, a woman that lies in.
Gesine, a lying in. Gesir, to lie down, to lie in childebed; also to remain, or
abide. Gestation, a bearing, or carrying. Gestion, an action. Gesver, as
guesver. Get, a casting, or throwing out; also a set of counters; also set.
Getisse, terre getisse, such as is thrown out of a house, etc. Gets, as Jects.
Getteen, of jet, black as jet. Getter, for jetter, to cast. Gettonner, to bud.
Gettons, for jettons, counters. Gettons des arbres, buds. Geve, a cage, coop,
or open basket to keep chickens in. Geural, a Pass for a Traveller. Geure, as
Giure. Ghirlande, for guirlande, a Garland. Giaret, a small seafish. Gibbar, a
kind of Whale. Gibbasse, a pouch, or budget; also a great bunch. Gibbe, a
bunch, or swelling, any thing that stands poking out. Gibbecier, a pou^h-maker.
Gibbeux, bunched. Gibbeyer, as Gibboyer. Gibbosite, swelling, bunchiness.
Gibets, little packets of Grapes wrapped up in Fig Leaves, whereby they are
preserved fresh two years together. Giblet, a gimblet, or piercer. Gibolee, for
giboulee, a great and sudden shower of rain. Gi^rogliphique, hieroglyphick.
Giez, a hawks gests. Giffiard, full cheekt. Giffle, a cheek, or the bag on
either side of the chap wherein meat is hidden or held. Gigandal, Gigantal,
Gigantin, giant-like, monstrous, or huge big. Gigantomachie, the wars of the
Giants against the Gods. Gigoteau, a knuckle, or the bony-end of the leg.
Gigotte, as Chausses a la gigotte, a fashion of very close Venetian-breeches.
Gimbelet, as giblet. Gimbreter, to play wanton tricks. Gimbreteux, lecherous,
wanton, lascivious. Gimpier, a maker of crepines for hoods. Gindre, as geindre.
Gingembre, seasoned with Ginger. Gingioule, a sort of fruit. See Gingeole in
the N. D. Gingioulier, the narrow-leaved tree that bears the gingioule.
Ginglyme, a mutual receiving, or lodging of one bone within another. Ginguets,
sour Wines. Ginguette, small, poor, or sour Wine. Gippon, a short Cassock; also
a rag, or clout thrown up and down. Cottonner le moule du gippon, to eat much,
to stuff the guts. Gips, Mortar, Plaster. Girandin, the name of a bird.
Giraudette, the name of an apple. Girbe, the cawl wherein the bowels be
wrapped. Gire, turned with the wind, whirled about. Girelle, the name of a
fish. Girer, to turn with the wind, to whirl about. Girets, armor for the
thighs of horses. Giroflade, for giroflee, a Gilly-flower. Girofle, stuck, or
seasoned with Cloves. Girofleat, made of Cloves, or of Gilly-flowers. Girole,
the Skirt-wort, or Skirret-root. Giromantie, divination by Circles. Gironnee, a
lap (or bosom) full of. Gironomique, circular. Girouet, for girouette, a
Weathercock. Girouette, furnished with a Weathercock; also inconstant,
uncertain. Giroufle, for girofle, a Clove. Giroule, as girole. Gisie, the
gisern of birds. Giste de boeuf, a rand of beef. Gith, Bishops-wort. Gitte, a
sprig in a branch. Giver, as Girer. Givereau, the name of a waterfowl. Giure,
a white, or hoar-frost upon trees after great and long freezing. Glacoir, a
privy. Gladiation, fencing. Glagou, as glayeul; also sedge, or a collop of
phlegm spet out. Glaieul, as glayeul in the N. D. Glainage, Glaine, Glainer, and
Glaineur; see them without an i in the N. D. Glaireux, slimy; also full of
gravel. Glais, Glaitel, as glayeul in the N. D. Glaize, terre glaize, a moist
and slimy white foil. Glamet, a sea-mew. Glandage, mast; also mastage; the
season of turning hogs into the woods; the feeding of hogs by mast in woods.
Glandage, fed with mast. Glandager les porceaux, to feed hogs with mast; to lay
swine in masty woods. Glandaux, the name of a kind of olives. Glandee, as
bonne glandee, good store of mast; a good year for acorns. Glandeer, to get, or
gather mast. Glandeux, full of mast, stored with acorns. Glandier, the same;
also of or belonging to mast. Glands, pellets, bullets. Glandulaire, like a
kernel, in kernels. Glane, a gleaning; also the corn that is gleaned, or left
for the Gleaner. Glangion, a Cuttle-fish. Glap, the barking of a Dog. Glappier,
as Clapier. Glappisseur, a yelper. Glass, noise, crying, bawling; also ice;
also a kn^ll for the dead. Glass, (Adj.) bled Glass, blought Wheat. Terre glase,
fat earth. Glason, a clod, or turf of earth. Glasonneux, turfy, full of turves.
Glass, Glasser, and Glassis, as glace, glacer, glacis in the N. D. Glasso^er,
a privy. Glastre, Sea-mud. Glatir, to bark, vawl, bawl. Glatissant, barking,
yawling, bawling. Glatissement, a barking, or bawling. Glatisseur, a barker, or
bawler. Glatteron, the great bur. Glaumet, a Sea-cob, or Sea-gull. Glavoir, a
screaking. Glay, a noise; also as Glaye, the blew-Lilly, or Flower-de-luce.
Glaz, for glace, Ice. Glazeux, cloddy, tursie; clammy, fat, clayish. Glebe,
Glebe-land belonging to a Parsonage. Glene, a small hollowness in a bone, the
outward concavity of the Shoulder-blades. Gleneur, gleaning, or gathering
after. Glenoide, as glene. Gleteron, as glatteron. Glette, the froth of an egg;
also jelly; the phlegm or filth which a Hawk throws out at her beak after her
casting. Gletteux, slimy, frothy. Glic, as jouer auglic, to lecher, to play at
fast and loose. Gliceau, a bottom of thread. Glimpe, a light made of the stalk
or stem of an herb dried, and afterward greased over. Glincer, for glisser, to
slide, to slip. Glire, for dire, to say. Gliron, a Dormouse. Glischer, for
glisser, to slide. Glisseau, a bottom of thread. Glisse-tousjours, ever
gliding, always moving. Glix, a Dormouse. Globeux, Globuleux, round like a
Globe, of or belonging to a Globe, full of Globes. Glo^, the clucking of a hen.
Gloe, a cloven piece of wood. Gloriation, a glorying, or boasting. Gloriette,
small glory; also a little room in the top of a Tower; also a little
banqueting house in a Garden. Glorieuse, (Subst.) a kind of Scate-fish.
Glorieusete, pride, boasting, vainglory. Glorin, the fork-fish. Glosier, a
kind of white Vine. Glossateur, for gloseur, a Glosser, an Interpreter.
Glouglouter, to guggle, to sound like a narrow-mouthed pot, or strait-necked
bottle when it is emptied. Gloussant, poule gloussante, a clucking Hen. Glout,
for glouton, gluttonous, greedy. Gloutement, gluttonously, greedily. Glouteron,
the Bur-dock, or great Bur. Gloutonnaire, Gloux, gluttonous, greedy. Glu de
soarre, a bundle of Straw. Gluaux, Lime-twigs. Gluber, to slay, or pill. Gluc,
Ergo glue, a word used by Scholars in derision of an absurd Conclusion.
Gluement, a catching with Bird-lime. Glueur, a Gl^wer. Glueur, (f.) glewiness,
clamminess. Glueux, full of glue; also clammy. Gluit^, long and whole Straw.
Glutinosite, clamminess. Gluy, as Gluits. Glyphonoire, a Plaisterer's bosse.
Goache, perdrix goache, the gray Partridge. Goalon, a sloven. Gob, tout de gob,
at one gulp. Gobeau, a gobbet, bit, or morsel; also a Viol, or strait-mouthed
vessel of Glass; also a great goblet. Gobelin, as face gobeline, a crimson
face, the face of a ply-pot. Gobeliner, to play the Goblin, to make a hideous
noise. Gobe-mouche, a bird that lives altogether on flies. Gobeguinaut, a
greedy feeder. Gober, to feed greedily, to let down whole gobbets. Gobe
quinault, down with it Whoreson. Goberge, a kind of Haddock, or Cod-fish.
Goberger, to cast up, to vomit. Se goberger, to please himself. Gobier, as
chant gobier, homely singing. Gobisson, a fashion of long and quitted cassock
or coat, used in old time by Horsemen. Gocourt, short. Godal, a tit, a jade.
Godde, as une lasche godde, a slothful bylding. Goddon, a filthy glutton, or
swiller. Good, as godde, Godelure, s^mbled, rumpled. Godelureau, a Coxcomb, a
proud Wood-cock. Gopemare, the Nightmare; also a sound made, or a word cast
out of a feast, whereby the Guests are warned to forbear eating for a certain
time. Godemiche, a Dildoe. Godet, an earthen bole, a stone cup, or jug.
Godichon, mon godichon, my pilock. Godillon, a Girdle. Godin, neat, fine, or
spruce. Godiner, a pretty lad. Godinette, a pretty lass. Godiveaux, as
goudiveaux. Godran, for goderon, pitch and tar. Godron, Godronne, Godronner, as
goderon, goderonne, goderonner in the N. D. Goerin, as Gorret. Goes, the name
of a kind of Grapes. Goetie, devilish magic, or witchcraft. Goffe, dull,
blockish. Goffre, for gaufre, a wafer; a honeycomb; a kind of scurf.
Gogaille, a feasting, a merriment. Gogayer, as goguer. Gogo, a gogo, with full
contentment, or his belly full. Gogue, a Sheeps-paunch; a haggas. Gogues,
jollity. Estre en ses gogues, to be in a pleasant humor. Goguenarder, to break
j^sts. Goguenelle, a Wen^h. se Goguer, to be crank, or merry, to set cock a
hoop. Gohee, a welcome, joyful salutation, or h^arty entertainment. Goiart, a
long Hedging-bill, or Hook. Goibier, Baker-legged; also splayf^^ted. Goiffon, a
Gadgeon. Goilant, the name of a Sea-fowl. Goildronneur, a pitcher, or tighter
of ships. Goimpre, for goinfre, a good fellow. Goiran, a kind of short-wing'd
Eagle that li^^ altogether on fish. Goitrons, waddles, or wattles. Goiveau, il
fait goiveau, it is dawy (a rustical word.) Golette de mais^^, as holette.
Gomar, a Kneading-table, the board wherein bread is worked, or pi^s made.
Gomene, as Gumene. Gomir, for vomir, to vomit, cast, or sp^^ up. Gomissement, a
vomiting, casting, spa^ing up. Gommene, as Gumene. Gomorrhean, a S^domite, a
buggerer. Gomphose, a fastening of one bone within another. Gonagre, the Gout
in the Knees. Gondolier, a Venetian-wherry-man. Gonfalonnier, Gonfanier, an
Ensign, or Standard Bearer. Gonsalon, Gonfanon, an old fashion Standard, such
as is used in the Wars made by the Pope. Gonfanonnier, as Gonfalonnier.
Gonfler, to cause a swelling. Se gonfler, to swell. Gonin, Maistre Gonin, a
notable Jugler. Gonnelle, a whole Petticoat, the bodies and skirts being joined
together. Gonomphe, a kind of box. Gontfanon, as Gonfalon. Gontier, franc
gontier, a substantial Yeoman, a rich fellow. Gorbion, as Euphorbe. Gorde, for
cord, a rope. Gorgaillet, a Quail-pipe. Gorgement, up the throat. Gorgerin,
(Adj.) of, or belonging to the throat. Escrouelles gorgerines, the King's Evil
in the throat. Gorgette, a pretty little throat, or mouth. Gorgias, for
gorgerette, a Gorget. Gorgias, (Adj.) gaudy, flaunting, delighting in bravery;
also feeding with mirth. Gorgiasement, gaudily, flauntingly. se Gorgiaser, to
flaunt it, to please himself in the bravery of his apparel. Gorgiasete,
bravery, sineness, gaudiress. Gorme, for gourme, the strangles, a thick rumor
which young horses void at their narr^ls, or by the overture made under their
throat. Gormette, for gourmerte, a curb. Gorre, a S^w; also the French Pox;
also bravery, gallantness. Femmes a la grande gorre, hussing or flaunting
Dames. Gorreau, as gorret; also the thread, or quantity of flax, etc. that is
drawn at once from a distass in spinning. Gorrerie, gallantry, bravery; also
pride, or vainglory. Gorret, a little Sheat, or Barrow-pig. Gorrette, a cap;
also a justle, or thump. Gorrier, gallant both in apparel and carriage; also
proud, vainglorious. Gorrierement, bravely, gallantly; proudly,
vain-gloriously. Gorron, a Sheat, or little young hog. Gort, a Wear in a
running water; or as gourt. Gosaran, a necklace, a border, an ornament for the
bosom or neck. Goscote, as Coscote. Gossampine, the Bumbast, or Cottonbust.
Gosse, Gosser, Gosserie, and Gosseur. See Gausser, etc. in the N. D. Gotereux,
for goitreux, that has a wen under the throat. Goton, as groton, a little
grot. Goualon, as ^^alon. Gouasche, as goasche. Goubeau, as gobeau. Goubelet,
for gobeler, a bowl, a cup. Goubelettes, little tin vessels used by Jugglers
and Inchanters. Gouber, an afternoons repast. Goude, a Marigold; also a Sow.
Goudeau, for godeau, a Gardiners setting iron. Goud-sallot, a good fellow, a
boon companion. Goudiveau, a kind of open Pie, also a figure in carving like
that Pie; or a long painted Oval. Goudron, etc. See goderon in the N. D.
Goueastre, for goitreux, one that has a w^n, bunch, or swelling under his
throat. Gouest, the name of a fruitful Vine, whose wood is of a tawny color.
Gouet, a little heart knife to crack nuts, and pill gree^ walnuts withal; a
little catparse knife. Faulcon gouer, a dropped hawk. Gou^treux, f^ll of g^ll^,
infinitely deep; swallowing up whatsoever comes near it. Gotage, as Vouge; also
a Joyner's Gouge; a Soldier's P^^ or Whore; the hammer wherewith t^^^s are
marked in the Ki gs Forests. Gouhourde, a guard. Gou^jur, a gudg^on.
Goujataille, a troop of Soldiers ^^^s, a cru^ of Crack-ropes. Gou^ate, a
Soldiers Wench. Gou^aterie, Soldiers boys, young Ra^^-hells that follow a
Camp. Gouillard, a lo^^r of his belly. Gouillarder, to eat greedily.
Gouillardise, a greedy feeding; also nice feeding. Gouinsre, for goinsre, a
boon companion. Govions, s^tters. Gouir, for jouir, to enjoy. Gouju,
full-ch^^t, plump-faced. Goulard, goularder, goulardise. See Goui^lard,
gouillarder, gouillardise. Gouldron, gouldronne, gouldronner, as goderon,
goderonne, goderonner in the N. D. Goulee, a mouth full of. Gouleeur, for
Arpenteur, a Sarveyor of land that measures only by the Pole. Goulet, a
gullet, the end of a Conduit-pipe whereat it discharges it self; also the
mouth or neck of a narrow-neck^ Vessel; the hole of a Fox or Badger; a narrow
Brook, or deep gather of water. Goulet de cheminee, the funnel of a chimney.
Goulet de fenestre, a narrow loop-hole in the wall of a Prison, etc. Goulette
de vin, a mouthful of wine. Goulfe, for golfe, a Gulf. Goulfi, swollen, or puffed
up; plump, sat, well-fed. Goulfre, for gouffre, a Whirlpool. Goullardise, as
gouillardise; also Ribaldry, licentious or lewd talk. Goullee, a la goullee,
secretly, by stealth, or as in Goulee. Goulet, the pipe of a sink, or gutter.
Goultran, for goderon, Shippitch. Gouluement, for goulument, greedily. Gouphon,
the ^iege of a door or window. Goupil, a Fox. Goupille, the iron pin that go^s
through the joint of a hinge, or la^p of a cl^^h. Gourat, for Goujat, a
Soldiers boy. Gourd, as gourt, or gourgue; also a whirl-pool. Gourd, (Adj.)
drowsy, dull, hea^y; stiff, senseless, b^^^ned. Gourd-foulement, as
gourfoulement. Gourdi, h^num^^d. ^e Gourdir, to (...) be^^^^ned. Gouret, as
gorret, a Sheat, or barrow-pi^. Gourfoule, crushed, bruised, mortified by
violent handling. Gourfoulement, a crushing, or bruising, a mortifying by
violent handling. Gourfouler, to crush, or bruise, to mo^^ifie by violent
handling. Gourgias, as gorgias; also proud, lofty, stately. Gourgue de moulin,
the conduit of a Water-mill, the watercourse or ditch that is directly under
the wheel. Gourmanderesse, a gluttonness. Gourmandeur, a glutton. Gourmet, a
Wine-cunner, a Wine-merchants broker. Gourmeter, Gourmetter, to curb.
Gournauld, Gourneau, a Gurnard-fish. Gourre, beguiled, cheated, cons^^d.
Gourrier, as Gorrier. Gourt, a violent stream, or gulf of waters; a whirlpool,
or deep hole in a water. Gousse, devoured, eaten; also stuffed with eating.
Goussepille, shaken, or tugged, as a Cat by a Dog; also shaked, un^usked,
shipped. Goussepiller, to shake, or tug, as a Dog does a Cat; also to shale; to
strip. Gousser, to dev^^r; to stuff or fill with meat. Goussu, husk. Gouster,
for Collation, afternoons nunchion. Gout, gowty, troubled with the Gowt.
Goutran, ship-pitch. Goutte-rose, an extreme redness of the face. Goutreuse,
the name of a bird, in bigness and shape somewhat resembling a Swan. Gouvernal,
for gouvernail, the rudder of a ship. Gouverneresse, for Gouvernante, a
Go^^^ness. Gouvert, for gouvernement, government, Gouytrouz, as goitrons,
Swines w^ddl^s. Goy, a little hand-bill, vine-hook, or vine-knife. Goyart, a
long hedging bill. Goye, for joie, joy; also as goy. Goyelle, a kind of
cheese-cake. Goyon, a gudgeon. Gozal, a sitting Pidgeon. Grabat, a poor man's
bed; a coarse mattress, a straw-bed; or a cou h. Grabeau, a garbelling of
spices, etc. also a precis search into matters. Grabelle, garbelled; also
curiously searched into. Grabeller, to gari le spices, etc. to search curiously
into. Grabue, for Gradue, a Graduate. Grabuger, to make a great stir.
Grachinoier, as grafigner. Gracieusement, graciously. Gracieusete,
graciousness; also gratuity. Grade, degree, state, or dignity; a step. Grade,
graduate, or having taken a degree. Gradot, a Gurnard. Graduel, a Mass Book, or
part of the Mass, invented by Pope Celestine in the year 430. Graduellement,
gradually, by degrees. Grafigner, to scratch. Graffe, as griffe graffe, by hook
or by crook, any way. Graffions, the best sweet Cherries. In old time the
Lieutenants of Earls bore that name. Graier, the Officer that gathers the
King's right of Grarie in Woods and Forests. Graigneur, as Greigneur, greater.
Graillant, as grailleux. Graillat, for graille, a rook, or white-bill'd Crow.
Graille, for grele, slender. Grailleu, speaking hoarsely, sounding hollowly,
croaking like a rook. Grainant, seeding, running to seed. Grain, seeded, run
unto seed. Grainer, to seed, or run unto seed. Temps de grainer, the season of
laying Swine, the time wherein they are driven into Forests and Woods for
Mastage and other feeding. Grairie, as grarie. Grais, a kind of Potters clay
or earth, fit to make vessels of; also a hard and sparkling brown freestone;
also a certain Vine that has a very big stock. Graisle, for grele, thin,
slender. Graislete, as greslete. Graissayer, to lisp. se Graisse-sondre, to
swelter. Graissement, fatly, greasily. Graisseure, fattiness, greasiness.
Graisseux, fatty, greasy. Graissier, one that loves fat things; also a
Grasier, or fattener of cattle. Graissin, fat mould, or dung to manure ground
with. Graller, to parch, as pease, nuts, etc. Grame, Gramen, grass; also
Couch-grass, or Dogs-grass. Gramigne, Couch-grass, Dogs-grass. Gramment, for
grandement, greatly. N'a pas gramment, it is not long ago. Grammouse, a kind
of French dish. Grampe, taken with the cramp; or not able to stir, as one that
has the cramp. Grampelle, a Grampel, or Pungar. Granche, for grange, a barn;
also the carcass of a fowl. Grand (Subst.) le grand des biens ou de la terre,
the whole substance, or inheritance, that is to be parted among Coheirs.
Grangeage, corn, or fruits laid up in barns; also a Fee paid for corn-room in a
barn. Passer grangeage d'un champ, to lease out a corn-field, or the crop
thereof. Grangee, a Grange, or Country-houshold. Grangee de bled, a barn full,
a large heap of corn. Granger, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a barn. Grangeux, of
a barn, full of barns. Grangier, for Granger, a Farmer, or Barn-keeper.
Grangiere, for Grangere, a Farmers Wife. Grangousier, a great throat. Granet
Oriental, an Oriental Garnet, a stone very near as good and well-colored as
the Ruby. Granule, reduced into seed or grain. Granuler, to reduce into seed,
or grain. Granuleux, grainy, seedy; also in grains, or little seed-like pieces.
Graphide, a description, or delineation. Graphigne, scratched. Graphigner, to
scratch. Grapillon, as grappillon. Grapir, to creep, crawl, or climb up.
Grappage, a grape-gathering. Grappe, for grape, a bunch of grapes. Grappelle,
the less Burdock. Grapper, for grapiller, to glean after Vintage. Grappes, the
scratches, in a horses legs. Grappetant, gleaning after Vintage. Grappete,
gleaned, as Grapes after Vintage. Grappeuse, a woman that gleans after Vintage.
Grappil, for grapin, the grapple of a Ship. Grappillage, a grape-gleaning.
Grappiller, Grappilleur, as grapiller, grapilleur in the N. D. Grappillon, a
little cluster of grapes. Grappin, as grappil. Grappu, for grapu, full of
clusters of grapes. Grarie, the Kings right in every sale of Wood, made in the
Forests of his Subjects. Grasselet, somewhat fat. Grassesse, fatness. Grasset,
as grasselet. Grassette, the herb Orpine, or Liblong. Grasseur, as grassesse.
Grassier, to lisp. Great, pasture, feeding, grazing for cattle; also a
scratching, or clawing. Envoyer au great, to send a grazing, a master to turn
away his servant. Grate, for agreeable, grateful, acceptable. Grateleux, scabby,
itchy. Gratement, a scratching; also an itching. Gratia Dei, Harts-fodder.
Gratieusement, Gratieusete, as gracieusement, gracieusete. Gratieux, for
gracieux, gracious. Gratigne, scratched. Gratigner, to scratch. Gratin, the
remnant of Childrens pap left in the bottom of the skillet wherein it was
boiled. Gratiole, the herb called Hedgehyssop. Graton de pore, a fleshy part of
the fat that holds the entrals being melted and cut in pieces. Grattement, as
gratement. Gratter, for grater, to scratch. Grattoir, a bread-grater. Gratture,
a scratch, a scratching. Gravade, a reproach; also any hard measure. Gravage de
la Mer, the Sands, the Seashore. Gravaigne, the wild Goose, called a
Barnacle. Gravan, the name of a small Seafish. Grave, sand, or gravel; also
the pulse Axfitch. Gravee, a shaking. Gravele, as cendres gravelees, ashes made
of Wine-lees burned. Gravelee, Tartar, old lees of wine. Gravellon, the stone.
Gravanter, as grevanter. Graveolence, an ill smell. Gravoir, a heap of gravel.
Gravois, gravel. Gravonner, to dig with the Fingers, to search out. Gravouer,
for gravier, Gravel. Graux, sluices, or open passages, made of purpose to let
the Sea into Ponds or low places. Graye, for graille, a rook; also the Cornish
chough. Grayerie, as Grarie. Greal, sang greal. See Sangreal. Greau, a dish, or
dish full of. Grebe, as griaibe. Grebonde, a service at Tennis, wherein the
Ball runs not along on the house, but bounds on the side thereof. Grecanisant,
speaking Greek, or imitating a Grecian. Greciser, to act the Grecian, or to
speak Greek. Grecques, Gregs, Gallogaskins, wide Venetians. Grecs, a wild
Boars upper tushes. Gree, an agreement. Gree, agreed unto, allowed of. Greer,
to agree, or give consent unto; to approve, or allow of. Gref, for grief,
grievance, wrong, injury. Greffer, to graft. Greffiers, a kind of white
hounds. Gregeois, Grecian, of Greece. Gregual, a North-east-wind. Gregues,
great hose. Greguesque, as Gregeois. Greguesques, as gregues. Greigneur, great;
also greater, larger, bigger, elder. Greinselle, for groseille, a Goose-berry.
Grelace, a great hail. Grelle, for grele, hail. Grelot, trembler le grelot, as
Grelotter, to quake for cold. Grelurette, as gurluret. Gremeau, (for grumeau)
de sang, a clot of blood. Gremeler, for grommeler, to grumble. Grenadille, a
Pomegranate-blossom; also a little Pomegranate. Grenage, Grain, Corn, Seed;
also the growth, or increase thereof. Grenaille, Grain, or Seed; also the Gold,
Silver, etc. taken out of water, whereinto it has been thrown red-hot out of
the crucible. Grenaille de bronze, the scaly dust or substance lying on Brass,
etc. after it has been melted, and falling from it of it self, or with little
blowing. Grenatier, the little border engraven about a seal. Grenatine, a small
granet; also marble spotted red, whether naturally or artificially. Grene, for
grain, Seed. Grenee, as pouldre de gross grenee, great Grain, powder fit for
the Cannon. Greneterie, the place or Office wherein the Controlers of the Kings
Garners reside. Grenetiers, Overseers, Keepers, or Controlers of the Kings
Salt-garners. Grenie, as garder une fille a grenie, to keep a Maid long without
a Husband. Grenil, for gremil, herb Grummel. Grenouillette, a little Frog; also
the herb Crow-foot. Grenouillon, a little Frog. Grenu, full of Grains. Gres, as
grez. Gresil, hail, drizling; also the white frost that hangs on trees.
Gresille, drizzled on. Gresiller, to hail, to drizzle. Gresillon, a Cricket.
Gresillonne, whitish, as Grass with frost. Gresillonner, to chirp like a
Cricket. Greslement, thinly, slenderly, lankly, prettily; also shrilly, or
sp^eakingly. Greslet, little, pretty. Greslete, littlene^^, slenderress.
Gresleux, haily, fail of hail, subject unto hail; stormy. Greslier, of, or
belonging to hail. Gresse, for graisse, fat, or grease. Gresser, to grease, to
liquor. Gressier, a Li per, one that lispeth. Gretiller, to crackle. Grettes de
lin, the hards, or tow of flax. Grevable, grievous, painful; also likely to
burd. Grevance, a grievance. Grevant, grieving. Grevante, grieved, vexed,
oppressed. Grevanter, to grieve, vex, or oppress. Greve, sand, or gravel; a
sandy shore; also the shin, or forepart of the leg. La greve des cheveux, les
cheveux departis en greve, the shedding, or shading of the hair, the parting
thereof on the forehead. Greve, grieved, troubled, molested, hindered; also
burst, whose bowels are fallen into his cods. Grevelure, the mail of a Hawk.
Grever, to grieve, trouble, molest, hinder; also to dig into, or make hollow
with the nails. Greveure, an inward rupture, or bursting of the lower part of
the belly; an extraordinary swelling of the Cods by the bowels fallen into
them. Grevolable, deserving the rope. Greux, the nails. Grez, a kind of
freestone good to pave with. Grezille, wrigled, crumpled, curled. Greziller,
to wriggle, crumple or curl; also to crackle as a shell in the fire, or salted
flesh on coals. Grezillons, Hawks-bells; also little gobbets of fat or salt
meat broyled; also twirls, as of hair curled. Griache, for greche, speckled.
Griaibe, a Sea-mew. Griais, a kind of dainty red-legged Partridge. Griais,
(Adj.) gray, or of the color of a Starling. Griblettes, collops. Gribouiller,
to rumble, or croak, as the guts do through windiness. Gribouillis, the
rumbling, croaking, or stirrirg of the Guts; also a feigned name for a Devil.
Gribouri, a Goblin, a walking spirit that rumbles in houses a nights. Grieux, a
villain, a thief, a rascal. Griffu, having great claws. Grigne, wrinkled.
Grigner, to grin. Grignette, the ordinary Partridge. Grigneur, greater, larger,
bigger. Grignon de pain, a corner of a loaf. Grignote, gnawed, or nibbled away.
Grignoter, to gnaw, or nibble away, to eat like a Coney or Squirrel.
Grillement, a broyling; a parching with great heat; a gliding, or sliding
along; a grating, or shutting up with Grates. Grilletier, a Cricket-catcher;
also a maker of Hawks bells. Grillette, furnished with bells, as a Hawk.
Grilleux, full of Grates, made like a Grats. Grillot, the name of an apple.
Grillotier, a Gridiron-maker; also a maker of rattles, and suchlike toys for
Children. Grillottement, a ringing, or rattling; also a jogging. Grillotter, to
ring, or rattle; also to jog. Grimacer, to make faces. Grimacier, a Carver, or
maker of such Anticks as in buildings seem to support great arches, pillars, or
beams. Grimasseur, a maker of faces. Grimau, Grimaud, or Grimauld, a
grim-faced-fellow; also a Grammar-school-boy. Grimaude, a kind of Owl.
Grimauderie, or Grimaulderie, a School, or crew of mean Grammar-scholars.
Grimbeti Coll^tee, as Besongnee. Grimelet, as grimouche; or a smatterer in
learning. Grimoire, a book of Conjuring, or exorcising. Grimouche, a paultry
Pedant. Grimpe-mur, one that scrambles up a wall. Grimpreau, for grimpereau, a
Wood-pecker. Grimpure, for grimpement, a climbing up. Grinceur, an angry
gnasher of the teeth. Grinches, a kind of black sweet cherries. Grimeur,
greater. Gringalet, a merry Grig. Gringette, as grignette. Gringoriane, as eau
Gringoriane, holy water. Gringotis, for gringotement, a quavering.
Gringu^naudes, the filth which after purging sticks to the tail. Gringuenoter,
to quaver. Gringuenoteur, a quaverer. Gringuenotis, a quavering. Grinon, for
grillon, a C^^^ket. Grinson, a Chassinch. Grinsor, for grincer, t^^^h. Grio,
new Barley st^^^d (...) water, then dried by a s^^, then s^^^d, and kept for
(...) uses. Grioter, to gither f^wer Cheri^^. Grioteux, gravell^; als^ (...).
Griotte, Gravel; also (...) meal or flower of fri'd barley; or as grio. Grip,
Rapine, Violence; a violent catching of other men's things. Allons au Cap de
grip, let us go for a prize, (a phrase of Pirates.) Gripauline, the herb
Motherwort. Griphe, Gripher, as griffe, griffer in the N. D. Gripp-argent, a
gripe-money; a greedy, or covetous Judge, Magistrate, Officer, Lawyer.
Grippeminaud, a griping, greedy, cruel fellow. Grippeminer, to gripe, or grasp
greedily, covetously, cruelly. Grippets, the ramples of an overlong, or
ill-made Garment; also the rustings or s^arles of overtwis^d thr^^d. Grisard, a
Badger; also a Sea-G^ll. Griser, for grisoner, to grow gray-hair'd. Grisle, for
grille, an Iron-grate. Grislement, a crackling noise, as of meat a broiling.
Grison, as pierre de grison, a kind of free stone which is but l^ft when it is
taken out of the Quarry, but afterward grows very hard. Grisonneure, a growing
whitish, or gray-hair'd. Grisser, to crackle, or creak like a shoe. Else
grissoyent d'ardeur de le voir, they longed extremely to see it. Grivelement,
Griveleure, speckledness, or a speckled color. Grivette, a Throstle, or Mavis.
Grivole, Grivoler, as grivele, griveler in the N. D. Grivolement, Grivoleure,
as grivelement. Grizonner, for grisoner, to grow gray-hair'd. Gro^^^e, for
gros-bee, a certain a^^-coloured and great-headed bird, somewhat less than a
T^^^^h. Grobiamisme, slo^^liness. Grobi^, as fair du grobis, to be (...), or
^^^ly, to take state up^^^. Gro^^. (...) quantity of stir^^ng (...) things. A
la groee, (...) s^ambling for nuts, etc. (...) on the ground. Gre^^ner, to
puzzle. Groi^non, a kind of Peach. Groiseller, for gro^eillier, a
Goosberry-shr^h, or ^l^^^. Groiselle, for groseille, a Gooseberry.
Groisellettes transmarines, red Gooseberries. Groisse, for grossesse, a woman's
being great with child. Groisseler, as groiselier. Groizil, broken Glass.
Grole, a Rook. Grolle, the round circle in the white at butts. Grolle, parched,
as Pease, Beans, etc. Grollier, a Cobbler. Noyer grollier, a young or little
Walnut-tree. Grome, cuffed. Grommelement, a grumbling, or muttering.
Grommeleux, grumbling, muttering, murmuring; also rugged, rough. Grommellement,
as grommelement. Gromme, cuffed. Grommer, to cuff. Gronau, a Gurnard. Groncer,
to roar, as the Sea in a storm. Grondeller, to rumble, or to roar, as a
tempestuous water that beats against rocks or roots growing to the banks
thereof. Gronderie, a grumbling. Grondin, a Hog. Grondir, as grondeller.
Grongnard, grunting; also frowning. Grongnement, a grunting. Grongner, to
grant, like a Hog. Gros-doux, a kind of apple. Groselier, for groseiller, a
Gooseberry-shrub. Groselle, for groseille, a Gooseberry. Gros grain, the name
of a s^uff. Gross, tottered, rocked, shaken. Feves grossees, parched, or
carled beans. Grosser, to totter, rock, or shake, as weak building in wi^^y
weather. Groslier, as grollier. Gros-menil, a kind of pear. Gros-oeil, a kind
of apple. Grosselle, for greseille, a Gooseberry. Grosser, to rattle in the
throat. Grosserie, great work; also radeness, grosness; also Grocery; wares
uttered, or the uttering of wares by wholesale. Grossier, a Grocer. Grossoye,
engrossed, written fair, or in great and fair letters. Grossoyer, to ingross,
to write fair, or in great and fair letters. Grotesquer, to lurk in Caves, or
Dens, and obscure places. Grouee, la grouee des fruicts, that fruit which falls
in the night; Windfalls. Grouette, gravel, or a gravelly soil. Grouetteux,
gravelly, stony. Grougnaut, a Gurnard. Grougouler, to rumble, or croak, like
the Guts. Grouiller, to move, stir, or scrall; to rumble; to swarm. Grouillier,
as grollier. Grouillis, a stirring heap of worms, etc. also the springing of a
child in the womb. Groulard, a bunting. Groule, as grosle. Grouler, as
grouiller. Groulette, a kind of little earthen-vessel. Groumeler, for
grommeler, to grumble. se Groyer, to boast. Gruan, Gruant, for gruau, Oat-meal.
Grue (Adj.) simple, silly. Le monde n'est plus grue, the world grows wise
adays. Grugeoir, a small Grater. Grugeons, the smallest, or most writhen fruit
on a tree; Writlings. Gruger, to grudge, repine, or mutter; also to eat a crust
of bread. Gruiner, to gr^^tle, like a Hog. Gruire, as g^^rie in the N. D. Grum,
for grain, a Grain. Grume, a knot, bunch, or cluster; also a twinkling, or
sparkling, as of a Diamond. Grumelement, a grunting as of Hogs. Grumeler, for
grommeler, to gruntle. Grumeleux, clotty, cluttering. Bois grumeleux, rough,
knotty, rugged wood. Grumer, to shit Grates. Grum^ux, as grume leux. Gruotte,
for gri^ve, the tart kind of Ch^ry. Grepe, Gruper, as gripe, griper in the N.
D. Grupeme^^, Gru^pade, a grasping, a ^at^^ng ^^ld. Grus, for gruau. Gruel.
Gruser, to grieve, or to repine at. Grusler, to q^^k^ to shi^^r. Grusler des
pois, to par^h Pease. Gruyau, for gruau, oatmeal. Gruyer, (Adj.) of a Crane;
also made (as a Hawk) only for the Crane. Gruyerie, and Gruirie, as gruerie in
the N. D. Gruyo see, as grio. Gryllon, for grillon, a Cricket, or Grasshopper.
Gryotte, as gruotte. Grypaume, the herb Motherwort. Gryper, for griper, to
catch hold. Grys, for gris, gray. Guaillardet, a Streamer in a ship. Guainier,
Judas-tree. Guaire, for guere, little. Guaives, as Gayves. Gualebaut, a
toss-pot. Guaranion, a kind of horse. Guarantir, as garantir in the N.D.
Guarbances, Fitches, Vet^h^s. Guarde-manger, for garde-manger, a cup-board.
Guardon, as gardon in the N. D. Guare, for gare, beware. Guarent, for Garant, a
Warrantee. Guari, for gueri, cured. Guarigues, plain cha^pian fields. Guarir,
Guarison, Guarissable, as guerir, guerison, guerissable in the N. D. Guarite,
for guerite, a watchtower. Guarot, as garot in the N. D. Guas^aliens, an Order
of religious people, consisting both of (...) and women. Guastier, as Gastier;
or one that is hired to tend other men's grounds. Guatte, the small or young
Shad, the river-Pil^^^^. Gualt, a kind of apple. Guyae, Lig^^^ (...). Guayer,
for g^^er, to ford. Guayli^er, as Guainier. Guayre, for guere, little. Guerle,
cra^^ed with meat and drink. Guedon, nice, ^^aint, s^r^^^lo^^ of receiving what
i^wa^^ (...) longed for. Et apres gued^^, and afterward^ (...) to it with a
better (...) ^^^k than they had refused it. Guedouar, as godouard. Guedou^le, a
small (...) or bottle. Guedouille, as gue^o^le. Guedou^e de vinaigre, a small
Vinegar-bottle. Guelphe, faction, seditious. Guemente. ask^d, or in^^^red
after; also lamented, or co^^^ined of. Guementer, to ask, or inquire after. Se
guementer, to lament, mourn, complain, groan. Guenaud, a beggar; also a digger
of Graves. Guenchir, to start aside, thereby to avoid a coming blow. Gueneau,
the throttle, or throatboll. Guenipe, a rag, or clowt; also a clouterly woman.
Guenonnee, a most beastly wench, one that has been ridden by a Monkie. Guenot,
a Shepherds familiar. Guenupe, a little Monkey. Guepillon, a
Holy-water-sprinkle. Guepillonneux, sprinkling, casting water upon. Guerb,
Common of pasture for a man's beasts throughout all his Neighbors Grounds.
Temps de guerb, is from mid- September to the middle of February. Guerdon,
recompense, or reward; also the name of a fish. Guerdonne, recompensed,
rewarded. Guerdonnement, a recompencing, or rewarding. Guerdonner, to
recompense, to reward. Guerete, laid, or made fallow, manered, fitted for seed,
etc. Guereter, to lay, or make land fallow, to prepare it for seed.
Guerguesses, wide Country-hose. Guerissable c^rable. Guerisseur, a ^^aler, or
carer. Guerite, as murs gueritez, walls, or rampires farnished with places of
retreat. Guerle, a free made of a skin dried and pierced full of ^oles. Gu^rle,
sp^i^^-eyed, or goggle-eyed. Guerler, to sift through a guerle. Guerluset, a
byword for a beggarly Soldier, a Shagrag. se Guermenter, as se guementer.
Guernette, a Prawn. Guernier, for grenier, a Garner. Guerpie, Guerpine,
Guerpison, a q^itting, forsaking; who a creeping, crawling, or moving forward
by little and little. La Guerpie, a wid^^. Guerrite, as Gueri^e in the N. D.
Guerroyable, sit to ^e wa^red on. Guerroye, warred against. Guerroyement, war,
warfare. Guerroyer, to war, to make war u^^^. Gu^rroyeur, a Warrior; also a
swaggerer, a contentious person. Guespee, Guespiere, a nest, or swar^ of Wasps.
Guespilleur, a squanderer. Guespillonne, besprinkled. Guespillonner, to
be^prinkle, or bedew with a Holy-water-sprinkle. Guespine, a waspish Dame.
Guest, as harang guest, a shotten, or lean Herring. Guestre, having startups
on. Guesve, Seigneur Guesve, a Landlord ^^to whom surrender is made of the
ground held of him. Chooses guesves, waifs, strayes, or things left, quitted,
abandoned. Guesve, waived, refused, abandoned, given over. Guesvement, a
waiving, or refusing; also a resignation, or surrender of land. Guesver, to
waive, refuse, abandon, or give over; also to surrender, give back, or resign.
Guesveux, plashy, flashy; also beplashed. Guette, for guet, a Watchman.
Guette, watched, observed, dogged. Guettement, a watching, observing, or
dogging. Guetteur, a watcher, a busy observer of. Guetteur de chemins, a
way-layer, a highway-robber. Guen, for Cuismier, a Cook. Gueuant, begging in
the highway, or like a rogue any way. Guever, as guesver. Gueuer, for gueuser,
to beg. Gueuesse, for gueuse, a woman-beggar. Gueullard, the muzzel, or mouth
of a beast; also a wide-mouthed fellow; also an imhoss (like the head of a
Lion) upon ancient buskins. Gueulle, as gueule in the N. D. Gueus, for gueux, a
beggar. Guey, for gue, a foord. Gueuze, for gueuse, a woman-beggar. Guidage, a
pasport, or writ of safe conduct. Guide, guided, conducted. Guidean, a kind of
fish-net. Guider, to guide, lead, or conduct. Guiddeymant, the needle of a
Sea-compass. Guicor, a Guide. Guier, as guider, to guide. Guieres, as guere,
little. Guiges, the handles of a target, or shield. Guignade, Guignement, a
winking, or aiming at a thing with one eye. Guigne-queue, a wag-tail.
Guigneron, a dung-farmer. Guigneur, a winker; also a blinker. Guignons de
roches, the corners, or edges of rocks. Guilee, a great shower of rain.
Guilhedin, for guilledin, a Gelding. Guille, the quill, or faucet of a
wine-vessel; the keel of a ship; also guile, craft, deceit. Guille de beurre, a
piece of butter made of the fashion of a finger. Guille, beguiled.
Guillebardeau, a tool, or instrument. Guillee, as guilee. Guillemine, a certain
Edict against some exorbitant Privileges of the Church, devised and published
by Guillaume Pojet, a Chancellor of France. Guillemins, an Order of Hermits.
Guillemot, the name of a fowl that somewhat resembles a Plover. Guillenard,
part of a woman's etc. Guiller, to cosen, beguile, deceive. Guilleret, merry,
pleasant; also red about the gills, as one that has drunk somewhat hard.
Guillerie, Guillery de passercux, the chirping of Sparrows. Guillochis, a kind
of flourishing in Masonry, or Carpentry. Guilloquet, part of a woman's etc.
Guilmin, a coxcomb, a sot. Guilon, a wanton girl. Guilverdons, great gobbets of
liquid meats, as of Oysters, etc. Guimaux, Prez guimaux, fertile meadows, mowed
twice a year. Guimpier, a maker of crepines. Guimple, the crepine of a
French-hood. Guinche, a sword, or hatchel for a flex-wise. Guincher, to
wriggle. Guindage, a hoysing, or lifting up; or an engine to lift up things
with. Guinderesse, the rope whereby the Mizzen-sail is hoised up. Guindol, for
guindal, an engine to lift up stones with. Guindoles, Guindoules, the fruit
called Jujahes. Guindre, a wheel to wind silk on. Guinguois, de guinguois,
slovenly, unhandsomely; also hassingly, swaggeringly. Guinson, for pinson, a
Chassinch. Guipilon, an holy water sprinkle. Guirlande, wearing a garland, or
set out with garlands. Guisarme, a kind of weapon, a staff that has within it
two long pikes, which with a shoot or thrust forward come forth. Guise, guise,
manner, fashion, custom. Guisnier, a sweet cherry-tree. Guiterne, or Guiterre,
for guitare, a guitar. Gulpe, a wound, or bloud-wipe. Gulpine, a quitting, or
forsaking; a waiving, or giving over an Estate in Land. Gulpir, to quit, leave,
or waive. Gumenes, the tackling of a ship. Guoguettes, for goguettes, a merry
humor. Guorre, Guoy, as gorre, goy. Gurleret, a nickname or byword for a
beggarly Soldier. Gurpir, to quit, forgo, leave, abandon. Gurpison, as
guerpie. Guses, the ball of the eye. Gutale, Guttale, ale, good ale. Guy de
Flandres, a kind of mortar wherewith fret-work is made. Guyberges, as
guymberges. Guynettes, young Guinny-hens. Guynes, for guines, sweet Cherries.
Guypiere, Guypure, for guipure, guimp. Guyron, geronne, in Heraldry. Guysarme,
as guisarme. Guysarme, as guisarme. Guysarmier, one that serves with a
guisarme. Guyure, a snake, an adder. Gy, as gyp. Gymnaste, exercised, or nimble
at exercise. Gynecocratie, Gynocratie, the Government of a woman. Gyngois, as
guinguois. Gyp, or Gyps, mortar, plaster, or a kind of white stone whereof
plaster is made. Gypse, like mortar, or plaster, also mortered, or
plaistered. Gyraffe, as girafe in the N. D. Gyrine, the frog called a Tadpole.
Gyroflee, for giroflee, a Gilly-flower. Gyroles, Skirret-roots. Gyron, as
guyron. Gyrouet, and Gyrouette, for girouette, a weathercock. Gyrouetteux,
flitting, wavering, inconstant, as a weathercock.
H
HAaler, as haler in the N. D. Habarre, as gabarre. Habatre, as abbatre in the
N. D. Habeline, distempered; also all bepissed. Habilete, for habilite,
fitness, aptness, skill, ability, nimbleness, activity. Habilite, enabled,
fitted, confirmed; allowed of. Habiliter, to enable, to make fit for; to allow
of. Habiliter un mineur, to enable an Infant to sue, or answer in Law, by
appointing him a Guardian who may do it for him. Habillage de poulailles, the
dressing of poultry, the pluming, drawing, etc. Habitacle, an habitation.
Habitual, for habituel, habitual, or got by degrees. Habituation, for habitude,
an habit, or custom. Habitue, (Subst.) a houshold-servant, or attendant.
Hable, for havre, a haven, or harbor. Habordean, the fish Haberdine. Habrizer,
to shroud himself; also to sleep. Hachement, a hacking, slicing, or cutting in
pieces. Par hachement, in slices. Hachereau, a little ax, an addis. Hachette, a
hatchet, or small ax. Hacquebuse, an harquebuze. Hacquebuter, to shoot in or
with an harquebuze. Hacquet, as haquet; also a little Cistern, or open vessel,
for the rinsing of Glasses, or cooling of Wine in Summer. Hacquetier, as
haquetier. Hadea, (an Interjection) ha! are you there? Hadot, Hadon, a salt
Haddock. Haffres, fright, astonishment. Haffreux, for afreux, frightful.
Hagiographe, written holily, or sacredly. Hagle, mailed, speckled as the coat
of a Hawk. Haglure, the mail, or speckledness of a coat of a Hawk. Hahay, as
fair gros hahay, to make a great stir, or mighty slaughter. Haias, a kind of
Beech-tree. Haict, as hait. Haillonne, cut into rags, or tatters, whereof
clowts are made. Discourse haillonnez, ragged, or patched discourses.
Haillonner, to cut into rags, or tatters; to make clowts of. Haillonneux,
ragged, tattered. Haim, a fishing-hook. Haines, the hips. Haineur, a hater,
loather, abhorrer. Haineusete, hatefulness, odiousness. Haineux, full of hate;
also odious, or hateful. Haineux (Subst.) enemies, adversaries. Hair (masc.) a
carrion-jade; also a wretched or miserable fellow. Haireux, rough, rugged.
Haironneau, a young Heron. Haironnier, of, or belonging to a Heron; also
Heron-like, long, tall, slender, lank. Faulcon haironnier, a Herner, a Faulcon
made only to the Heron. Haironniere, a Herons nest, or ayrie; a Her^shaw, or
shaw of wood, wherein Herons breed. Haistre, for hetre, a Beech-tree. Hait,
liveliness, lustiness; gladness, cheerfulness; readiness. Cela est bien a mon
hait, that fits my humor, pleases my fancy. Haite, lively, found, lusty.
Haiter, to like well of, to be well pleased with; also to cheer up. Haitie, as
haite. Haitoudeau, as hestoudeau. Hal, an ashy-coloured Scate-fish, whose skin
is poudered all over with brown spots. Halachie, a Shad-fish. Halaine, as
halene. Halberne, for halbrene, broken-feathered. Halebant, for albren, a
little wild Duck. Halebran, a Teal; also a little wild Duck. Halebreda, an
ill-favored man or woman. Halebrant, as halebran. Halecret, a Croslet.
Halecrete, armed with a Croslet. Haleine, for halene, breath. Haleineux,
long-winded, full of breath. Halene, breathed on; also searched, or smelt out.
Halene de la flattery, fed with the breath of flattery. Halenee, Halenement, a
breathing; also a breath, wind, or exhalation. Halener, to breathe, or blow
upon; also to smell out. Haletant, short-winded. Haletement, a painful (or
fast) panting; also a breathing, or venting out. Haliboron, as Aliboron.
Haligornes, trash, old (or outcast) stuff. Halime, a kind of Sea-Purslane.
Haliter, for haleter, to pant; also to excite, or stir up. Halitre, for hale, a
scorching heat. Hallage, as Droict d' hallage, hallage, the toll that is due to
the Lord of a Fair or Market for such Commodities as are vented in the Hale of
the place. Halle, for hale, an open Market-house, or Hall standing on pillars.
Halle (an Interj.) ha-boys, now now. Halleboter, to glean after Vintage, to
rake, or gather together. Hallebotte, flaggy, or ill-filled. Hallebottes, the
tops or flowers of a certain weed containing two or three little red seeds
apiece. Hallebrene, crest-fallen, off the ^inges, clean out of heart; also
grievously beshitten. Hallebrent, as halebran. Hallecret, as halecret.
Hallefessier, a Scoundrel, a base or scurvy fellow, a Tyrants flatterer.
Hallene, Hallener, as halene, halener. Haller, to hallow, or Encourage dogs
with hallowing. Halleron, part of a woman's etc. Halles. See hale in the N. D.
Halleter, for haleter, to pant, or to blow hard. Halmyrach, for Amiral, an
Admiral. Halot, a hot and blasting mist. Halte, for alte, a stand or stop.
Hambour, Hambourg, a kind of little barrel. Hame, furnished with a hook.
Hamech, a purging composition. Hameconne, full of, or furnished with
fish-hooks. Hameconner, to furnish with fish-hooks. Hamesson, for hamecon, a
fish-hook. Hamessonne, as hameconne. Hamet, a small fish-hook. Han, the groan
wherewith Wood-cleavers keep time to their strokes. J'ai chante a son han, I
have spoken with him. Hanap, a drinking-cup, or goblet. Hancher, to snatch at
with the teeth. Hanchois, a Pilchard. Hanchu, great-hipt. Handon, a kind of
Dragon, whose biting is not venomous. Hanebane, Henbane. Hanede, as enter a la
hanede, to graft in a Willow-pole. Hanegue, a Corn-measure, containing about
six Parisian bushels. Hannebane, as hanebane. Hannicroches, Hannicrochemens,
intanglements, subtilties, cavils. Hannir, for hennir, to neigh. Hannissement,
the neighing of a horse. Hannon, a Cockle. Hanse, a certain Society of
Merchants combined together for the good usage and safe passage of
Merchandises; also an association with, or the freedom of the Hanse; also the
fee, or fine, which is paid for that freedom. Hanse, free of the Hanse, sworn
of the Company of Hanse-Merchants; sworn and made free of any Company, or
Corporation. Hanser, to make free of the Hanse, or of any Civil Company, or
Corporation. Hantement, for hantise, an haunting, or frequenting. Hape, or
Hap, a clasp, or the hook of a clasp, or a hook to clasp with; also the clowt
or band of iron that is nailed upon the arm or end of an axeltree, and keeps it
from being worn by the often turning of the nave of a wheel. Clou a hap, a
clowt-nail. Happee, a grasp, a snatch. Saisine d'happee, a violent seizure of,
or entry into another man's land; a forcible entry, or disseisin. Happelopin, a
Catch-bit, a Smell-feast. Happement, a catching. Happe-sonpe, a spoon.
Haquebute, an Arquebuse. Haquebutier, an Arquebusier. Haquet, a Dray.
Haquetier, a Dray-man. Har, as hard in the N. D. Harangeson, Herring-season.
Haranguant, for harangueur, an Orator, or one that makes a Speech. Haranier,
of, belonging, or like unto an Herring. Haransor, for harang soret, a
red-Herring. Harassier, the Owner, or Overseer of a Race. Haraud, the form of
an Hare; also a certain Cry used in Normandy, for which see Haro in the N. D.
Haraude, openly reviled, or railed at. Harauder, to revile, or rail at openly.
Harault, as haraud. Le monde luy cry harault, the world cries out, or bids
fie, upon him. Harce, for hearse, an Harrow; also a Portcullis. Harcelle, a
little With. Hardage, for hardes, a Travellors things that he carries with him.
Hard, an herd, flock, or troop of wild beasts; also a soft-shelled egg, a
wind-egg; also an hoord. Hard, laden with baggage; also trucked, bartered,
exchanged. Hardelle, a little With, or faggot-band; also a herd of beasts; a
crew of men; also a young maid, or lass. Harder, to truck, barter, exchange.
Hardeux, as hard. Hardiement, for hardiment, boldly. Hardillon, the thong of a
buckle. Hardouer, a resorting, or a repair unto. Hardre, as oeuf hardre, a
wind-egg, or soft-shelled egg. Harelle, a herd, or flock; also a popular
Commotion. Harene, for harang, a Herring. Harengade, a fish like a little Shad.
Harengerie, an Herring-shop, or Market; also a selling of Herrings, or the
Herring-sellers trade. Harengeson, H^rring-sea^on. Harengiere, for harangere, a
woman that cries, or sells Herrings. Fair la move aux harengieres, to stand on
the Pillory. Harer un chien, to set a dog on a beast; to encourage him by some
voice, or by clapping on the back, when he is set on. Harfleur, an ebbing.
Hargas, as saulcon hargas, a sore-Faulcon. Harie, harri'd, vexed, molested.
Harier, to harry, vex, or molest. Harigot, a kind of Jig. Harle, a kind of
Sheldrake. Harlou, instead of Hare-loup, a word wherewith dogs that hunt or
assail a Wolf are cheered and encouraged. Harmene, a little Basilisk.
Harmonique, for harmonieux, harmonious. Harnachement, for harnois, the harness
of a horse. Harnas, the same. Harnas de mouton, the head and pluck of a sheep.
Harnas de roture, a Plough. Haroder, as harauder. Harondelle, for hirondelle, a
Swallow. Harou. See haro in the N. D. Harpade, a catching, or snatching at.
Harpail, a flock, h^rd, or crew. Harpaille, as herpaille. Harpailleur, a
Keeper, or Overseer of Deer; also as Arpailleur. Harpanter, for arpanter, to
survey, or measure land. Harpaut, the name of a Shepherds dog. Harpechorde, a
Harpsicord, a Dulcimer. Harpens, a kind of Night-bird. Harpes, for hardes, a
Travellors things. Harpeur, an Harper, one that plays on the Harp. Harpi,
catching, snatching, grasping at. Harpoy, poison. Harquebousade, and
harquebusade, harquebouse, harquebuse, harquebouse, harquebuse, harquebuser,
and harquebusier. See them without h and o in the N. D. Harquebutier, for
Arquebusier, an Arquebusier. Harry, a carterly voice of exciting. Hars, for
hard, a fag^t-band, a With. Harse, for hearse, an Harrow. Harselle, a little
With. Harseller, for harceler, to vex. Harse, Harsement, Harser, Harseur. See
them with an e, instead of a, in the N. D. Heart, for hard, a With. Les hearts,
the shoulder (or neck) vein of a horse, whereat most commonly he is let blood;
or as les Ars. Haschehsach, a feigned voice of coughing. Hase, an old female
Coney, or Hare. Haseau, a Bream of a middle size. Haste, for broche, a spit.
Hastele, bound up with small splints. Hastelettes, little splints, wherewith
Faulconers bind up their Hawks broken legs. Hasteleux, hasty, quick, speedy,
nimble. Hastemenue, an Hogs haslet. Hastereau, the throat-piece, or forepart of
the neck of a hog; also a dish made of one Liver or more of a calf, etc.
Hasterel, as hastereau; or a Hogs haslet. Hasteur, an hedger, or hedge-maker.
Hastilles, the inwards of a beast; as an Hogs haslet, Calves gather, Sheeps
pluck, etc. Hastivel, for hativeau, an hasting-apple, or pear; a soon-ripe
apple; a hair-brained fool. Hastivete, hastiness, speed, rashness. Hatelier,
for attelier, a place for a Tradesmans tools. Hattereau, as hastereau. Hau, for
ho, an Interjection of calling. Haubans, for aubans, the Shrowds of a ship.
Haubelon, for hoblon, Hops. Haubereau, for hobereau, an Hobby-hawk. Haubergeon,
a little coat of mail, or only sleeves and gorget of mail. Haubergeon de
femmes, the roll wherewith some women bear up their gowns about their hips.
Haubergeonnier, a maker of Coats of mail. Have, dreadful. Yeux haves, hollow,
or sunk in the eyes. Have, soaked, withered, wasted; also di^figured, dreadful
to look on. Havee, a gripe, or handful; a booty, or prey; a toll exa^ted by the
Executioner of some towes upon small wa^es, and fruit sold on Market-days.
Havement, greedily, ravenously. Haver, for happer, to hook, or grapple with an
hook. Haveron, wild Oats. Havet, a little hook. Havi, parcht, burnt up, as
grass by the hot Sun. Havir, to parch, or burn up, as a hot sun does grass.
Haulche, a raising, or out-bidding in an outcry. Baulcher, to raise, or
out-bid in an outcry. Haulchie, raised, or out-bid. Haulchier, as haulcher.
Haulsage, as haussage; also pride, arrogance. Haulsaire, lofty, slately,
high-minded. Haulse, the underlaying of a shoe, or the piece of leather that
underlays it. Haulse-bee, a lifting up of the chin in scorn; also a blow, or
chock under the chin. Haulse-menton, a crutch-like prop of wood, serving to
bear up the head of one that is fallen into extreme weakness; also a false
boasting. Haulse-pied, a net, or engine wherewith Wolves, Badgers, Foxes, etc.
are caught. Haulseree, the drawing, or haling of Barges, or great Boats up a
river by the force of men ashore. Haultainete, haughtiness, loftiness, or
stateliness, Haultbert, as hauber in the N. D. Hault-mure, high-walled; also
tall. Un plat de soupes hault murees, a dish of Brewes, whose sops are heaped
roof-ways one upon another. Hault-murer, to compass, or fortify with high
rampires. Haumelore, an Omelet, or Pancake of eggs. Havoir, for avoir, to have.
Havre, (Adj.) dreadful. Haussage, an hoising, or hea^ing up. Haussaire, as
haulsaire. Hausse, a scoop to lade or fetch up water. Jouer a la hausse qui
baisse, to play at titt^r totter, to ride the wild mere. Hausie-bee, as
haulse-bee. Hausse-^ul, a French Vardinga^^, or the kind^ of roll ^^^d by such
w^^^^ as use ^o Vardingal^s. Hausse-plie, a Vardingale. Hausse-plie, fur^ished
with a Vardingale. Hautaignes, V^^^s which (is ^^ps) imbra^ and creep up on
long poles. Hautain^te, as haul^^i^^^e. Haut-bert, for haubere, a^ ^igh, or
chief Lord. Haut-cofte, a S^r^^^n. Haut-d'a^^, a Cloth of Estate. Haute, a
Dock, to mend, or build ships in. Haute-lissier, a maker of (...).
Haut-gourdier, a d^^perate (...). Hautin, the Sea-pike, or Spit-fish. Hautins,
as Autins. Haut-licier, as haute-lissier. Haut-parage, the highest Peerdom; a
title, or tenure whereby the Peers and Princes of the blood of France hold
their land, or (more generally) a tenure in Capite: for (as that tenure) it
moves wholly and directly of the Crown. Haut-passage, an Imposition of 7 pence
in the pound upon Wools, Cloths, Linnens, Canvasses, etc. Hauvens, for Auvens,
Penthouses of cloth h^ng before Shop-windows. Hay, and Hay, two Interiections.
Hayer, to hedge; also to hate. Hayeton, ^edge-making; also hedging-time.
Hayeur, a hater. Hayneux, as haineux. Hayon, for tente, a Tent. Hayreux, lean,
scraggy; poor, miserable; also rough, ragged. Hayt, as de bon hayt, willingly,
freely. Haze, as hase. Heaulme, or heaume, an Helmet; also the Heart-cherry.
Heaulme, as heaume, wearing an Helmet. Heaulmer, or heaumer, to put on an
Helmet. Heaulmerie, or heaumerie, an Armourers-shop, or Warehouse. Heaulmier,
or Heaumier, an Armorer, or Helmet-maker; also the Heart-cherry-tree.
Heaulmiere, the Rudder-port of a ship. Hebbe de la Mer, the ebb, or ebbing of
the Sea. Hebene, for ebene, Ebony. Hebenin, of, or belonging to Ebony. Heberge,
an house, lodging, harbor. Heberge, housed, lodged, harbored. Hebergement, as
heberge. Heberger, to house, lodge, or harbor; to dwell, or ibid. in. Hebrieu,
for hebren, the Hebrew. Hectique, for Etique, sick of an Hectic or continual
Feater; also lean, in a consumption. Hederiforme, fashioned like (...). Vein
hederiforme, a certain v^in which ^asses do^^ along by the sides of the W^^h.
Hedre, f^ hetre, a B^^^^^tree. Hedret, as haidroide. He, or Hei, an
Interjection of lamenting. Helaine, Elicampane, Sea^-wort. Helinites, an Order
of white Friars, that wear a yellow Cross on their br^sts. Heleoseline,
Smallage. Helepolle, a great Wooden-engine wherewith in old time the tops of
Rampires were battered. Helesie, the name of an herb. Heliotrope, the herb
Turnsol; also a precious stone, which, as a Burning-glass, receives and
retorteth the Sunbeams. Helixine, barren, or creeping Ivy. Helvenaque, the
name of a kind of Grape. Hematide, pierre hematide, the Bloud-stone.
Hemicraine, the Megram. Hemicanique, troubled with, or subject unto the Megram.
Hemine, as Emine. Hemiole, so much, and half so much again. Hemiplexie, a dead
Palsy in half of the body. Hemitrite, la fiebvre hemitritee, an Ague
compounded of a continual Tertian, and an intermittent Quotidian. Hemorrhoidal,
as Vein hemorrhoidale, a small branch of the Spleenvein coming to the
Fundament; also a certain vein in the neck of a woman's Womb. Hemorrhues, for
hemorrhoides, the Emrods, or Piles. Hemy, an Interjection of lamenting, ay me.
Henouars, Salt-porters, carriers of salt. Heouse, Holly, or the Holm-tree.
Heptaphon, sevenfold. Heptomagene, the seventh Male. Herage, an airy of Hawks;
a brood, kind, or stock. Herauder, to blaze, publicly to denounce, or
declare. Herbageux, grassie, full of grass. Herbaux, certain duties whereto
some Inheritances are liable in Poictou. Herb, fed with grass, laid on the
grass, turned into grass. Herbelette, small herb, or grass. Herbergage, or
herberge, as heberge. Herberge, herbergement, herberger, as heberge
hebergement, heberger. Herbergerement, Herbergerie, a house, lodging, or
dwelling. Herbette, small herb, or grass. Herbettes, lettice, burrage,
purslain, sorrel, and such like wholesome herbs. Herbeux, grassie, full of
grass, or herbs. Herbier, for herboliste, an Herbalist; also a Gardener; also
an Herbal. Herbiere, an Herb-woman; also the windpipe of a bird, and the
throatpipe of a beast. Herbist, grassie (or well-grown) pastures. Herbiste, as
herbier. Herbrege, herbregement, herbreger, herbregerie, as heberge,
hebergement, heberger, hebergerie. Herce, for hearse, an Harrow. Herceler, for
harceler, to trouble, vex, or molest. Hercement, Hercer, Herceur, as hersement,
herser, herseur in the N. D. Herceure, an harrowing. Hercher, for herser, to
harrow. Herculiane, Herculienne, a loadstone. Herderti^ler, the great, or
master-devil. Herdre, to cleave, or stick fast unto. Here, for hair, a shirt
made of rugged hair, a penitential shirt. Hereditable, inheritable. Heredital,
hereditary; or as herital. Heredite, an Inheritance. Heresy, turned heretic;
as obstinate, or impious as an heretic. Hereste (for arete) de poisson, a
fishbone. Hergne, for hernie, a bursting, or rupture within the cods. Hergneux,
burst; also froward. Herigote, dew-claw'd, having spurs or dew-claws.
Herigotes, Dew-claws, also Spurs. Herigoteure, the having of dew-claws, or
spurs. Heripe, Heriper, as herupe, heruper. Herissonnement, a sudden quivering,
or shivering, by the sense or apprehension of an abhorred thing. se
Herissonner, to have his hair stand up on end. Heritable, inheritable; also
held in Fee-simple, or for ever. Heritablement, inheritably, in Fee-simple, or
for ever. Heritablete, an inheritance, or the soil inherited. Herital, of
inheritance; also inherited, or held in see. Heritance, Herite, (Subst.) for
heritage, an inheritance. Heritel, as herital. Heritier, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to an heir, or inheritance. Herle, as harle. Hermaire, for armoire, a
Cupboard. Hermandree, for germandree, Germander. Herme, for ferme, firm; also
waste, untilled, solitary. Hermile, a little round member in Architecture, the
same as Astragale in the N. D. Herminer, to fur with Ermins. Herminette, a
little plaining ax. Hermitresse, a Woman-hermit. Hermodacte, Dogs-bane.
Hermole, Burstwort, Rupturewort. Herne, burst, having a rupture about the
Privities. Herniaire, as hermole. Hero, for heroes, a Hero. Herouet, the name
of an apple. Herpail, a herd, or flock. Herpaille, a crew of shirking fellows.
Herpailleur, a seller of old trinkets of Iron, etc. Herpe, grasped, snatched;
also harp-like; out-breasted and lank in the groin like a Greyhound. Herpelu, a
Stiver, a French shilling. Herper, to grasp, or snatch. Herper contre terre, to
creep, or crawl. Herpes, the shingles, running-worm, or wilde-fire. Herr,
Master, Sir; also a Rogue; also a saucy man. Herre, a Rogue, Beggar, Vagabond.
Herry, the Fundament, or Arse-gut. Hers, an Interjection of Calling. Hersele,
for harcele, vexed, tormented. Hersoir, for hier a soir, yesternight. Heart, as
Erte in the N. D. Hertringue, I drink to you. Herupe, whose hair stares or
stands an end; also bristly, pricked, dishevelled, disordered. Heruper, to make
it stare, or stand ill-favouredly; to disorder the hair. S'heruper, to set up
the bristles, her hair to stare. Heruppe, as herupe. Hespalier, a Sailer, or
Mariner. Hesperie, the West Tower. Hestoudeau, for Etoudeau, a great
Cock-chick. Hestreau, a young, or little Beech-tree. Hetaudeau, as hestoudeau.
Hetique, as hectique. Heu, a dutch Hoy; also a Lighter. Heu hasch, feigned
words for a cough. Heudri, musty, corrupted, putrifi'd; stained, or spotted as
unaired linen. Heudrir, to must, corrupt, or putrify; to spoil for want of
airing. Heulet, a boult, or little Isle cut out of the land of purpose to be
overflowed every tide by the Sea, that of the froth salt may be made. Heullant,
yelling, howling. Heure, set, or appointed as an hour; limited, stinted, or
tasked by the hour. Bienheure, for bienheureux, happy. Heurete, Heureusete,
happiness, prosperity. Heurlement, and Heurler, as hurlement, hurler in the N.
D. Heurlerie, for hurlement, an howling. Heurt, Heurtade, a shock; also a piece
of high ground; or the top of a mountain. Bastir en heurt, to build on high, or
on the upper side of an hill. Heurte, as heurete. Heurtes, small azure balls.
Heurtis, for heurtement, a knocking, hitting, or striking. Heuse, as house.
Heusse, the linch-pin, whereby the arm of the axle-tree is kept within the nave
of a cart-wheel, etc. Heyron, a Sea-mew. Hiacinthin, light blew. Hibernal, of,
or belonging to the Winter. Hideur, dread, horror; a thing horrible and
fearful to behold; also hideousness. Hieracite, a kind of bloud-stone. Hiere
pierre, a certain yellow and very bitter composition in powder. Hierobotane,
Juno's tears, Holy-herb. Hierre, for lierre, Ivy. Hil^ux, black-tailed, or
black on the tail, as a bean is. Hillots, fellows. Hinard, wry-necked.
Hinnelement, as Isnellement. Hipate, a sixth, or the proportion of six in
Music. Hipogriphe, as hypogriphe. Hipothecaire, as hypothecaire. Hippiatrie,
horse-physick. Hippoglosse, horse-tongue. Hippopotame, a water-horse. Hirable,
as Giraffe in the N. D. Hiraudie, a paltry Garment. Hirein, Goat-like, of a
Goat. Branche hircine, brank ursin, bears claw. Hire, a rammer. Hirete, an
Inheritance. Hisnel, as Isnel. Historial, historical. Histrion, a Stage Player.
Histrionique, Player-like, sit for, or belonging to a Stage Player. Hiulque,
gaping as the earth in drought; full of chinks. Ho, a great troop of Cavalry.
Hobain, Hobaine, as Aubaine in the N. D. Hober, to remove from place to place.
Hobere, as Aubere. Hoberger, to fly, or to save himself by flying. Hobille, a
Jerkin, Jacket, or Coat. Hobin, an hobby; a little ambling horse. Aller le
hobin, to amble. Hobineux, hobby-like, or belonging to an hobby. Hoc, as ho;
also a grapple, or great hook. Hoche, a nick, or notch on a tally. Hochebot, a
kind of boat. Hochebride, a rakehel, a desperate fellow. Hochecue, for
hochequeue, a Wagtail. Hochement, a shaking, or jogging. Hochepli, a
Vardingale. Hoche-prunier, a plum-tree shaker; a man's yard. Hocqueteur, a
basket-carrier. Hocton, for hoqueton, a Jacket. Hode, toil, wearisomness. Hode,
toiled, wearied. Hoder, to toil, or to weary. Hoe, for ho! an Interjection of
wondering, of reprehension, of forbidding. Hogner, as hoigner. Hoguine, vexed,
molested, offended. Hoguinement, a vexing, molesting, or offending. Hoguiner,
to vex, molest, or offend. Hoguines, the pieces of armor which cover the arms,
thighs, and legs. Hoho! an Interjection of wondering. Hoigne, a grumbling,
mumbling, muttering, or whining. Hoigner, to grumble, mumble, mutter, or whine.
Holette de maille, a shirt of mail. Holostion, hairy small Plantain; also
mountain-Plantain; also the herb called Stitchwort. Holothurie, a certain thing
found in the Sea, yet neither Plant, Fish, nor fit to be eaten. Holotte, a
Madge-howlet, or little Owl. Hom, for homme, a man. Homage, for hommage,
homage. Homar, a Lobster. Homelette, for aumelette, an Omelet, let, or pancake
of eggs. Homenage, for hommage, homage. Homenas, a good silly Cokes. Homicide,
killed, slain, murdered. Homicider, to kill, slay, or murder. Homicidere, an
homicide, or murderer. Hommace, a Virago, a manly, or stout woman. Hommager,
to owe, or do homage unto; also to reverence. Hommasse, as hommace. Hommeau,
Hommelet, Hommet, a dwarf, a very little man. Hommesse, as hommace.
Homocentricalement, in one center. Homologation, an allowance, or approbation
of, a consent unto. Homonceau, a petty fellow. Homs, for homme, a man. Hon hon,
an Interjection of wondering. Fair hon de la test, to seem loath. Hondlee de
soin, a load of hay. Hondrespondre, a drunken, or swaggering Dutchman. Hongner,
as hoigner. Honni, reproached, shamed, disgraced; spotted, blemi head. Honnir,
to reproach, shame, or disgrace; also to sport, or to blemish. Honnorance,
Honoraire, an honorable Present given to a Prince, Ambassador, or great
Officer at his first Entry; a Donative bestowed on Soldiers; a fee. Honoraire,
for honorable, honorable. Honorance, as honnorance. Honorifique, honorable,
worthy. Honouars, as henouars. se Hontir, se Hontoyer, to be ashamed of.
Hopelande, for houplande, a Shepherds cloak, pelt, or gaberdine. Hopperie, a
whooping, or shouting. Horaprime, as Oraprime. Horcentric, Horcentrique, out of
the Center. Horche, a horche, near a wind. Hord, as heurt. Horleat, Barl
y-water, drink made of Barley. Hordoux, s^o^enly, greasy, nasty. Hoar, as de
la en hoar, from that time to this. Horepole, a s^h called Whirlpool. Hormale,
as Orvale. Horo, I see him (an Hunters term.) Horologuer, and Horologier, for
Horloger, a Clock- (or Watch-) maker. Horreau, a Mackerel. Horribler, to make
terrible. Horriblete, horribleness, terribleness, hideousness. Horripilation, a
sudden quaking, or shivering; also a growing rough with hair. Horripiration,
the same; also smart. Hortailles, all kind of gardening Vtensils. Hortatif,
exhorting. Hortie, for ortie, a nettle. Hortolages, garden-stuff. Hoseaux, as
houseaux. Hospille, Hospiller, as houspille, houspiller. Hospitable,
hospitable,; also fit to dwell in. Hospitaler, to receive into an Hopital.
Hosquet, for hoquet, the hiccock. Host, an Host, or Army; a Squadron, or
Battalion close together. Hostager, given in hostage, laid in pawn. Hostarde, a
Bustard. Hostau, for hotel, a Noblemans house. Hostelage, hospitality; also a
bed, or nights-lodging, for a guest. Droict d'hostelage, the rate
Merchant-strangers are at in some parts for their Warehouses, whether they
hold them but a night, or a whole year. Pains d'hostelage, a certain Duty paid
by some Vessels unto their Lords, in regard of the Houses wherein they dwell.
Hostele, lodged. Hosteler, to lodge (in both senses.) Hostelier, an Host, an
Inne-keeper. Ris d'hostelier, a feigned loughter, mirth over from the teeth
outward. Hostellage, as hostelage. Hosteller, as hosteler. Hostiere, as Gueux
d'hostiere, a beggar from door to door. Hostigement de fief, a declaration in
open Court, to whom a fief belongs after the decease of him that had it last,
or for the security of a debt. Hostigie, as heritage hostigie, an Inheritance
whose true Owner is declared in Court. Hostile, hostile, enemy-like.
Hostilement, hostilely, with deadly f^ud. Hostise, as Ostize. Hot, as host.
Hottailles, baskets, dossers, etc. Hottee, a s^^ttle full of. Hotter, to carry
a dosser on the back. Hottereau, a small dosser. Hotteu^, Hottier, one that
carries a dosser on his back. Hotton, the stalk of an ear of corr. Houage, a
digging, or turning up of the ground. Houaller, to yawl, or cry out aloud.
Houay, ^^w-now. Hou^^lande. for houplande, a Sh^^-^^ds cloak, pe^t, or
gaber^^^. Houbiller une Vache, to milk a Co^^. Houde, a Surg^ons Instrument
wherewith the mouth of a Wound is stitched and drawn together. Houcau, for
hoyau, the French matto^k (a tool of husbandry.) Houet, a tenter-book. Houille,
sedge, or fennegrass; also a kind of Mineral that makes very good fires.
Houische, ^^^ht. Houlle, the rolling of the waves of the Sea. Houpe, t^sted, or
^^sselled; also whooped at. Houpelu, tusted. Houper, to tust, also to whoop
unto. Houpier, or Houppier, the thick top, or ^^^ping of a tree. Houquet, for
hoquet, the hiccock; also s^^ ^old. Hourd, as ou est meu le hourd, where blows
are walking, or thumps given. Hourdage, a fashion of walling, or covering for
walls, of reeds wrought like h^rdles, and dawbed over with loam, or clay.
Hourde, a herd, or flock of wild beasts. Hourdis, as hourd; also hurdles.
Hourt, a boisterous encounter, a violent con^lici. House, as houx. House, a
drawer, or course stocking worn over a finer by Country People. House, that
bath such drawers on; also booted. Houseau, a course drawer worn over a
stocking instead of a boot. Il a laisse les houseaux, he is no better than a
dead man. Housee, as houseau; also an Hippocras-bag, or hose to strai^
Hip^ocras through; also a shower of rain. se Houser, to pull on Drawers, to
draw on boots. Housleau, the Holly, or Holm-tree. Houspaillier, a Groom in a
Stable. Houspille, tagged, ^or fed, lugged; also (...), ragged, tattered.
Houspillee, as houssepillee. Houspillement, a violent pulling, or tagging; a
tearing of ones garments, or of one by the garments. s'Houspill^r l'un l'autre,
to tug, or ^^ar one another, to towse as a dog does another. Houssee de pluye,
a shower of rain. Houssepillee, a sluttish draggle-tail, whose Gown ever sticks
full of straw. Houssepailler, as houspiller. Houssepillee, a ragged slut.
Houssepillement, as houspillement. Housseur, Housseuse, a sweeper. Houssiner,
to swinge with a switch. Houssineux, full of switches. Houssoir, any broom tied
to the end of a long stuff, for the sweeping of Chimneys, or the upper parts of
dusty rooms. Housson, for houx, the Holm, or Hulver-tree. Houssoner, as
houssoir. Houssu, hairy, rugged with hair. Mouton houssu, a sheep well-woolled,
or of great burden. Crins houssus, thick locks of hair. Houssure de lain, a
sleece, or great lock of wool. Houtarde, a bustard. Houtin, as Autin. Houze, as
house. se Houzer, as se houser. Hoye, tired, overtoiled; also lame, or impotent
by nature. Hu, for huee, a hissing at one. Hua, a kind of black Kite. Huard, a
buzzard-like Eagle. Huau, as hua. Huaume, the helm of a ship. Hubi, lively,
sprightly; also well-batled, well-amended in flesh, etc. Hubir, to make thrive.
Hubit, a setting up of the bristles. Hucrie, a ^^outing. Huge, for hu^he, a
kneading-trough. Hugrement, bravely, gallantly. Huguenotterie, Calvinism.
Huguenottique, Huguenot-like; of, or belonging to a Huguenot. Hui, to day.
Huictante, eighty, fourscore. Huilerie, a room to keep Oil in. Huisserie, the
Office of an Usher, Doorkeeper, or M ssenger in a Court; also the furniture or
stuff of a door. Huisset, a wicket, or little door. Huistri^re, a bed of
Cysters; the place wherein Oysters are got, or fished. Hullement, an howling.
Huller, for hurler, to houl. Hum hum, a coughing accent, or voice. Humable,
that may be supped. Humaige, as humee. Humanthin, as Bernadet. Humble; (a
Subst.) a Trout-like fish. Humble-fier, meek and froward. Humblesse, humility.
Humee, a broth for a sick man; also as humet. Humement, a supping, or sucking
up. Humeraire, Humeral, of, or belonging to the shoulder. Humerie, as humement.
Hume-sang, the herb Burnet. Humet, broth, pottage, candle; any liquid and
supping meat; also a sup thereof. Humeter, to sup, or sip. Hume-vesne, a
Suck-sist, one that lays his nose on his next fellows bum. Humeux, a notable
drinker. Humier, the Occupant of a thing whereof another is the owner. Humiere,
a supping, or sucking up; also the occupancy of another man's lands, etc.
Humoire, a close bit, a bit without any liberty for a horse. Humoral, of
humors, moist, juicy, sappy. Hunisque, espee hunisque, a kind of Cimitar used
in old time. Hupee, as huquee. s'Huper, to raise, or set up his crest; to
become proud, lofty, stately. Huque, a Dutch-womans mantle. Huquee, as il n'y a
qu'une huquee, you have but a little way thither. Hurlegay, thoroughly tipled.
Huraut, a great, or full-grown wild Boar. Hurbee, a Vine-fretter. Hure,
staring, bristly, like a wild Boars-head. Hurelais, Vine-fretters. Hurgon, red
Beets. Hurque, an bulk. Hurt, as hourt. Hurte-bise, one that scuffles with the
North Wind. Hurteller, to trample on with the feet. Hurter, for heurter, to
knock, hit, or ran against. Hurtis, knocks, dashes, hits. Hus, the Elder-tree.
Husche, for huche, a kneading-trough. Husciame, Henbane. Hustite, a Bohemian
Coin. Hussite, turned Protestant. Hustaudeau, Hutaudeau, a big cock-chick.
Hutin, a brabling, or scoulding. Hutin, (Adj.) contentions. Hutinement, a
brabling, or scolding. Hutiner, to scold at, to vex. Hutineux, contentious,
troublesome. Hutudeau, a big cock-chick. Huvelot, up-headed, well-^^aped on.
Huy, as hui, to day. Huye, hooted at. Huyer, to hoot at. Huystre, for huitre,
an Oyster. Huze a huze, cheek by jowl. Hyaseyame, Henbane. Hybleanne, a Be.
Hydrargire, Quicksilver. Hydraulique, as voix hydraulique, the sound of
running waters. Hydrie, a water-pot, or bucket to draw water with. Hydrocele,
the falling down of humors into one of the stones. Hydromantie, divination by
the observation of water, or by spirits appearing in it. Hydropholie, an
extreme fear of water. Hye, for hie, a rammer. Hyer, for hier, yesterday.
Hyere, a powder made of Aloes, and other bitter Simples. Hyeuse, for yeuse, the
H^lm-oak. Hygienique, health-preserving Physic. Hymenean, of, or belonging to
a wedding. Hynaire, a Saker passenger. Hyoide, os hyoide, the forked bone which
is at the root of the tongue. Hypate, as hipate. Hypenemien, windy, barren,
like the eggs laid by an untrodd^n h^n. Hyperbolie, for hyperbolique,
Hyperbolical. Hyperdulie, the highest worship, such as belongs only to God.
Hypernephelisie, a contemplator of high matters among the clouds. Hypocauste, a
sto^^, or hot-house. Hypociste, the ex^^^scency that hoots up from the root of
the shrub Cist^s, or H^ll^ R^^^; also the Medicinable j^i^^ ^^tracted from it,
and hardened by Draggists. Hypocriser, to dissemble, or play the hypocrite.
Hypocrisement, hypocritically, dissemblingly. Hypogastre, the lower part of the
^^lly, from the Navel to the hair of the privities. Hypogastrique, of, or
belonging to the hypogastrum. Hypogee, a vault, or cellar arched over head.
Hypogriphe, a Monster, half horse, half griffon. Hypopie, matter growing or
gathering in a crushed eye; also a bone under the eye. Hyposarque, a kind of
Dropsy. Hypostase, a substance; also a residence in urine flitting toward the
bottom thereof. Hypothadee, given, or devoted unto God. Hyppodrom, a Course, or
Running-place for horses; also a place wherein horses are managed. Hyrundelle,
for hirondelle, a Swallow. Hyrundinier, of, or belonging to a Sow. Hysgin, a
light red, or bright bay; or a kind of purple stain made by the black-berry.
Hysser, to hoise up. Hysterique, affection hysterique, the suffocation of the
Matrix. Hyvernee, the Winter-season.
J
JA, almost, very near, already. Ja n'avienne, God forbid. Il ne viendra ja, he
will not come at all. Jabler, to make the croes of a pi^ce of cask. Jabol, a
truckle, or pulley. Jacee, herb Iri^ity, Hearts-ease. Jacent, lying. Jachere,
fallow ground, lay-land; also any earth that lies idle. Jacoit que, though,
although, notwithstanding. Jacque, Jacked, armed with a Jack, or Coat of Mail.
Jacquelet, a Jack of the Clock-house, or the little man that strikes the
quarters in a Clock. Jaque^^ard, a Coat, or shirt of Mail; also a great statue
of wood, against which in old time young Soldiers practiced to sight.
Jacquemin, as Jaquelin. Jacquet, a Spunger, a Smell-feast. Jactance, a
bragging, or boasting. Jactateur, a bragger, or boaster. Jactation, as
Jactance; also a swinging, t^^sing, or shaking up and down. Jacture, loss,
damage; or a wrack. Jad^au, a bowl, or maz^^. Jaet, for jayet, p^^t. Jagayette,
a kind of short spear. Jagl^u^, bastard (or ^ater) slower de l^^^. Jaguette, a
Pie. Ja^ant, as Geant. Jaibeau, a little pi^ or (...) full of water to keep
fish in. Jalaye, a Wine-measure containing 12 French pints; also a So, or tub.
Jalet, as jallet. Jallage, as forage. Jallay, as Jalaye. Jalle, a Chilblane;
also as jalaye. Jallee, as jalaye. Jallet, a little casting bowl. Jallet
embrase, a fire-ball. Are a jallet, a stone-bow. Jallir, Jallissant, as
jaillir, jaillissant in the N. D. Jallissement, a spouting up of water.
Jalousement, jealously, suspiciously. un Jamais, a very long time. Jambette, a
little leg. Donner la jambette, to give a foil. Fair la jambette, a horse to
go on three legs, and gracefully to shift and hold up the fourth. Jambier, of,
or belonging to the leg. Jambier (a Verb) to go. Jambonnier, a seller of bacon,
or gammons of bacon; also a beggar. Jamboyer, to jet, or wantonly to go in and
out with the legs; also to cross the legs often in dancing. Jamme, Pearl. Jan,
for Jean, John; also a Cuckold. Jan de blanc, a white Kite; also the Corpus
Christi. Jan gipon, a coxcomb. Jancer un cheval, to stir a horse in the stable
till he swart with all. Jane, a certain vessel, or measure for Vinegar, etc.
Janequin, Janet, Jack. Jan-femme, an Hermaphrodite; also a Milk-sop. Jangler,
to jangle, to talk saucily, or scurvily. Janglerie, a jangling, a saucy
talking. Jangleur, a jangler, or saucy talker. Jannet d'eau, Water-lilly,
Water-rose. Jannette, Jenny. Jannin, a Wittal. Janot, Jack. Jans femme, as
Jan-femme. Jans pilhommes, Gentlemen. Jappement, a barking. Japper, to bark.
Japperie, a barking. Jappeur, a barker. Jaquelin, Jaqueline, Jaquelot,
Jaquelotte, Jaquemin, Jaquemine, all diminutives of Jaques James. Jaquet, a
Pilgrim to St. James of Compostella; also a flattering Smell-feast. Jaquetter,
to prattle; also to flatter. Jaquiers, a sort of Rebels so called, because they
wore a fashion of Jackets used by the Soldiers of those times. Jar, a gander.
Pied de jar, the herb Goose-foot, or wild Orage. En jar, a caterwawling, or
bitch-hunting. Jarbe, for gerbe, a sheaf. Jarce, chawned. se Jarcer, to chawn.
Jarceure, as jarsure. Jard, as Jar; also the first great receptacle or pond of
salt water, whereof salt is made. Jardeau, Jardereau, a codded weed that winds
about Corn, and intangles it. Jardinage, garden-stuff; also as Jardinement.
Jardine, dressed, as a Garden. Jardinement, a gardening, a dressing of a
Garden. Jardiner, for dresser un Jardin, to make a Garden, to dress it.
Jardinet, a little Garden. Jare, a Jar. Jargeot, as jargot. Jargonnement, a
gibridge. Jargonneur, a gibridge-monger. Jargonnois, gibridge. Jargot, a kind
of course garment worn by Country People. Jargouiller, to warble, chirp, or
chatter. Jargueul, the windpipe of birds, whereout they warble. Jarnage, a
swaggering; or a swaggerer. Jarnat, a swaggerer. Jarnigoi, the same; also a
rustical blasphemy. Jarre, the name of a codded and Corn-intangling weed.
Jarretade, a slash over the hams. Jarretier, Baker-legged, that goes in at the
knees. Cheval jarretier, an interfeering horse. Jarrons d'une roue, the fellows
of a wheel. Jarrousses, a kind of Tares, or small Vetches. Jarrus, Starchwort,
or Calvesfoot. Jarrye, the Oak-tree. Jars, a gander. Jarser, to chawn. Jarsure,
a chink, or chawn; also the nib of a pen. se Jarter, to garter himself, to tie
his garters. Jartier, for jartiere, a garter. Jartier (Adj.) of, belonging to,
or serving for a garter. Vein jartiere, the garter-vein, or ham-vein. Jasard,
a chatterer, an idle talker. Jasarde, a prating gossip. Jasement, as jaserie.
Jaseran, a flagon-chain; also a bracelet, or neck-lace of that chain-fashion;
also a coat, or shirt of great and close-woven mail; also the hoop of a
shackle. Jasereau, as jasard. Jaserie, a prattling, or tittle-tattle. Jate, a
bowl, a mazer. Jatte, the same; or a measure containing about the Parisian
pint. Jau, a Cock; also a Barbel; or a Dorce-fish. Javar, Javard, Javarre, a
swelling in the hollow of the pastern of a horse. Javelier, Javeliere, a
Corn-pike, or Pitchfork wherewith sheaves of corn be laden and unloaded.
Javelin, for javeline, a Javelin. Javelinier, one that uses a Javelin.
Javelotier, a Darter. Jaugeage, the gaging, or measuring of Casks. Javioler, to
prattle. Javioleur, a prattler. Jaule, a Prison. Jaulnement, of a yellow hue.
Jaulnet (Adj.) yellowish. Jaulnette, S. Peter's wort. Jay, for geay, a Jay.
Jayon, the Jay. Jazer, for Jaser, to prate. Jazeran, as jaseran. Jazerane, a la
jazerane, of a flagonchain fashion. Ibice, a wild beast like a Goat, living
amongst the snowy tops of mountains. Icelui, he. Icelle, she. Ichneumon, the
Egyptian Rat. Ichoreux, whayish, waterish. Ichthiomantie, divination by fish.
Ichthiophagie, fish-eating. Icosaedre, one of the five regular bodies in
Geometry. Icosimite, as Lychnocosimite. Ictere, the yellow Jaundies. Icterique,
sick of the yellow Jaundies. Ictide, as belette ictide, an Otter, or
water-Weesel. Ideal, for ideel, imaginary, only in the fancy. Idiotisme,
simplicity, sottishness; also propriety in a language. Idoine, fit, proper,
convenient. Idoiniete, aptness, fitness, convenience. Jean-Almy, the name of an
apple. Jecoraire, of, or belonging to the Liver. Jectee, a cast, throw, or
fling. Jectement, a casting, throwing, or flinging. Jecteur, a caster, thrower,
or flinger. Jectice, terre jectice, earth newly cast up out of a ditch, or
furrow. Jectigation des espaules, a wagging, or shrugging of the Shoulders.
Jectisse, as jectice. Jectonner, to shoot, to put forth twigs. Jenin, as Cocu
jenin, an arrant Cuckold. Jens, an herb like Rosemary. Jercer, as jarcer. Jere,
as gere. Jerver, to be loath. Jessemin, for jasmin, Jasmin. Jesuitains, an Order
of white Friars, wearing hoods on their heads like women, and shaving their
beards continually. Jet, Jette, Jet. Jettien, made of Jet. Jettonner, as
jectonner. Jeunastre. somewhat young. Jeunastrer, to behave himself like a
young man. Jeunement, youthfully, youth-like. Jeunet, somewhat young. Jeuneux,
much fasting. Jeuse, for yeuse, the Holm-oak. Ignave, lazy, dull. Igne,
burning, or fiery; also fired, burned. Ignise, a burning, or firing. Ignition,
the same. Ignoramment, ignorantly. Iky, for ici, here. Ila, as illec. Isles, the
flanks, or the sides of the lower part of the belly. Iliade de maux, as many
mischiefs as befell the Trojans at the siege and destruction of their City.
Ilias, the same. Ilicine, as Chelydre. Illation, inference, or conclusion.
Illec, there, thither. D'illec, thence, from thence. Illegalite, illegality.
Illitere, illiterate, ignorant. Illimite, boundless, unlimited. Illine, softly
anointed, gently rubbed on. Illiner, to anoint softly, to rub on gently.
Illiquide, obscure, doubtful. Illude, deluded, mocked. Illuder, to delude, to
mock. Illuminateur, an illuminater, or enlightener. Illusoire, illuding; also
vain, idle, to no purpose at all. Illustrateur, an Illustrator. Illuvion, as
alluvion; also filthiness, nastiness, uncleanness. Imager, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to Images; adorned, or furnished with Images. Imager, for Imagier, a
maker, or seller of Images. Imagette, a little Image. Imbecille, weak.
Imbecillement, weakly. Imberbe, beardless. Imbibe, soaked, or drunk in.
Imblessable, not to be wounded. Imbriago, a most venomous kind of the
Sea-hare; also the beardless Sea-barbel, or Sore-mullet. Imbrocation, as
Embrocation. Imbuvable, unfit to be drunk of. Imitatif, imitating; or done by
imitation. Immangeable, unfit to be eaten. Immanite, inhumanity,
outragiousness. Immariable, unmarriable, past marriage. Immedicable, u^^urable.
Immeuble, for immobile, unmovable. Immisce, intermeddled with. s'Immiscer, to
intermeddle with. Immisericorde, unmercifulness. Immisericordieusement,
unmercifully. Immisericordieux, unmerciful. Immixte, unmixed. Immobilaire,
unmovable. Immondicite, uncleanness. Immortalisation, an immortalizing, or
immortalization. Immortifie, unmortifi'd, too much addicted to his pleasures.
Immortification, the state of one that is unmortifi'd. Immune, free, or
exempted from. Immutable, for immuable, unchangeable. Impact, hard fastened.
Impacter, as empacter. Impar, odd, uneven. Impartir, to impart, to make
partaker of. Impatronise, impatronized. Impatroniser, to give possession.
Impendent, imminent, near at hand. Impenses, costs, charges, expenses.
Imperatoire, Masterwort. Imperer, to rule, command, or domineer. Imperfaict,
for Imparfait, imperfect. Imperforation, a closing, or shutting up, for want of
boring or piercing. Impericon, St. Johnswort. Imperiosite, stateliness,
imperiousness. Imperissable, Imperissible, unperishable, which cannot miscarry.
Imperit, unskilful. Imperitement, unskilfully. Impersonnellement, impersonally.
Imperspirable, not to be breathed into, not to be pierced with air. Impetigine,
a dry itching scab. Impetrable, obtainable upon request. Impetration, an
obtaining by request. Impetre, obtained by request. Impetrer, to obtain by
request. Impiement, impiously. Impiteux, pitiless, without mercy. Implantation,
an Implantation. Implanter, to implant. Implication, Implicit, implication.
Implorateur, an implorer; an humble and earnest intreater. Imployable,
inflexible. Impoli, unpolished. Impollu, unpolluted, undefiled. Importable, not
to be born. Importamment, importantly, forcibly. Importeux, without Port or
Harbor. Impossibiliter, to make impossible. Impost de sa person, impotent,
unweldy. Imposte, the springer of an arched Gate; the moulding that bears the
arch. Impotence, impotency, weakness. Impourveu, as improuveu. Impreciable,
unvaluable. Impregnation, a getting with young, a conceiving. Impremedite,
unpremeditated. Imprescriptible, without the compass of prescription, which by
no length of time can be alienated or lost. Imprestance, pressed, or impressed
money, received, and to be employed for another. Imprevoyance, improvidence.
Improbable, improbable. Impropere, an exprobration, upbraiding, or twitting in
the teeth; a reproach, or imputation; also a nickname, or disgraceful title.
Improperer, to exprobrate, upbraid, or lay in ones dish; to nickname, or
miscal. Improuveu, unprovided for, unlooked for. A l'improuveu, suddenly,
unawares. Impugnance, for impugnation, an impugning, resisting, or
withstanding. Impuissamment, impotently. Impulse, urged, compelled. Impulser,
to urge, to compel. Impulseur, an urger, a compeller. Impuniment, without
punishment. Impurite, for impurete, impurity. Imputeur, one that puts things
upon others. Inabordable, unaccessible. Inactionable, unsuable. Inadmissible,
unallowable. Inadvertamment, unadvisedly, heedlesly. Inaguerri, grown warlike.
Inamendable, unamendable. Inamollissable, not to be softened. Inanite, inanity,
emptiness. Inanition, as inanite; also, an emptying. Inapercevance, dullness,
stupidity. Inarcature du col, the bowing of the neck. Inassociable, unsociable.
Ination, as inanite. Inaudite, unheard of. Inaugure, consecrated, dedicated.
Incagant, beraying, disgracing. Incaguer, to beray; also to disgrace. Incant,
for encan, an outcry of goods. Incaquer, as incaguer. Incarnatif,
flesh-breeding. Incastre, enclosed in a Castle. Incentriquer, to place within a
center. Inceratif, cleaving, or sticking unto. Incere, for infere, inserted.
Uncertain, (Subst.) Incertainete, an uncertainty. Incessible, undeterminable.
Incession, a pace, gate, or going; also a hot bath for the lower parts of the
belly. Incidemment, incidently, by chance. Incineration, a reducing, or burning
unto ashes. Incis, a Rock, or hard ground, cut to give passage to a spring.
Incisif, making an incision. Incisoires, the four Fore-teeth. Incitant, for
incitateur, an inciter, or inticer. Incitement, an inciting, or incitation.
Inclement, severe, cruel. Inclinant, inclining, disposed. Incline, inclined,
bent unto. Incliner, to incline. Inclite, famous, renowned. Incolumite, safety.
Incommendable, discommendable. Incommensurable, unmeasurable. Incommesurable,
the same; or not to be measured by one and the same measure. Incommuable,
immutable, unchangeable. Incommun, not common. Incommutable, as incommuable.
Incongelable, not to be congealed. Incongrue, incongruous, absurd.
Inconsiderant, inconsiderate. Inconsumptible, unconsumable. Incontamine,
undefiled, unspotted. Incontinemment, incontinently, unchastly, immoderately.
Inconvenable, improper, unfit, unbecoming. Inconvenance, an unfitness.
Inconvenient, (Adj.) as inconvenable. Incornifustibuler, to plod upon, to beat
the brains about. Incorrompable, not to be corrupted, seduced, or won by gifts,
etc. Incrasser, to thicken, to make thick. Incredible, for incroyable,
incredible. Incrediblement, incredibly. Increpation, a reproof. Increpe,
reproved. Increper, to reprove. Incrustation, a pargetting, or rough-casting; a
crustiness or ruggedness. Incruste, pargetted, or rough-cast; grown to a scab,
or crustiness. Incruster, to parget, or rough-cast; to set a scab, or crust on;
to make rugged and thick, as a crust. Incuisable, not to be sodden. Inculpe,
charged with, or guilty of; also blameless, innocent. Incurie, carelessness,
negligence. Incurieusement, plainly, after a homely manner. Incuriosite,
plainness, unaffectation. Incurrir, to incur. Indagateur, a diligent searcher.
Indague, dishonest, base, unworthy. Indalgos, a Gentleman. Indanniser, for
indamniser, to save harmless, to indemnisie. Indar, a Turkie-cock. Inde,
Indico, light blue. Indecentement, undecently, unhandsomely. Indecision, an
undecision, a doubtful or undetermined state of things. Indecrotable, not to be
made clean. Indefatigable, indefatigable. Indegene, homebred; born, or growing
within the same Territory. Indeleble, for indelebile, indelible, or
uneffaceable. Indemne, indemnifi'd. Deniers indemnez, money which comes in
clear to the purse. Indemne, harmless, cleared of all damage. Indevidable,
unwindable. Indevinable, not to be guessed at. Indiciblement, unspeakably.
Indict, denounced, commanded, appointed by authority. Indicte, an Indiction, or
Command. Indigestible, not to be digested. Indiguer, for indiquer, to show.
Indiligent, negligent, careless. Indire, to publish, denounce, or declare.
Indispos, for indispose, indisposed, not well. Indissolu, undissolved.
Indition, a numbering of time, or years; also a mark, sign, or token.
Individuite, individuity. Indoleance, want of sense in pain; no feeling of
sorrow, no apprehension of grief. Indon, a Turkie-cock, or a young Turkey.
Indubitamment, undoubtedly. Induce, a truce, or cessation of Arms; also a
Vacation, or a cessation from proceeding in a suit for a certain time agreed on
by both parties. Induement, for indeuement, unlawfully. Indulgentieux, full of
indulgence. Indult, a pardon of indulgence, the Pope's Bull for that purpose.
Indult, (Adj.) young, not yet of age. Indultaire, one that has an Indulgence
or Pardon from the Pope. s'Industrier, to labor, endeavor, or bestir himself,
to make himself fit for some employment. Ine, for une, one. Inecroulable, as
inescroulable. Ineffaceable, or Ineffacable, indelible, which no time nor
violence can wear out. Ineffroyable, not to be frighted, or scared. Ineloquent,
not eloquent. Inepte, unapt, unseasonable; also idle, or vain. Ineptement,
unaptly, unseasonably, idly. Ineptie, Ineptitude, unaptness, unseasonableness;
idleness, or foppery. Inequalite, for inegalite, disparity, or disproportion.
Inescroulable, Inexcroulable, unshakable. Inexcusablement, without excuse.
Inexecute, unexecuted, unperformed. Inexpugnable, impregnable. Inexterminable,
not to be cast out, or destroyed. Inextinguible, unquenchable. Inextricable,
inextricable. Infaict, or Infaicte, for infecte, infected. Infaicter, Infaire,
to infect. Infame, defamed, discredited. Infamement, infamously. Infamer, to
defame, discredit, or disgrace. Infamete, disgrace, or discredit. Infanticide,
Child-murthering. Infantile, Infantin, for enfantin, childish. Infauste,
ominous, unfortunate. Infectioner, for infecter, to infect, or fill with
infection. Infeodation, Infeode, Infeoder. See Infeudation, Infeude, Infeuder
in the N. D. Infiable, not to be trusted to. Infibulation, a buckling, or
clasping together. Inficiation, a denial. Infigure, figured, marked or noted
with a figure. Infiniement, for infiniment, infinitely. Infinitude, an infinite
number. Infirmatif, weakening; also disanulling, or disallowing. Infirmer, to
weaken; also to disanul, or to disallow. Inflammable, apt to flame. Inslation,
an inflation, a windy swelling, or puffing up. Infleschissable, inflexible.
Inflictif, inflicting, apt to inflict. Insoliature, Leaf-work, in Carving, etc.
Insondre, to infuse; also to sleep. Inforcable, impregnable. Inform,
shapeless, ill-favored. Infortiat, one of the three Volumes of the Pandects.
Infracteur, an infringer, violater, breaker of. Infraction, Infracture,
infringement, violation, breach. Infrangible, not to be broken. Infrasque,
intricated, pestered, entangled. Infrasquer, to intricate, pester, entangle;
also to feed with vain hopes. Ingambe, light-legged, swift of foot.
Ingargouillat, the cross point in dancing. Ingenier, to beat his brains about a
thing. Ingenieux, for Ingenieur, an Engineer. Ingeniosite, ingeniousness.
Ingenue, for ingenu, ingenuous. Ingenuement, for ingenument, ingenuously.
Inglorieux, inglorious. Ingrave, for engrave, engraven. Ingraver, to ingrave.
Inguerdonne, unrecompenced. Inguerissable, uncurable. Inguine, the Groin.
Ingurgite, swallowed in. Ingurgiter, to swallow in. Inhabilement, unably,
weakly, unhandsomely, unfitly, sottishly. Inhabilitation, a disabling.
Inhabilite, (Part.) disabled, made unable. Inhabilitement, a disabling.
Inhabiliter, to disable, to make unable Inhabiter, to inhabit, reside, or dwell
in. Inhabitue, unaccustomed. Inhibe, forbidden; hindered. Inhiber, to forbid, to
hinder. Inhonneste, dishonest. Inhonestement, dishonestly. Inhumation, a
burying, an interring. Inian, by St. John (a childish oath.) Inidoine, unfit.
Injectement, an injection, a casting in or upon. Inimaginable, unconceivable.
Injurieur, an injurer, a wronger. Inn, innate, born, or bred in. Innocenter,
to whip, or lash, as they do in France on Childermas or Innocents day, all such
whose Breech they may easily come at. Innomme, as Contract innomme, an equal
exchange of money, and land given only for land. Innumerable, innumerable.
Innumerablement, innumerably. Innumerablete, innumerableness. Inobedience,
disobedience. Inobedient, disobedient. Inoffensible, not to be hurt.
Inofficieux, unserviceable, unkind; also unrespectful. Inofficiosite, want of
due respect. Querelle d' Inofficiosite, a suit commenced by Orphans, etc. whose
Parents have given from them what was their due. Inopie, want, scarcity, need.
Inquant, the place where things are sold by Outcry. Droict d' Inquant, five in
the hundred due unto the King, upon things sold by Outcry, in some parts of
Provence. Inquanter, to sell, or pass away at an Outcry. Inquietation, a
disquieting, vexing, molesting, or troubling. Inquietement, unquietly.
Inquieteur, a disquieter, or troubler. Inquilin, a Tenant, Lodger, or Inmate.
Inracinable, which will not take root. Insail, the Rudder, or Stern of a ship.
Insalubre, unhealthful, unwholesom, noisome. Insalubrite, unhealthfulness,
unwholesomness, infection. Insatiabilite, or Insatiablete, unsatiableness.
Insciemment, unwittingly, ignorantly. Inscience, ignorance, want of knowledge.
Inscophie, Inscrophie, as cheveux inscrophiez, hair turned up after the nearest
manner. Insculpe, engraven. Insculper, to ingrave. Insectable, insectible, not
to be cut, or divided. Insidiation, treachery, deceitfulness; a laying in wait
for; a laying of snares. Insidieux, treacherous, deceitful, lying in wait for.
Insigne, for enseigne, a sign. Insimule, accused of, charged with. Insipience,
indiscretion, sottishness, dotage. Insipient, indiscreet, sottish, doting.
Insolation, a sunning, a setting or laying open in the Sun. Insolide, unsolid,
loose, or weak. Insolidement, unsolidly, weakly; also thoroughly, wholly, for
the whole. Insolite, strange, unused, unaccustomed. Insolu, unpaid,
undischarged, undefrayed. Inspere, unhoped for. Insperement, beyond all hope.
Insperse, inspersed, sprinkled, or cast upon. Instable, unstable, unsteady.
Instablement, unsteadily. Instauration, instauration, a renewing, or repairing.
Instaure, restored, renewed, or repaired. Instaurer, to restore, renew, or
repair. Instigue, instigated, enticed, urged. Instiguer, to instigate, entice,
or urge. Institutaire, a Title of the Emperor Justinian, who writ the
Institutes of the Civil Law. Institute, for Instituts, Justinian's Book of
Institutes. Instructive, for instruction, instruction. Instruer, for instruire,
to instruct. Instruisable, fit to be instructed. Instrumenter, to draw and
ingross an Instrument, Conveyance, Evidence. Instrumentier, a certain
Vine-devouring Vermin. Insuave, unsweet, unpleasant. Insubstantiel,
unsubstantial; light, idle, vain. Insulain, an Islander. Insult, for insulte,
an insult. Insuperable, insuperable. Insurger, to rise up against; to labor
earnestly. Insuyvre, to pursue. Intarissable, not to be dried up. Integralite,
wholeness. Integre, integrated, perfected, made whole. Intelligencier, an
Intelligence-giver. Intempere, intemperate, immoderate. Intemperement, for
intemperamment, intemperately, immoderately. Intempestif, intempestive,
untimely, unseasonable; also disordered, unreasonable; also unlucky.
Intempestivement, unseasonably; unreasonably, out of course; unluckily.
Intendit, a principal deposition; writings, or books, wherein the chief or main
points of a Suit are contained. Intenteur, an intender, an attempter; also the
beginner of a Suit. Interbaste, basted, or quilted between. Intercalation, a
setting of an odd thing between even ones. Interclaire, as Intercalaire in the
N. D. Intercostal, between the ribs. Interject, an Interposition, a speech put
in, a word cast between. Interine, Interiner, as Enterine, Enteriner in the N.
D. Interlocation, an interposition. Interloquer, to interpose some speech, or
speak in another man's tale; also to delay a Cause by some new allegation; or to
stay the whole for a while, by ending only some part thereof. Interlunaire, the
season between the going out of the old, and coming in of the new Moon.
Intermediat, in the middle or intermedium, that is, between two. Intermettre,
to put between; also to leave off for a time. Interminant, boundless.
Interminer, to prescribe. Intermis, intermitted, discontinued. Intermittant,
intermitting, discontinuing. Internecion, an universal slaughter. Internement,
internally, inwardly. Interossel, between the bones. Interpellateur, an
interrupter, or disturber; a saitor, or intercessor. Interpellation, an
interruption, or disturbance; a summons; a request, suit, or intercession.
Interpolation, a polishing, scowring, furbishing, new-dressing of things.
Interposement, interposition. Interpretateur, an Interpreter, or Expositor.
Interrogat, a questioning, or examining. Interrogue, Interroguer, as Interroge,
Interroger in the N. D. Interroy, a Regent, or Protector, that governs a State
from the death or deposition of one Prince, to the entrance or election of
another. Intersigne, a sign, or token of. Intervalle, put in distances, done by
pauses. Interversion, a wrongful turning, or conveying away of; a purloyning,
or deceiving; also a turning upside down. Interverti, interverted, converted or
turned the wrong way; purloyned; deceived; overturned. Intervertir, to
intervert, convey or turn the wrong way; to purloyn, or deceive; to overthrow,
or turn upside down. Intestinal, of, or belonging to the Intestines.
Intheriner, as Enteriner in the N. D. Inthime, for intime, adjourned to an
appeal. Inthronization, an inthroning, or inthronization. Inthronize,
inthronized, placed in a Throne. Inthronizer, to inthronize, or place in a
Throne. Intimant, an Appealant, one that cites his Adversary upon an Appeal.
Intirable, not to be drawn, or pulled out. Intitulation, an intitulation,
denomination, description. Intonation, a rumbling, or thundering. Intonation de
gare and serre, the sounding of Drum or Trumpet, whereby Soldiers are warned
to stand close, and look to themselves. Intouchable, not to be touched.
Intrade, revenue, rent, profit coming in. Intraictable, for intractable,
intractable, unruly. Intrans, senior Sophisters, such as prepare themselves to
commence Batchelors. s'Intregenter, as s'Entregenter. Intrication, an
intrication, pestering, or insnaring. Intrinque, Intrinquement, Intrinquer, as
Intrique, Intriquement, Intriquer. Intrinseque, intrinsecal, inward.
Intrinsequement, intrinsecally, inwardly. Intrique, a Labyrinth, or Maze.
Intrique, intricated, entangled, perplexed. Intriquement, intricately.
Intriquer, to intricate, entangle, or perplex. Intronisation, intronise,
introniser, as Inthronization, inthronize, inthronizer. Intrus, intruded,
thrust into. Intrusion, intrusion. Intruz, an Intruder, an Usurper of the
possession of a vacant thing. Intuitif, which is, or may be seen into.
Intumescence, a swelling. Invade, invaded. Invader, to invade. Invasible,
invasible. Inventeresse, for Inventrice, an Inventrix. Inventif, inventive,
full of devises. Inventorizer, for inventorier, to take an Inventory of.
Invers, inverted, inside outward, upside down. Investison, Investiture.
s'Inveterer, to inveterate, or grow old; to become rooted, or come to a habit
by custom. Invigilance, invigilancy, sleepiness, or laziness. Inviolablete,
inviolableness. Inviole, inviolate, sound, uncorrupted, constant, faithful,
true. Invitement, an invitation. Involuere, a cover. Involver, to involve; also
to entangle. Involution, an involution; also an intangling. Involution de
process, the perplexing of a Cause. Invoqueur, an invoker. Invulnerable,
invulnerable. Jo, for moi, I. Joannes, a Pedant. Joannitiques, an Order of
Monks wearing red Habits, and the representation of a Chall^e in their breasts.
Jobelin, a Sot, a Coxcomb. Jocondale, a Dollar. Jocquer, to stop, or stand
still (as a horse, or cart, in the way.) Jodelle, a Sea-coot. Joeudi, for
Jeudi, Thursday. Joffu, plump in the face. Jointe, a joint, a s^am. Jointee, a
joint, or double handful of, as much as can be held within both hands together.
Joletrin, a Youngster, or young Gallant. Jolice, a soft and tender stone, which
in frosty weather falls unto dust. Joliement, for joliment, prettily,
handsomely, neatly. Jolier, for Geoler, a Jailer. Joliet, handsome, pretty,
spruce. Joliete, Jolivete, handsomness, prettiness; also jollity. Jombarbe, for
joubarbe, Houseleek. Joncade, a spoon-meat (made of cream, rose water, and
sugar.) Jonchement, a strewing with, or making of rushes; also a deceiving, or
beguiling. Joncheur, a strewer of rushes, a worker of things with rushes; also
a deceiver, a dissembler. Jonchu, full of rushes. Jong, for jonc, rush,
bulrush. Jongler, to juggle; also to play the Poet. Jongleries, juggling
tricks; also old Poetical inventions. Jongleur, a Juggler; also a Rimer, or
Poet. Jonne, for jeune, young. Joquetter, to leacher; or to line, as a dog does
a bitch. Jorroise, a Horse-plum. Josmin, for jasmin, jasmin. Jotte, Beets.
Jotteux, clammy. Jou, for joug, a yoke. Jou, for moi, me. Et jou mot, for my
part, I will not speak one word. Jouarre, an old Rimer, or Ballad-maker, a
maker of Interludes for Children and Country-folks to act. Jouart, a windgal in
the leg of a horse. Joudarde, a Sea-coot. Jouee, the whole cheek, extending
from the eye-brow to the chin; also a box on the ear. Jougneur, a younger
Brother. Jouelle, a yoke. Jouelles, yoaked or arched Vines, Vines so
underpropped that one may go under the middle of them. Joueresse, a
woman-gamester. Jouete, youth. Joufflu, as joffu. Jougal, as l'os jougal, the
end, or outward part of the cheek-bone toward the ear. Jougler, Jougleur, as
jongler, jongleur. Jovial, Jovien, sanguine, born under the Planet Jupiter.
Jouigleur, as Jongleur. Jouncher, for joncher, to strew. Journal, (Adj.) daily,
done in (or belonging to) the day. Journalier, (Subst.) a journey-man, or a
day-labourer; also a poisonous herb, which being eaten of, kills within a day.
Journau, Journeu, as Journeau in the N. D. Journieur, a daily work. Jouste, for
proche, near, hard by. Jousteux, that loves to just. Jouvence, for jeunesse,
youth. Jouvenceau, Jouvencel, a youth, or young lad. Jouxte, as jouste.
Jouaulerie, the trade of jewelling. Joyaulier, for Joyalier, a Jeweller.
Joyeusete, joyfulness. Iracond, choleric, fretful. Ire, anger, wrath. Ire,
angry. Ireusement, angrily. Ireux, as iracond. Iris, the Rainbow; also a
flower-de luce. Irrachetable, unredeemable. Irradiation, irradiation, a shining
upon. Irraisonnable, unreasonable. Irrecevable, unreceivable. Irrecuperable,
unrecoverable. Irrefragable, unrevocable. Irreligieusete, irreligion.
Irreligieux, irreligious. Irremarquable, not to be remarked. Irremeable, from
which one cannot go back. Irremediablement, without remedy. Irremittent,
continual, not ceasing. Irreprouvable, unblamable. Irrequiet, restless,
unquiet, turbulent. Irrespectueux, rude, or unrespectful. Irresveillable, not
to be awaked. Irreveland, not to be revealed. Irreverent, unreverent. Irroge,
imposed, enjoined; laid, or set upon. Isars, the wild Goats, of whose skins
Shamois-leather is made. Ischie, the Sciatica, or Hip-gout. Ischine, the
backbone. Ischion, the huckle (or hip-) bone. Isciatique, troubled with the
Sciatica, pained in the hips. Islaye, a willow-grove; also a great bundle or
quantity of Osier-twigs. Islette, a little Island. Isleux, full of Islands.
Islois, an Islander. Isnel, quick, active, nimble. Isnellement, quickly,
actively, nimbly. Isope, Hyssop. Isopleure, a triangle, or other Figure,
whereof all the sides be equal. Issant, as Timon in the N. D. Issant, (Adj.)
going, issuing forth. Issir, to issue, to go out. Istau, for tell, such a one.
Iste-miste, as parler en iste-miste, speak finely. Istiomene, as Estiomene.
Italianizer, or Italiennizer, to do like an Italian. Ithiobole, a swallower of
bits, or morsels. Ithyphalle, a standing up. Jubilation, exultation. Jucheoir,
Juchoir, a roust. Jucondale, a D^ller. Judiciellement, judicially, according to
the law. Juene, for jeune, young. Jugeolle, as Jugeoline in the N.D. Jugere, a
Roman furlong, 240 foot long and 120 broad. Jugerie, a Court, or Seat of
Justice; also the Jurisdiction, Liberties, Territory, or Precincts of a Town.
Juglande, a Wall-nut. Juglaire, of, or belonging to the throat. Juillet rosat,
a Syrrup made with Rose Water and Sugar. Jule, a small worm. Jumelet, a young,
or little twin. Junjubier, for jujubier, a Jujube-tree. Junonique, belonging to
Juno. Juoil, a white and transparent fish, no bigger than a man's finger.
Ivoirin, of (or like) Ivory. Jupin, Jupiter. Jupinesque, Jupiter-like. Jupper,
to showt, or cry out aloud. Jurande, an oath, or deposition. Juratoire,
swearing, or to be sworn. Jurat, a Sheriff. Juraye, for yvroie, Darnel.
Ivreson, the act of drunkenness. Juridiciant, a Judge, or Magistrate.
Juridicie, a Party, or Client, one that is in law. Juron, an oath. Juroye,
Darnel. Jus (Adv.) down, to the ground. Mettre jus la say, to lay down his
coat. Juscle, a Cackerel. Jusier, the gifirn of a bird. Just, for jus, juice.
Justicement, the effect, or execution of Justice, or of Jurisdiction.
Justiciaire, of, or belonging to Justice, or Jurisdiction. Justicier (a Verb)
to judge, or have jurisdiction over; to punish, to execute the acts or
appointments of Justice. Jusvert, Green-sauce. Juveignerie, youngership, the
condition, estate, or title of a younger brother. Juveigneur, a younger
brother. Juveigneurle, Juveigneurerie, as Juveignerie. Juvenile, young,
youthful, childish. Juvenilement, youthfully, childishly.
K
KAlendrier, for Calendrier, a Calendar, an Almanac. Kali, Glasswort,
Saltwort, Crabgrass. Karabe, the best yellow Amber. Karat, as Carat. Karesme,
for Careme, Lent. Karobbe, Karoble, a Carob-seed; also the 24 part of a grain.
Kebule, Kebus, the biggest kind of the Mirabolan-plum. Kedusudure, the
land-Adder. Keratoide, as tunique Keratoide, the horny tunicle of the eye.
Kermes, Scarlet-berries, the seed of the Scarlet-oak. Kesudure, as Kedusudure.
Ketre, Tar. Kyriele, Kyrielles, a multitude; also a mighty coil, or noise.
Kyst, a membrane within the body, containing superfluous humors.
L
LAbeche, a South-west wind. Labeurer, for labourer, to work, to labor. Labie,
a lip. Labier, of, or belonging to a lip. Labile, fleeting, unstable,
uncertain. Laboration, a laboring, working, or toiling. Labordean, an
Haberdine. Labor, Tillage, Husbandry. Labouret, Shepherds purse, Caseweed.
Labrusque, the wild Vine. Labyrinthe, intricated, made as a Labyrinth, or Maze.
Labyrinther, to intricate, to make a Labyrinth or Maze, or something like it.
Labyrintheux, most intricate, jull of windings and turnings. Laceration, a
tearing, or mangling. Lacere, torn, mangled. Lacerer, to tear, or to mangle.
Lacert, a Lizard; also the Viver, or less Sea-Dragon. Lacerte, a fleshy muscle.
Lachrymal, weeping, bewailing. Laconiquement, shortly, or pithily in speech;
strictly, or sparingly in life. Laconiser, to speak short and pithily, to live
strictly or sparingly. Lacquay, for Laquais, a Footboy. Lacre, a kind of hard
wax. Lactifiant, Lactifique, milk-breeding. Lacunaire, the main beam of a house
being somewhat arched; also an arched cieling, or floor of boards. Lacune, a
puddle, pit, or ditch of standing water; also a sen, marsh, or waterish ground.
Lacustre, of, or belonging to a Lake. Ladrige, Leprosy. Ladronnerie, a den of
Thieves. Lagagne, Corn-rose, red Poppy. Lai, breadth of cloth. Laictee, a litter
of whelps. Laictence, for laitance, the milt, or soft roe of fishes. Laictier,
milkie, full of milk, milk-yielding, made of milk. L'herbe laictiere, Wolves
milk. Vache laictiere, a milch-Cow. Laictifique, milk-making, milk-yielding.
Laidange, a reviling, railing, or defamation; an heinous imputation. Laidanger,
to revile, rail, or defame. Laidangeux, reproachful, reviling, opprobrious.
Laideron, somewhat ugly. Laidoyer, as laidanger. Laignie, wood. Laignier, a
wood-yard, or wood-pile. Laigs, Legacies. Laine-facture, a spinning, carding,
or working of wool; clothing. Laineux, woolly, full of wool. Marcher avec des
pieds laineux, to go softly, to tread gingerly. Lairre, a thief. Laisarde, for
laisard, a Lizard. Laisardin, Lizard-like; of, or belonging to a Lizard.
Laische, as lesche. Laisse, as less in the N. D. Laist, the right side of the
cloth. Laitisse, a kind of whitish gray fur. Laittage, the ballast of a ship.
Laive, a kind of tille. Laiz, a Legacy; also the increase that a River yields
to a Lord by an Island or Hoult growing within it; also rows of bushes or
shrubs marked out in a Copse or Underwood. Laize, for laise, the breadth of
cloth. Laize de cuir, a thong of leather. A la grande laize, amply, fully, or
in full measure. Lamaneur, the Pilot of a Ship. Lambdoide, as Commissure
lambdoide, a certain joint or seam in the hinder part of the scull. Lambeliner,
to deceive, to delude, to bring into a fools Paradise. Lambin, the great
Humble-bee; also a clouterly fellow. Lambique, distilled. Lambiquer, to distill.
Lambourde, a Summer-tree, full of mortaises for the ends of Joysts to lie in.
se Lambriquer le cerveau, to beat his brains about something. Lambrissage,
Lambrissement, a wainscotting, or feeling; also an imbowing, or frettizing in
wainscot. Lambrun, Wainscot, feeling. Lambrunche, for lambruche, the wild
Grape-bearing Vine. Lambrunchement, Wainscot, or wainscotting. Lambrusque, as
lambrunche. Lamen, lamentation. Lamibaudichon, a Tale of a Tub, or of a roasted
horse. Lamie, the Breaknet-fish. Lamine, a thin plate of metal, a sword-blade,
a shingle, or state, a thin plank or board, a brasen-tomb, a corslet made of
rib-like joints to move with the body. Lampas, Lampast, the lampas, or
swelling, in a horses mouth. Lampereau, the name of a black vine. Lamperon, a
little lamp. Lampeux, full of lamps; of, or belonging to a lamp. Lampier, a
branch for a lamp. Lampiride, a gloe-worm. Lamponner, to dally or play the fool
with. Lamponniers, an idle companion. Lampourde, the great bur. Lamprillon,
Lamproyon, a little lamprey. Lampsane, Lampsans, dock-cresses. Lampugos, a kind
of Lobsters. Lampugue, the name of a seafish. Lanage, woollage, the trade of
wool. Lane, a stroke in swimming; also a space or interval. Lancade, a throw,
or fling. Lanceman, ones Countryman. Lancement, the same; also a throwing, or
flinging; also a rowsing, or thrusting up a Deer. Lanceole, Lanceolette, for
lancelee, rib-wort. Lanceron, a Jack a Pickerel that is about a foot long.
Lanceur, a hurler, darter, thrower. Lanci, the squinzy, also a kind of stitch,
or pain like a stitch. Lanciner, to prick, strike, or thrust into; also to
tear, wast, or consume. Lancy, as lanci. Landie, the dew-lap in a woman's
privities. Landie deschiquetee, an over-ridden Hackney, or Harlot. Landits, as
lendits. Landore, a rude clown; a poor sneaksby. Landrivel, the lantern of a
ship. Landyer, to cloy, to trouble, or be tedious unto. Lanfrelucher, to
lecher. Langager, to chat, tattle, or prattle. Langager, Langageur, Langagier,
a pratler. Langart, for languard, a pratler. Langager, to discourse, or hold
chat with; also to worm, or search the root of the tongue of an hog, etc.
Langayerie, the worming of hogs, etc. Langayeur, a great talker, also an
Officer that searches the tongues of Market-hogs, therein to discern whether
they be sound or not. Lange, a kind of sea-bird, which diving into the belly of
a Whale, feeds on his heart. Langeots, little swath-bands, or clouts of wool
for little children. Langoureusement, languishingly, droopingly. Langoureux,
languishing, drooping, pining. Langoustin, a great Prawn. Langoyer, to
languish, or pine away. Langrole, the Ask, or small lizard that haunts old and
ill-kept houses. Langroust, the sea-Crevice. Languagier, for languard, a great
talker. Languarde, a tatling housewise. Languayeur, as langayeur. Languisson,
languishment. Lanice, of, or belonging to wool. Lanifice, wool-work, cloth
working. Lanifique, wool-breeding. Lanisse, as lanice. Lanoy, for lanier, a
Lanner. Lanstringue, drink Countryman. Lantagine, a kind of laurel, or baytree,
whose leaf yields no manner of smell. Lantane, the waysaring tree. Lante, a
kind of spider. Lantenaires, Laniers. Lanternerie, loytering. Lanternerie de
cervelle, trouble, or intoxication of the brain. Lanugineux, cottony, downy,
mossy; soft as cotton, or wool; also covered with soft and short hair, down, or
wool. Lanuleux, wolly, as soft as wool. Lanzon, a Pike, or Pickerel. Lapace,
the ordinary, or sharp-pointed Dock. Lapas, patience, Monks rhubarb. Lapes,
fiery ejaculations in the air. Lapidement, a stoning. Lapideur, a stoner.
Lapifidie, Lapifie, turned into a stone, made (or become) stony. Se Lapifier,
to be turned into a stone. Lap, a Bur. Lapreau, for lapereau, a young rabbet.
Laqs de tems, a lapse (or course) of time. Laqs, a snare. Laqs courant, a
running knot. Laquesenee, a man's yard. Lar, a man's chief house. Lardasse, a
stick, thrust, or great prick. Lardier, a tub to keep lard or bacon in; also a
board to lay it salted on; also a slovenly fat fellow. Lardier, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to lard. Lardonnement, a smart jesting. Lardonner, to jest smartly.
Lardonneur, a smart jester. Lareze, for larege, the Larch, or Larinx tree.
Larfondement, the disease wherein one voids his fat or grease in his
excrements. Larfondu, that voids his fat or grease in his excrements. Larget,
somewhat large, or wide. Largiteur, a liberal giver. Larigau, the head of the
windpipe. Boire a tire larigau, to drink till the throat cracks. Laringe, the
root of the Tongue; or as larigau. Laringuau, the same. Larix, the larch, or
Larinx-tree. Larmelette, Larmette, a small tear. Larmeux, full of tears.
Larmot, a kind of Lizard. Larmoyable, lamentable, woeful. Larmoyement, a
weeping, or shedding of tears. Larmoyer, to weep, or to shed tears. Larmoyeux,
full of tears. Larmuse, a little Earth-newt, or Ask. Larnesse, for
larronnesse, a Woman-thief. Larre, a Thief. Larre de chats, catterwawling.
Larreciner, as larronner. Larrecineusement, thievishly. Larrecineux, thieving.
Larris, untilled ground. Larronceau, a little thief. Larronner, to steal, to
play the thief. Larronnerie, a thieving, or stealing. Larronneux, thievish.
Larronniere, a Den of thieves. Larval, haggish, ghostlike, dreadful. Larve, a
Hag, Ghost, or Spirit; also one that looks like Death, or like a Ghost. Larynx,
as larigau. Las, as laqs, a snare. Lasanon, the pan of a Close-stool.
Lasonophore, a Groom of the Close-stool. Lasche, (Subst.) the name of a fi^h.
Laschee, a loosing, or slackening. Lasdaller, a tired Jade; a dreaming or lasie
draw-latch; a kind of bird. Lasseron, the S^w-thistle. Lasset, a Snare; also a
Lace. Lassete, weariness. Lassiere, a kind of net, or toil for wild beasts.
Lassis, coiffure de lassis, a network Coif. Lassus, or Lasus, above, yonder;
upward. Latent, hidden, lurking. Latentement, hiddenly, lurkingly. Laterne, the
Scut^heon, or Knob in the middle of a Timber-vault. Laticlave, a kind of
Cassock worn by the ancient Romans. Latinement, in Latin, after the manner of
the Latins. Latinier, an Interpreter. Latinisateur, as Latiniseur. Latiniser,
to make Latin, to turn into Latin, to write or speak Latin. Latiniseur, one
that writes or speaks Latin. Fair du Latiniseur, a dun^e or ignorant fellow
to pretend to Scholarship. Latinogotise, barbarous gibridge, mixed of Latin
and the Goths language. Latitation, a hiding, or lurking. Latite, hidden,
concealed. Latiter, to lie hid. Latomie, a Quarry of stones. Latonien, as
flambeaux Latoniens, the Sun and Moon. Latre, a Churchyard. Latrineux,
stinking, full of ordure. Latteron, for laiteron, the Sow-thistle. Lavace
d'eaux, a flood of waters. Lavacier, (Adj.) washing away violently, sweeping
all away before it, as a swift current. Lavage, a Water-pool; a piece of land
surrounded, or drowned up by water; also a washing. Lavage de chaulx, white
lime. Lavages, for lavaille, hogs wash. Lavanche de glace and de neige, a great
heap of Snow tumbling from the top to the bottom of a hill, and overthrowing
whatsoever lies in its way. Lavaret, a whitish Trout, or Shadlike fish.
Lavaron, as Cabasson. Lavasse, as lavace. Lavatoire, a place, or vessel to wash
in. Laubaut, as Claubaut, a great yelling cur. Laud, the toll that is paid for
Wares retailed in certain Fairs and Markets. Lavedan, an iron-gray Jennet.
Laveur, a washer. Lauraye, a plot of Laurel-trees. Laurens, as Cloche de S.
Laurens, great blisters in the face. Lauriere, as lauraye. Laurin, of Bays,
set or stuck with Bays. Lauserne, Lauserte, shrub (or milk) Trefoil. Laxif,
for laxatif, laxative. Laxite, laxativeness. Lay, a lay, song, roundelay; also
the breadth of cloth, etc. also a dol^ful complaint. Lay, for laique, a lay (or
secular) man. Lay, as bois layez, Woods marked how far to be felled, how much
to be sold; or that has rows of Copse-wood left growing to the same purpose.
Layer un bois, to leave marks in a wood for the felling or selling of trees.
Layn, sober, modest, of a soft or still disposition. Lays, trees, or ranks of
trees left in Copses. Lazanon, as lasanon. Lazur, the Lazal, or Azure-stone.
Leal, loyal, true, trusty. Leans, within there, in that place. Leaute, loyalty,
trustiness. Lebeche, as leveche. Lebre, for lievre, a Hare. Leconomantie,
divination by water in a basin. Lechard, as leschard. Lechedoigt, a lechedoigt,
sparingly. Lechercan, a lick-dish. Lecheresse, a licorous woman. Lecheur, a
licker. Lectrin, for lutrin, a Readers pulpit. Ledanger, as Laidanger. Led, as
ledon. Ledoires, reproaches, revilings. Ledomier, the lote, or nettle-tree.
Ledon, the shrub Cistus ledon. Ledoyer, as laidanger. Lee, for lay, a wild
Sow. Legart, a Lizard. Legater, to bequeath. Legement, a Lighter for
Salt-barks. Legendier, the golden Legend, a book of the lives of Saints.
Legeresse, for legerete, lightness, nimbleness. Legible, legible. Legier,
legierement, legierete. See them without an i in the N. D. Legumage, Pulse, as
Beans, Pease, and any Cor^ that is gathered by pulling. Legumineux, of, or
belonging to pulse. Legz, for legate, a legacy. Leiche, as less in the N. D.
Leicher, for lecher, to lick. Lendeux, full of nits. Lendit, a great Fair kept
(in a field near to St. Denis) from the second Wednesday of June, till
Midsummer-eve. Lendits, fairi gs, or yearly presents bestowed by the Scholars
of Universities on their Tutors. Lendole, the flying fish. Lengaier, Lengaieur,
as langayer, langayeur. Leniment, a comforting, easing, or refreshing. Lenir,
to lenisie, assuage, ease, comfort, or refresh. Lenklat, a kind of Dog-fish.
Lent, as lentille in the N. D. Lenteux, as lendeux. Lentice, for lentisque,
the Lentisk, or Mastick-tree. Lenticulaire, an Instrument wherewith Surgeons
plane and cut away the broken bones of a wounded skull. Lentillade, the spotted
and longnosed Thornback. Lentillat, the Dun-hound, or Duncow, a fish. Lentille,
freckled. Lentisce, as lentice. Lentiscine, Mastick. Leonceau, for lionceau, a
young Lion. Leonin, lion-like; of, or belonging to a Lion. Leontin, as
Leonceau. Leoparde, libbard-like. Leporin, of, or belonging to a hare. Leppe,
Sea-grass, or Sea-weed. Lepreserie, leprousness. Leproserie, a Spittle for the
leprous. Lequesat, a kind of sauce for Woodcocks. Lerelot, the foot, or down
of a Country-maidens song. Lermier, for larmier, the eave of an house. Lerot, a
Dormouse; also the nutmouse, or hasel-mouse. Lerre, a Thief. Lesard, for
laizard, a Lizzard. Leschard, a slap-sawce; also a miser. Lesche, a long slice
of bread; also a leash to hold a dog in. Lesche de mer, a slimy worm, thick as
a finger, and a foot long. Leschedoigt, as lechedoigt. Lescherie, much licking.
Lesciver, to buck clothes, to wash or scow^ with lie. Leser, to hurt. Leser la
majeste, to commit high treason. Lesion, hurt, harm, offense. Lestager, to
ballast a ship. Letabonde, jocund, merry. Lethal, deadly, mortal. Lethe, death,
mortality; also oblivion. Lethean, deadly, mortal. Letice, a beast of a
whitish-gray color. Letiere, for litiere, a Litter. Lettager, as lestager.
Lettrise, as Verse lettrisez, Verses whose words begin with one and the same
letter. Lettron, Gum (or rush) Cichory; also the Sow-thistle. Letuge, the
leakage of a ship. Leu, for lieu, place. Sans feu ne leu, without house, or
harbor. Levage, as Droict de levage; an Imposition of 3 bushels and 3
quarters, or 15 sous upon every boat full of sal^ transported. In some parts of
France, it is also a penny for a beef-pipe of Wine, load of Corn, etc. And a
halfpenny for a Sheep, Hog, etc. due unto a Lord of Jurisdiction, if they have
been within his Liberty eight days together before their sale or
transportation. Levaille, an uprising, or getting up. Levandiere, a Midwife.
Leucophlegmatie, a fl^gmatick dropsy. Leucophlegmatique, sick of (or troubled
with) such a phlegmatic dropsy. Lewd, Leude, a Vassal, Tenant, or Liegeman.
Leudes fran^s, Gentlemen professing Arms or Soldiery, and holding their Lands
of others; but paying no tax to any. Leudes serfs, Villains, subject to all
Impositions. Leve, for levee, a trick at Cards; also a mallet. Leveche, a
South-west wind. Levement, a raising, or setting up; also a levy, or levying;
also a leavening. Levesche, Levesse, as leveche. Leveton, Leveure, Yest.
Leveur, a raiser, or reaver up; a Collect^or; a ^^a^ener. Leville, Darnel, or
Tares. Levistie, Lovage. Levreton, Levron, a young Greyhound. Lexive, for
lessive, lie (wherewith linen is cleansed) also a buck of linen clothes.
Lexivier, of, or belonging to lie, sit for ly^. Lexiveux, Lexivicux, full of
lie; or as lexivier. Leyau, a Wound of the breadth and depth of an inch. Leyde,
a certain Tax, or Imposition upon Wine and other commodities. Leyette, for
layette, a Drawer. Lez, nigh, hard by; also as le in the N. D. Lezard, for
laisard, a Lizard. Lezard, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Lizard. Liace, as
liasse. Liage, a binding, or tying; a sodering, or combining together. Droict
de liage, hoopage, or a fee due to some Lords for the hooping of every
Wine-vessel their Vassals have. Liairre, for lierre, Ivy. Liais, a very hard
freestone whereof Stair-steps, and Tomb-stones be commonly made. Liants, the
bands of lead that fasten the panes of a window to the bars. Liarder, to beg,
or get poorly, slowly, or by the penny. Liarre, for lierre, Ivy. Liasse, a
bundle, or handful of. Liasse d'oignons, a rope of Onions. Libament, a
Sacrifice, a thing offered, or tasted of in the offering. Libanomantie,
divination by frankincense. Libanot, Libanotis, herb Frankincense, Hart-root.
Libidineux, lascivious, lustful. Libidinosite, lasciviousness, lustfulness.
Libure, a little Isle cut out of the land, whereon Bay Salt is gathered after
every tide. Liburnique, a very light and swift Ship, used by the ancient
Pirates. Licaleil, a Lamp. Licanthrope, and Licanthropie, as lycanthrope,
lycanthropie. Lice, (Adj.) smooth, sleck. Licharder, to pick morsels curiously.
Liche, a kind of the fish Glaucus. Liche-casse, a Li^k-^o^. Liche-doigt, one
that li k, his fingers; also one that d^ s things leisurely. A liche-doigt,
sparingly. Liche-frite, a Dripping-pan. Lichement, a li^king, or slapping up.
Lichene, a Ring-worm, or Tett^r. Licher, for lecher, to lick. Licherie, a
licking. Licheron, a lickerous fellow. Licheur, a licker. Licisque, a dog
engendered between a Wolf and a Dog. Licisque orgoose, a salt-bitch. Licitation,
a setting to sale unto him that will give most; also a prizing, a cheapening.
Licitation and decret, Fine and Recovery. Lictee, as littee. Lide, a kind of
wooden and warlike Engine used in old time. Lie, as fair chere lie, to be
merry; dire une chose de chere lie, to say a thing with a merry countenance.
Liege, corked, stopped with cork. Soulier liege, a cork-shooe. Lieger, to cork;
to stop, raise, or underlay with cork. Liement, a binding, tying, or fastening.
Liement, merrily. Liens, as leans. Lienteric, flux lienteric. See the next
word. Lienterie, a flux wherein meat is voided raw and undigested presently
after the eating thereof. Lienterieux, Lienterique, troubled with that flux.
Liepard, for leopard, a leopard. Lier, (Subst.) the allay of Coin. Liernes,
slits, interlaces, or intertoises of timber. Liesse, mirth, gladness. Liet, as
liais. Liet, (Adj.) merry, glad. Liette, a till, or drawer; also a casket, or
small cosser full of tills or drawers. Lieve, as leve. Lievement, as levee in
the N. D. Lieur, a binder, or tyer. Lieure, for liaison, connection. Lieutrin,
for lutrin, a Readers Pulpit in a Quire. Lieux, (Adj.) full of lees, dregs, or
grounds. Lifrelofre, a Swag-belly. Ligament, a ligament, or ligature; a tie,
band, or string. Ligamenteux, full of ligaments, strings, or ligatures.
Ligeaulte, loyalty, or the fidelity due by a subject unto his natural Prince.
Ligence, as ligeance in the N. D. Ligier, for ledger, light. Lignade, provision
of wood. Fair lignade, to take in fuel, or firewood. Lignear, of, or belonging
to a line; also in a direct course or line. Ligneraye, a line-yard, or
flax-yard. Ligneux, woody; also full of lines, or small and long threads.
Lignier, a pile of wood. Lignoul, for ligneu, Shoomakers thread, done over with
pitch. Ligombeau, a Sea-crevice, or little Lobster. Ligoter, to prune a Vine;
to take from about it the stones, clods, or herbs that hinder the budding
thereof. Ligule, a little tongue, or tenon; a spoon, slice, or small ladle used
by Apothecaries; also a small Roman measure containing about a spoonful, and in
weight three drams and a scruple. Ligumbault, as ligombeau. Ligustic, the herb
Lovage. Limaceux, full of snails, or as Limacial, snail-like, winding, or
turning about like the shell of a snail. Limaconner, to turn, or wind about,
like the shell of a snail, or as Soldiers that cast themselves into a ring.
Limailles, for legumes, pulse. Limaire, a young Tunny. Limande, a Burt, or
Bret-fish; also a short cudgel; a broad pipe-staff or board fit for a cake.
Limas, Limasse, Limasson, a snail. Limature, a filing; also file-dust. Limb de
bouteille, the mouth, or brink of a bottle. Limestre, drap de limestre, the
cloth whereof hoods be made. Limestres, those that wear such hoods. Limignon
d'une chandelle, the week of a candle. Liminaire, set before the entry, or at
the beginning of; dedicatory, fore-running. Limitateur, Limiteur, a limiter, or
bounder. Limitrophe, bordering upon. Limoine, wild beets. Limonne, as poncille.
Limpide, clear, transparent. Lineage, for lignee, lineage. Linagier, a direct, or
near kinsman. Linarole, the name of a pear. Linceul, a sheet for a bed. se
Linder par terre, to creep, or crawl along the ground. Line, for ligne, a line.
Lineament, Lineature, lineament, or feature. Linee, for lignee, lineage.
Linement, as liniment. Linge, (Adj.) lean, thin, scraggy. Lingiere, for
lingere, a Seamster. Lingotiere, the mould wherein ingots are framed, or cast.
Linier, a flax-man, a seller of flax. Liniere, a flax-woman. Liniment, a thin
Ointment; also a soft rubbing on. Linir, to anoint, to rub softly or gently on.
Linitif, refreshing, mollifying. Linition, an anointing, a gentle rubbing.
Linomple, a fine and thin linen. Linon, lawn. Linostolie, a cutting of the
hair. Linsueil, a sheet (for a bed.) Lintheau, for linteau, the lintle over a
door. Lionin, of, or belonging to a Lion; Lion-like. Lionneau, for lionceau, a
young Lion. Lionneux, full of Lions. Lionnier, a Keeper of Lions. Lionnin, as
Lionin; also of a Lion-tawny color. Liperquam, as fair du liperquam, to show
his authority. Lipie, as lippie. Lipothymie, a swooning. Lippaire, Lip-salve.
Lip, a lip; also as lippie, and lippitude. Lippie, the redness or soreness of
a blear eye. Lippion, part of a woman's etc. Lippitude, blearedness, a running
of the eyes with pain and redness. Lippu, thick-lipt; also hanging the lip, as
a child that is ready to cry. Liquabilite, aptness to melt, or to become liquid.
Liquation, a melting. Liquerice, for reguelice, lickorice. Lire, for lyre, a
Lyra. Lire-liron, the burden of a Song. Liripipie, hooded, as a Graduate.
Liripipion, a Graduates hood. Liripipionne, as liripipie; also mellow,
cup-shotten. Liron, a Dormouse. Liron de pain, a luncheon of bread. Lisable,
for lisible, legible. Lisard, for laisard, a Lizard. Lisarde, the same; also a
woman that reads much. Liser, to list, or border a garment; also to coast along
by a Country. Lisiereux, prescribing the limits, setting the bounds of several
Countries. Lisisque, as licisque. Lissaron, the herb Perwinkle. Listeau, a
little list; also a selvedge. Litarge, as litharge in the N. D. Literaire, of,
or belonging to letters, or learning. Literon, as litron. Lithiase, the Stone
in the Bladder. Lithomantie, Divination by casting of Pible-stones.
Lithortipon, stone-breaking, stone-dissolving. Liticontester, to protest in a
Suit, to deliver or lay open before a Judge the chief points of the Declaration
and Answer. Litiger, to wrangle, or to contend; to be at variance, to go to Law
with. Litiscontestation, the delivery or laying open of the chiefest points of
a Case pro and contra before a Judge, after the answer is put in. Litorne, a
Wing-thrush. Litron, a wooden measure, containing somewhat more than our pint,
and used by the Retailers of Salt, Pulse, etc. Littee, the litter of a Bitch,
Lioness, etc. also a bed of leaves, hay, grass, etc. to lay or pack up things
in. Litteron, Littron, as litron. Litue, a crooked staff used by the Roman
Augurs; also a Crosier, or Bishops staff. Liture, a dash with a pen; a dashing,
or blotting out with a pen. Livane, a Pelicane. Liveau, for niveau, a Masons or
Carpenters level. Livel, level. Lividite, the color appearing upon a stroke,
black and blue. Livoy, a small Vine-hook, or Vine-knife. Livraison, a delivery;
also a Court-dish. Livrement, a delivery. Livresque, bookish; of, or belonging
to a Book. Lixive, for lessive, lie. Lizant, bordering, setting a list or
border on; also coasting along. Lize, glib, smooth, sleek. Lizeron, and Lizet,
as liseron, liset, in the N. D. Lizette, a little grayish vermin. Liziere, for
lisiere, the list of cloth. Lizieux, a sort of woollen Cloths. Loage, for
louage, a letting out. Lobeau, a little lobe, or lappy piece of. Lober, to
cosen, or deceive. Local, local; belonging to, or contained in a place. Locar,
bled locar, a kind of Wall-barley called S. Peter's corn. Localement, locally,
in a place. Locateur, a letter, or hirer of. Locatif, a tenant, inmate, or
lodger. Location, a hirer, or letter out of; also a setting, or bestowing in a
place. Loch, a loche; a liquid Confection, or soft Medicine, to be held in the
mouth till melted. Locher, to wag, like a thing that is loose. Lochette, a
groundling, a small-bearded Loach. Locule, a little Purse. Locupleter, to
enrich, or make wealthy. Lodier, a quilt, or a quilted counterpoint for a bed.
Lodes, as lods in the N. D. Lo, a quantity of fish taken by some few Normand
Lords, of every fisher-boat that comes into, and moors within their havens,
creeks, or harbors; especially if the Boat belong unto any of their Tenants,
or any inhabitants of their territories. Loere, a Ducker. Lof, as loo.
Logeable, fit to be lodged, or entertained in a house. Une maison fort
logeable, a house of great receipt. Logie, as Droict de logies, a yearly Tax
levied unto the Kings use upon every Provostship within the County of Poictou,
besides the rent at which it is farmed, and 18 d. for the Officers of the
Chamber of Accounts. Logisme, the due and judicious understanding of a thing
according to reason. Logistique, the Art of counting. Lohoc, as loch. Loidorer,
to revils, or rail on. Loinceau, as loinseau. Loingnet, somewhat far off.
Loingnettement, a little way off. Loingtain, foreign, remote. Loingtainete,
farness, remoteness. Loinseau de sil, a clue, or bottom of thread. Loisible,
lawful, allowable. Loist, as il me loist, I may, I am allowed, it is lawful for
me. Lombaire, as lumbaire. Lombles, the parts which be on each side of the
Navel. Lombe, the loin, flank, or haunch; the leg, or knuckle. Lombris, a
Ground-worm. Lonce, for Once, the Ounce, a ravenous beast. Lonche, for louche,
squint-eyed. Longale, a Loyn. Longard, a delayer, prolonger, or protracter.
Longeastre, somewhat long. Long-encolle, long-necked. Longierre, a long narrow
towel. Longis, a tall and dull slangam, that has no making to his height, nor
wit to his making; also one that being sent on an errand is long in returning.
Longue, for long, a Loyn. Longuement, long, a long time. Longuerie, for
longueur, length. Long-vestu, a coin worth 11 sh. 6 p. Longuet, somewhat long.
Lonze, a match to keep fire with. Loo, the Loof of a Ship. Bouter de loo, to go
a wind, to lay tack aboard. Looh, or Loot, as loch. Lopine, cut into gobbets,
divided into lumps. Lopiner, to cut into gobbets, to divide into lumps.
Lopinet, a bit, a small gobbet. Loquacite, talkativeness. Loque, a rag, or
tatter. Loquence, speech, talking. Loqueteux, ragged, tattered. Loquette, a
little rag, or tatter. Lordault, for lourdaut, a block-head. Lorderie, as
lourderie. Lorgue, as tique toque lorgne, thwick thwack; also here and there,
at random, without discretion. Torche lorgne, the same. Loricard, a misshapen
fellow. Loricarder, to lubber it. Lorion, for loriot, the Wit-wall, or
Hick-way. Lormerie, small iron-work, as nails, spurs, etc. or a Spurriers
trade. Lormier, a worker in small iron; a Spurrier. Los, laud, or praise; also
willingness, consent. Losengier, a flatterer, a pickthank. Lor, lot, portion.
Loti, as loty. Lotie, division, partition, sharing. Lotir, to casts lots for;
also to divide, part, or share. Lotize, divided, parted, shared. Lots, Fines of
alienation. Lottir, as lotir. Loty, divided by lots; parted, shared. Louade, as
laud. Louager, Louagier, an hirer, or farmer; a lodger, an inmate. Louanger,
to praise, to commend. Louangier, a praiser, or commender. Loubet. Seek
May-loubet. Loubine, the Seafish called a Base. Louche, (Subst.) a little
ladle, or great spoon. Loucher, to take up with a ladle. Louchet, a spade, or
spade-like instrument, half headed with iron. Les louchets d'une bale, the
corners of a pack. Loudier, for courtepointe, a counterpoint, or quilt; also a
Smell-smock, a leacherous Knave. Loudiere, as une gross loudiere, a common
hackney, a filthy lascivious queen. Lover, for loir, a dormouse. Loueresse, a
woman that praises, or commends. Loueur, a praiser, or commender. Lougaru, as
loup garou in the N. D. Loup-araigne, a kind of Spider that hunts or watches
for flies. Loupasson, a young or little sea-Wolf. Loup-chat, the Lynx, or
Ounce. Loupeux, full of wens, troubled with a wen. Loupie, Louppe, for loupe, a
wen; and in a horse, the water-farcy. Lourche, the game called Lurch, or a
lurch in game. Il demeura lourche, he was left in the lurch. Lourdant, as il
est en son lourdant, he is in a surly mood, or churlish humor. Lourderie, for
lourdise, sottishness, blockishness. Lourdin, blunt, blockish, clownish.
Lourdinet, the same. Lourdois, as en son lourdois, bluntly, rudely. Lo ure, a
bag-pipe. Lourette, a small bag-pipe. Lourpidon, an old Witch. Louschement, a
squinting, or looking askew. Louscher, to squint, or look askew. Louschet, as
louchet. Lousse, as louche. Loutrier, an Otter-hunter, or Otter-catcher.
Louveau, Louvet, Louveton, a young Wolf, a little Wolf. Louviche, greedy,
ravenous. Louvichement, greedily, ravenously. Louvier, for Louvetier, a
Wolf-catcher. Louvier (Adj.) Wolf-like; of, or belonging to a Wolf. Melancholy
louviere, a frenzy which makes the patient shun all company, on a conceit that
he is turned Wolf. Louvin, as louvoir, wolf-like, of a Wolf. Loyaulment,
loyally, faithfully. Loyer, hire given for a house or Country-farm, or unto
Servants, or Work-folks; a stipend, salary, wages; also a reward. Loyette, a
Marlin. Loz, as los. Lozange, and Lozenge, for losange, a lozenge. Lozenge,
lozenged, Lozenge-like; also mocked, gulled, beguiled. Lozenger, to cosen,
cheat, or deceive. Lu, light. Luberdine, an old maid. Luberne, the female
Libbard; a Panther. Lubin, Lubine, a Base, or Sea-wolf; a Monk, or Friar.
Lubre, lubrick, filthy. Lubrifier, to make slippery. Lue, for lut, a Lute.
Lucarne, having windows in the roof. Lucel, Lucet, a young Pike, or Pickerel.
Lucheran, a scritch-Owl. Luchet, a spade, or as louchet. Lucifugue, a kind of
beetle, or light-hating fly. Lucide, shining, bright. Lucrative, (Subst.)
lucre, gain, or profit; also the profession of the law, because very lucrative.
Lucs, as lus. Luctation, a wrestling, or struggling. Lucte, for lute, wrestling,
or the art of wrestling. Lucte, wrestled, strugled with. Ludicre, toyish.
Ludificatoire, mocking, deceiving. Lueil, ray, darnel. Luet, Devoir de luets, a
bushel of Ry^ due by every Tenant and Householder, that keeps a fire and tillage
within a Parish in Brittany. Luettes, little bundles of pieces of Ivory cast
loose upon a table; the play is to take up one, without shaking the rest, or
else the taker loses. Lueux, light, glittering, shining. Luictement, a
wrestling, or struggling with. Luisans, sparkles, or fiery and star-resembling
Meteors, in the middle region of the air. Luisantement, brightly, shiningly.
Luisarner, to glow, or glimmer. Luiton, a Goblin, or Robin-good-fell^w. Luiton
de mer, a Triton, a fish that resembles a man. Lumbaire, of, or belonging to
the flank, or loyn. Lumbrique, a ground-worm. Lumer, to shine, to give (or
cast) a light. La chandelle lume mal, the candle burns dimly, or burns but ill.
Lumillette, Luminette, the herb Eyebright. Luminier, a Vestry-Keeper; also an
Agent, or Solicitor for a whole Township. Luminon, for lumignon, a thing that
gives a clear light. Lune, rounded, or bowed, like an half moon. Luner, to
round, bow, or compass. Luner un arc, to bend a bow. Lupasson, as loupasson.
Lupege, Lupoge, the whoop, or dunghillcock. Luvre, for leuvre, lured, allured.
Lus, a Pike (fish.) Lus marin, a Cod-fish, also the Haddock. Lustreux,
Lustrueux, shining, glittering. Lutiner, to play the Goblin, or Night-Spirit.
Lutiz, clay, loam, dirt. Lutre, for loutre, an Otter. Luxation, a being out of
joint. Luxer, to put out of joint; also to be out of joint. Luxure, for luxe,
luxury, sensuality; any superfluity, or excess in carnal delights. Luxurieux,
luxurious, sensual, voluptuous. Luyton, as luiton. Luz, as lus. Luzerne, for
luserne, Medick-Fodder, horned (or snail) Claver. Luzerner, to glow, or
glimmer. Luzerniere, a plot of ground sowed with Medick-Fodder. Ly, for le,
the. Lyarre, for lierre, Ivy. Lyasse, as liasse. Lycanthrope, troubled with the
Frenzy, or Melancholy, termed Lycanthropie. Lycanthropie, a Frenzy, or
Melancholy, which causes the Patient (who thinks he is turned Wolf) to flee all
company, and hide himself in dens and corners. Lyce, a bitch. Une fause lyce, a
lewd queen, a wicked harlot. Lychnobien, the week of a candle; or one who
instead of the day uses the night, doing all his business by candlelight.
Lychnocosomite, the chiefest Light, or Lanthorn of the World. Lychnon, a light,
candle, or link; also the w^ek of a candle, or match of a lamp; also a
lanthorn. Lycopse, a kind of the red-rooted herb Orchanet. Lycopthalmie, a
precious stone of four sundry colors. Lie, for lie, dregs, lees, or grounds.
Lyerre, for lierre, Ivy. Lymitrophe, bordering upon. Lymon, as limon in the N.
D. Lymphatique, allayed, or mixed with water; also mad, furious, giddy,
fantastical. Lyncee, a Lynx. Yeux de lyncee, quick, piercing eyes. Lyncurse, a
precious stone bred of the congealed urine of a Lynx, and preserving the eyes
from charms. Lynges, for liens, bands. Lion, for Lion, a Lion. Lyonceau, for
lionceau, a young Lion. Lype, a lip. Fair la lype, to hang the lip, as a child
who is about to cry. Lypothimie, a kind of deadly swooning. Lyripipie,
Lyripipion, as liripipie, liripipion. Lys, as lis in the N. D. Lysarde, as
lisarde. Lysimachie, Water-willow, or Willow-herb. Lysteau, as listeau.
Lyturgie, or Lyturgue, for liturgy, Liturgy.
M
MA dia. See Madia. Macabre, as danse macabre, death. Macaleb, the
bastard-Coral, of whose sweet and shining black berries Chains and Bracelets be
made. Macalep, and Macalet, as macaleb. Macar, a mate, match, or fellow.
Macareau, a Mackerel-fish. Macaronique, a Macaronick; a confused heap or huddle
of many things. Macault, a scrip, or wallet; also a chest filled with precious
stuff and hidden in a secret corner. Mace, as Mage in the N. D. Macer, a
redish, aromatical, ^^d astringent rind of a certain Indian root. Maceris, as
macer. Maceron, the herb-Can^^ Alexanders. Maceronne, ^s maceron. Mache,
Water-torch, Cats-tail. Machecoulis, as maschecoulis. Mache-rave, a
Turnep-eater. Mache-rivet, a Cobbler, or Shoemaker. Macheron, as maceron.
Maches, the mashes, or holes of a net between thread and thread. Machette, the
Owl, or Madge-howlet. Macheure, a black smutch, or smear; also a crush, or
bruise, which leaves a black or blue spot after it. Macheure de fer, the dross
of iron. Macheure, besmeared; also made black and blue with a crush, etc.
Machiavelisme, subtle policy. Machiavelizer, to follow Machiavels politic
Maxims. Machicoule, fortified with maschicoulis. Machicoulis, as maschicoulis.
Machoirier, a horned, and great-jawed Snake. Machonner, to chaw slowly, or
gently; to mumble. Machoter, the same. Machoueres, for machoires, the jaws.
Machurer, to besmear. Le chauderon machure la poisle, one knave disgraces
another, or one neighbor detracts from another. Macis, mace. Macle, the mash
of a net; also (in Blazon) a Mascle, or short Lozenge, having a square hole in
the midst. Macle (Adj.) raw. Macles, Pot-hangers. Macque, a Lozenge, or
Net-ma^h. Macreau, for maquereau, a Mackerel-fish. Macreon, an old man.
Macrobe, that has had a long time in this life. Maculatures, waste-papers.
Macule, a spot, or blot, a stain, or blemish. Maculer, to spot, to blot, to
b^spatter, to stain. Mademoiselle. See Mademoiselle in the N. D. Madant, w^t,
molst; drunk with. Mad^fier, to wet, or to moi^ten. Ma^ia, in good truth. Madia
non, no ^^^s^^ot^. Madiene, a choleric old wives oath. Madier, timber.
Madoure, a ^ogg^rhead. Madre, a thick-streaked grain in wood. Madrier, a plank,
or piece of timber, whose grain is full of crooked and speckled streaks. Maeut,
a maker of Sallads, or May-sauces. Mafe, Mafi, by my faith. Magagnat, in timed.
Magagne, as mehaing; also defect, imperfection, corruption, putrefaction.
Magault, as macault. Magdaleon, a Langate, a Rowler. Magdaleon d'entract, a
salve spread upon leather or linen, and hard rolled up. Magique, magical.
Magistere, Mastership, authority; also mastery, a masters part, or
masterpiece. Magistral, magistral, of a master or magistrate; also
master-like, skilful, artificial. Magistralement, Master-like, artificially.
Magistronostralement, dunsically. Magnagna, true Roger. Magnan, a loor, clown,
Country-fellow. Magnanimement, magnanimously, stoutly. Magniaux, Silkworms.
Magnie, a company, or number of people. Magnigoules, wide-mouthed knaves.
Magnin, a Tinker. Magnymagna, twittle-twattle. Magot, a Baboon, or Ape, that is
faced like a dog; also the Scottish Coot, or Moor-hen. Maguelet, as macaleb.
Mahaleb, as macaleb. Maheustre, a swaggerer. Mahonne, a kind of great ship.
Mahutte, the pinion of a birds wing. May, for may, the month of May. Maict, a
batch, a kneading-trough; a salting-tub. Maidin, a Turkish coin worth about a
penny. May, the greatest kind of Sea-crab, a Frill. Maiens, timely hay, gotten
in May. Majeul de roue, the nave of a wheel. Majeur, for Maire, the Mayor of a
Town. Nos Majeurs, our Ancestors. La majeure party, the major part. Maignan,
as magnan. Maigne, great. Maignen, as magnin. Maigre (Subst.) the name of a
great fish. Maigrelet, Maigret, somewhat lean. Maigrete, for maigreur,
leanness. Maigue, Whey. Maillerie, a Marl-pit, or Marly soil, the place wherein
Marl is gotten. Maillettes, small mashes, or links of mail. Maillol, as
mailleton in the N. D. Mailloque, the 24 part of a second, and the least weight
that Jewellers and Goldsmiths use. Mailloter, to beat, or break with a mallet.
Maillotins, a factious Multitude which in old time did much mischief in and
about Paris. Maillotonnerie, any factious Crew, or seditious Company. Main, for
matin, the morning. Main-bonne, Main-bournie, ward, government, oversight,
administration; also the patronage, defense, or protection of a Sovereign. Main
de gourre, an hogs foot, or one that is handed like a Sow. Main-mettre, to
man^mit, to set at liberty. Main-mis, manumitted, made free. Main-mise, a
manumission, or setting at liberty. Mainotte, a small hand, a child's hand.
Main-pleine, sufficient Goods taken, or Land enough seized upon an Execution.
Mainsme, a bundle of Grapes. Mainsne, a younger brother. Maint, many.
Maintefois, often, oftentimes. Maintenance, maintenance, support. Main tourner
a main, in the turning of a hand, instantly, suddenly. Mairerie, for Mairie,
Mayorship. Mairgue, Whay. Mais, as je n'en puis mais, it is not my fault, it is
not long of me. Mais-huy, not this day. Maisne, a younger brother. Maisne, as
argent baille a maisne, money let out to use for the benefit of younger
brethren, being Infants or Orphans. Maisneaux, as meneaux. Maisnete,
youngership, the estate or title of a younger brother. Maisonnage, timber trees
cut down for the building of a house. Maisonnages, houses, lodgings, dwellings.
Maisonne, housed, furnished (or stored) with houses. Maisonnee, a house full,
household, or family. Maisonner, to build houses, to store or furnish with
houses. Maisonnier, keeping a house; also belonging to, or serving for a house.
Maistraille, the Main-sail of a Ship. Maistral, the North-west wind. Maistre,
(Adj.) chief, principal. Un maistre cable, a Sheat-cable. Le maistre doigt, the
middle finger. Maistre-garde, a Master-Warden in a Forest. Maistrement, as
magistralement. Maistre-pied, the stock, or principal arm of a plant.
Maistre-sergent, a Master (or chief) Sergeant; an Officer in Forests.
Maistre-Sergenterie, the Office, or Walk of a Master-Sergeant in Forests.
Maistrier, for maitriser, to master, rule, or govern. Maistroqueux, a
Master-cook. Majuscule, somewhat greater, of good stature, of a reasonable age.
Maiz, Turkey-wheat. Mal, (Adj.) ill, bad, naughty; mischievous, hurtful;
unseemly; sore, crary. La male bosse, a plague sore. Malabatre, an Aromatical
Indian leaf, which swims on pools and ditches, without any apparent root.
Malace, a storm, or tempest. Maladerie, an Hospital for the diseased; also the
sick-mans Ward in any Hospital, Maladre, infected with a scurf, or leprosy.
Maladvis, rashness, indiscretion, inconsideration. Malagine, a mollifying
Plaster for Scabs and hard Impostumes. Malaginer, to mingle, or incorporate
several things (especially metals) together. Mal-aigre, a kind of worms that
breed in an Hawks gorge. Mal-aisance, uneasiness, difficulty, trouble.
Mal-aise, disease, pain, or trouble. Mal-aiser, to disease, trouble, or
disquiet. Malandres, the Malanders (a horses disease). Malandrin, a cassed
Soldier without pay, or employment. Malarmat, a kind of rough-sealed Gu^nard,
which being alive is red; but dying, of another color. Malart, a Mallard, or
wild Drake. Malaxe, mixed, beaten together; also kneaded, handled, or wrought
with the hands until it be soft. Malaxer, to beat together, as eggs; also to
soften, work, or knead unto a softness; to handle a thing until it be soft.
Mal-cindre, ill-supported, weakly underpropped (by a weak, or ill-made Centry.)
Malcontent, the name of a Game at Cards. Malcontentement, discontent. Malcus, a
Hangar. Maleable, as malleable in the N. D. Male-bosse, a plague-fore, a
pestilent botch. Maledicence, detraction. Male-facon, an absurdity, or ill
manner. Male-facons des process, faults committed in pleading. Malefice, a
mischief, an ill act; also a mischievous witchery. Male-grace, as Malgrace.
Maleir, for Maudire, to curse. Malement, ill, badly, mischievously.
Mal-endurant, tichy, impatient. Mal-engin, fraud, cheat, or deceit.
Malengineux, fraudulent, deceitful. Malengroin, sullenness, sour look.
Mal-enthalente, ill-minded, ill-affected. Maleole, as malleole. Malesuade,
hunger; also a sweating pain, or sickness. Maletoste, for maltote, an
extraordinary Tax, or Subsidy; also any Imposition. Maletote, and Maletoulte,
the same. Maletoultier, for maltotier, a Collector of Taxes, or Subsidies.
Malfaict, a misdeed, fault, offense, or trespass. Mal-feable, not to be
trusted. Mal-gisant, a masterless man, or one who for want of a Master is often
sped with a bad lodging; also a fellow of ill-behaviour, or lewd c^^versation.
Malgrace, dissavour, displeasure; anger, or blame incurred. Mal-hardi, fearful,
timorous. Malheurer, to make unhappy. Malheurete, mischance, misfortune.
Malheustre, the Pinion of a Birds wing. Malign, a Springtide. Malignement,
malignantly, maliciously, wickedly. Malignite, malignity, spite, ill will.
Malingre, sore, scabby; also crazie, tichy. Pomme de malingre, a sowrish apple
called the Maligar-apple. Malivole, malicious, spiteful, churlish. Malleation,
an hammering. Mallece, the dregs, or coursest of Sugar. Mallement, much,
mightily. Malleole, the Ankle, or Ankle-bone; also the vein that runs along
upon the Ankle. Malletier, bearing, or belonging to a male, budget, or wallet.
Mallette, for malette, a little male. Malobatre, as malabatre. Malot, a little
Boar. Mal-patient, impatient. Mal-seance, unseemliness. Mal-talent, spite, ill
will. Mal-tasse, ill made up, unorderly hudled or jumbled together. Maltaulte,
Maltaultier, as maltote, maltotier in the N. D. Maltoute, as maltote in the N.
D. Malvaisie, for malvoisie, Malmsey-wine. Malubec, the Falling Sickness.
Malvedi, a small Spanish-coyn. Mal-vestu, ill-cloathed, ragged. Malvoism, of
Malmsey. Mal-usite, ill-fashioned, rude, that has not been in much good
company; also raw, unexperienced. Mamaye, a great Indian-peach. Mambour, or
Mambourg, a Captain; also the Governor of a Province; also the Guardian of an
Infant, Protector of a Widow, etc. Mambournie, as Main-bournie. Mamelue, as
mammelue. Mamilaire, Mammal, of, or belonging to the breasts. Mammeaux, a kind
of panick. Mammelette, a little dug, breast, or udder. Mammeleux, as
mamillaire; also having great dugs. Mammellement, breast (or pap) like.
Mammelu, as mammeleux. Mammeluch, as Mammelu in the N. D. Mammelue, a fools
babble. Mammeron, for mammelon, the nipple (or teat) of a breast. Mammillaire,
as mamillaire. Mammuque, a wingless bird, of an unknown beginning, and after
death not corrupting. Manable, habitable. Manance, a dwelling, abiding, or
inhabiting in. Manant, a dweller, abider, or inhabiter; one that dwells where
he was born; also a boor, clown, country-fellow. Manat, a monstrous Indian-fish
that resembles an Ox. Manbourg, as Mambour. Mancelles, great iron-rings,
whereby the Thill-horse, etc. is fastened unto a Cart. Manche, hafted, helved.
Manchereau, a little haft, or handle. Les manchereaux de la Charrue, the
Plough-handles. Mancheron, a bracelet, or bracer; also a half-sleeve, or
wrist-sleeve; also a muss. Mancherons de robbes, the hanging half-sleeves of
some fashioned gowns. Manciper, to deliver the possession of, to sell, pass
away, or give up. Mand, for mandement, an Order, or Command. Mandataire, one
that comes to a Benefice by a Mandamus. Mande, a maund. Mandegloire, for
mandragore, Mandrake. Mandication, for manducation, an eating. Mandil,
Mandille, a Mandillian, or loose Cassock. Mandole, a Cackarel-fish. Mandore, a
Kit, a small Gittern. Mandosiane, Mandoussiane, a broad and old-fashioned short
Sword. Mandre, the Cell of a Monk, or Hermit; also a hovel, or shed; a stall,
or soddering-place for beasts in the fields. Mandregloire, a Mandrake.
Manducite, great eating. Manee, a small vessel, or measure, whereof 96 make but
one Minot. Droict de manee de sell, that measure full due to the Abbot and
Covent of S. Sulpice upon every horse-load of salt brought into Bourges, and of
every one that sells any salt in Bourges. Mancquinage, antic ingravery, or
carving in Wainscot or Stone-work. Manette, a small hand; also a manacle.
Maneuvre, for maneuver, a workman. Manganese, a certain mineral, which being
melted with glass amends the color thereof: there is also good glue, or black
enamel made of it. Mangeaille, food. Mangeatif, eat able. Mangemerde, the name
of a fish. Mangeoire, the gullet, or swallow. Mangerie, gluttony, hasty or
greedy feeding; also a room, or house, to eat in. Fair mangerie avec, to eat,
or keep house with. Mangeson, an itch. Mange-sujet, a fit Epithet for a Tyrant.
Mangeves, mast, acorns, any thing that wild swine usually feed on. Mangonel,
as mangouelle in the N. D. Mangonisme, the craft of setting out of saleable
things. Mangonne, a Brokers wife. Mangonneau, as mangonelle in the N. D.
Mangonner, to set out things to sell; also to mangle, or disfigure by mangling.
Mangouri, a base Turkish coin, whereof sixteen do little more than countervail
our penny. Manguiere, a great headed, and short stalked nail used about ships.
Maniacle, for maniaque, mad, frantic. Maniance, a managing. Manicles,
hard-fetters. Manicordion, an old fashioned Claricord. Maniement, for maniment,
a managing, or handling. Manieur, a handler, a manager. Manifacture, for
manufacture, manufacture. Manifacture, wrought, or done with the hands.
Manifacturer, to work, or frame with the hands. Manigance, a secret practicing;
also an unstay'd, or unseemly behavior. Manigotter, to handle, or finger much.
Maniguet, the spice called Grains, or grains of Paradise. Maniguette, as
maniguet. Manille, the handle of a pot, etc. Maniller, a Bracelet-maker; also
one that in Popish Churches gathers for a poor Preacher. Manjore, a Manger.
Maniot, a certain Root, which boiled is good meat; but raw, poison. Manipulon,
for manipule, a maniple, or fannel, a scarf-like Ornament worn about the left
wrist of a sacrificing Priest. Manivelle, an instrument wherewith disjointed
bones are set in their former places; also the handle whereby a Grindle-stone
is turned. Manivilles, the braces whereby a windbeam is turned. Mannequin, as
manequin in the N. D. Mannequinage, as manequinage. Manneux, full of Manna.
Manoir, a Mansion, Manor, or Mannor-house; also a room in a house. Manople, a
kind of long Gantlet; or as manipulon. Manouvrer, to hold, occupy, or possess.
Manouvrier, for Maneuver, a mechanical workman. Manque, (Adj.) lacking,
wanting. Manquerot, a maimed, or lame creature; one that wants some of his
limbs. Mansais, as deniers and sols mansais, double the worth of deniers and
sols Tournois. Mansart, a Culver, or Ring-dove. Manselles, as mancelles.
Mansionnier, a dweller, one that has a mansion in a place. Mansuet, gentle,
courteous, meek, or mild. Mansuetement, gently, meekly, mildly. Mansuetude,
gentleness, meekness, mildness. Mantel, for manteau, a Cloak. Manteler, to
cloak, or cover with a cloak. Manthe, a rough mantle, a rug. Manticore, a
ravenous Indian beast, that has a face like a Man, a body like a Lion, and
three ranks of sharp teeth. Mantil, for nappe, a table-cloth. Mantin, a kind
of Prawn. Mantonel, the catch of a d^^^. Mantonniere, as mentonniere. Manuel,
(Subst.) a manual, a pocketbook. Manuellement, as bailler manuellement, to
give in hand, pay ready money, deliver presently. Manumission, a manumission,
or affranchising. Manutenteur, a maintainer, or upholder. Mappule, a little
piece of Lawn, wherewith the sacramental Pix is covered. Maquerelleux, full of
bawdry, belonging to the bawdy art. Maquignonner, to drive a Horse-coursers
trade, to deal deceitfully in bargains; also to play the bawd. Mar, as harang
de mar, a great, fair, fat, and full-rowed Herring. Marabais, a kind of base
Coin. Maramedi, as maravedi. Maran, a Renegado. Marant, as mareant. Marasme, a
Consumption in the highest degree. Marasme, wholly consumed, wasted, or drained
of moisture. Maratresque, Step-mother-like. Maraudaille, a pack of silly
rogues; a crew of beggarly vagabonds. Marauder, to play the idle vagabond.
Maraudise, idle knavery. Maravedi, a little Spanish Coin. Marbreux, full of
marble. Marbrier, a Marble-cutter, one that works in marble. Marbriere, a
quarry of marble. Marcanet, a kind of River-fowl. Marcasite, for marcassite,
the Marcasite, or Fire-stone. Marcez, March-corn, such as is sowed about March,
as Barley, Oats, etc. Marcgrave, a Marquess. Marchage, as Droict de marchage,
the Common of pasture which the Inhabitants of one Jurisdiction, Parish,
Village, or Manor have over all the grounds belonging to another. Marchal, for
Marechal, a Marshal. Marchandement, Merchant-like. Marchement, a marching,
walking, or stepping. Marchette, a little step, a small footing. Marchettes,
small Organ-keys. Marchir, as marchiser. Marchis, a thick trace or tract of men
or beasts; also a path beaten out by often n treading. Marchiser, to border,
adjoyn, or lie so near together that one touch another. Marchons, stillings for
wine-vessels to stand on. Marchure, as marchement. Marciage, Droict de
marciage, all the profit of natural fruits, as hay, etc. and the half of all
others, as wine, corn, etc. due every third year within Bourbonnois to a
Landlord, in lieu of his whole rent. It Is also due as a fine, upon every change
of Lord and Tenant. Marcier, to receive the rent or fine called Marciage.
Marcote, Marcoter, as marquote, marquoter in the N. D. Marcou, an old male-cat,
a gib-cat. Mardelle, for margelle, d'un puis, the brink, or brim of a Well.
Mare, moored, fastened with cables, held fast by anchors, as a ship in a
harbor, etc. Mareant, mooring. Mareer, as marer. Marenge, our ordinary blue
Titmouse. Marer, to moor, or be moored; to lie fastened with cables, or hold
fast by anchors. Marshall, (Adj.) of, or belonging to, made or done by a
Smith, or Farrier. Mareschaucees, timber to build withal. Marets, or Marez, for
marais, Marsh, Fen, or Moor. Marfil, Ivory, or the Elephants-tooth unwrought.
Margaigne, as mortgage. Margaignon, a male-eel. Margaire, the name of a bird.
Margariton, Pearl, or the powder thereof. Margasin, for magazin, a Magazine, or
Storehouse. Marger, to make a margent, brink, edge, or brim. Margne, for marne,
Marl. Margotte, Margotter, as marquote, marquoter in the N. D. Margouiller, to
gnaw, to mumble with the teeth, instead of kissing to bite. Margoute, for
marquote, a Vinesprig. Margueillier, for Marguillier, a Churchwarden.
Marguillierie, Church-wardenship. Marguy, a Hanger. Mariable, marriageable.
Mariaulet, a man of no account, esteem, or credit; an insufficient witness; or
as mariolet. Mariee, the caul of a beast. Mariement, a marrying. Mariets,
mariets, violets. Marieur, a Match-maker. Marille, a Register. Marine noire,
the name of a grape. Marinesque, a la marinesque, mariner-like. Marinesques,
long mariners hose. Marinette, the Lodestone. Marinier, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to a mariner. Marin-onfroy, the name of an apple, round on the one
side, and flat on the other. Mariolement, bawdery, lasciviousness. Marioles,
the waddles and stones of a Cock. Mariolet, a Wencher, a wanton Youth; or as
mariaulet. Marisque, a great unsavory fig, that ripening opens on the sides and
discovers its seeds. Marital, belonging to a marriage or wedlock, (especially
on the Husbands side.) Marlane sale, a dried Whiting. Marliere, a Marl-pit.
Marlotte, a fashion of light gown, or mantle for the Summer. Marmaille, young
rascals, a troop of lewd and idle boys. Marmaride, a kind of very hard gray
marble. Marmaux, arbres marmaux, hedgetrees, wild trees. Marme rayee, a kind
of sundry-coloured Seafish. Marmes, a rustical oath. Marmitonnage, scullionry,
or the Office of a Scullion; also nastiness, sloveniiness. Marmitonner, to tend
the Beef-pot, like a Kitchin-boy; to play the saucy rogue. Marmo, toothed, or
furnished with teeth. Marmonne, mumbled, muttered. Marmonner, to mumble, to
mutter. Marmontaine, as marmotaine. Marmor, the Goldeny, or a kind thereof;
also as marmo. Marmorat, Mortar, wherein among other things little pieces of
the b^st marble are put. Marmoset, as marmouset in the N. D. Marmotaine,
marmotan, marmote, the Alpine-mouse, or Mountain-rat. Marmoterie, a muttering,
or mumbling of words between the teeth. Marmotonne, made to grumble, or that
yields a grumbling sound. Marmotonner, to grumble, mutter, or murmur; to make a
rumbling noise. Marmouselle, a little puppy, or pug to play with. Marmouserie,
doting, raving. Marneux, full of Marl. Marniere, a Marl-pit. Marochemin,
Horehound. Maronne, Federfew. Maronnier, for marinier, a Mariner. Marouque, a
shrub called Lybia-rush, or Christ's thorn. Maroute, bastard-Camomil. Marpaut,
an ill-favored scrub; also a lickorous fellow. Marquable, of mark, of note.
Marquasin, for marcassin, a young wilde-boar. Marquet, a small Venetian coin.
Marquetage, for marqueterie, inlaid work. Marquette, as marquet. Marqueture, a
marking, or spotting; a mark, or spot; also inlaid work. Marquisotte, as barbe
faicte a la marquisotte, a beard cut after the Turkish fashion. Marrabais, as
marran. Marrabaise, as bonnet a la marrabaise, a flat cap. Marrain, for
marrein, timber for building. Marran, Marrane, a Renegado, a Christian turned
Turk, or Jew; also a converted, or baptized Moor, Turk, or Jew; one that turns
Christian for fear, rather than out of devotion; also a Jewish, cruel,
hard-hearted, or hollow-hearted fellow. Marranise, turned Turk, or Jew; also
con^erted from a Jew to a false-hearted Christian. Marrant, digging, or
fetching up weeds with a French mattock. Marrassau, a kind^ of short sword or
ax, for an Executioner. Mar, dug, broken up. Marrer, to dig, or break up.
Marrine, a Godmother. se Marrir, to grieze, fr^t, or fame. Mar^^^ou, grief,
sorrow. Marro^e, for marrube, the herb Horehound. Marroche, a mattock, or
instrument like it. Marrochon, a little French mattock. Marrouch^uin, the herb
Horehound. Marson, a Shoat, a Hog that is a year, or under a year, old.
Marsupie, a purse, or pouch. Martel, jealousy, suspicion, a flea in the ear.
Martelage, martelerie, martellement, a hammering. Marteline, a small bewing
pick; a Masons hammer, or pick. Martengalle, a kind of dance. Martiner, to
guzzle. Martingale, a martingale for a horse. A la martingale, absurdly,
foolishly. Martre, for mart, a Martin; also a Game played with huckle-bones and
a little ball. Martroy, a place of execution or punishment. Martyrement,
Martyr-like. Martyrer, for martyriser, to martyr one. Martyrologie, a Book of
Martyrs. Marzol, as Escourgeon. Marzolin, a kind of delicate Italian cheese
made of sheeps milk, not curdled with runnet, but with Artichokes flowers. Mas
de terre, an Ox-gang, containing about 20 acres. Mascarer, to blot, soil blur,
sully, disfigure. Mascaret d'eaux, a huge and sudden ravage, or inundation of
waters. Mascaut, as macault. Mascelles, the jaws. Maschaut, a bag of money, or
as macault. Maschecoulis, the stones at the foot of a Parapet (especially over
a gate) resembling a grate, through which offensive things are thrown upon
Pioneers and other Assailants. Elle a les dents a maschecoulis, le haut
defendant le bas, she has a thin row of teeth, whose rottenness and stench
drive men from her trench. Masche-crouste, a gnaw-crust, a hungry fellow.
Maschefouyn, a b^ar, or one that is fitter to feed with cattle, than to conv^r^
with men. Masche-frain, a bridle-champer; a Lawyer. Mascherivet, as macherivet.
Mascheur, a ch^wer. Mascheure, a c^awing, o^ chewing. Maschiller, to ni^^le, or
ch^^ pr^^tily. Maschurer, as machurer. Masclon, the Cholick of the Stomach.
Masculeyte, manhood, or the male-kinde. Masle-femelle, an Hermaphrodite, or one
that is both man and woman. Maspeton, Laserwort. Masquarade, for mascarade, a
Mascarade. Masquarize, masked. Masquerade, Masquerie, a Mask, or Mummery.
Masqueure, a masking, or disguising. Masquine, the representation of a Lions
head, etc. upon the elbow or knee of some old-fashion Garment. Masserotte, a
Wood-cleavers beetle; also the head, or but-end of a club or beetle. Masseter,
one of the muscles whereby the nether jaw is drawn upwards. Massicor, a yellow
color made of lead; or as Massicot, oaker made of ceruse, or white lead.
Massir, to make massive, solid, hard, or sound; to compact, beat close, or ram
hard in. Massitere, a kneader of bread, or of paste. Massonnier, (Adj.) of,
belonging to, serving for a Mason, or Masons work. Massoret, a Spirit, Ghost,
Hobgoblin. Massorets, such Jews as corrected the false-written words of
Scripture, not blotting them, (for of that they made ascruple) but noting them
with a little o, and setting down their corrections in the margent. Masterel, a
small mast, or any mast but the main one. Mastication, a chewing. Masticatoire,
a masticatory, a medicine for the rhume chawed, or held between the teeth.
Muscles masticatoires, the muscles from which the jaws receive their chawing
motion. Mastiche, wherein there is Mastick. Mastieine, manna in grains, manna
of the Levant. Mastine, a ma^tiff, or cur-bitch; also a f^ll queen. Mastiquer,
to infuse, or put maslick, rozin, etc. upon any thing before it be sodered;
also to join, or close with mastick. Mastoide, as apophyses mastoides,
processes of bones descending from the sides of the head behind the ears.
Muscle mastoide, a muscle that bends and bows down the head. Masturbation,
filthy frigging. Matachin, for matassin, the Matachin dance; also those that
dance it. Mate, a number of sprigs growing together upon an herb. Enfans de la
mate, Cheaters, Cut-purses. Matelotage, the hire of a ship or boat, and of the
Sailers or Watermen thereto belonging; the sraight or fare due for the use of a
ship or boat. Mateologie, vain inquiry, or overcurious search into high
matters and mysteries. Mateologien, a vain, or overcurious searcher into high
matters. Mateotechne, vain knowledge, crooked art. Materas, for matelas,
mattress, or quilt to lie on; also a quarrel, or arrow for a Crosbow. Materas
desempenne, an unfeathered quarrel; also a shittle-headed fellow. Matereau, as
matz, or as masterel. Materien, timber for building. Maternite, motherhood.
Matetoultier, for maltotier, a gatherer of taxes. Mathelineux, frentick, wild,
half mad. Mathematique, (Adj.) mathematical. Matheotheene, as mateotechne.
Matine, as mastine. Matlas, as materas. Matlasse, of quilts. Matou, Matouard, a
He-cat. Matrac, a kind of glass-bottle. Matrasser, to mall, or beat down; to
break, or bruise asunder. Matraz, as matrac. Matrical, belonging to, or serving
for the matrix. Matricave, Fedderfew. Matricide, that has killed his mother.
Matricile, of, or belonging to the matrix. Matrimony, matrimony. Matronal,
matron-like, motherly, grave. Matrones, Damask-violets, Queens-gilliflowers.
Mattarruys, a mad, rash, or hair-brained ass. Mattele, knotted, clotted,
curdled. Mattes, curds, or curdles. Matti, dried up. Mattinel, of the morning;
also timely, or early in the morning. Mattonne, as Ciel mattonne, a sky full
of small curdled clouds. Mattraz, as materas. Maturatif, ripening. Maturation,
maturation, or ripening; a growing to a head, or a resolving into matter.
Maturer, to ripen; also to matter. Matz, the mast of a ship. Mau, an evil, or
mischief. Mau, (Adj.) bad, ill, naughty. A mau chat mau rat, two knaves well
met. Maubrenage, as une femme qui demeure a maubrenage, a stinking, or nasty
draggle-tail. Maucoereux, queasie stomached. Mauconduict, ill-guided, or
governed. Maudisne, that has had but a course dinner. Maudite, a kind of
sandy-coloured vermin like a Viper. Maudole, misshapen, ill-favored. Mauduict,
clownish, unmannerly. Mauffait, Mauffe, a Goblin, a Spirit. Maufle, a Wretch;
or as mauffe. Maugisant, ill-bedded, ill-lodged. Maugratieusement, hastily,
rudely, unpleasingly. Maugratieux, rude, unpleasing. Maugre, as maulgre.
Maugreement, a cursing. Maujoin, the Arabian gum called Beninne. Maujoinct,
loose, gaping, ill set together. Maujoine, as Barbier de maujoine, a Barber of
a woman's etc. Maulave, ill-washed. Mauldisson, curse. Maulgre, for malgre, in
spite of. Mauloubet, the Wolf (a disease.) Maulubec, as malubec, or as
mauloubet. Maulx, for maux, mischiefs. Maumarie, ill-married. Maumene, misused.
Maunet, unclean, nasty, filthy. Mavortien, martial. Maupiteux, pitiless,
unmerciful. Mauplaisamment, unpleasantly, unhandsomely. Mauplaisance,
unpleasaneness, unhandsomeness. Mauplaisant, unpleasant, unhandsome. Mauprest,
unready, unprovided, unprepared. Maurelle, for morelle, the herb Morel.
Maurequine, as gout maurequine, blindness, or extreme dimness of sight, caused
by the obturation of the Optic Sinews. Mausade, harsh, unsavory; uncivil,
unmannerly; unapt, unseasonable. Mausadement, harshly, unsavourly; uncivilly,
unmannerly; unaptly, unseasonably. Mausadete, harshness, unsavoriness;
incivility, unmannerliness; unaptness, unseasonableness. Mausoigneux, careless,
or negligent. Mausoupe, ill-supped, that has had but a bad supper. Maussane,
the wayfaring tree. Mauvaisement, badly. Mauvaistie, badness. Mauvis, a Mavis;
a Throstle, or Thrush. Max, as mas. Maxillaire, of, or belonging to the
Jaw Bone. Dents maxillaires, the Grinders, or Cheek-teeth. May, a kneading
trough; also a pile of wood, etc. Mayenche, a Titmouse. Mayeres, the branches
of Poplars and Willows, fit to make props or stays for Vines. May-loubet, the
disease called the Wolf. May-mis, maimed. Mayrastre, a stepmother. Mays,
Turkey-wheat. Maz, a small Country-Tenement; also the Mast of a Ship. Means,
void and empty places between beds in Gardens, reserved for special herbs.
Meat, a way, or open passage; a hole, or pore in the body. Mecaniquerie,
Mecaniquete, mechanicalness; baseness of humor. Mecer, for menacer, to
threaten. Mechanize, made, or grown base, or vile. Mechef, as meschef.
Mecheron, a little match, or candleweek; also a sparkle. Mechine, a
Maidservant, or Chambermaid. Mechoir, as meschcoir. Mect, a kneading-trough,
or tub. Medaille, set, or furnished with Medals. Medaillon, a little Medal.
Medalle, for medaille, a Medal. Medamothi, of no place. Mede, a precious stone
that yields a Saffron-like sweat, and a taste like Wine. Medecin, (Adj.)
physical. Mediastine, a partition made in the body by certain thin skins, which
divide the whole Breast from the Throat to the Midriff into two hollow bosoms.
Medicamenteux, curing, healing. Medication, Medicinement, a curing, or healing.
Medier, to divide into halves; also to mediate. Medicu, Medicus, so God help
me, or by the faith of my body. Medimne, a corn-measure, containing almost two
of our bushels. Medin, an Egyptian coin of Silver. Mediocrer, to temper, to
qualify. Medique, Medick-fodder, Snail-claver. Medisson, as mesdisson. Medon,
the drink Mede, or Braget. Medullaire, of marrow. Medulle, marrow, pith.
Medulleux, pithy, full of marrow. Mefaict, a fault, offense, or trespass.
Meffaict, (Partic.) misdone, trespassed. Meffaire, to misdo, trespass, or
offend. Megalopsychie, magnanimity. Megicier, as Megissier. Megis, tawing; the
pieces cut from skins in tawing, or the liquor wherein they are, or have been
tawed. Megisserie, the tawing, or dressing of thin skins for gloves, purses,
etc. Megissier, a tawer, a leather-dresser. Megiste, very great. Megle, a kind
of forked pick-ax, or gruh-ax. Megre, for maigre, lean. Megrelin, a lean scrag.
Megue, as maigue. Mehaigne, lamed, maimed, grown impotent. Mehaigner, to maim,
or make lame with blows. Mehaing, a maim, weakness, or impotency. Mejane, a
Mizzen-sail; also a Guilthead of a middle size. Meiche, for meche, match.
Meicheron, a little match, week, or snuff; also a sparkle. Meignie, as mesgnie.
Meillauque, Turkey-millet, great black millet. Meillarer, to improve, or make
better. se Melancholier, to be melancholy. Melandrin, a Seafish, that (his
blackish color excepted) resembles the Perch. Melanterie, a Caustic Mineral
(of the color of Sulphur) found in Brass-mines. Melegette, the spice called
Grains, or Grains of Paradise. Melet, the name of a Seafish. Melette, the
Smie, or Sea-groundlin. Meliceride, an Impostume, or Sore, whose humor
resembles honey. Melichore, a winged Scorpion that has two stings; also a
precious Stone that is white on the one side, and of a honey-colour on the
other. Melicrat, Mede, or Metheglin. Melin, bastard-yellow, straw-colour.
Melioration, an improvement, or bettering; the repair of a House, whereby it is
much improved. Meliorer, to improve. Melitite, the sweet (or honey) stone.
Melle, an apple like a Quince, both in smell and bigness; also a Medlar.
Mellifier, to make of honey. Melliflue, out of which honey flows; also sweet
as honey. Mellindres, delicate little Pies made of Indian wheat and Sugar.
Melline, a filberd. Melliturgie, the making of honey, Bees-work. Melonniere, a
garden, ground, or bed of Melons. Melopepon, a Melon-pumpion. Melte, the
Circuit of a Judge or Sergeant, the Territory wherein they exercise their
Jurisdiction. Melze, for melese, the Larch, or Turpentine-tree. Memarchure,
surbating of the feet of cattle. Membraneux, filmy, full of membranes. Membret
d'esperon, the gimmew, or joint of a spur. Memelon, as mammelon. Memener, to
misuse, molest, oppress. Meminges as meninges in the N.D. Memithe, the bitter
and stinking juice of the herb Glaucium. Memorablement, memorably. Memoratif,
mindful. Memoriallement, memorably. Memorieux, of a good memory. Menacement, a
threatening. Menaceux, menacing, full of threats. Menande, surely, without
doubt. Mende, as menande. Mendeux, faulty, false. Mendicite, beggary,
beggarliness. Mendience, a begging. Mean, as mendole. Menestranderie, a company
of Minstrels, or Fiddlers. Menestrandier, Menestrel, for Menetrier, a Fiddler.
Menier, ones own. Meniguette, as maniguette. Mennetot, the name of a sweet
Apple. Menon, a gelded Goat. Menone, a Ministrel. Mensale, the table-line in
the hand. Mensionnier, as Mansionnier. Mensonger, false, untrue. Mensonger, (a
Verb) to lie, to fib. Mensongerement, lyingly, falsely, Menstrual, menstrual,
of, or belonging to a woman's flowers. Menstrue, a woman's flowers. Mensurable,
measurable. Mentastre, Calamint, Mountainmint. Mentereau, a fibber. Menterie, a
lie, a fib. Menteusement, most untruly, very falsely. Menteux, full of lies.
Menthastre, as mentastre. Menthe, for mente, Mint. Mentibules, the jaws.
Mentonnier, of, or belonging to the Chin. Mentonniere, a chock, or bob under
the chin; also the chin-piece of a Helmet; also a chin-cloth. Mentule, a man's
yard. Menuailles, small ware, or trash. Menuement, sl^nderly, thinly. Menuet,
something small. Menuete, smalness, littleness, thinness. Menuisse, small fish
of diverse sorts; or the small fry of fish cast into a Pond, etc. for the
storing thereof; also a kind of net wherewith such fish may be caught; also
any small trash, guts, or garbage; and the gobbets or parings of fish cut and
cast away by Fi^hmongers; also a small kind of Gudgeon. Menuisete, smalness,
littleness, slenderness. Menuisier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Joyner, or to
Joyners work. Menusaillerie, small stuff. Menuville, as manivelle. Mequine, as
me^hine. Merane, as mejane. Meratre, for maratre, a stepmother. Mere de
Chastel, du Gibet, de la Justice, the Seat, place, or mark of the H^use of a
Lord Chast^lain, and of h^s Gibbet, or Gallows, which be signs of his
Jurisdiction. Mercadence, small traffic. Mercader, a Merchant, or Tradesman.
Mercandeau, mercandier, a paultry Merchant. Mercantil, Merchant-like. Mercerot,
a Pedlar. Mercier, for remercier, to thank, or give thanks. Mercuire, the herb
called Mercury. Mercurial, of Mercury; born under the Planet Mercury; humorous,
fantastical; talkative; crafty, deceitful. Mercurializer, to be humorous, or
fantastical; also to talk too much. Merdaille, a crew of shitten knaves, of
stinking fellows. Merde, a kind of oath. Merdefer, the dross of iron.
Merdefin, a Physician. Merdigues, a rustical oath. Merdre, as merde. Merdugues,
as merdigues. Mereau, as marreau in the N. D. Meregrand, for grand' mere, a
Grandmother. Merge, a name for ducking sowl. Meriane, Noon-rest. Merianer, to
rest, or sleep at Noontide. Meridian, for meridien, the Meridian. Meridien,
for meridional, Southerly Merin, a Sergeant, or common Bailiff. Meritement,
meritoriously, deservedly. Merlane, for merlan, a W^^ting. Merle, for ne^le, a
Medlar. Merlet, a battlement of a wall. Merlier, a M^dlar-tree. Mermelade,
Marmalade. Merque, for marque, a mark. Merque de bois, a row, or grove of trees
near to a house. Merrain, and Merrien, for marrain, timber for building. Mers,
as batture faicte an dessus des mers, upon the head or face. Merveillable,
marvelous, admirable. Merry, the gullet, or pipe, whereby meat passes down into
the stomach. Mes, for mets, meat, a mess or service of meat. Mes, for plus,
more. Oncques mes, never more. Mesadvenance, uncomeliness, or misbecoming.
Mesadve^ ir a, to mishappen, to succeed ill unto. Mesadventure, Mesadvenue,
mischance, m^sfortune. Mesaise, trouble, a f^iction, misery. Mesarriver, to
happen unluckily. Meschance, a mischief, or mischance. Meschef, the same.
Mescheniere, candle-week mullein. Mescheoir, as mesadvenir. Meschine, as
mechine. Meschinon, a girl, a little or young Maidservant. Mesele, Maslin,
wheat and rye mingled. Mescreable, not to be credited. Mescreu, as mescru.
Mescroire, to mistrust, or suspect; also to believe amiss. Mescru, mistrusted,
suspected; not credited. Mes-dames, the title of the French Kings Daughters.
Mes-damoiselles, the title of the French Kings Brothers Daughters. Mesdisson,
obloquy, detraction; a railing on. Mesdonner, to give amiss. Mese, an eighth,
or proportion of eight in Music. Meseau, Mesel, leprous. Meselerie,
mesledness, leprosy. Meseleux, meselled, leproas. Meselle, a leprous woman.
Mesellerie, as meselerie. Meselleux, as meseleux. Mesenterique, of, or
belonging to the mesenterium. Mesescrire, to write ill, or amiss of; to write
against. Mesestimer, to disesteem. Mesfaire, to wrong, or to abuse. Mesgnie, as
mesnie. Mesgue, Whay. Mesguis, as megis. Meshaigne, peevish, froward. Meshain,
as mehaing. Meshingande, almost off the hinges, loose in every joint. Meshuy,
not to day, not till to morrow. Meslangeur, a mingler, a hudler of things
together. Meslement, mixtly, confusedly. Mesleure, a medley, or mixture;
mingling, or meddling. Meslie, for mele, mixed. Meslier, a Medlar-tree; also a
fruitful V^ne, whose leaf is almost round. Meslinge, Meslinge, Meslinger, as
melange, melange, melanger in the N. D. Meslouer, to dispraise, or discommend.
Mesmarche, trodden, or gone awry. Mesmarcher, to tread, or go awry.
Mesmarcheure, a wry step, or treading; an ill posture, or setting of the foot
in treading; also a strain got thereby. Mesmement, especially, chiefly.
Mesmete, selfness, its own essence or being. Mesnageable, husbandable.
Mesnagement, good husbandry, frugality, thriftiness. Mesnagerement, frugally,
thriftily. Mesnagier, Mesnagierie, as menager, menagerie in the N. D. Mesnie, a
household, or family. Mesoffrir, to underbid; also to wrong, or abuse. Mesolabe,
an half Astrolabe. Mesouan, or Mesouen, henceforward, from henceforth.
Mesparler, to speak ill, or amiss of. Mespartement, a misparting; an unfit
division. Mespert, a half part, or a keeping of a thing for half the profit
coming of it. Mesple, a Medlar. Mesplier, a Medlar-tree. Mesprisement, a
contemning, or despising. Mespriseresse, a scornful Dame. Mesprison,
misprision, error, offense; a thing done, or taken amiss. Mesrien, Mesrin, for
marrein, timber for building. Messagier, for Messager, a Messenger.
Messeamment, unseemly, unhandsomly. Messeance, unseemliness, unsuitableness.
Messel, for missel, a Mass Book. Messer, a Master. Messeresque, as generosite
messeresque, the generosity of Italian Gentlemen. Il Messied, it becomes not.
Messier, a Keeper, or Oversee^ of a Vineyard. Messiffier, to say, or sing Mass.
Messilier, Sergent Messilier, an Officer that looks unto Vineyards, and other
fruit-bearing grounds. Mession, the Vacation (among Lawyers and Scholars)
during Vintage. Messire, Sir. Messottier, a massing Priest. Mestais, for
Metayer, a farmer, a h^^^andman. Mestif, for metis, a m^^grel. Mestivailles,
Mestivales, Harvest-feasts. Mestive, reaped. Mestiver, to reap, to make
harvest. Mestoyant, middle, between both. Mesvenir, as mesadvenir. Mesurage, a
measuring. Droict de mesurage, the right of appointing or proportioning of
measures. Mesurant, as mesure mesurante, the vessel, or instrument wherewith a
thing is measured. Mes-usage, bad usage. Met, for maitre, master. Metacarpe,
the upper part of the hand, from the wrist to the knuckles, or the root of the
fingers. Metagraboulize, puzzled in. Metagraboulizer, to puzzle himself about.
Metais, as mestais. Metaise, a farmers wife. Metalepse, a figure, whereby a
word is put from its proper signification. Metalier, of, or belonging to metal;
full of, or abounding with metal. Metalise, reduced into metal. Metallier, one
that deals in metals. Metallurgie, a searching for metal in the earth.
Metaphoriquement, Metaphorically. Metaphrene, that part of the back which is
over against the heart. Metaposcopie, a man's p^^si^gnomy. Metayerie, for
metairie, a farm; also the revenues thereof. Metayse, as metaise, and as
metayerie. Mete, a limit, bound, or end. Meteil, as mescle. Metelle, the
Thorn-a^ple. Meteorologie, a di^^^^rse of M^ttors. Methelle, as metelle.
Methridat, for mithridat, Mithridatum. metopomantie, di^ination by the face.
Metoyant, parting in two; also equally belonging to two. Mur metoyant, a
partition wall. Metrisie, made into m^ter, put into verse. Met, the drink
M^ad. Metteur, and encherisseur de Fermes, a Chapman for Fa^^^s. Mettre,
(Subst.) a C^^-measure in some parts of Burgundy, containing two and a half of
that Country b^hels. Metz, a M^ssuage, or ^^nement. Meus. the Mood of a Verb.
Meuglement, a ^^ll^^ing. Meugler, to bellow. Meulette, a little mid-^^o^, or
griedle-stone. Meulier, o^ or belonging to a will (or grindle) ^a^. Dents
meulieres, t^^ grinders. Meulon de foin, a cock of Hay. Meulonner, to make up
hay into cocks, or slacks. Meulot, a little cock of hay. Meur, for muraille, a
wall. Meurete, maturity, ripeness. Meuriere, a ground, or grove of M^lberry
trees. Meurisson, a ripening; a making, or growing ripe. Meurler, to bellow.
Meurlon, the name of a certain whit. Vine, or Grape. Meurole de pommes, a hoord
of Apples. Meuron, a black, or bramble-berry. Meurs, for moeurs, manners.
Meurtrier, (Adj.) murdering. Meurtrierement, cruelly. Meusnier, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to a mill, or Miller. M^x, a Plow-land and Tenement thereto
belonging. Meyans, as means. Meyenne, dung, dirt, silthy ordure. Mezarin, a
Physician. Meze, an untilled Ground, wherein many several men's cattle run.
Mezeau, as meseau. Mezelle, a kind of brass, or copper, good to make Ordnance
of. Mezellerie, meselness, leprosy. Mezenge, for mesange, a Titmouse. Mial,
for miel, hon^^. Miaulement, a mewling, or mewing. Miauleur, a mewler, or
mewer. Miauleux, mewling, or mewing. Miault, a m^wing, or counterfeit ^oi^^ of
wailing. Mibaudichon, as fair le mibaudichon, to do any thing unhandsomely.
Mibrutal, uncivil, barbarous, almost as ^ade as a beast. Micacollier, the Lote,
or Nettle-tree. Michelot, a Pilgrim to S. Michaels mount. Michemis, a Tarkish
fruit somewhat resembling the Apricock. Michette, a small manchet. Michon, a
Sot, a Logge^^ad. Miclette, an excellent Composition, that stops all kinds of
Flaxes, and d^^'s up the superfluous moisture of the body. Micocoules,
Lote-berries. Mico^oulier, the Lote, or Nettle-tree. Micour^^r to bend, or bow
himself a pretty deal; almost, or half to double. Micraine, for migraine,
Megrim. Microist, as my-croist. Mideloret, a word coined in derision of our My
Lord. Midenier, halfpenny, or half a fine. Mideronner, to sleep in the
afternoon. Miel (Adv.) not at all, by no means. Mielleusement, sweetly,
lushiously. Mielleux, sweet, lushious, full of honey. Miellier, of, or
belonging to honey; bearing honey. Mielsaude, M^theglin. Mi-este, Midsummer.
Mi-estoupement, an half stopping. Miesure, as miesureux. Miesuresse,
incontinency, wantonness. Miesureux, wanton, lascivious. Mieucre, malapert,
outrageous; or as miesureux. Mieuresse, a saucy qu^an. Migeotte, full ripe,
well-ripened. Mignardelet, pretty, dainty. Mignardeur, a lu^^er, dandler, or
cherisher; a soother, or flatterer. Mignardiser, for mignarder, to dandle,
cocker, or make much of. Mignie, a troop, or company; a household. Mignonnet, a
minikin. Mignonnete, quaintness, spruceness. Mignonnette, ones Sweeting, or
Sweetheart. Mignot, a wanton, a darling. Mignotement, tenderly, kindly.
Mignotement, Mignotise, a tender usage, a dandling, or cockering. Migration, a
removing. Migrelin, a small thin scrag, or tender starveling. Migrer, to
remove, to shift from one place to another. Mi-jour, noon. Mil, for millet,
Millet. Mil sarrasin, French-wheat. Milace, a kind of the Holm, or Scarlet-oak.
Milacie, fed with Millet. Milaire, a mile; also as Cenchrite. Milandre, a
little Dog-fish that is mortal enemy to mankind. Miliart, as milliart. Miliasse,
thousands, or a huge number of. Militer, to war. Millefeuil, for milleseuille,
Milfoil. Mille-graine, Oak of Jerusalem, Oak of Paradise (an herb.) Millene
d'annees, a thousand of years. Mill pieds, the Palmer-worm. Milleraye, a M
llet-ground. Milleret, a middle Ray, the half of a Ray (a piece of gold worth
almost 7 shil. Millerine, the straw, or stubble of Millet. Millesoudiers, old
maimed Soldiers; such as have 1000 sous (or 5 l. sterling) of yearly pension.
Milliart, a thousand millions of millions. Millier (Adj.) of, or belonging to a
thousand. Milliet, a Serpent of a greenish color. Millon, a kind of flint, or
hard stone. Milloque, Furmety, or Pottage made of Millet. Milods, half fines
due in cases of collateral succession unto Censuel inheritance, or in cases of
Donation. Milrai, Milret, as milleret. Mime, a fool, jester, or scoffer; a
dancer in a Play; a foolish and ridiculous Poem, part, or play; also a grave
and sententious Poem. Mi-more, swarthy, blackish, half-Moor. Minage, a
measuring of corn by the Mine. Droict de minage, a fee due unto some Lords,
upon every Mine of corn that is measured within their Territory. Minatere, a
Mine digger. Minau, a corn-measure. Minauderies, foolish tricks. Mince, minced,
cut very small. Mince-feuille, Federfew. Mince-feuille, thin-leaved. Mincelet,
somewhat thin, small, or slender. Mincement, slenderly, thinly. Mincer, to
mince, to cut into small pieces. Mincete, thinness, slenderness. Minchon, as
michon. Mineux, outward, seeming, apparent; belonging to, or consisting in the
countenance or gesture of the face; also one that minces it exceedingly; also
mining, or undermining; also full of mines. Mingant, a broth thickened with the
meal of pounded roots. Mingrelet, thin, or lank. Minime, tres petit, the least,
or smallest. Minion, sinople, red lead, vermillion; Painters red, made of
burned Ceruse. Ministre, ministered, served, assisted; offered, or afforded
unto. Ministreau, a little Minister, small Officer, or Assistant. Ministrer, to
minister, serve, or assist; also to offer, or afford unto. Ministresse, a woman
that ministers or serves unto. Minois, a ^o^r face, or crabbed countenance; a
crafty or discontented look. Minon, a little Kitling. Minons, cat-tails, or
catkins; the long aglet-like buds of nut-trees. Minoratif, as medecin
minorative, a gentle Physic. Minu, the particular Survey or Description which
a Purchaser is bound to deliver unto the Lord of whom his purchase is held.
Minue, diminished, lessened. Minuer, to diminish, to lessen. Mioche, a crum, or
scrap. Mioler, to mew, like a cat. Mi-panche, half-bowed, half hanging down.
Mipotence, as en mipotence, made like a half-gibbet. Mique, a kind of hasty
pudding. Miquelot, a Pilgrim to S. Michaels mount; also a petty Pedlar. Mirach,
the outward lower part of the belly, covering all the entrals. Miracleur, a
doer of miracles. Miraclifique, wonder-working. Miraillet, a kind of thornback.
Mirailler, a looking-glass maker. Mirailler, (Adj.) of a looking glass.
Miraine, oak of Jerusalem, oak of Paradise. Miramomelin, a Lord over Lords.
Mire, for Medecin, a Physician, or Surgeon. Mirecoton, Mirelicoton, the
delicate yellow peach, called a Melicotony. Mirelifique, exceeding wonderful.
Mirelifiques, toys, bables; tricks to mock apes, to amaze Infants with.
Miriade, ten thousand. Mirifique, strangely wrought, admirably done. Mirlirot,
hearts claver. Mirloret, a spruce fellow. Mirouiller, Miroitier, as Mirailler.
Mirond, semicircular, half round. Mirouaillier, as Mirailler. Mirouallier,
(Adj.) often looking into a glass. Mirouer, for miroir, a Looking-glass.
Mirtil, a Mirtle-berry; also a Salamander, or Deaf-worm. Misaille, a wager
laid. Misanthrope, a hater of men's company. Mis en avaunt, as mon mis en avaunt,
my subject, the thing which I have propounded. Misque, moss. Missal, of, or
belonging to the Mass. Missile, as feu missile, a squib, or other fire-work
thrown. Missotage, things belonging to the Mass. Missotier, of the Mass.
Mistagogue, a Teacher, or Interpreter of mysteries and ceremonies; also a
keeper of the Churches Relics. Miste, neat, fine, or spruce. Mistement,
neatly, finely, sprucely. Mistigouri, my pretty rogue. Mistoudin, a spruce
fellow. Mistrouille, a great slut. Misy, a caustic a rug, or mineral of a
golden color and luster. Mitaille, great file-dust. Mitan, the middle of.
Mitanier, of the middle. Mitaut, as la region du mitaut, the middle region of
the air. Mithologie, as mythologie in the N. D. Mithologiquement,
mythologically. Mithre, for mitre, a miter. Mitifier, to soften; to digest, or
concoct. Mitigation, mitigation, qualification. Mitigue, mitigated, qualified.
Mitiguer, to mitigate, to qualify. Mi-tirer, to draw out the half of. Mitis,
nice, curious, precise; hypocritical. Miton, the small worm called a Mite.
Mitou, a great cat. Fair le mitou, to dissemble, or play the hypocrite.
Mitouard, a cat; also an hypocrite. Mitoufle, furred like a cat, or with cats
skins. Mitouin, a dissembler, an hypocrite. Mitoyen, as moitoyen. Mitraille,
broken brass, or copper; lamps of diverse metals mingled and melted together.
Mitrement, a crowning with a miter. Mixtionne, Mixtionner, as mistionne,
mistionner in the N. D. Mizone, the name of an Italian pear. Monadies, good
morrow to ye. Mobilaire, for mobile, moveable. Mocayart, the stuff Moccado, or
a kind thereof. Mocquereau, a little mocker. Modeler, to model. Modelon, as
modillon in the N. D. Modestete, modesty. Modicite, moderateness. Modie, an
ancient Roman measure containing somewhat less than our peck and a half.
Modifiable, qualifiable. Modulation, harmony. Module, the same; also a model,
the measure, bigness, or quantity of a thing; also a certain measure in
Water-conduits. Modurre, as madoure. More, for move, a mouth, an ill-favored
extension, or thrusting out of the lips. Moellon, for moilon, rubbish. Moge, a
measure containing about six bushels. Moiau, for moyen, the yolk of an egg.
Moignon, a stump, or the blunt end of a thing. Moil, a Sea-barbel, or
Sore-mullet. Moile, a dam whereby the force of water is broken. Moileux, for
mouelleux, full of marrow. Moillonneux, moilonneux, full of rubbish. Moiner, to
play the Monk, to breed Monks. Moinerie, the state or profession of a Monk.
Moinichon, a little paultry Monk. Moinsne, as mainsne. Moissine, a great bunch,
or bundle of bunches of grapes, (an Overseers fee in Vintage-time) also a
little not of bunches or cl^sters tied together with long stalks, and hang^d up
to be kept long. Moissonnier, of, or belonging to harvest. Faueille
moissonniere, a reaping-sickle. Chevreau moissonnier, a fat kid. Oison
moissonnier, a stubble-goose. Moite, moist, wet. Moiteau, as motteau; or as
motte in the N. D. Moiteur, moistness, humidity. Moiton, the half of a bichot;
two bushels and a half, and in some places three. Moitoyen, any whole thing
that is enjoyed in common; also parting in the midst several possessions. Mur
moitoyen, a partition wall, whereof the one half or side belongs to one, and
the other to another; also a wall wherein many have parts according to the
scope of their Tenements, or state of their Tenures. Moitoyennerie, the
enjoying of a thing by many in common. Moitoyrie, for metairie, a Farm.
Molaine, as moulaine. Molard, as poire de molard, a very tender and delicate
pear. Molares, as les dents molares, the grinders, or cheek-teeth. Mole,
molded, cast in a mould. Molebout, a kind of great Sealump. Moleste,
offensive, troublesome, noisome. Molestement, offensively, noisomly. Molesteur,
a molester, troubler, or vexer. Molestie, molestation, or trouble. Molet, for
mollet, somewhat soft, or tender. Molibdene, as plombaigne; also the ^erb
Ledwort. Moliere, a ^og, or quagmire. Moliere, as pierre de moliere, a
grindstone, or grindlestone. Molin, for moulin, a mill. Moliner, to work, or
thicken in a mill. Molinet, for moulinet, a round flouri h with a two-hand
Sword; also the roll wherein the whip of a Rudders tiller goes. Molinier, a
miller. Molition, attempt, endeavor. Mollart, as molard. Mollete, Moloice,
softness, tenderness. Mollification, a mollifying, or softening. Mollify,
mollified, softened. Mollifier, to mollify, to soften. Mollifieur, a
mollifier, a softener. Mollinets, the j^wels at the end of bodkins; also rings
having pearls harging at them. Mollir, to mollify, to soften. Molu for moulu,
ground. Molosse, a foot of three long syllables. Molue, for morue, cod, or
green fish. Molure, for moulure, a grinding. Molurien, the name of an harmless
serpent. Molyboide, the mineral and leaden colored calamine; or else the oar
of lead, or lead-stone untried. Mome, a momus, a carping fellow. Momentaine,
momentary, transitory. Momental, Momentane, the same; also weighty, important,
of moment. Momerie, a carping, or fault finding. Mommerie, a mummery, a
mumming. Momm^ur, a mummer, one that goes a mumming. Mommon, the same; also a
company of Mum^^ers; also a visard, or mask; also a let, by a Mummer at dice.
Il luy couvra son mommon, he swived her. Mon, the gisern of a bird. Ascavoir
mon sy, whether. C'est mon, certainly, truly. Monacal, Monastical.
Monacalement, monastically. Monade, an unity, or singleness. Monaquat, M^nkhip,
the duty or state of a Monk. Monjacart, Silk moccadoe, or a kind thereof.
Monceler, to heap, or pile up. Moncelet, a little heap or pile. Moncet, a
sparrow. Mondanifer, to be worldly. Monde, (Adj.) clean, neat, clear, pure,
sincere. Mondification, a mundifying, or purging. Mondinet, a spruce fellow.
Monettes, warning or admonishing women. Monial, of, or belonging to a Monk.
Moniale, a Nun. Monilles, neck-laces. Monine, as monnine. Monitorial, mo^itory,
admonishing. Monne, a Monkey, or Pug. Monneage, an Ai^ or Subsidy of 12 d. paid
to the (...) of Normandy, (...) third (...) by every H^^^h^lder, (except Ci^^
Officers, benefi^^d men, Gentl^men, poor Wido^s, and ^^me other privileged per
ons) to the end that the ^^in of the Co^^try might not b^ altered. Monnier, the
Chevi^, or Ch^b-fish. Monnine, a marmoset, or little monkey. Monnoyage, as
monnoyage in the N. D. Monnoyement, a coining, or money making. Monnoyer, for
monoyeur, a mint man. Monochordiser des doigts, to quaver with the fingers.
Monocle, monocule, one-eyed. Monogame, one that never had but one wise.
Monologue, one that loves to hear himself talk, or talks very much about a very
little. Monomachie, a single combat. Monon, a little green-leaved shrub, which
bears a red fruit like a small cherry, but not to be eaten. Monope, a Peonian
beast as big as a bull, which nearly pursued squirts out a sharp and fiery
ordure deadly to such as it lights on. Monopolier, for monopoleur, a Monopoler,
or Monopolizer. Monoue, an Eunuch. Monstier, a Monastery; also a Minster, or
Cathedral Church; also any Parish Church. Monstree, for montre, a view, sight,
or muster of. Monstrement, a showing. Monstreur, a shewer. Mont, for beaucoup,
much. Montable, ascendable. Montagner, faulcon montagner, as Montagon, a kind
of hardy faulcon, hard to be kept. se Montaigner, to look big on it, to carry it
high. Montaignette, a little mountain. Montaignois, of, or belonging to
mountains; residing or dwelling in mountains. Montaignolle, as montaignette.
Montain, a kind of faul^ on that uses to look much on her feet; also the
little bird called a Brambling. Montanage, as montenage. Montance, as a la
montance de cent, a rising, or amounting to above an hundred. Montelet, a
little mountain. Montenage, Toll paid unto certain Lords by such as buy and
sell beasts and other Merchandise within their Territory's. Monte-vin, a
strait-mouthed vessel of glass. Montigene, born, or bred on the mountains.
Mont-joye, a barrow; a little hill, or heap of Siens laid in or near an high
way, for the better discerning thereof, or in remembrance of some notable act,
or accident befallen in that place; also an heap; also a goal to run at.
Montouer, for montoir, a mounting block. Montrouage, as montenage. Montueux,
for montagneux, hilly. Moquettes, mocks, gudgeons. Moralis^ur, an Expounder of
morality's. Morbifique, unwholesome, breeding of diseases. Morbleu, a kind of
foolish oath. Morbilles, the small pox. Morcel, for morceau, a bit of any
thing. Morcelaire, as Collation morcelaire, a short collation, a bit and away.
Morcele, nibbled, eaten by bits. Morceler, to nibble, to eat by little and
little. Morcelet, a little bit. Morche, food, vict^als. Morcillant, as un a^l
morcillant, a greedy or hungry eye; such an one as expresses a great appetite
to be at it. M^rcille, piece-mealed, divided into small morsels or pieces; also
nibled. Morciller, to piecemeal, to divide into small morsels or pieces; also
to nibble. Mordant, (Subst.) a kind of great, black, and slow Spider. Mordeur,
a biter. Mordicant, nipping, pinching, biting. Mordication, a nipping,
pinching, or biting. Mordienne, a kind of oath. Mordille, nibled, gnawed.
Mordiller, to nibble, or gnaw. Mordiquer, to bite, pinch, or nip. Mords, for
mordu, bitten, gnawn, nipped, stung. M reau, as cheval moreau, a black horse.
Moree, a kind of murrey, or dark red colors. Morel, as moreau. Morelles,
m^r^l-berries. Morene, th ^^rods, or piles. Morengue, the name of a kind of
Olive. Moresse, a woman-Moor. Moret, a kind of Lie, whereof Soap is made; also
as moree. Morets, winne-berries. Morfe, a feasting. Morfee, as morphee.
Morfiaille, greedy eating; also bad, or dead wine, such as is no better than
droppings. Morfiailler, to feed greedily, to writh the mouth ill-favouredly in
chawing or swallowing. Morfiailleres, food, or victuals greedily and
ill-favouredly taken in. Morfil, Ivory, Elephants teeth. Le morfil d'un
cousteau, the edge-side of a new and unground knife. Morfondement, for
morfondure, an over-heating of the blood. Morganegibe, a matrimonial gift, or
such a title as our frank marriage. Morgoy, a kind of rustical Oath.
Morguesoupe, a la morguesoupe, whilst they were eating their brewes, or sat
pottage. Morgueur, Morgueux, a maker of strange mouths, or sow^ faces.
Morhoue, a Porpoise, or Sea-hog. Moribonde, dying, or ready to die. Morienne,
dying a natural death. Morigere, for Morigine, mannerly, of good carriage.
Morille, the smallest and daintiest kind of red Mushrom. Pinsemorille, the
game called Hinch-pinch, and laugh not. Morin, vent morin, the Southwind.
Morionne, armed, or covered with a murrian. Lievres morionnez, silly and
cowardly Tradesmen turned Watchmen. Soldats morionnez, Footmen. Morique, for
Morisque, a Morrisk Turnament. Morir, for mourir, to die. Morme, Mormyre, the
ruddy and spotted Sea-bream, or Goldenny. Morn, d^lled, blunted; also tipped,
headed, or pointed with. Esperons mornez, spurs with blunt rowels. Morner, to
blunt, or dull the point of a weapon; also to tip, head, or point with.
Morni^l^, an I^alian fruit growing like a t^ad-stool; a trick at cards; a cuff,
or pash on the lips. Bailler mornifle sur les levres du Roy, to coin false
money. Moroche, the smallest, coursest, and driest kind of Indian wheat.
Moromancie, foolish divination. Moron, as mouron. Morosophe, foolish-wise.
Morphee, the morphew. Morphie, Ivory. Morpiaille, as morfiaille. Morquacasse,
all bruised, or out of joint. Morrail de mulet, a kind of muzzle tied about a
mules nose, and having hanged at it a great poak full of hay or oats for him to
feed on as he goes. Morrailles, as mourrailles. Morre, a pouch-mouth, a mouth
guarded with great out-standing or slouching lips; or as mourre. Morrion, for
morion, a murrian. Morrude, a Gurnard, or Curre-fish. Morsaul, as marsaul.
Mors^llant, Mors^ller, as morcillant, morciller. Mors^ll^ure, a piece-mealing;
a breaking, or dividing into many small pieces. Mortaillablement, by (in)
mortmain; also servilely, slavishly, by villanage. Mortau, for mortel, mortal.
Mortement, deadly, as one that is dead; also weakly, faintly, like one that is
half dead. Morte-saison, the season wherein herring, or other seafish, are not
fit to be caught. Mortgage, or Mortgaige, mortgage. Mortifere, deadly,
mortiferous. Mortifieur, a mortifier. Mortmain, as main morte in the N. D.
Mortuage, a mortuary, that which is due or given to a Parson out of a dead man's
goods. Mortuaille, a Funeral. Mortuaire, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Funeral,
or mortuary. Morvat, a dot of snivel, or of snot. Morveau, snot, snivel.
Morveau de limacons, the slime of snails. Morvenie, the rough C^dar of Lycia.
Morver, to snivel, to be snotty. Morves, les morves de petit point, a kind of
^^^nzie in an horse, during which b^ neither knows any that have t^^ded him,
nor hears any that come near him. Moscaire, Os moscaire, the great bone
whereupon the ridge-bone re^^th. Moscellin, of, or belonging to musk.
Moschardins, small pellets, or grains of a delicate paste made of the gum
Dragagant, rose water, dragons blood, and musk. Mose, a pattern, as one herring
in a barrel showing the goodness of the rest; or as moison. Moss, bois mosle,
billets, logs, or Logwood. Mosler, to cast in a mould. Mosleur, as mouleur.
Mosquets, as mosquettes. Mosquette, a little Turkish Church; also a Musket.
Mosquettes, little Jewels, earrings, etc. Motacille, a Wagtail. Mote, as motet
in the N. D. Motelle, a powt, or eel-powt. Mothe, a little earthen fortress, or
strong house built on an hill. Motoire, moving, that makes to move. Motrice,
moving, stirring. Motte, as motet in the N. D. Motte, (Adj.) set, or usually
sitting on a clod. Motteau, as mottelet; also a clot of congealed moisture.
Mottelet, Mottelette, a little clod, or t^rf of earth. Motteleux, cloddy,
tursie. Mouaillon, for Moilon, rubbish. Mouaner, to yawl, or cry like a little
child. Mouard, mumping, mowing. Moucade, the stuff Moccadoe. Moucadou, a
handkerchief. Mouce, blunt. Moucet, a sparrow. Mouchard, a sly fellow; a spy, a
pickthank. Moucharder, to spy, watch, or observe. Mouche, (m.) a ship-boy, or a
sailer; also a vine-branch that runs out in length, and is under-propped.
Mouchement, a wiping of the nose; a snuffing of a candle; a mocking; a
curtailing. Mouchet, a M^squet; a little singing bird like the friquet; an ear
of ^^me kind of corn, as of millet, etc. the cats tail or haglet that hangs on
nut-trees; also any manne of flap. Mou^^on, a li^^^ fly; also the snuff (...)
candle. Mo^^^re, for mouture, a grinding. Mouee de g^^s, a crowd of people.
Mouffle, a Winter-mittain; the vaulted cover or lid of a Goldsmiths crucible.
Moufflet, plump. Mougnon, as moignon. Mouillement, a wetting, or moistening; a
soaking, or steeping. Mouille-vent, a bibber, one that often wets his
windpipe. Mouilleure, as mouillement. Mouilloir, a little vessel wherein
Spinsters moisten their fingers. Mouillure, as Mouilleure. Mouisson, a Cows
milking. Moul de bois, a wood-stack, or pile of wood. Moulaine, mullein,
longwort. Mouldeur, a grinder. Mouldure, grist, or grinding; also a pounding,
or stamping into pieces. Moulerie, a casting in a mould. Moulette, for molette,
a grind-stone for colors. Mouleu^, a Moulder, or caster of things into moulds;
also a grinder; also an Assizer of wood (whether for building or firing) an
Officer that looks it be sufficient both in size, quantity, and quality.
Moulie, wife. Mouliner, to grind. Moulinier, a Miller. Moulle, for moule, a
mould. Moulleur, as mouleur. Moullon, Moulon, a dry wall made with lime or
mortar; also a heap or mass of any such thing. Moulon d'eau, a great billow of
water. Moulon de foin, a Hay-cock. Mouloter, to hunt after field-mice. Moult,
much, greatly, exceedingly. Moulue, for morue, Stock Fish. Mounier, for munier,
a Miller; a Kings-fisher; a Titmouse. Mourable, ready, or likely to die.
Mourene, as murene in the N. D. Mourin, a Weevel. Mourlon, the name of a
fertile Vine. Mouron, for mourron, the herb called Pimpernel. Mourrailles,
barnacles for a horses nose. Mourrin, a mite, or weevel. Mourru, chuffy, like
the face of a Lion, or the muzzle of an Ox. Mourrues, the Piles or Emrods in
the fundament; also the mumps, or mourning of the chine. Mourue, the mumps, and
(in a Horse, etc.) the mourning of the chine; also a fish called Poorjack.
Mousce, for mousse, moss. Mouschard, as mouchard. Mouschebout, the spotted Cod,
whereof Haberdine is made. Mouschetiere, a fly-flap; also the end of a beasts
tail. Mouschon, a little fly. Mousque, a name of contempt, or nickname for an
ordinary boy. Mousque, (Adj.) that has lost his ears, or both his ears and his
tail. Mousse, (m.) a Skipper; or a Ship-boy. Mousse, (Adj.) dull, blunt.
Mousse, dulled, blunted. Mousseau, a little round heap, or ball of moss.
Mousselu, mossy. Mousseron, for moucheron, a gnat. Mousseux, mossy, full of
moss. Mousson, a Cows milk, or milking, as much as she yields at a milking.
Moussu, as mousseux. Moustache, having a mustachoe. Moustardier, (Adj.) of, or
affecting mustard. Moustele, Moustoile, a Weesel. Moute, grist, or grinding.
Moutonnage, Toll paid unto certain Lords by those that buy and sell beasts, or
other merchandise, within their Territories. Moutonnaille, Sheep, Weathers.
Moutonnee, a tractable, fond, or silly Wench. Mouveur, a mover, or stirrer; a
stirring, busy, or troublesome fellow. Moux, the plural of mol, soft. Moyau,
the middle, or center of; the nave of a wheel. Au moyau de, in the very bowels
of. Moyennement, meanly, moderately. Moyennete, meanness, competency. Moylon,
Moyne, Moyneau. See them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Moynerie, as
Moinerie. Moynesse, a Nun. Moynoton, a little Monk, also the little Titmouse.
Moyson, size, bigness, or quantity. Moyton, as moiton. Muablete, mutableness,
changeableness. Muance, change, alteration. Mucagineux, slimy. Mucer, to hide.
Much, an hiding hole. Mucilage, slime, or a slimy liquour drawn from seeds,
roots, etc. a clammy sap, or juice. Mucosite, sliminess. Mucqueux, slimy,
snotty, musty. Mucydan, slimy, moldy, hoary all the year long. Muement, a
changing, altering, or transforming; a turning, or casting of the coat; a
mewing. Muere, dampish. Muerier, for meurier, a Mulberry-tree. Muette, the
Chamber or Lodge of a Lieutenant, or chief Ranger of a Forest; also an Hares
nest, the form or place wherein she kindles. Mugault, as macault. Mugereul, a
kind of mullet. Mugot, an hoord, or secret heap of treasure. Mugotte, hoorded;
also ripened, as fruit in straw. Mugotter, to hoord; also to ripen, as fruit in
straw. Muguette, a Nutmeg. Muguette de mouton, the nut of a leg of Mutton.
Muguot, as mugot. Muifle, Muifleron, a kind of Sardinian sheep, whose wool is
hairy like a Goats. Mular, a kind of great Whale. Mulard, one that has kiby
heels. Mulasse, the Sea Monster called a Whirl-pool. Mulataille, mules, a
company of mules, also the kind or generation of mules. Mulcte, fined,
amerced. Mulctoire, finable; also a fining, or amercing. Muletaille, as
mulataille. Muliebre, womanly; womanish. Muliebrement, woman-like, womanishly.
Mulin, a narrow heel, a high coffin, such as all mules have. Mulin, (Adj.) of,
or belonging to a mule. Mullon, as moulon. Mullot, for mulot, a field-mouse.
Mulon de soin, an hay-stack, or hay-cock. Muloteur, Mulotier, hunting for, or
feeding on field-mice. Multation, a fining. Multe, a fine, or penalty. Multer,
to fine. Multicuple, a great multiplication. Multicuple, (Adj.) manifold.
Multiplicable, multipliable. Multipliement, a multiplying. Multre, the skin
wherein the Calf lies in the Hindes belly. Mumer, the little Wag-tail. Munde,
clean, neat, or pure. Munde, Mundifier, as monde, mondifier in the N. D.
Mundificatif, mundifying, cleansing. Municipial, for municipal, municipal.
Muniment, a strengthening, or fortifying; also ammunition. Munimens,
justifications of allegations, in law. Munitionnaire, storing or furnishing
with munition or victuals; also belonging thereto. Munitionner, to provide of,
or furnish with ammunition; to victual beforehand. Muque, for nuque, the nape
of the neck. Muqueux, as mucqueux, Muraille, walled. Muraillier, Mural, of, or
belonging to walls; also cleaving unto walls, as Ivy. Mureraie, a grove of
Mulberry-trees. Muret, the Purpleshell-fish; also a bench made against an
out-wall to sit on. Murette de poisson, fish-broth, or sauce, wherein fish has
been thoroughly boiled; also the pickle wherein it is kept; the liver and long
fat gut of a Pike. Murge, a heap of stones picked up out of a Vineyard or Garden
in the dressing thereof. Murler, to low, to bellow. Murmurantement, with
murmuring. Murmurat^ur, a murmurer. Murmuration, Murmurement, a murmur, or
murmuring. Muron, a Salamander. Murte, for myrte, the Myrtle-tree. Murtrir, for
mourtrir, to bruise; to kill. Musaique, for Mosaique, Mosaic. Musangere, a
Titmouse. Musaphis, Doctors, or Prophets among the Turks. Musaraigne, a
Shrew-mouse. Musard, a muser, or a dreaming fellow; one that stands gazing at
every thing; also a man of no dispatch. Musard, (Adj.) musing, dreaming, or
gazing on every thing; lingering, prolonging, delaying. Mort musarde, death
that is long a coming. Musardie, a mump, dump, or dreaming; a pause, delay or
lingering. Muscadeau, Muscadel, the Wine Muscadel. Muscadelle, a Musk-rose.
Pomme muscadelle, a Musk-apple. Muscadet, the wine Muscadel; also a Cider,
which (made of a very small and sweet apple) resembles Muskadine in color,
taste, and smell; also the Muscadine raisin. Muscagineux, as mucagineux.
Muscardins, as Moschardins. Muscatelin, muscadine. Muscateline, the Musk-pear.
Muscellin, of Musk, having Musk in it. Huille muscalline, musk-oyl, an oil
extracted from musk and other Aromatic Simples; also oil of Ben. Muschebout,
as mouschebout. Muscositez, slimy, or snotty humors. Musculeux, brawny, full
of muscles. Vein musculeuse, the first branch of the flank-Veins, which
communicates it self with di^ers Muscles about the Belly and Loins.
Musculosite, a musculous substance, or a brawny stiffness. Museleux, Muselier,
muzzeling, or tying up the muzzle. Musequin, a little dogs pretty snout; also
an effeminate Courtier; also a place to muse in, or gaze out at. Muserolle, a
musrol for a horse. Muset, a Shrew-mouse. Musimone, a beast that is bodied like
a sheep, and coated like a goat. Musnier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Miller.
Musquardins, as moschardins. Musquat, for muscat, muscadine. Musquete, for
musque, perfumed with musk. Musquette, a mosquette; also a certain yellow and
hard-rinded pear. Musqueux, full of musk; also as Mucqueux. Mussale, a kind of
shellfish that somewhat resembles a mus^le. Musse, a secret corner, or hiding
hole; an old nook to lay a thing out of the way in. Musser, to hide. Mussette,
a little hole, to hide things in. Mustelle, a powt, or eel-powt. Mut, as
mussette. Mut, for muet, dumb. Chiens muts, a kind of white hounds, which
never call on a change; also lime-hounds. Mutation, change, alteration,
changing, exchanging; also a shadowing with colors of a different kind.
Mutinateur, a mutiner, a firebrand of sedition. Mutination, Mutinement, a
mutining, a factious stirring. Mutules, brackets, corbels, or shouldering
pieces; Compartiments. Muyage, as bailler terre a muyages, to let ground for a
certain number of muys of corn, to be paid in lieu of rent. Myagre, a great,
thick, and greenish Snake or Serpent, that ^aunts houses to hu^t mi^^.
Mycacoulier, the Lote, or Nettle-tree. My-cornu, half-horned. My-croist,
half-increase, or half the profit that is made, half of that which comes of a
thing. Bail de bestes a my-croist, a letting out of cattl^ to the halves.
Bailleur de febves a my-croist, a cheater, a cousener. Myere, a Physician, or
Surgeon. My-forchu, half-forked. Mygale, a Shrew-mouse. Mygrene, for migraine,
Megrim. My-jour, Noonday. Mine, as mine in the N. D. Mynsser, for mincer, to
mince. Myope, a kind of full-eyed Serpent which has feet, though they be but
little ones. Mire, the male Lamprey; also a Leech. Myrepsique, as balan
myrepsique, the aromatical nut or acorn called Ben. Myrique, the shrub
Tamarisk. Myrmecique, as Escadrons myrmeciques, ants. Myrobalan, for myrabolan,
a Myrabolan plum. Myrtil, a Myrtle-berry; also the less kind of myrtle, called
Noble-myrtle. Myrtillet, Myrtle-berries. Myrtin, of, or belonging to the
Myrtle-tree. Huile myrtin, Myrtle-oyl. Mysanthrope, as misanthrope. Mysoye,
made half of silk. Mystagogue, as mistagogue. Mystaudique, seeming mystical.
Mystaudiquement, mystically, or sacredly in show. Myste, a Priest. Mythologe,
an Expounder of fables. Mythologiser, to expound, or moralize a fable.
My-voute, half-vaulted, half-arched.
N
NAbote, Nabotte, a woman-dwarf. Nacle, as nacre in the N. D. Nacqueter, as
naqueter. Nadair, as nadir in the N. D. Nadel, a Sloe-worm, or blinde-worm.
Nadelle, a Smy, a Sea-groundling. Nagement, Nager, Nageure, a swimming. Nai, a
Ship. Naifver, to represent in lively colors; to describe rightly, or
properly. Naintre, a Dwarf. Naintresse, Naine, a She-dwarf. Naise, steeped, or
soaked (as hemp) in water. Naiser, to sleep, or soak hemp in water. Naissant,
(Subst.) as son propre naissant, his ancient Inheritance, Land whereto he was
born, or comes. Naissant conventionnel, money given by a father or mother to be
employed on a purchase for their child, or the land purchased with such money.
Naizer, as naiser. Nambot, for nabot, a dwarf, a dandiprat. Namps, for nans,
movables. Nampt, a distress; a beast or moveable distrained; also a beast
seized for trespass or Damage-fesant; also a seizure, or distraining (in which
sense our Common-lawyers use Naam.) Obligation par nampt, a bond and pawn to
boot. Namptir, Namptissement. See Nantir, nantissement in the N. D. Nantilles,
freckles. Napel, Helmet-flower, great Monks hood (a venomous herb.) Naphe, as
nafe in the N. D. Napleux, pock^e, full of the French pox. Napoller, for
napolier, the great clot-bur. Naquaire, a loud Instrument of music somewhat
like a hoboy. Naque, as naere in the N. D. Naque-mouche, a fly-catcher, an idle
gull. Naquer, in gnaw, or bite often, and with a harsh sound. Naquet, the boy
that serves or stops the ball after the first bound to make a better chase at
Tennis; a Court-keeper, or Tennis-court-keepers boy. Naqueter, to serve or stop
a ball at Tennis; also to wait at a great man's door; to observe dutifully.
Naqueter les dents, to chatter the teeth. Naqueter de la queue, to wag the
tail. Narcaphthe, an aromatical Indian wood, called by some red Storax.
Narcotique, stupefactive, benumming. Nardin, of Spikenard. Huile nardin,
Spike-oyl. Nareau, a nostril. Nargues, pish, fie, it cannot be so. Naricard, a
great-nosed man. Nariller, as naziller. Narilles, a hawks narrels, or nostrils.
Narquin, Narquois, a cousener, an Impostor, a Gypsy; also the gibbridge used
amongst such people. Narrateur, a narrator, or relater. Narratif, narrative.
Narre, told, related, reported. Narrement, a telling, relating, reporting.
Narrer, to tell, relate, report. Narreur, as narrateur. Nasal, of, or belonging
to the nose. Vein nasale, the Nose-vein, seated between the nostrils. Nasarde,
a fillip, or rap on the nose; also a frump, or jeer. Nasarde, fillipped on the
nose; also derided, frumped. Nasarder, to fillip, or rap on the nose; also to
break a jest on; also to speak in the nose. Cette cord nasarde, this string
jarreth. Naseaux, the nostrils. Fendeur de naseaux, a swaggerer, a cutter.
Nasomonite, a bloud-red stone streaked with many black veins. Nasquir, to be
born, to rise, or have a beginning. Nassel, the chin-hand of an Helmet.
Nasselette, a small Scull, or Cock-boat. Nasselier, of, or belonging to a
cock-boat, or longboat. Nasserie, as nassiere. Nassidure, any swelling or
tumor in the body at its first rising, and before the kind thereof can be
discerned. Nassiere, a Weel to catch fish in. Naste, a kind of Pole-reed, or
cane; also Naphta. Natel, (Subst.) birthday. Natoire, a place to swim in.
Natice, as Nerite. Nationnaire, ones Countryman. Natrete, knavery. Natte,
matted. Natter, to mat. Nattier, a maker of Mats. Nattier, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to mats, serving to make mats. Nau, for navire, a ship; also a gutter
on the top or side of a house. Navage, for naufrage, shipwreck. Naucelle, a
boat. Naucheux, queasie-stomached, or apt to vomit. Naudin, a Coxcomb. Nave, a
Ship. Navee, a ship full of. Nauf, a Ship. Naufrageux, causing shipwracks.
Naviculaire, Os naviculaire, the second bone of the instep (so called, because
fashioned like a boat.) Navigage, navigation; also a Navy. Naule, nauleage, for
naulage, fraught, or fare. Barques de nauleage, wasters, or passage-barks.
Navre, wounded, hurt. Navrer, to wound, to hurt. Navreur, a wounder, a hurter.
Navreur de gens, a cheating shifter, one that cousens all he deals with.
Navrure, a wound, or hurt. Nauseatif, loathsome, or apt to make one spue.
Nausee, an offer, or disposition to vomit; also a loathing or abhorring of
meats, etc. Nausiclete, the master, or owner of a ship. Naut, a gutter. Nautil,
Nautile, the shelly Pourcountrel, made somewhat like a round and open boat,
and, swimming ever (except in time of danger) with her belly, or the inside of
her shell, upwards. Nautonnier, a Mariner. Naux, as festes naux, Christmas holy
days. Nayer, for neyer, to drown. Nayf, for naif, plain, downright. Nazal, the
nose-piece of an Helmet. Nazard, a kind of harsh or jarring wind-instrument.
Nazard, (Adj.) jarring. Nazarde, as nasarde; also a kind of pear. Nazarder, as
nasarder. Naz de capre, Goodman Goats-nose. Naze, a nose. Nazeaux, as naseaux.
Naziller, to root with the nose; also to thrust his nose into every company.
Nazilleux, well-nosed, or having a goodly nose. Neance, a denial; a Traverse in
Law. Neantise, trifling, idleness, baseness, cowardice, unworthiness.
Neant-prix, a very low rate. Neble, a little cloud; a mist, or fog. Nebulon, a
knave, a rascal. Necessitaire, needy; also needful. Necessiter, to necessitate,
or compel. Nectar, (Adj.) Nectarin, of Nectar; sweet as Nectar. Necyomance,
divination by conference with dead bodies raised. Neesle, gros de neesle, a
piece of coin worth about 3 d. sterling. Negatoire, negative. Negocieux, full of
business. Negrier, a certain wild Vine that yields a black grape. Negriez, as
negrier; also the black grapes thereof. Negroeil, as nigroil. Neigeux, full of
snow. Neigre, duskie, swart, blackish. Nele, cockle growing among corn. Nelle,
as neesle. Neller, to varnish, enamel, or glaze with the stuff nelleure.
Nelleure, an enamel, varnish, or glazing; one part whereof is of fine silver,
two of copper, and three of lead; also a varnishing, or enamelling withal.
Nemorale, the wood Tortoise. Nendea, marry no forsooth. Nenuphard, Nenuphar,
the waterlilly, or water-rose. Nepheu, for neveu, Nephew. Nephretique passion,
pain in the reins by gravel, or the stone. Nephritide, the same; also the stone
or gravel settled in the reins. Nephrocartaticon, (or rather) Nephrocatharticon,
physic that purges the reins. Neptunales, Neptunes feasts, or holy days. Nep
union, Neptunois, of the Seas nature, of the Sea. Neraut, the name of a Vine.
Neret, as le sol neret, is about a quarter less than the Tournois, or one part
in six more than half the Parisian. Nerion, the shrub Oleander, or rose-tree.
Nerite, a shellfish and Sea-snail very like the Periwinkle. Nerme, nothing.
Nerprun, Buck-thorn, Way-thorn. Nerquois, as Narquois. Nerte, the Mirtle-shrub.
Oyseau de nerte, the Mirtle-thrush. Nerver, to tie with sinews. Nerveures,
strong or sinewy bands; bolt-ropes; welts; carved streaks in wood or stone.
Nerveusement, strongly, stiftly. Nervu, for nerveux, nervous, sinewy. Nesple, a
medlar. Nesplier, a medlar-tree. Nesquin, a base fellow. Nessum, Nessun, no
body. Netieures, as nettieures. Netre-dene, for notre Dame, our Lady. Nettelet,
pretty, and neat, smug, smirk. Nettier, for netteyer, to cleanse. Nettieures,
the sweepings of a house, any cleansings. Nettissoir, a Comb-brush. Nettoyable,
sit, or apt to be cleansed. Nettoyeures, as nettieures. Neuchu, knotty. Neve, a
mole, or freckle on the body. Neuement, simply, absolutely; immediately,
forthwith. Neusain, of nine, for nine days. Neusaine, for neuvaine, a ninth, or
the number of nine. Neusiesme, for neuvieme, the ninth. Neusiesmement, ninthly.
Neusme, Neume, a sound, song, or cl^^^ of song after an Anthem, or the long
holding of the last note of an Anthem. se Neutralizer, to stand neuter, to take
neither part. Ni, (Subst.) a nay, or denial. Niance, as neance. Niant, a
denier. Niard, faulcon niard, a Nias-fa^lcon. Nicete, sloth, laziness,
idleness; simplicity. Nicette, as pucelle nicette, a slow, dull, simple, or
fooli^h girl. Nich^ul, a nest-egg, the egg that is always left in a hens nest.
Nichil-au-dos, a doublet whose back is of courser stuff than the forepart; any
thing that makes an outward show of goodness or worth which inwardly it wants
or comes short of. Nichilodo, the same. Nicotiane, Tobacco. Nideur, the stench,
or fulsome savor of things broiled or burnt. Nidoreux, Nidorulent, smelling,
or savouring of broiled or burnt things; also fulsome as such things are.
Nieble, as nielle. Nieds, as niais in the N. D. Niee de poussins, a brood of
Chickens. Nielle, blasted. Niement, a denying, or gainsaying. Niespe, an
Aspen-tree. Nieu, for nid, a nest. Oeuf nieu, a nest-egg. Nieur, a denier.
Nieuses, sweepings. Niez, Niezer, as niais, niaiser in the N. D. Niezere,
silliness, simplicity. Nigauder, Nigauderies, as niger, nigeries. Nigelle,
nigella, Bishops-root. Niger, to trifle, to play the fop. Nigeries, sopperies,
fooleries, trifles. Nigeur, a sop, or trifler. Nigeuse, a fond, or idle wench.
Nigroil, the Sea-bream. Nigromance, Nigromancien, as Negromance, Negromancien
in the N. D. Nihil, as mettre nihil en, to disannul, to annihilate. Nihil-gris,
a dust, or foot, which mounting up with the smoke of Furnaces wherein copper,
etc. is melted, sticks to the roof of the house. Nihilite, nullity, the being
nothing, or of no value. Nille, the turning peg of a Vielle; also the ware-band
of a Millstone. Nimbot, a dwarf, a dandipra^, or little skip-^ack. Nipheset, a
man's ya^a. Niqueter, to ^irde fault. Ni^i, as ^^u^^ peine de Nisi, under the
pain of curse or excommunication. Nissole, a whit^h Dog-fi h. Nitouche, as
fair de la saint nitouche, to play the hypocrite, or make an innocent show;
to seem not to care for a most affected thing. Nitreux, of niter, full of
niter, salt or bracki h as niter. Nitriere, the pl^^ wherein niter is fr^^d or
gotten. Nitrosite, the saltness, or brack^shness of niter. Niveter, to be idle
or lazy; to be sidling here and there to no purpose. Nocher, a Pilot, or
St^^rs-man. Nodeux, knotty. Nodofite, knottiness. Noe, as Noue. Noer, to
s^ri^^; to gird, or jert forward in swimming. Noeus, for neuf, new. Noialliere,
that part of an Orchard wherein the Kernels or Stones of several Fruits are set
or sowed for increase. Noif, Snow. Noir-beau, a kind of dog. Noir^^et, Noiret,
blackish, duskish, dun. Noirete, for noirceur, blackness. Noireton, a little
black. Noirettes, blackish clifts; also small Walnut trees. Noir-mordant, the
name of a great and very venomous Spider. Noirte, for noirceur, blackness.
Noir-ver, an apple, or pear, that is not perfectly ripe. Noise, a quarrel,
strife, or variance. Noiselle, for noisette, a small nut, or hasel nut. Noiser,
to scold, squabble, wrangle, or quarrel. Noiseux, Noisif, contentions,
quarrelsome. Noisille, a small nut. C^sser la noisille, to cog a dye. Nois
ller, for noiseller, a small-nut-tree. Noisillier, (Adj) full of, or stored
with s^^ll^n ^s. Noisill^^, a hasel nut, a small nut. Nois^llous des darts,
little dates^o^^s. Noleage, Nolle, the fr^ught paid for (...), the s^r^ due for
pass^^ (...). Nombra^^^, (...). Nombr^^, a (...). Nom^rement, a telling, or
reckoning. Nombres, for No^b^e, the numbles of t^^^g. Nombreur, a (...), or
reckones. Nombriller, (Adj) of, or belonging to the navel. Nombrillet, a small
navel. Nommee, a list. Nommeur, a namer; also a denominator; the figure that is
under the line in an Arithmetical fraction. Nomothesie, the making, publishing,
or proclaiming of a Law. Nompair, an odd number. Nompareillement, excellently.
Non, as un non de la test, a nod that imports a denial. Nonain, a Nun.
Nonante, ninety. Nonantiesme, ninetieth. Noncer, to tell, or declare; to show
or signify. Nonceur, a teller, a reporter, a shewer, or signifier.
Nonchalamment, Nonchalemment, heedlesly, carelessly. Nonchalance, Nonchalence,
heedlesness, carelessness. Nonchalant, Nonchalent, heedless, or careless.
Nonchaloir, to neglect, or be careless of. Nonchalu, neglected, not cared for.
Nonciateur, as nonceur. Nonciation, a report, relation, or message. None, the
fourth quarter, or ninth hour of the day; happening in Summer about four in the
afternoon, in Winter about two. Nonnain, a Nun. Nonnie, not a whit.
Nonpourtant, nevertheless. Non-prix, an undervalue, a low price. Non-valeur, a
disability, or deficiency; a defect in worth, or want in value. Non-valloir,
the same. Nopcage, Marriage, Wedlock; also a marrying. Droict de nopcages, the sea d ie to Churchmen upon Marriages. Nopeier, nuptial, of a wedding.
Nopeierement, by way of Marriage. Nopsage, as nopcage. Nore, the Wise of a Son,
a daughter-in law. Norrecquier, a chief Shepherd or H^r^sman, that oversees
diverse men's Cattle. Norroest, for Nord-ouest, Northw^^^. Nosocome, a Hospital
for the diseased. Nossieurs, my Masters. Nostradame, a Liar, an Impostor. Not,
a Southern wind. Notairial, drawn by, (or passed before) a Notary; belonging to
the office of a Notary. Notamment, namely, especially, chiefly. Notariacon, the
trick or jert of a Notaries pen, which makes a letter serve for a syllable or
words, as etc. for and catera. Nothe, bastard, adulterous, counterfeit. Notice,
notice, knowledge. Notification, a notification, information, signification.
Notte, for note, a note. Nou, a knot; also the knob, or bunch of the throat; a
vessel of stone like a font wherein pots and glasses are set to cool in water.
Nou, a nou, swimming, or by swimming. Nouageux, Nouailleux, knotty, knobby.
Nouaine, as neufaine. Novale, a Vine lately planted; a ground newly broken, or
plowed up; land that is made arable. Novalite, innovation; or a renewing.
Novalitez, novelty's, new things. Novation, as novalite. Noue, a little low
meadow lying near the water and apt to be overflowed; also a gutter between two
tiled roofs. Nouel, for noel, Christmas; also a Christmass-Carol, or Song made
to the honor of Christ; also a voice of acclamation or congratulation used by
people welcomeing such as are gracious with them. Nouel nouvelet, the burden of
a Christmass-carol. Novenaire, a ninth, or the number of nine. Novenaire,
(Adj.) the ninth, also nine. Noverce, a stepmother. Nouet, a little knot; also
a little linen bag, or poke hard tied up. Noueure, a making into a knot.
Noueuse, centinody, knotgrass. Novimestre, of nine months, or at nine months
end. Nourrin, the fry, or broad of young fish, reserved for the storing of a
pond, etc. Nourissable, nourishable. Nourissement, a nourishing, feeding, or
sustaining; a breeding, or bringing up. Nourrisseur, a nourisher, feeder,
sustainer. Nouvelet, pretty new. Nouvelis, as nouvellis. Nouvellete, for
nouveaute, novelty; also novel disseisin, a new or late interruption or
impeachment of possession. Nouvellis, fallows, ground that lies fallow every
other year; or as novales. Nouzille, a small nut. Noveraie, a Grove, or Orchard
of Walnut-trees. Noynce, the knuckle of a finger. Noysette, Noysettier, see
them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Noz fieux, for mon fills, my Son. Nu,
for nud, naked. Nuager, to cloud, to shadow. Nuageux, cloudy, full of thick
clouds. Nuaux, clouds. Nubile, Marriageable. Nubileux, cloudy, overcast.
Nubilosite, a cloudiness, or overcasting. Nudosite, as nodosite. Nue, for nuee,
a cloud. Nuesse, the extent or compass of feodal or Censuel Seigneury, whereof
other Fiefs or Cens are held immediately. Nugicanoricrepe, an idle singer of
lies, or trifling matters. Nuictal, nightly, by night, of the night.
Nuictamment by night, in the night; or every night. Nuictegal, the equinoctial.
Nuicteux, nightly, dark. Nuir, for nuire, to do hurt. Nuisance, hurt,
annoyance, damage. Nuisant, Nuisif, for nuisible, noxious, hurtful.
Nuitamment, as nuictamment. Nulluy, Nully, as Null in the N. D. Numerable, that
may be numbered. Numereux, for nombreux, numerous. Numero, the number that is set
on every billet in a Lottery. Il entend le numero, he is fully acquainted with
the matter. Numerosite, a great number of. Numme, a little Silver coin among
the ancient Romans, worth about three half pence sterling. Numulaire,
money-wort, two-penny grass. Nuncupative, nuncupative. Testament Nuncupatif, a
Will Nuncupative, a Will not written, but declared in Words before sufficient
Witnesses (now abrogated.) Nundination, a trafficking in Fairs and Markets.
Nutritif, nourishing. Nuyct, for nuit, night. Nyaie, an airy, or nest full of.
Nycete, as nicete. Nyche, for niche, a nice. Nyctalope, a night-wandring beast;
also a certain herb that shines and is seen afar off in the night. Nymphal, of,
or belonging to a Nymph. Nymphee, the water-lilly, or waterrose. Nymphette, a
little Nymph. Nympheux, full of Nymphs.
O.
OBaine, as Aubaine in the N. D. Obedianciers, four Church Officers, viz. Dean,
Archdeacon, Almoner, and Sexton. Obediemment, obediently. Obedience,
obedience. Obedient, obedient. Obeine, as Aubaine in the N. D. Obeissamment,
obediently. Obel, the white poplar-tree. Obelon, a sallad of sodden hopbuds.
Obere, indebted. Obercau, a hobby-hawk; also a little proud squal. Oberon, the
hand-vice or tool wherewith a Locksmith holds a key as he files it. Obesite,
fatness. Obfusquer, for offusquer, to ossuscate, darken, or make dim. Obice, a
let, or hindrance. Obicer, as objicer. Objicer, to object, or lay against; to
upbraid, or twit in the teeth with. Obit, a burial, or funeral. Objurgateur, a
chider, rebuker, or reprover. Objurgation, an objurgation, or reproof.
Objurgatoire, objurgatory, chiding, rebuking. Objurguer, to chide, reprove, or
rebuke. Oblade, a kind of Sea-ruff, or Sea-pearch. Oblectation, delight.
Oblecter, to rejoice. Obliage, Droict d'Obliage, a fine paid in some places by
Tenants, who have not paid their rents, or performed their yearly duties on
their usual days. Obliaige, as Obliage. Obligatoire, obligatory, binding.
Oblitere, obliterated, abolished. Oblivieux, forgetful; also causing
forgetfulness. Oblivion, oblivion, forgetfulness. Oblong, oblong, somewhat
long. Obnubiler, to make cloudy, or dark. Obnunciation, a forbidding of any
thing upon a sore-knowledge, conjecture, or likelihood, of the ill success
thereof. Obombration, an obumbration, or shadowing. Obombrer, to obumbrate, or
shadow. Obre, lung-wort, lions claw. Obreptice, stolen, falsely come by.
Obreption, the getting of a thing by dissimulation or private consenage.
Obreptissement, by stealth. Obrize, Or obrize, gold perfectly sined or tried.
Obrophore, a carrier of light. Obrue, overwhelmed, opppressed. Obsequieux,
obsequious, officious, dutiful. Observance, observance, duty, respect, or
regard; an observation; a law, discipline, or ordinance; fashion, use, custom.
Observantins, Freres de l'Observance, an Order of gray Franciscan Friars.
Obsesseur, a besieger. Obsister, to withstand, or resist; to gainsay, impeach,
let, or stop. Obstaclement, a letting, hindering, or impeaching; also a stoping
or shutting up. Obstacler, to let, hinder, impeach; to stop, or shut up.
Obstant, withstanding. Obstaque, hindered. Obtemperation, obedience. Obtempere,
obeyed. Obtemperer, to obey. Obtenebrer, to obscure, or darken. Obtenement, an
obtaining, or attaining unto. Obtenue, a purchase, or a thing obtained.
Obtester, to object, conjure, humbly or heartily to beseech; also to call to
witness, or call upon for succor. Obtrectateur, a detractor, backbiter, or
standerer. Obtrectation, detraction, backbiting, slandering. Obtundre, to beat,
strike, or thump; to blunt, or make dull; to inculcate, or repeat often; to
weary, or they with words. Obturateur, a stopper, or shutter up. Obturation, a
stopping, or shutting up. Obturber, to disturb, to trouble. Obtus, blunt,
edgeless; weakened, without spirit. Obtusement, bluntly, dully. Obvention, a
meeting with, a coming against; happening, or chancing unto. Obvention
testamentaire, a Legacy bestowed by chance, or where it was not looked for.
Obumbre, overshadowed. Obumbrer, to overshadow. Ocaigne, Ocaine, Dogs-leather,
or a dogs skin well dressed. Occasionnellement, occasionally. Occasionner, to
occasion. Occiant, West. Occiant, (Adj.) killing, staying. Occipital, belonging
to the noddle, or hinder part of the head. Occire, to kill, to stay. Occis,
killed, or slain. Occision, a killing, or slaying. Occultateur, a concealer, or
hider. Occultation, a concealing, or hiding. Occulte, concealed, hidden.
Occulter, to conceal, to hide. Occupateur, the occupier, possessor, holder,
injoyer of a thing which he has seized. Occurrent, an occurrent, or
occurrence. Occurrent, (Adj.) accidental, occurring, or coming in the way.
Occurrer, to occur, or offer it self; to happen, or fall out on a sudden.
Oceanique, of, or belonging to the Ocean; residing, or living in the Main.
Oci^ux, idle, that has little to do. Ocrisse, a scold, or shrew. Octaedre, a
body, or figure of eight faces. Octante, eighty, fourscore. Octantiesme,
eightieth. Octenaire, an eighth, the number or a proportion of eight.
Octimestre, of eight months. Octonaire, eight, of eight. Octostique, a staff,
or stanze of eight Verses. Octosyllabe, of eight syllables. Octroy, Octroye,
Octroyer. See Ottroi, etc. in the N. D. Octuple, eight times doubled, sixteen.
Oculairement, perspicuously, evidently. Ocule, quick-sighted; circumsp^^. Ode,
a way; also Diers Woad; so a poetical Ode, or Song. Odelette, Odette, a small,
or she Ode. Odoration, as odorement. Odore, smelt, scented. Odorement, a
smelling, or scenting. Odorer, to smell, or scent. Odorifique, odoriferous. Oe,
the voice wherewith Carters use to stop their horses. Oeconomat, Stewardship,
(but especially of a Church-living.) Oedemateux, full of (or subject unto) a
stegmatick and painless swelling. Oedeme, a painless, waterish, and stegmatick
swelling. Oedipodique, as jambe Oedipodique, a lame, or gouty leg. Oeilladette,
a pretty wink. Oeilladier, belonging to the eye, or look; also eying often
affectionately or wantonly. Oeillage de vin, the filling up of leakie
Wine-vessels. Oeillarder, to cast amorous looks. Oeille, full of eyes, like a
Peacocks tail; also filled up as a leaking vessel. Oeiller les vins, to fill up
Wine-vessels which have leaked. Ocill^res, as bride a oeilleres, a bridle with
eye-flaps for a Fore-horse. Oeilleton, a Pink, or small Gilli-flower; also a
little bud. Oeiller, (Adj.) of, or belonging to an eye. Oeillieres, the
eye-teeth, or tushes. Oesipe, the filth and sweaty greasiness of wool growing
on the flank and shoulders of a sheep. Oeson, the weason, or Throat-pipe. Oest,
the East Wind, or Coast. Oestre Junonique, a gad-bee, or dun fly. Oeuf molette,
an Omelet, or Pancake of eggs. Oeuvance, Oeuve, the row, or spawn of a fi^h.
Offendre, to offend, or displease. Offenfement, an offending, or displeasing.
Offensible, offensive. Off^ux, ^^ppy, full of lumps or gobbe^s. Offici^ux,
officious, ready to serve ^n^. Officine, a shop, or work house. Offraye, an
Osprey. ^^^cation, ^su^ ^tion, a dimming, (...). (...) ^harp taste-plea^ (...)
O^^^^^ ^^gress, or Gun-bullet in (...). O^^e, crastness, indisposition. Ohie,
craste, indisposed. Ohier, to make sickly, or craste. Oignement, an anointing;
an ointment. Oignoncettes, Chives, Rush-onions. Oignonnerie, for oignoniere, a
plot, or garden of onions. Oignonnet, the Onion-apple, or pear. Oignonnette, a
wild onion. Oillet, as oeillet in the N. D. Oince, a hawks pounce; a hook; a
hand, or fist; an Ounce, or Linx. Oinct, for oing, hog's grease. Oingtereule,
Sicklewort, Carpenters herb. Oingture, as Oignement. Oinse, as oince. Oisel,
for oiseau, a bird. Oiseler, to fall a birding, or fly at birds, like an
ill-made hawk. Oiselerie, Oiseliere, a fowling, or bird-hunting; also a cage
for birds, a coop for fowl. Oisivement, idly. Oistre, for huitre, an oist^r.
Oistriere, as huistriere. Oleagineux, oily, full of oil; also of an Olive, or
Olive Tree. Oleaginite, oyliness, or an oily substance. Oleastre, a wild
olive tree. Olecrane, the end or tip of the elbow; also the elbow it self.
Oleeux, oily, full of oil. Oliban, Frankincense in drops. Oliette, poppy,
chesbols. Oligophore, Vin oligophore, weak, or small wine, such as can bear but
little water. Olivaire, of an olive, like an olive. Olivot, a great olive.
Olle, a seething pot. Ollonnes, as aulonnes. Olmeau, a young, or little elm.
Olometre, an Instrument wherewith all kind of dimensions are measured. Olonne,
canvas for the sail of a ship; also the sail it self. Olphe, the Mat-rush, or
Mat-weed. Omaille, great cattle. Omase, the thick and fatty part of a Bullocks
paunch; a fat tripe, or chitterling. Ombilic, as Umbilic. Ombilical, as
Umbilical. Ombrageusement, obscurely, darkly; also jealously, skittishly.
Ombraire, an umbrello, or shadow. Ombreux, shading, full of shade. Ombriere, an
Vmbrello. Ombroyer, to shadow. Omioteleftes, alike-sounding clauses. Omitton, a
furred Ornament worn by Canons. Omniforme, of all shapes. Omnigene, of all
kinds; also most kind. Omnimode, of every way; also infinite in means.
Omnipotence, omnipotency. Omnipotent, omnipotent. Omoplates, the
shoulder-blades. Omphacin, huyle omphacin, oil made of green or unripe olives.
Omusse, as omitton. Onagrier, of a wild ass. Le pas onagrier, a very swift
pace. On^, ever, at any time; also never. Oncial, of, or belonging to an ounce,
weighing as much as an ounce. Lettres onciales, huge Letters. Oncles, for
ongles, nails. Oncques, never. Onctuosite, oyliness. And, d'ond, whence,
whereby. Onde, waved; surging, waving; also streaked, wrought, or cut like
waves. Ondee, a great and sudden fall of rain; a power of rain. Ondele, as
onde. Ondeler, to run, to pour down by waves; or as onder. Ondelette, a little
wave. Onder, to wave; to make plaits, or streaks like waves; to work, or
flourish with waves. Ondette, as ondelette. Ondoyement, a surging, or waving;
also a dangling, or a gentle moving in the wind. Oneraire, of burden. Nefs
oneraires, ships of burden. Onereux, onerous, burdensome, heavy. Onglade, a
scratch with the nails. Ongle, nailed; also scratched, or marked with a nail.
Ongler, to scratch, or mark with a nail. Onglet, a little nail. Onguentaire,
of, or belonging to ointments. Gland onguentaire, the aromatical nut or fruit
whereof the Perfumers oil of Benne is made. Onicocrite, a judger of dreams.
Onicocritique, judging of dreams. Oniropole, an expounder of dreams. Onitide,
wild (or grove) marjoram. Onocrotal, a swan-like bird that brays like an ass;
or as Gout-treuse. Onogire, loose-strife, willow-herb. Onomantie, divination by
names; also the skill of repeating many names by the art of memory.
Onomatopose, the feigning of a name, or a word made by a certain sound.
Onothomantie, divination by a man's name. Onques, never. Onques-mais, never, at
no time. Onques-puis, never after, at no time after. Onse des doigts, the
fingers ends under the nails. Onyche, the gem called an Onyx. Onymantie,
divination by oil and wax. Onzain, a small coin worth 11 d. Tourn. Opacite,
obscurity, gloominess. Ophiase, a sore, which fretting the skin of childrens
heads, makes their hair fall off in diverse places. Ophioctene, a kind of the
many-legged Scolopendra, and a mortal enemy to Serpents. Ophiogene, the wild
Parship, or Harts-fodder. Ophite, a kind of marble spotted like a Serpent.
Ophraye, for Orfraye, an Osprey. Ophthalmiste, the uttermost skin of whose eye
is inflamed. Opineur, an Opiner, one that delivers his opinion. Opiniastrie,
Opiniastrise, obstinacy, stubbornness. Opistographes, papers written upon on
both sides. Opobalsame, Opobasme, opobalsamum, the gum or liquor which issues
from the wounded Balsam-tree. Opocalpase, a kind of poison wherewith myrrh is
too often sophisticated. Oportet, it ought, it must. Opportunement,
opportunely, seasonably. Opportunite, opportunity, seasonableness. Oppress,
oppression. Oppress, oppressed. Oppresser, to oppress. Opprobrier, to shame,
to rebuke, to check; to cast in the dish, or twit in the teeth. Oppugnateur, an
oppugnator, or assaulter. Oppugnation, oppugnation, assault; open resistance.
Oppugn, oppugned, assaulted; openly resisted. Oppugner, to oppugn, or
assault; openly to resist. Opter, to choose; also to wish. Opthalmie, for
Ophthalmie in the N. D. Option, option, election, choice; also a wish, or
desire. Opulentement, for opulemment, opulently, richly, abundantly. Opuscule,
a little work, a small Book, or Treatise. Oraculeux, Oracle-like, true as the
Gospel, infallible. Orade, the Guilt-head (a Seafish.) Orager, a tempest to
rise. Oraprimes, now at length. Oration, an Oration. Orb, (Adj.) blind,
sightless; also dark, without light. Coup orb, a dry blow, a blow that neither
makes overture nor fetches blood. Orbiculaire, orbicular, circular, round.
Orbiculairement, orbicularly, circularly, globe-like. Orbiere, a
blinding-board, or head-board, hung before the eyes of an unruly beast.
Orbitaire, belonging, or like unto the Orbite. Orbite, Orphanism, lack of
Parents; also want of Children; any lack, or want. Orbite, the hole, or seat of
the eye. L'orbite d'une poulie, the mortaise wherein the shiver of a pully
runs. Orchades, great ships; also a kind of great fishes, mortal enemies to
Whales. Orchal, Wire. Orche, a orche, on the left hand. Orchenie, a
transposing. Orches, as Orchades. Orchestre, the Senators or Noblemens places
in a Theater, between the stage and common seats; also the stage it self. Ord,
filthy, nasty, foul. Ordelot, sullied, stained. Ordement, filthily, nastily,
dirtily. Ordi, as Ourdi in the N. D. Ordinateur, as Ordonnateur in the N. D.
Ordinatif, ordering. Ordir, to defile, or as Ourdir in the N. D. Ordisseure, a
defiling; or as Ourdissure in the N. D. Ordon, a sloven, a nasty fellow; also
the rank or row which a Reaper has undertaken to go on in. Ordonnement,
orderly, fitly. Ordonneur, an ordainer, appointer, or commander; also an
orderer, or disposer of things. Ordonques, seeing then. Ordoyer, to defile.
Order de vay, the name of a very small apple. Ore, prayed unto, besought,
implored. Le Jeudy and Vendredy orez, Holy-thursday, Good Friday. Oreiller, (a
Verb) to hearken, to listen. Oreillere, an Earwig. Oreillet, an Ear-ring; also
the ear, piece of an Helmet, etc. the flap or piece that covers the ear.
Oreillette, a little ear; also an earring, or small toy to hang at the ear.
Oreilleur, a hearkener, or listener. Oreilleure, an Ear-ring. Oreillier, for
oreiller, a Pillow. Orendroit, now, about this time. Orer, to pray. Ores, now,
at this time. Orfanite, Orphanism, the state of an Orphan. Orfante, as
Orfanite; also want of Children. Orfaverise, Orfavrise, as Orfevrise in the N.
D. Orfavrerie, for Orsevrerie, the Goldsmiths trade. Orfenin, for Orphelin, an
Orphan. Orfevre, for orfevrise, wrought with Goldsmiths work. Orfevresse, a
Goldsmiths wife, a Woman-goldsmith. Orfevreux, furnished with, or working
Goldsmiths work; also full of Goldsmiths. Orfevrie, for Orfevrerie, the
Goldsmiths trade. Orfres, buds. Organique, organical, instrumental, used as a
means. Organiste, (Adj.) as organique. Orgasme, an extreme fit of anger. Orgee,
Barley-greel. Orgeol, for orgelet, a long wart resembling a barley-corn, and
growing on the edge or corner of an Eyelid. Orgie, a fathom. Orgies, the
sacrifice of Bacchus. Orgoose, as Licisque orgoose, a salt bitch. Orguilleux,
as orgeol. Orgueilli, grown proud, or stately. s'Orgueillir, to grow proud, or
stately. Oribus, as Compere d'oribus, a superficial, or hollow-hearted friend.
Pouldre d'oribus, powder of projection, or of the Philosophers stone; any
cousening, or juggling powder. Orichal, for archal, Wyre. Oriere, as oree.
Oriflam, Oriflambe, as Oriflame in the N. D. Oriflant, an Elephant. Orige, the
Orix, a fierce and cruel wild beast. Originalement, Originellement,
originally. -Orillier, for oreiller, a pillow, Orillons, as oreillons in the N.
D. Orin, golden, of gold. Orine, for origin, origin. Oriol, as oriot. Orion,
for horion, a great blow upon ones head or neck. Oriot, a highaw, or witwall.
Oripeau, base (leaf, or false) gold, Painters gold, such gold as is laid on
hangings of leather, etc. Oripilation, as horripilation. Orizon, for horizon,
the Horizon. Orlement, a hemming, or selvedging. Orlet, a little hem, or
selvedge. Ormaire, for armoire, a Cupboard. Ormeteau, for ormeau, a little, or
young Elm-tree. Orne, the furrow made by a Plough, the deep rut or track made
by a Cart-wheel in the ground. Il conduisit sourdement cette orne, he carried
this business very closely. Ornement, neatly, finely. Orneomantie, divination
by the moving of birds. Ornier, full of ruts, worn by many tracts.
Ornithogalon, star of Bethlehem, (an herb.) Oroer, for oratoire, an Oratory.
Orologeur, for horloger, a Clock (or Watch) maker. Oroscope, for horoscope,
ones Nativity. Orpeau, as oripeau, or as Orpel, silver and by-gold, a kind of
leaf-tin, used in the silvering over of trifles for children. Orphanite, as
Orfanite. Orphe, a kind of dainty Sea-ruff, or Sea-pearch. Orphee, as Orphie.
Orphelinage, the state of an Orphan. Orphie, the Hornbeck, or Gar-fish.
Orpigment, for orpiment, orpiment. Orpimenter, to mingle, or color with
orpiment. Orprimes, now at length. Orque, as Ourque in the N. D. Orthogoine,
Orthogonal, right-cornered. Orthopnoique, one whose light-pipes are so
obstructed that he cannot breath but when he holds his neck upright. Ortie,
nettled, pricked, or stung with nettles. Ortier, to nettle, to prick or sting
with nettles. Ortieur, a nettler. Ortigue, the Sea-nettle. Ortrail, a Privy.
Orval, an inconveniency; also as Orvale, the herb Clary. Orvaris, for hourvari,
the doubtings of a pursued Deer. Orver, Orvier, a Snake. Oscines, singing
birds; those especially which presage ought by their singing. Oscitation, a
gaping, or yawning; idleness, or negligence. Oseraye, a grove, or ground of
Osiers. Osereux, full of, made with Osiers. Oseur, a hater, loather, detester.
Osiereux, as osereux. Osmonde, osmund. Ossailler, to set, or work with bone.
Ossaillerie, bone-work; bone-stuff; also a working with bone. Ossas, a great
thick bone. Osse, bony, made of bone. Ossee, as lossee. Osset, for osselet, a
little bone. Ost, as host. Ostade, the stuff woosted. A demi ostade, cut in
panes, etc. like a Spanish-leather Jerkin. Ostadine, satin of Cypres. Ostage,
for hotage, hostage. Ostager, as hostager. Ostarde, a Bustard. Ostel, as hotel
in the N. D. Ostement, a removing, or taking away. Ostenseur, the index, or
hand of an Astrolabe. Ostension, a showing. Ostentateur, an ostentator, a
bragger. Ostentatrice, a boasting woman. Oste-vent, a porch, or portal
contrived; a piece of cloth hung or set before a door to keep off the wind;
also a Penthouse. Ostiere, a Spittle, or Hospital. Ostize, a rent-hen, etc.
paid or delivered in lieu of a dwelling house. Ostracisme, ten years
banishment, wherewith the Athenian state allayed the immoderate power of their
great men. Ostruce, for autruche, an Ostridge. Otarde, a Bustard Otardeau, a
young Bustard. Otruche, Masterwort, false Pellitory of Spain. Ottelles, Ottels
(in blazon.) Ouaille, a sheep. Ouaine, a sheath. Ouaire, a great leather-bottle
for oil or drink to be kept or carried in. Ouan, a glove; also the last year.
Ouarir, for guerir, to cure. Ovation, a small Triumph granted to a Roman
Commander that had got a bloodless victory. Ouazon, as glazon. Oubier, the sap,
white, or softest part of wood subject to worm-eating. Oublayerie, the making
of wafers, Oublayeur, a Wafer-maker. Oubliages, certain annual rents due unto
some particular Canons of Nostre Dame de Gracay en Berri. Oubliance, oblivion,
forgetfulness. Oubliant, oblivious, forgetful. Oubliette, a dungeon or close
room under ground for heinous Malefactors. Oublieur, a Wafer-maker; also as
oubliant. Oublition, forgetfulness. Ouche, the name of a fertile Vine; a notch;
a spot of ground reserved near to a house, for the sowing of Beans, Pease, or
Hemp in. Oudre, as ouaire. Oue, for oie, a goose. Oueille, a sheep. Ouelle, the
River-smelt. Ovent, a penthouse. Over, to lay an egg. Ouere, as ouaire.
Ouidire, a report, or hearsay. Ouiltre, as ouaire. Ouir, for ouie, the sense
of hearing. Ouldre, as ouaire; also the Ork (a Sea Monster, and the Whales
natural enemy.) Oule, a surge, or great wave of the Sea; also a great
Earthen-pot. Oulme, for orme, an Elm. Oulot, a kind of brass, or copper, fit
to make Ordnance of. Oulque, a Hulk. Oultragement, an outraging, wronging,
abusing. Oultrageur, an outrager, wronger, abuser. Oultrebord, exceedingly,
beyond the bounds of. Oultrecouler, to surround, or overflow. Oultrecuidamment,
over-weeningly, or presumptuously. Oultrecuidance, an overweening,
presumption, pride, arrogance. Oultrecuide, overweening, presumptuous,
self-conceited. s'Oultrecuider, to over-ween, to presume, or to think too well
of himself. Oultreement, through and through; also extremely, exceedingly,
beyond all measure. Oultrefendre, to cleave asunder. Oultrefendu, cloven
asunder. s'Oultremarcher, to overreach in pacing. Oultre-naturel,
supernatural, beyond nature. Oultrepasse, an excess, or transgression; an
eminency, or eminent thing; a surpassing. L'oultre pass des Advocats, the best
or most eminent Lawyer. Oultrepassement, a surpassing, exceeding, excelling; an
eminency; overpassing, outgoing; also a proceeding, or marching forward.
Oultreperce, pierced, thrust, or struck through. Oultrepercer, to pierce,
thrust, or strike through. Oultreplus, a surplusage, or overplus. Oultreplus,
(Adv.) furthermore, moreover. Oultrepreux, extremely valiant. Oultrer, to
pierce, thrust, or strike through; to run through and through. Oultrer une
journee, to fight from morning till night, or to fight a battle out. Ourague,
the channel, or conduit, whereby the urine of an unborn Infant has passage.
Ourche, the game at Tables called Lurch. Ourle, for orle, hemmed. Ourler,
Ourreler, to hem. Ourlet, a hem. Oursal, of, or belonging to a Bear. Ourse, as
Dehouse. Ourseau, Ourselet, Ourset, a little, or a young Bear. Oursette, a
young or little Shebear. Oursillon, a very little Bear. Oursin, the Sea-bear, a
kind of Tunny. Oursin, (Adj.) bear-like, of or belonging unto bears. Oursonne,
as Oursette. Ousclage, that which a contracted man gives to his affianced or
future wife. Ousteron, Outeron, a Reaper, or Mower; a Hind, or Hireling, only
for the Harvest-time or work. Outillemens, movables, houshold-furniture or
implements. Outin, as Autin. Outre, (Subst.) the Ork; (a Seafish) also a
Borrachoe; or as ouaire. Outre, (Adj.) over-ripe. Ouvre, wrought, Ouvree, the
eighth part of a Burgundian Journau. Ouvrer, to work, do, act, or endeavor. Il
ouvre sagement ^n cet affair, he carries himself discreetly in this business.
Le temps ouvre, time works (or wears) out every thing. Ouvreur, an opener.
Ouvroir, a Workhouse, or shop to work in. Ouystre, for huitre, an oyster.
Oxicrat, as oxycrat. Oxiderrique, sharpening, or clearing the fight.
Oxirrhodin, a liquid medicine of vinegar and Rose Water, applied to the heads
of frentick people. Oxisacre, syrup made of vinegar and sugar. Oxugone, sharp,
angled. Oxycedre, the crimson, or prickly Cedar. Oxycrat, a potion of vinegar
mingled with water. Oyard, a gander. Oye, grand'oye, great store. Oyon, a green
(or young) goose. Oyre, an oyl-budget. Oyseille, for oseille, sorrel. Oyzeau,
for oiseau, a bird. Oyzelerie, as Oyselerie. Oz, for os, a bone. Ozane, the
name of an apple. Ozene, a stinking sore, or Ulcer in the Nose; also a kind of
rank smelling Percountrel fish, that feeds on oysters, and is fed on by
lampreys. Ozer, for oser, to dare. Ozeraye, a Grove of oziers. Osereux, full of
oziers; also of ozier, of wicker. Ozier, for osier, the ozier, or water-willow
tree. Oziere, a withy twig. Ozme, a kind of sink, or pipe, serving to convey
away filth. Ozymel, as Oximel in the N. D.
P.
PAccages, pastures, or pasturegrounds. Pace, as mettre en pace, to bury.
Pache, a bargain, or contrall. Pacifiement, an appeasing, or pacifying.
Pacifiquer, a peacemaker. Pacifiquement, peaceably, quietly. Pacquette,
honey-wort. Pact, for pacte, a bargain or contract. Pactieux, covenanting,
contracting. Pactionne, covenanted, bargained. Pactioner, to covenant, to
bargain. Padane, a kind of open bit which gives much liberty to the tongue of a
horse. Padoen, Padoence, Padouen, a common Pasture. Padouir les uns sur les
autres, Neighbors to lead their beasts each into others Pastures, or to common
one upon the other. Paduentage, Common of pasture in one or diverse Parishes.
Paelleree, a shovel full. Paellette, a little shovel. Paellier, the landing
place of a halfpace stair, every broad step thereof. Paellonet, a small pan, or
skillet. Pageat, Pageau, Paget, Pageot, a little ruddy sea-bream. Pagerot, a
little Page. Pagnon, the pinion of a Clock, the nut in whose notches the teeth
of the wheels do run. Pagnotte, one that has neither wit nor courage. Pagre, a
kind of Sea-bream. Pagrure, Pagul, Pagure, a Grampel, Grit, or Pungar.
Painisme, Paganism. Paignon, a little loaf of bread. Paileree, as Paelleree.
Paillace, for Paillasse, a straw-bed. Paillarde, a Whore. Paille, a stack of
straw; also a straw-colour; also a Bishops Pall. Droict du paillee, the
Privilege of the Pall, or of wearing a Pall, due only to some Bishops.
Paille-maille, as palemaille. Pailles, spangles; also the flakes or sparkles
that fly from hammered and red-hot iron. Pailleux, strawy, chaffy; also full of
flaws. Paillisson, a small frying pan. Pailliz, a heap of straw, or of chaff.
Paillote, as terre paillotee, earth mingled with chaff or straw. Paincture, for
peinture, painting. Paindre, for peindre, to paint. Paineux, full of bread.
Paintre, for Peintre, a Painter. Paisiblete, peaceableness, quietness. Paissage
de bestes, the pasturing, or feeding of Cattle. Paisse solitaire, a
mountain-bird like a Throstle or Owzel. Paissemment, as paissage. Paissiere, a
bank or causey held up, or in, by stakes. Paisson, the herbage of Woods or
Forests; the feeding for Cattle therein. Paissonner, to feed, or brouze in
Woods, etc. Paissu, fed on, grazed, eaten by Cattle. Pal, a stake, or pole;
also a putting to death by a stake thrust longways through the body; a way much
used amongst the Turks. Palabre, as parole in the N. D. Palabreur, a pratler,
an idle talker. Paladin, a Knight of the round table. Il sait bied de son
Paladin, he swaggers very much. Palalalan, the sound of the French March.
Palamide, a young Tuny; also the Bonito fish. Palamie, the bloody rifts; a
disease or impostumation in the roof of a horses mouth. Palatin, as lettres
palatines, such letters as are pronounced by the help of the palate, as, g, t,
r, etc. Palemaille, a Game wherein a round box or bowl is with a mallet struck
through a high arch of iron (standing at either end of an alley one) which he
that can do at the fewest blows, or at the number agreed on, wins. Palene, the
pennant, a rope which helps to hoise up the boat, and all heavy merchandise
aboard a Ship. Paleree, a pail full of. Palerons des espaules, the
shoulderblades. Paleter du chanvre, to bruise hemp with a pestle or beetle.
Pal-fer, an iron-headed shovel, spade, or stake, used by Gardeners. Pali, a
pale, or thick lath; a stack, pole, or pile. Paliatif, cloaking, biding,
coloring. Medecines paliatives, medecines which ease for a while, but heal not
altogether. Paliation, a cloaking, hiding, or coloring. Palicer, as palisser.
Palier, for pailier, to palliate, cloak, or disguise. Palifie, impaled,
defended with a Palissado. Paligenesie, regeneration, or diversity of
generation. Palinotode, diversity of birth. Palis, as Pali. Paliser, to
publish. Palisse, for palissade, a palissado. Palisse, palissadoed, paled
about. Palisser, to enclose with pales. Palisson, a flat iron or shovel to bake
a cake on. Palicure, the shrub called Ram of Lybia, or Christ's thorn.
Pall-allant, a strutting Braggadochio, or as Palalan. Pallamente, part of the
Orelop, or upper deck of a Galley. Pallares, a kind of Indian pulse. Palle, for
pale, a shovel; also as palletoc; also the beazil, or head of a ring. Palle,
for pale, pale. Palle, party par-pale, (in Heraldry.) Pallemail, as palemaille.
Pallement, palely. Paller, for parler, to speak. Pallerons, as palerons.
Palleter, to scuffle, or fight with. Palletie, a scuffling, or fighting.
Palletoc, a long and thick pelt or cassock; a garment like a short cloak with
sleeves. Palletoque, that wears a palletoc. Pallette, for palette, a little
shovel. Palleur, for paleur, paleness. Palliatif, Palliation, as Paliatif,
paliation. Pallier (Subst.) as Palluyer; also the landing place of a half-pac'd
stair. Pallir, for palir, to grow pale. Pallis, as pali. Palisade, for
palissade, a palissado. Pallissement, paleness, or a growing pale. Pallonneau,
as palonneau. Palluyer, an Officer who with a shovel unlades or lades the Salt
which is for the Kings store. Palmaire, belonging to, or being in the palm of
the hand. Palmant, he that bids most rent for a Lease, or money for an
Inheritance which is to be let or sold. Palmee, an out-bidding of all for a
Lease, or an Inheritance. Palmer, to stroke, smooth, or lay down with the palm
of the hand. Palmer les chevaux des Orgueilleux, to abate the huff of the
proud. Palmier, (Adj.) of, or belonging to the Palm Tree; also a bearing a
branch of Palm. Heritage palmier, an Inheritance exposed unto sale. Palmite,
the low or little wild date-tree. Palmule, a date. Palon, the broad end of a
wooden shovel; or as masserotte. Palonneau, a piece of a strong rope doubled,
and having a knot with an eye in the middle of it, whereby it serves to fasten
draught-horses unto the thill of a Cart or Carriage. Palot, as tenir palot a,
to hold tack, or keep even with; also a dunce. Palouade, a kind of Spanish
fish. Palper, to handle gently, to stroke, or touch gingerly; also to sooth, or
flatter. Palpitation, a panting, or often beating. Palpiter, to pant, or throb;
to beat, move, or stir very often. Palte, a soft, and delicate Indian fruit
like a great pear. Palthoc, as palletoc. Paltoquier, as palletoque. Paltret, a
Cleaver. Palu, a fen, or marsh. Paludement, a Coat-armor, or horsemans coat, a
jacket reaching to the knees. Paludeux, as palustre, or full of marshes, fens,
or moors. Palvesate, a Targuet-fence, under which the Soldiers that make
approaches, or are upon entering of a breach, be shrouded. Palumbe, a ring-dove,
stock-dove. Palustre, fenny, marshy, moorish. Paluyer, as palluyer. Pam, for
empan, a span. Pamp, for pampre, a vine-leaf. Pamphage, eat all, devouring all.
Pamphedron, a hornet, or ox-flie. Pampier, of, or belonging to a vineleaf;
also, bearing only leaves. Pampillettes, spangles. Pampre, full of vine-leaves.
Panaillon, as penaillon. Panax, as panais in the N. D. Pancart, a great gut.
Panceron, a great belly, or paunch; the full stuffed belly of a doublet.
Pancerotte, Pancetre, a little paunch. Panchaique, as odeur panchaique, the
smell of Arabian Frankincense. Panchement, for pante, a bending, leaning, or
bowing forward; an inclination. Pancu, as pancart. Pand, as pan in the N. D.
Pandectaire, containing, or belonging to all manner of books; or books that
entreat of all matters. Pane, of bread. Eau panee, a panado. Panegyric, for
Panegyrique, a Panegyric. Paneree, a basket full. Paneron, Panerot, a little
basket. Panes, red pimples, or freckles in the face. Panete, made into bread.
Panets, as Panais in the N. D. Paneux, full of bread. Panice, a sudden and
madding fear. Panicle, a little loaf. Paniere, as panniere. Panifice,
bread-making; also bread. Panifier, to make, or bake into bread. Panil, for
panic, panick. Panilliere, the grine. Paniz, for panic, panick. Pannader, a
horse to prance, curvet, or bound. Pannades, the curvettings, prauncings, or
boundings of lusty horses. Pannoye de soye, plush. Panneau, a young Peacock;
also as paneau in the N. D. Pannicule, a little clowt; also the skin wherein a
Child lies wrapped in the womb. Panniere, as pain de panniere, a great white loaf
yielded by the Tenants of S. Gondon sur Loire, to their Lords yearly, and
besides their Cens. Pannilliere, as panilliere, Pannoyer un baston, to wield,
or toss a stick. Panomphee, of all Nations and Speeches. Panoplique, completely
armed. Panosse, vicille panosse, an old hag. Panouere, a little basket, or
dosser. Panoye, le Jeu de la panoye, a game, or kind of Wrestling. Pans, a kind
of large Imposthumes. Pansard, as pancart. Panser, as penser in the N. D.
Pansotte, a small paunch. Panseron, as Panceron. Pansu, as Pancart. Pantagone,
for pentagone, five-cornered. Pantagrueliste, a good fellow. Pantagruellion,
hemp. Pantais, a difficulty of breathing in hawks, etc. Pantarbe, a certain
black stone which resists fire. Pantarque, as Pancarte in the N. D. Panteine,
a great Net, or Toil, used for the catching of wild beasts. Pantharbe, the name
of an artificial Heaven, devised by one Joachas, an Indian Magician.
Panthelement, a panting, or puffing. Pantheologie, the whole sum of Divinity.
Pantherien, of a Panther, or like a Panther. Panthiere, a great drawing net.
Panthois, for pantois, short-winded. Pantiere, as panthiere. Pantime, a bundle
of raw silk. Pantiser, to breathe very fast. Pantodiables, all, or whole
Devils. Pantoiment, a panting, or often blowing. Pantoiment tourmenter, to vex
one so, as to make him scarce able to draw his breath. Pantoiser, to be
short-winded, or be out of breath. Pantomime, an Actor of many parts in one
play. Pantoufleux, full of, or fit for slippers. Pantoyer, as pantoiser.
Panurge, an old Fox. Pao, for par, by. Paonneau, a young Peacock. se Paonner,
to take a pride in himself. Paonnesse, a Pea-hen. Paonnien, of, or belonging to
a Peacock; peacock-like. Paour, for peur, fear. Paovre, for pauvre, poor.
Paovret, a poor sneak. Paoureusement, fearfully. Paoureux, fearful. Papacite,
Popedom, Popery. Papafigue, a gnat-snapper, or fig-eater. Paparot, pap, or a
poultice. Papechieu, a Lapwing, a black Plover. Papefigue, as papafigue.
Papegau, as Papegay in the N. D. Papelard, a dissembler, a flatterer.
Papelarder, to dissemble. Papelardie, Papelardise, hypocrisy, flattery.
Papeligosse, the Country of Butterflies. Paperasse, rifled, or often tossed
over, as the papers of a Student. Paperasses, old papers. Paperat, a Paper- (or
Note-) book. Papet, as papin. Papetasie, as papetasse; also much fumbled, as a
bundle of written papers. Papetasse, patched, or poorly made up with paper.
Papetasser, to patch, or stop up with paper. Papieter, not to eat heartily, to
dally with his meat. Papifigue, a scorner of the Pope. Papille, the Nipple of a
woman's breast. Papillot, a little Butter-fly; also a Plague Sore. Papillotage,
a spatling; also the twinkling of spangles, etc. Papillote, as papillotte.
Papilloter, to glisten, or to shake like spangles, to set with spangles; to
bespattle. Papillotte, for papillote, a spangle; also thistle-down, or the soft
down blown from the tops of flowers by the wind. Papillottes de boue, spots of
dirt. Il croid que les estoiles sont papillottes, he thinks the Moon is made of
green Cheese. Papilotte, bespangled, or set off with spangles; also bespattled.
Papillottement, a bespangling; also a bespaiting. Papillotter, as papilloter.
Papilloteux, all bespangled. Papimanes, Papists, or doters on the Pope.
Papimanie, Papistry. Papin, pap for children. Papoage, Inheritance by kindred,
or ancient descent. Papoal, as Biens papoaux, an estate coming from an
Ancestor, or by descent. Papon, pap for children. Papoter, as papieter. Pappe,
Thistle-down; also the soft down which grows on the leaves and stalks of some
herbs. Paqueter, for empaqueter, to pack up. Paquette, as pasquette. Parabande,
the rail that runs along on a rank of Ballisters in a Terrace, etc. Parable,
easy to be got, or come by. Parabrin, a gratulation, or welcome. Paraclitique,
that has an ill name. Paradoxique, against common opinion. Parager, a
copartner, or as Parageau in the N. D. Paragon, for parangon, a paragon, or
peerless one; the most complete piece in any kind whatsoever; a pattern, or
touchstone, whereby the goodness of things is tried. Paragonner, to paragon;
to match, or compare with; to try the goodness of a thing by comparing it with
others. Parin, for parrain, a Godfather. Paralellogramme, a long Square.
Paralogizer, to reason captiously, to argue deceitfully. Parangonneux, full of
comparisons. Paranniser, to perpetuate. Parapel, as parapet in the N. D.
Parasangue, as parasange in the N.D. Parasceve, a preparation. Jour parasceve,
Good Friday among Christians, and among Jews any Friday. Paraseline, as
paraselene in the N. D. Parastrates, the conduits or passages whereby the seed
goes from the Kidneys in the act of generation; or two Kernels which grow at
the end of the Bladder, and receive the seed brought unto them by Vasa
deferentia; also stones set to, or about a pillar. Paravant, heretofore.
Parcage, a Park, or Enclosure, a Pound. Parcelle, peece-mealed. Parchage, as
parcage. Parcheminerie, a parchment making; also the street or place wherein
parchment is sold. Parcheminier, a parchment-maker. Parciere, as Terres
baillees a parciere, land set out for part of the crop. Parcion, a Copartners
portion. Parcite, parcity, scantness, frugality. Parcon, as parcion.
Parconnier, for parsonnier, a partner. Parcoule, strained through. Parcouler,
to strain through. Parcours, custom, usage; ancient proceedings in point of
commerce between the Towns or Countries of several Lords. Bourgeois de
parcours, Freemen of the Jurisdiction of Sens in Champagne, who by a bare
challenge, may advow themselves to be also the Kings Freemen. Parcreu, as
parcru. Parcroissant, ripening. Parcroistre, to ripen, or make an end of
growing; to come to its full pitch; also, to grow among. Parcru, full grown,
thoroughly ripe, come to perfection; also grown, or sprung up among.
Pardigoince, the name of a great and delicate plum. Pardil, a dark-spotted gray
color of a horse. Pardonnement, a pardoning. Pardonnigere, a Pardon-bearer,
one that carries and makes sale of the Popes Pardons up and down (...) country.
Pardormir, to sleep soundly; to finish or sleep out his sleep. Pardurable, as
perdurable. Pareade, a certain fiery-coloured, quick-sighted, and wide-mouthed
Serpent, not very venomous. Pareatis, the Conclusion of a peremptory Warrant or
Injunction, like unto our Hereof fail ye not, etc. Parecoup, a ward-blow; or
any thing that serves to put by a blow. Parefrenier, for Palefrenier, a Groom.
Parence, a Livery. or Suit. Parennite, as perenneite. Parensus, an overplus. le
Parensus, the before-named. Parentelle, affinity, consanguinity. Parergue, an
addition, or appendix; any thing that is beside the principal question, point,
or purpose in hand. Paresser, to loiter, to live idly. Paresseusement,
slothfully, lazily. Paret, a wall. Paretoine, a certain fatty Painters white.
Pareure, as parure. Parfaire, to perfect, to finish. Parfaiseur, a perfecter,
or finisher. Parfiler, to spin all. Parfin, as a la parfin, at length, at last.
Parfondeur, for profondeur, depth. se Parforcer, to do his utmost. Parsournir,
to furnish, or make up. Parfumatoire, used in, or for perfumes. Pargoys,
cousteau pargoys, a little child's knife. Parguarir, to cure perfectly.
Parietaux, the name of two bones in the upper end and forepart of the Scull.
Parite, parity, equality. Paritoire, for parietoire, Pellitory of the wall.
Parjurement, for parjure, a perjury, or forswearing. Parlementerie, a parley, a
conference. Parleresse, as langue parleresse, a prattling tongue, a tongue that
never lies. Parlerie, a prattling, Parlier, a Pleader, an Attorney. Parlier,
(Adj.) speaking; of, or belonging unto speech. Parlire, to read over. Parloer,
for parloir, a Parlour. Parloire, a prattling, or idle discourse. Parlouer, a
Parliament, or Assembly of the States; a public Conference. Parlouer aux
Bourgeois, an Assembly, Meeting, or common Council of Citizens. Parmentier, a
Tailor. Parnage, pawnage. Parnombrer, to tell all out, to reckon all over.
Paroccir, to kill outright. Parodelle, a kind of Cheese-cake. Paroice, for
paroisse, a Parish. Paroir, (Subst.) a Farriers paring Knife, or paring Iron.
Paroir, for paroitre, to appear. Parolette, a little word, but a word or two.
Parolle, for parole, a word, or speech. Paron, a dam, an old one that has
young ones. Parronnel, the name of a pear. Parons, for parens, kindred.
Paronychie, Whitlo-grass, or Nail-wort, (a weed.) Paroximique, of, or in the
sit of an ague. Paroxisme, the return, or fit of an ague. Parpaigne, a pillar,
buttress, or supporter of stone-works, serving to bear up a beam, or summer in
a wall. Parpaillon, as parpillon. Parpaing, Parpeine, as parpaigne. Parpillon,
a Shrimp. Parpillottes, spangles. Parpin, a great lump of stone unsquared, or
newly cut out of the Quarry. Parquage, as parcage. Parquoi, therefore,
wherefore. Parrasme, Stone-rosin. Parricider, to murder his own father; also to
commit any heinous or unnatural murder. Parrin, for Parrain, a Godfather.
Parrodelle, as parodelle. Parroquet, for perroquet, a Parrat. Parservir, to
serve thoroughly. Parsimonie, parsimony, or thrift. Parsoy, a parsoy, by
himself; also from him, by his entreaty or means. Part, for naissance, a birth.
Partageable, fit to be divided. Partiaire, in parts, for parts, of parts.
Partiali^^^, to be partial. Participial, of, or belonging to a Participle.
Particip^alement, as a Participle. Partiment, Partissement, a parting, or
dividing; also a departing. Partisseur, a parter, or divider. Partizant,
Part-prenant, a partaker. Partrouble, extremely troubled, molested, or
perplexed. Partroublement, an extreme trouble. Partuer, to kill outright.
Parvenche, for pervenche, the herb Perwinkle. Parvite, smalness, littleness.
Parure, a decking, or trimming; an apparel, a suit. Pascage, a grazing, or
feeding of cattle. Paschal, for pascal, of, or belonging to Easter. Paschier, a
pasture ground. Pascrit, faded, dried, out of season. Paslement, palely,
bleakly. Pasmaison, for pamaison, a fainting fit. Pasqueages, pastures.
Pasquenade, a Parsnip. Pasquerages, Pasqueraiges, pastures. Pasquerette, a
little dairy. Pasquil, and Pasquille, for pasquin, a Pasquil, a Libel clapped
upon a post. Passadoux, an arrow. Passager, for passer, to pass, to go on; to
remove often. Passager and varier la voix, to warble, or divide in singing.
Passageur, a ferryman. Passagier, for passager, a passenger. Passature, a
straining; also the thing that is strained. Pass, time, accidents,
occurrences, or things past; also a Hen-sparrow; the rack of a Cross-bow; the
iron goal or arch of a Mall. Pass de Canarie, a Canary-bird. Passefile,
curled. Passe-filons, small ear-locks, or curled locks drawn out on either
side; any tufts of hair. Passefillonne, curled. Passe-fin, excellent fine
cloth. Passemarrel de temps, a merry sport or pastime. Passement, for passage,
a passing; also a straining through, Passement de Tesmoings, an examination of
Witnesses. Pass par tout, a resolute fellow. Une pass par tout, a double Key
that opens all the doors in the Court. Passe-passee, a juggling trick.
Passe-pied, a caper; also a kind of dance peculiar to the Youth of the higher
Brittany. Passe-poil, a snipped, or jagged welt of Tassata and the like in a
garment. Passe-porte, a Bill of lading. Passe-prouesse, exceeding valiant.
Passerat, a Sparrow. Passerelles, Passerilles, raisins of the Sun. Passerin,
Sparrow-like; of, or belonging to a Sparrow. Langue passerine, the fruit of the
Ash, called Ashen-keys. Passe-rose, the name of a rose. Passe-vent, swifter
than the wind. Passeur, a Ferry-man. se Passioner, to grow passionate.
Passionnerement, passionately. Passon, a posset. Passules, small raisins.
Pastenague, Pastenaille, parsenip. Pastenaque, the Fork-fish; also a parsnip.
Pasteux, full of dough; clammy, as bread which is dough-baked. Pasticerie, for
patissierie, pastry. Pasticier, for patissier, a Pastry-Cook. Pastilles, little
lumps of wood. Pastin, past, a little piece of past or dough. Pastinage,
past-meat. Pastis, a pasture-ground not enclosed; also pasture, or feeding for
cattle. Pastissage, a making or baking of pyes or past-meats. Pastisser, to
make pies or paste-meats. Paston, a mash of meal for a horse; also a certain
paste, or mealy ointment that comforts or strengthens his hoof; also the piece
of leather wherewith the toe of a shoe is lined. Pastophores, sacred Priests
among the ancient Egyptians. Pastorat, a Pastoral office. Pastoreau,
Pastoureau, a young, or mean Pastor. Pastourelle, a Shepherdess. Pastre, a
Shepherd. Pasturable, which may be turned into, or put unto pasture; which may
be fed on. Pasturement, a pasturing, grazing, or feeding. Pasturer, to pasture,
graze, or feed. Vain pasturer, to turn his cattle into, or let them run in
grounds held Vain pasture. Pasturier, a Grazier. Pasturon, as paturon. Patact,
a tack, dap, or knock. Patafle, the size of bread allowed by Authority.
Pataflerie, foppery, foolery. Pataque, a Neapolitan coin worth 200 Quadrins.
Patarasse, as petarasse. Patart, a Low-country-coyn worth a Stiver, five
whereof amount to six pence Sterling. Pataut, gross, corpulent, big, fat. Pate,
for patte, a paw; also a plate or band of iron, etc. for the strengthening of a
thing. Pate, pawed, broad-footed. Pateade, as pareade. Patelion, for
patelineur, a cogger, a flatterer. Patelle, the ball, or whirl-bone of the
knee; also the little shellfish called Lympine. Pateller, to chatter, to
warble. Patellette de la testiere, the head-dag, the broad piece of leather
that runs through the top of a head-stall. Patenostrages, beads. Patenostrier,
a maker, or seller of beads; also an hypocrite; also a string of beads. Patent,
patent, evident. Patepelue, hairy-handed, rough-footed. Paterliquer, to be
fatherly. Pathologie, that part of Physic which entreats of the causes,
qualities, and differences of Diseases. Pathologique, of, or belonging to
Pathologie. Pathonomique, a necessary and undoubted sign. Patible, passive,
sufferable. Patibulaire, of, or belonging to the gallows, deserving the
gallows. Fourche (sign) patibulaire, a gibbet, or gallows. Justice
patibulaire, high Jurisdiction, power to hang offenders. Paticier, for
patissier, a Pye-maker. Patientie, for patience, herb patience, Monks-rhubarb.
Patine, the cover of a Chalice. Patiner, to handle rudely, or carelessly; to
toss and turn a brittle thing often between the fingers. Patinostres, beads.
Patinostrier, as patenostrier. se Pationner, as se passionner. Patouil, a
dabbling, or slabbering. Patouillard, a dabbler, a slabberer. Patouillas, a
plash, or puddle. Patouille, for Patrouille, a still night-watch in War.
Patouille, dabbled in with the feet, slabbered. Patouiller, to dabble in with
the feet, to slabber. Patriarchie, Patriarkship. Patricotage, a wrangling, or
brangling. Patriot, a Father, or Protector of the Country or Commonwealth; also
as Patriote, ones Countryman. Patrociner, to protect, or support. Patronal, of,
or belonging to a Patron; done in remembrance of a Patron. Patronner, to take
into protection; also to make or frame by a pattern, to imitate. Patronymique,
derived of the Fathers, or Ancestors names. Patrouille, besmeared; also swept,
or made clean. Patrouillement, a besmearing; also a sweeping with a maulkin;
also a padling in the water. Patrouiller, to besmear; to deprave; to sweep, or
make clean with a maulkin; to paddle or pudder in the water. Patrouilleur, a
besmearer; also a malicious carper, or depraver. Pattepelue, as patepelue.
Pattiner, as patiner. Pattouquis, the pelting sound made by anvil-beating
hammers. se Pavaner, as se pavonasser. Pavanier, a Pavine-maker; a dancer of
pavines. Paucher, as pocher in the N. D. Paucite, paucity, fewness. Pavesade,
for pavoisade, a Target-fence. Pavescher, to shelter. Pavide, fearful.
Pavidite, fear. Pavigeade, as pavesade. Pavis, a nectarin. Paulcer, as pocher
in the N. D. Paul, staked, or set with stakes. Paulle, an Italian coin worth
about 11 d. sterling. Paulmelle, Beer-barley. Paumee, a clap, stroke, or blow with
the hand. Paumiere, a woman that keeps a Tennis-court. Paumon, the navel-gall
(a horses disease.) Paumoule, beer-barley. Pavoisier, a Targeteer. (...)
Pavoiseux, as pavoisier. se Pavonasser, se Pavonner, to take a pride in
himself. Pausement, leisurely, fair and softly. Paute, for patte, a paw.
Pautoniere, as Pautonniere. Pautonnier, a lewd, stubborn, or saucy knave.
Pautonniere, lewdness, sauciness. Pauzade, a pausing or resting; also a resting
seat or place. Payelle, a little round pan; also a little frying pan.
Payennerie, Paganism. Payennete, Heathenishness. Payennie, Paganism. Payrastre,
a step-father. Peageau, as Chemin peageau, a Road wherein Toll may be taken.
Peagier, for Peager, a Toll-gatherer. Peaucier, a Skinner, a Fell-monger.
Peaucier, (Adj.) skinny; of, in, or belonging to the skin. Peaultre, as
peautre. Peaussu, skinny, or thick-skinned; also limber, or slaggy, like the
loose skin of a withered body. Peautraille, scrapings, or offals of skins, a
serve of scoundrels. Peautraillerie, scurvy old stuff of skins or leather.
Peccadille, a little sin. Peccant, sinning, offending, trespassing; also
offensive. Peccatrice, for pecheresse, a woman sinner. Piece, as perrot. Pecile,
a pide, or skude color of a horse. Pecoul, the tail, or arse; the stalk of any
fruit. Pect, the breast, or udder. Pectoncle, a Cockle, or small Callop.
Peculateur, one that robs the public Treasure, or converts it unto his private
use. Peculativement, by robbing of the Prince's, or public Treasure. Pecule, a
stock or substance gotten by private industry or toil. Pecune, coin, money.
Pedagogisme, an instructing, or teaching; the office of a Teacher; also
Pedantism. Pedales, a horses kickings, or flingings out with the heel. Peder,
for peter, to fart. Pederotte, an opal. Pedicule, the stalk of a leaf, or of
fruit. Pedieux, the name of a certain Muscle. Pedion, the part of the instep
that is next unto the toes, and contains five bones answerable unto them.
Pegade, a glass full. Pege, pitch. Pege, pitched, bepitched. Pegmate, a stage,
or frame whereon Pageants be set, or carried. Pegouse, a kind of Sole-fish,
that has Eye-like spots on her back. Pehoulle, Sea-coal. Peignarre, Peignerre,
Peigneur, Peignier, a Comb-maker. Peignoir, Peignouoir, a Comb-case.
Peincturer, to paint. Pejorer, to impair; to make, or to grow worse. Peis, for
poisson, a fish; also the breast. Pel, for peau, skin; also lime, or plaster,
for the walls of an house. Pelain, ^^^ners lime-pit. Pelard, a round stick
pilled, or barked. Pelasse, the pilling of the skin; also the paring of an
apple; also the rind or bark of a tree. Peldure, the name of a certain
hard-skinned sig. Pele, the boult of a lock. Pelegrin, for pelerin, a Pilgrim.
Pelerinant, going on pilgrimage. Pelerine, a Pilgrimess. Pelerine de Venus, a
Whore. Pelet, a little hair. Pelication, a depilatory, or pitchy Plaster,
serving to pull off hair. Pelice, for pelisse, a skin of fur. Pelice, furred.
Pelicieux, wanton, lascivious. Pelis, short wool. Pelisson, a furred petticoat,
or frock; also a kind of white meat much used in Poictou Pellage, the color
of the hair. Pelle, the bolt of a lock; also a shovel. Pelle-bosse,
herb-willow. Pellerelle, the falling of the hair. Pellet, the 24 part of a
Prime (an exceeding small weight.) Pelliculeux, full of little skins, or thin
rinds. Pellucide, bright, shining. Pelon, the outmost rugged husk of a green
Chestnut. Pelorde, a little and thick-shelled Cockle, that lives and lies
altogether in the mud. Pelosses, bullace, or little wild plums. Pelourde, as
pelorde. Peluette, the herb Mouse-ear. Pelusse, the paring of fruit; also the
pilling, or white and inner rind of trees. Penade, a bounding, or prauncing.
Penader, to bound, or praunce. Penaillous, rags, tatters, patches. Penal,
penal, inflicting penalties. Penancier, as penencier. Penard, a melancholy
old man; a poor wretched fellow; also a feather, or plume of feathers; also a
man's yard. Penates, houshold-goods. Penault, a Burgundian measure containing 12
Quarts. Penaut, (Adj.) ashamed, out of countenance. Pencer, and Pencher, for
pancher, to bend, or lean downward. Penchon, a declining, or weighty inclining;
a stooping. Pendage, a hanging. Pendante, a label pendant. Pendardeau, a little
Crack-rope. Pendement, a hanging. Pendentif, the Key or Scutcheon of a Vault,
that which hangs directly down in the middle thereof. En pendentif, steep down.
Pendereau, as pendardeau. Penderie, a hanging. Pendesyllable, of five
Syllables. Pendiculation, a stretching in the approach of an Ague. Pendille, a
thing that hangs danglingly. Pendiller, to hang danglingly, loosely, or but by
hal^es. Pendileches, Pend-oreilles, pendants. Pene, the bolt of a lock. Peneau,
a flag, or streamer; also a rag, or tatter; also a slut. Peneliere, as penil.
Penencier, he that after confession made, or a notorious offense committed,
enjoins the Confessant or Offender his penance. Pener, to take great pains;
also to trouble, ^ex, or molest. Pen^usement, defectedly, in a dump. Penide, a
pe^^e^, the little wreath of sugar taken in a cold. Penidial, as sucre
penidial, fine white Sugar whereof Pennets be made; also the Pennets
themselves. Penil, a man's, (or most properly) a woman's groin. Penillier,
belonging to the groin. Penillons, as penaillons. Penit, French wheat.
Penitencieux, very penitent. Pennache, a bunch, or plume of Feathers; also a
hat or cap after the old French fashion. Pennache de boeuf, a fair pair of
horns. Pennache de mer, a certain creature which is neither fish nor plant, at
one end resembling a feather, and the uncovered nut of a man's yard at the
other. It shines by night like a star. Pennade, as penade. Pennader, as
penader. Pennarol de Chirurgien, a Surgeons Case, the box wherein he carries
his Instruments. Penneton d'une clef, the bit, or neb of a key. Pennon, a
pennon, flag, or streamer. Les pennons d'une fleche, the feathers of an arrow.
Pennonceau, Pennoncel, a pennon on the top of a lance; a little flag, or
streamer. Pennule, Penon, a small piece of flesh, or of our body, not
altogether separated from the whole. Pensement, a thought, a thinking; a
physicking of. Penseresse, Penseuse, a woman that thinks. Penseur, a thinker.
Pensil, slightly hanging. Pensioniste, a Pensioner. Pensionne, hired by
pension, that takes a yearly stipend. Pensivete, cark, thoughtfulness. Pent
d'un rets, a whole pane, piece, or fold of a net. Pentaphylle, five-leaved
grass. Penteur, a Penant, the name of one of the ropes which pass over the top
of a mast. Penthiere, as panthiere. Penture, the hinge of a door. Penule, a
long Cloak, fit to be worn in rainy weather. Penury, penury, scarcity, want.
Pepelon, the nipple of a dug. Pepetiller, to crackle. Pephage, as pamphage.
Pepiement, Pepier, for pepie the pip. Pepier, (the Verb) to peep, cheep, or
pule, as a young bird in the nest. Pepier de soif, the tongue to peel by reason
of an extreme thirst. Pepieur, a peeper, cheeper, puler. Pepinerie, for
pepiniere, a seed-plot. Pepin-perce, the name of a certain dry sweet apple.
Pepon, a Pompion, or Melon. Pepre, peppered. Pequatille, a peccadillo, a small
sin. Peque, a mare. Per, for Pair, a Peer, a Paragon; also a mate, match, or
companion; also a certain Game at Cards. Peragration, a wandering about.
Peramese, a ninth, in Music. Peratre, a step-father. Perattendre, to wait for
an opportunity. Perce-fueille, Through-leaf, (an herb.) Percele, blue-bottle,
corn-flower. Percelle, struck, beaten down. Perce-pain, an Ear-wig. Percepceux,
taken, gathered, received. Perceptible, for percevable, perceptible,
receivable. Perception, a perceiving; a gathering, taking, or receiving.
Percet, a Peach; also a piercer. Percheux, belonging to, or full of pearches.
Perclorre, to benum, to take away the use of the limbs. Perclusion, a numness.
Perdable, sit to be lost. Perdement, a losing. Perdeur, a loser. Perdigonne,
the name of a plum. Perdriau, for perdreau, a young Partridge. Perdris^ur, a
Partridge-taker; also an Officer that has the command of that Game in France.
Perduellisme, Treason against Prince or Country. Perdurable, perdurable.
Perdurablement, for ever. Pere, for poire, Perry. Peregrin, a stranger, a
foreiner. Peregrin, (Adj.) foreign, outlandish. Faulcon peregrin, a passenger.
Peregrination, peregrination, long travel. Peregriner, to take long Journeys.
Peregrineux, as peregrin (Adj.) Peregrinite, for^^n speech, habit, custom,
behavior, etc. Peremptorise, Heritage peremptorise, an Inheritance whose
Challengers having after summons made default, are no more admitted to
prosecute or continue their claim. Peremptoriser, to peremptorise, to grant, or
pass away peremptorily; or to exclude a Challenger after a default made by him.
Perenne, Perennel, perpetual, continual. Eau perenne, water continually
running, never dry. Perenniser, to perpetuate. Perennite, perennity, eternity.
Perequant, an equal rater, or assessor of others; (Adjectively) equalling,
rating equally. Perequation, an equalling, or making even; an equal rating.
Perfique, a Pear-plum. Perfiquier, a Pear-plum-tree. Perflable, which may be
blown through. Perfoliate, through-leaf, (an herb.) Perforatif, boring,
piercing, or thrusting through. Perfum, Perfumer, etc. See parfum, parfumer in
the N. D. Perger, to proceed, or go on. Pergude, perished, lost. Periapte, a
medicine hanged about any part of the body. Pericharie, excessive joy.
Periclimene, the Wood-bine, or Honey-suckle. Pericliter, to jeopard, hazard,
endanger. Pericraine, for pericrane, the Pericranion, the whole skin of the
skull. Perier, the gisern of a hen, etc. Periller, to be in some peril, or
hazard, to perish. Perilleusement, dangerously. Perimer, to spoil, abolish,
overthrow. Perinee, the seam, or line that runs between the fundament and the
cods. Periodic, for periodique, periodical. Perioste, the skin wherewith the
ribs be covered; or the thin skin wherein any bone is covered. Peripheree, the
circumference, edge, or border of a circle, etc. Peristile, a Cloister, a
walking-place set about with pillars. Perjure, forsworn. Perlette, a small
pearl. Perlon, a Rotchet, or Gurnard-fish. Permanable, permanent. Permeable,
quickly running, or passing through. Permistion, a mingling together.
Permutateur, a barterer, exchanger. Permutation, a bartering, or exchanging.
Permuter, to barter, or exchange. Pernis, as perpins. Perons, startups,
high-shooes; fishers boots; also bags, or fatchels of leather. Peroration, the
conclusion of an Oration. Peroximes, fits of an ague. Perpaigne, as parpaigne.
Perpetrer, to perpetrate, act, commit. Perpetuation, a perpetuation.
Perpetuller, to tickle. Perpetuons, perpetually begging Friars. Perpins,
Perpenders, or Perpent-stones; stones made just as thick as a wall, and showing
their smoothed ends on either side thereof. Perplex, perplexed, intricate.
Perplexement, perplexedly, intricately. Perprendre, to seize, or take into his
hands ground that lies waste or common. Perprlnse, Perprison, a seizing, or
taking into his own hands (without leave of Lord, or other) ground that lies
waste or common. Perpuce, for prepuce, the foreskin. Perquisiteur, a diligent
searcher. Perresine, rosin. Perrie, a Peerdom. Perrier, the ship-Artillery
called a fowler. Perriere, as perrier; also a quarry of stone. Perrot, an Oak
which has been (or might have been for the age thereof) twice lopped.
Perruque, wearing a Perruke; long-hair'd. Perruquet, one that wears an
effeminate lock or frizled tuft of hair. Perserutation, a through search, or
diligent inquiry. Perse, the piercing of a vessel. Perseguier, as persiguier.
Perse-pierre, as perce-pierre in the N. D. Perser, for percer, to bore, to
pierce. Persin, for persil, Parsley. Persoir, a piercer. Personat, a place or
title of honor enjoyed by a beneficed person, without any manner of
Jurisdiction in the Church. Personate, the clot, or great bur. Personier, as
personnier. Personnage, for person, a person. Personnerie, a partnership; a
sharing, or enjoying with another. Personnier, a partner; a joint Tenant, or
Tenant in common; also a contributer with others in the payment of Taxes, or
other public duties; also one that joins in an Action or Suit with another;
also a Complice. Personnier, (Adj.) joining, or enjoying with another. Moulin
personnier, a common mill. Perspicacite, perspicacity, ready apprehension.
Perspirable, which may be breathed through. Perspiration, a perspiration, or
breathing through. Perspire, sprinkled, moistened. Perstraindre, or
Perstreindre, to wring, or squeeze hard; also to check, or chide. Pour le
perstreindre en un mot, to be short. Persuadeur, a perswader; an inducer unto.
Persuasoire, perswasory. Il Pert, it appears. Pertroubler, to trouble.
Pertuis, for trou, a hole. Pertuisanon, a little Partisan. Pertuise, full of
holes. Pertuiser, to make a hole, to bore full of holes. Perturber, to trouble,
or to disturb. Perversion, perversion. Perversion de bouche, a convulsion
whereby the mouth is drawn awry. Pervertissement, a perverting, or depraving.
Pervis, as parvis in the N. D. Pes, as peis. Pesade, as posade. Pesart, the
disease called the Nightmare. Peschage, a fishing, or place to fish in.
Pescheable, which may be fished in. Pesche-amande, the almond-peach.
Pesche-coing, the quince-peach. Peschement, a fishing. Pesche-noix, the
nut-peach. Pescher, for Vivier, a fish pond; also a Peach-tree. Pescheresse, a
Woman-fisher. Grenouille pescheresse, the Sea-frog, or Sea-toad. Pescheteau,
the Sea-frog, Sea-toad, or Sea-devil. Pescheux, full of fishing. Peschier, for
pecher, a Peach-tree. Couleur de fleur de peschier, a peach-colour. Pesle, the
bolt of a lock. Il fait le doux Dieu dessous une pesle, he behaves himself
gently, he is a fair-conditioned man; or he minces it too much. Pesle-mesle,
confusedly mingled. Pesles, thrums, or that which hangs at the end of a piece
of cloth like fringe. Pesne, the bolt of a lock. Pesqueur, a Fisherman.
Pessaire, a pessary, a great suppository made of soft wool, and fashioned like
a finger. Pesseau, for Paisseau, a stake. Pesson, as paisson. Pesteil, a
Pestle. Pesteux, plag^y, pestilent, infections. Pestifere, pesti^^^ous.
Pestilentiel, pestilential. Pestiller, to paddle, to crackle; to beat thick and
short. Pestrissure, a kneading. Petace, pieced, be patched. Petalisme, a form
or sentence of banishment among the old Syracusans, writing his name whom they
would be rid of in an Olive-leaf. Petarasse, a clap, or stroke on the buttocks;
the farting of a lusty horse. Petas, a mole, or wart; also a kind of
Rouncival-pease. Petasite, lag-wort, butter-bur. Petaud, Petault, a farter;
also a footman. Petauristique, tumbling, vaulting, going upon ropes.
Petelement, as petelis. Peteler, to stamp, trample, or tread hard upon.
Petelis, a stamping, or trampling upon. Petereau, a little fart, or squib.
Peteuse, the name of a fish. Petillages, the Orders and Customs observed by
Merchants in their trading and custom-paying. Petiot, very little. Petiteur,
for petitesse, smalness, meanness. Petitose, the garbage of fowl. Peton, a
little foot; also the slender stalk of a leaf or fruit. Petonner, to pat, or
tread down the earth by often trampling on it. Petrar, a wild Sparrow, less
than the tame one. Petrarquifer, to write like a passionate lover. Petreux, Os
petreux, the bone of the temples, one of the eight bones whereof the skull
consists. Petrification, petrification. Petrinal, a Petronel, or horsemans
piece. Petrol, petrole, or petrolle, naphta. Petteler, as peteler. Petulance,
petulancy, sauciness. Petum, Tobacco. Peucedane, Horse-strong, Sulpherwort.
Pevier, as Canon pevier, a Cannon pevier. Peuille, Peulle, part of a new piece
of coin amongst Mint-men, specifying the quantity, weight, allay, and day of
delivery out of the coin. Pevoesne, or Pevoisne, for pivoine, peony. Peuplaye,
a grove of Poplar-trees. Peuple, for peuplier, the Poplar-tree. Peupleraye, as
peuplaye. Peuresie, for pleuresie, Pleurisy. Pezar, a whole Pease, or
Beanstalk. Pezart, as pesart. Pezze, the Pitch-tree. Phagediane, a kind of
ulcerous Canker. Phagoue, as fagoue. Phaisander, as faisander in the N. D.
Phalange, the name of a most venomous spider; also a apiece Troop, or
Battalion of eight or ten thousand men, ranked so as they may encounter the
Enemy every way. Phalene, a small Butter-fly, or moth, which in the night loves
to be flattering about candles. Phalere, trapped, as a Soldiers great horse.
Phalerer, to furnish with trappings. Phaleres, Horse-trappings. Phaleuces,
verses of eleven syllables. Phalot, and Phanot, for falot, a cresset-light.
Phanal, for fanal, the lanthorn of a galley, or ship. Fantasy, fancied, or
conceived in mind; also fantastically made. Phantosme, as fantome in the N. D.
Pharasse, a cresset. Pharien, high, or light, as a Watchtower on the
Seacoast. Pharique, a kind of dangerous poison. Pharmacie, a curing with
drugs. Pharmakeutie, Physic which much cures by drugs or simples. Pharmaque,
a simple, or drug. Pharol, pharot, as Phanal. Phaseoles, Phasiols, and
Phasioles, French-beans. Phavier, a Ring-dove. Phee, a Fairy, or one of the
Destinies. Phee, fatal; enchanted, bewitched. Phelandrion, Small-burnet,
Saxifrage. Phengite, the name of a certain bright stone. Phenice, crimson,
scarlet. Philactere, and Philacterie, as phylactere. Philadelphe, a lover of
his brother. Philargirie, love of silver, covetousness. Phillyree, Mock-privet.
Philocrise, love of gold. Philogrobolize du cerveau, that has got a worm in
his head, crack-brained. Philologue, a lover of learning, study, or discourse.
Philomesse, a lover of the Mass. Philophanes, a lover of light.
Philosophalement, philosophically. Philotheamon, a lover of our Gods.
Philotime, ambitious, affecting honor. Philotome, a lover of Passions.
Philtatodelphe, an excessive lover of his brother. Phiphre, a Fife, or small
pipe. Phisicalement, naturally. Phissane, a certain tumbling trick; or a
licentious way of dancing or singing, used in some places by Buffoons, or Vices
in Plays. Phlebotomer, to let blood. Phlebotomie, bloodletting. Phlegmagogue,
a medicine that purges phlegm. Phlegmon, a certain inflammation of the blood
which causes a hot and red swelling; also a little and long wart breeding
among the hair of the eyelids. Phlegmoneux, swelling with inflammation; also
full of phlegm. Phlegmonne, swollen with hot blood; or troubled with a phlegmon.
Phlomie, Phlymouse, physiognomy. Phoebe, the Moon. Phoenicoptere, a certain
crimson-winged bird. Pholade, as Pelorde. Phoque, a Sea-calf. Phogue, for
fougue, a sudden passion. Phrene, the midriss. Phrigie, as Phrygie. Phrontiste,
the first rank. Phrontistere, the front of a building. Phrygie, Phrygian
melody; a kind of tune or music wherein there seemed to be a divine fury.
Phryllelimeuse, Phryllelimouse, physiognomy. Phrymeuse, Phrymouse, the same.
Phryson, a Friezland-horse. Phthiriase, the lousie evil. Phthise, for phthisie,
phthisick. Phylaciste, Phylacte, a Jailer. Phylactere, a Prison; or as
Phylacterie, a scroll of parchment with the ten Commandments written in it,
worn by the Pharisees about their heads and arms. Phylomie, and Physonomie, for
physionomie, physiognomy. Physetere, the Whirl-pool, (a huge fish.)
Physiognomie, for physionomie, physiognomy. Physiologie, a reasoning out of the
nature of things; also anatomizing physic, or that part of Physic which
treats of the composition or structure of man's body. Physis, nature. Piaffard,
Piaffeur, a braggard, a vainglorious man. Piaffeusement, braggingly, proudly.
Piailler, for pioler, to cry like a chick; to scold, to tipple, or drive away
time by drinking. Piailleur, a scolding man; also a sipper. Piaison, a
tippling, or immoderate drinking. Pialet, Dodder, (a weed.) Pian, as marcher
pian, to march leisurely, to go fair and softly. Pianelle, a Night-slipper.
Pianelleux, wearing, or full of slippers. Piat, a young Pie. Piaux, newly
hatched chickens, or birds. Pibale, a young Lamprey. Pible, the pizzle of a
beast. Pibole, a kind of Bag-pipe. Piboleur, a Piper. Picadilles, as
piccadilles. Picardent, as piquardant. Picardiser, to speak, or do like a
Picard. Pication, a pitching, or bepitching. Piccadilles, the several divisions
or pieces fastened together about the brim of the collar of a doublet, etc.
Piccon, a prickle, or small prick. Pice, pitched, or full of pitch. Piceastre,
the wild Pitch-tree. Picee, the Pitch-tree. Pichier, a pitcher. Picmart, a
Woodpecker. Picorer, to forage, rifle, or ransack. Picoreur, a boothaler, a
ravening Soldier. Picotage, a pricking here and there; also a spotting, or
speckling. Picote, the small pox. Picoterie, a nipping, a dispute. Picoteure,
Picoture, a prick; a spot; a freckle, or pimple. Picquamment, piercingly.
Picquois, a Pick-ax. Picquot, a prickle, or small prick. Picte, a French
farthing, the fourth part of a Denier. Pictre, the breast, bosom, or stomach.
Picts, the bulk, or pitch of the body. Pie, for boisson, drink, liquor. C'est
un Croque la pie, he is a notable Toss-pot. But pie signifies besides a Goose,
the broyled thick skin of a piece of beef, the monstrous appetite of Maids and
big-bellyed Women unto coals, ashes, paper, and other such unnatural meats.
Pie, for pieux, pious, godly. It signifies also merciful, black and white as a
Magpye. Pieca, long ago, a great while since; also heretofore, in times past.
Piecette, a little bit, or piece. Pied-bornier, a Tree that serves to divide
several Tenements or Inheritances. Piedfief, a Fief dismembered, which a Vassal
may for his benefit alien to whom he list. Pied-gris, a clown, a boor.
Pied-leger, as pied-viste. Pied-poul, the round-rooted Crowfoot.
Pieds-corniers, certain trees marked out for limits unto the sale of Wood; also
as pied-bornier. Pied-sonnant, trampling, or making the ground ring again with
his proud steps. Pied-terre, an alighting, or setting foot on the ground.
Pied-viste, light-footed, swift of foot. Pienne, rose de pienne, peony. Piepou,
as pied-poul. Pier, to sip. Pierigot, as manganese. Pierrerie, for pierriere, a
quarry of stone; also stone-work. Pierrette, a little stone. Pierriz, heaps, or
walls of dry or unmortared stones. Pierron, as perron in the N. D. Pierrotte, a
small stone; also a stony, flinty, or gravelly soil. Pierrou, the name of a
certain base Coin. Piesante, a path, or small way, some two foot and a half
broad. Piesette, a piece, or compartment; the joint whereat the players are
hanged in the port, or upset of a bit. Pietaille, a footing, or footmanship;
also a footman; or a company of footmen. Piete, a kind of spade, or digging
tool. Pietonner, to fetch thick and short steps. Pietonneux, treading thick and
short. Pietre, in bad plight, beggarly, needy. Pietrement, poorly, wretchedly.
Pietrer, to tread down, or to trample under the feet. Pietrerie, wretchedness.
Piette, a Pewet. Pieuler, for pioler, to cry like a chick. Pieumart, as
piemart, a Wood-pecker. Pieur, for pire, worse. Pige, as pis, or as pinge.
Pigeasse, pied, party-colored. Pigeonnade, a billing, or Pigeon-like bussing.
Pigeonelle, a very young Pigeon. Pigeonner, to catch pigeons; also to bill, or
kiss like a Pigeon; also to cheat, or cosen a silly fellow. Pigeonnerie, the
billing of Pigeons; a long and lascivious kissing. Pigeonnet, a young, or
little Pigeon. Pignaresse, a flax-woman. Pignates, pots, or balls of
wilde-fire. Pignaux de Collier, the nails, or prickles of a bandogs Collar.
Pigne, for paigne, a comb. Pignes, the griftly parts of the eyelids. Pignolat,
the preserved kernel of a Pineapple, or conserve of Pine-kernels. Pignoratif,
engaging by suretiship, or with a pawn. Pignoration, a straining, or
distraining; a seizing, or taking for a distress,; also an impledging. Pignore,
a distress, or a thing that is taken Damage-fesant. Pignorer, to distrain, to
seize or take for a distress, or in respect of damage done; also to impledge.
Pignouer, a comb-case. Pilee, Pilement, a beating, or bruising in a mortar.
Pilette, a little ball; pile; body of a tree; funt; or mortar. Pilettes,
pimples about the nose or chin. Piliforme, one of the smallest Membranes of the
Eye, before whose glassy humor it stands. Pillard, a pilserer, filcher,
purloiner. Pillemaille, as palemaille, a Christmas-box. Pillement, Pillerie, a
robbing, or rifling. Pillier, for pilier, a pillar. Pillolet, wild, (running)
Time. Pillorier, Pilloriser, to set on the Pillory. Pillot, a small pile, or
heap. Pillotage, a pile-work, or driving down of piles; a foundation, causey,
or water-work made of, or strengthened with piles. Pilloter, to pick, or take
up here and there; to gather one by one. Pilloterie, a picking, or taking up
here and there, a gathering one by one; also a robbing, or rifling. Pilloti,
for piloti, pile, or piles. Piloir, for pilon, a pestle. Pilorier, as
pillorier. Piloselle, pilosella, mouse-ear. Pilot, for Pilote, a Pilot.
Piloter, as pilloter; also as Pilotier, to do the part of a Pilot, to sound the
depth of water with a line and plummet. Pilotiser, to pile, or strengthen with
piles. Pilure, a pill. Pimard, as picmart, a wood-pecker. Pimbesche, a subtle
Queen, a cunning Drab. Piment, Oak of Jerusalem, or Oak of Paradise (an herb;)
also a kind of wholesome pear. Pimente, spurge-olive, widow-wail (a shrub.)
Pimer, to crawl, move, or stir. Pimpe, spruce, curiously pranked up.
Pimpenauder, to prank up. Pimpenelle, for pimpinelle, burnet. Pimper, to make
spruce or fine. Pimperneau, a Grig, or Spitch-cock. Pimpernelle, for
pimpinelle, burnet. Pimpompet, a kind of Game wherein three ^it each other on
the bum with one of their feet. Pimpreneau, as pimperneau; also a knave, or
rascal. Pimprenelle, for pimpinelle, burn^t. Pinard, Pinart, an exceeding small
piece of money; also such a title as is our fellow, etc. Pinastre, the wild
pint-tree. Pinatelle, a copper-coyn, having some small quantity of Silver in
it, and worth about five liards. Pinatellier, a Coyner of pinatelles. Pinates,
as pignates. Pinaux, the name of a kind of grapes. Pincersi, Pincervin, the
Linden-tree. Pinces, for pincettes, pincers, tongs. Pinceter, to pinch thick;
to nip, or twitch often; to touch a Lute, etc. nimbly; to pull off hairs, or
moats with small pincers. Pinche, as pine, in the latter sense. Pinchon, as
piochon. Pincotter, to pinch, or ^i^ often. Pine, a pi^, a kail, a prick,
member, babble. Pincau, the seed or kernel of a grape; also a kind of white and
longish grape. Vin pineau, excellent strong wine. Pinet, hogs sennel,
sulphur-wort. Pinette, a kind of Cider made of water mingled with the juice of
Crabs; also a grove of pine-apples. Pineux, of, or belonging to pine-trees;
also full of pine-trees. Pinge, a pillock, member, babble, etc. Pingres, aux
pingres, a womanish play with ivory-balls. Pinguereaux, a kind of sweet
cherries. Pinhadar, a young, or little wild-pine. Pinier, the rosen-tree, or
any other whose fruit resembles a pine apple, as the great Cedar, Cypras, etc.
Piniolat, as pignolat. Pin, the shellfish called a Naker; also the sin of a
fi^h; also the broad and grislly part of the ear; also as pinge. Pin du nez,
the gristle of the nose, the bone whereby the nostrils are divided. Pinneux,
full of sins. Pinnophylace, a kind of little seafish. Pinnothere, a little
shellfish of the kind of Shrimps. Pinnule, a little sin of a fish. Pinnules,
the sights belonging to the albidada of an Astrolabe. Pinocque, the name of an
Indian fruit of the higness of a Cherry. Pinon, for pignon, the pi^ion of a
clock. Pinot, the name of a red-stocked and round-leaved Vine. Pinsegreneur
d'Amadis, a Phrasemonger, a spruce discourser. Pinses, as pinces. Pinsoir,
certain Engine (made of iron headed stakes) wherewith fish is caught. Pinteler,
to tipple, or ply the pot. Pintelette, a little pint. Pinteur, a tipler, a
pot-companion. Pintier, a Pewterer. Pinton, as pinteur. Pinules, as pinnules.
Piocher, to dig, or break up the earth with a pioche. Piocheur, a laboring
man, one that breaks up the earth with a pioche. Piochon, a little pick-ax.
Piole, sputted, speckled. Piole riole, ^^gaudy, s^t out with sundry colors.
Piolement, the cheeping of young birds. Piolet de Caille, a Quail-pipe.
Pioleur, a cheeper, or chirper. Pionnier, (Adj.) made by, or belonging to a
Pioneer; Pioneer-like. Piorioler, to diversify with variable colors. Pioter,
to cheep, or chirp; also to tipple. Pipeau, an oaten pipe; a bird-call.
Piperelle, nigella, Bishops-wort. Pipet, a small pipe, Fowlers pipe, or
bird-call. Pipette, the little knot, or tuft, on the top of a cap. Pipeusement,
deceitfully. Pipeux, deceitful. Pipion, a Spanish Coin, worth about eighteen
pence Sterling. Pipis, for pipy, the chirping of small birds. Pippeau, as
pipeau. Pipper, as piper in the N. D. Pippis, as pipis. Piquant, for point,
the point of a dart, spear, etc. the prickle, or sharp top of some kind of
leaves, as of the holly, etc. also the nose, beck, or stem-end of a ship; also
a kind of prickly thistle. Piquard^nt, the name of a grape that yields an
excellent ^^ite wine. Piquassat, a speckled gilliflower. Pique-boeuf, a clown,
a boor. Piquement, a pri^^^^ng, or stinging; also a quilting. Piquenaire, a
like-man. Pique-papier, a Scribe, a Scrivener. Pique-poul^, the name of a
certain grape. Piqueton, a prickle, as of a thorn. Pique^^, a prickly thistle.
Piquoter, to prick, or sting often; also to spot, or speckle all over.
Piquotement, Piquoteure, a frequent pricking or stinging; also a spotting, or
specking. Piquoteure de bran de Judas, red pimples rising in the face.
Piquotte, small wine, servants wine. Piramidal, broad beneath and sharpening
upwards, like a pyramid. Piratique, Piratical, Pirat-like; of, or belonging to
a Pirat. Pirauste, a fire-fly, or a worm bred and living in the fire. Pirette,
bastard-pellitory. Pirevollet, a whirligig. Pirole, wild beets, or the herb
Pirola. Piromantie, divination by fire. Pirope, as Pyrope. Pirot, the Pirot, or
hag-fish; a kind of long shellfish. Pirou, a green Goose. Pirouetteux,
whirling, or turning swiftly about. Pis, (Subst.) the breast, bosom, or
stomach of a man; the dug or udder of a cow, ewe, she-goat, etc. the brisket of
an ox or beef, the navel of a dog. Pisay, as pize. Piscantine, a kind of small
and well-watered Vine. Piscine, a fish pond; also a pool to water Horses, or to
keep Ducks in. Pissasphalte, pitch mingled with bitumen. Pisse-chaude, for
chaudepisse, a clap. Pissement, a pissing. Pissenez, as Serfs pissenez, the
bastards of Villains or Slaves. Pisseux, pissing much and often; also full of
piss. Pissolaire, the sheath or skin of a horses yard. Pisson, a pipkin.
Pissoter, to piss often. Pissotiere, the pissing tool; or the receptacle of
piss; also a pissing place; also the running of a bucking tab. Pistace, for
pistache, a pistachoe. Pistacher, the pistacho, (or fistick-nut) tree.
Pistaulendrier, a man's yard. Piste, stamped, pounded, brayed. Pisteau, a
pestle. Pister, to bray, pound, or stamp; also to go where one would have him.
Pistolade, a pistol-shot. Pistolandier, as pistaulendrier. Pistolier, a
Horseman that serves with a pistol. Pistolochie, a kind of long Birth-wort.
Piston, a pestle. Canon a piston, a certain Bit, which gives the tongue liberty
without a port. Pistrine, a hake-house, or a house wherein, before the
invention of Mills, the Romans caused their Slaves and unruly Servants to bray
all their corn in mortars. Pit, as pis. Pitance, any thing that one eats with
bread. P^^ancier, the Mancipler, or Distri^^ter of Victuals in a Monastery.
P^^^^^ier, (Adj.) of a pittance, or ^^^^ng for a pittance. P^^^^der, to behave
himself rude^. P^e, rudeness, clownish^^^^. P^^a^^^, a clown. Pitel, the pan of
a close-stool. Piteux, pitiful, merciful; also wretched, or in pitiful case.
Vous nous la baillez bien piteuse, you tell us but a sorry tale. Pitois, the
vermin (or beast) called a Fitch. Piton, as piston; also an eye for a
curtain-rod, etc. Piton a vis, a serve with an eye. Pitroy, dirt, mud, mire.
Pittasse, as elle saisoit chere pitasse, her behavior was full of
coffeehouse. Pittouer, a Bittern. Pituitaire, phlegmatic. Pituiteux, full of
phlegm. Pityocampe, a venomous worm that breeds in Pine-trees. Pive, the fruit
of the pine, or pitch-tree. Piugarreau, as bigarreau in the N. D. Piuler, to
pule, or che^p, like a little Chick. Pivoesne, for pivoine, P^^ny. Pivotter un
huis, to hang a door on pivots. Pize, as murailles de pize, earthen walls.
Placarde, fastened, or pasted, as a Si quis, etc. on a post. Placcar, as huis
qui se serment a doubles placears, doors which are shut with double locks.
Placide, mild, peac^^ble, ^^i^^. Placidement, mildly, peaceably, q^^^tly.
Placitre, a fair large Court before a C^^^^ (...) great House. Plasagourde, a
made word, of some affinity with our Gixy, Punk, etc. Plagiaire, one that
steals, or takes free people out of one Country, and sells them in another for
slaves; a s^^aler, or s^horner of men's Children or Servants, for the same or
like purpose; also a Book-thief, or one that fathers other men's works upon
himself. Plagie, stealth, or subornation of men's Children and Servants, with an
intent to sell them. Plaict, as plect. Plaidasserie, a wrangling, or litigious
pleading. Plaidereau, a litigious Brangler, one that is never out of Law.
Plaideresque, Lawyer-like. Plaiderie, a pleading; a Suit in Law. Plaidoirie, a
plea, an argument; the Pleading, or opening of a Cause. Plaidoyer, for plaider,
to go to law, to plead. Plaidoyeur, for plaideur, a Pleader, or a Lawyer.
Plaineure, the superficies; the plain, level, or flat ground of. Plainte, (m.)
a Plaintiff. Plaisanter, to jest, or quip merrily. Plaisanteur, a jester, a
buffoon. Plait, for played, debate; a plea, or pleading. Fair du plait, to make
a deal ado. Il me tient plait, he holds me tack, he finds me chat enough.
Plameuse, a fifty-cuff. Plan, for plane, the Plane-tree. Plan, for bellement,
softly. Planare, a Plane-tree. Planchage, a planking, boording, or flooring.
Planchaye, planked, boorded, floored. Planchayer, to plank, board, or floor.
Plancheer, Plancheter, as planchayer. Planchette, a woman's stirrup; also the
plate or bottom of a stirrup whereon the foot rests; also a busk. Planchier,
for plancher, a boarded floor. Plane, (f.) a Joyners plane; also a plaice.
Planer, for applanir, to make smooth, or even; also to raze, blot, or put out.
Planetaire, of, or belonging to the Planets. Heures planetaires, 12 hours for
the day, and as many for the night. Plani, for applani, smoothed. Planier,
(Adj.) plain, flat, even, smooth. Planier, (a Verb) to shave, as a Tanner does
his ^ides. Planir, to level, even, or make smooth. Plant, for plan, the
ground-plot of a building. Plantage, a planting, or setting. Plantail, as
plantal. Plantaire, the least of the six hinder Muscles of the leg, ending in
the sole of the foot. Plantal, a plant or set, the cions of a tree, or slip of
an herb, set or planted. Plantars, Willow-plants, or great branches or poles of
water-trees lopped off, and reserved to be set. Plantas, a planting, or
setting; also a place to plant, or set trees in; also as Plantat, a Plant, and
particularly the branch of a Willow, or other water-tree fit to be planted.
Plant, for abondance, plenty, store, abundance. Planteau, a young plant, or as
plantal. Plantemalan, a caltro^. Plantier, in, or belonging to the sole or
bottom of the foot. Planton, a young plant, or stock transplanted, and kept to
be grafted on. Plantureusement, largely, plentifully. Plantureux, abundant,
plentiful. Planure, a plain; a large, open, and even piece of ground.
Plasmateur, a Potter, or a maker of earthen Images, etc. Plasmation, potters
work; or the making of Images, etc. of clay or earth. Plassage, a fee paid in
some Towns by Merchants and Tradesmen, for the showing of their Commodities in
the Marketplace, or public Streets. Plastras, rubbish; clods, or pieces of
old and dry plaster. Plastronne, breast-plated. Platane, for plane, a
plane-tree. Plateaux, flat and thin stones, flakes of stones, etc. Fumees en
plateaux, flat grattiching, fewmishing, or dung of a Deer. Platelee, a Platter
(or dish) full. Plat-escuelle, a deep dish, or platter. Platin, a flat near the
Sea. Platin de fer, a cart-clowt of iron. Platis, a flat shelf, or shallow
place in the water. Platte, a Bleak-fish. Platteaux, as plateaux. Plattebande,
a flat band. Plattiz, as platis. Platuse, a Plaice-fish. Plau, the South Wind.
Plauton, for peloton, a clue, or bottom. Play, wounded. Player, to wound.
Playt, as plait. Plect and cheval de service, due in some places and cases from
the Vassal to the Lord feudal, as under-service. Plectre, the quill, or bow,
wherewith a viol is played on. Plegerie, suretiship. Plegeur, a Plaintiff in an
Action. Pleinfonce, wide, or spacious. Pleintisse, Pleintithe, the full scope,
or whole compass of. Pleion, long straw softened in water, thereby to be
pliant, and sit for the binding of Vines, etc. Plejure, a pledging, or
suretispip. Homme de plejure, a pledge, or surety; or a Vassal who may be a
Bail for his Lord. Plente, plenty. Pleonasmique, superfluous. Please, plashed,
as young boughs. Plesser, to plash, to bow young branches one within another;
to thicken a hedge, or cover a walk, by plashing. Plessis, the plashing of
trees; also a hedge, or walk of plashed trees. Plet, as plect. Plethore,
fullness, or abundance of good humors in the body; also headache by the
superfluity thereof. Plethorique, fat, corpulent, ever full of good humors.
Plevi, warranted, assured, whose goodness or sufficiency is undertafor. Fille
plevie, a Virgin promised in marriage. Plevine, a warrant, warranty, or
undertaking for the goodness or sufficiency of. Pleviner, Plevier, to
undertake, or promise for, to be surety. Pleurable, fit to be wept for.
Pleurard, a weeper, or whiner. Pleure, a thin and smooth skin wherewith the
inside of the rib is covered. Pleurement, a weeping, or shedding of tears.
Pleure-pain, a niggardly wretch, a miser. Pleuretique, sick of, or subject unto
a Pleurisy. Pleureux, full of tears; also ever weeping. Pleuvi, as plevi; also
quit, absolved, released. Pleuvine, as plevine. Pleuviner, as pleviner; also as
plouviner. Pleuvir, as pluvir. Pliage, Pliaison, Plicature, Pliement, a
folding, or plaiting. Plie, a Plaice (especially a great one.) Plieur, (Adj.)
folding, bending. Muscles plieurs, two muscles (a great, and a little one)
whereby the toes are bowed. Plion, a kind of stiff Osier. Plionner, to
wrinkle. Plomant, plumming, or trying the straightness of work by a plumb-rule.
Plombagine, pure lead turned almost into ashes by the vehemence of the fire.
Plombasse, lead-like, lead-coloured. Plombature, soder of lead or tin.
Plombeau, a Plummet, or weight of lead. Plombele, leaded, sodered (or covered)
with lead; bearing lead. Plombement, a leading, or tinning; a sodering, a
marking of wares with lead^ a sounding with a plummet. Plomberie, a leading, or
the leads of a Church, house, etc. Plombet, as plombeau; also the plumb-line
used by Archit^^^ Plombeure, as plombement ^aphes de fer a plomb^^^ iron-hooks
fastened, or sodered together with lead. Plombier, (Adj.) lead-like, of lead.
Pierre plombiere, Lead-oar, or lead-stone before it be tried. Plomeau, a
plummet, or little ball of lead. Plomer, to plum; a Mason to try or judge of
the straightness of his work by his plumb-rule. Plommee, for plombee, the
leaden weights of a Clock. Plommer, as plomer; or as plomber in the N. D.
Plongement, a plunging, diving, or ducking; a thrusting far into. Plonget, for
plongeon, a ducker. Plorer, for pleurer, to cry, or to weep. Plot, a block.
Plote, Ploter, Ploton, as pelote, peloter, peloton in the N. D. Plourer, as
plorer. Ploustre, a rowler; also a harrow. Ploustrement, a levelling of ground,
or breaking of clods with a rowler. Ploustrer, to level ground, or break clods
with a rowler. Ploustreur, a clod-breaker, or one that breaks clods with a
rowler. Ploutroer, a rowler; the rolling instrument wherewith ground is
levelled, and clods broken. Plouvier, a plover. Plouviner, to mizzle. Plouvoir,
for pleuvoir, to rain. Ploye, an arch, or vault; a bending, or bowing. Pluau,
the South Wind. Plucquoter, to pick nicely. Plumaceau, a soft fold of linen
laid next above the plaster on a wound; also a bunch of feathers. Plumage,
feathers, a bunch of feathers. Plumement, a plucking the feathers from; also a
fleecing. Plumeteur, a Scribe, Clark, or Penman. Plumetis, a summary, or short
relation of the substance of a Cause delivered in writing unto the Judges; also
short notes and instructions for the draught of a pleading or evidence taken
from the mouth of a Client (or otherwise) by a Clerk or Notary public.
Plumette, a little feather, a small pen. Plumeux, full of pens, or feathers.
Plure d'une voulte, the ^ent, or compass of a Vault. Pluserois, Plusieur, the
name of a prohibited fish-net, or fish-destroying engine. Plus-valeur, an
overvalue, surplusage, overplus, or remainder. Pluvial, for pluvieux, rainy.
Pluvine, a Salamander, or Deaf-worm; also as plevine. Pluvir, Pluir, for
pleuvoir, to rain. Plye, for plie, a Plaice. Poacre, a kind of scab about the
nose or muzzle of a sheep; also as pouacre. Poale, a stove, or hot-house; also
a drying pan; a little pan. Poalon, for poilon, a skillet. Pocheculier, a
shoveler. Pochee, a pocket full. Pocon, as posson. Podagre, (Subst) the gout in
the legs or feet. Podagre de lin, the weed Dodder. Podagreux, full of the gout.
Poderaste, a Sodomite, a boy-buggerer. Podimetrie, foot-measure, or measuring
by the foot. Poeslier, a Tinker, or Brazier. Poeste, homme de poeste, a Yeoman.
Poetastre, an ignorant Poet. Poeterie, for poesy, poetry. Poetiser, to make
verses. Poetride, a Poetess. Poetry, Poetry. Poetrons, ordinary yellow plums.
Poevrette, for poivrette, the herb Gith. Poge, ou Pogge, the sheat, or cable
which fastens the main yard on the right hand of a ship. A poge, at or on the
right hand. Naviger a poge and a ourse, to hold an uncertain course at Sea by
reason of contrary winds. Pognard, for poignard, a poniard, or dagger.
Poictrail, for poitral, a poitral. Poictreux, as piece poictreuse, a piece of
coin that rises or bears out in the middle, and is flat or thin about the edge.
Poictrinal, a great and heavy petronel, shorter (but of a wider bore) than a
musket. Poictrinal, (Adj.) belonging to the breast or stomach; also stomachal,
or comforting the breast. Poictrinalier, one that serves with, or uses to shoot
in a great and heavy petronel. Poictrinette, a little breast. Poictrineux, as
poictrinal (Adj.) also as poictreux. Poictron, the fundament. Poifaict, sloth,
negligence, idleness. Poifaifant, a negligent, slothful, or idle fellow.
Poignalarde, a stab, or thrust with a poniard. Poignalarder, to stab, or thrust
into with a poniard. Poignastre, the Viver, or little Sea-dragon. Poiler, for
peler, to pill; also to rue; to die, or color unevenly. Poillu, for pelu,
hairy, rough with much hair. Poinconner, as poinsonner. Poinconnet, a little
bodkin, or puncheon. Poinconneux, pricking as a bodkin. Poincte, pointed,
sharpened at the point; also stitched, quilted. Poincteler, Poincter, to prick,
or point often; to bud, or shoot out. Poinez, as c'est un poinez racle, it is a
thing resolved on. Poinree, a Pear Tree. Poinsonnade, a prick, or hole made
with a bodkin; also a stamp, or mark set on with a punc^^on, etc. Poinsonner,
to prick with a bodkin; to stamp, or mark with a puncheon, etc. Pointade, a
prick, thrust, or stitch; a sting. Pointure, a prick; also a pricking; also a
shooting, as of pain in the body; also the gout in the joints. Poipre, the
purples. Poirasine, rosin. Poiree, Beets. Poisamment, for pesamment, heavily.
Poisee, Poisement, a poising, or weighing; also weight, or heaviness.
Poisillons, a kind of small pease, or pulse. Poisle, smeared with soot, or
with the touch of a sooty Skillet, etc. Poisler, to smear with soot, or with
the touch of a sooty skillet, etc. Poislier, a Br^sier, or Tinker. Poisliers,
the posts which uphold the screw of a Vine-press. Poislure, a smearing, a
besooting. Poisonneux, poisonous, full of poison. Poissage, a pitching, or
bepitching. Poissard, a filcher, a pilserer; one whose fingers are as so many
lime-twigs. Poissement, as poissage. Poisseux, pitchy, or full of pitch.
Poissillon, Poissonnet, a little, or a young ^^^h. Poissonneux, full of, or
abounding in fi^h. Poissonnier, (Adj.) abounding i^, or belonging to fish.
Poissure, as pois^^e. Poisteau, a little bird like a ^i^r^t. Poistrir, f^r
p^^rir, to k^^ad. Poitron, the tail, a^se, or bum; also a kind of H^^^-plum.
Poixement, as ^oi^age. Poixer, for poi^er, to pit h, to bepitch. Poizer, for
p^ser, to weigh. Pol, for pole, a pole. Polaine, the (...) it (...) of (...) in
the Pr^w of a (...) as poulaine. Polemoine, (...) also the shrubby (...),
called Make-^at^. Polican, for polican, a P^li^a^. Policier, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to Government. Poliement, for poliment, smoothly, neatly. Polieul,
Pell a mountain, or Polly, (an herb.) Poliot, for pouliot, Pennyroyal.
Polipragmon, a busie-body. Polisyllable, for polysyllabe, of many Syllables.
Polpe, for poulpe, the pulp, or fleshy part. Polsonnets, two buttons with hooks
at their ends, passing through the branch, and holding the water-chain of a
bit. Poltronesque, cowardly, faint-hearted; lazy, idle. Poltronesquement,
cowardly, faint-heartedly; lazily, idly. Poltronie, for plotronnerie,
cowardice, faint-heartedness; laziness, idleness. Poltroniser, to be a coward,
to slug it. Polygraphie, a diverse manner of writing. Polymixe, a candle having
many wicks. Polypeux, that has a Noli me tangere in the nose. Polyphilie,
affection divided, love unto many. Polypus, as polype in the N. D. Polytric,
Polytricon, black Venus hair, our Ladies hair. Pomardiere, an Orchard of
Apples. Pomcirade, for poncirade, Balm-gentle, herb Balm. Pomelee, Bear-foot.
Pomme, Cider. Pommelaye, Pommelee, as pomelee. Pommelette, a little apple; also
a daple. Pommelle, the pommel of a sword, etc. Pommelu, plump, or round as an
apple. Pommelure, plumpness, roundness; also dapleness. Pommer, to grow round,
or apple-like. Pommeraye, an Orchard, or Apple-yard. Pommette, a little apple;
also the ball of the cheek. La pommette du nez, the tip, or end of the nose.
Piece a Pommette, a little pleasant roll in the mouth of a bit. Pommeux, full
of apples. Pomon, for poumon, the lungs. Pompes, bosses; pully-pieces for the
knees. Pompette, a pimple on the nose or chin. Pompholige, the light oar, or
foil of brass. Pompile, a kind of Pourcontrel fish; also a kind of Tunny
which follows ships while they are in the Main, and leaves them when they draw
toward the shore. Pompon, a pumpion, or melon. Pomponne, the longest and
smoothest kind of pumpion. Ponceau, Poncel, for petit pont, a little bridge.
Poncer, to polish with a pumice-stone. Ponceure, a polishing with a
pumice-stone. Poncille, the Assyrian Citron. Poncire, a Pome-citron. Poncon,
half a tun. Ponderamment, heavily. Pondereux, heavy. Ponderosite, heaviness.
Poneau, a close-stool. Poneropole, the Town of the wicked. Pongneor, as piqueur
in the N. D. Ponhete, a kind of Vine. Ponneresse, Ponneuse, as geline
ponneresse, a laying hen. Pontage, Bridge-work; also Pontage, or Bridge-toll.
Pontail, as pont volant. Pontanage, as pontage. Ponte, a laying of eggs. Ponte,
bridged, that has a bridge over it, or belonging to it. Pontenage, as
pontanage. Ponteux, full of bridges. Pontif, for Pontife, a chief Bishop, or
Prelate. Pontille, a prick, or little point. Pontique, of Pontus. Pontis, a
little bridge. Pontonnier, a Ferry-man. Popin, spruce, neat, or fine. se
Popiner, to trim up himself. Popisine, the smacking sound wherewith Riders
encourage or cherish their horses. Poplitee, Poplitique, a large Vein in the
middle of the Thigh; also a Sinew near to the gartering place, and serving to
turn the leg inwards. Populaire, for le peuple, the common people, the vulgar.
Populeon, Popilion, an Ointment made of black poplar buds. Populeux, populous,
full of people. Populo, a Roll or List of the Fees, or augmentation of Fees,
accruing to the King by the Chancery-Seal; also a pretty plump-faced and
cherry-cheekt boy; or a picture of such an one. Populosite, abundance of
people. Populotier, the Clerk of the Chancery, who in his turn is to make and
keep the Populo. Popyle, the fish Pourcontrel. Porcausou, sowsed hogs-flesh.
Porcelette, a kind of shellfish; also a kind of little Sturgeon. Porche, for
parce que, because. Porchereau, a Sea-hog. Porcherie, a hog-sty. Porchet, a
stake, or pole. Porchier, for Porcher, a Swine-herd. Porchin, of, or like a
hog. Taisson porchin, a hog-badger. Porcille, a Sea-hog. Porcin, as porchin.
Pain porcin, the herb Sow-bread. Porcorau, Liverwort. Poreau, a wart; also any
corn or hard skin coming by labor on the hands or feet. Poree, Beets;
pot herbs; also pottag^ made of beets, or with other herbs. Porfil, and
Porfile, as pourfil in the N. D. Porfiler, as pourfiler in the N. D. Porion,
wild onion, or wild leek. Porositez, for pores, pores. Porque, a S^w. Porque,
(Adj.) hoggish, or Sow-like. Porquet, Porquette, a young pork. Porrace, green
as a leek; of, or like a leek. Porree, as poree. Porriere, a bed of leeks.
Porrion, as porion. Portache, as procace. Portage, carriage; also the custom,
fare, or fee paid for carriage. Portatisse, portative, portable. Port'-aubans,
chain-wales, pieces of wood nailed on both the Outsides of a ship, to keep them
from being worn or galled by the shrowds. Porte-brandons, fiery, flaming. Ciel
porte-brandons, the starry Firmament. Porte-ciel, heaven-bearing. Porte-colle,
as protecole in the N. D. Porte-eseritoire, a Notaries Boy, one that serves but
to carry his pen and inkhorn after him. Porte-flambeux, as Ciel
porte-flambeaux, the starry Sky. Porte-fleurs, flouri hing, flower-bearing.
L'Element porte-fleurs, the Earth. Porte-fraise, a supporter for a ruff
(wrought, or embroidered, and cut into diverse panes.) Porte-guidon, an
Ensign-bearer unto a Troop of horse. Porte-harnois, a Cross, the cross-like
perch whereon Armor is usually hanged. Porte-hanbans, as port-aubans.
Portement, a carrying, or bearing; a wearing; a supporting, or upholding; also
health, or likeing. Porte-mors, the cheek-piece, or cheek-band of a bridle.
Portente, a prodigious, or monstrous thing. Portenreux, prodigious, monstrous,
strange. Porte-panier, a basket-carrier; also a Pedlar. Porte-parole, a
message-carrier between party and party. Porte-peine, laborious, painful,
pains-taking. Porte-piece, a Shoomakers punch, or punchion. Porte-poche, a bag
(or a pouch) bearer, he that carries the Scrip or Wallet for a company of
Beggars. Porte-poulet, a bawd, or carrier of Love-messages. Porte-queue, a
Train-bearer. Portereau, a little or less Gate adjoining unto a greater for a
Palace or House of State; also a Floud-gate, or kind of Sluice, whereby the
course of a River is diverted into a Gut on the one side thereof, cut out for
the turning of some Mill, etc. Porte-roolle, a prompter of one that makes an
Oration, or acts a part, in public. Porte-sac, as porte-poche. Porte-semelle,
the upper leather of a Galoshe. Port-estrieux, the plate of a stirrup.
Porte-tablettes, a Pedlar, or one that carries Table-books, etc. to sell.
Porteure d'une semme, a woman's burden, or Childbearing. Portier, (Adj.)
carrying, bearing. Brebis portiere, a bearing Ewe. Portinal, a portal.
Portioniste, a Prebend in a Cathedral Church. Portionne, rated, shared,
measured out; also stinted. Portionner, to rate, share, or measure out; also to
stint. Portiuncule, an Indulgence obtained (as some report) by S. Francis, of
the Virgin Mary, for the remission of all the sins of those, who (en payant)
came in at one, and went out at another, door of a Church, dedicated unto her
in Angiers. Portoir des Vignes, the branch that bears the Grapes. Portoire,
Portouoire, any thing that helps to carry another thing; and particularly a
Vessel like a half Tub, wherein Grapes be carried on horseback from a remote
Vineyard. Portueux, full of Ports; also of, or belonging unto a Port or Haven.
Portugaise, Portugalle, Portugaloise, a Portegue, a sort of Golden Coin.
Porture, a carrying, bearing, or wearing. La porture d'une brebis, the little
skin or film, wherein a Lamb comes wrapped out of the Ewes belly. Posade, a
lighting down of birds; a laying down of a burden; a resting place; a stop made
by a horse. Etre a la posade, to rest him self, to sit still. Posement, a
putting, s tting, or placing. Posement, staidly. Posque, a potion, or drink
made of vinegar and water. Possesseresse, Possesseuse, a Woman that possesses,
holds, or enioys. Possessoire, (Subsl.) a possession, or a thing possessed.
Posion, the quarter of a Chopine; a little measure for milk, ver^^i^, and
vinegar, not altogether so big as the quarter of our pins. Postele, as poupele.
Poster, to ri^^ post, to make h^^e. Posteral, as posterol. Posteres, the
posteriorums, or hinder parts. Posterieur, posteriour, hinder, inferior.
Posterol, the red Sea-nettle (an ugly and imperfect Seafish.) Posteux, hasty,
or in post-haste. Postille, a postil, gloss, or compendious exposition.
Postilleux, much using, or loving to ride post. Postillonner, to ride post.
Postiquer, to play the vagrant Impostor, or wandering Jugler. Postiqueries,
juggling devices, tricks ^f legerdemain. Postiqueur, a wandering Impostor, a
roguing Jugler. Postulation, a demand, suit, request, or supplication; also a
complaint, or expostulation. Postule, demanded, required, sued for; also
admitted, elected, adopted; also joined in office, linked in company with.
Postuler, to sue, demand, or require; also to plead, or argue at the bar; also
to sue, accuse, or complain of. Postules, wheals, powks. Postuleux, full of
wheals, or powks. Posturable, sequetrable. Potage, made pottage, reduced into
pottage. Potager, (Subst.) a by-place in a Country House, instead of a Larder,
for the laying up of raw or cold meats; also a porridge-belly, or a great
purridge-eater. Potager, (a Verb) to make pottage; also to have in his power.
Se potager, to play the good husband, or give himself wholly to husbandry; to
apply his business at home. Potagerie, herbs, or any other stuff, whereof
pottage is made. Pota^if, pot-plying, tippling square. Pote, the great
Sea-nettle; also swollen, or benumbed with cold. Pote, plump. Potee, brass,
copper, tin, pewter, etc. burnt or calcinated; also a pot full of any thing.
Potein, naturally lame, or defective in a limb. Potelee, (Subst.) plumpness.
Potentiel, strong, forcible, powerful in operation. Potentille, wild Tansey,
Silver-weed. Poterne, a po^tern, or postern-gate, a backdoor to a Fort, etc.
Potes, a kind of shining fish made somewhat like a Cap. Potestat, a principal
Officer, or chief Magistrate. Potie, a knot in ^^^llen cloth; or a rotten
thread or threads and ready to fall from cloth. Potie, as poupele. Potieux,
over-dainty, nice, curious; also peevish, froward, pettish. Potingues, drinking
exploits. Potiron, a Toad-stool; also a kind of Dolphin-like fish. Potonnier,
as pautonnier. Pottee, as potee. Pottein, broken pieces of metal, or of old
vessels, mingled one with another. Pottele, for potele, plump. Pottin, as
pottein; also soder of metal. Potus, physical potions. Pouae, faugh (an
Interjection, used when any filthy thing is said, or showed.) Pouacre, filthy,
nasty, on^ that is ever spitting, or blowing his nose; also la^^^, slothful,
idle. Pouallier, as poalier in the N. D. Poucher, as pocher in the N. D.
Poueiniere, as poulsiniere. Pouein, a Chicken. Pouctau, the wild Poppy, or red
Corn-rose. Poueyrade, the herb called Balm. Poudroyer, as pouldroyer. Poveau,
the pan of a close-stool. Pouee, the ridge of a bed in a Vineyard. Pouelle, for
poile, a Stove. Pouer, to go up; to hale against wind and tide; to pile, or
heap up. Pouer la Vigne, to raise the beds of a Vineyard into ridges.
Pouillard, lousie. Poul, for pou, a louse. Poulaine, as Souliers a poulaine,
old-fashion shoes held on the feet by single latchets running overthwart the
inslep, which otherwise were all open; also, those that had a fashion of long
hooks sticking out at the end of there toes. Ventre a la poulaine, a huge belly.
Poulainement, a foling. Poulainer, to fool. Poulcee, an inch, or inch-measure,
the breadth of a thumb. Poulceon, the 24 part of a Chopine. Poulcepied, the
Pourcontrel, or many-footed fish. Poulcier, as poulcee. Pouldre, and its
Derivatives in use. See them without l in the N.D. Pouldrement, a powdering; a
turning into powder. Pouldrette, fine powder, small dust. Temps de pouldrette,
the season wherein a husbandman breaks the clods of his plowed land. Pouldreux,
dusty, full of dust. Avoir les pieds pouldreux, to be of a nimble or active
constitution, or of a straggling or wandering disposition. Pouldroyement, a
powdering, pulverising. Pouldroyer, to powder, to pulverise. Poulemart, a
weapon like a hanger. A fill de poulemart, with edge or dint of the sword.
Poulener, as poulainer. Poulenne, as poulaine. Poulette, a young hen.
Poulinement, a foling. Pouliner, a mare to sole, or bring forth a colt.
Poullailler, for poulailler, a poulter, or keeper of pullen. Poullarde, the
Sea-hen (a fish.) Poullart, bled poullart, St. Peter's corn. Poullaze, the
Indian Raven. Poulle, for poule, a hen. Poulle, as bled poulle, the wall-barley
called St. Peter's-corn. Poullier, for poulier, a hen-house. Poullion, for
poulion, a little pully. Poulmelee, Bears-foot, Setterwort. Poulmonnie, for
pulmonie, any infirmity of the lungs. Poulpele, as poupele. Poulpie, Poulpie,
for pourpier, Purslane. Poulpre, as pourpe. Poulser, and its Derivatives in
use. See them with an s instead of l in the N. D. Poulse-avant, any thing that
thrusts another forward; an Overseer and forwarder of a work that requires
haste. Jeu de poulse avaunt, lechery. Poulsier, for poussiere, dust. Poulsin,
for poussin, a chick. Poulsiner, to hatch, breed, or bring forth chickens.
Poulsniere, the seven stars. Poultis, a little gate or door accompanying a
great one before, or belonging to a drawbridge, etc. Poulx, for poux, lice.
Poupart, an infant, or young child; also a milk-sop. Poupe, the ^^at of a
woman; the dug of a ravenous beast; also pulp; also the cancrous disease of the
nose called Noli me tangere. Poupes de chenilles, bunches, or clusters of
caterpillars. Poupeau, a little teat, or dug. Poupele, pithy, brawny, full of
pulp; also plump, fleshy. Poupetier, a baly (or puppet) maker. Poupette, a
little baby, a puppet. Poupier, of, or belonging to the Poop of a ship. Vent
poupier, a full (or whole) wind at sea. Poupillons, little teats, or dugs.
Poupin, as popin. Poupine, as pompon. Enter en poupine, to lodge a graft within
a slit made into the top of a stock, and withal to hood it. Poupinement,
neatly, sprucely, quaintly. Pouple, a Poplar-tree. Poupon, an Infant, suckling,
or young baby; also as pompon. Poupper, to dandle. Pourbondir, to bound, leap,
or jump over; also to manage a horse, to make him leap, or bound. Pourbouiller,
to parboil. Pource que, for parce que, because. Pourcelet, for porcelet, a
young hog. Pourchaille, for pourpier, Purslane. Pourchas, eager pursuit,
earnest chase after. Pouvret, somewhat po^r. Pourfendre, to cleave through.
Pourfendu, cleft through. Pourfier, to affirm boldly. Pourfit, for profit,
profit. Pourfiterolle, as profiterolle. Pourject, Pourjecter, as projet,
projetter in the N. D. Pourmener, and its Derivatives. See promener, etc. in
the N. D. Pourneant, in vain, for nothing, to no purpose. Pourparlement,
Pourparle, Pourparler, a Treaty, or Conference about an agreement to be made,
or thing to be done. Pourpe, for poulpe, or polype, the fish Pourcontrel.
Pourpens, great thought, care, study. Pourpense, seriously thought of.
Pourpenser, to bethink himself, to think or consider of. Pourpied, for
pourpier, the herb Purslane. Pourplante, planted throughout, set all over.
Pourplantement, a planting, or setting all over. Pourplanter, to plant, or set
all over. Pourpointerie, a Doublet-makers shop, or a Doublet-makers row, or
street. Pourpointier, a Doublet-maker. Pourprendre, to hold, or take up all.
Pourprins, fully held. Pourprinse, Pourpris, a Close, or Enclosure; or one
enclosure of diverse rooms or closes. Le pourpris d'un Manoir, the Out-rooms,
Courts, Gardens, Orchards, Park, Wood, or Warren, lying round about or near
unto a Manor; and being within one hedge, ditch, pale, or wall. Pourquerre, to
search, or seek hard after. Pourquines, a kind of small black figs. Pourquis,
searched, or sought hard after. Pourreau, for porreau, a leek. Pourris, a
suppuration, a rotting, a turning out of blood into healing. Pourrissable, soon
rotting, likely to grow rotten. Pourrisseur, a rotter; also the spotted and
short-tailed Serpent, no bigger than a little Viper, but presently rotting
whatsoever part of the body is stung by her. Pourrissure, for pourriture,
rottenness. Poursaillir, to leap out of, to bound over. Pourseme, sowed
throughout, or all over. Pourseme de rougeolle, full of the measles. Poursemer,
to sow throughout, or all over. Poursuir, for poursuivre, to pursue, to
prosecute. Poursuivable, pursuable. Poursuivir, Poursuyr, to follow; also to
wander from Country to Country. Pourtoir, as portoir. Pourtraict,
Pourtraicture, for portrait, a picture. Pourvende, a Prebendry, the place of a
Prebend. Pourvoy, a provision, help, remedy. Pousade, as posade. Poussade, a
push, thrust, or jouit. Pousse, as de pleine pousse, at once, at one p^^h.
Pousse, (f.) short wind, pursiness; also the hinder part of a ^ows belly, or
the parts whereon her hinder teats are. Pousse de bled, the chaff of corn.
Pousse-avant, as poulse-avant. Poussepied, the Pourcontrel fish. Pousset de
bronze, the scaly dust that falls from brass, after it has been melted, or
much heated. Poussier, for poussiere, dust. Poussoir, an impulsory Instrument
used by Surgeons for the forcing through of a forked arrow-head. Poussouer, the
Iron-pin wherewith Joyners drive out wooden pegs. Poustaignade, a brood, nest,
or laying of eggs. Pousteau, for poteau, a post. Poustele, as poupele. Poutie,
and Poutieux, as potie, potieux. Poutriages, beams; posts. Poux, for legume,
pulse. Pouy, fie. Pouyr, as tout n'y scauroit pouyr, all cannot go in.
Pouzaranque, an Instrument wherewith water is drawn out of Garden-wells. Poy,
for p^u, little. Poyle, a stone. Poytois, as putois. Poyvre, and its
Deri^atives in use. See them with an i instead of y in the N. D. Poivrier, the
pepper-plant. Practic, for pratique, practical. Practicien, Pragmaticien, a
Practitioner in Law, a Solicitor. Pragmatizer, to practice, to solicit.
Praguerie, league, faction, rebellion. Prain, great with young. Prairier, of,
or belonging to a Meadow. Sergent prairier, a Meadow-keeper, an Officer that
looks unto Meadows. Pranchette, a woman's stirrup. Prangeler, cattle to chew
their cud in the afternoon. Praquerie, as praguerie. Prat, for pre, a Meadow.
Preau, a little Meadow, or a green close; also a smooth green seat under an
Arbor. Preaux, the name of a white, small, and sweet apple. Prebender, to
bandy, at Tennis. Prebstre, for Pretre, a Priest. Precairement, par precaire,
by entreaty, request, or desire; also at another man's will and pleasure; or
only for a while. Precellence, pr^^^ll^n^y, an excellency, or surprising.
Preceller, to excel, to surpass. Preception, a precept. Preceptorizer, to
tutor, to go^^^^. Precep^rice, teaching, instructing. Precesseur, a for^goer;
also a Pred^^^ss^r. Pre^hant^r, to sing before the rest; to begin a Song.
Precipite, for precipice, a precipice. Precipiteux, headlong, foolhardy,
hair-brained. Preclare, excellent. Precogiter, to think of beforehand.
Precognition, Precognoissance, foreknowledge, or former notice of.
Precognoistre, to foreknow. Preconter, to abate, or defaulk part of a sum due
upon a former reckoning. Precordial, belonging to the midriff; near to, or
about the heart. Precordiaux, the midriff; also the heart strings, or sil^n of
the heart; also the parts which be near or about the heart; also the sides of
the belly under the ribs; and sometimes also the whole numbles. Predestinee
satale, fatal destiny. Predial, consisting of, growing in, belonging unto
Meadows. Predicant, for Predycateur, a Preacher. Predivination, a foreghessing,
or presaging. Prediviner, to ghess at beforehand. Pree, for pre, a Meadow.
Preer, to turn into Meadows. Pre-eslu, pre-elected, fore-chosen. Prefige,
prefixed, appointed beforehand. Prefiger, to prefix, to appoint beforehand.
Prefim, determined, appointed, limited beforehand. Prefinir, to determine,
appoint, or limit beforehand. Pregnamment, pregnantly, forcibly, strongly.
Pregnant, pregnant, forcible, strong. Preguste, a fore-ta ler. Preh^ster, to
precipitate, to hasten extremely. Preignant, as pregnant. Preigne, fall, or
with young; also with child. Preignement, as pregnamment. Preigneur, a being
great with child, or with young. Preir, as preer. Prejudicier, to prejudice.
Prejuge, (a Parti^,) fore-judged. Prejugement, a fore-judgement, or former
judgment, a Case ruled in Law; a prejudice or hurt do^e to a Cause by a
Precedent. Preluger, to fore-judge, to rule or direct the opinion of Judges by
a former judgment. Prelasser, to carry himself gravely, portly, pompously; to
square it like a Prelate. Prelation, preferment before others in purchasing.
Prelingant, a boasting ass, or proud coxcomb. Prematurite, forward or timely
growth. Premesse, as presmesse. Premie, a reward, or recompense. Premisse, a
fore-placing, a setting before. Premonstre, portended, or foretold. Freres de
la Premonstree, an Order of Friars which wear white habits. Premourant, dying
first, or before another. Prenonce, foretold, or declared beforehand.
Prenoncer, to foretell, or declare beforehand. Prent, as prent. Prenus, as and
ubi prenus? and where will y^^ take or find them? Preparatoire, preparatory.
Preparement, a preparing, or providing. Prepatour, a Vineyard, or Vine-close
for the best or choicest plants. Preplantement, a fore-planting. Prepostere,
preposterous, or disorderly. Preposterer, to place, or set preposterously, to
put the cart before the horse. Presagier, to presage, or foretell. Presagieux,
Presagiant, presaging, foretelling; full of presages. Presbyteral, Priestly,
belonging to a Priest. Presbytere, a Parsonage, Vicarage, or Priests house.
Preschement, a preaching. Prescience, a prescience, or foreknowledge.
Preservatif, (Adj.) preserving. Presignifie, foretold, signified beforehand.
Presle, as prele. Presme, a near kinsman by father and mother, or in a direct
li^e. Presme d'esmeraude, a base or course emerald. Presmesse, near kindred,
the being next of kin, or the privilege of recovery, or disingaging of land,
due unto the next kinsman. Pres-prenant, Crediteur pres-prenant, an hard or
strict Creditor, one that will be satisfied to the utmost. Presseance, for
preseance, precedence. Pressier, the tree that bears the peach called press.
Pressif, for pressant, urgent. Pressis, cullises, or stained meats.
Pressoirage, as pressurage in the N. D. Pressoireur, for pressurier, he that
works at the Wine Press. Pressouoir, for pressoir, a Wine Press. Pressed, for
vite, quickly. Prestable, which may be lent. Prestance, worthiness, or
excellency. Un homme de belle prestance, a proper, or personable man.
Prestation, a loan; also a lending; a paying of duties, rents, or services.
Preste-charitez, a back-biter. Prestement, as pressed. Prestere, a tempest, or
whirlwind. Prestesse, readiness, quickness, or nimbleness. Presteux, lending,
putting out unto loan. Prestiges, deceits, tricks, impostures. Prestigiateur, a
Jugler. Prestitue, appointed. Prestolant, a Steward, or Overseer, a Surveyer
over a Farm. Prest-oreille, attentive. Prestraille, paultry Priests.
Prestraillerie, a pack of scurvy Priests; also the order of Priesthood.
Prestral, Priestly, of, or belonging unto Priests; also Priest-like. Prestrot,
a little Priest; an under-Priest or Curate; also a little bird something like a
linnet. Presure, as pressure in the N. D. Pretendu, (Subst.) a thing pretended
unto, or stood for. Pretente, a pretense, purpose, project, or intent.
Pretermettre, to pretermit, or omit. Pretermis, pretermitted, omitted.
Pretermission, pretermission, omission. Pretrot, as Prestrot, in the last
sense. Preu, as preux. Prevalence, that which remains of the price of land sold
for the payment of a debt. Preudefemme, a virtuous and discreet Matron. Preudes
gents, valiant, or honest persons. Preud'homme, a stout man; also an honest or
discreet man; also the herb Clary. Preud'hommier, stout, valiant; honest,
faithful. Preveil, an ordinary Meeting of Spinsters and Youngsters at a certain
Place where they work and make merry together. Prevenement, a preventing.
Prevenu, (Subst.) a preventing (in Law) of whatsoever may be objected.
Prevostablement, by Martial Law. Prevostaire, Prevostal, Prevostel, of, or like
a Provost; subject unto the Jurisdiction of a Provost; criminal. Preut, first,
first of all. Preux, stout, valiant; also loyal, faithful, honest, worthy; also
discreet, skilful, ready. Les neuf Preux, the nine Worthies. Preyer, a kind of
Linnet. Priapisme, a lustless extension, or swelling of the yard. Priement, a
praying, an entreating. Prim, as presme. Prim, (Adj.) prime, first, forward;
also thin, small. Prime barbe, the down, or a mossy beard on a young man's chin.
Prime, as le prime des Chevaliers, a prime Knight, the flower of Knights; also
the first hour of the day; also a small Goldsmiths weight, whereof 24 make but
one grain. Soupes de prime, Monastical brewes; cheese and bread put into
pottage; or chopped parsley stewed or laid together with the fat of the
b^^^s-pot on the bread. Prime, (Ad^.) chiefly; ^^nest. A prime, but just now.
Retournez vous au prime, came you again but now? Primement, chiefly, expressly;
also thinly, narrowly; also exactlly, curiously. Primerain, Primeroge
Primerouge, early, timely, forward. Figues primeroges, the first figs that
come, which being too forward commonly thri^e not. Primes, Or primes, now at
the last; only at this time, but now. Primeur, s^alness, slenderness; also
prim^ness, excellency; also forwardness. Primices, for premices, the first
fruits. Primicial, of, or belonging to first fruits. Primordial, first rising,
beginning from. Prin, as prim. Principesque, Princely. Principie, begun, or in
breeding. Principion, a petty Prince. Prinfief, as le Seigneur de Prinfies, the
Lord Paramount, or immediate Lord of an Inheritance, charged with Rent.
Pringalle, a fashion of warlike Engine used in old time. Pringert, a kind of
small bird. Prins, for pris, taken. Prinsault, de prinsault, suddenly, out of
hand. Prinsautier, a starter, a nimble ^umper. Prinsautier, (Adj.) sudden,
quick, or nimble. Prinse, for prise, a taking, or sei^^^g. Printaner, to
spring, or flourish as the Spring. Pris, for prix, price. Prisage, Prisee,
Priserie, a rating, or ^aluing, a rate, or ^aluation. Prisme, as prime. Priste,
a kind of Whale. Pristine, former, old, a^tient; wo^t^^^, accustomed; also
late, or b^t little past. Privaise, the place where the Privy is; also a pipe,
or sunnel, for the avoiding of the ill air of a Privy. Privement, a depriving,
or bereaing. Privoite, for privaute, privacy. Proba^lete, for probabilite,
probability. Probation, a proof, an approbation. Probatique, as Piscine
probatique, a Pond for the washing of the sheep that were by the Law to be
sacrificed. Probosce, a big snout, a huge nose. Proboscide, the trunk, or snout
of an Elephant. Procace, the Post, or Carrier that goes weekly between Rome and
Naples. Procerite, height, talness. Processeux, Processif, litigious, always in
Suits. Processional, Processional; belonging to, or serving for a Procession.
Prochainement, nearly, next, or last. Prochainete, for proximite, nearness,
neighborhood. Prochas, a purchase, a pursuit. Prochasser, for pourchasser, to
prosecute, to pursue. Prochesief, the Fi^f, or Inheritance that is held of a
Lord by a direct and immediate Tenure. Procidence, a falling down of a thing
out of its right place. Proclameur, for proclamateur, a Proclaimer. Proclif,
prone, apt, or inclining. Procours, as parcours. Procrastination, a
procrastination, or delay. Procrastine, procrastinated, or delayed. Proculteur,
for Procureur, a Solicitor. Prodenou, a rope which compasses the Sail-yard of
a Ship. Prodigal, for prodigue, a prodigal. Prodigalise, la ^hed. Prodigaliser,
Prodiger, to la^^^h. Proditeur, a Traitor, a tr^a^^c^o^^ fellow. Prodition, a
treason, or treachery. Prodrome, the forerunner, or news-bringer of another
man's coming; a preparer of the way for another. Prodromes, the Winds which rise
a little before the Dog Days. Proe, for prove, the sore-castle of a Ship.
Proesme, a neighbor; also a Pro^m. Profanement, a profaning, or profanation.
Profanement, profanely. Professoirement, by profession. Proficiat, a ^e^ or
benevolence bestowed on Bishops in manner of a Welcome, immediately after their
Installments. Profiterolle, as pourfiterolle. Profiterolles, Servants vails.
Profonde, deepned; searched for into; pressed, or sank down into the bottom.
Profonder, to sound, search, or go deep into; to dive, or sink unto the bottom
of; to press down. Prosondite, for profondeur, profundity, depth. Profuseur, a
pourer out; a profuse, or lavish man. Progeny, progeny, offspring. Progenier,
to procrea^e, to propagate; to breed, or to beget. Progeniteur, a progenitor,
ancestor, or forefather. Prognostication, for prognostique, a prognostication,
an argument or sign of a future thing. Progreder, to proceed, or go forward.
Prohibeur, a prohibiter, a forbidder. Proisme, as presme. Prolation, an
utterance, or delivery of Words. Prolectation, a pleasant enticement, a
delightsom provocation. Prolepsie, a natural foreknowledge conceived in the
mind. Prolifique, fruitful, or breeding apace. Prolixe, prolix, long, tedious;
large, abundant. Prolixement, prolixly, tediously, at length, at large;
liberally, abundantly. Promarginaire, extended on the margent. Prome, a Butler,
or Drawer; also a Yeoman of the Larder. Promenement, a walking. Prominence, a
prominency, a jutting out; a p^^t-house. Prominent, prominent, or jutting out.
Promiscue, promiscuous, indifferent; also confused, without order.
Promiscuement, promiscuously, indifferent^r, confusedly. Promptuaire, a
Storehouse, a Buttery. Pronateurs, certain M^s^les, whereby the hand is bent
or bowed downwards. Pronau, a pulpit, or the place out of which the prone is
delivered. Prone, (Adj.) prone, ready, apt, inclining. Prononcable, fit to be
pronounced. Pronostique, a prognostication. Pronube, a Bride-maid. Juno
pronube, Juno the Goddess of Marriage. Propelet, a sp^^^ or a quaint fellow.
Propens^^^, ^^ensit^, (...), or in^^ination. Prophyloctice, an antidote, a
counterpoison; or that part of Physic which concerns the preservation of
(...). Propine, drinking money, or somewhat to drink. Propitier, to make
propitious, to a^^o^e, to pa^^^y. Proposeur, a propounder, a proposer. Propret,
^eat, spr^^e. Proprictairement, in property, as an owner, his own.
Propugnacule, a Fortress, or strong hold. Propulsation, a driving back, or
putting away. Proriter, to provoke. Prosenette, as Proxenette. Proserie, a
Place appointed for the nourishment of poor people. Prosner, a Priest to
pronounce the Prone. Prospective, the Perspective, or Optic art; also a
bounded Prospect; a limited Vi^n or Survey. En prospective, openly, for a show,
to be seen. Prosperement, prosperously, happily. Prostates, certain Kernels in
the neck of the Bladder. Prostration, a prostrating, a falling at the feet of.
Prosyllognine, a second Syllogism proving the first. Protele, shifted off, put
back; delayed. Proteler, to shift off, to put back; to delay. Proterve,
froward, cursed, snappish; also proud, saucy, impudent. Protervement, frowardly;
also proudly, saucily, impudently. Protervie, Protervite, frowardness,
curstness, peevishness; also pride, sauciness, or impudency. Prothocolle,
Protocole, as Protecole in the N. D. Protodiables, the first, or chiefest of
Devils. Protomartyre, the first Martyr. Prou, enough. Bon prou leur face, much
good may it do them. Provateure, a kind of green Cheese made in Italy, of the
milk of Buffels. Provect, well grown in age, or of good years; forward in the
course of Arts. Provende, for Prebende, a Prebendry; also provender. Provenir,
to proceed. Proufit, and its Derivatives. See them without an u in the N. D.
Proufiterolle, as profiterolle. Provide, provident, circumspect, wary,
fore-casting. Providemment, providently, with good forecast. Proujecter, for
projeter, to project, or design. Provignable, propagable. Provignage, for
provignement, a planting (or setting) of Vine-sprigs for increase. Proviseur, a
Purveyor, or Provider. Provisoire, provisory, conditional. Proumeu, for promeu,
promoted, preferred. Proumouvoir, to promote, or prefer. Provocatoire, a
provocatory, a writing whereby one is provoked; a challenge. Provoquement, a
provoking. Provoqueur, a provoker, a challenger. Prouveu, Prouvoir,
Prouvoyance, and Prouvoyant. See them with pour instead of prou in the N. D.
Proxenete, a Broker, a Huckster, a man-dealer between party and party. Proyer,
as preyer. Prunelat, the name of a Vine or Grape. Prunelette, a little plum.
Prunier, (Adj.) bearing, or abounding with plums; of, or belonging to plums;
loving plums. Prurir, to itch, to tickle; to desire lustfully. Prurit, an
itching, or tickling; a la^^ful desire of, or affection unto. Pruver, as
preyer. Psalm, for pseaume, a Psalm. Psaultier, for pseautier, a Psalter, a
book of Psalms. Pseudonard, Lavender. Psilothre, Britony, Tettarberry; also an
Ointment for the taking of hair away. Psoloente, a kind of Lightning, whose
flash destroys whatsoever it lights on. Ptoschalazon, a medler, a busie-body.
Ptyade, a kind of Serpent, which raising up her neck and head, spits venom at
those whom she cannot reach with her teeth. Puantise, for puanteur, a stink, or
stench. Puberte, youth, or the age wherein hair begins to grow about the
privities. Publicain, a Publican, or Toll-gatherer; a Farmer, or Levyer of
public Revenue. Puceal, maidenly, or maiden-like. Puceler, for depuceler, to
get a Virgins maidenhead, to deflour her. Pucher, to take up. Pudibunde,
shame-faced, bashful. Parties pudibundes, the privy parts. Pueille, as peulle.
Puel, as Bois estans en puel, having been lately cut, or lopped. Puer la vigne,
to cut a Vine; or as pouer. Puerilite, boyishness, childishness, simplicity.
Puette, a peg in a hogshead of wine; also the peg-hole. Pugnitif, warlike,
contentious, quarrelsome. Puinne, Puisne, spindle-tree, prick-wood,
prick-timber. Puitier, a Well-maker. Puits, for puis, a Well. Pulceau, the name
of a Vine. Pulceaux, full of fleas. Pulcier, of a flea, or full of fleas.
Pulciere, flea-wort; also fleabane. Pulcot, a little flea; a Vine-fretter.
Pulege, Pennyroyal. Pulluler, to bud, shoot, or spring out. Pulmonee, as
poulmelee. Pulpe, the pulp, or pith of plants, etc. also the brawn, or solid
and musculy flesh of the body. Pulpite, for poupitre, a desk. Pulsatil,
knocking, beating. Pulsatille, pass-flower, flaw-flower. Pulsation, a knocking,
thumping, or beating. Pulte, a poultice. Pulverin, the touchhole of a piece of
Ordnance. Pulvinaire, a bolster for a Princes bed; also a banqueting Bed made
in the Roman Temples to the honor and for the ease of their Gods. Pulvine,
furnished with cushions, or pillows. Pumice, pierre pumice, a Pumice-stone.
Punaisie, stink, or stench. Punctille, as pointille in the N. D. Punction, a
pricking, or stinging; also a pointing. Punctual, for punctuel, punctual.
Punctuation, Punctue, and Punctuer. See ponctuation, ponctue, and ponctuer in
the N. D. Punesie, Pleurisy. Pupe, the fish Pourcontrel. Pupilaire, pupillary,
of, or belonging to a Pupil. Pupilarite, nonage. Pupine, the name of an apple.
Puput, a Whoop, or Dunghil-cock; also a kind of frog. Puputer, to whoop, or
cry like the Whoop. Purer, for suppurer, to grow unto a head, or mattar; to
yield mattar. Purge, a Purge; also a clearing, or justification, or the
endeavor which a delinquent uses to purge himself. Purgement, a purging.
Purificatif, purifying. Puron, a botch, or blain full of ordure or filthy
mattar. Pusillanime, pusillanimous, cowardly. Pusillanimement, cowardly.
Pusillanimite, pusillanimity, cowardliness. Pussons, the small green flies that
lie cluttering under the leaves of herbs, and within a while devour them.
Pustuleux, blistered, or full of blisters. Putanier, as Putier. Putasser, to
follow whores. Putasserie, a whoring, or wenching. Puteal, of a pit; deep as a
pit. Puterbe, an Hermit (or any other) whose breath is tainted by much feeding
on herbs. Puterie, as putasserie. Putier, a Wencher, a Whoremonger. Putoir, a
stink, or rank smell; a Wencher; or as Putois, a Fitch, or Fulmart. Putput, as
puput. Putredineux, full of rottenness. Putride, rotten, putrified. Put, a
Wench, or a whorish Lass. Puye, as appuye. Puyne, as puinne. Py, as pis.
Pyafer, or Pyapher, for piaser, to be stately, to carry it proudly. Pype-pou,
the round-rooted Crow-foot. Pygme, little, of a small stature. Pyment, as
piment. Pynthe, for pint, a pint. Pyralide, a Fire-fly. Pyrate, and Pyraterie,
as Pirate, Piraterie in the N. D. Pyratique, Pyratical; of, or belonging to a
Pirat. Pyronomie, the art of governing or ordering Alchymistical fires. Pyrope,
a kind of fiery-red Carbuncle. Pyrotechnie, the making of Fireworks.
Pyrothique, caustic, and corrosive. Pyrouet, for volant, a shittlecock.
Pyrouette, as pirouette. Pyvoine, for pivoine, Peony.
Q
QUadragenaire, of forty years. Quadragesimal, of, or belonging to Lent.
Quadrain, for quatrain, a Stanza, or staff of four Verses. Quadrangule,
quadrangular, apiece. Quadrannier, of four years, four years old.
Quadrature, square, well-grown, well-set, almost as thick as long. Quadre,
squared; also sitted, or agreeing unto. Quadrelle, an arrow, a shaft. Quadrer,
to square; also to suit, or be fit for. Quadrilettre, a word of four Letters.
Quadrille, a Squadron containing 25 (or fewer) Soldiers. Quadrin, a farthing.
Quadrivie, a place where four sundry ways do meet; also a way that has several
turnings, or partings. Quadrupe, four-footed. Quadruplement, a quadruplication.
Quadruplique, a second rejoinder, or a third defense, or writing put into Court
by a Defendant. Qu'a-hu qu'a-ha, well or ill, one way or another; also
laboriously, painfully. Quai, for Quay, the Key of a River, or Haven; also a
pillar of marble, or stone. Quaisse, Quaissier, as Caisse, Caissier in the N.
D. Qualibre, as Calibre in the N. D. Qualibre, sit for (fitted unto) the bore.
Quandoque, as Docteur de quandoque, a Dunsical Doctor. Quaneuse, a Mill-hopper.
Quantores, albeit, though, although. Quantes fois, how often, how many times.
Toutes and quantes fois, or Toutes fois and quantes, as often as. Quanton, as
Canton in the N. D. Quaqueroles, the tawny Beetles which buzze about the flocks
in Hay-time; also the shells of Snails, etc. Quaquet, or Quaquetement,
Quaqueter, Quaqueteur. See Caquet, Caqueter, Caqueteur in the N. D. Quarantain,
Quarentaine, for quarantaine, a term of forty days. Quaresme, for Careme, Lent.
Quaresmeau, as Jour quaresmeau, a Lenten, or Fish-day. Quarillon, etc. See
Carillon in the N. D. Quarlet, the small Plaice, or fresh water Plaice; or a
kind of broad and short Plaice. Quarme, the horn-beam, or hard beam. Quarneau,
for creneau, a pinnacle, a battlement. Quarquan, for carcan, a carknet. Quarre,
a square; also a corner. Quarrefour, Quarreler, Quarrele, Quarrelure. See them
with Ca instead of qua in the N. D. Quarrelet, as quarlet. Quarreleur, for
Savetier, a Cobbler. Quarrellage, as Carrelure in the N. D. Quarrement,
squarely. Quarrer, Quarreure. See Carrer, Carrure in the N. D. Quarrier, as
Quarrieur. Quarriere, a highway, a quarry of stone; also as Carriere in the N.
D. Quarrieur, a Quarrier, or Quarry-man. Quarril, the fourth part of a Spanish
Real; a small Coin worth our three halfpence. Quarroy, a great and broad
Highway. Le grand Quarroy, the Kings Highway. Quartage, a fourth. Quartage, a
fourth part of the price whereof is paid, as a Custom, unto the King.
Quartaire, the quarter of a pound; also a measure containing about 12 spoonfuls
of liquid, and weighing about 5 ounces in dry things. Quartault, the quarter,
or fourth part of a measure. Quartellee, a certain quantity of, or measure for,
ground in Bourbonnois. Quartement, fourthly. Quarteranche, the eighth part of a
Bichot (a measure for co^^.) Quarteree, a Bushel. Quarternier de Gensdarmes, an
Officer having the charge or command of four Gensdarmes. Quassant, Quassation,
Quasse, Quasser. See them with Ca instead of qua, in the N. D. Quas^ette, for
cassette, a little box. Quasseur, a breaker. Quasseure, for cassure, a bruise.
Quaternaire, fourth. Quatir, as Catir in the N. D, Quatridien, of four days.
Quatroille, diversified, streaked with one color upon another. Quatruplon,
four Ducats in one piece. Quau, for corpse, body. Quayer, as Cayer in the N. D.
Quayre, a little worm that breeds between the bark and wood of trees. Quecas,
as quocas. Quemand, as Caimand. Quemilse, the principal overture of a melting
furnace. Quemen, a way. Quemuletier, a Counter-charmer, a Wizard, or good
Witch. Quenaille, for canaille, rascals. Quenaise, as Droict de quenaise, the
Right of Escheatage, whereby an Inheritance Roturier falls into the Lords
hands, when the Tenant thereof leaves no Heirs of his Body behind him. Quenie,
a certain old-fashion garment; or as Squenie. Quenouillee, a distaff full of.
Quenouillette, a little distaff; also a kind of small apple. Quens, a Count,
or an Earl. Quercelle, Quercerelle, a Kastrel. Querimonie, a complaint, or
moaning. Queritant, seeking for, enquiring after. Querquois, for carquois, a
quiver. Querre, for querir, to fetch. Quesne, for chene, an Oak. Quesnoy, a
Wood of Oaks. Quesse, for caisse, a chest. Questable, finable; (as some Tenants
are at the pleasure of their Lords) also searchable. Questal, servile, holding
by Villanage; held by a servile Tenure. Questaux, Villanes, the property of all
whose Estate is in their Landlords; so that they can neither devise by will,
nor alien by bargain, any part of it. Queste-pain, a common beggar; or a
begging. Questionnette, a small question, or a slight demand. Questionneur, a
questioner, an inquisitive Companion. Questuaire, gainful, or profitable. Queu,
for queux, a whet-stone. Queuage, a certain Impost levied in some parts of
France, upon every Queue or Pipe of wine. Queue, tailed, that has a tail.
Queuette, a little tail, or stalk; the tip of a thing. Queus, for queux, a
whet-stone. Queuse, a rude lump, or mass, as of iron, etc. coming from the
furnace, or before it be wrought into bars. Queusser, as pren guard que ton car
ne se queusse, take heed thy cart does not overthrow. Queut, as queus. Queute,
small drink, small beer. Queux, for Cuisinier, a Cook. Le grand Queux de
France, the Kings chief Cook. Queymander, to beg from door to door. Quidam, a
certain man. Quidditatif, doubtful, obscure, full of quirks; also contentions,
litigious. Quideau, a wicker engine whereby fish is caught. Quierchier, the
name of a small bird. Quietin, as Theatin. Quietude, rest, or peaceableness.
Quignet, a little corner. Quillard, for billard, billiard. Quillat, the
refining, or touch of gold; also a carrat. Quillebandier, one that plays much
at nine-pins. Quillela, a kind of Play like unto Cat and Trap. Quillevillis,
skirret roots. Quillons de la guard d'une espee, the cross bars of the hilt of
a sword. Quinaire, an ancient Roman Coin. Quinaud, an ape, or monkey; an ill
favored creature. Je l'ai rendu quinaut, I have put him to a nonplus.
Quinconce, as Verger quinconce, an Orchard whose trees are ranked in equal
distance asunder, and directly one over against the other. Quine, as fair la
quine a quelcun, to make mouths at one. Quines, two fives on the dice.
Quinette, a crutch; also a snipe. Quinquailles, old iron; also small iron ware.
Quinquallier, for Quinquaillier, an Iron-monger. Quinquaneleur, a Bankrupt; one
that procures or forces his Creditors to give him five years day of payment.
Quinquangle, having five angles, or corners. Quinque, as pain de quinque,
delicate bread made against the five solemn Feasts of Easter, St. Peter's and
St. Paul's day, the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, and Christmas. Quinquenaut,
the name of a fly in Beausse. Quinquenelle, Quinquennelle, a respit or term of
five years. Fair quinquenelle, to become bankrupt. Quinquennon, as Privilege
de quinquennon, a Protection for five years granted by the Prince (or his
Officers) unto a Debtor, who makes good proof of the loss, or extreme
diminution of his Estate, since the time of the making of the bargain, whereby
he became indebted. Quinson, a Chaffinch. Quintain, as quintin. Quinte-feuille,
cink-foyl, five-leaved grass. Quintement, (Adj.) fifthly. Quintessence,
exceedingly refined, or purified. Quintessencer, as quintessencier in the N. D.
Quintessencieux, all quintessence, full of spirit. Quintil, a rash Judge, a
hasty Censurer of other men's writings. Quintin, French lawn; a course kind of
lawn. Quinuneve, en order quinuneve, checkerwise. Quiquenelle, as quinquenelle.
Quis, sought, looked, or searched for; fetched, gotten. Quitement, freely, or
without hinderance. Quiterne, for guitare, a guitar. Quiteur, or Quitteur, a
quitter, acquitter, or discharger. Quittus, an acquittance, or quietus est.
Qulocul, the last or youngest Child one has. Quocas, shaled nuts. Quocquetier,
a Huckster. Quolibet, a quirk, or quiddity; also a jest, or byword. Un vieux
quolibet, an old saying. Quoquar, an egg. Quoquelicoq, for coquelicoc, wild
poppy. Quoquemart, for coquemar, a brazen pot, or chafer, with a cover. Quote,
quoted, marked, noted in the margent; also taxed, assessed, rated. Quoter, to
quote, or mark in the margent; also to tax, assess, or rate. Quotidien, daily.
Quotiens, totiens quotiens, very often, as often as he pleases. Quotient, the
part, or portion, which in the division of a thing among many falls unto every
ones share. Quotize, Quotizer, as Cotise, Cotiser in the N. D. Quottite, an
even assesment, or rate imposed; the laying on every one his share. Quouat, an
underling. Quoue, tailed, having a tail. Froument quoue, tailed wheat,
fox-tail. Quoy, quiet, still. Quoyement, quietly. Quoyete, quietness, stilness.
R.
RAballe, a certain root, of whose juice (mixed with other simples) a pretty
sauce is made. Rabalter, to rumble, rattle, or make a terrible noise, as (they
say) spirits do in some unfortunate or unfrequented houses. Rabaniste, a dunce;
also one that studies, or is cunning in the Works of the Rabbis. Rabans,
rope-yards, the ropes whereby the Sails of a Ship are tied unto the Yards.
Rabaschement, a rumbling, or a terrible rattling, such as (some say) is made by
Hobgoblins in some unfortunate or unfrequented Houses. Rabascher, Rabaster, as
rabalter. Rabat-joye, a bringer of ill-tidings, a teller of ill news (after the
receipt of good ones.) Rabavit, prickmadam, sengreen the lesser. Rabbe, as rabe.
Rabbienne, reconciled. Rabbienner, to reconcile, to make friends again.
Rabdomantie, divination by twigs, or small wands. Rabe, a turnep; a round
Limosm radish. Rabiere, a plot, or bed of turnips. Rabilite, re-inabled,
restored. Rabiliter, to re-inable, to restore. Rabillecoustrer, to patch, to
mend. Rabine, a high-grown wood. Rabinique, Rabby-like; of the Rabbis.
Rabioles, turnips. Rabitue, re-accustomed, settled again. Rabituer, to
re-accustom; to settle again. Rabble, strong-backed. Rablette, a shrew-mouse.
Rabobeline, patched, or pieced again. Rabobeliner, to patch, or piece again.
Rabobelineries, patches renewed, or patches upon patches. Rabolliere, a rabbets
nest, the hole wherein a Doe-Cony keeps her young ones. Raboteure, a
smoothing. Raboudris, crooked or misgrown trees, which will never prove timber.
Rabougri, a grub, a short-necked crook-back. Rabougrir, to grow crooked and low
withal. Rabouliere, as rabolliere. Rabrouer, for rebrouer, to chide, to
rebuke. Rabroueur, a chider, or rebuker. Rabuser, to re-abuse. Raccamuse,
squashed, or pashed down; beaten flat. Raccamuser, to squash, or to pash down;
to beat (or to make) flat. Raccointer, to make once more acquainted with, to
reconcile. R'accoller, to embrace again. Raccorni, grown as hard as horn.
Raccornir, to make as hard as horn; also to grow hard like horn. Raccueilly,
for recueilli, gathered. Rachais, lean, scraggy. Rachalander, to get into trade
again. Rachapter, for racheter, to redeem. Rachapteur, a redeemer. Rachasse,
chased, or driven back again. Rachasser, to chase, or drive back again.
Rachasseur, a chaser, or driver back again. Rachater, as rachapter. Rachetable,
redeemable. Rachimburges, certain Judges of Causes which were determinable by
the Salick Law. Racin, for raisin, a grape. Racinette, a small root. Racineux,
full of roots. Racle, a scraper; a rasp, or grater; also the iron, ring, or
hammer of a door. Racledenare, a scrape-good. Racleresse, a scraping woman.
Raclet, the name of a fool, and therefore of little understanding in the Law.
Racletorets, such as rub sweaters in hot Bathes, or hot houses. Racompter, for
raconter, to tell. Racorny, as raccorni. Racourir, for recourir, to recourse.
Racquit, as raquit. Racrocher, to make of the form of a hook. se Racroupir, to
gather close together his hinder parts. Rade, (Adj.) quick, swift. Radial, of,
or belonging to the upper and bigger bone of the arm. Radjancer, for ragencer,
to put in order again. Radieux, radiant, shining, glittering, blazing, flaring.
Radis, a raddish-root. Radis sendu, the double raddish, or many rooted raddish.
Radot, as les arbres qui servent de radots aux maisons, trees which serve (or
are good) for the reparation, or mending of houses. Radote, un vieux radote, an
old doting fool. Radoub, for radoubement, a repairing. Radouere, a strickle
for the measuring of corn. Radresse, a redress, reformation, amends. Radresser,
and its Derivatives. See redresser in the N. D. Radvestir, to re-invest, to put
again into possession. Radvestissement, a re-investing. Radveu, re-advowed,
re-approved, taken into protection again. Radune, assembled, or gathered
together. Raduner, to assemble, or gather together. Radvouer, to re-advow, to
re-approve, to take into protection again. Raf, see rif. Rafaux, wild Bores of
about two years of age, when first their tasks begin to peer out of their
mouths. Rafe, a rifling. Fair sa raze, to make his hand, or make up his mouth,
by many purchases or prizes. Rafe, rifled, scraped, caught, or snatched; also
slipped away. Rafer, to rifle, scrape, catch, or snatch; also to slip away.
Raffarder, to rail, or scoff at. Rafflade, a gripe, grasp, or violent seizure.
Par une rafflade, at once, at one clap. Fair une rafflade, to catch, or to
snatch at. Rafflater, for reflater, to flatter again. Raffoler, to hurt, or
fall again; also to besot again. Raffuste, new-stocked; fitted with a new
stock, or staff, frame, or carriage. Raffuster, to fit or furnish with a new
stock, staff, frame, or carriage. Rasreschir, and its Derivatives. See
rasraichir, etc. in the N. D. se Ragaillardir, to grow merry again. Ragalice,
for reguelice, lickorice. Ragats d'eau, a great flood, inundation, or ravage of
waters. Ragement, dalliance, wantonness, lasciviousness. Rager, to dally, or
play the wanton. Rageux, wanton, lascivious, lastful. Raggrandir, to increase,
or enlarge. Raguiser, to sharpen again. Raillard, jesting. Raillon, a kind of
dagger which opens and shuts with a vice. Fer de flesche a raillon, a
shoot-head, a forked or barbed head. Raim, a bough, or branch of a tree. Par
raim de baston, or par raim and baston, a delivery, or quitting of land, by the
delivery of a bough, rod, or stick that grows thereon. Rain, as raim, a bough.
Rain de forests, the purlues, or skirts of forests; the places that be next, or
near adjoining unto them. Rain, a frog. Rain de buisson, the hedge-toad.
Rain verte, the green-frog. Rainette, a little frog; also a pawn at Chesse.
Rainseau, Rainselet, a little branch, or bough. Raiole, as riole. Raionne,
furrowed, set or sown in furrows; digested into several ranks, rows, or
furrows. Raipaire, as repair in the N. D. Raire, to shave. Raise, for raze,
shaved. Raise, a path, or furrow between ^eds in a Garden, or in a tilled
ground. Raisine, for resine, rosin. Rais^nee, for raisine, a thick conf^^ion of
grapes. Rai^^^^x, full of grapes. Rai^^iere, the third membrane or skin of the
eye, wherein the hole ^^, by which we see; also the V^^ld. Raisinnee, as
raisinee. Raiz, a net. Raiz, for raze, shaved. Raize, as raise. Rale de Cheval,
the pastern of a horse. Ralette, as marcher de ralette, to tread but lightly.
Ralle, as rasle. Rallement, a rattling in the throat. Raller, to rattle in the
throat; also to return, or to go again. Raller a terre, to run fast and close
by the ground. Rallion, an arrow with a forked, or barbed head; a broad arrow.
Ralonger, to lengthen, to stretch, or draw out in length. Ramage, (Adj.) of, or
belonging to branches; also wild. Ramaison, as ramoison. Ramancher, to set a
new have, or handle; to reduce to its former order; to put again in its former
place. Ramar, the fi^h called the Sea-fox. Ramasse, for balais, a broom.
Rambade, the bend or wale of a Galley. Ramberge, a fashion of long ship
narrower than a Galley, but swift and easy to be governed. Rambure, the name
of a sowrish apple. Ramentevoir, to put in mind of, to remind. Ramentu,
remembered, called to mind. Ramerci, a certain forbidden Engine wherewith fish
may be caught. Ramereau, Ramerot, a young Stock-dove. Rameure, a rowing.
Rameux, for ramu, full of branches, or boughs. Ramieller, to use further
enticements, to sweeten once again. Ramification, a branching, or spreading
into several branches. Ramifie, branched, or spread in branches. Ramifier, to
branch, or spread in branches. Ramilles, small sticks, or twigs; little boughs,
or branches. Raminagrobis, a counterfeiter of gravi^y, a severe outside of a
flight inside. Ramingue, froward, peevish; also wandering, loytering, roving
about. Cheval ramingue, an inconstant moving horse. Ramodere, moderated,
qualified, tempered. Ramoderer, to moderate, qualify, temper. Ramoisin, a
seared, or dead branch cut from a tree. Ramoisons, loppings of trees, or the
tops of branches lopped off. Ramoiti, moistened, soaked again. Ramoitir, to
moisten, to soak again. Ramolles, Past-meats like Sausages. and made of the
juice of herbs, the yolks of eggs, cheese, and meal, seasoned with salt, and
boiled with water until they float; when they are taken out of it, and served
up hot. Ramonter, for remonter, to lift up again. Ramortissement, as
amortissement in the N. D. Rampable, which may be crept on. Rampar, for
rempart, a Rampire. Rampeau, as Droict de rampeau, a privilege, or power to
lecher. Ramplaige, for remplage, a filling up. Ramponne, a jest. Ramponner, to
jest. Ramposne, as ramponne. Rampson, for rancon, a ransom. Ramusele, as un
nez ramusele, a thick and short nose, a bottle-nose. Ran, a Ram. Rancade, as a
rame ou a voile rancade, with all their oars or sails, as fast as they can go.
Ranche, hoarse. Rancin, the new hunting of dogs after a default. Ranco, trotter
de ranco, to walk from rank to rank, from one to another. Rancoeur, rancor,
hatred, malice, or inward grudge. Rancon, a Welsh-hook, or hedging-bill; also a
triple-forked weapon about the length of a Partisan. Ranconneur, a ransomer;
also an oppressor, or extortioner. Randonnee, a swift, or violent course.
Randonner, to run swiftly, violently, as fast as he can. Rane, a frog.
Ranglier, for Rangier, a Raindeer. Ranguillon, the tongue of a backle.
Ranulaire, as Vein ranulaire, a Vein under the tongue, opened or let blo^d for
the S^^i^ancy. Ranules, the Veins which are under the tongue; also the little
Mascles of that part. Ranulet, a painful swelling of the Veins under the
tongues of Cattle. Ranuncule, the Crow-foot, or Butter-flower. Raouler, as
rouler in the N. D. Rapaire, the dung of a Hare. Rapatrier, as repatrier.
Rapeau, for rappel, a repeal, or calling back; also a return, or a second
course, or hurl at keyles. Rapedenare, as racledenare. Rapel, a lure for a
Hawk. Rapement, a rasping, a hard scraping. Raper, to rasp, or scrape hard;
also to knock at a door, etc. Rapetisse, diminished, grown less; also set in,
as a piece of work. Rapetissement, a diminishing, or growing less; also a
setting, or standing in a piece of work. Rapetisser, to lessen, to diminish;
also to set in a piece of work, or a piece of work to stand in beyond its
fellows. Rapeur, a rasper, or hard scraper. Raphan, a Horseradish. Raphanelle
sauvage, Dittander, Pepper-wort. Raphe, a beast shaped like a Wolf, and spotted
like a Panther; also the name of a Saint. Mal de S. Raphe, a Leprosy, or the
wild Scab. Raphe, a radish; also a Lepers clicket; also a handful of; also the
game at dice called Raffle. Rapher, for raffer, to sweep all away. Raphileux,
rugged, rough, knotty; also full of seams. Raphine, as mal de S. Raphine, the
wild scab. Rapiere, an old rusty Rapier. Rapille, a kind of sand used in the
cutting of marble. Rapineux, ravenous, greedy, covetous. Rapoil, a Shaver, or
Barber. Rapoule, the Bur-dock, or great bur. Rappe, a Game, or Exercise,
wherein the Actors, being armed with Gauntlets, busset one another. Rappe, for
rape, small wine. Brouer rappe, the broth of Chicke^s and Veal, with crumbs of
white bread, livers of Pullein, ver^^^^, and white Ginger strained together.
Rappeau, as rapeau. Rappecon, the Seafish called a Heaven-gazer. Rappes, the
Pains, a disease in a horses leg. Rappetissement, as rapetissement. Rappez, a
kind of Grapes preserved in Must, and served to the table as great dainties.
Rapporte-nouvelle, a News-bearer, or Tale-carrier. Raprecy, a re-valuation, or
new price made of. Rapse, for rape, a rasp. Raptacer, Raptasser, for
rapetasser, to patch. Raquaille, for racaille, rascality. Raque, dirt, filth,
ordure; mud, mire; or as rasque. Raque, as vin raque. See rape in the N. D.
Raquedenare, as racledenare. Raquetier, a Racket-maker; also one that handles a
racket well. Raquettes, the high-sided perwigs, or wires of hair, worn
heretofore by Gentlewomen. Raquit, a discharge, a redemption. Raquitable,
redeemable. Raquoise, quieted, appeased, pacified. Raquoiser, to quiet,
appease, or pacify. Rarefacient, making thin, or scant. Rarefaction, a making,
or becoming thin. Rarefier, to rarifie, to make thin or scant. Ras, for sarge,
Serge. Ras de Milan, the ^^^^st kind of bare serge, a Silk-serge. Rascas, as
Dousin rascas, the great Sea-Vrc^i^; or the Sea-Scorpion. Rasche, a s^^ald, or
a running s^^rf, e^peciall, in the heads of little children. Rascle, for
perdrix, a Partridge. Raze, for rasement, a shaving, or sh^^^ing; also a^
incursion into, or a ra^aging of (...) Enemies Cou^t^^. Rascau, network; also
a great slat^^t^^^ed Boat, Barge, or Lighter; or as radeau in the N. D.
Rase-poll, a Barber. Rasibus de, close to, even with. Rasibus qui bouge, the
word of a certain (...), wherein or with a feast strikes all (...) and
up-standing (...) d^w^ into it (...) i^ it. Raser de bl^^d, a mea^^re
containing (...). Rasle, a rattling in the throat. Rason, a delicate red-scaled
fish in the Seas about Rhodes and Maltha. Called thus, because his back is
fashioned like a rasor. Raspatoire, a rasp. Rasper, as raper. Raspecon, as
rappecon. Raspeux, rugged, rough as a rasp. Rasque, the scurf of a scald head.
Rassailler, to set on again. Rassel, arse-smart, water-pepper. Rasserene, made
lightsome, cheerful, clear, or calm. Rasserener, to make lightsome, cheerful,
clear or calm. Rassote, grown sottish; fallen into dotage. Rassotement,
sottishness, dotage. Rassoter, to grow a sot, to dote. Rastelot, wild Chervil.
Raston, a fashion of round and high Tart made of butter, eggs, and cheese.
Rasue, as resue. Rasurier, a Shaver, a Barber. Rataconne, botched, patched.
Rataconner, to botch, to patch. Rataconnerie, a botching, or patching.
Rataconneur, a botcher, or patcher. Rataconniculer, to reiterate lechery.
Ratatine, gr^bby, shrank in, thick and short. Rateceler, to mend a bo^^, etc.
Ratelle, for rate, the Spl^^n. Ratelou, male (or long) Birthwort. Ratepenade, a
Bat, a Rearmouse. Ratepenade de Mer, the flying fish. Ratepenades, as
raquettes. Ratiocination, a discoursing, reasoning, arguing. Ratiociner, to
discourse, reason, or argue. Rational, reasonable, endued with reason. Ratisse,
scraped, grat^d. Ratisser, to ^^rape, to grate. Ratisser le cer^^au, to ^^x, or
perplex the brains. Ratissouer, for ratissoire, a g^^ter. Ratissure, a ^^^ping,
or ^^^aping; also the s^ranags of. Rat-liron, a Dormoase. Ratoir, a m^us^-trap,
or a trap for rat^. Ratoire, a Raptory, a skie-breaking (...) or (...). Raten,
a ^itt^^ rat, or mouse; also a ra^ton. Rat^rere, a pari^^-(...); also a
rat-trap. Rattatine, a ratatine. Ratte, for souris, a mouse. Ratte volage, a
bat. Ratteinte, a reaching, or overtaking once more. Ratteloup, as ratelou.
Rattendrir, to make soft again. Rattier, sullen, retired, unsociable; also
belonging to the spleen. Rattierement, sullenly, retiredly, privately, in
huggar-muggar. Rat-veul, a Dormouse. Rature, razed, or scraped out. Ravacher,
as ravasser. Ravaille, small fish sold one with another. Raval, as ravallement
in the N. D. Ravanel, the Raddish-root. Ravanille, a little raddish. Ravasser,
to rave, to talk idly. Ravauderesse, for ravaudeuse, a woman-botcher. Ravayde,
a coyl, or stir. Rauder, for roder, to wander up and down. Ravel, as bogne
ravel, the name of a little Seafish. Ravenet, the raddish root. Raverdir, to
wax green, or to canker, as a brazen vessel that is either not used, or ill
kept. Ravestissement, a reinvestiture. Ravet, as ravenet. Ravette, a little
turnep. La petite ravette, the garden-rampion, or wild rape. Raveul, as
rat-veul. Raviere, a plot, or bed of turnips. Ravigore, recovered, restored
unto vigor up again. Ravigorer, to recover, to restore unto vigor, to revive
or cheer up again. Ravigotter, to revive, a half-dead man to return unto life.
Ravineux, violent, impetuous. Ravive, revived. Raviver, to revive. Raulet, the
name of a certain great pear. Ravoire, for ravage, ravage, ransack. Ravoirer,
to recover, to have again. Ravole, fled back. Ravoler, to fly back, to return
flying. Rauque, hoarse, harsh, or of an unpleasant sound. Rause, sedge,
sheer-grass. Rayant, for rayonnant, radiant, glistering. Rayaux, bars, or long
and narrow pieces of metal. Raymolles de blanc de Chapon, the brawn of a Capon,
raisins of the Sun, and marrow shred all together; then made into little cakes
or loaves, and fried with seam, or hogs sewet, and served up with Sugar strewed
on them. Rayole, as riole. Rayonneux, full of beams, full of furrows. Raze, the
broadest part of the shoulder blade, very gristly and bending toward the
backbone; also as raze. Razeforts, Forts-razing. Razis, a kind of white
Ointment used by Surgeons, for the drying up of Sores. Re, shaven. Reachet, a
redemption, or buying again. Reaffle, the Devil. Reaffranchi, made free again.
Reagal, the right Aconite. Reaggravation, a re-aggravation, (and particularly)
the last and most direful Excommunication of Offenders. Real, for reel, real,
essential. Real, for Royal, Royal, Princely. Realement, as reaument. Realgar,
the fume, or smoke of Minerals. Realisation, a making real. Realise, made real.
Realiser, to make real. Realleguer, to allege again. Realler, to return, to go
again. Reant, braying as a Stag. Reaplani, new-levelled, made plain or even
again. Reappoincte, new sharpened at the point; also newly (or again) agreed.
Reau, a deep furrow. Reaudition, a second hearing, a hearing over again.
Reaument, really, essentially, effectually, thoroughly; assuredly, certainly,
indeed. Rebaille, restored, given back. Rebailler, to restore, or give back.
Rebailler form, to bestow a new shape. Rebaisotter, to reiterate kissing.
Rebanni, banished again. Rebannir, to banish again. Rebanqueter, to make (or to
be at) a new or another banquet. Rebarbatif, grim, stern, sour, froward.
Rebarboter, to mutter, or mumble words often between the teeth. Rebarder un
Cheval, to put on a horses armor, trappings, or furniture again. Rebatement, a
repulsing, or beating back. Rebatter, to tumble down. Rebeine, a rout, tumult,
uproar, or rebellion. Rebellement, a rebelling. Rebeluter, to bolt over again.
Rebenir, Rebenistre, to bless again; to hallow or sanctify a holy (but
profaned) thing. Rebetre, a Wren. Rebeyne, as rebeine. Rebigoter, to play the
hypocrite, or superstitious noddy again. Rebindaine, turned upside down. A
jambes rebindaines, with legs wide stradling, and upwards turned. Rebine,
eared, or tilled the second time. Rebinement, a second earing, or breaking up
of land. Rebiner, to plough, till, or ear ground the second time. Rebineur des
chooses accordees, one that denies or calls back his word, that will not stand
to conditions before agreed on. Reblandi, re-appeased, pacified again.
Reblandir, to re-appease, or pacify again. Reblandir le bestail prins en
dommage, to pay for the damage done by Cattle. Reblandir le Seigneur, a Tenant
upon the seizure of his Land, for non-payment of Rent, etc. to repair unto his
Landlord, or to his Officer, and demand the true cause thereof; or make him a
reasonable and sufficient offer of satisfaction; or with good words, and in
fair terms, to excuse his omissions, or defaults of payment, etc. and entreat
him to bear yet a while with him. Reblandissement, a re-appeasing, or pacifying
again; also an offer of satisfaction, or a request of forbearance, for Duties
omitted, Rents unpaid, Wrongs done. Rebobeline, patched, mended again.
Rebobeliner, to patch, or mend again. Rebobelineur, a patcher, a botcher.
Rebobine, patched all over. Rebondonner, to stop with a bung again. Reborner,
to make new bounds for. Rebote, booted again. Reboter, to boot, or pull on
boots, again. Reboucler, to buckle again. Rebouer, le bas rebouer, an engine
wherewith fish is (forbidden to be) caught. Rebouffer, to puff up the cheeks
again. Rebougie, feared again. Rebougier, to fear again. Rebouillement, a
boiling once more, or over again, a second boiling. Rebouiller, to boil once
more, or over again. Rebouillonner, to bubble, or wamble over again. Reboule,
bowled again; also turned down, or in; shrunk in. Rebouler, to bowl again; also
to turn down, or in; to shrink in. Rebousse, as rebours in the N.D. Rebout, for
rebut, a repulse, or denial. Reboutement, a repelling, or rejecting; a
refusing, or denying; also a checking, or rebuking. Rebouter, to repel, or
reject; refuse, or deny; check, or rebuke. Reboutonner, to bud again; also to
button again. Rebransler, to shake again. Rebriche, a motive, or advertisement
in writing upon an Inquest. Rebricher, to make a motive, or advertisement in
writing upon an Inquest. Rebride, bridled again. Rebrider, to bridle again.
Rebrillement, a double glittering, or twinkling; a twinkling, or sparkling
reflection. Rebrise, bruised, or broken again. Rebriser, to bruise, or break
again. Rebrocarder, to retort a jest. Rebroie, as rebroye. Rebrosser, to
return, to retire; also to bend; also to turn up the point, edge, or end of a
thing. Rebrosser la terre, to break up the ground. Rebrousser, to browze, or
nibble again. Rebroye, stamped, or pounded again. Rebroyer, to stamp, or pound
again. Rebruire, to resound, or to make a new rumbling. Rebugler, to low, or
bellow again; also to ring, or resound. Rebure, (Subst.) a repulse, a denial.
Recalcitrer, to kick, or strike back with the heels again. Recancele, cancelled
again. Recanceler, to cancel again. Recanement, the braying of an Ass. Recaner,
to bray like an Ass. Recarder la lain, to card wool over again. Recarreler des
souliers, to set new soles on shoes. Recasse, cassed, or abolished again.
Recasser, to cass, or abolish again. Recave, hollowed, or dug into again.
Recaver, to hollow, or dig into again. Receindre, to gird anew. Recelation,
Recelee, Recelement, a concealing, hiding, or keeping close. Receleement,
hiddenly, closely. Receleresse, for receleuse, a woman that secretly receives
stolen goods. Recense, numbered, told, reckoned; also related. Recensement, a
numbering, telling, or reckoning up of; a relating. Recenser, to number, tell,
or reckon; also to relate. Recentement, for recemment, recently, newly, lately.
Recepe, cut off, or away; also repaired, mended; or underset. Receper tout le
bois, to cut all the wood away. Receper une muraille, to repair a wall, or mend
it at the bottom. Recepice, Recepisse, an acquittance, or discharge.
Receptaire, a note of physical Receipts. Receptoire, a receptory, any peace or
vessel that is fit to receive. Recerceller, to hoop anew; also to curl, or turn
up, as the hair. Recerche, and its Derivatives. See Recherche, etc. in the N.
D. Recez, recoilings, retreats, departures; also vacations. Rechaffaude, set,
or presented on a scaffold again. Rechaffauder, to set up, or to set on a
scaffold again. Rechamailler, to hack, or slash again. Rechaner, to bray like
an Ass. Rechange, as robbes de rechange, change or choice of Gowns, several
Gowns. Door and argente a rechange, interchangeably silvered and gilt.
Rechangement, a shifting, an exchanging, a changing again. Rechangeur, an
interchanger, or exchanger. Rechargeouer, a spring; the ginn set for Snipes,
Woodcocks, etc. Rechatouiller, to tickle again. Rechaucher, as rechausser in
the N. D. Rechauffement, a heating again; also a heating, or putting into heat.
Recheance, a possession in trust; the use, or custody of a thing on condition,
or with a Proviso, to restore it. Recheminer, to walk again. Recheoir, to
return, to fall back or again. Recheville, pegged, or pinned anew. Recheviller,
to peg, or pin anew. Recheuter, to relapse; to fall back, or again. Rechiffrer,
to make new ciphers, to cipher over again. Rechignard, a frowning, or grim
fellow. Rechignement, grimness, or frowning. Rechignement, frowningly, grimly.
Rechiner, for rechigner, to frown, or to look grimly. Rechoir, as recheoir.
Recidive, relapsed. Recidiver, to relapse. Recine, an afternoons nuncheon, or
collation. Reciner, to feed between dinner and supper. Recise, herb Avens,
Bennet, or Blessed. Recitateur, Reciteur, a reciter. Recitement, a reciting.
Reclaim, and Reclain, as reclam in the N. D. Recliner, to incline. Reclorre, to
shut, or close up again. Reclos, shut, or closed up again. Recocquebille, whose
end turns upward. Nez recocquebille, a Nose whose bridge is flat or hollow in
the midst, and turns up at the end. se Recoibler, to withdraw, or to retire
himself. Recollationne, re-examined by the Original. Recollationner, to
re-examine a Copy by the Original, or one writing by another; also to take a
new Collation. Recombatre, to fight again. Recomfort, as reconfort.
Recommandablement, comm^^^ably. Recomfort, as reconsort. Recommandablement,
commendably. Recommandaces, funeral-prayers, or praises. Recommandatif,
recommending. Recommandatoire, recommendatory. Recommanderesses, such Women as
by commending and undertaking for Maids procure them services. Recommuniquer,
to impart again. Recompensement, a recompencing, or rewarding. Recondit,
hidden, concealed, kept secret. Reconduiseur, one that brings another home
again. Reconferer, to talk of the matter again. Reconfermer, for reconfirmer,
to confirm again. Reconfesser, to confess again. Reconfine, banished again.
Reconfiner, to banish again. Reconfort, great comfort. Reconforte, much
comforted. Reconforter, to comfort much, to cheer up exceedingly. Reconfronter,
to compare once more together. Reconfuter, to confute again. Recongreger, to
re-assemble, to rally. Reconjure, conjured again. Reconjurer, to conjure again.
Reconqueste, a second conquest. Reconquerre, Reconquestre, and Reconquestier,
for reconquerir, to conquer again. Reconse, hidden, concealed. Reconsement, a
hiding, or concealing. Reconser, to hide, or to conceal. Reconsiderer, to
consider again. Reconsolide, reconsolidated, closed up again. Reconstruire, for
rebatir, to build up again. Reconsulter, to take new advice. Recontempler, to
review. Recontester, to make new protestation of, or complaint unto.
Recontracte, recontracted. Recontracter, to pass a new contract. Recontraindre,
to compel again. Reconvaincre, to convince again. Reconvention, a new
agreement; also the reviving of a Law-sute. Reconvertir, to convert again.
Reconvier, to re-invite. Reconvoquer, to re-assemble, or call together again.
Reconvoy, an attendance back. Reconvoye, re-conducted. Reconvoyer, to bring
back. Reconvoyeur, he that brings back. Recoquilleure, a curling; also a taking
heart, or growing lusty. Recoquiner, to fall a begging again. Record, a record,
a Witness that remembers well the thing he witnesses; also a testimony. Now by
Records (in the Plural Number) are also meant two Persons, whom a Sergeant used
heretofore to have with him, or call unto him, when he arrested, or served a
Writ on a man. In the first case clapping them on the shoulders, he willed them
to bear witness what he had done. In the second, they signed together with him
the return of the Writ; or if they could not write, he signified in it their
names and presence. These Records were to be sufficient and well-known
Inhabitants of that Place, and neither Kinsmen, Allies, nor of the household of
the Party that employed the Sergeant. Recordation, a remembrance. Record, new
strung; also testified, related, reported, notify'd, cer ti fy'd. Exploict
record, an Execution done by a Sergeant in the presence of the Records, or two
Witnesses. Recordeler, to string anew; also to twine again an untwisted cord,
or string. Recorder, as recordeler; also to testify, relate, report, notify,
certify. Se recorder, to remember, to call to mind. Recordeur, a Witness, one
that was present at the deed doing, and remembers it well. Recors, a witness, a
record. Recors, (Adj.) remembering, mindful of. Recouler, to run, or to glide
back. Recoulourer, for recolorer, to give a new color to. Recoupes, shreds,
clippings, parings; also a middle sort of bran. Recoupler, to couple again.
Recouronner, to crown again. Recourquebille, as recocquebille. Recourroucer, to
anger again. Recourse, for recours, a recourse, or refuge. Recourser, for
retrousser, to tuck up a garment. Recouseure, a new sowing, or stitching up.
Recouvrance, a recovery. Recoy, rest, quiet, ease. Recrant, Recreant, tired,
toyled, wearied, spent, out of heart. Recreativement, sportfully, delightfully,
pleasantly. Recremens, excrements. Recrespe, crisped. Recrever, to burst again.
Recrimination, recrimination, or retorting of a crime, an accusation of an
accuser. Recriminer, to recriminate, retort a crime, accuse an accuser.
Recrocu, as recocquebille. Recroire, to believe again; also to re-seize, to
re-arrest; also to restore, deliver, or give back. Recroist, a re-increase; a
new, or second growth. Recroquebillage, a hooky bending, or bowing; a winding,
or turning inwards. Recroquebille, Recroqueville, and Recroquille, crooked,
bent, bending, wound, or turned inwards. Recroquillement, a bending, bowing,
turning, or winding inwards. Recroquiller, to bend, bow, turn, or wind inwards.
Recroquillonne, as recroquebille. Recrudi, made, or grown raw. Recrudir, to
make, or to grow raw. Recte, right, equity, justice, honesty. Rectificateur, a
rectifier. Rectification, a rectifying, or rectification; a correction,
purification, separation of pure from unpure stuff, by a second distilling,
etc. Rectorerie, for Rectorat, a Rectorship, a Vice-Chancellorship. Rectorial,
Rector-like, belonging to a Rector or Vice Chancellor. Recueilleur, a
Collector, a reaper, or gatherer together. Recueiller, for recueillir, to
gather. Recul, a recoil, or giving back; also the hinder part of a thing.
Reculade, a recoyling, a going, or giving back; also a by-hole, or secret
corner. Reculee, as recul. Reculorum, a reculorum, backward, behind, or
behind-hand; also forsaken. Recupercute, for repercute, reflected.
reverberated. Recurer, to cure, or to heal again. Recutir, to circumcise; to
clip, or cut about. Recutit, circumcised; clipped or cut about; also
new-skinned. Recuver, to tun, or put into a fat, again. Redaigner, to vouchsafe
once more. Redarder, to throw back a dart. Redargue, checked, reproved,
rebuked. Redarguer, to check, to reprove, to rebuke. Redargution, a check,
reproof, or rebuke. Redater, to redate, to add a new date unto. Read, for
roide, stiff. Redebatre, to debate again. Redebvoir, for redevance, an
obligation. Redebvoir, (a Verb) to owe again. Redeclamer, to declame again.
Redeclarer, to declare again. Redecliner, to decline again. Redecorer, to
decorate again. Rededie, dedicated again. Rededuire, to deduct again.
Redefaire, to undo, to defeat again. Redeleguer, to re-appoint, to give a new
commission unto. Redeliberer, to deliberate again. Redemanger, to itch again.
Redemener, to stir, toss, or tumble again. Redemeurer, Redemourer, to stay once
more. Redemolir, to demolish again. Redenoncer, to denounce, or publish again;
to threaten, or summon anew. Redent, a double notching, or jagging, as in the
teeth of a saw. Redesfermer, to open once more. Redesfier, to distrust again.
Redesjuner, to eat a second breakfast. Redespouiller, to strip again.
Redevaller, to let, or put down again. Redevider, to make a new division.
Redevoir, as redebvoir. Rediffamer, to slander again. Redifier, as reedifier.
Redigerer, to digest again. Redime, redeemed. Redimer, to redeem. Redins,
redding clothes. Redistribuer, to distribute again. Redition, for reddition, a
restoring, surrendering, or yielding up. Redituaires, as Moines redituaires, a
Sect of Franciscan Friars which have Lands and Revenues; therein differing from
the Mendicants, or begging Friars, who are to possess nothing. Redolent,
fragrant, odoriferous. Redompter, to subdue, or to tame again. Redompteur, one
that subdues, or tames again. Redon, a gift returned, or one thing given for
another; also the requital of an ill by a good turn. Redondage, gross, or
course meal; grudgeons. Redondamment, excessively, superfluously. Redonner, for
render, to give back, to return. Redonter, as redompter. Redormir, to sleep
again. Redormissement, a sleeping again. Redouble, a double fold; a redoubling.
Redoubleure, a redoubling. Redoubtillon, a scarecrow. Redoupier, a horse to
turn diverse times with one breath. Redoutillon, as redoubtillon. Reduite, for
reduit, a block-house, a little fort. Ree, a faulty, or guilty person; one that
is accused, or arraigned; a defendant in any suit. Reedification, a
new-building. Reedifie, built again. Reedifier, to build again. Real, (Subst.)
a manner of catching waterfowl. Reement, the braying, or bellowing of a red
Deer. Reemere, as remere. Reentement, a new-grafting, a grafting again.
Reenter, to graft again. Reenterrer, to re-inter, to put into the earth again.
Rear, to bellow, to bray as a red Deer. Reestre, to be again, or to be renewed.
Refacon, a new fashion, a second form. Refaconner, to make of a new (or
another) fashion. Refaillir, to fail the second time. Refarder, to paint over
again. Refascher, to anger again. Refect, for refait, repaired, mended.
Refectouer, for refectoire, a Refectory; or the room wherein the Friars eat
together. Refente, a cleft, slit, or cut, (especially in the middle of a
thing.) Bois de refente, cleft wood, such as pales, etc. are made of. Refente
de feuilles, the line or division that runs along or appears in the middle of
leaves. Referer, to relate, report, or recite. Referir, to smite, or strike
again. Refesser, to whip, or scourge again. Refester, to make a new holy day.
Refestier, Refestoyer, to fear again. Reffe, as une noix reffe, an hard-shelled
nut. Reffiron, the third gate of the womb; or the mouth of the matrix, which is
left across, and not lengthwise, as the hymen, etc. Reffonder, as refonder.
Reffort, for raifort, a horse-raddish. Reficher, to fasten again. Refier, to
trust once more. Refiger, to clot, or coagulate again. Refigure, figured over
again. Refigurer, to figure, or to paint over again. Refiler, to spin again.
Reflairer, to smell, or vent again. Reflamber, to retort, or beat back a flame;
also to flame back. Reflateur, a great flatterer. Refleuter, to pipe again.
Reflexif, reflexive, reflecting. Reflot, an ebb, or ebbing of waters.
Reflourir, for refleurir, to flourish again. Refocillation, a refreshing, or
reviving. Refociller, to refresh, to revive. Refomente, fomented, or cherished
again. Refomenter, to foment, warm, or cherish again. Refonce, headed again, as
a Cask; also plunged, or gone down to the bottom again. Refonder les despences,
to pay back the costs and charges. Refondrement, as renfondrement in the N. D.
Refondrer, as renfondrer. Refort, for raifort, a horse-raddish. Refouir, to dig
into again. Refouloir, the rammer head, wherewith powder is rammed into a gun.
Refournir, to furnish anew. Refourvoyer, to mistake his way again. Refraction,
a rebound. Refraindre, as refreindre. Refrainte, a restraint, a bridling, or
refraining. Refraischir, (...) rafraichir in the N.D. Refranchir, to leap, or
skip over again. Refrappement, a striking again; also a reflecting, or a
reverberating. Refreindre, to bridle, to restrain, or keep under. Se
refraindre, to refrain, or forbear. Refrenation, a refraining. Refrene,
bridled, refrained, or kept under. Refrener, as refreindre. Refrequente,
frequented again. Refrequenter, to frequent again. Refreschir,
Refreschissement, as rafraichir, rafraichissement in the N. D. Refreschissoir,
a small fountain. Refresote, frizled, curled. Refreter un navire, to new-rig a
Ship. Refrigerateur, a refresher, or cooler. Refrigere, coolness, refreshment.
Refriquer, to rub again; to renew an old grief, to r^b an old sore. Refriquer
une chose jugee, to revive, or set on foot an old adjudged Suit. Refrire, to
fry again. Refrissonner, to quake, or to shiver again. Refroisser, to break
asunder again. Refronce, re-doubled, much gathered; also exceedingly wrinkled,
or rumpled; also frowning. Refu, for resus, a denial. Refue, as resue.
Refugieux, for refugie, fled to a place of refuge. Refuite, a flying back, an
evasion. Refulger, to shine, to glitter. Refuseur, a refuser, or a denier.
Regabeller, to double a tax, custom, or toll; also to impose a new one. se
Regaillardir, as se ragaillardir. Regalement, royally. Regalice, and Regalisse,
for reguelice, licorish. Regaliste, one that injoys, or stands for a benefice
that is subject to the Droit de Regale. Regardement, a looking, viewing,
beholding. Regardeur, a spectator, viewer, or beholder. Regardeure, and
Regardure, a look, sight, or view. Regazouiller, to report, or to record, as
birds do, one another warbling. Rege, a measure of three foot and a half, used
by Surveyours in the Bourdelois. Regeance, for regence, Regency. Regeiner, to
tortare, or to rack again. Regenner, to imitate, or counterf^it nearly.
Rejereer, as rejareer. Regetter, for rejetter, to reject. Regimbement, a
kicking, or striking back with the feet or heels. Regimbeur, a wincer, or
kicker. Regir, Regisser, to govern, or to rule. Registration, a registring, a
recording. Reglisse, for reguelice, licorish. Reglure, as reiglure. Regnard,
for renard, a fox. Regnardaille, the brood of foxes; also a crew of subtle
knaves. Regnarde, a bitch-fox. Regnardeau, for renardeau, a young (or a little)
fox. Regnard^r, to play the fox; to steal aside upon a guilty conscience, or
for fear of being taken; also to pervert a truth with shifts, tricks, or
subtilties; also to spue. Regnarderie, sliness, or craftiness; also a stealing,
slipping, or stinking aside upon approach of danger, or guilt of conscience;
also a perverting of the truth with shifts, or crafty lies. Regnardesque,
crafty, or full of sleights. Regnardiere, a fox-furred gown, or garment.
Regnardise, fox-like subtilty, sliness, or craftiness. Regnateur, a reigner,
governor, absolute Ruler. Regnatrice, a Queen, a Sovereign Governess. Regnaut,
the language, or barking of foxes. Parler regnaut, to speak through the nose.
Regnicoles, the actual Inhabitants of a Kingdom. Regnure, as renure.
Regobillonne, merry, pleasant, in a merry mood. Regodronner, Regoldronner, to
pitch a ship (for example) to make it tight; also to set a ruff-band again.
Regorge, as je leur en bailleray a regorge, I will over-glut them withal, I
will feed them (or cram it into them) until they spue again. Regoubillonner, to
eat an after-supper, to eat late anights; also to be in a merry mood.
Regouster, to taste again. Regrabellement, a curious and reiterated sifting of,
or search into. Regrabeller, to sift a matter over and over, to search into the
bottom of it. Regracie, thanked, or thankfully acknowledged. Regraciement, a
thankfulness, or thankful acknowledgment. Regracier, to thank, or to
acknowledge thankfully. Regraing, for regain, the after-crop of bay. Regrateur,
for Regratier, a scourer of old clothes. Regratier, (a Verb) as regracier.
Regravir, to climb, or creep up again. Regredille, Regredillonne, crisped,
curled. Regrediller, Regredillonner, to crisp, to curl. Regres, a resignation
of a Benefice, upon condition, that if during the Resignors life it become void
by resignation or death of the Resignee, it shall return without farther
Induction or Institution unto him. But this conditional Resignation, heretofore
in use, is not at this day allowed of in France. Regretable, fit to be
lamented. Regrez, as regres. Regriffer, to claw again. Regringote, chanted, or
quavered again. Regringoter, to chant, or to quaver again. Regripper, to gripe,
or snatch again. Regrisse, frowning, grim, fullen. Regrouvi, a starveling.
Reguarir, for reguerir, to cure again. Regue, as rege. Reguerdonner, to reward
plentifully. Reguetter, to watch very narrowly. Regule d'antimonie, a kind of
tin. Regurgitation, an overflowing. Regurgiter, to overflow. Rehabilitation, a
re-establishing, or restoring unto former ability. Rehabiliter, as rabiliter.
Rehabitation, a returning to a former habitation. Rehabiter, to re-inhabite, or
dwell again in. Rehabiteur, to settle again; to accustom, or inure unto again.
Rehacher, to hack, or chop again. Rehair, to hate again. Rehaiter, to revive,
rejoice, or cheer up exceedingly. Rehaler, to hale, or pull again. Rehanter,
again to haunt, or frequent. Reharceler, Reharier, to hurry, turmoil, vex
again. Rehasarder, to venture again. Rehaster, to hasten again. Rehennir, to
neigh again. se Reherber, to get new grass. Reherser, to harrow over again.
Reheurter, again to hit, dash, or knock against, Rehoche, shaken, or jogged
again. Rehocher, to shake, or jog again. Rehonnir, to shame, or dishonor
again. Rehouement, a new digging. Rehouer, to dig again. Rehouser, to pull on
breeches again. Rehousser, to cover with a horse-cloth again. Rehucher, to
whoop, or call back from. Rehumecte, moistened again. Rehumecter, to moisten
again. Rehumer, to sup up again. Rehurter, as reheurter. Rejalir, and Rejallir,
for rejaillir, to spurt up. Rejalissement, a spurting up. Rejanner, to deride.
Rejaper, to bark again. Rejarcir, to rive, or cleave again. Rejaser, to prate
again. Rejauger, to gage a cask again. Reject, a rejection, a refusal; also a
new putting forth, a casting out again; also as rejet. Reject de fosse, the
bank of a ditch. Reject d'arbre, a young shoot, or sucker. Fueille de reject,
the leaf that succeeds in the place of another leaf, which has been plucked or
beaten down. Reject de femme, a putting away of his Wife. Rejection, a
rejection. Rejet, the brim of the lover of a Dove-coat, whereon the Pigeons
alight; also the jerk given by a horses legs, when he yerks out behind; also
as reject. Rejettal, an Engine wherewith small birds are caught. Reifort, for
raifort, a horse-raddish. Reigle, and its Derivatives in use. See regle, etc.
in the N. D. Reigleure, and Reiglure, as reglement in the N. D. Reimber, for
redimer, to redeem. Reimportuner, to importune again. Reimposer, to impose
again. Reimprimer, for r'imprimer, to reprint. Reimprobrer, to upbraid again.
Reimputer, to lay a new imputation. Reinciser, to make a new incision into.
Reinciter, to incite again. Reincliner, to bend, lean, or incline again.
Reinduire, to induce again. Reineux, strong-backed, lusty; also of, or
belonging to the reins. As malady reincuse, the running of the reins.
Reinfecter, to infect again. Reinformer, to inform again. Reingerer, to thrust
in again. Reinhumer, to bury again. Reinjurier, to revile, or to wrong again.
Reinnover, to innovate again. Reinser, for laver, to rinse, to wash.
Reintegration, a re-establishment. Reinterpreter, to interpret, or to expound
again. Reinterroguer, to examine again. Reinviter, to invite again. Rejouster,
to just again. Reiponce, as raiponce. Reistre, a Reister, a German Horseman;
also a fashion of long cloak. Faict a la Reistre, made after the new fashion
(especially if there be any grosness in it.) Rejudication, a re-adjudging unto.
Rejurer, to swear again. Relaboure, tilled, or plowed over again.
Relabourement, a second tilling, or plowing. Relabourer, to till, or plow
again. Relaict, whay. Relaier, as relayer. Relaisser, to leave, or relinquish
again; also a Har^ to squat. Relantir, to smell (or to grow) musty. Relaps,
relapsed, fallen into an error which he had recanted, or sickness which he had
recovered. Relasser, to weary again. Relaxation, a relaxation, discharge, or
enlargement. Relayer, to succeed in the place of the weary; to refresh,
relieve, or ease another by an undertaking of his task. Relayer coche and
chevaux, to take fresh horses and coach. Relegation, a relegation, or
exilement. Reliage, a binding, or hooping of Casks, etc. Relicher, to lick over
again. Relinquer, to relinquish, leave, or forsake. Relinqueur, a relinquisher,
or forsaker. Reliqua, rest, remnant, or leaving. Le reliqua d'une fiebvre, the
remains or grudgings of an ague, after it has seemed to leave one.
Reliquaille, an old remnant, fragment, or monument. Reliquataire, in
arrearages, behindhand, in whose hands there is yet somewhat to be paid; also
left, remaining. Reliquateur, one that is behindhand, or in arrerages, one that
has yet somewhat to pay. Relivrer, to deliver again. Rellet, the name of a
tart apple that has party-colored sides. Reloger, to lodge again. Relods,
Relots, as Droict de Relots, 20 pence upon every pound of Lods and Ventes due
unto a Landlord in Purchases made of the Estates of his Tenants Censuels.
Relouer, to hire again. Reluicter, to wrestle, or contend again. Remailler, to
piece a broken Coat of mail, or net, with new links, or mashes. Remaindre, as
beaucoup remaint de ce que fol pense, much is behind of that a fool accounts
of; a fool comes ever short of his intentions. Remains, remnants. Remander, to
send for back again. Remanent, a remainder. Remanoir, to remain, or rest, or
stay behind. Remantilles, remnants. Remassonner, to build anew. Rembade, as
rambade. Rembancher, to put a thing into its right place again. Rembouer, an
Engine wherewith fish is (forbidden to be) caught. Rembours, for remboursement,
a reimbursing, restoring, or paying. Rembraser, to re-inflame. Rembre, to
redeem. se Rembrider, as Cheval qui se rembride, a horse that arms or defends
himself upon the breast, by clapping the branches of his bit against it.
Rembrousser, as rebrousser in the N. D. Remediement, a remedying, redressing,
healing, or helping. Remembrance, a remembrance, or mindfulness; also a cause
of remembrance; a resemblance, or image of; a thing that bears the form, or
puts us in mind of another thing. Remember, remembered, called to memory. se
Remembrer, to remember, to call to mind. Rememoration, a remembrance, or
remembering. Rememore, remembered, recorded. Rememorer, to remember, to record,
to call unto mind. Remenant, as remanent. Remenement, a bringing back. Remere,
a redeeming of things morgaged, or sold. Grace ou faculte de remere, a power of
redeeming things morgaged, or sold. Remerer, to redeem, or buy back, a thing
sold. Reminiscence, remembrance. Remissionaire, whose offense is remitted.
Remmalicer, to grow more spiteful, or malicious. Remocquer, to deride again;
also to towe one Vessel at the stern of another. Remollitif, mollifying,
softning. Remolquer, as remorquer in the N. D. Remonce, for remontrance, a
remonstrance. Remontage d'Artillerie, Carriages for great Ordnance. Remore, the
Suck-stone, or Sea-lamprey; a little fish, which cleaving to the keel of a
ship, hinders the course of it. Remorfondre, to take cold again after much
sweating. Remot, for eloigne, remote, or far off. Remouvoir, to remove, or put
away. Remparer, to fortify, to enclose with a rampire. Rempenner une flesche,
to new-feather an arrow. Remper, as ramper. Remplace, placed again; also set in
the place or stead of another. Remplacement, a new placing; a laying, or
setting in another place; also a putting in the place or stead of another.
Remplacer, to place again; to take out of one place and set in another; also to
put one thing in the place of another. Remplier, to lay down a seam, to turn in
a hem. Remplissement, Remplisson, a filling. Remploy, a re-imployment, as of
money made of one thing or another. Remployer, to reimploy. Remplumer, to
feather anew. Je me remplume, I begin to recover my health, wealth, or
authority; I pick up my crumbs again. Rempoissonner, to furnish again with
fishes. Remprisonner, to cast into prison again. Rempson, for rancon, ransom.
Remu, as Octroyer remu, to give, or agree unto a delay in a Suit. Remuance, a
frequent moving, or stirring. Remucres, fustiness, or mouldiness.
Remue-mesnage, a turbulent, or tedious person; one that affects change,
novelties, innovations. Remueur, a mover, or remover. Remugle, musty, or fusty.
Remuneration, a recompense, or reward. Remuneratoire, remuneratory. Remunerer,
to remunerate, recompense, or reward. Remusseau, a bottom, or clue of thread,
yarn, etc. Renager, to swim back. Renaissement, for renaissance, a new birth;
or a being new born. Renal, of, or belonging to the kidneys. Renaquer, as
Renasquer. Renardaille, Renarde, Renarder, Renardesque, and Renardise. See them
spelt with a g before n. Renardier, of, or belonging to a Fox. Renasquer, to be
heartily vexed, to swear horribly. Renaviger, to sail back, to sail over again.
Renavrer, to wound again. Renaut, as regnaut. Renche, for rang, rank.
Rencheoir, to fall again. Rencheute, a relapse. Renchier, a Rain-Deer.
Rencocher, to knock the second time. Rencon, and its Derivatives. See rancon,
etc. in the N. D. Renconneur, a ransomer; an oppressor, or extortioner.
Rencontreur, a merry man, a facetious person. Rencuser, to detect, or betray.
Rendable, restorable. Rent rendable, a rent-seck or charge which may be
extinguished, redeemed, or bought out. Rendage, Rendement, a rendering, or
yielding, a restoring, or giving back. Rendenter, to set new teeth unto.
Renditer, to frame a new Indictment against; also to demonstrate, manifest, or
point at again. Rendon, as randon. Rendouble, as redouble. Rendouer, a
retribution; or the time, or vessel, of restoring. Renduire, to anoint, or
besmear again. Reneau, as bocque. Reneger, to snow again. Renettoyement, a
second cleansing. Renettoyeur, one that cleanses, or scoures a thing over
again. Renfardeler, to pack up again. Renferrer, to lay new irons on; also to
strike, or thrust through again with a sword. Renfester une maison, to put new
ridge-tiles on a house, to new-roof it. Renfierir, to make proud, stately, or
furly again. Renflage, Renflement, a new-swelling. Renflamber, Renflammer, to
reinflame. Renfonce, new-headed as a Cask, whose bottom or head is new set in;
also hollowed, or sunk in. Renfoncement, a new-heading of Casks; also (in
Painting) hollowings, sinkings, or shadowings. Renfondrer, to sink again; also
to darken, obscure, or over-shadow. Renforcir, for renforcer, to reinforce, or
strengthen again, to double the force. Renfourner, to put into the Oven again.
Renfrongner, and its Derivatives. See refrongner, etc. in the N. D. Reng,
Renge, for rang, rank. Renge, for range, ranked, set in order. Rengelet, the
name of a yellow and sweet apple. Rengendre, re-ingendred, new-begotten.
Rengendrer, to re-ingender, to beget again. Rengendreur, a re-ingendrer.
Renger, as ranger in the N. D. Rengette, as se laisser aller a la rangette, to
give her self a whorish scope, to suffer her shoe to go awry. Rengier, for
rangier, a Rain-Deer. Rengigner, to bewitch, or deceive again. Renglacer, to
congeal again as ice. Rengloutir, to swallow up again. Rengluer, to glue again.
Rengouler, to devour again. Rengourmer, to curb, or keep in strait subjection.
Je te rengourmeray bien le groin, I will make thee hold thy head low. Rengrege,
exasperated, grown worse. Rengregement, an exasperating. Rengreger, to
exasperate, or make worse. Renhanter, to new-head a pike, etc. Renhardir, to
reincourage. Renhaster, to put on the spit again. se Renherber, to get new
grass, to become grassy again. Renhorter, to advise (or exhort) again.
Renhuiler, to oil over again. Renjabler, to new-rigol a piece of Cask.
Renjanter, to put new spokes into a wheel. Renicher, to return home. Renitence,
resistance, a hard-thrusting or endeavoring against. Renitent, resisting,
endeavoring, laboring, or thrusting against. Reniveler, again to measure, or
lay even with a level, again to sound with a plummet. Renn-fane, the Standard,
or Coronet of a Troop of horse. Rennuyer, to weary again. Renogle, the little
green frog, or toad. Renoiant, false of promise. Renoiser, again to brawl, or
contend in words. se Renommer de quelqu'un, to give out that he belongs to one.
Renoter, to mark again. Renoueur de vieilles Causes, a renewer of old Suits.
Renouille, for grenouille, a frog. Renouvee, for renouee, Knotgrass. Renouvet,
a soon-ripe apple that is no bigger than a Tennis-ball; also the Cider made
thereof. Renfaismer, to give new seisin unto. Rensemencer, to sow again.
Rensevelir, to bury again. Rentamer, again to cut, open, or break up.
Rentasser, to heap, or pack up again. Renter, for reenter, to graft again.
Renteux, yielding Rent, charged with Rent. Rentonner, to tune again.
Rentraicture, the laying in of a seam with the fingers; also a drawing of rent
cloth, a dearning. Rentrainer, to trail, or to draw back. Rentreur, for
rentrayeur, a dearner. Renvahir, to reinvade. Renversement, inside outward,
upside down, topsy turvy, backward. Renvier, to revy at play. Il y renvioit de
sa rest, he ventured all upon it. Renure, as la renure d'une poulie, the
hollow, or furrow of a pulley, wherein the rope runs about it. Reoste, taken
away again. Repairer, to lodge in, to repair unto. Repaissaille, a feeding, a
repast. Reparee, for blette, the herb called Blit, or Blits. Reparement, a
repairing. Repargner, as respargner. Reparoistre, to appear again. Je te le
feray reparoistre, I will make thee pay soundly for it. Repart, a re-division;
also a reply. Repartement de debtes, an equal dividing, or sharing of a Debtors
estate, or of the money made of it, among his Creditors. Repateliner, to
flatter, or sooth up again. Repatrie, restored unto his own home; also
reconciled, or made friends with. Repatrier, to restore to his own home; also
to reconcile, or make friends again. Mais c'est le repatrier trop loing, but so
we fetch his pedigree too far. Repensement, a serious considering, or earnest
thinking of. Repentailles, repentance, or the accidents and fruits thereof.
Repentin, sudden, unlooked for. Repentivement, penitently. Repercutif, a
repercutive, a Medicine that repels, or drives pain from the place whereunto it
is applied. Repermis, permitted, or suffered again. Repertible, which may be
found, or recovered. Repertoire, a repertory, or inventory. Repetasser, for
rapetasser, to patch. Repeyret, Feverwort, small Centory. Repigeonnement, a
budding, or putting forth again. Repigeonner, Repionner, to bud, or put forth
again. Replaindre, to complain again. Replantement, a replanting.
Repletivement, fully. Repliement, Replieure, Replissure, a folding again.
Replouvoir, to rain again. Reployement, a folding again. Repolon, the Soldiers
manage. Reponce, rampions. Reponcer, to pound again. Reponchon, as raiponce.
Repontique, as Rheupontique. Reposade, a rest, or a resting place. Faisons
reposade, let us rest, sit down, or take our ease. Reposement, quietly.
Repositoire, a Repository, or Storehouse. Reposouer, for reposoir, a
resting place. Repost, as en repost, secretly, closely. Repoulsoir, as
repoussoir. Repous, a paving; a pargetting, or filling with rubbish, etc.
Repoussoir, a thing that drives back, or pusheth out; the iron tool wherewith
wooden pins are thrust out; also the top of a pitfal, or trap for foxes, etc.
Repratiquer, to practice, or contrive again. Reprehension, a reproof, check, or
rebuke. Repremiation, a rewarding. Reprenart, a rebuker, reprover, checker, or
carper. Reprin, bra^, or the course st of meal. Reprins, Reprinse, as repris,
reprise in the N. D. Reprovisionne, furnished with new provision. Reprouvable,
blameable. Reprouver, to blame, or find fault with. Repudiement, for
repudiation, a divorcing, of putting away of his wife. Repue, as repeue in the
N. D. Repulluler, to bud out again. Requamer, for recamer, to embroider.
Requarreler, as recarreler. Requart, the fourth part of a fourth. Requerable,
requirable. Rentes requerables, Rents to be demanded on the ground, or at the
place for which they are due; as are all Rents, not otherwise agreed upon.
Requerre, for requerir, to require. Requien, a certain ravenous, roughskinned,
and wide-mouthed fish, which is good meat. Requinque, smugged up. Camus
requinque, one whose flat nose is turned up. se Requinquer, to smug up himself.
Requint, the fifth part of the fifth penny for which a Fief has been sold (as
of an hundred four) due, besides the said fifth, unto the Lord Feodal, and paid
most commonly by the Purchaser. Requisitoire, a request, or suit unto.
Requisitoire, (Adj.) inquisitive; also requiring, requesting. As Lettres
requisitoires, Letters of request, or entreaty. Requoy, as recoy. Rere, to
hellow as a Stag, to trout as a Buck. Rerefief, as Arrierefies in the N. D.
Rere-Vassal, a Vassal to a Vassal, a Vassal that holds of a mesne Lord, or of a
Vassal. Res, a net. Resailler, to start back. Resarcir, to repair, or to mend;
also to make amends for. Resasser, to sift again. Resavourer, to taste again.
Resauter, to start back. Resbaudir, to glad, or rejoice. Resbaudir un Chien, to
encourage, or cheer up a Dog with clapping, whooping, etc. Reschal, yellow
wire. Reschauffoir, for rechant, a chasing dish. Reschier, to shift, or take
out of one thing to put into another. Rescindant, a Contract which has been
made void by Law. Resconcer, Resconser, to conceal, or to hide. Rescouable,
rescuable, recoverable. Reseant, resident, abiding. Resecouer, to shake again.
Resection, a resection, cutting or paring off. Resee, a purse-net.
Resemblement, for ressemblance, a resemblance, or likeness. Resequer, to pare,
cut, or clip off. Reserener, to clear up again. Reserveement, sparingly,
moderately. Resiliment, a leaping, skipping, or rebounding back; a going from
his word. Resilir, to leap, skip, or rebound back; to go from his word. Resine,
for raisine, the juice of Grapes boiled to a consistence of honey, and given to
Children, as our honey spread on bread. Resineux, full of Rosin. Resiniere, as
raisiniere. Resipiscence, a repentance, or amendment. Resisiesme, or
Resixiesme, a sixth part out of a sixth. Resixiesmement, by way of a sixth part
of a sixth. Resize, herb Avens, Benet, or blessed. Resler, to thaw. Resoluble,
resolvable; also dissolvable. Resoluement, for resolument, resolutely.
Resommeiller, to slumber again. Resommer, to sum, to summon again. Resomption,
a repetition, assuming, or beginning again. Resonder, to sound again.
Resonnamment, resoundingly, loudly. Resonnance, a resounding, or reflected
sound. Resouhaiter, to wish again. Resource, as ressource in the N. D. se
Resourdre, to spring, rise, or get up again; to mend, recover, or come to its
former estate or vigor. Resours, raised, recovered, got up again.
Resouvenances, memorandums, remembrances. Respandement, a spilling, or
shedding. Respardre, to scatter again. Respargnant, sparing, thristy, hard.
Respargne, parsimony, sparing, thrift, hardness. Respargner, to spare, to save.
Respectable, worshipful. Respectatif, Respectif, heedy, circumspect, discreet.
Respi, for repit, respit. Respir, breath, or respiration. Respirement, a
breathing, or drawing of breath. Respireur, a breather, a respirer. Respiter,
to respit; to prorogue, or put off for a time; to forbear, to delay. Resputer
de mort, to reprieve, save, or deliver from death. Resplendisseur, for
resplendeur, resplendency, splendour. Respoissir, to thicken again. Responce,
for reponse, an answer. Respondement, an answering; also a matching, or
correspondency; a likeness, concurrence, equality. Respons, the Answers made by
the Clerk, or People, in Service-time. Responsadoux, the Seafish called a
Heaven-gazer. Responses, Rampions (a Salladroot.) Responsif, an Answer to a
Lawbill, or an Answer in Law. Responsif (Adj.) answering, giving, or making an
answer. Responsion, a Surety, or Assurance. Ressasie, for rassasie, filled,
glutted, satisfied. Ressasier, to fill, glut, or satisfy. Resseant, as
reseant, resident, abiding, dwelling continually in. Exoine de mal resseant, an
essoin, or excuse for the absence, or not appearance, of one that lies sick.
Resseantise, residency, a continual dwelling or abiding in one place.
Ressemblable, much like unto. Ressemer, to sow again. Ressie, an Afternoons
nuncheon, or drinking. Ressimer, to snuffle again. Ressiner, to make a
drinking, or collation, in an afternoon. Ressize, as resize. Ressoigner, to aw,
fear, or dread; also to care, cark, or take thought of. Ressore, parched,
scorched, dried, or burnt up by the Sun. Ressourdre, as resourdre. Ressuccer,
to suck up, or in again. Ressuit, dry, or dried; hard, or hardened; without any
manner of sap, or softness. Ressuivre, to follow again. Restablissable,
re-establishable. Restaigner, to stay, or abide long in a place. Restat, a
remainder, or overplus. Restaurant, a restorative. Resternuer, to sneeze again.
Restibule, as retouble. Restifve, as restive. Restile, as Champ restile, a
field that is sowed, or bears fruit every year. Restipulation, a waging of Law;
a putting in of a Pledge for the assurance of his Answer unto an Action, etc.
Restipuler, to wage Law (as in Restipulation.) Restive, made or grown resty;
stopped, or drawn back. Restivement, restily, stubbornly, backwardly,
sloathfully. Restor, a recovery or remedy against a Vouchee, or any one by whom
a man is damnifi'd. Restouble, as retouble. Restouper, to stop again.
Restrainctif, for restrictif, restrictive, or binding. Restrinction, for
restriction, restriction. Restringe, the Lentisk, or Masticktree. Restuyer, to
sheath, or shut up again. Resvanouir, to swoon again. Resudant, sweating; also
pithy. Resudation, a sweating, or sweaty dropping. Resude, sweated, sweat out
of, come from in a sweat. Resue, an ancient Tax or Imposition of four pence in
the pound for Merchandise, and ten sols Tournois upon every pipe of Wine
brought into, or sent out of the Kingdom. Resveillable, awakeable. Resveillon,
a meal made late in the night, and long after supper. Resul, as reseuil in the
N. D. Resultat, for resulte, a result. Resurgir, to rise, grow, or spring up
again; to recover a former being; to lift up his head once more. Resuscitatif,
reviving, raising up from death to life. Resusciteur, a reviver. Ret, a net.
Retail, a shred, paring, or small piece cut from a thing; also half an Oxgang,
or Oxgat of land. Retaillat, circumcised. Retaille (Subst.) as retail; also a
Tailors Vails. Retaillons, shreds, clippings, or the like. Retaindre, for
reteindre, to die again. Retalionne, requited, satisfied with the like.
Retapper, to bung again. Retarge, Retargement, Retarger, as retarde,
retardement, retarder in the N. D. Retatine, withered, shrunk in, decayed.
Reteinture, a dying over again. Retenail, an hold, or a thing to hold by.
Reteneur, a retainer, detainer, withholder. Retenter, to re-attempt. Retentras,
as il fait du retentras, he is deaf of that ear, or seems to listen somewhat
else. Retentum Is when a Court pronounces not a full Arrest, but reserves
somewhat to be afterward ordered. Retenuement, sparingly; also advisedly.
Reths, a net. Retiaire, casling a net in sight, therewith to take an enemy.
Retien (Subst.) a retention; a restraint. Retier, a Net-maker. Retiercement, by
way, or after the rate of a third out of a third. Retiers, a third part of a
third. Retiforme, fashioned like a net. Retinacle, a slay, or hold. Retiree
(Subst.) a retreat; also a place of retreat. Retisser, Retistre, to weave
again. Retombe, a false Cup, wherein drink falling into an odd corner, seems to
be drank up; also a flat Vault, or a Room made Vaultwise. Retombee, a falling
back; also the crookedness of a Sickle turned backwards. Retombee d' humeurs, a
running of humors, or a disease wherein the humors that grieved one place leave
it, and get into another. Retondir de toutes parts, to ring, or to resound all
over. Retorceure, Retordement, Retordure, a twisting; a wresting back; a
retorting. Retordeur, a twister. Retorquable, retortable. Retort, for retors,
twisted. Retouble, a field, or ground sown every year. Retouiller, to mingle,
puzzle, or confound again. se Retrahir, for se retirer, to retire, to withdraw.
Retraicter, to revise, or run over; also to handle, or entreat of again.
Retraintif, restrictive. Retransitif, reflective upon it self. Retrasser, as
retraicter; also to mend, or to correct. Retroacte, a former act, proceeding,
or dispatch in Law. Retroactif, retroactive, casting, or driving backward.
Retroceder, to recoil, retire, or give back. Retrograde, a retrogradation.
Retube, a flat Vault, or Vault made like the back of an Oven. Retumbee, as
retombee. Reu, a brook, small stream, or little gullet of water. Revainquir, to
subdue again. Revalider, to reinforce, to improve. Revaloir, as je te le
revaudray, I shall requite thee sor't. Revengeur, a revenger. Revengeure, a
revenging. Reve-grand, much-doting. Revelement, a revealing, disclosing, or
discovering. Reveleux, wanton, lascivious, unruly. Revendage, a retailing, or
selling again. Revenderesse, for revendeuse, a woman that sells small things by
retail. Revendication, a resuming of, or a re-establishment in a pretended
right. Revenge, revenged. Revenger, to revenge. Reventes, as Venterolles, or as
Reventons, a Fee due to a Lord Censuel (over and besides the Lods and Ventes)
from a Purchaser of Land charged with Cens, who has undertaken to discharge
the seller of the Lods, which he for his part should upon the bargain have
paid. Revenue (Subst.) revenue, rent; also a return, or coming again. Revenue
de bois, the newspring, or putting out of wood after it has been lopped, or
felled. Reveoir, for revoir, to see again, to revise. Reverable, reverend.
Reverberatoire, a Reverberatory. Reverencer, Reverender, to reverence.
Reverential, reverent, full of reverence. Reverisier, to verify, or make good
again. Revers (Adj.) strange, uncouth, cross, harsh. Reversailles, the
reversions of (or drink left in) the Masters glasses, or draughts poured
together into a pot for the Servants. Reversche, for reveche, froward, unruly.
Reversi, a kind of trump, played backward, and full of sport. Reversure, the
waining, or turning at the top of a piece of ground, where one furrow ends, and
another begins. Reversures, as reversailles. Revertir, to return, or come back.
Revescherie, churlishness, frowardness, unruliness. Revest, a re-investiture.
Revestiaire, Revestiere, a Vestry. Revifier, to revive, to quicken again.
Revigourer, to add new vigor, to give new strength unto. Revirade, a
wheeling, or turning round; a back-jert, whisk, or thrust. Revirer, to turn
again and again. Se revirer contre l'Ennemi, to wheel about upon the Enemy.
Reviseur, a reviser, or reviewer. Revisit, a review taken by the King of his
Officers Accounts. Revisitation, a revising, reviewing, or overlooking again.
Revivisienne, a reviving, a returning unto life. Reume, for rheum, a rheum.
Revoguer, to sail back, or again. Revol, a flying back, a return upon the wing.
Revoluble, sit, or apt to be turned about. Reupe, for roupie, the dropping of
the nose; also a belch. Reupontic, as Rheupontique. Reuppe, as reupe. Reupper,
for roter, to belch. Reystre, as Reistre. Rez, a flat, or level ground; the
superficies of a level piece of ground. Le mur est a rez de chaussee, the foot
of the wall stands level with the ground that is about it. Rez a rez, Rez de
rez, even (or level) with, close unto. Mettre rez pied rez terre, to make even
with the ground. Rez, (Adj.) shaven. Rezueil, for reseuil, a sort of network.
Rhabarbe, for reubarbe, rubarb. Rhabituer, to accustom, or inure again.
Rhagade, Rhagadie, a chap, or chawn, coming by cold, etc. in any part of the
body, but especially in the fundament. Rhamindique, the Indian root called
otherwise Mechoacan. Rhamne, the fruitful white bramble called Christs-thorn.
Rhapontique, the least, or worst kind of Rubarb growing in Pontus.
Rhatimburgs, select, or express Judges for the decision of all Cases that fell
within the compass of the Salick Law. Rheteur, a Rhetorician. Rhetorique,
(Adj.) Rhetorical, of Rhetorique. Rhetoriquement, Rhetorically, eloquently,
Rhetorician-like. Rhetoriquer, Rhetoriser, to play the Rhetorician, to speak
eloquently, to argue neatly. Rheupontique, as Rhapontique; also the root of
great Centory. Rhomb, Rhon, a Turbot; also the shrub Sumack. Rhupontique, as
Rhapontique. Rhus, the shrub Sumack. Riagas, Aconite. Riau, as reu. Ribaine.
See ribon. Ribaudaille, a crew of Ruffians. Ribaudequin, Ribauderin, a fashion
of huge Cross-bows. Ribaudine, Ribaulde, a whore. Ribaulder, to play the
ruffian. Ribauldise, ribauldry, ruffianism, whoring. Ribault, for ribaud, a
ribald, a ruffian. Ribe, a coast, bank, or shore. Ribe taillade, a full-deep
shore. Ribes, Ribettes, red Goose-berries, garden or bastard Currants. Ribier,
the red Goose-berry plant; also a kind of Vine. Ribler, to rifle, rob, or
ransack. Riblerie, a boot-haling, rifling, or robbing; also a violent incursion
upon an Enemy. Ribleur, a boot-haler, robber, or preyer upon passengers, etc.
Ribon ribaine, by hook or crook, whether you will or no. Ricalde, a scold.
Ricaner, Ricasser, to dally, to play the wanton. Ricaneux, dallying, or playing
the wanton. Richereau, a wealthy Chuff, one that has more wealth than wit.
Ricochet, the sport of skimming a thin stone on the water, called a Duck and a
Drake. C'est la chanson du ricochet, it is an idle, or endless tale or song; a
subject whereof one part contradicts another. Ricote, a kind of milk-meat; or
as Ricottes, curds made of whey. Rid, a Flemish Coin worth about 5 shill.
sterling. Rid de Gueldres, is worth about 3 shill. sterling. Rye, Rye, a waste
piece of ground. Rien-ne-vaut, a rascal, or base fellow. Riens, for rien,
nothing. Riere, backward, behind; also with, or among. Rierban, as Arriereban
in the N.D. Rierefief, as Arrierefief in the N.D. Riere-filz, a grandchild.
Riere-vassal, as Rere-vassal. Riets, as rye. Rieu, as reu. Rieulle, as ruille.
Rif, a gullet of water. Il ne luy lairra ni rif, ni raf, he will leave him
nothing, he will strip him of all. Rifage, a frowning huswife. Rifflade, a
ravenous, or a rifling Drab; one that lives by the spoil of them she converseth
with. Rifflandouille, a belly-god, a lover of good cheer. Rifle, fire. On n'y a
laisse ne rifle ne rafle, they have left no manner of thing behind them, they
have swept all away. Rifler, to rifle, ransack, sweep all away before him; also
to eat greedily. Rigalisse, for reguelice, licorish. Rigaud, as a jambes
rigaudes, with stradling and up-stretcht legs. Rigaule, a gullet of water.
Rigle, for regle, rule. Riglet, for reglet, a riglet. Riglisse, for requelice,
licorish. Rigolage, Rigolement, Rigolerie, a jesting, or laughing at. se
Rigoler de, to jest, or to laugh at. Rigoleur, a jester, one that delights in
laughing at others. Rigoreusement, Rigoreux, as rigoureusement, rigoureux in
the N. D. Rillon de porc, as graton, or that part of a hogs entrails which is
like the tripes in an Ox. Rim de vent, a puff of wind; also as rum in the N. D.
Rimaille, paultry rhyme. Rimarde, a paultry Poetess. Rimart, a paultry Poet.
Rimasser, to make sorry verses. Rimasseur, as rimart. Rimasseuse, as rimarde.
Rimette, a little rhyme, or small rhiming poesy. Rimonner, Rimoyer, to rhyme.
Rimoyeur, a rhimer. Rinceau, as rinseau. Ringer, as ruminer in the N. D.
Rinseau, the stalk (or part of the stalk) of a plant; a little bough of a tree.
Rioge, as mesentere in the N. D. Riole, streaked. Riote, a scolding, brabling,
or brawling; also the band of a faggot, or baven. Rioter, to scold, brable, or
brawl. Rioteux, scolding, brabling, brawling. Riotte, as riote; also a
flimflam, idle discourse, or tale of a tub. Riottement de chiens, the yarring,
or whurring of dogs, dogs brabling. Ripaille, pillage; also gluttony,
surfeiting, idle expense of money, or of time, in pampering the belly.
Riparographe, a writer of trifles. Ripeilleux, Ripilleux, craggy, rugged,
rough, uneven. Ripope, as vin ripope, bad wine made a great deal worse by much
water; or the droppings of wine taken out of the tub that stands under the
spigot, and mingled with water for poor folks. Rippe, the small fish called a
sharpling, stickle-back, or back-stickle. Ripperie, a cheating, or cousening.
Rippope, as ripope. Ripuaire, a certain Law agreeing with the Salick both in
substance and date. Riquaner, as ricaner; or to bray like an Ass. Riqueraque,
thoroughly, wholly. Feu de riqueraque, wildfire. Risses chevreaux, fat Kids.
Rissole, the browness of a thing fried. Rissole, fried brown. Rissoler, to fry
brown. Rissole, a Jews ear, or Mushrom that is fashioned like a Demi-circle, and
grows cleaving to trees; also a small and delicate minced pie, made of that
fashion. Rithmailler, for rimailler, to make sorry verses. Rithme, for rhyme,
rhyme, or meter. Rithmer, for rimer, to rhyme, or to make meter. Ritual, of, or
belonging to Rites. Rivager, belonging, or near unto the waters side. Rivagier,
one that dwells near the waters side. Rive, for rivage, bank, shore, or
waterside. Riverau, a ferryman, a waterman; also a Welsh hook, or hedging
bill, made with a hook at the end; or as Rivereau, a bill-hook, or the pole
with a fork of iron, etc. at the end, wherewith Watermen set forward their
Boats when they row not. Rivereux, full of, or belonging to, rivers; also that
haunts Rivers. As faulcon rivereux, a river-hawk. Riverotte, a brook, a little
stream. Rivet, the welt of a shoe. Tirer au rivet, to sow like a Shoemaker;
also to pluck as much from one as from another. Riuler, to ravel out, like
silk. Rivure, a riveting. Rob, the juice of black whurtle-berries preserved.
Rob de ribes, the preserved juice of red gooseberries, or bastard currants.
Robber, for derober, to rob, to steal. Robbery, robbery, stealing. Robbeur, a
Robber, a Thief. Roberge, a kind of long ship, wherein both sails and oars are
used. Robice, a robbing, robbery, or theft. Robille, as provision de la
robille, the rings, jewels, and attire of a Widow, with as much other stuff as
she can carry, adjudged unto her upon the renouncement of her deceased husbands
Estate. Robineries, pleasant conceits. Robon, a short gown; or a side-cassock
reaching below the knees. La sequelle au robon, mean Tradesmen, poor Merchants.
Roboration, Roborement, a strengthening, or stiffening. Roborer, to strengthen,
to stiffen. Roborin, le bas roborin, as rembouer. Robre, the great oak, or
great gall-tree, the most hard and durable Oak that is. Robustete, strength,
force, or might. Rocard, as un vieux rocard, an overworn sincaunter, one that
can neither whinny nor wag the tail. Roce, for rosse, a jade. Roch, for roche,
a rock. Rochaille, rocks. Rochau, a rock-fish, any fish that lives among rocks;
and particularly the Cook-fish, or Sea-thru^h; as also the fish Coenus. Rocher,
(Adj.) rocky, of a rock. Rocheray, as Colombe rocheraye, a rock-pigeon, a wild
pigeon. Rochier, for rocher, a rock. Rocquer un enfant, to rock a child.
Rodage, a certain Toll exacted by some Country-Lords upon every Wain that
passes (though in the highway) near to their Seignories, whether it be laden
or no; and if it be, they will be paid both for the load, and for the cart.
Rodanes, a kind of sweet cherries. Rode, the Dorce, or gold-fish. Rodelle d'un
clou, the head of a nail. Rodemontade, as Rodomontade in the N. D.
Rodibiliardique, fat, or larded with fat. Rododaphne, oleander, or the rose-bay
tree, (a shrub very beautiful, and very full of poison.) Roelle, as rouelle in
the N. D. Rogatons, Indulgences. Roger bon-temps, a mad rascal, a merry greek.
Rogue, the mesenterium. Rogue, (Adj.) proud, saucy, arrogant. Roguement,
proudly, saucily, arrogantly. Roigne, for rongne, scurf, scabbiness, the mange.
Roigner, and its Derivatives. See them with an n instead of i in the N. D.
Roigneux, for rongneux, scabby. Roisons, Rogation-week. Rolat, a roll, or list.
Oblige en rolat, subject unto the rigor of the Court of a Baillif. Rollier, for
Roulier, a Waggoner. Rollon, a roller, a rolling stone. Roman, a Roman beam.
Roman, so is called in the Confines of Germany, and Lorrain, the Language that
is not German. Romanesque, Romish, Roman. Romans, beets. Romicole, one that
affects or honors Rome, or the Romish Religion. Rommeler, to rumble, grumble,
or grunt. Rommeny, the fur called budge. Romore, as remore. Rompable, apt to be
broken. Rompeis, ground n^wly ^ok^ up; especially such as have not within the
memory of men been tilled. Rompe-pierre, Rompierre, the herb Saxifrage; also
Samphire. Rompture, for rupture, rupture, breach. Cas de rompture, an equal
sharing of a Bankrupts Goods among his Creditors. In which case, if he had Land
subject unto rent, the Landlord has it the first year in lieu of his
arrearages, and after him every one in his turn has it his year. Rompu, as bon
rompu, a good fellow, a boon companion. Rompue, a rout, a defeat. Rompure, a
rapture, breach, fracture. Roncay, a briar-plot, a ground or place full of
briars. Ronce, hurled, or making a whurring noise, as a stone cast with
violence. Ronceux, full of brambles, or briars. Ronciere, and Roncoy, as
Roncay. Rondace, for rondache, a round Target, or great Backler. Rondacher, one
that serves with a rondache. Rondeler, to turn round. Rondole, the Sea-bat, or
reremouse. Ronfle, a hand-ruff, at Cards. Jouer a la ronfle, to play at
hand-ruff; also to snore. Vous me remettez a point en ronfle veue, you put me
shrewdly to my plunges. Ronge, a gnawing, fretting, or nibling. Cela luy
revient tousjours au ronge, that does still vex him. Rongeard, gnawing,
fretting. Rongnette, a Farriers paring knife. Rongnonner, to pare, to clip by
little and little; also to grumble, murmr, mutter. Ronse, as raye ronsee, a
thornback, or rock-ray. Ronsiere, and Ronsoy, as ronciere. Ronson, for
rondelle, a Target. Ronteis, as rompeis. Roole, for roll, a roll. Roolet, In
the Civil Wars 'twas a Watchword among the French Clergy, signifying a
Collection for the Pensions of those great Personages which had undertaken to
protect them; also as rollet in the N. D. Roolle, for roll, a roll. Roolle,
for roll, rolled up. Ropts, pot-shards. Roquan, a gluttonous Rock-fi^h, which
makes of grass a nest in the Sea, and therein hatches her spawn. Roque, a Rock;
a Fort, Castle, or Citadel. Roquette, for petit roc, a little rock. Roquille
de vin, the quarter of a French pint. Rosage, Rosageur, Rosagine, the shrub
Oleander, or Rose-laurel. Roseignol, for rossignol, a nightingale. Rosetique,
as vin rosetique, the best kind of Gascony Wine, growing within the Territory
of Nerac, and there so called from its vermillion hue. Rosiere, a bream-like
fish, ever full-rowed. Rosillant, dew yielding. Rosin, rose-like; of, or
belonging to roses. Rosmant, as rosillant. Rosmement, a bedewing, a falling of
dew. Rosmer, the dew to fall, to distill or drop down as the dew; to bedew.
Rosmeux, full of dew. Rosle, for roll, a roll. Rosoyant, bedewing; also of a
rosy color. Rosoyer, to bedew. Une Vapeur qui rosoye, a drizling, or a misling
rain. Rospe, a toad. Rosse, the roche-fish. Rossette, as marquote in the N. D.
also the sea-cat. Rossignoler, to record, or sing like a Nightingale.
Rossignolesque, Nightingale-like, harmonious, melodious; also doleful,
mournful. Roast, roast meat. Rostedon, one that requires, or takes back the gift
which he had bestowed. Rostissiere, a rosting Cook^ Wife. Rotateurs, two
muscles which turn about the eye. Rote, a great highway in a Forest; also a
tree growing thereon. Rotondite, rotundity, roundness. Rotte, the band of a
faggot. Rotte de cire, five pound of wax. Rottee de bois, a certain measure or
quantity of wood, (whether fagots or billets) laid together, eight or ten foot
in length, about four in height, and having at either end two stakes to hold it
in. Rotteur, an Officer that measures les rottees de bois, indifferently for
the buyer and seller. Rottier, for routier, an old Traveller. Rottine, for
routine, rote. Rotule de genouil, the ball, or whirlbone of the knee.
Roturierement, basely, ignobly. Rouable, as rabble in the N. D. also an Engine
wherewith fish is forbidden to be caught. Rouaille, a device or engine,
wherewith fish is caught. Rouaisons, Rogations, Gang-days. Rouart, a Marshal or
Provost Marshal, an Officer that breaks, or sees broken, malefactors on the
wheel; also the wheel-fish. Rouce, for Ronce, bramble, briar. Rouche, a rush.
Roucherole, the River-nightingale, or a kind of Kings fisher, that sings very
sweetly. Rouchet, as rougette. Roucin, as rousim. Roucoler, for roucouler, to
croo like a dove. Rouctement, a belching. Rouen, as Cheval rouen, a roan-horse.
Rouer (Subst.) a wheeling about. Rouesse, the name of a certain great pear.
Roueter, to turn a spinning wheel. Rouette, a little wheel. Rouge d'avoine, a
certain pear, whereof excellent perry is made. Rouge-bourse, for rouge-gorge,
robin red-breast. Rougelet, the name of an apple. Rougement, redly. Rougette,
the red fish. Rougnette, as rongnette. Rouhard, crying, or mourning, like a
Wood-culver, or turtle-dove. Rouhastre, a scuffling, conflict, or contention.
Rouiller, to pummer, or beat about the ears. Rouillons, vetches. Rouisse, the
name of a great pear. Roll, the stay of a Weavers loom, having teeth of reed,
etc. like a Comb. Roll, for roll, a roll, or list; also the high way for
Carts and Wagons. Roulier, (Adj.) as Cheval roulier, a strong Cart-horse, a
lusty tugging jade. Roulis, great round stakes, or piles. Roumarin, for
romarin, rosemary. Roupieux, snotty, whose nose is ever dropping. Il fut bien
roupieux, he was mightily ashamed, or much deceived. Roupille, a cassock.
Roupt, for rompu, broken, burst in pieces. Roupte, as route in the N. D.
Rouseau, a flower which flies away with the wind, like the down of a thistle;
also the herb Water-torch, or Cats-tail. Poire de rouseau, a very tender and
delicate pear, good to make Perry of. Rousee, for rosee, dew. Rousoyer, to
bedew, to wet gently. Roussable, the close Room wherein Herrings are smoaked
until they be red. Roussau, the name of a fig. Rousselet, the name of a
delicate small Pear. Rousser, to groan or complain like a grunting Woman, or
overworn Jade. Rousset, a little ruddy Dog-fish; also red wheat. Rousset.
(Adj.) ruddy, inclining to dark red. Roussette, a Russetin-apple; also a little
Dog-fish, whose ruddy skin is poudered all over with black spots; also a
certain ruddy, or dun-red bird, no bigger than a Titmouse. Roussin, a curtal,
or strong German horse. Roussin de service, a horse of arms, or for the war.
Roussmer, to whinny after Mares, like a rammish or leacherous Jade; also to
leap a Mare. Roussoyer, for roussir, to wax (or grow) ruddish. Rouste de bois,
a with. Router, for roter, to belch, or break wind upwards. Routte, and
Routtier, as route, routier in the N. D. Routure, as roture in the N. D.
Routures d'eaux, ways made or worn out in rocks, by a continual running or
beating of waters. Rouveau, as pomme de rouveau, the Redding, or
Summer-golding. Rouvieres, the name of a kind of Olives. Rouvraye, and
Rouvroye, a Forest, Wood, or Grove of strong Oaks. Rouvre, for roure, the
hardest kind of Oak. Rouy, oversodden, and wanting liquour in seething; also
steeped, or soaked in water, as hemp. Roye, a line, streak, or furrow. Royer,
for rayer, to raze, or to blot out. Royes, the meazels. Roynette, a little, or
a poor Queen; also the herb called Queen of the meadows. Royzelet, a Gin, or
device to catch Wood-cocks. Rozelet, the name of a small and beautiful bird.
Rozereaux, a kind of Martins, whose skins are of much request. Ru, as reu;
also a cast, hurl, throw, or swinge. Il entend le ru du baston, he is a cunning
fencer, an old-beaten soldier. Rubarge, as roberge. Rubesie, made red. Ruben,
for ruban, a ribbon. Rubenner, to set out wit's ribbons. Rubennier, for
rubanier, a ribbon-maker. Rubette, a green earth-frog, or red toad; very full
of poison, and of great use among Witches. Rubicans, the white hairs that he
scattered here and there upon the coats of some colored horses. Rubicunde,
very red, blond-red. Rubie majeur, ou des Teincturiers, the herb Madder, red
Madder. Rubie mineur, Claver, Goose-grass. Rubienne, the Red-tail, or Stark, (a
small bird.) Ruble, an Italian weight of about 600 pound, after 12 ounces to
the pound. Rubitelle, the half of a Ruble. Rubrication, a redness, or a
ruddiness; also a making, or waxing red. Rubriche, Oaker, red Lead, red chalk,
or marking stone. Rubriche, made, or grown red; also marked with red Oaker,
written or printed in red Ink. Son Calendrier est rubriche, said of a Woman
that has her months. Rubrificatif, a Plaster of so strong Simples, that it
ulcerates, or (at least) makes red the place it is applied unto. Rucher, to
make hives; to gather honey into hives. Ruchette, a little hive. Ruchot, a
fashion of a cloak tied close about the neck, and thence falling down round
about the body. Rudache, ondach e in the N. D. Rudente, wreathed like a Cable.
Rudenture, a wreath, wreathing, or wreathed work; a border that is wreathed, or
of the form of a Cable. Rudepeau, a kind of stinking Adder, and full of
scales. Rudoyement, hard usage. Rudoyer, to use one hard, to give him ill
words. Rueur, a kicker, a thrower. Ruffage, dogged, churlish. Ruffienner,
Rufienner, to play the ruffian. Ruffiennerie, or Rufiennerie baudry. Ruffisque,
a ruffian. Rugiment, for rugissement, a roaring, or bell^wing. Rugine, the
Instrument wherewith a Surgeon sc ileth bones. Ruginer un os, to scale, or
scrape a bone. Rugisseur, a roarer, a bellower. Rugosite, ruggedness,
roughness. Rugueux, rugged, rough. Ruin, the grunting of a hog. Ruinement, a
ruining, or undoing. Ruir, to roar, like a Lion; also as rouir in the N. D.
Ruissement, a roaring like a Lion; also as rouissement in the N. D. Ruit, the
rut of Deer, or Boars; their lust; and the season wherein they engender; also a
herd of female Deer followed by the male in that Season. Ruite, as Venaison
ruitee, Venison killed, or gotten in rut-time. Rumatique, for rheumatique,
rhumatick, troubled with a rheum. Rume, a rheum. Runge, the chewing of the cud;
or as ronge. Rupricam, a bay horse. Ruption, a breaking. Ruptoire, a Corrosive,
or potential Cauter. Ruque, the name of an Apple that yields an excellent
Cider. Rural, rural, rustical, Country-like. Fief rural, an ig^obl^ or bale
Fief, which has with ^^^ted ho^s^, nor a^ other mark of Antiquity or Gentry
belonging to it. Ruscher, as ru^her. Ruseement, (...). Ruser, to use tricks, to
(...) ^^ningly. Rustanderie, Rusterie, as rustrerie. Rustication, husbandry, or
(...) work; also a dwelling in the Country. Rustiquer, to play the Clown, or
Husbandman; to till the ground. Rustiquerie, husbandry, tillage, rural
provision or staff. Rustrement, Roister-like, sau^ily. Rustrerie, a swaggering.
Rutiler, to glitter, shine, or glare. Ruyr, a Vicount. Ruyle, as ruile in the
N. D. Ruyler du plastre avec de l'eau, to mingle, or moisten, plaster with
water. Ry, a little brook. Ride, Ryder, Ryme, and Rymer. See them with an i,
instead of y, in the N. D.
S
SAbatique, of the Sabbath, keeping the Sabbath. Sabatisme, holy rest.
Sabatizer, to rest, or keep holy the Sabbath Day. Sabe, new sweet wine half
boiled away, and kept for sauces and seasonings. Sabe de coing, the Juice of
Quinces half boiled away, and good against a cough. Sabe, as haleine sabee, a
fragrant, or sweet smelling breath. Sabech, the little hawk, termed a Masket.
Sabine, the shrub called Savine; also Hart-wort, or Birth-wort. Sablere,
Sabliere, the Summer that compasses the top or upper part of a room. Saboir,
for savoir, to know. Sabonner, Saborner, to agree beforehand, or to be at a
certain rate. Sabote, turned, or whipped, as a top; also fashioned like a top.
Saboter, to whip a top. Saboule, rolled, tossed, tumbled. Saboulement, a
rolling, tossing, or tumbling. Sabouler, to roll, toss, or tumble; also to
scuffle with. Sabourre, balasted. Sabourrer, to balast. Sabrin, the spotted and
scaly Serpent Hemorrhois, whereof one being bitten, bleeds at all the natural
pores, or passages of the body, to death. Sabuleux, sandy. Sacabribe, a Beggars
wallet, an Almscrip. Saccade, a fall from a horse; also a flirt. Elle aura la
saccade, she shall be turned over. Saccader, to throw, to cast down; also to
overturn a wench. Saccageux, sacking, ransacking. Saccamenter, as sacmenter.
Saccerelle, a Dock for a Horses train. Saccharin, of sugar; as white or sweet
as sugar. Saccouter a l'oreille, to whisper in the ear. Saceller, to rub in
bathing with little bags full of bran, etc. Sacerdot, for Pretre, a Priest.
Sacmente, sacked, ransacked; also hacked, or hewed in pieces. Sacmenter,
sacked, ransacked; also to hack, or hew in pieces. Sacotin, Feverwort, common
Centory. Sacouter, as saccouter. Sacquement, a hasty drawing, a quick pulling
out of a sword, etc. also a sacking, or ransacking. Sacquemente, as sacmente.
Sacquer, to draw hastily. Sacquer la main a l'espee, to clap his hand on his
sword (with a purpose to draw it). Il luy sacqua l'espee des mains, he snatched
his sword out of his hands. Sacquerelle, a dock for a horses tail. Sacraire, a
Vestry in a Church; also a private Chapel, or Oratory. Sacrificatoire,
sacrificatory, belonging unto sacrifice. Sadariege, the herb Savory. Sadayer,
to handle gently, or stroke softly; also to flatter, or collogue with. Sade,
pretty, neat, fine, or spruce. Sadement, prettily, neatly, finely, sprucely.
Sadinet, as sade. Fair la sadinette, to mince it, to be coy. Sadree, as
sadariege. Saffraniere, a Saffron-field, or plot; a ground sowed with Saffron.
Saffrenier, a seller of Saffron; also a bankrupt, or one that owes more than he
is worth. Saffrete, wanton dallying, lascivious toying; also a ravening, or
gormandizing. Saffrette, a wanton, lecherous, or lascivious queen. Safre,
(Adj.) wanton, waggish, lascivious, lecherous; also ravenous, gluttonous,
gormandizing. Safrete, and Saffrette, as Saffrete, Saffrette. Sagacite,
Sagacity, or quickness of apprehension. Sagapen, Sagapene, Sagapin, the Gum, or
the hardened and gummy juice of the bruised, cut, or broken root of Ferula, or
Fennel-grant. Sagemener, as sacmenter. Sageraut, wise, wary, discreet. Saget,
pretty wise. Sagette, an arrow, or shaft; also the Ditch-weed called
Arrow-head, or Water-archer. Sagette, shot with arrows. Sagetter, to shoot
through with arrows. Saggotter, to joult. Sagitale, as sagittale. Sagittelle,
the Launcet wherewith a Surgeon opens Veins and Imposthumes. Sagittale, as
commissure sagittale, the seam which runs along on the top of the head, and
distinguishes the right side of it from the left. Sagmenter, as sacmenter.
Sagnie, a bundle of the slender stalks of Sea-grass, or of other Sea-weeds
wrapped close together and thrown by the working of the Sea upon the shore.
Sagoin, Sagouin, a little Marmoset; also a knavish Wag, an unlucky Lad. Sahue,
a Sallow-tree, the Goats willow-tree. Saiffe, the Dace, or Dare-fish. Saigneux,
bloody, full of blood. Sailleur, a leaper, a jumper. Sailli, gone out, issued
forth; also leaped on. Saillicoque, as Salecoque. Saillier, for saillie, a
sally. Saillir, to go out; also to appear above, to stand out beyond others; to
leap, jump, bound, skip, hop; to ride, or leap upon one another, as the male
does the female. Sain, (Subst.) seam; the tallow, fat, or grease of a hog, or
of a ravenous wild beast. Sainctelot, somewhat holy, or Saint-like. Saint n'y
touch, an hypocrite. Sainct-foin, Medick fodder, Snail-claver. Sainne, as
seine. Sainteur, a certain Rent paid by those that have been freed from bondage
unto those that affranchised them. Saint-foin, as Sainct-foin. Saintre, as
Droict de Saintre, a Right belonging to some Lords, who may thereby eat, with
(only) their Cattle, all the waste, untilled stubble, or bu^hy grounds that be
within their Manors. Sais, certain pieces of iron, whereby the axle^^t^e is
fastened unto the body of the Wain, etc. Saitte, a kind of twopenny-broad
Ribbon made of a very course silk. Saive, for seve, the sap of plants. Salace,
lecherous, lascivious. Salacite, lechery, lasciviousness. Saladier, belonging
to, or fit for a Sallad. Salarie, hired, fee'd. Salarier, Salariser, to hire,
to fee. Salaude, as sale in the N. D. Salcoque, Salecoque, an uncased Prawn.
Salet, somewhat nasty. Saleures, salt meats. Salez, the Burgundians (called so
in old time by the French, mocking them for their controversies with the
Germans touching their Salt Pits.) Salezart, a very sloven. Salfuge, a kind of
Serpent that is poisoned by salt. Salicoque, as Salcoque. Salicor, Salicorne,
the herb Salt-wort, or Frog-grass. Salicots, as Saligots. Salidure, a little
push, or wheal. Saliette, Herb-sorrel. Saligot, a sloven. Saligots, Water-nuts.
Salin, a garner for salt. Salisson, a sloven, or a slut. Salissure, a fouling,
or soiling. Salival, slimy. Salivation, a continual having of much spittle in
the mouth; or a drawing of humors to the mouth, and a delivery of them from
thence in manner of spittle. Saliver, to slabber, to be full of spittle.
Saliveux, slabbering. Saliviere, the plate whereat a hits players hang, the
flap to hang the players at. Sallebrenaut, a slovenly man. Sallebreneux, most
filthily bewrayed. Sallisseure, as salisseure. Salloir, a Salting-tub, or
table. Sallorge, a Cellar, or low Room to keep salt in. Salmandre, for
salamandre, a Salamander. Salmigondin, as Salmigondi in the N. D. Salmille, the
herb Chervil. Salmonde, herb Avens, Bennet, or Blessed. Salnitre, Saltpeter
candied, or fined unto the color and substance of white Sugar Candy. Saloir,
as salloir. Saloppe, a sloven, or slut. Saloque, the South-east wind. Salorge,
as Sallorge. Salouer, as Salloir. Salpestreux, full of Saltpeter. Salpestrier,
a Saltpeter-man, or Saltpeter-maker. Salsature, as salsitude. Salseparille, the
Indian herb or drug Sassaparilla. Salsitif, salt, or salt-making. Salsitude,
saltness, brackishness. Salsugineux, smacking of salt. Saltereau, as sautereau.
Saluade, a salutation, or greeting; a volley of great or small shot bestowed on
a great person, or worthy friend. Salvador, a Savior. Salvage, as Droict de
Salvage, a tenth part of Goods that were like to perish by shipwreck, due unto
him that saves them. Salubre, wholesome, healthful. Salubrement, healthfully.
Salubrite, wholesomness, healthfulness. Salve, as saluade. Saluerne, a great
drinking-cup. Salus, as saluts; also a certain crafty Seafish which biteth
away the bait, and medleth not with the hook. Salutaire (Subst.) the health, or
preservation of. Salutairement, healthfully, wholesomly, comfortably.
Saluter-libenter, one that salutes every one (but cares for none) he meets.
Saluts, an old French Crown. Samarre, as chamarre in the N. D. Sambacin, as
huile sambacin, oil of Jelsomine-flowers. Sambregoy, as par le sambregoy, a
foolish Oath, like our Gods bodkin, etc. Sambuchin, as huile sambuchin, oil of
the flowers or berries of the Elder-tree. Same, the Mullet-fish. Samoireau, a
great black grape which yields very harsh wine. Sampongne, a Bag-pipe, or
Oaten-pipe; also the Bell hanged about the neck of a Sheep or Goat. Sampsue,
the sweet herb Marjoram. Samy, a half-silk stuff, which has a gloss like
satin, and is narrower, but lasts longer. Sanable, healable, curable.
Sanchet, a black pudding; also an old Coin of gold worth above 2 shill. sterling.
Sanctimoniale, a Nun. Sanctimonie, sanctimony, holiness; also the profession of
a religious person. Sanction, a Law, Decree, or Statute. Sanctoron, an
hypocrite. Sandalin, of, or belonging to a sandal. Sandarac, Sandarache, as
Sandaraque in the N. D. Sandastre, a kind of carbuncle, or burning stone,
wherein small golden drops or sparkles that shine like stars appear. Sandeau, a
link, or torch. Sandouille, the name of an apple. Sanele, wild mustard.
Sanemonde, herb Avens, herb Bennet, or Blessed. Saner, to cure, to heal; also
to geld, or spay a Sow. Sanes, Parliaments, or general Assemblies; also two
sixes at dice. Sanglamment, Sanglantement, bloudily. Sanglanter, for
ensanglanter, to make bloody, or to besmear with blood. Sanglement, a girding
of a horse. Sangleron, a young wild boar. Sangliere, a wild sow. Sanglotin, a
boar-pig, or a little wild boar. Sanglout, for sanglot, a sob, or sigh.
Sang-messeacute;, whose blood is stirred, whose color comes and goes through a
great or sudden fear, etc. Sang-meslure, a stirring of the blood. Sangoy, a
rustical kind of Oath. Sangreal, part of Christ's most precious blood wandering
about the world invisible (to all but chaste eyes) and working many wonders and
wonderful Cures, according to King Arthur. Sangsuer, to suck blood like a
Horseleech. Sanguificatif, bloud-making, turning into blood. Sanguifier, to
convert, or turn into blood. Sanguineral, the little fish called a M^nrow.
Sang^^nite, consanguinity, kindred, parentage, nearby of blood. Sanguinolent,
bloody, full of blood. Sanguisorbe, Burnet, Pimpi^^. Sanie, purul^^t matter.
Sanieux, full of purulent matter, of corrupt or filthy blood. Saninier, as
Savinier. Sannier, a Salter, Salt-seller, or Salt-maker. Sansonet, Sansonnet, a
Starling; also a little pretty fart. Sansue, for sangsue, a Horseleech. Santal,
as sandal in the N.D. Santonique, Wormseed, or Wormseedwort. Sanues blanches,
the white wild Colewort. Sanut, as canus. Sanxi, decreed, enacted, ordained;
also forbidden. Sanxion, as sanction. Sanye, as sanie. Saon, a challenge of, or
exception against a Witness, Juror, etc. Saonier, for Saunier, one that sells
salt. Saonne, challenged, or excepted against. Saonnement, a challenging, or
excepting against. Saonner, to challenge, or except against a Witness, Juror,
etc. Saoulete, Saoulure, satiety, fullness. Sap, as bois de sap, Deal-plank,
Deal-boards. Saphre, as safre. Sapine, an open tub, or vessel (of Fir-wood,
etc.) wherein bottles of wine are usually set. Sapinette, a grove, or wood of
Fir-trees. Sapineux, full of Fir. Sappin, a Chiappin, or Spanish Pantofle.
Saquer, as sacquer. Saquerelle, a dock for a horses train. Sarache, an Albanian
fish very like to the Anchova. Sarazine, as sarrasine. Sarbacane, or
Sarbataine, for Sarbatane, a long trunk to shoot in; also the musical
instrument called a Sagbut. Sarcable, fit to be weeded, or that may be weeded.
Sarcasine, a bitter jest. Sarclet, for sarcloir, a Weeding-book. Sarcophage, a
stone called Eat-flesh, because it consumes in 40 days the dead carcasses
enclosed within it. Sarcoter, to swive. Sarcotique, breeding new flesh.
Sarcueil, for cercueil, a Cossin for a dead Corpse. Sardaine, for sardine, a
Sardin. Sardanapalisme, effeminate sensuality. Sarsoct, as sarsouette.
Sarsouage, a grubbing, digging, or cutting up of weeds. Sarsouette, an
Instrument whose iron head, about a foot long, is forked on the one side, and
sharp on the other, to grub, or cut up weeds, or noisome herbs. Sarsouir, to
grub, or cut up weeds. Sargette, a fine (or thin) serge. Sargon, the Gilthead.
Sargoter, as sarcoter. Sarin, a certain Water-herb, which has a hard ro^t
necessary for Smiths. Sarisse, a long Spear, Lance, Pike, or Javelin, used by
the ancient Macedonians. Sarlatan, for Charlatan, a Mounte-bank. Sarmenteux,
full of twigs, or small branches. Sarmentin, of, or belonging to a small
Vine-branch. Dragme sarmentine, a draught, or cup of wine. Sarrabouite, as
Strabouite. Sarrasson, fleetings, or hasty curds, scummed from the whey of a
new-milk-cheese, then thickened with a little milk, or the yolk of an egg, and
boiled on a soft fire. Sarre, a small piece of Artillery, used in old time.
Sarrer, as serrer in the N. D. Sars, Chichlings, yellow wild Fitches. Sart,
Sea-moss, Lungwort. Sarteau, the Bell-pear, or Gourd-pear. Sartie, a Ship-boat.
Sartre, a Tailor, or Botcher. Sarvagnin, a sort of delicate wine of a dark-red
color. Sassefique, Sassefrique, as sassify. Sassement, a sisting, ranging, or
boulting. Sasser, to sift, range, or boult. Sasseur, a sifter, ranger, or
boulter. Sasseures, siftings. Sassisy, Goats-bread, Josephs-flour. Sassure, as
sassement. Satellite, a Sergeant, or Catchpole. Satiete, satiety, fullness,
plenty. Satisfactionnaire, a preacher of satisfaction. Satouilles, little
Lampreys bred in small fresh-water-streams, into which the Sea comes not.
Satrape, a great Ruler, or Commander; the Lieatenant, or Governor of a
Country. Saturige, the herb Savory. Saturite, saturity, fullness, plenty.
Saturnien, sad, sour, lumpish, melancholy. Satyriase, Priapism, a lustful
extension, or swelling of the yard. Satyric, for satyrique, satirical.
Satyrium, for satyrion, Satyrion, or Rag-wort. Sau, for sell, salt; also an
Ox-house, or the like, in a Country-Cottage. Savart, as friche in the N. D.
Savate, an old shoe; also the play called Bob and hit, or Hideman-blind.
Savaterie, a co^ling, or the trade of a Cobbler; also a street, or place wherein
old shoes be sold. Savatier, for Savetier, a Cobbler; also the play called
Hideman-blind. Savaton, a shoe; also a piece of an old shoe. Vieil savaton,
the Millers thumb (a fish.) Saubanite, a sleeveless yellow coat, or gown,
painted all over with representations of Devils, and put upon such as are found
guilty by the Inquisition. Saucles, as melet. Saudenier, a Soldier that takes
pay. Save, for seve, the sap of a plant. Savetier (Adj.) of, or belonging to
cobling, or old shoes. Saveud, as Terres laissees en saveud, grounds that lie
unlaboured. Sauf-respit, respit of Homage, or a time granted by a Lord unto his
Vassal for the doing of his homage. Sauge, seasoned with Sage. Sauger, the name
of a sweet and tender apple. Saugrenee, a porridge, or meat of pease and broth
half boiled, and put into a dish with sops, salt, saffron, sallet-oyl, and some
verjuice, or vinegar. Sauldoy, branches of Willow cut every third or fourth
year, for props for Vines, etc. Saulge, Capon-sauce made of Sage; also as
sauge. Saulmone (for saumon) de plomb, a great sow of lead. Saulmonnier, of a
Salmon. Saulmonniere, a Salmon-trout. Saulmurages, rubbish of stone, brick,
etc. laid under the groundsil or foundation of a house. Saulmure, pickled.
Saulnerie, a Salt-shop, or Garner for salt. Sauloye, a plot, or grove of
Willows. Saulse, and its Derivatives in use. See them spelt with c, instead of
ls, in the N. D. Saulserette, Saulseron, a little saucer. Saulsiere, a saucer.
Saulsisse, for saucisse, Sausage. Saulsissier, a maker of Sausages.
Saultelement, a skipping. Saultelle, the branch of a Vine left growing (when
all the rest are lopped) for a future years increase. Saultereau, a Locust, or
Grasshopper; also the Jack of a Virginal. Saulterette, a Shrimp, or Prawn.
Saulx, for saul, a Sallow, or Willow-tree. Saume, a She-ass. Saumee de bled,
the quantity of four Setiers of corn, or the third part of a Parisian Muid.
Saumee de terre, a proportion of land containing in square 1600 reeds, and each
of those reeds 8 spans in length. Saumonneau, a young, or little Salmon. Saune,
the herb called Blite, or Blites. Saunelage, as Droict de Saunelage, the tenth
part of Goods which are saved from Shipwreck, due unto him that saved them.
Savonnier, of, or belonging unto soap. Savorade, Savorados, a poor kind of
pottage extracted only from the juice of bare and hollow bones. Saupe, the name
of an unsavory and unwholesom Seafish. Saupiqueter, to give a sharp taste
unto. Saupiqueux, sharp, or tart. Sauquene, a young or small Gilt-head. Saure,
a Sorrel-colour; also a Sorrel-horse. Saurel, the bastard-Mackarel. Sauret, as
saure. Saurer, Saurir, to make Sorrel, or turn into a Sorrel-colour. Saurir les
harengs, to redden Herrings. Saurisseur, a redder of Herrings. Saus^ssier, as
saulsissier. Saussiere, as saulsiere. Sautelle, Sautereau, as sautelle,
sautereau. Sautier, a leaper, jumper, skipper. Sautueil, for sautoir, Salteer
(in Heraldry.) Sauvageau, for sauvageon, a wild plant, set, or stock fit to be
grafted on. Sauvagete, savageness, wildness. Sauvelage, as saunelage.
Sauvement, safely, securely. Sauvete, safety, security. Sauve-vie, stone (or
wall) Rue, white Maidenhair. Sauvoir, a flat and close boot (bored full of
little holes) for the keeping and feeding of fish in rivers, etc. Sauzin, a
kind of Olive. Saxatile, stony, gravelly; breeding the stone; also living, or
lurking among stones. Sayete, Sayette, the stuff Sey. Said, the large fish-net
called a Seyn. Sayon, as say in the N. D. Sbaraglin, an Italian Game at
Tables, wherein one adds six to every cast he throws; as, if he cast 12. he
plays 18. Sbirre, as Satellite. Scabeau, Scabelle, for escabeau, escabelle, a
joynt-stool. Scabie, the scab, or scabbiness. Scabieux, scabby. Scabin, a
Judge. Scabreux, rough, rugged; also skittish, dangerous to be dealt with.
Scace, a scatch-bit. Scaiole, a kind of Alum. Scalene, a triangle, the three
ends whereof are unequal. Scalenes, certain neck-muscles, whereby the head is
moved and bent. Scalle, a scale, a ladder, a pair of stairs. Fair scalle, to
go up unto; also to land, or go ashore. Fair scalle en Espagne, to sail into
Spain. Scalme, a thowl, the little peg whereby the oar of a skiff is stayed.
Scalpelle, a Surgeons penknife, or launcet. Scameux, as suture scameuse, the
seam whereby the bone of the temples is united with, or divided from, the
scull. Scammes, scales; also the nails, or small plates of old-fashioned
Habergeons. Scammonie, for scammonee, Scammony. Scandebee, a kind of Oyster.
Scapellaire, as Scapulaire in the N. D. Scaphe, a Skiff, or Ship-boat; also a
Niche; also a hollow Dial cut into wood or stone in the form of a long basin,
and having the hour-pin or needle in the middle thereof. Scaphoide, as Os
scaphoide, a bone in the instep made somewhat like a skiff, or long basin.
Scarbillat, as escarbillat. Scare, a delicate Seafish which cheweth like a
beast. Scarificateur, a Scarifier, an Instrument wherein there are 18 sharp
wheels, the which let go at once do scarifie and make incision in as many
several places. Scariotte, for scariole, scariol. Scarvine, a Pilgrims Cloak.
Scasser, as sasser. Scatophages, excrement-eaters. Scavantement, for savamment,
learnedly. Scede, a wooden table, whereon in old time people writ with chalk.
Scedule, as cedule in the N. D. Scelere, wicked. Scelete, for squelette, a
Skeleton. Scenicle, the little bird called a Siskin. Sceu (Subst.) knowledge,
notice. Schalupe, for chaloupe, a Shallop. Schede, Schedule, a cedule, or note
in writing; also a writing stuck on a post; also the return made by a Sergeant
upon an Adjournment or Arrest. Schelette, as Scelete. Schelme, a knave, a
Devil. Schine, the linen Cassock which Countrymen wear, gathered in the neck
like a Surplice. Scholarite, Scholarship. Scholiaste, an Expounder of, or
Glosser upon, a Text. Sciage, saw-dust, or a sawing; also cleft wood, as
boards, laths, etc. Scientement, for Sciemment, wittingly. Scientifique,
Scientique, most learned, of great knowledge. Sciette, a little saw. Scille,
for squille, the Squilla, or Sea-onion. Scillet, the nut of a musical
Instrument. Scillitie, of the Squilla, or Sea-onion. Scinq, Scinque, the Skink;
a kind of small land-Crocodile, diverse parts whereof are of good use in
Physic. Scintillation, a sparking, or sparkling. Scintille, a spark, or
sparkle of fire. Scintiller, to spark, or to sparkle. Sciomance, divination by
Conference with the shadows of dead men. Scionneux, full of scions, or of
shoots. Scipoulle, as scille. Scirre, a hard and almost unsensible swelling, a
kernel bred between the flesh and skin by cold, or of thick and clammy phlegm.
Scismatique, for schismatique, a Schismatic, (and Adjectively) schismatical.
Scismatiser, to play the Schismatic; to raise a Schism, or breed a Division,
in the Church. Scisme, for schism, a Schism. Scissile, that may be cut, or
divided. Scissure, a cleft, cut, or crack. Scissure, cleft, cut, cracked,
broken. Scieure, for sieure, a sawing; also saw-dust. Sclavine, as esclavine.
Sclirrolique. See Shiliroique. Scoffion, a Coif richly set with Jewels.
Scoletie, a kind of spotted spider. Scolopendrie, Spleenwort. Scopeterie, a
Volley of small shot. Scordion, Scordium, Water-germander. Scorie, the dross,
or scum of melted, or tried-metal. Scorpene, a little dark-green fish, having
certain weak (but venomous) prickles on her head. Scorze, a round Italian
Corn-measure, 22 whereof go to the Ruble. Scorzon, a short black Serpent full
of yellow spots, and very venomous. Scote, as la scote d'une voile, a sheat.
Scotin, difficult, or intricate. Scotte, as scote. Scourgeon, Amel-corn, or
Starch-corn. Scourre, as la terre ne se scait scourre de cette herb, the
ground cannot overcome, or be rid of, this weed. Scousse, as secousse in the N.
D. Scripteur, a Writer. Scriptule, for scrupule, a scruple, the third part of a
dram. Scrofule, the King's Evil, or a Wen under the throat. Scrophulaire, as
scrofulaire in the N. D. Scrutine, for scrutin, scrutiny, or search.
Scutiforme, fashioned like a Scutcheon. Scybale, a hard (or hardened) turd.
Scylle, as scille. Scync, and Scynque, as Scine, Scinque. Scyomantie, as
sciomance. Scyrre, as scirre. Scyrreux, kernelly, knotty. Scytale, a kind of
Slot-worm; also the Shrew-mouse; also a little round or square stick full of
Cypbers. Seamment, decently, handsomely. Seas, as a Dieu seas, farewell. Sebe, an
Onion. Sebelline, as Mart sebelline, for Zibeline, a Sable, the beast whose
skin we call Sables. Sebeste, Sebestin, the Sebesten, or Assyrian-plum.
Sebestier, the Sebesten, or Assyrian Plum-tree. Sebille, a wooden bowl used in
Vintage-time for the lading or tunning of new Wine, and for the tasting thereof
before it be tunned. Sebu, the Elder-tree. Sec (an Interj.) ware that. Secacul,
an Indian Ginger-like root, which eaten preserved enables a man unto Venery.
Seccer, to saw, or cut asunder. Sechabot, the little black vermin breeding in
puddles, and termed a Bull-head. Secheron, a dried pear. Prez secherons, high,
or dry Meadows, such as are neither overflowed, nor moistened by any River.
Sechot, a Powt, or Eel-powt. Secilienne, the watering-chain of a Bit. Seclus,
secluded, deprived of. Secourable, helpful, assisting, ready (or willing) to
relieve. Secourcer, to tuck up the coat, etc. Secourgeon, as Scourgeon.
Secretain, for Sacristain, the Sexton of a Church. Secretainerie, a Sextry, or
Vestry. Secretariat, a Secretariship, the Office, or Place of a Secretary.
Secret, a thin steel-cap, or a close scull worn under a hat, etc. Secretion, a
separation, or setting apart; also a thing separated, or set apart from others.
Secretrice, of a separating faculty. Sectaire, a Sectary. Sectil, easily cut.
Porreau sectil, the Cut-leek, or Maidens-leek. Sects, as Ceps in the N. D.
Seculaire, as Jeu seculaire, a Game which is played but once every Age.
Secularite, secularity, temporalness. Securidaque, the pulse Axseed, or Arwort.
Sedatif, quieting, asswaging, easing. Sedenette, the Sea Monster called a
Whirl-pool. Seder, to quiet, assuage, or mitigate. Sediment, a settling of
dregs. Sedon, as Ceton. Sedulite, sedulity, diligence. See, for soie, silk.
Seel, for seau, a seal. Droict de Seel, the privilege of having a Seal,
wherewith his Vassals are to stamp all their Contracts. Seelle (Subst.) a
Covenant made, or Contract passed, between Party and Party, under Seal; also
the sealing of a thing. Seelleur, a Sealer. Seelleure, a sealing. Seession, as
fair seession, to break, to turn Bankrupt. Seeux, as soyeux. Segaline, a
delicate pear ripe in August. Segnale, notable, famous. Segrarie, a
Verderership, or suchlike Office of account in Forests. Segrayer, a Verderer,
or such a like Officer of some authority in Forests. Segrayerie, as Segrarie.
Segregation, segregation, separation. Segrege, segregated, separated. Segreger,
to segregate, to separate. Segrette, an iron-scull, or cap of fence. Segue, for
eigue, Hemlock. Seguette, a cavesson of iron full of teeth, or having a sharp
indented edge to the noseward. Sehu, the Elder-tree. Seiche-frite, for
lechefrite, a Dripping-pan. Seicher, and its Derivatives in use. See them
without an i in the N. D. Seicheron, as secheron. Seicheur, for secheresse,
drought. Seides, the bristles, or stiff-hairs of a horse, or hog. Seignee,
Seigner, as saignee, saigner in the N. D. Seigneuriage, Seigniory, Sovereignty
Seigneurier, to domineer. Seillon, a little pail, or bucket; also as sillon in
the N. D. Seillonner, as sillonner in the N.D. Seissete, a kind of pale-red
Wheat. Seizain, a quarter of an ounce, or the 64 part of a pound-weight.
Senelite, a light, white, and transparent stone, easily cleft into thin flakes,
whereof the Arabians make their glass, and glasen windows. Selerin, as celerin.
Selsir, the rotting Serpent Seps. Semainier, one that works by the week.
Semainier, (Adj.) weekly; of, or belonging to a week. Semaises, a sort of great
pots. Semaison, as semaille in the N. D. Semantiere, for Cimetiere, a
Churchyard. Semblance, for semblant, a show, or appearance; also likeness.
Semeler un soulier, to sole a shoe. Semence, for seem, sowed. Semencier, of,
or containing seed. Sementine, a certain Pear, so called, because it is always
ripe about seeding time. Semestre, (Adj.) of, or for six months. Semidroict,
base, or low Jurisdiction. Semillant, wantonly unquiet, or stirring, foolishly
restless. Semillon, a wanton stirring. Seminal, of seed. Semoisson, for
semaille, seeding-time. Semole, the fine flour of an excellent Italian wheat,
ministered by Physicians in panadoes and broths. Semonce, a summons, warning, or
inviting. Semondre, to summon, warn, or invite. Semonneur, a summoner, or
inviter. Semoule, as semole; also ground-wheat that is between meal and flour,
or has only the coursest of the bran sifted from it. Sempervive, Housleek.
Sempiternel, Sempiterneux, everlasting, perpetual. Senacle, a story in a
building. Senaud, a knave, a rascal; a rich man that pretends to be very poor.
Seen, for Synod, a Synod. Senedette, a kind of great Whale. Senelles, heps,
or bawthorn-berries. Senes, twelve, or two sixes, at dice. Senestre, sinister.
La main senestre, the left hand. Sengle, for sangle, a girth. Sengle, (Adj.)
single, simple, not double. Senglot, Senglout, for hoquet, the hiccock.
Sengloter, Senglouter, to be troubled with the hiccock. Sengloteur, one that
has the hiccock. Senicle, for sanicle, Sanicke; also the little Siskin-bird.
Senne, for seen, the purging plant Seen. Sensouire, excessive saltness of soil,
a fault in land bred by the noisome slime of salt marshes. Sent, for sentier, a
path. Sentemeur, for sentiment, a feeling, a smelling, or tasting. Sentier,
(Adj.) of, or in a path. Sentine mere, a little salt-boat, or bark. Sentive,
the faculty of feeling, smelling, etc. Sentrille, a kind of fresh water fish.
Sep, as cep in the N. D. Separaison, for separation, separation; also a balk,
or division between two lands. Separatoire, a Separatory, the Chizel or
Instrument wherewith Surgeons cut out the pieces of bones left between the
holes which they have bored with a Trepan. Sepe, Sepadon, as Selsir.
Sepmainier, as semainier. Septaine, the precincts, or liberties of a Town.
Septantiesme, seventieth. Septembrin, of, or in September. Liqueur septembrine,
wine. Septenaire, a seventh, a proportion of seven, the number of seven.
Septenaire, (Adj.) containing seven; in, of, or belonging to seven. Septeree, a
setier full of. Septiemement, seventhly. Septimestre, of seven months, or at
seven months end. Septinaire, as septenaire. Septique, putrefactive, corrosive.
Septirage, as stirage. Septuagenaire, threescore and ten years old. Sept-virat,
the joint Rule, Government, or Authority of seven men. Septuple, sevenfold.
Sepulchral, of, or belonging to a grave. Sepulturable, sit to be buried.
Sepulturer, to bury, to lay in the ground. Sequel, a sequel, or consequence;
the issu^, or success of a thing; also a great man's Train. La Sequelle au
robon, mean, (pitiful) Tradesmen. Sequence, a sequence. Sequences, answering
Verses, or Verses whereto answer is made in the Mass. Sequenie, a frock, or
loose Jacket of Canvas, open before, and worn by Porters, etc. over the rest of
their apparel. Sequent, following. Sequinant, the sweet-flowered rush, called
Squinant, and Camels-hay. Ser de laict, whey. Ser montain, bastard Lovage.
Serain, as serein in the N. D. Seraph, a Turkish Coin of fine Gold, worth about
a French Crown. Seraphiser, to sanctify, consecrate; extol, or magnify to the
heavens. Serapin, as sagapen. Serargent, the penny father. Serat, as laict
serat, milk boiled with garlic and onions; also sour milk. Serbataine, as
sarbacane. Serbin, the crimson, or prickly Cedar; also the rosin that issues
from the great Cedar. Sercisi, as sassify. Sereler, and its Derivatives. See
Sarcler, etc. in the N. D. Sereueil, for cercueil, a cossi^. Seree, for soiree,
the evening; also an evening-task, or work; also a gossiping of neighbors by
turns at their own houses. Sereine, for Sirene, a Mermaid. Sereiner, to clear,
as the weather; to look cheerfully, to make lightsome, or pleasant; also to
calm, appease, or pacify. Serencer, as serancer in the N. D. Serene, as la
goutte serene, blindness, or extreme dimness of sight, caused by the obturation
or stopping of the Optic Sinew. Serennade, as serenade in the N.D. Sereux,
serous, or waterish like whey; also loving the evening; being in, or near the
evening. Serf, a servant, or a slave. Serfs fonciers, such as having been
conquered by the ancient French received Lands of them, on the Condition of
doing them any service. These were by no means permitted to change the
habitation they first betook them to. Serss pissenez, the bastards of slaves,
or villains. Serfoot, a weeding-book, or a weeding-fork. Serfoue, weeded,
grabbed, or eat up with a weeding-fork. Serfouettes, the Instrument wherewith a
Gardener grubs, or cuts up weeds. Serfs, an Order of Black Friars, which thus
term themselves. Sergeanter, Sergeanterie, as Sergenter, Sergenterie.
Sergeanteux, Sergeant-like, or using a Serjeant-like authority. Sergeantise, as
Sergentise. Sergentaillerie, Sergeants, or a Company of them. Sergenter, to
arrest, attach, or summon; to act the Sergeant any way. Sergenterie, Sergentie,
and Sergentise, Sergeantship, the Office, Place, or Duty of a Sergeant; also
(in the Customs of Normandy) a kind of fief without Court or Jurisdiction; or
that service, which in the English Law is termed grand or petit Sergeantie.
Seri, Seriau, quiet, calm, still, fair, clear. Serie, the Eve of a Holy Day;
also the Evening. Seriens, Soldiers that served on foot. Serin, of silk; also
serene. Seriphie, Sea-worm-wood. Sermenteux, as sarmenteux. Sermonner, to
preach, to make a Sermon. Sermonneur, a Preacher, a Sermon-maker. Sermontain,
siler mountain, bastard lovage. Serourge, a Brother-in-law, one that has
married a man's own, or his wifes sister. Serpaut, Marriage-goods, any
household stuff or movables given in marriage with a Son, Daughter, or Cousin.
Serpeger, to wind, or crankle in and out; to wave, or go waving, like a
Serpent. Serpeillere, as Serpillere. Serpente, for serpent, a serpent.
Serpigine, a redness of the skin with pushes and wheals. Serpiller, to pack up
in canvas, etc. also to glean after Grape-gatherers. Serpillere, for
sarpilliere, a sarpler, or sarp-cloth. Serpillette, Serpillon, Serpillonnette,
a small Vine-hook, or Gardiners hooded knife. Serpolet, for serpoulet, running
Time. Serquify, the delicate root of the herb Goats-beard. Serrail d'un huis,
the bolt of a door. Serran, a fish resembling, but somewhat less, than the
Sea-perch. Serrant, a Green-finch. Serratan, as serran. Serratil, closing, or
shutting up close together. Serrecrapiere, the close buttock play, lechery.
Serre-front, a head-band, or forehead-cloth. Serrement, closely, compactly.
Serre-nappe, a Cabinet, Room, or Chest for the keeping of Tablelinnen; also the
basket wherein it is put up at the taking away. Serre-poignet, a covetous, or
closehanded wretch. Serre-teste, a border of Goldsmiths work, etc. worn by
Gentlewomen upon their Coifs or Hoods. Serreure, for serrure, a lock. Sert, the
first course at table. Serte, a kind of flat-bottomed Boat used in old time.
Servage, servitude, bondage, or slavery. Servans, as Serfs. Servant, for Esprit
familier, a Hobgoblin, a Ghost, or walking Spirit. Servantin, the Sole-fish
termed a kind fool. Serve, a stue for fish; also a mue for fowl; also the herb
Sage. Servement, servilely, by villenage, by a base or servile Tenure.
Serviablement, serviceably, officiously. Servicial, a glister. Servis, the
Cens, and other small yearly Rights, or Duties paid by the Tenants of
Inheritances unto the Lord of the Soil, in acknowledgment of his direct
Seigniory. Servitute, a Duty wherein one piece of ground, and the possessor
thereof, is liable, or subject unto another. Hommes de servitute, a kind of
Villains, or servile Tenants, liable to their Lords Taxations while they live:
And when they die, their Sons must buy their possessions of him, or else he
seizes and holds them: and their Daughters (if they had no Sons) must lose the
Soil, and take such husbands and portions as he is pleased to allot them.
Servivi, an Act, or Certificate of the actual Services performed by an Officer,
who thereupon receives the Wages, and is allowed the Privileges due unto his
place. Sery, the Shrew-mouse. Sesamin, of sesamum. Sesamoide, bastard-woad.
Sesamoides, certain little flat bones, wherewith the joints of the fingers and
toes are filled, settled, and strengthened. Sesne, the mother of wine.
Sesquialtere, one and a half, or half as much again, as three in respect of
two. Sesquin, a kind of base coin. Sesquitiers, as much, and a third part
more. Sessile, sitting, or seeming to sit; easy to sit on; of a low stature.
Verrue sessile, a kind of hard, broad, flat, and blackish wart. Sesterce, the
fourth part of the ancient Roman penny, worth about three half pence farthing
of English money. Sesterce de terre, the fourth part of a Saumee, a measure for
land somewhat less than the ordinary Arpent. Sestine, a Stanza of six Verses.
Sete, the Quitterbone, a round and hard swelling upon the cornet (between the
heel and quarter) of a horses foot. Setier, (Adj.) bristly, rough. Seton, a
rowel; the rowelling, or roping of a bruised or strained horse. Setton, as
seton; also section. Setule, as sete. Seu, an Elder-tree. Seueil, for seuil,
the threshold of a door. Seveux, sappy, full of natural moisture. Sevir, to
rage, to be mad at; to deal most cruelly with. Seule, for seuil, a threshold;
also a groundsil, or the piece of timber which compasses the bottom of a room.
Seulet, alone, solitary, or apart from others. Seulle, as la seulle d'une
chartee de foing, as much meadow-ground as will bear a load of hay. Seur, for
sureau, an Elder-tree. Seur, for soeur, a sister. Seur, for aigre, sour.
Seurat, as vinaigre seurat, Elder-vinegar. Sevronde, for severonde, the eaves
of an house. Sexagenaire, 60 years old. Sextaire, an ancient Roman measure
containing somewhat more than our pint. Sextement, sixthly. Sexterce, Sexteree,
as Sesterce. Sextier, as setier in the N. D. Sextule, a weight of four
scruples, or the sixth part of an ounce. Seyette, serge or sey. Seynale, as
salvatelle in the N. D. Seyeux, full of silk. Sezain, the toll, or fee due for
grinding; also as seizain. Seziesme, (Subst.) a sixteenth part. un seziesme
d'aulne, three Inches. Shilithoique, as Goutte shilithoique, a kind of cold
Gout. Sibi, as a son sibi, to himself. Sibille, a tunning and tasting dish in
the time of Vintage. Sibilet, an ass, a fop. Sibylin, of a Sybil, or
Sybil-like; prophesying. Sicap, as de leur sicap, of their own head, after
their own fancy. Siccite, dryness. Siciliane, as ceciliane. Sicilique, a
quarter of an ounce. Sicinnie, a dancing and singing together. Sicinnistes,
such as dance and sing together. Sicnie, as sequenie. Sicot, as bricot.
Sideration, as syderation. Siderite, the iron-like stone siderites, which (as
some imagine) has power to set men at odds; also the lodestone. Sienite, a
kind of rich marble gotten about Thebes. Sieser, to become fit. Siette, a
little saw. Sieu, the suet of Deer, wild Goats, the Roe, etc. also the grease
of capons, and of such other fowl. Sieurel, the bastard-mackerel. Sieurie, for
Seigneurie, Lordship. Sieute, as poissons d'une sieute, fishes of one size or
goodness. Sifflantement, with a whistling sound. Sifflerie, a whistle, or
whistling. Sifre, for chifre, a cipher. Sigillatif, sealable, or apt to seat;
also made of wax. Sigille, sealed. Signacle, a sign, seal, mark or character.
Signale, as segnale. Signamment, namely, expressly, especially, particularly.
Signet, a signet, seal, stamp, or mark. Signeur, a signer, a subscriber; a
marker, stamper; a crosser, or blesser. Signifiance, Significance, a
signifying, or signification; a declaring, or betokening; also an argument,
sign, or token of. Silenes, Boxes in Apothecaries shops painted on the outside
with diverse odd figures. Silentiaire, a Patron, or Pattern of silence.
Silentieux, very silent. Siler, the herb seseli, or hart-wort. Sili, a yellow
earth (found in gold and silver Mines) whereof, being burnt, Painters do make a
kind of vermillion. Siliquastre, Guinney pepper. Silique, the husk, or cod of
beans, pease, etc. also a poise, among Physicians, etc. coming to four grains.
Silure, the ravening sheat-fish, or Whale of the River. Sime, as la party sime
du foie, the massy part of the liver, that which has no manner of hollowness
in it. Simier, as cimier. Simiotique, as medecin simiotique, that part of
Physic which entreats of the significant marks of what is past, and what is to
come, as well in regard of health as of sikness. Simme, for cime, the top of a
tree or mountain. Simmiste, a Secretary, or Privy-Counsellor. Simpler, to
cosen, to deceive. Simplesse, for simplicite, simplicity. Simplette, a simple
Wench. Simpliciste, simpliste, an Herbalist, one that understands, or professes
to understand the nature of simples, plants, or drugs. Simploce, the ending and
beginning of two next-adjoyning Verses with one word. Simulateur, a dissembler.
Simulation, a dissembling, or dissimulation. Simulte, a spite, or grudge.
Sinalles, as senelles. Sinapiser, to revive a mortified place, and draw fresh
humors and color unto it, by a plaster of mustard seed; to raise blisters,
or bring smart by such plasters; to strew over with sharp and smarting powder.
Since, a dish-clout, shooe-clout, or the like. Sincer, to wipe, rub, or make
clean with a clout. Sincope, cut off. Sincoper, to cut off. Sinelles, as
senelles. Sineulle, the handle whereby some kind of wheels, or wheel-like
engines are turned. Sing, for sign, a sign, mark, or character; a spot on the
face, or other part of a newborn Infant; also a bell, or the sound of a bell.
Tu n'en as pas fait les sings sonner, thou have not made all the world ring of
it. Singeot, a little ape. Singeotte, an ill-favored, or Monkey-faced wench.
Singesse, a she-ape. Singeur, an apish mome, or a keeper of apes. Singlage, a
sailing in the sea; also a Mariners hire, wages, or entertainment. Singlant, as
verge singlante, a switch. Voix singlante, a shrill voice. Singlee, Singlement,
a sailing; also a whisking, or lashing. Singlet, a whisk, or lash. Singleure,
as singlement. Sinipion, a kind of disease peculiar to children. Sinissome,
blessed thistle. Sintegne, a kind of bloody flux. Sinterese, a remorse of
conscience. Sintre, as cintre in the N. D. Sinuosite, a hollow turning or
winding; an intricateness. Sion, for scion, a scion or shoot. Sions, the
boisterous incounters of two strong winds, either sidelong or across. Siphach,
the inner rind of the belly, wherewith all the entrals are covered. Siphon, the
cock, or pipe of a conduit, the tap, or faucet of a hogshead; also a fannel, or
tunnel; also a quill, or pipe to suck wine with. Siringue, for seringue, a
syringe. Siringue, squirted, injected. Siringuer, to squirt, or inject with a
syringe. Siroch, for siroco, a south east wind. Sironne, a kind of fomentation.
Sisalle, as grive sisalle, a field fare. Sisame, as sesame in the N. D.
Siserre, the throstle, or mavis. Sistolique, without intermission, in motion.
Sit, a seat, or situation. Sitibond, extremely thirsty. Siticines, that sounded
Trumpets, or sung unto pipes, at Funerals. Sive, a broth, or sauce made of the
entrals of a hog; also broth or sauce for the forepart of a fried Hare, made
of wine, vinegar, verjuice, herbs, and spices, and served with toasts, or sops;
also seam, or swines grease. Du sive d'huistres, oyster-broth, or broth made of
boiled oysters. Sive, a chibol. Sivele, a buckle. Sivette, for civette, civet;
also a Civet-cat; also a chive, or small chibol. Sixener, to yield six for one;
also to come forth by half dozens, or by six and six together. Sixte, for
sexte, a sixth, or proportion of six, in Music. Sizement, a sitting. Skelete,
as scelete. Smirge, lovage, or parsley of Macedonia. Sobressaut, for
soubresaut, a tumbling, or tossing up. Sobresse, for sobriety, sobriety; also
activity, or nimbleness. Sobrique, pranked, or perfumed. Socque, a sock, or
sole of dirt or earth, cleaving to the bottom of the foot in a cloggy way, or
in a moist and clayie soil. Sodalite, fellowship, society. Soef, sweet; soft,
smooth; mild, or gentle. Soef, (Adv.) gently. As le boeuf march soef, the
weary Ox treads gently or gingerly. Soefflairant, Soeffleurant, most fragrant,
delicately smelling. Soefvement, sweetly, deliciously, smoothly, gently.
Soefuete, sweetness, pleasantness, deliciousness, gentleness, mildness,
smoothness. Soeil du Sanglier. See sueil. Soeurette, a little sister.
Soeurorge, as Sororge. Sofistication, Sofistiquer, as sophistiquerie, and
sophistiquer in the N. D. Sogrenu, as saugrenu. Sogrenue, a jest. Soiage, for
seyage, the reaping of corn, etc. Soier, for seyer, to reap, or to cut down
corn. Soieur, a reaper. Soigner, to take care, to be diligent about. Soil de
Sanglier. See sue^. Soilure, a galling, or breaking of the skin by frequent
use, or overmuch rubbing; a chafe-gall. Soire, Soireux, of, or in the evening,
toward night. Soitier, a Silk-man; also as setier in the N. D. Soitier, (Adj.)
of, or full of Silk. Soiture, a reaping of corn. se Solacier, to be merry, to
recreate himself. Solacieux, delightful, comfortable. Solage, as Solaige; also
soil, or good ground. Solaige, a sunny place; also the force or power of the
Sun upon a place. Solaire de la jambe, the greatest of the six hinder muscles
of the leg, ending in the sole of the foot, the which it serves to extend.
Solane, for solan, the herb nightshade. Solatre, Garden nightshade, petty
morrel. Sold, for sol, a penny. Soldade, a la Soldade, Souldierlike, bravely,
valiantly, swaggeringly. Sultan, as souldan. Soldanelle, sea-bindweed.
Soldatesque, (Adj.) of, or belonging to a Soldier; souldier-like.
Soldatesquement, Souldier-like. Soldatise, made, or turned a Soldier.
Soleillant, sunning, sunny. Soleille, sunned, laid in the Sun; also warm,
sunny, shining, or heating like the sun. Soleiller, to sun; to lay out, or to
dry in the sun. Soleilleux, sunny, open unto, or lying full in the sun. Soler,
to sole a shoe, or stocking. Solerets, as Sollerets. Solerre, the East Wind.
Soles, les soles, the groundsel of a house. Soleye, sunned, exposed unto the
sun. Solfe, a solfa, a note in singing. Solfie, solfaed; also distempered.
Solicitude, care, cark, perplexity, or anguish of mind. Solidaire, solid,
whole; liable to the whole. Solidairement, solidly, soundly, surely; also
wholly, for the whole. Solier, a floor; a cellar, or low garner; a shoe.
Solifuge, a kind of Spider, or vermin like a spider, in the silver Mines of
Sardinia. Termed thus, because it ever flies from light. Soliseque,
sun-following. Solistime, Divination by a falling on the ground of bread given
unto Chickens. Solle, as sole in the N. D. Sollerets, Armor for the feet.
Solette, a little sole. La solette d'un esperon, the under-leather of a spur.
Sollier, as solier. Sollouoir, a salting, or sowcing Tub. Soloir, as souloir.
Sols, as sol in the N. D. Solsie, as soulsie. Solsticial, Solstitial, of, or in
the Solstice. Solu, loose, free, careless. Oraison solue, prose. Solut, as
solu, loose. Clear solut, a lay or secular Churchman, one that is not tied unto
the Church, nor bound to attend a Cure. Solutif, solutive, laxative, loosing,
dissolving. Solz, as sol in the N. D. Some, for son, bran. Somate, a body.
Somayer, as sommayer. Sombre-pres, dark-blue; also (of the sky) thinly
darkened, or overspread with clouds. Sombrer, for obscureir, to darken.
Sombriere, a broad-brimmed hat. Somiere, as sommiere. Sommade, a horse-load.
Sommaige, the top of a Tower, etc. Sommaire, (Adj.) summary, chief, principal;
full; succinct, compendious. Un procez sommaire, a process wherein no formality
or formal proceeding has been used. Sommarer, to plow, or break up the ground.
Sommation, a sum, or the summing of money; also a summoning, or denouncing.
Sommayer, to put hoops upon hoops, or to hoop a Vessel with the hoops called
Sommiers. Sommeillard, Sommeilleux, sleepy, drowsy, slothful. Sommette, a
little sum. Sommier, for cheval de bat, a sumpter-horse. Sommission, for
soumission, submission. Sommiste, a Summist, an imitator or understander of
Thomas Aquinas his Sums. Sommite, for sommet, top. Somne, for sommeil, sleep.
Somnisique, causing sleep. Mortelle somnifique, deaths herb, sleepy, or deadly
Nightshade, Somption, a taking, or receiving. Somptuaire, sumptuary, of, or
belonging to cost, bringing in expense. Sondre, the Linden-tree. Songe-creux,
one that is in his dumps, or in a brown study; also a dreaming, sleepy, or
heavy-headed gull. Songner, as soigner. Songneusement, for soigneusement,
carefully. Sonnaillerie, the tingling of a little bell. Sonnaillier, Sonnalier,
carrying a bell. Mouton sonnaillier, a bell-weather. Sonoreux, shrill. Sont, as
Messieurs de non sont, imperfect, or prickless men. Sophie, wisdom; also the
herb called Flixwort, or Flixweed; also the Dace, or Dare-fish. Sophisterie,
sophistry. Sophistiquement, a sophisticating, adulterating, falsifying.
Soporal, sleepy, of, or in sleep. Soporifere, soporiferous, sleep-procuring.
Soprefin, thread of gold or silver. Sor, as la pipee du for, the Season wherein
the weather grows cold. Sorbition, a supping; also broth, or pottage. Sorceler,
for ensorceler, to charm, inchant, or bewitch. Sorcellage, for sorcelerie,
witchcraft, or sorcery. Sordidement, nastily, miserably. Sori, for souri, a
mouse. Soriciere, a mouse-trap. Soringue, Eel-sauce made of fried Onions and
toasted bread steeped in pease-broth, then strained with wine, vinegar,
cinnamon, ginger, and other spices, all put into a pot with the eels cut into
pieces, and (after a little seasoning with saffron and salt) thoroughly boiled.
Soriser, to mouse, or hunt mice like a Cat; also as sorer in the N. D.
Sorisseau, a little mouse. Sorissiere, a mouse-trap. Sorne, the evening.
Sorner, to jest, sell bargains, speak merrily. Sornetteux, full of jests, or
pleasant conceits; that loves, or uses to tell merry tales. Sororge, a
brother-in-law, the husband of a sister. Sororite, Sisterhood. Sorrat, a great,
short-snouted, sharp-toothed, and most ravenous Hound-fish. Sortablement,
fitly, or sutably. Sosmes, Vassals, Tenants. Sotart, a coxcomb, a noddy.
Sotbriquet, for sobriquet, a nickname. Sotiner, to play the sot. Sottart, as
sotart. Sottelet, a little sot. Sotterie, Sottie, for Sotise, folly,
sottishness. Sottiner, as sotiner. Souater, to partake with, or be a partner
in; also to join together, after the manner of Country-Peasants, who bring
every one a horse or two for the making of a Team, which no one of himself can
furnish. Souaton, a partner, or partaker with; also one that joins or
contributes with his Neighbors to the making up of a thing for their common
use. Souatter, as Souater. Soubarbe, the part that is between the chin and the
throat; also the throat-band of a bridle. Endurer une soubarbe, to endure an
affront. Soubastement, a foundation, or groundwork; a low building within the
ground, for the support of Rooms above the ground. Soubattue, Soubatture, a
surbate, or surbating. Soubchanter, to sing under, or after another.
Soubehantre, Soubcontroleur, Soubcurateur, Soubdaine, and Soubdainement. See
them without a b in the N. D. Soubdainete, suddenness. Soubdespensier, an
Vnder-cater, or an Vnder-Clark of a Kitchen. Soubdiacre, for Soudiacre, a
Subdeacon. Soubelin, as un Chat soubelin, a great or mighty Cat. Soubeline,
high, lofty, haughty; extolled, lifted up, or set on high. Soubgardien, an
Vnder-Warden, or an Vnder-Guardian. Soubhaiter, for souhaiter, to wish.
Soubhastation, for encan, an Outcry, or open Sale of things forfeited, etc.
Soubhaster, to make an Outcry, or open Sale. Soubject, Soubjection, as Sujet,
Sujetion in the N. D. Soubleve, Soublevement, Soublever. See them without a b
in the N. D. Soublin, as ^oubelin. Mart soublin, a Sable. Soubmaistre, for
Soumaitre, an Usher in a School. Soubmerger, for submerger, to drown, sink, or
overwhelm. Soubmettre, for soumettre, to submit. Soubministration, a
subministration. Soubministre, an Vnder-minister, an Vnder-servant.
Soubministrer, to subminister unto. Soubmis, Soubmission. See them without a b
in the N. D. Soubors, as sabors. Soubpendue, and Soubpeser. See them without a
b in the N. D. Soubrecoup, a downright blow. Soubresaulteux, a Tumbler.
Soubride, a jerk given to a horse with his bridle; also as Soubarbe.
Soubriquet, for sobriquet, a nickname. Soubrire, and Soubris. See them without
a b in the N. D. Soubs-acazement, Soubs-acazer. See Soubz-acasement, etc.
Soubs-age, under age. Soubs-aide, an Vnder-aid, the Aid which Tenants pay unto
their mesne Lord, toward that which is due both by him and them unto the Lord
paramount. Soubs-arrenter, to let out at an under-rent. Soubs-celerier, an
Vnder-butler, or a Yeoman of the Cellar. Soubslevement, for soulevement, a
rising, a sedition. Soubs-majeur, is in some Towns a Magistrate of Authority,
or Dignity, next unto the Mayor. Soubs-maistre, for soumaitre, an Vnder-master,
an Usher. Soubs-manant, a Tenant, Vassal, or Subject unto a Lord. Soubson,
Soubsonner, as soupcon, soupconner in the N. D. Soubs-poictrine, the
flank-piece, or bottom of the brisket of an Ox, etc. Soubstenable, for
soutenable, tenable, desensible. Soubstenance, as soustenance. Soubs-Tenant, an
Vnder-tenant, a Tenant unto a Tenant, or to a mesne Lord; also as Soustenant.
Soubstenement, as soustenement. Soubstenir, Soubtenir, for soutenir, to
sustain, support, uphold, or bear up. Soubterrain, which is under the ground,
or within the earth. Soubterrer, as sousterrer. Soubtraire, for soustraire, to
withdraw, or to take away. Soubtrayant, substracting, withdrawing; also
seducing, alluring, enticing away. Soubz, as soubs. Soubz-acazement, a dead
Fief, rent seck, mesne (or under) rent. Soubz-acazer, to raise a new rent seek,
new services, or new Cens upon the letting or aliening of land already so
rented, or liable to services, or unto Cens. Soubz-acazeur, one that raises
such a rent, etc. as in soubs-acazer. Soucens, Soucensier, as Surcens,
Surcensier in the N. D. Souchette, a little stock, trunk, or log. Soucheux,
full of slocks, stumps, or logs. Souchon, the stump of a tree, etc. Soucicle,
Soucie, a little yellowish bird, hardly as big as a Wren, and called by some a
Ninmurder. See Soulsie. Soucieux, careful, thoughtful. Soucille, the under-lid
of the eye. Soudainete, suddenness, haste, or great speed. Soudan, a King,
Prince, or Sovereign. Soudard, for soldat, a Soldier. Soude, as soulde.
Soudespensier, as Soubsdespensier. Soudie, an ancient Title for a great Lord or
Nobleman. Soudre, (a Subst.) the Linden-tree. Soudre, (an Adj.) ugly, deformed.
Souduire, for seduire, to seduce. Souduis, seduced. Souduiseur, a seducer.
Souef, Souefvement, Souefvete. See soef, soefvement, soefvete. Souefflairant,
as soefflairant. Soueffleurer, to persume, sweeten, or imbalm. Souer, to bring
a boar unto the sow; also to gueld, or spay a sow. Souevement, sweetly,
pleasantly. Souffire, for suffire, to suffice. Soufflemboyan, a Pudding-maker.
Souffleteux, Souffleux, blowing often, or pussing violently; also ready, or apt
to puff. Souffreter, to be in great need. Souffreteux, poor, needy. Souffrette,
poverty, need. Souillard, for Souillon, a Scullion, a Kitchin-boy; also the
name of a Dog. Souillarderie, sluttishness, nastiness, greasiness; the habit,
state, or office of a Scullion. Souillement, a soyling. Souillonne, a Drudge,
or Kitchin-wench. Soulacier, as solacier. Soulas, solace, comfort, ease.
Soulasser, Soulassier, as solacier. Soulcicle, Soulcide, and Soulcie, as
Soucicle. Soulcieux, as soucieux. Sold, for sold, Soldiers pay. Souldan, as
soudan. Souldart, for soldat, a Soldier. Soulde, Souldee, Salt-wort,
Glass-wort, or Crab-grass; also Soldiers pay; or as soulte. Ils sont tousjours
a la chasse des souldes, they are ever hunting after entertainment. Souldoyer,
for soldat, a Soldier. Souldoyer, for soldoyer une Armee, to keep an Army under
pay. Soulet, alone, solitary. Soulfreux, Soulfureux, full of brimstone.
Soulier, (Adj.) fit for, or belonging to a shoe. Souloir, to be wont, or
accustomed. Soulphre, Soulphriere, as soufre, soufriere in the N. D. Souls, for
sol, a French penny. Soulsi, the Marigold buds. Soulsi d'eau, Soulsi aquatique,
the yellow Willow-herb, or Water-willow. Soulsie, as soulsi; or as soucicle.
Moineau a la soulsie, the Ring-sparrow. Soulte, for sold, Soldiers pay.
Eschange de terre sans soulte, Land exchanged only for Land, without any thing
to boot. Soulte mobilaire, a return, or amends in Movables, or in Money, made
by a Coheir or Coparcener, that has a greater, to him that has a less part in
the Land than he should have. Soupape, the stopple of a Baloon; also the sucker
of a Pump. Soupconnable, that may be suspected. Soupendre, to hang on, or over;
to jutt, or bear out; to stand, or lean beyond; also to build upon arches,
pillars, vaults, etc. Soupoictrine, as soubspoictrine. Soupoultreau, an
under-beam. Souppendre, as soupendre. Souppier, a sopper, one that is ever
dipping his bread in the beef-pot. Soupple, and Soupplesse. See them with a
single p in the N. D. Souppous, Substitutes. Souquenie, a canvas Jacket, Frock,
or Gaberdine. Source, sprung, begun. Sourcens, Sourcensier. See them without an
o in the N. D. Sourcer, to spring, to begin; to issue, or draw its original
from. Sourchelons, the Frounce (a hawks disease.) Sourcicle, as Soucicle.
Sourcier, for sorcier, a Sorcerer. Sourcilier, of, or on the eyebrows.
Sourciller, to move the eyebrows up and down. Sourd, for Salamandre, the
Salamander. Sourdant, springing up, rising, or arising from. Sourdastre,
deasish, thick of hearing. Sourdault, somewhat deaf. Sourdement, (Subst.) a
rising, or springing up. Sourdent, the stump of a broken tooth. Sourdesse,
Sourdete, for surdite, deafness. Sourdin, as sourdastre. Sourdise, as
sourdesse. Sourdoyant, as sourdant. Souretier, a mouser, or catcher of mice.
Sourge, as surge in the N. D. Souriceau, a little, or young mouse. Souricier,
as Souretier; also (Adjectively) of, or belonging to mice. Sourien, loving (or
hunting after) mice. Sourisseau, Sourisson, as souriceau. Sourte, as soutte.
Sousbarbe, as soubarbe. Souschambriere, a house-maid, or a drudge. Souschanter,
as soubschanter. Sousclavier, under the Kannel-bone. Artere sousclaviere, the
ascendant branch of the great Artery. Muscle sousclavier, one of the muscles,
which in fetching the breath dilate and stretch out the breast. Vein
sousclaviere, one of the two main ascendant branches of the hollow vein,
divided into six parts. Souscoeur, the Pericardium, or thin skin whereby the
whole heart is covered. Sousgreve, the less bone of the leg; also the calf of
the leg. Sousappe, as soupape. Souspecon, and its Derivatives. See Soupcon,
etc. in the N. D. Souspendement, a hanging, or leaning over; a jutting, or
bearing out. Souspendre, as soupendre. Souspendu, hanging, or hung over;
juttied, or set out beyond. Une demarche souspendue, a stealing pace.
Souspirable, worthy of moan. Souspiraille, having holes, vents, or other
passages for air to come in and out at. Souspiral, as soupirail in the N. D.
Souspirement, a sighing. Sousplie, bent, or bowed under. Soustenance, a prop,
support, or maintenance. Soustenant de balance, the cheeks of a balance, the
two upright pieces between which the needle plays. Soustenant de bride, the
check-piece of a bridle. Soustendrons, the sides of the belly under the short
ribs. Soustenement, a sustaining, supporting, upholding, maintaining; an
enduring, or abiding. Sousternery, she that gives suck to a newborn Child for
two or three days, and until the Mothers milk is fit for it. Sousterre, put,
laid, or buried under (or within) the ground. Sousterrer, to put, lay, bury
under (or within) the ground. Soute, as soutte; also a hogsty. Soutest, the
Pericranium. Soutre, Soutte, a binn to keep bread in; also the room of a ship
wherein the provision-bisket is laid. Souvendier, the herb Cichory. Soyer, for
seyer, to reap corn. Soyes, Is in the throats of swine a disease that stifles
them, if it be not presently cured; also as Sais. Soyeux, full of silk, or of
bristles. Soytier, of silk, or dealing with silks. Spaidaires, an Order of
white Friars wearing on their habits a representation of two red swords.
Spadasin, Spadassin, a swaggering fellow, a hector. Spalnier, to breem and
grave, or make clean a Ship. Sparaillon, the Purple-fish. Spargirie, Alchimy;
extraction of Quintessences. Spargirique, an Alchimist, or Extractor of
Quintessences. Spargitide, terre spargitide, Lemnian earth. Spariee, a
Sea-wreck; or as Varech. Sparte, Sparton, Spanish-broom, or bastard
Spanish-broom, whereof bands to tie Vines, and (as in old time) ropes for
Shipping may be made; also Matweed. Spase, ou peis espase, the Sea-Fox.
Spasmatique, Spasme, troubled with a Cramp, or a Convulsion. Spasmeux, full of
the Cramp, or Convulsive; also Cramp-breeding. Spaze, as spase; also a sword.
Speans d'une Vache, a Cow-dugs. Speautre, for epeautre, spelt, or spelt corn.
Specifiquement, specially, particularly. Spectable, visible; also worthy.
Speculaire, clear, transparent; also helping the sight. Speltre, as speautre.
Spengitide, as sphengitide. Spermatiser, to eject sperm. Spet, the name of a
Seafish, by some called the Spit-fish, by others the Sea-pike. Sphacele,
mortified by inflammation. Sphaceler, to mortify by inflammation. Sphatule, as
spatule in the N. D. Sphengitide, transparent. Sphenoide, as l'os sphenoide,
the cuneal bone. Sphicie, a kind of spider like a great Wasp. Sphinge, for
Sphinx, the Sphinx (whose Description you have in the N. D.) Spicaire,
Roman-spike, or Lavender. Spicquenard, the herb Spikenard. Spinal, of, or in
the chine, or backbone. Spincile, a kind of very red Gurnet. Spineux, as
espineux. Spinul, a splent in a horses leg. Spique, Spike, Lavander.
Spiquenard, as spicquenard. Spiracle, a breathing hole; a hole to let air,
breath, or smoke in and out; also a hole that evaporates a strong or pestilent
air; a damp hole. Spiracle, (Adj.) giving breath, breathing life, infusing
spirit into. Spire, a round, or circle; a turning, or winding compass; the
coyling, or making up of a cable; also a Quadrant, or Square in the bottom of a
Pillar. Spiriteux, Spiritueux, giving (or breathing in) life; also quick,
lively, vigorous. Spirolle, a kind of small artillery. Splanade, a plain, or
champion Country. Splenitique, for splenique, troubled with the spleen. Spode,
the heavier soil, foot, or oar of brass, gathered on the floors of melting
houses. Spodizateur, one that makes spode, or gets foot, etc. from brass, by
trying, or melting. Spodon de can, artificial or counterfeit spode, made of
the roots of reeds, and Ox-bones burnt. Spoliateur, a thief, a robber, a
pirate. Spoliation, a stripping, or depriving of. Spoliatrice, a Wench that
lives on the spoil. Spolier, to ship, to rob. Spolin, a kind of Gold or Silver
thread. Spolentes. See Psoloente. Sponde, a sponde, side-ways, or edge-long.
Spondilles, ou Spondyles, the knuckles or turning joints of the chine, back, or
neck-bone; also the heads of Artichokes; also the unsavory or ill-tasting
Oysters Gaiderope^. Spongethere, a little Seafish like the Sea-spider, said to
guard and govern the Sponge. Spongiosite, spunginess, or spungy lightness.
Sponseur, a voluntary Promis^^, Undertaker, or Surety for another. Spontane,
voluntary, of free will; natural, not forced; without help, or constraint.
Spontanement, voluntarily. Sport, a hand-basket, or frail with handles, used
for Market-employments; also the load of a Camel, or Moil, coming to 375
pounds, after 16 ounces to the pound. Sportule, money, or meat given ordinarily
by Princes to the people, or unto their followers; board-wages; also a
Counselors fee; also a little Maund, or Hand-basket. Spouilleresse, as
espouilleresse. Spurrie, spurry, or frank (a Dutch herb, and an excellent
fodder for Cattle.) Spyrate, a kind of flux in the fundament; or (more
properly) as Spyrathe, the dung of a Sheep or Goat. Squadron, for Escadron, a
Squadron. Squaranchon, the smooth-shelled Cray-fish, termed a Pungar, Grit, or
Grampel. Squenente, as squinant. Squenie, as souquenie. Squillin, vinegar
sharpened by the Sea-onion, or Scallion. Squillitique, of, or seasoned with the
Sea-onion. Squinade, as Cancre squinade, the long-legged and rough-coated
Crabfish, termed by some a Fryl. Squinant, Squinant, or Camels-hay. Squinaude,
as squinade. Squine, as bois de squine, the knotty and medicinable root of an
Indian or Chinean bulrush. Squiopetins, an Order of Augustine Friars. Stacte,
as Myrrh stacte, the best kind of Myrrh. Stafilade, for estafilade, a lash,
or thwack with a stirrup-leather. Stagnant, as eau stagnante, standing water,
as of ponds, pools, motes, and ditches. Stalle, a seat, or stall to sit on.
Stanbouque, the wild Goat Ibex. Stangue d'une ancre, the staff of an anchor.
Stanguette, the eye of the branch of a bit. Staphisaigre, Louse-wort. Statere,
an Athenian Coin of Silver, weighing half an ounce; also a Coin of Gold worth
about 16 shillings 4 pence; also a Roman or Goldsmiths balance; Troy-weight.
Statif, standing, pitched, or set. Stationnaire, stationary, settled, standing.
Stationne, settled in a place. Stationner, to settle in a place. Statuer, to
establish, ordain, or appoint; to pitch, plant, settle, or set fast; to
purpose, determine, judge, or think assuredly of. Statuaire, as Amend
statuaire, a Fine imposed at the pleasure of the Court. Steatome, an Impostume
whose matter is like fat or tallow. Steccade, a Place railed in for a Combat,
or Lists. Stechados, Cassidonia, French Lavander, or the flower thereof.
Stellage, as Droict de stellage, Toll-corn, and Toll-salt; a dish-full upon
every Septier of either, so^d within Bouillon; due to the Duke thereof.
Stellagier, a Toll-gatherer for the Duke of Bouillon. Stellingues, Libertines.
For so did the Saxons, upon Liberty of Conscience granted them by Lotharius the
Emperor, term themselves. Stellion, the spotted or starry Lizard; also an
envious fellow, or one that cannot endure another should be the better by him.
From the Stellio, which having cast his skin (a sovereign Remedy for the
Falling Sickness) presently devours it, to deprive mankind of it. Stellionat,
a cousening, or counterfeiting of merchandise; an unjust, or deceitful gaining;
a malicious or fraudulent bereaving of his money, wares, due provision or
bargain. Stentoree, as Voix stentoree, a huge Voice, such an one as the Grecian
Stentor had. Stercorin, excremental, turdy. Stereometrie, the measuring of
solid bodies. Sternomantie, Divination by a man's breast. Sternutatoire, a
sneezing Medicine, or Powder. Sterometrie, as stereometrie. Sterpi, as
Courtilliere. Sticines, Fluters, or Pipers. Sticonomantie, Divination by words
written on the barks of trees. Stier, as Setier in the N. D. Stigmatize,
branded, marked, burnt with a hot iron; defamed, infamous. Stigmatizer, to
brand, burn, or mark with a red hot iron; also to defame openly, disgrace
publicly. Still, as style in the N. D. Stillatoire, stilling, distilling,
dropping. Stillicide, the dropping of a houses eaves. Stillitique, as Vinaigre
stillitique, vinegar wherein the prepared Sea-onion has been steeped.
Stimulateur, an instigator, a provoker. Stimulation, a spurring on, provoking,
or instigating. Stimulatrice, a stimulatrix, an instigatrix. Stimule, a sting,
goad, or spur; an instigation, urging, egging, or enticing. Stimuler, to
instigate, entice, or spur on. Stinc, the Shin-bone; also a kind of small
fish. Stince, as scinc. Stipal, as Fief stipal, a Fief which descends to a
direct heir, or still continues in the possession of those which are of the
main stock of a family. Stipendie, a stipendiary, or hireling. Stipendie (a
Partic.) hired, entertained with wages. Stipendier, to give wages to.
Stipicite, costiveness, obstruction. Stipoule, the Sea-onion. Stippes, as
Droict de stippes, and nobis, Is in some parts of Normandy, a penny Tournois,
in other places three pence, upon every pound made of the Farms of the Kings
Domaine muable, due to the Officers of the Court of Accounts. Stiptique,
restrictive, stopping. Stirage, Toll, or Custom due to the King, etc. upon
every Septier. Stocfiz, stock fish. Stoechados, as Stechados. Stole, a long
robe, gown, or garment, reaching to the ankles, or heels. Stomacal, good for
the Stomach. Mot stomacal, an earnest expression, coming from the heart; also
uttered in choler. Stomachique, of, or in the stomach; also sick at the
stomach. Stomaque, angry. Stoques, as fair stoques, to borrow, or take up
money upon Interest. Strabouite, a squint-eyed fellow; also one whose actions,
as well as eyes, are awry. Strambot, a Jig, a Catch, or Country-song.
Strangulation, a strangling, stifling, or choking. Strangulation de la
matrice, the suffocation of the matrix. Strap. See Seraph. Stratagematique,
full of stratagems; of, or like to stratagems. Strepite, a noise, a rumbling,
or rustling. Strette, a pinch, or twinge. Strident, clashing, creaking. Strie,
chamfered, channelled, made full of gutters or holes. Strieure, a chamfering,
channelling, furrowing in stone or timber. Strin, a bastard-diamond. Stropes,
the loops whereby the oar of a skiff, etc. do hang, or hold to the Thowles.
Strophe, a belly-ake, or fretting of the guts. Strophule, the Kings evil.
Stropier, for estropier, to lame, or maim. Strumosite, a swelling of the
throat. Stryge, a screech-owl. Stuc, a fine and shining Potters clay; also
compounded mortar, or clay made of lime, sand, paper, and other materials; very
sit for Imagery. Stupeur, for stupidite, stupor, numness, unsensibleness.
Stygial, Stygien, Stygieux, of, or belonging to the Stygian lake. Femme
stygienne, a devilish queen. Still, as style in the N. D. Stylobate, the
footstool of a Pillar, or the whole frame of the lower part thereof. Styptique,
as stiptique. Styrax, for storax, storax. Su, the South; also an elder-tree; or
like sus, up. Suader, to persuade. Suadeur, a perswader. Suages, sweatings, or
things which cause sweating. Suais, as suays. Suaseur, as suadeur. Suasif,
Suasoire, persuasive, able (or fit) to persuade. Suasion, a persuasion. Suave,
sweet, pleasant, delicious; also meek, soft, or gentle. Suavement, sweetly,
pleasantly, deliciously; also meekly, softly, or gently. Suavite, sweetness,
pleasantness, deliciousness; also meekness, softness, gentleness. Suays, a kind
of frogs. Subarbe, as soubarbe. Subaudition, part of a man's meaning expressed,
and the rest understood; or such an expressing. Subcostale, a thin and smooth
skin which clothes the inner side of the ribs, and covers the vital parts
contained within the bulk. Subdial, all open, abroad in the air. Subelin, as
mart subeline (for Zibeline) a sable. Subet, a lethargy. Subhastation, an
Outery, or Portsale. Subhaste, sold by Outcry. Subhaster, to sell Goods by
Outcry, or Portsale. Subjacent, subjacent. Subier, the Cork-tree.
Subinfeudation, the creating of an undertenure in fee. Subjoindre, to subjoyn,
to add (or put) unto. Subitain, sudden. Subjugation, a subduing, or bringing to
subjection. Subler, for sifler, to whistle. Sublet, a whistle; also a whistling
noise. Sublim, and Sublin, for sublime, sublime, high; also refined, or
exquisite. Submersion, a submersion, or drowning. Subministrateur, a
subministrator, one that supply's underhand. Subministration, a
subministration, or underhand supply. Subministre, supplied, or furnished
underhand. Subministrer, to furnish, or supply underhand. Submirmilant, as
submurmurant. Submis, for soumis, brought under. Submurmurant, murmuring,
muttering, or mumbling to himself. Subrecart, an assistant, or associate; one
whom a Judge calls to sit with him; one whom Physicians for an important
cure, or consultation, chus^ to join with them. Subredorade, a great Gilthead.
Subreptice, Subreptif, subreptitious, foisted, or falsely crept in; indirectly
come by; supposed. Subreption, a subreption, a foisting or false creeping in;
also a filching, purloyning, or stealing away. Subreptivement, subreptitiously,
underhand. Subricant, as subrecart. Subrogue, Subroguer, as subroge, subroger
in the N. D. Subsidiairement, subsidiarily, by way of subsidy. Subsidier, to
lay subsidies on. Substancier, to sustain, feed, or nourish. Substante,
Substanter, as sustente, sustenter in the N. D. Substantieux, Substantifique,
substantial, or yielding substance. Substitu, for Substitut, a substitute; a
Deputy, or Lieutenant. Substraction, substraction, a withdrawing, or taking
away from; a diminution of. Subterrain, that is under the earth. Subtle,
(Subst.) a kind of small gold or silver thread. Subtiliation, a subtilizing, or
subtiliation. Subtilier, to subtilize, extenuate, make thin or fine; also to
devise, to contrive. Subtilisement, a subtilizing. Subventane, windy, full of
wind, that has nothing but wind in it. Subverti, subverted, over-turned,
rained, over-thrown, destroyed. Subvertir, to subvert, overturn, ruin,
overthrow, destroy. Subvertisseur, a subverter, overturner, overthrower,
destroyer. Succarin, of Sugar. Succelent, for succulent, succulent, juicy.
Succentrine, very finely searsed. Succenturieux, supplying the number, filling
up the place of one that is absent or dead. Succer, for sucer, to suck.
Succeron, a little and long-nosed vessel of earth, whereby young Infants are
suckled or fed. Succif, sucking, or which may be sucked. Succion, a sacking.
Succocitrin, as cicotrin. Succot, full of juice. Succotte, sucked gently, and
smackingly; also kissed often. Succoter, to suck gently and smackingly; also,
to kiss often. Succotrin, an extraordinary fine searse; also, as Cicotrin.
Succotrine, scarced very finely. Succrin, of sugar, mingled or seasoned with
sugar, sweet as sugar. Allun succrin, alum compounded of rose water, whites of
eggs, and roch-allum; used much by some Women for the cleansing, or whitening
of their faces. Succussation, a hard shaking, a joulting, a violent jogging.
Suceron, as succeron. Sucher, for sucer, to suck. Sucoter, gently, and
smackingly to suck. Suceree, as fair la succree, to mince it, to show her self
very coy. Sucrier, a Comfit-maker. Sucrin, as succrin. Suction, a sucking.
Sudorifique, procuring, or causing sweat. Suee, a sweat, or sweating. Suerie, a
sweating. Le Pais de suerie, the pocky Country. Suest, for Sud-est, south-east.
Suetolt, the lump, puddle, or sea-owl (an ugly fish.) Suette, the sweating
sickness; also a kind of small Dace, or Dare fish. Sueur, qui sue, a sweater.
Sueux, sweating; taking great pains. Sufflegan, for suffragan, a Suffragan.
Suffumigation, a smoking, or fuming under; the smoke which is from under a
stool received into the body for the diseases of the guts, fundament, or
matrix. Suggillation, and Sugillation, a black and blue mark by a blow; also
the bloud-shot of an eye; also slander, or detraction. Suggille, Sugille,
marked with black and blue spots; also reproved, taunted, blemished. Suggiller,
Sugiller, to make black and blew with strokes; also to reprove, taunt, or
blemish. Suier, for sureau, the elder-tree. Suil, for seuil, the threshold of a
door. Suille, hoggish. Suin, for sureau, the elder-tree. Suineux, greasy, oily,
or filthy, as the unwashed wool of sheep. Suinter, to sweat, as stones against
moist weather. Suites, or Suittes, the cods of a wild boar. Suivamment,
consequently, afterward. Sul, as suls. Sulphureitez, sulphury things.
Sulphureux, sulphurous, full of sulphur. Sulphurin, of sulphur. Suls, an
elder-tree. Un canon de suls, a kex; a hollow stick, or branch of elder; or a
pot-gun made thereof. Sumach, a shrub called sumack. Sumach de cuisme, the
berry, or fruit of that shrub used heretofore instead of Salt, especially in
sauces. Sumelle, for semelle, the sole of a shoe or stocking. Sumerger, for
submerger, to sink, submerge, or drown. Sumettre, for soumettre, to bring
under. Sumis, for soumis, brought under. Sumptuaire, as somptuaire.
Sumptuosite, for somptuosite, sumptuousness, costliness. Superabondance,
superfluity. Superabonder, to super-abound. Supercede, Superceder, and
Supercession, as supersede, superseder, supersession. Supereminence,
super-eminence, prerogative, excellency above others. Superengendrez, Children
begot at several times by supersetation. Superer, to vanquish, or to overcome;
to pass, exceed, or excel. Supererogation, for surerogation, supererogation.
Supereroguer, to do more than needs or is required. Superfetation, as
superfoetation. Superficiel, for superficie, superficies. Superfoetation, a
superfoetation, or second conceiving; a breeding of young upon young.
Superfoeter, to conceive a second time, to breed young upon young.
Supergurgiter, to overflow. Superimposer, to lay new impositions on things
already taxed. Superimposition, an imposition upon an imposition.
Superintendance, and Superintendant, as surintendance, and surintendant in the
N. D. Superlativement, in the highest degree; also loftily, in a huff.
Supernater, for surnager, to swim over, or to swim upon. Supernaturel, for
surnaturel, supernatural. Supernaturellement, supernaturally. Supernel, high,
above. Supernellement, on high, from above. Supernumeraire, for surnumeraire,
supernumerary. Supersede, superseded, surceased, left off, or given over.
Articles supersedez, parts of an Account neither allowed, nor utterly rejected,
upon the Accomptants humble suit for a farther day to bring in some principal
Acquittances, or pieces of importance; which day if he slip, he falls into
arrearage, and an Execution is presently awarded against him. Superseder, to
supersede, surcease, leave off, or give over. Supersession, a surceasing,
leaving off, or giving over; and in Exchequer-matters, the suspension of an
Account, etc. as under the word supersede. Supinateur, a muscle in the wrist,
serving to turn the palm of the hand upwards. Suppedite, thoroughly supplied, or
furnished; also fully subdued, vanquished, or trodden on. Suppediter, to supply
thoroughly, to furnish sufficiently; also to vanquish, overcome, subdue, tread,
or bring under. Suppied, a footstool, or any thing set under the foot, for the
better settling or stay thereof. Suppied d'Orgues, the footstool, or pedals to a
pair of Organs. Supplesse, for souplesse, suppleness, pliableness, activity,
nimbleness. Suppliment, for supplement, supplement. Supportation, a bearing, or
helping up. Ce qui soit dit avec supportation, by your leave, or under
correction. Supposement, a putting of a thing under another; a suborning,
foisting, or forging; a thrusting of bad stuff among, or in lieu of that which
is good. Sur, for Sud, the south. Sur, for aigre, sour, sharp, or tart.
Surachapt, an over-buying; a bargain too dearly bought, or for which too much
has been given. Suracheter, to pay too dear, to give too much for.
Suradjouster, to add, or to put more. Surage, for suranne, decrepit, over-old,
grown far in years. Sural, sowrish. Surale, a great vein under the bending of
the knee. Surandoillier, as surendouiller. Surannation, a growing old, or
stale; a Cause not followed, or called on; a Sentence, Commission, or Command
not executed within the year and day. Suranner, to pass, or exceed the compass
of a year; to heap years upon years, grow stale, or very old. Suranter, to
graft, or fasten upon. Surattendre, to go fair and softly before, to slack his
pace that another may overtake him; also to wait too long. Qui bien attend ne
surattend, he does not overwait that waits to good purpose. Suravancer, to
advance too far, or upon. Surbaigne, bathed, bedewed over. Surbaisse, as Voute
surbaissee, a flat Vault, or Arch. Surbande, bound, welted, or guarded over.
Surbastir, to build upon. Surbature, a surbating. Sur-belheur, the name of a
certain tart apple. Surboire, to drink upon; or to drink too much after meat.
Surceance, as surseance in the N.D. Surciel, the testern of a Cloth of state.
Surconcevoir, as superfoeter. Surcot, an upper-kirtle, or a garment worn over a
kertle. Surcottier, the Tenant unto a Cottier, he to whom a Cottier has left
his land for a Rent or Cens. Surcottiere, Land, or an Estate in in Land, held
of a Cottier by Rent or Cens. Surcouvert, covered over. Surcouvrir, to cover
over. Surcrest, a crest upon a crest, an upper top or crest. Surcrez, for
surcroit, an addition. Surcroistre, to overgrow, to rise or spring upon.
Surculeux, full of hard shoots, slips, or sprigs. Surdastre, deafish. Surelle,
sorrel. Suremplir, to fill up, or to over-fill. Surendouiller, or
Surentouiller, the Royal of a Stag, the Beancler of a Buck, the second branch
on either of their heads. Surer, for sevrer, to wean. Surete, for seurete,
safety. Surfaiseur, one that overvalueth his ware. Surfaix, a sursengle, or
long girth. Surflorir, to blossom upon the fruit, or to bloom or blossom after
the first blossoms are faded. Surflot, the rising of billow upon billow, or
the interchanged swelling of several waves. Surflotter, to float, or swim upon.
Surfondu, melted away; also powered upon. Surfondre, to melt away; also to power
upon. Surfriser, to frizle over, to curl upon. Surgallion, a sloven, or slut.
Surgeonner, to shoot out, or spring up. Surgerme, sprung up, spread abroad.
Surgette, over-cast. Surgidoir, Surgidoire, a road, gulf, or bosom of the Sea
for ships to ride in; also a Cape, or Bay of land entering into the Sea; also
the hole or hollow of an Impostume or mattary sore. Surgissement, a going
ashore; a riding, or drawing near the shore. Surguinder, to hoise up on high.
Surhaste, precipitated, over-hastned; hastened unseasonably, or before its time.
Surhaster, to precipitate, or over-hasten. Se surhaster, to make too much have,
to make more have than good speed. Surject, a covering, or over-casting. Droict
de surject, power to add unto the last price offered at an outcry.
Surjectement, an over-casting, or casting upon. Surjecter, to over-cast, or to
cast upon. Surillustre, most illustrious. Surimposition, as superimposition.
Surjon, as rejetton in the N. D. Surly, tied over, bound upon. Surlier, to tie
over, to bind upon. Surluire, to shine, or cast a great light upon.
Surmaconner, to build upon, or over. Surmanger, to eat upon, or immediately
after, a meal; to eat more; to over-eat. Surmarcher, to tread, or go upon.
Surmesure, over-measure, or too great measure. Surmeule, an upper Millstone.
Surmontement, a surmounting, surpassing, or exceeding; a subduing, or
overcoming. Surmontement des Joues, a chuffy outstanding, a swelling of the
checks, beyond all due and comely proportion. Surmoust, new, or sweet wine.
Surmulet, a sore-mullet, or the great sea-barbel. Surnoyer, to overwhelm; to
overtop, or over-grow. Suroest, for Sud-ouest, the South-west wind. Suroindre,
to anoint upon, or over. Suronder, to float upon the waves. Surop, for sirop,
sirrup. Suroreiller, to whisper in the ear. Suros, Surot, a bony and vicious
excrescence growing about the cornet of a horses foot (and then called a
ring-bone) or upon his shin-bone (and then called a knot, or a knob.) Surpayer,
to pay too dear for. Surpeau, an upper-skin. Surpelis, for surplis, a surplice.
Surprendre, to hang up, over, or upon. Surpendu, hanged up, over, or upon.
Surpendue, Surpente, a jetty; an out-jutting room, etc. also a room, or false
floor, to lay wood in, gained between a Cellar (for that purpose made the
deeper) and the room which is next above it. Surpepon, a great melon, or
pumpion. Surpoids, over-weight, or weight above just weight. Surpoil, as
serpaut. Surpoinct, spech-grease, an oily grease scummed from pieces of
liquored leather, sodden for that purpose in water. Surpoiser, to over-weigh,
or weigh down a thing weighed with it. Surpoix, as surpoids. Surposte, a hurt
upon the cornet of a horses foot, by crossing one foot over another.
Surpreneur, a surpriser, an overreacher. Surprins, and Surprinse, as surpris
and surprise in the N. D. Surquanie, as souquenie. Surquerir, to question too
busily with. Surreptice, as subreptice. Surreption, as subreption. Surrester,
to rest, or pawse upon. Surrogation, Surrogue, Surroguer. See Subrogation,
subroge, subroger in the N. D. Sursaillant, leaping on, or over; springing, or
spurting over. Sursaille, a leaping on, or over; also an overgrowing; also as
sursaut in the N. D. Sursaillir, to leap on, or over; also to overgrow, spring,
or spurt over; also to start up suddenly, as one awaked by a great noise.
Sursangle, a sursengle, or long birth. Sursaulter, Sursauter, as sursaillir.
Surselle, the ridge-rope, a broad and great band (or thong) of strong leather,
etc. fastened on either side of a thill, and bearing upon the pad or saddle of
a thill-horse. Sursemeur, a sower, or strewer. Sursemeur de noises, a
sire-brand of contention. Sursemeure, the measeldness of hogs. Sursis, for
surcis, superseded, left off. Sursomme, over-weight, an over-heavy burden. La
sursomme abbat l'asne, an extreme burden sways the silly ass. Sursoulte, too
much boot given in exchange, etc. Sursoyer, for surseoir, to supersede, leave
off, or lay aside. Sursueil, the upper-sil or headpiece of a door, the piece
of timber that lies over a door. Surtaux, an over-sessing, or over-rating in
the Subsidy-book. Surtaxe, over-sessed. Surtissu, woven, or whipped over with.
Surtomber, to fall over, or upon. Survaleur, overvalue. Surveille, the day
before the Eve of a great holy day. Survenance, Survenement, Survenue, an
accident, hap, chance, or unexpected occurrence; a stepping, or coming in
unlooked for; a relieving, helping, or succouring. Surverser, to power upon.
Survestement, an upper garment. Survestir, to cover over with a garment.
Survoler, to fly over. Survoleter, to flicker, or ho^er over. Survuide, emptied
out of one vessel into another. Survuider, to empty out of one vessel into
another. Susan, a year and day past; or the passing of a year and a day without
performing that which should have been done within it. Susanne, for suranne,
superannuated, very old. Susat, of elder, or elder flowers. Susbarbe d'une
bride, the nose-band of a bridle. Susbout, up, an end. Susceps, Suscet, a
Subject, or one that lives under the protection of another. Suscitateur, a
raiser, inciter, provoker, or stirrer up. Suscitation, a suscitation, raising,
inciting, stirring up. Susclavier, upon the kannel-bone. Vein susclaviere, the
second main ascendent branch of the hollow vein. Suscouche, the Nightmare.
Suseau for sureau, an elder-tree. Susespineux, resting upon the backbone.
Muscle susespineux, a muscle whereby the arm is raised or drawn upwards.
Suslambris, the upper cieling of a house, etc. Suspection, for soupcon,
suspicion, jealousy. Suspend, for suspens, suspense. Suspensif, suspensive,
suspending, only for a time. Suspensoire, hangling, dangling, suspensory, in
suspense. Suspensoires, certain cords or strings (hanging from the bed-stead)
for a sick man to take hold of, and bear up himself with, when he would remove,
or alter his lying. Suspied, up, a foot. Sustentifique, sustaining, feeding,
maintaining, nourishing. Sus-test, the pericranion, or the skin that covers the
skull. Susteste d'une bride, the headpiece of a bridle. Sus-ventre, as
epigastre. Susuest, for Sud-ouest, a Southwest wind. Sutin, the sweating
sickness. Suvereau, the great bastard-mackarel. Suyer, for sureau, an
elder-tree. Suyn, as suin in the N. D. Suyne, a precious stone found in some
serpents. Suyte, Suyvant, and Suyvre. See them with an i instead of y in the N.
D. Suyvamment, successively, consequently, afterward. Suzeau, as suseau.
Suzerain, Sovereign, and yet subaltern; superior, but not supreme; high in
Jurisdiction, though inferior to the highest. Suzerainete, the Jurisdiction or
Power of a Suzerain. Sybilot, as sibilot. Sycomantie, divination by fig leaves.
Sycomore, the sycomore-tree. Sycophage, a fig-eater. Sycophantin, a sycophant,
parasite, or smell-feast. Syderal, starry, of, or belonging to the stars.
Syderation, Tree-plague, a blasting in trees by great heat and drought; also a
sudden numness of a limb, followed by a total putrefaction, and utter
destruction thereof. Sydere, tempered and forged by the course and
constellation of the stars. Syer, for fire, to saw. Syloatique, huge, mighty.
Symmetrie, well proportioned, in just symmetry. Symmistre, a Secretary, or a
Privy-Counsellor. Symniste, a fellow, or Colleague in a sacred Profession.
Symphise, a natural and unmoving union of two bones. Symplegade, an embracing,
or clipping; a whirlpool, or swallowing gulf. Symposiarque, the Master, or
overseer of a Feast; a Feast-maker. Syn, as suin in the N. D. Synanchie, the
squinzy. Synanthrose, a close conjunction of bones without any visible motion.
Sincere, Syncerement, and Syncerite. See them with i instead of y, in the N. D.
Syncope, Syncopization, a cutting away; also a swounding. Syncopizer, to cut
away; to swound. Syneretisme, the joining of two Enemies against a third
person. Syncrisme, a thin and spreading ointment, or medicine. Synderese, a
remorse of conscience, or that part of the Soul which opposes it self unto
sin. Synderique, as Nerss synderiques, binding sinews. Synochite, a stone
whereby (as Magicians affirm) the dead be raised. Synonimer, to make two words
bear one sense. Synople, for sinople, sinople, or green color. Synterese, as
synderese. Syntre, as Cintre in the N. D. Syparathe, the dung of a Goat or
Sheep. Siphon, as siphon. Sire, as Sire in the N. D. Syringue, etc. See
Seringue in the N. D. Syroch, as Siroch. Syron, for ciron, a hand-worm. Syrte,
a quick-sand, or shelf of sand in the Sea, or in a River. Systole, the motion,
or lifting up of the heart and arteries; also the shortening of a long vowel.
Sytorpe, cut off.
T.
TAbarre, a long riding Cloak, or Garment. Tabellion, a Notary public, or
Scrivener, allowed by Authority to ingross and register private Contracts and
Obligations. Tabellionnage, the Office of a Tabellion, the place wherein he
engrosses and registers private Contracts. Droict de Tabellionnage, the
Privilege of a Lord Chastelain, or high Justicier, to make or keep him under a
Notary for the engrossing of ill Deeds and Contracts passed within his
Jurisdiction. Also a half penny in the pound for Contracts of the sale of land,
etc. exceeding the value of 15 l. Tournois, due to the King within the liberty
of Sens. Tabellionne, the Office, Function, or Art of a Tabellion. Tabellionne,
(a Party.) drawn at large, engrossed, registered, by a Tabellion. Tabellionner,
a Tabellion to draw, ingross, or record a Deed. Tabian, as laict Tabian, the
milk of Tabia, a place in Italy, very healthful for such as are in a
Consumption. Tabide, consuming, wasting, languishing, pining away. Tabisie,
wasted, consumed, rotted, putrified; also infected, poisoned, corrupted.
Tabifier, to waste, consume, rot, patrify; to infect, poison, or corrupt.
Tablage, a tabling, or boording; also a table, or great board. Tablature d'un
Luth, the belly of a L^te. Tablee, a table full of. Tablier de Notaire, a
Scriveners Shop or Booth. Tabouler, to make a great noise, to knock loud and
fast like a Cooper in the hooping of a Cask. Taborlan, a mighty Prince. Tabour,
for Tambour, a Drum; also a Drummer. Batre le tabour a coups d'offelets, to
play at dice on a drums head. Tabourasse, a Drum, or Tabor. Tabourder, to play
on a Drum, or Tabor; to rap, or knock. Tabourdeur, a Taburer, or Drummer.
Tabourement, a drumming; also a rapping, knocking, or thumping (as on a Drum)
at a door, etc. also to strike on the back side. Taboureur, as Tabourdeur; also
a thumper, or a knocker; a Whoremonger. Tabourin, a Drum, a Tabor; also a
Timpany in the belly. Tabourin des oreilles, a certain skin, or film within the
ears. Tabouriner, to play on a Tabor; also to drum, or strike up a drum.
Tabourinesse, a woman that plays on a Tabor, or strikes up a drum. Tabourinet,
a little drum, or tabor; also a little Room contrived in the corner of a square
Hall with tapestry or boards. Mener au tabourinet, to inveigle, or draw one to
that one list. Tabourineur, a Taborer, one that plays on a Tabor. Tabourineuse,
and Tabouriniere, as Tabourinesse. Tabourne, as tadorne. Tabouter, as tabuter.
Tabureau, a mocker, or s^^ss^r. Tabut, trouble, turmoil. ^agoteur de tabus, a
seditious, turbalent, or troublesome f^llow. Ce Villain ne vaut pas le tabut,
this Rogue is not worth the beating. Tabater, to trouble, disquitt, to molest.
Tacconnet, as taconnet. Tachette, a little spot, or stain. Tacheture, a spot,
or speckle; also spotting, speckling, or marking. Tacle, any headed shaft, or
(...), whose feathers be no^ waxed, but gla^d on. Tacon, a little Salmon; or a
s^^ll and delicate Trout caught in a River that passes by Clermont i^ Auvergne.
Taconne, Taconnet, colts-f^nt. Taconner un soulier, to set a pat^^ on a shoe.
Tacroux, Sunburned; al^^ extremely covetous, or (...). Tado^ne, a bla^k (...)
waterfowl somew at (...) bigger than a Duck. Taforee, a fe^^-^^at. Tahon, for
taon, a d^^-fly, or a brizze. Tahou, as poire de tahou, a small pear whereof
excellent perry is made. Taie, a great grandmother. Taige, a kind of Vine.
Tail, for taillade, a cut, slash, or gash. Taillandier, (Adj.) cutting, or
shipping off. Taille-bacon, a clown, or boor, one that usually feeds on bacon.
Taille-boudin, a great pudding-eater. Taille-bras, Taille-canton, an
arm-slasher, a cutter, or swaggerer. Taillement, a cutting, slitting, or
slashing; a notching; a carving, or ingraving; a gelding, or speying.
Taillerin, a slice of. Taille-sebe, as Courtilliere. Taille-vent, a
Wind-cutter, an idle (or fond) swaggerer. Taillon, a little slice, cut, or
gash; also a great chipping-knife; also a kind of Tax, raised by Henry 2. Anno
1549. toward the increase of the pay of the Gensdarmes (who usually lay
billeted in Villages) and to enable them to pay their Hosts for whatsoever th y
had of them. Taillonne, cut by slices, bits, or parcels. Taillonneux, full of
slices, parcels, little bits. Taillouer, as Tailloir in the N. D. Tainturier,
for Teinturier, a Dier. Taion, a great grandfather. Tairir, for tarir, to dry
up. Tais, a potsheard; a scull: a s^, or great scale. Taiser, to be silent.
Taisible, still, silent, quiet, busht. Taisiblement, silently, quietly. Tal,
oil extracted from the berries of the crimson and prickly Cedar. Talaires,
Mercury's winged shoes. Talare, rea^^ing, or hanging down to the heels or
ankles. Talemouse, as talmouse; also a cast or dash on the lips. Talemouser, to
cast, or dash on the lips; also to ^^x, trouble, or molest. Talente, (...)
upon, earnest after. Tales, di^^; also the Game termed C^ kall. Talle, as
thale; also a shoot, sprig, (...) had. Tallemellier, a hedge-baker. Taller, the
coin termed a Doll^r. Taller, (a Verb) as thaller. Tallevas, an old-fashion
Targuet, having in the bottom of it a pike, whereby (when need was) it was
stuck into the ground. Tallut, as talus in the N. D. Talmouse, a Cheese-cake.
Taloche, rapped, or bobbed over the fingers ends. Talonnement, and Talonnerie,
a treading on or down the heel, a striking with the heel. Talonneux, having, or
using heels. Talque, for talc, Isinglass. Talu, sloping. Maison talue, a house
whose bottom is senced from the rain that falls off the caves by water-tables
or boards set off from the wall. Talvassier, a loggerhead. Taluer, to set, cut,
or make aslope. Talure, the blue mark of a blow, or bruise. Taluzer, as taluer.
Tam, Black Briony, our Ladies seal. Tamaridin, Tamarind, as tamarinde in the N.
D. Tambrays, as estambres. Tambu, the bastard-pepper plant, called Betle, or
Betre. Tamoulenant, pondering, musing, studying. Tancon, a chiding, checking,
rebuking, reproving. Tandiment, for tandis que, whilst. Tanee, the herb
Feverfue. Tanelliere, the worm-fretter, a worm which makes holes in the sides
of ships. Tanesie, for tanaise, tansy. Tangible, tangible. Tangueurs, as
tanqueurs. Tanne, tawny, swarthy. Tannee, for tanaise, tansy. Tanquard, a
tankard. Tanqueurs, such as carry ashore stuff or persons out of ship-boats.
Tanson, as tancon. Tansonnier, apt to chide. Tantan, the bell that hangs about
the neck of a Cow, etc. Tantiesme, as le tantiesme du mois, such a certain day
of the mouth. Tantinet, a little, never so little. Tantouiller, to tumble,
wallow, or welter in. Tapecon, the Heaven-gazer (a scaleless Seafish) of the
bigness of a foot, having a wide mouth and a great head, on whose top his eyes
(wherewith he looks directly upward) are placed. Tape-coue, a tail-knocker, a
belly-bumper. Tapeinois, as tapinois. Taper, to tap, or strike; also to stop.
Taphoree, as taforee. Tapinaudiere, Tapinet, a den, or lurking-hole. Tapineux,
lurking, secret, hidden, close. Tapinois, en tapinois, lying close and still;
also closely, secretly. Contenu en tapinois, held low, or kept under.
Tapissement, a hiding of himself, a lurking, squatting, or lying close; also a
furnishing with tapestry. Tapon, for tampon, a bung, or stopple. Taponnus, a
dunce. Tappecon, as tapecon. Tapper, as taper. Tapper, as jouer au tapper, to
play at span-counter. Tappir, as tapir in the N.D. Taquain, for taquin, a
hold-fast, a covetous man. Taquain, Taquet (Adv.) suddenly, or at the same
instant. Taquet, a brace, or piece of wood nailed against a post, etc. to keep
another from shaking or slipping; also the clapper of a Mill. Taquette, as
besongner a la taquette, to work hard, or eagerly, to sit at it. Tar, a kind
of Weesel. Tarabin tarabas, pish-pish. Taraire, for tarelle, an augar. Tarande,
a Buff. Tarantole, as Tarantule in the N. D. Taravelle, a Gardeners
setting-iron. Tarault, as taraire; also as Tarots. Tarc, a kind of Tar,
wherewith Sheep are marked, and (for some scabby diseases) anointed. Tard
(Adj.) tardy, tedious, lingering, long in coming. Tardance, a delay, or long
staying in a place. Tardelet, somewhat slow, or tedious. Tardement, for
tardivement, slowly. Tard-fleury, a very sweet apple, of the bigness of a
Tennis-ball. Tardite, for tardivete, tardiness, slowness. Tardiver, to linger,
slack, or delay. Tardoune, as Tadorne. Tare, defective, wasting, drossy;
worm-eaten, or full of holes; hurtful; whose use countervails not the charge
one is at about it. Tarefranc, Tarefranche, as glorieuse. Tarelet, a little
augar. Tareronde, the Fork-fish, a kind of Scate which has in her tail an
indented and venomous prick. Targe, covered with a shield or target; also
tarried, staid. Targement, a shielding, or covering with a shield; also a
tarrying, lingering, or delaying. Targer, to shield, or cover with a shield;
also to tarry, stay, or delay. Se targer d'une raison, to defend himself by a
reason. Targette, a kind of snacket, or hasp, wherewith Casemates, etc. are
closed. Targon, the herb Tarragon. Tarier, the bird called a Bunting. Tariffe,
waste paper to bind up small wares in; also Arithmetic, or the casting of
accounts. Tarle, a Wood-worm, or Wood-moth. Tarle, worm-eaten. Tarmees, thick
magots; or short and hairy Worms, oftentimes breeding in the fundaments of
horses; also Wood-worms. Tarots, a kind of great Cards, whereon many things
are figured; which make them much more intricate than ordinary ones. Tarquet, a
kind of little dog, or hound, usually kept by Ladies and Gentlewomen
Tarracier, as terrassier. Tar, as tare. Tarse de l'oeil, the gristle whereon
the hair of the Eyelids grows. Tarse du pied, the first part of the foot
next to the leg, and answerable to the wrist of the hand, consisting of 7
bones. Tartaire, a Tartary Faulcon. Tartarasse, a Tortoise. Tartarin, the
water-bird called a Kings-fisher. Tartarot, as tartaire. Tartelages, Tarts, or
meats like unto tarts; also things that belong to, or are sit for tarts.
Tartelette, a little tart. Tartelle, Tartenelle, a whirligig. Tartinages, as
tartelages. Tarton-raire, Gut-wort, a beautiful and extremely purging French
shrub, or shrub-like berb. Tarague, an Indian beast which has hanging ears,
lives alone among rocks, and breeds a kind of Bezoar-stone. Taschement, an
endeavoring, attempting, or assaying. Tasse, heaped, piled, made up into
trusses or bundles. Tasser, to heap or pile up, to make into trusses or
bundles. Tassot, a Newt, or Ask. Tastement, a tasting, or essaying; also a
handling, feeling, touching; a groping for. Taster, for gouter, to taste.
Taste-vin, or Tate-vin, a Wine-Cunner, a Broker for Wine-Merchants.
Tastonnement, a groping. Tatin, a little, or a small quantity. Tatou, a kind
of long-tailed Hedgehog, which instead of a prickly Coat has a scaly one,
whereinto (in times of danger) he draws up himself. Tavaillole, as Tavayole in
the N. D. Tavan, a brizze. Tavan de Mer, the Sea-brizze. Taudir, to cover
Booths in Fairs, etc. with canvas, or with raw cloth, etc. Se taudir, to cover,
or shelter himself. Tavelle, a small edging lace, a crown-lace. Tavellement, a
spotting, or speckling, a marking with spots of sundry colors. Tavelliere, the
little worm called a Wood-fretter. Taverdette, a kind of plague. Taverneage,
the Penalty inflicted on a Vintner, or Wine-drawer, that has sold his Wine at
a higher rate than was set him by the Magistrate. Taverneur, frequenting
Taverns. Taverneux, loving Taverns; also full of Taverns. Taves, red pimples,
or freckles on the face. Taulache, a little Target, or Buckler. Taulpetier, a
Mole-catcher. Taulpin, as un franc taulpin, a trained man or soldier made of
an husbandman; also a boor, a clown. Taune, as tanne. Taupiere, un Impostume,
or soft swelling in the Head, wherein it makes a hole somewhat like to that
which a Mole roots in the ground. Taure, small Lunary, small Moon-wort.
Taureliere, a Cow that longs for the Bull. Taurillon, a young, or little Bull.
Taute, Tautte, a Calamary, or Sleeve-fish; also a roller, or a round truncheon,
laid under a great stone, etc. the more easily to remove it. Tauter, to lay a
roller, etc. under an heavy thing, the better to remove it. Tayeux, full of
skins, or films; also troubled with a pin or web in the eye. Tayon, a
Grandfather; also an Oak of 60 years growth. Tect, the roof, or cover of a
house; also a stie, or house to keep hogs or geese in. Tede, the fat pith, or
heart of the Pine Tree, called by some the Torch-tree. It Is also (and most
properly) the whole stock thereof turned heart, or of so fat and rosiny a
substance, that lights may be (and by the Clowns of Auvergne are) made of it.
Teiller, for tillau, a Linden-tree. Teinter, to twang, like the spring of a
hard-bent bow. Telamons, great ships; also supporters, or supporting Images in
building. Telant, as Vin telant, thick, or clammy Wine, Wine that ropeth. Tele,
for toil, linen cloth. Teleniaban, Manna. Telephion, Orpin, or Livelong.
Teller, a Linnen-weaver. Teline, Telline, as Flion. Telon, as tiretaine.
Tember, Tembut, the bastard-pepper. Temereement, for temerairement, rashly.
Temperement, a tempering, or moderating. Temperie, temperateness of Weather.
Tempes, for temples, the temples. Tempestatif, turbulent, unquiet, seditious.
Tempestativement, tumultuously, turbulently. Tempesteux, for tempetueux,
tempestuous, blustering, stormy. Templettes, fillets, or head-bands for women;
also Jewels hanging upon their foreheads by bodkins thrust into their hair.
Temporal, of, or in the temples. Temporalles, Coat-armours, or Heralds Coats.
Temporaux, the Muscles by which the temples are moved. Temporiseux, for
temporiseur, time-serving, temporizing. Tempre, Temprement, quickly.
Tempre-meure, as elle est tempremeure, she is full ripe, or marriageable.
Tenacement, fast, or surely; also tenaciously. Tenacite, tenacity,
fast-keeping, sure-holding; also hardness, or niggardliness; constancy,
stedfastness; also clamminess. Tenais, the slip of a plant. Tenaisie, for
tanaise, tansy. Tenamment, as tenacement. Tenant, (Subst.) a hold-fast, or hard
man; also the side, or limit on the side of a house or piece of ground; also a
Defendant in a Just or Turnament; any one that withstands another, or holds and
makes good a place against him; also a continual course, or unintermitted
continuance of things; as Tout d'un tenant, all together. Tenar de la main, a
certain Muscle whereof the greatest part of the palm of the hand consists.
Tencer, as tanser in the N. D. Tendelet, the tilt, or cover of the poop of a
Galley. Tendineux, f^ll of tendons. Tendret, for tendrelet, somewhat tender.
Tendrete, Tendreur, for tendresse, tenderness, or softness. Tendrieres, chaps,
rists, or chawns on the nipple of a woman's breast. Tendrillons, tendrels,
little gristles. Tendrineux, Tendronneux, full of tendrels, or of slender
gristles. Tenebrions, Night-spirits, Hobgoblins. Tenement, a Country,
Territory, or Land, possessed, or held absolutely; also a Tenement,
Inheritance, or Lands held in fief by Cens, or a chief Rent. Tenementier, a
Tenant, or Farmer. Tenesme, a great desire void of power to purge. Tenie, a
filet, head-band, or hai^lac^; also a kind of brow, or juttying in a pillar.
Tenre, as tender in the N. D. Tenser, for tanser, to chide. Tensis, bending, or
stiff bent. Tentatoire, a proof, essay, offer, attempt. Tentement, a tempting;
a trying, or attempting. Tenteresse, a woman that tempts. Tenthredon, a kind of
fly. Tentier, a Tent-keeper, or one that lives in a Tent. Tentissement, a
tingling. Tenue, (Adj.) this, slender, slight, weak, or little. Tennement,
thinly, slenderly, slightly, weakly. Tenuite, thinness, slenderness,
sl^ightiness. Tenure, a Tenure, a hold or estate in land. Tenure brisee, a
disleisin; also as tenue in the N. D. Tenurement, as tenuement. Tenuret,
somewhat thin, slender, or slight. Tenurete, as tenuite. Tephramantie,
Divination by ashes blown, or cast up into the air. Tepidite, for tiedeur,
luke-warmness. Terapeutique, as therapeutique. Terbenthin, the turpentine-tree.
Terbenthine, for terebentine, turpentine. Tercage, a third breaking, or digging
up of the ground. Terceau, a quantity of wine taken by some Lords upon every
vessel belonging to their Vassals; who, if they broach any before, or before
notice thereof given to the Lord, or his Officers, lose 60 sols Tournois.
Terceer, for tercer, to break, or dig up the ground a third time. Tercot, a
little ash-colored and long-tongued bird, called a wryneck. Terebinthine, as
terbenthine. Tereniaban, liquid manna, of the color and consistence of honey.
Terges, little Images of Saints made on pieces of painted paper or leather, and
worn like brooches in the hats of the youths of the Parish at public meetings,
or on solemn days. Tergiversation, a shrinking back, a dodging, or paultry
excusing; a No^^^t in Law. Tergiversa^eur, a shrinker back, a dodger, a
parlterer; one that is not suited, or withdraws a suit, but with a purpose to
begin an^w. Tergiverser, to shift off, or shrink back, to dodge, or paulter; to
withdraw a suit; to run back, but not give over. Teriere, for tarelle, an
augar. Teriz, a kind of long-heeled Linn^t. Termement, the appointing of a
certain term or time. Termination, a determining, finishing, ending; also a
limiting, or bounding. Termoyer, to appoint a time, to set a day. Ternaire, of
^^ree, or of a third. Ternenaire, a number containing many threes. Terner, to
throw a tree, at dice. Ternier, a wall-pecker. Terrageal, as Terrage in the N.
D. Terrager, to hold, or let out lands for which Terrage is due; also to sort
or lay out the fruits belonging thereto. Terrageresse, as Grange terrageresse,
a Barn for the receipt or keeping of Country-toll. Terragerie, field-rent; or
the having of, or holding by, field-rent. Terrageur, one that has Terrage, or
field-rent. Terraignol, a horse that is hardly raised from the ground.
Terrantole, as tarantule in the N. D. Terrassier, an ignorant or homebred
Clown, one that never stirred off his own dunghill. Terrau, Terreau, mould,
soil, fat earth; or as Terraul, or Terraut, a heap, or bulwark of earth; also a
seat of earth in an Arbor. Terregarde, as matiere de terregarde, a Controversy
about the meers or bounds of lands. Terre-ne, born, begotten, or bred of the
earth. Terreneusviers, new-found-land-men. Terre-plein, a platform of earth;
or the earth which is rampired and filled unto the inside of a bulwark or wall.
Terrer, to terrify, to affright. Terrestrete, Terrestrite, earthliness,
worldliness; also an earthly lust, or appetite. Terre-tremble, for tremblement
de terre, an earthquake. Terreux, earthy, earthly, of earth, full of earth.
Terribler, to make terrible; to make a terrible show. Terrier, (Adj.) of earth,
or soil. Terriere, an augar. Terrin, as terrasse in the N. D. Terron, soil,
manure, dung fully incorporated with the earth. Tertiane, a tertian Agae.
Terue, thin, sl^nder. Terzerol, a mizzen, or poop-sail. Tesme, for theme, a
theme. Tesniere, for taniere, a den. Tessere, squared, or made apiece like
a die. Tesson, for taisson, a badger. Tessonneau, a young, or little badger.
Tessons d'un pressoir, the side-boords of a Press. Test, the skull of the head.
Testable, testable, that can make a Will; also, that may be devised by Will.
Testard, the pollard, or chevin-fish; also the little black vermin called a
Bull-head. Testard, (Adj.) headstrong, obstinate. Testarderie, obstinacy.
Testelette, a little head. Testier, heady, ruling or possessing the head.
Testimoniale, a testimonial. Testonne, curled, frizled, entramelled. Testonner,
to curl, frizzle, entramel. Tests, as test; also a potsheard, or piece of a
broken pot; also the hard shell of a Crab, Tortoise, etc. Testu, (Subst.) as
testard; also the Cod-fish. Le testu d'un Masson, a Masons hammer. Tetard, as
grand tetard, a great sucker, a child that sucketh much. Tetasse, a long,
s^aggy, withered, and filthy dug. Avalle en tetasse de Vieille, hanging down
like the wrinkled and ugly breast of an old hag. Tetassier, having great or
long d^gs. Tete, Tethe, a teat, pap, or d^g Tethine, a ^ittle teat, pap, or
(...) Tethye, a certain deformed ex^cence, bring neither fish nor (...) of the
Sea. Tetin, the nibble, or nipple of (...) Du tetin en horse, from his info^.
Tetineux, as tetassier. Tetrade, a quaternity, or mess, the proportion or
number of four. Tetradique, of, or belonging to four. Degrez tetradiques, a
Staircase having between every four steps one broad one. Tetragnathe,
Tetragnatic, a white, rough-legged, and most venomous Spider. Tetragone,
quadrangle, or of four corners. Tetrahil, Tetrahit, Glidewort. Tetrasyllabe, of
four syllables. Tetrique, rough, crabbed, unpleasant. Tette, as tete. Tettee,
one sucking, a Child's meal, as much as it will suck at once. Tetthe, as tete.
Tetther, for tetter, to suck. Tetthon, for tetton, the breast. Tevot, a
cowardly Braggadochio, one that will say much more than he dares do. Teur, a
lattice-like cover of horsetail hair, in many doubles, upon the narrow board
whereon Clothworkers do sheer their cloths. Textuel, of, or in a text. Juges
qui sont bons textuels, learned Judges, such as can readily cite all the Books
which are in a Case. Texture, a texture, or contexture; work, frame, or
composition. Tez, as test. Tezez, shaven, or bald fellows: also younglings,
fops, fondlings. Thacor, a scab or pile in the fundament. Thagadie, as rhagade.
Thairir, for tarir, to wither. Thalasie, sea-sick. Thalasse, the Sea. Thale, a
green, or as Talle. Thalent, for talent, a talent; or a gift. Thaller, corn to
bud, shoot out their tops, or begin to ear. Thamarinde, as tamarinde in the N.
D. Thapsie, the stinking, or deadly Carrot. Tharir, for tarir, to wither.
Thassot, a Newt, or Ask. That, a Salamander. Thaumaste, a wonderer. Theatins,
the Theatins, a Sect of Priests in credit about Pope Clement vij time, and of
more antiquity, by some few years, than the Jesuits. Theatral, of or belonging
to, or done in a Theater. Theie, an Aunt. Theion, an Uncle. Thelemite, a
Libertine, one that does what he list. Theologal, Theological, belonging to
Divinity, or Divines. Vin Theologal, notable good and strong Wine.
Theologalement, Theologically. Theologastre, a petty Divine, a smatterer in
Divinity. Theomaches, Warriors against the Gods, as the old Giants are feigned
to have been. Theophaine, the Epiphacy, or Twelfth-day in Christmas.
Therapeutique, Theraputrice, curing, healing. Therbenthine, for terebentine,
turpentine. Theriacal, of Treacle. Thermes, armless Images; also hot Baths, or
Waters, which be naturally and continually warm. Thesaurier, Thesoriser, for
thesauriser, to treasure up. Theumulle, a Coat Armor, or Horsemans Coat, worn
by a Prince or General on a day of battle. Theze, as tede. Thezoriser, for
thesauriser, to treasure up. Thie, as tede. Thielles, airy inflammations.
Thilibie, whose stones be worn or wasted away. Thimbre, the herb Savory.
Thimbree, as thymbree. Thinnicule, the fish T^nny. Thiphaine, the Epiphany, or
Twelfth-day. Thiriaque, for Theriaque, Treacle. Thoe, a kind of Wolf said to
be a great friend unto men. Thomas, for Estomac, the Stomach. Thonneu, as
tonlieu, or toulieu. Thonnieu, as Droict on Gabelle de Thonnieu, a certain Toll
or Impost levied to the Duke of Bouillons use, upon every Tun and Hogshead of
Wine, or other drink, sold in gross within his Dominions, or transported out of
them. Thonnine, the back, or back parts of a Tunny. Thorachique, belonging to
the breast, or stomach. Thore, a certain thick and round circle, or member
about a Pillar; also the herb Wolves-bane; also Napellus, or Monks hood.
Thouiller, Thouilleur, as touiller, touilleur. Thrasonien, boasting, proud,
insolent, Thraso-like. Thresorillon, a little treasure. Thriacle, for
theriaque, treacle. Thriacleur, a maker, or seller of Treacle; a Quack, a
Mountebank. Thriaque, as thriacle. Thringle, as tringle. Thrombes de sang,
clots of congealed blood. Thrubal, a Trumpeter. Thun, for thon, the fish called
a Thunny. Thunine, as thonnine; or as tun. Thymbre, Winter-savoury,
Pepperbyssop. Thymbree, fish-(water, or brook-) mint. Thymelee, Spurge-flax,
mountain Widow-wail. Thymique, as Vein thymique, the first branch of la Vein
sousclaviere. It goes unto the fag-piece or kernel under the K^nnel-bone.
Thymoxalme, a Composition of Time, Pennyroyal, Rue, d^y Bacley-meal, Salt,
Water, and Vin^gar; good against the Gout, v^^tosities, and weakness of the
Stomach, and a good e^a^uator of gross and black humors. Thyn, for thon, the
Tunny fish. Thynnuncule, a little Tunny fish. Thyon, a Bunting (a bird.)
Thyphaine, Epiphany, Twelfth-day. Tiburon, a kind of Sea-calf in the
Indian-Sea. Tichous, little Cakes made of eggs and flower, with a little butter
(and sometimes cheese among it) eaten ordinarily with Sugar and Rose Water.
Ticq, as tiquet in the last sense. Tique torche lorgne, thwick thwack Ticquet,
as tiquet. Tie, as tede. Tiedeer, Tieder, to warm, to make lukewarm, to give a
little heat unto. Tiedete, for tiedeur, warmness, luke-warmness. Tiedi, warmed,
a little heated; also hathed in, or bedewed with tears. se Tiedir, to grow
warm, or lukewarm; also to bathe, or b^d^w himself in tears. Tien-main, a stay
for the hand along the wall of a Staircase. Tiens le bien, a Crians, the long
lune or line which is tied unto a Hawks leg, to keep her from flying away at
her first luring. Tiercage, as tercage. Tiercelin, as Plomb tiercelin, lead
mingled a third part with white and fine, the other two with course and black
stuff. Tiercelin, (Subst.) Sarcenet. Tiercement, (an Adv.) thirdly. Tiercerets,
Tiercerons, certain cross-branches on the outside of a Vault. Tiercet, a Song
of triple Stanza's, or a Stanza of three Verses. Tierciere, the vessel, or
measure called a Tierce. Tiers-pied, for trepie, a trevet. Tiers-poinct, as
Voute poinctue comme a tiers-poinct, a Vault raised a little higher than the
hemicycle, or half circle. Tieu tieu Margot, the voice of Country People
calling their Kine unto them. Tieul, for tell, such. Tife, for attiffe, pranked
up, set off. Tifer, or Tiffer, to prank up, or set off; to busy the hands long
about a thing, that it may be done well, or to his liking that does it.
Tigette, a little stalk, or stem. Tigname, red Stirax, an Aromatical Indian
wood used by Perfumers. Tigne, for teigne, scurf. Tigneux, for teigneux,
scald-pated. Tignon, as tigne. Tigreau, a young, or little Tiger. Tigresque,
Tiger-like, fierce, cruel, swift, savage. Accoustre a la Tigresque, horribly
scratched or beaten, cruelly handled. Tigrin, Tigrique, of, or belonging to a
Tiger; also as Tigresque. Til, for tillau, the Linden-tree. Tiles, the small
motes of dust appearing, and roving up and down in the Sunbeams, which come
into a Room at the holes of walls, etc. Tillet, a ticket, or little note.
Tilier, as tilet; also as til. Tillaquer, to board, or floor the deck of a
ship. Tille, for teille, the rind, or pilling of hemp, etc. also the fruit of
the Linden-tree; also a kind of wimble. Tille, and Tiller, as teille, teiller
in the N. D. Tillet, and Tilleul, for tillau, or tilleu, the Linden-tree.
Tilleux, rough, rugged, knobby. Tillier, as tillet. Timble, a Coat Armor, or
Coat of armor; also as Timbre in the N. D. Timbon, a kind of brazen drum.
Timore, frighted, or scared. Timpanise, as Bastiment timpanise, a Building
having a gable-end. Timper, to tingle. Tin, as les oreilles me font tin, my
ears tingle, or glow. Tine, for cuve, an open tub, much used in Vintage. Tine,
a cole-staff, or stang, a big staff whereon a burden is carried between two on
their shoulders. Tinee, a stand full, a so full. Tinel, a household, or family;
also the Room wherein all the Servants of a family dine and sup; also as tine.
Tinet, the Whale termed a Horlepool, or Whirlpool; also as tine. Tinette, a
little stand, so, or tub; a bathing tub. Tiniez, long white Rocks lying under
water in the Sea. Tin, as tine. Tinole, and Tinon, as tinette. Tintalorise,
grim, froward. Tintamarre, crashing, jangling, or making a great noise.
Tintillant, tingling. Tintimale, for tinthymal, the herb Spurge, or
Wolves-milk. Tintin, the tinging, or towling of a bell; also the warble, or
song of a Nightingale. Tintiner, to ting, or towl a bell. Tinton, the burden of
a Song; a kind of dance; also as tintin. Tintoner, to ting, or towl often; to
glow, tingle, or dingle. Tintouin, for tintoin, a tingling in the ear. Il a
beaucoup de tintouins en la test, his head is full of proclamations, he is
very much puzzled, or perplexed. Tintouiner, as tintoner; also to puzzle, or
perplex. Tinture, red wine, or Aligant. Tiphaine, the Epiphany, or Twelfth-day.
Tipher, as tiffer. Tiphoine, as tiphaine. Tipule, a Water-spider. Tique, the
vermin called a tick. Tiquet, as tique; or a little tick; also the herb Kick;
also a disease which on a sudden stopping a horses breath, makes him to stop
and stand still. Pres du tiquet de la mort, near his last gasp, ready to
breathe his last. Tiquete, ticketted, or appointed by ticket. Tirace, as
tirasse. Tiran, any string, lace, line, or cord, which pulled at one end closes
at the other the thing it is fastened unto. Tirans, as trayans. Tirasse, a
drag-net for Partridges, etc. also the strap of a boot. Tirasse, dragged,
pulled, haled. Tirasser, to drag, pull, or hale. Tire-balle, an Instrument
wherewith Surgeons draw bullets out of the body. Tiree d'oeil, the sight, view,
look, or glance of the eye. Tire-feu, a Medicine, or Plaster, for the drawing
of fire, or extreme heat, out of a wound, etc. Tire-fiens, a drag wherewith
dung is taken up, upon the remove of a dunghill. Tire-fleiche, an Instrument
wherewith Surgeons draw arrows out of the body. Tirelaines, Cloak-twitchers,
Rogues which in the nightime lurk about the corners of streets, to snatch
away the Cloaks of such as pass by them. Tire-laisse, a let-go; a speedy
restoral, or giving back, of a thing seized as his own, but proving another
man's. Tire-lardon, a greedy fellow. Tire-larigaud, as boire a tire-larigaud, to
drink lustily. Tirelire, a Christmas-box; also the warble, or song of a Lark.
Tirelirer, to warble, or sing like a Lark. Tirelupin, a catch-bit; also a
scurvy fellow. Tirelyre, as tirelire. Tirement, a drawing, pulling, plucking,
or stretching; also a shooting; a wresting, forcing, or exacting from; a
drawing of Pictures; a going along, or making toward. Tire-pance, as a
tire-pance, till the belly crack withal. Tire-pied, a Shoomakers stirrup.
Tire-pierre, a Surgeons Instrument made like a tooth-picker at the one end, and
like a hook at the other; and used for the drawing of stones out of the
bladder, or bullets out of the body. Tire-poil, a hair-plucker; an Instrument,
medicine, or plaster, for the plucking away of hair. Tirin, as tarin.
Tirofageur, a cheese-eater. Tirouer, and Tirauoir, for tiroir, a drawer; also a
tiring, for hawks. Tirse, the dart, or javelin of Bacchus. Tisonner, often to
stir the fire, or to lay the sticks close together. Tissier, or Tissotier, for
Tisserand, a linnen-weaver. Tissiere, for Tisserande, a woman-weaver.
Titanique, belonging, or like to the Sun. Force Titanique, Giant-like force.
Titeller, to tingle, as a little bell. Titillation, a tickling. Titille,
tickled. Titiller, to tickle. Titrac, the fashion, or order of a thing.
Titubant, tripping, stumbling, staggering; stammering, wavering. Titubation,
tripping, stumbling, or staggering; a faultering, or stammering; a quivering,
trembling, or wavering. Tochere, fearn, or a fearny ground. Tocque, coised.
Tocquement, a coising. Toffe, and Toffu, as touffe, and touffu in the N. D.
Toge, Togue, a gown, or long robe. Tohu, confusion. Toille, as touille.
Toliban, a Turbant, or Turkish hat. Tollart, an Executioner, a Hangman.
Tollere, a Turkish Coin worth about four shillings sterling. Tollet, a thowl;
or as Scalme. Tollieu, as toulieu. Tollin, the toll taken by a Miller. Tollir,
to remove, to take away; to cancel, to abolish. Tollu, taken, removed, lift, or
carried away. Tolopan, for turbant, a turbant, or a Turkish cap. Tolte, as
toulte. Tomb, a tomb; also a gurnard fish. Tombement, a falling, or tumbling
down; a lighting upon. Tomberel, for tombereau, a tumbrel or dung-cart. Prendre
les perdris au tomberel, to take Partridges by tunnelling. Tomberelee, a
tumbrel full, the load of a tumbrel. Tombier, a Tomb-maker. Tombir, to make a
noise with stamping, or trampling. Tombissement, a stamping, or trampling
noise; the rustling of running horses feet. Tome, (f.) a train with a lame and
disarmed Heron, for the making of a young faulcon. Tomin, six penny weight, or
the weight of a Spanish real. Tommer, for verser, to spill, or to run out.
Tondailles, a sheep-shearing, or the feast made thereat. Tondelet, a fashion of
bases for a horseman. Tonderesse, a woman that sheareth or shaveth. Tondoison,
a sheering, or shaving. Tondu-ras, close shaven, levelled, or laid even with.
Tondure, as tondoison. Tonlieu, Toll due unto the Lord of a Fair or Market, for
the sale or standing of Cattle, and other Commodities in it. Tonneler,
Tonneleur, as tonneller, tonnelleur. Tonnellieu, as tonlieu. Tonnelle, a
tunnel, or stalking hors^ for Partridges; also a round Arbor, or a Walk covered
round with the interlaced branches of a Vine, etc. Tonneler, to take Partridges
with a tunnel or stalking horse. Tonnelles, the tender branches of trees
plashed, or interlaced together as they grow. Tonnelleur, a Tunneller, or taker
of Partridges with a tunnel. Tonnereux, full of thunder, thundering, or
thunder-like. Tonnine, meat made of tunny; or as Thonnine. Tonnoirre, for
tonnerre, thunder. Tonsiller, certain kernels at the root of the tongue,
subject unto inflammations and swellings, occasioned by the falling down of
humors from the head. Tonsture, as tondoison; also the Priests tonsure, or
shaving of his crown. Tonsure, sheered, clipped, powled; also shaven. Tonsurer,
to sheer, clip, or powl; also to shave. Tonture, as tonsture, Topiaire, the
making of Images in, or Arbors of, plants. Topiquer, as se topiquer, to be
titchy, or apt to take offense at; also to oppose, or contest with. Topiqu^ur,
an acute arguer, or dispater, an inventer of Logical and probable Arguments.
Top, as terre estant en top, waste ground. Toquement, the wearing of, or
furnishing the head with a sort of Cap called a Toque; also a clapping,
hitting, or knocking against. Toquer, to put on a toque; also to furnish one
with a toque; also to clap, knock, or hit against; also to jumble a woman.
Torasse, a low and little-bodied Cow, which covets the Bull more than other
Kine, and neither gives much milk, nor brings many calves. Torce, as torse.
Torche-bouche, as banquet a torche bouche, a feast which costs a man nothing.
Torche-culatif, tail-wiping. Torche-pot, the bird called a Nut-jobber. Il
ressemble an torchepot, he is his Wises master, he dares school her when she
does amiss. So the cock Nut-jobber beats his hen, when she has wandered any
long time from him. Torcheux, full of links; of a link; link-like; serving for
a link. Torcionne, wrested. Torcis de vermillons, a wreathed bunch of small
worms. Torcol, Torcollet, a wry-neck; also a top to play withal. Toreu, an
unlucky bird of a brown, or (as in some places) of a white color. Torculaire,
belonging to the tunne^ of the brain. Vein torculaire, the second branch of
the outward throat-vein, from which it ascends by the inside of the scull unto
the brain, which it moistens and feeds. Tordement, a twisting. Tordille, a
flea-bitten, or spotted color of horses, dogs, etc. Tordoir, the b^dd^r, or
under-stone of an Oyl-mill, or press. Tore, broad-leaved Wolves-bane; or as
thore. Toreau, for taureau, a bull. Toret, a small wimble. Torment, Tormente,
Tormente, Tormenter. See them with an u before r in the N. D. Tormentille,
Tormentile, Setfoil, (an herb.) Tormentine, for terebentine, Turpentine.
Tornadot, a return of dowry; the giving back of a woman's portion. Torn, for
turn, turned. Torne-dos, as tourne-dos. Torner, for tourner, to turn.
Torne-rost, a turn-spit. Tornes, as tournes. Tornesol, for tournesol, Turnsol,
(a flower so called.) Tornier, often to stagger, or turn round, like a Stag
that is drunk with browzing in May; also to beat up and down, or fly round,
thereby to deceive the Dogs that pursue him. Torpin, the Cramp-fish; also a
wry-legged man. Torque, a small Grove, or Tuft of wood, growing by it self.
Torque, wreathed, wound in, wrapped about. Torquer, to wreathe, wind in, or
wrap about. Torqueure, a wreathe; a wreathing; a place, or a thing writhen; and
particularly the wreath whereby the foot of a graft is preserved from the
injury of weather. Torrefie, scorched, parched, toasted; dried by the fire, or
in the Sun, and then done to dust. Torrefier, to scorch, parch, or toast; to
dry, and afterward do unto dust. Torrentin, belonging to, or abiding in
torrents, or swift and violent streams. Torrillon d'un Canon, the middle of a
Canon, the wreath, or band, about the middle part of it. Torrion, a great
Tower. Torse, a wreath; also a wrest, or wrinch; a bending, wandering, or going
out of the way. Torsement, a wreathing; a wresting, or wrinching; also as torse
in the last sense. Torsion, a wringing. Torsionnairement, as tortionnairement.
Torsure, as torsement. Torteau, a pancake; or as tourteau. Tortellees, the
curled toppings of the hair. Tortement, crookedly, wrily. Tortice, as Veins
tortices, crooked, or crankling Veins. Torticoler, to wry the neck.
Torti-colly, a wry-necked fellow. Tortillement, wreaths, wreathings, knots,
curlings. Tortillon, a little wreath; also a curled lock of hair; also the
twirling tendrel of a Vine; and generally any double thing writhen, twirled,
wound, or twisted together, or one within another. Tortillonne, wreathed, wound
up, curled, or twisted. Tortillonner, to wreath, twist, or curl. Tortionnaire,
unjust, hard, cruel, severe. Tortionnairement, unjustly, hardly, cruelly.
Tortionnier, an Extortioner. Tortipe, a splay-foot, or a splay-footed fellow.
Tortis, (Adj.) crooked. Tortiz, lime, or loam which has straw chopped into it.
Torterelle, for tourterelle, a turtle-dove. Tortouere, a hunting pole.
Tortuement, a bending, or winding in and out. Tortuement, Tortueusement,
crookedly, wrily. Tortueux, full of turnings, windings, or crinkle-crankles.
Tortugue, for tortue, a tortoise. Tortuosite, a crookedness, a bending, or
winding in and out. Torty-colly, as torti-colly. Torve, grim, stern, having a
cruel look. Tostee, a toast of bread. Totage, the whole sum, substance, or
matter; the whole, all. Totene, the Sleeve, or Calamary fish. Totiens quotiens.
See quotiens. Totinge, as totage. Totum, a kind of Game with a whirl-bone.
Touaige, towage, the towing of a Ship by boats, or at the stern of another
ship. Touaille, a towel. Touasse, as un gros touasse, a clusterfist, a lumpish,
ignorant, and unmannerly fellow. Touassier, clownish, lumpish, ignorant,
unmannerly. Touc, a sink, or filthy gutter. Touchement, a feeling, or handling;
a hitting. Toucheur, a toucher, feeler, handler. Toucheur d'asnes, an
ass-driver. Touchon, a little Touchstone. Toudi, for toujours, always. Toue, a
little, long, shallow, and flat-bottomed boat. Touer, to tow a ship. Touffeau,
Touffillon, a little tuft of trees. Touillaut, a lumpish fellow; also a
troublesome man. Touille, filthily mingled, or shuffled together; also dirtied,
besmeared. Avoine touillee croist comme enragee, in miry ground Oats grow as if
they were mad. Touillement, a filthy mingling, or shuffling together; also a
dirtying, or besmearing. Touiller, filthily to mingle, or shuffle together; to
dirt, or besmear; to pester, or entangle. Touilleur, a shuffling, or
troublesome fellow. Touillon, a Scullion, a filthy, greasy, nasty, or slovenly
fellow; also a dish-clowt, or a clowt to wipe shoes withal. Toulieu, as
tonlieu. Toulte, an exacting, or extorting of Subsidies. Toume, a sort of
cheese. Tounine, as thonnine, or tonnine. Toupeau, a tuft, or tassel of silk; a
flock or lock of wool. Toupier, to turn a top; also to whirl about like a top.
Toupil, for toupie, a top, to whirl about. Toupillon, a little top.
Toupillonnet, a very little top; also a stopple. Toupin, a stopple for a
bottle; also as tupin. Toupon, a stopple. Touraille, a Kiln to dry malt on.
Tourban, for turban, a Turbant, or Turkish Cap. Tourbe, a crowd, or throng of
people crowding together; also a trouble, stir, or ruffling. En tourbe, by
flocks, or multitudes; with confused voices. Tourbiginaux, wreaths of old
ropes, dipped in grease and pitch, and to be burnt in cressets. Tourbillonner,
to whirl about like a whirlwind; to deal boisterously. Tourbillonneux, full of
whirlwinds, or like a whirlwind; boisterous, raging, outrageous. Tourchon, for
torchon, a clowt, rag. Tourd, for grive, a thrush. Tourdelle, the great Thrush,
or Feldisare. Tourdion, a turning, or winding about; also a trick, or prank;
also the dance called a Round. Tourdre, as tourd. Toure, towred, full of
(graced, or furnished with) towers. Tourier, the Keeper of a Tower; a Watchman
in a Tower; also a Jailer. Touriere, as tourriere. Tourillon, an inner verril,
the round plate of iron whereby a piece of wood, often turned on, is preserved
from wearing and burning. Tourillon du bras, the head or top of the arm where
it is joined with the shoulder blade. Tourmentine, as tormentine. Tournaille, a
crooked turning, or winding in and out. Tournay, a Tourney. Tournayer, for
tournoyer, to turn round, or to wheel about. Tourne-bouler, to turn round.
Tourne-bride, a turning back. Tourne-dos, a turn-back, a coward. Tournee, as
par tournees, every one in his turn or course, rank, or place. Tourne-fol, for
tourniquet, a turnstile. Tourne-main, the turning of the hand. Dans un
tourne-main, in a trice, on a sudden. Tourneployer, to turn, bend, or bow which
way soever one would have it. Tournerie, a turning; also Turners work, or ware.
Tournerot, a turn-roast, or turnspit. Tournes en eschange, as Soulte.
Tourne-soleil, for tournesol, a turnsol. Tournet, a small turning rundle, or
ring, in the mouth of a bit, etc. Tournette, a rice, or yarn-wingle, to wind
yarn on. Tourne-vent, a fashion of penthouse, or portal set before a door, for
the keeping of wind out of a Room; also a moveable thing of metal on the top
of a house or chimney. Tourne-virer, to whirl about. Tourneure, a turning; also
any thing that turns or makes a thing sour, as leaven does bread, runnet milk,
etc. Tournoir, a Turners wheel; also the vice of a Press. Tournure, as
tourneure. Tourrele, encompassed with towers. Tourrier, as Tourier. Tourriere,
the Nun which attends on the Tour or turning Box in the wall of a Nunnery.
Tourrion, a small Turret. Tourte, for tourterelle, a Turtle-dove; also the made
dish called a Florentine; also the trundle-head of a Mill. Tourtelle, as
tortelle, Tourtillon, a small tourteau. Tourtoire, a hunting-pole; also an iron
tool (with a wooden handle) wherewith a Cooper notches, and draws on, the
principal hoops of a cask. Tourtourain, the nature of the turtle. Touse, shorn,
clipped, pared round. Touser, to shear, clip, or pare round. Toussir, for
tousser, to cough. Toustade, alezan toustade, a burnt sorrel, a dark-red color
like wood scorched, or metal burnt in the fire. Touton, part of a Woman's
privities. Touzelle, fine wheat, white winter-wheat. Toxant, for toisin, an
Alarm-bell, or the ringing thereof. Toye de plomb, a web of lead. Tozelle, as
touzelle. Trabe d'un ancre, the beam, or staff of an anchor. Trabee, a purple
and embroidered Cassock, or Robe, worn by Kings, or great men, under their
Mantles of state. Trabucher, as trebucher in the N. D. Trac, a track, or trace;
also a trade, or course. Trac de battaille, the train, provision, or followers
of an Army. Tout a trac, plainly, roundly, outright, altogether. Tracanard, as
traquenard. Tracette, a little trace, tract, or footing. Traceure, as trace and
tracement in the N. D. Traceux, tracing out, following the tract or footing of.
Trache, a cluster of fruits (as of Apples, Pears, etc.) growing together.
Tracher, for tracer, to trace out. Trachet, a little cluster of fruits.
Trachiartere, the pipe of the Lungs, one of the three principal Arteries in
man's body. Trachie, as trachiartere, or the windpipe. Tracouer, to run over.
Traction, a draught, or extraction; a drawing out. Tradiment, for trahison,
treachery, treason. Traditif, traditive, or of tradition. Science traditive, a
Science delivered by word of mouth from father to son, or by tradition
continued to posterity. Traditive, a method of teaching, or of speaking.
Trafique, for trafic, trade, or traffic. Traffiquerie, a trafficking; also
merchandise, or ware to traffic with; also a cheating, or deceiving. Tragee,
as dragee in the N. D. Tragelaphe, the great and blackish Deer called a
Stone-buck, Deer-buck, or Goat-hart, because conceived between a Buck-goat and
the Hind. Traget, for trajet, a narrow passage over Sea, or the like. Tragon,
the herb Tarragon; also amelcorn, or starch-corn. Tragoncee, as tragon.
Traguetter, as trajetter. Traiclou, the tool wherewith Shoo-makers pull their
tacks out. Traictif, as nez traictif, a pretty long nose, a nose of a graceful
length. Traictis, as mains traictisses, long and slender hands. Traictoire, as
tourtoire, in the latter sense. Trajectaire, a Ferry-man; also one that tumbles
through a hoop held up; also a Jugler, Impostor, or Couzener. Trajecter, to
ferry over. Trajectoire, the cannon, or tail of a perfuming funnel.
Trajectoire, (Adj.) passing, transporting, or conveying over. Traigne, the
Sea-dragon, Viver, Quaviver. Traille, for treille, an Arbor. Trailler, to wind
yarn; also to trail a Deer, or hunt him upon a cold scent, or with a
Lime-hound. Trainacer, as trainasser. Tramage, Trainage; or a Right whereby a
Lord of Tythe-grounds which have kept and wintered Cattle, whose Owners work
with them in the Tythe-grounds of another Lord, may lawfully take half of those
Tithes, when they are to be gathered. Trainard, as traine-gaine; also crawling,
or creeping along close by the ground. Trainasse, dragged, or trailed along.
Trainasser, to drag, or trail along. Trainasserie, a train, tail, or long tail;
also a trailing, or dragging along. Train, the woof, or west in weaving; a
garment of course cloth; a plot, practice, or conspiracy; also the body of a
tree cut off from the root and branches, and dragged along in a cart; also a
sledge; also a drag-net, or draw-net. Traineau a plommee, a Stelleer; Roman, or
Venice-beam, for the weighing of things. Trainegaine, a lazy companion, a dull
or heavy fellow; one that trails the scabbord of his sword after him, or wears
it so low and so loosely, that it drags on the ground as he goes. Traineller,
to trammel for larks. Traine-pieds, one that lazily or weakly trails his legs
after him. Traineresse, as bonnettes traineresses, the drablers for a sail.
Trainiere, common Trefoil, or three-leaved grass. Trainoir, for traineau, a
sledge. Trainon, a Drag-net, or Dray-net for fish. Trainquenailles, base
rascals. Traion, the teat, or nipple of a Cows udder. Traiot, a milking-pail,
or piggin. Traistreau, a young, or little Traitor. Traistrement,
Traistreusement, treacherously, persidiously. Traitif, as traictif. Traluire,
as treluire. Tramail, a tramel, or net for Partridges. Tramaille,
treble-mailed, woven or bound by treble mashes or mails. Tramblotis, a
trembling. Trameau, a kind of drag-net; also a trammel-net for sowl; also a
sledge. Trameter, to continue a suit, or hold on a pursuit, Trameul, a
mill-hopper. Tramillon, a little drag-net. Tramois, meslin of oats and barley
mingled. Tramontain, Northerly, coming from, or dwelling in the North.
Tranchaison, as tranchee in the N. D. Tranchelion, a notable trencher-man.
Tranche-montaigne, a terrible Swaggerer, one that is ready to cut down
mountains. Trancon, a truncheon; also a little piece of. Trangle, as tring^e.
Tranquiller, Tranquilliter, to calm, still, quiet, pacify, appease.
Transailles, corn sowed in the Spring, as barley, oats, etc. Transanimation,
for metempsycose, Metempsycosis, or the passage of the Soul from one body to
another. Transchangement, an alteration, or changing over into another quality
or nature. Transcoulation, a running, or gliding through; also a straining
through. Transcoule, run, or slid through; also strained through; let run out.
Transcouler, to run, or slide through, to strain through, to let run out.
Transcrivain, a transcriber. Transenter, to graft out of one stock into
another. Transfondre, to pour out of one vessel into another, to transfer, to
transpose. Transfretter, hastily to pass over, or along. Transfuyard, for
Transfuge, a Desertor that sides with the Enemy. Transgloutir les morceaux,
greedily to swallow down his meat half-chawed. Transissement, a swounding, or
falling into a trance. Translate, for traduit, translated. Translater, for
traduire, to translate. Translateur, for Traducteur, a Translator. Translatice,
transposed, transferred; also transitive, flitting. Transluire, to be
transparent, to shine (or be bright) through. Transmarche, transported into
foreign Countries. Transmarchement, a transporting into foreign Countries;
also a removing, or shifting out of one Country into another. Transmarcher, to
transport into foreign Countries; also to remove, or shift out of one Country
into another. Transmigration, a transmigration, or shifting of abode.
Transmigrer, to shift his dwelling place. Transmissible, transmittable.
Transmontain, dwelling beyond the mountains. Transmontane, for tramontane, the
North-star. Transompt, as transumpt. Transpasser, to pass, or go through.
Transpirable, transpirable, easy to breath out, or through. Transplacer, to
remove out of one place into another. Transplantation, for transplantement, a
transplanting. Transpontin, a ship-ladder; also a little bridge over a ditch.
Transpontin, (Adj.) outlandish, over Sea. Transvasation, a pouring out of one
vessel into another. Transversaire, Transversal, Transversel, cross, or
crossing. Mus^le transversaire, a certain Muscle which draws the head aside.
Transumpt, an exemplification; the copy of a record. Trantaner, as trantraner.
Trantin, a piece of Coin worth a French penny, or better. Trantrac, Trantran,
the sound of a Hunters horn. Trantraner, to wind a horn very loud, to make it
rattle. Trape, for trape, a well-set man. Trapelle, a little trap; a
mouse-trap. Trapercer, for transpercer, to pierce, or to run through. Trapeze,
figure trapeze, unequally sided and cornered, of unequal breadth. Muscle
trapeze, the Muscle whereby the Shoulder-blades are drawn upwards. Trappan, a
Stone-cutters drill, the tool wherewith he bores little holes in marble, etc.
Trappe, for trape, a trap; also a certain trip, or trick in wrestling.
Trappelle, as trapelle. Trappu, thick and short. Trapusse, a trap. Traquenard,
a racking horse or guelding, a hackney. Traquenarderie, a racking, or shuffling
pace. Trascendant, for transcendant, transcendent. Trasle, a Thrush, or
Feldifare. Traslier, a kind of the barren scarlet-oak. Trasser, for tracer, to
trace up; also to draw the first rude lines of a picture. Trasses, the slot,
view, or footing of a Deer. Trasseure, a dash with a pen, or pencil; also a
trace, path, or footing. Trastravat, a horse that is cross-traversed, that has
two overthwart white feet. Trau, for trou, a hole. Travaillement, a toiling,
moiling, or laboring; also a troubling, harrying, or molesting. Travat, as
trastravat. Travelot, a double quarter, or small beam. Travelure, a frame of
beams. Travers, (Adj.) cross, cross-wise; also ill-placed, out of order.
Traversain, (Adj.) cross, lying or laid across, or sidelong. Traversan, a cross
rafter, or quarter; an overthwart plank or board. Traverse, as oeil traverse, a
leering eye, or leering cast of an eye. Traverseux, cross, froward. Traversier,
(Subst.) a Ferry-boat guided by a rope fastened unto a post, etc. on either
side of a River; also a cross beam, plank, or board; also the wine-vessel
called otherwise poinson. Traumatique, any ointment or salve that is fit or good
for wounds. Travoison, as travaison in the N. D. Travonaison, an arched frame,
cieling, or floor of beams, etc. Travoniser, Travonner une muraille, to arch a
wall over with a frame of beams, etc. Travouil, rice, or a turning reel.
Trayans, the wires which are placed in the forepart of an arched, or
old-fashioned Organ, and serve to stop or open the pallats thereof. Traye, a
kind of thrush. Trayer, a milking pail. Trayme, and Traymeau, a kind of
drag-net for fishing. Train, as train; also a great round post, or piece of
timber, like to an apple tree. Trayneau, for traineau, a sledge. Trayne-guain,
as trainegaine. Trayons, the Teats, or Dugs of a Cow. Treau de saffran, a bed
of saffron. Trebouset, a kind of sweet wine. Trece, for tresse, a tress, or
lock of hair. Treffond, Treffoncier, as trefonds, trefonsier in the N. D.
Trefont de Tonnelier, a Coopers Turrel, the augar wherewith he makes holes.
Tregenier, a Salter, or one that sells salt (as some here) out of carts, etc.
Trehu, as treu. Treillage, grates, cross-bars, latticework; arbors; a railing.
Treille, Treiller, as treillisse, treilisser in the N. D. Treine, as trene;
also a dorman, or great beam. Trelis, for treillis, a trellis, or lettice.
Treluire, to glister, or shine very bright. Tremaille, a trammel, or net for
Partridges. Tremaille, as tramaille. Tremblaye, a grove of Asps. Tremble, for
torpille, a cramp-fish. Trembloer, the sound-board of a Musical Instrument.
Tremblotis, an often trembling, a quaking. Treme, as traime. Tremeau, as
trumeau; or a leg of beef. Tremegiste, an excellent Master, or Philosopher.
Tremeiller, to quake, to wag. Tremeur, a great fear or dread; a trembling, or
quaking thereby. Tremeze, a kind of Rye sowed in the Spring. Tremoise, the
Seat called the Cramp-fish. Tremouille, for tremie de moulin, a mill-hopper.
Tremoy, and Tremoye, as tremail in the N. D. Trempe, (m.) houshold-wine, or
small wine made for the Servants, of water and the grounds or bottoms of good
wine. Trempette, a sop, or sippet. Trempis, filthy water, wherein raw things
have been dipped, steeped, or soaked. Trempoir, the pit wherein Tanners do soak
their hides after they have been in their lime-pit. Tremue (for tremie) de
moulin, a mill-hopper. Tren, an Instrument (somewhat like an Eel-spear)
wherewith Mariners do strike and kill fish at Sea. Trenchaison, a gripe, or a
wring, as of the chollick. Trenchaisonner, to gripe, or wring like the
chollick. Trenche-montaigne, as tanche-montaigne. Trencheoir, for tranchoir, a
trencher. Trene, a threefold rope, or twist, called by Mariners a Sinnet.
Trenne, twisted, or made into a threefold rope. Trenou, a great ramp, or
tomboy. Trense, as transe in the N. D. Trentain, a thirtieth, or the number of
thirty. Trente-costes, a looby, a tall (but slim) fellow. Trepane, for trepan,
a trepan. Trepanation, a trepaning, a round opening of the scull with a trepan.
Trepe, trampled on, trodden under foot. Trepelu, a poor tattered rogue, a
beggarly wretch. Treper, to trample on, or tread under foot; also to stamp,
hop, skip, or trip. Trepidation, trembling, terror, fear. Trepier, a place
whereat three or four sundry streets or highways do meet ahead. Trepillard,
skipping, hopping, stamping, or trampling on. Trepiller, as treper. Trepiner,
for trepigner, to make a clattering motion with the feet. Trepis de bestes, a
trampling, or often treading on by the feet of beasts. Trepointe, as Souliers a
trepointe renversee. Tresabonescient, most earnestly. Tresacertes, thoroughly,
in great earnest, as much (or as far) as may be. Tresale, scorched, parched,
dried up, or drained of moisture by extreme heat; also (Substantively) a
scorching, parching, or great drought by an extreme heat. Tresaler, to scorch,
parch, or dry up, drain, or be drained of all manner of moisture by extreme
heat. Tresarriere, exceeding backward, very far behinde-hand. Trescau, a ^eap
of sheaves in a corn-field; also as trezeau in the N. D. Tresfoncier, and
Tresfond, as tresonfier, tresonds in the N. D. Tresme, and Tresmer, as traime
and traimer. Tresmousser, to bring forth abundance of moss; also, as
tremousser, to shiver. Tresne, and Tresnon, as trene. Trespassant, for
passager, a passenger. Trespecer, to pull, or tear into many pieces.
Trespercer, to pierce, or strike through. Tresque, exceeding much. Tresquer, to
dance. Tressault, Tressaut, a start or starting; also a leap, or leaping over.
Tresseau, the name of a fertile Vine. Tressette, a little tre^s, or lock.
Trestous, all, or every one. Treu, for trou, a hole; also the toll or custom
paid unto Lords for Salt and other Commodities carried along by their
Dominions; and generally any Toll, Tax, or Imposition. Treuage, as treu.
Trevertin, a kind of marble, or marble-like stone. Treufle, for trefle, a club
at Cards. Un nez d'az de treufle, a flat bottle-nose. Treuil, as trieule.
Trevisaine, as la Danse Trevisaine, lechery. Treul, a Wine Press, or any Press.
Treule, a little fish-net for Stues and small ponds. Trevongner, to pull, or
tug. Trezain, a thirteenth penny piece; also a thirteenth. As le trezain du
pain, vantage of Bread, the thirteenth loaf given by Bakers unto the dozen.
Trezeine de bois, thirteen billets, or logs; or as much wood as a man can
carry. Trezeler, to make up sheaves of corn into shocks; also to exclaim, or
rail on. Triacle, for theriaque, treacle. Triaclerie, the making of treacle;
also a cheat. Triade, a tree at dice; or a third. Tribaille, the poultry.
Tribailleur, a Poulter. Triballer, to dangle, to go dingle dangle. Tribart, a
short cudgel. Tribe, for Tribu, a Tribe. Triboler, to quake, to shiver; also to
jog like a cart in an uneven way; also to jumble, or to set a thing out of
order. Tribort, the Star-board, or the right side of a ship. Tribouil, trouble,
or vexation. Triboule-mesnage, an ill, or unskilful husband, that confounds his
own business. Triboulet, or Triboullet, a triblet, the tool whereon Goldsmiths
and Clockmakers put rings and little wheels, when they file, or otherwise work
them; also a slovenly fellow. Tribouller, as triboler. Tribule, a caltrop, or
saligot. Tric, a word whereby Printers do signify, that they give over
working. Tridcondaines, as triquedondaines. Trichard, cheating, cousening.
Trichiase, a Disease coming unto Nurses paps, by drinking down a hair; also a
small and invisible cleft about the backbone, running out in length, and
oftentimes causing death; also a vicious inversion of the upper eyelid, to the
trouble of the under one, and torment of the whole eye. Trichoterie, as
tricoterie. Tricon, a Gleek of Kings, Queens, Knaves, etc. three of them in one
hand together. Tricot, a hard stick. Tricoter, to knit. Tricoter la purete de
l'or, to alter, change, allay, or imbase gold. Tricoterie, cheating, or
cousenage. Tricoteur, a knitter. Tricoteur de procez, a crafty, or couzening
Lawyer; a contriver, or canvasser of Suits. Tricoteuse, a knitter, a woman that
knits. Tried, as Carriere tried, a strong speedy moving of a horse in his
carrier. Try, for triage, a choice, culling, or picking out. Triege, strong,
lusty. Tricule d'un puis, the round beam about which the cord of a Mill does
turn. Trifere, a certain compound and delicious Electuary. Trifourche,
treble-forked, threefold. Trigaut, an intangler, or perplexer of a business;
one that is full of shifts or sleights. Trihoris, or Trihory, a kind of
British and Peasantly Dance, consisting of three steps, and performed by
hobling youths, commonly in a round. Trikatiste, spitting fire. Triller, to put
on a new shirt, etc. and wear it till it be grown easy or soft. Trillon, the
ninth place in Numeration, and a hundred millions in number. Trilly (for
treillis) d'Allemaigne, sine buckram waved like a water-chamlet. Trimestre, of
three months. Trine, compounded, or made of three. Tringle, a curtain-rod; a
piece of round iron or wire of the bigness of a curtain-rod, used for the
joining of stones or timber, and for the hanging up of things; also a flat
stick, or lath-like piece of wood. Tringue, as tringle; also a drinking.
Trinquamaille, as trinquemaille. Trinqueballer les cloches, to jangle, or to
ring bells untunably and too much. Trinquemaille, such a box as Players take
money in at their doors. Trinquer, to drink much. Trinquerie, a stout drinking.
Triochite, triple-stoned. Triolaine, a list, file, or series; also a continual
clutter. Triole, a woeful song. Triomphe, and its Derivatives. See them spelt
with n instead of mp, in the N. D. Trion, choice or picked grain, clean corn.
Trioule, as triole. Tripailleries, all kind of tripes. Tripelle, as tripoly.
Triper, as treper. Tripetter, to trip, or foot it nimbly in dancing. Triphere,
as trifere. Tripied, for trepie, a trevet. Tripolion, Hogs beans, blue daisies.
Tripoly, a stone with the powder whereof Lapidaries do smooth or polish their
jewels. Tripote, tossed to and fro, as a ball at Tennis; also confusedly
jumbled, or hudled together. Tripoter, to play at Tennis, to toss a ball to and
fro; also confusedly to jumble, or huddle together. Tripoteur, a very bungler,
one that does huddle or shuffle things together. Tripotier, a great haunter of
Tennis-Courts. Tripper, as triper. Trique, severed from, or culled from the
rest. Triquebalaridean, a trifle, a thing of no worth. Triquedondaines, all
kind of superfluous trifles used, or usually bought, by women; any trash, or
paultry stuff; also a crew of rascals. Triquehouse, a boot-hose, or a thick
hose worn instead of a boot. Triquemadame, Prickmadam, Sengreen the lesser.
Triquenisques, trash, trifles, paltry stuff, things of no value. Argumens de
triquenisques, idle arguments. Monsieur de triquenisques, a threadbare
Gentleman. Triquetrac, for tric-trac, the Game Tick-tack, at Tables. Triquetre,
a Triangle. Triquette, a whirligig. Triquotter, as tricoter. Trisayeul, a great
great grandfather. Triscaciste, exceeding ill. Trissage, Germaunder, English
treacle. Trissyllabe, of three syllables. Tristeur, for tristesse, sadness,
melancholy. Trisulque, having three edges. Trituration, a breaking, or grinding
small. Triture, broken, or ground small. Triturer, to break, or grind small.
Trivialitez, trivial (or slight) matters. Triule, as trieule. Trocanters, two
bunches toward the top of the thigh bone; a great one (and the greatest of the
whole body) standing outward, a less and lower standing inward. Troche, as
test de Cerf trochee, a Hearts troched head, or whose top is divided into three
or four small branches. Trochelle, a certain Instrument of torture, used in the
Inquisition-house. Trochet, as trochee in the N. D. also a kind of small,
white, and sweet apple. Trochile, a Wren; also a little Waterfowl, which is
said to pick the teeth of Crocodiles; also a little wreathed band, or member in
Pillars. Trochisque, made like, or into a Troch^sk. Trocisque, as trochisque in
the N.D. also a stalk. Trosee, for trophee, a trophy. Trognic, scoffing,
mocking, deriding. Trognon, the stock, stump, or trunk of a branchless tree.
Troignon, as trognon; also the core within fruit. Trokalazon, as ptoschalazon.
Troiller, (for fouler) la vendange, to tread, or to stamp grapes. Troller,
hunts to trowl, range, or hunt out of order. Trollerie, a trowling, or hunting
out of order. Trombe, a round and hollow ball of wood, having a peak like a
casting top, and making a great noise when it is cast, as a top. Tromble, for
torpille, the Cramp-fish. Trompetteur, for Trompette, a Trumpeter. Tron, for
trone in the N. D. also the piece of a thing. Troncation, a mutilation, or
cutting off. Tronche, a great piece of timber, or as trone in the N. D.
Tronchet, a truncheon, a little stock. Tronchou, a kind of smooth flat fish
without scales. Troncir, to cut off into pieces. Tronconneur, a cutter of
things into truncheons, or lumps. Trondel, the trundle, or trundling of a ball,
etc. Trondeler, to trundle as a ball; or as rondeler. Trongne, of the face;
also from the teeth outward; also working, mowing, or making faces at.
Trongneux, making a sour countenance. Trougnon, as trognon. Troppeler, to
troop, or flock together. Troq, for troc, a truck, or bartering. Troquet, a
kind of small, white, and sweet apple. Trosseau, Trossel, for trousseau, a
truss, packet, bundle, or fardle. Trosse-qucue, for trousse-queue, a dock for
the train of a horse. Trosser, for trousser, to pack, or to tuck up. Trotier,
trotting, or which trotteth; also gadding, or wandering much up and down.
Trotiere, a gadding huswife. Trotigner, to trip it, to go thick and short; also
to run much up and down. Trotteresse, as trotiere. Trottier, for troteur, a
vagabond, or loytering fellow. Trottouer, a board in the lover of a Dove-coat
for Pigeons to alight on; also the Seat, or Tribunal of a Judge; also babbling,
or prattling. Trottres, low tresles, to heighten coffers withal. Trouee, a gap,
or muset in a hedge. Trougne, for trongne, ones look, or countenance.
Troupelet, a little troop, flock, or herd. Troupet, for toupet, a lock of hair.
Trousse-Galant, Stoop-Gallant, a kind of Plague, wherewith the richest and
strongest are the soonest infected, and once infected dead within two or three
days. Troussel, as trossel. Trousseure, as troussoire; also a truss used by
such as are burst. Troussis, a tuck, or tucking up, in a garment. Troussoire, a
belt, or girdle. Troussure, as trousseure. Trouvage, Trouvement, a finding,
inventing, devising, lighting on. Trouverre, an ordinary Poet, Rhim^,
Versifter, Ballad-maker. True, or Truage, a toll, custom, tax, or imposition.
Truandaille, a ^rue of ras^ally beggars, a company of lewd rogu^s. Truandeau, a
young rascal. Truble, a little fish-net for Stu^s and small Ponds; also the
waterfowl called a Shovelar. True, a blow, or thwack; also the popping, or
sound of the tip^, wherewith we use to encourage a horse. Je vous grupperay au
true, I shall take you napping, or catch you as you go by. Truchemander, to
interpret, to serve as an Interpreter. Trucheran, S. John's Wort. Trucheter, for
eternu^r, to sc^^^i. Truculent, cruel, or having a cruel countenance. Truege,
the Dorce, or Gold-fish. Truecie, as truege. Truelleur, a Plaisterer, or any
one that works with a trowel. Truette, as truege. Truseirande, female (great,
or mountain) Southernwood. Truffant bourdant, between j^st and earnest. Truffe,
for raillerie, a jest. Truffer, to deride; also to nod, or shake the head, as
those that approve not the thing they hear. Truffette, a jest. Truffeur, a
jester. Truffler, as truffer. Trustle, as truffe. Truine, the f^^h Tunny.
Trulle, as truble. Trumeau de boeuf, a leg of beef. Trumeau de veau, as rouelle
de veau in the N. D. Trupelu, as trepelu. Trupet, as troupet. Truquer to knock
or sight. Trut, (an Interj^^tion of Indignation) ^y man. Trut avaunt, a fart, no
such matter, you are much deceived. Truyette, a young, or very little Sow.
Truyettes, the marks of shin-burning, the red scorches or spot on burnt shins.
Trycher, and Trycherie, as tricher, tricherie in the N. D. Try, as try.
Trygonne, a kind of Scate-fi^h. Tu autem, as vous en scaurez le tu autem, you
shall understand the whole matter. Tube, a Conduit-pipe; also the hollow of the
backbone, or the pipe through which the marrow thereof does run. Tubercle, the
small rising or swelling of a wheal, or pimple; also a wheal. Tuberculeux,
swelling like a push or wheal; also full of pushes, or wheals. Tubereux,
swelling, bunchy, knobby. Tuberositez, swellings, bunches, knobs. Tubilustre, a
day whereon the Trumpets dedicated unto Sacrifices were hallowed, and the
Trumpeters purged with water. Tubule, a little conduit-pipe, or hollow reed.
Tucquet, a little hill. Tue-chien, the h rb Dogs-bane; also meadow (or wild)
Saffron. Tue-loup, the herb Wolves-bane. Tuement, a killing, slaying,
massacring. Tuseux, covered with, or full of tuf. Tuffe, a Footman, or Soldier
serving on foot; also as tuf in the N. D. Tuffeau, as tuf in the N. D.
Tuffiere, a bed of tuf; the Ground, or Quarry wherein it is gotten. Tugnicien,
as tunicien. Tugure, a cottage. Tugurion, a shed, or a little cottage. Tuileur,
for Tuilier, a Tiler, or Tile-maker. Tuileux, full of tiles. Tuilleau,
Tuillette, a little tile; also a wedge of Gold or Silver. Tuilot, a broken
tile, or piece of a tile; also a little tile. Tuition, tuition, defense, or
protection. Tulbant, for turbant, a turbant. Tuleau, as tuilot. Tulebute, the
pipe of a fountain, or gutter. Tulipan, for tulipe, a tulip. Tumbe, as tomb.
Tumber, for tomber, to fall. Tumbereau, for tombercau, a tumbrel. Tumesie,
swollen, or made to swell, puffed up. Tumefier, to make to swell, or puff up.
Tunal, the Indian fig tree. Tunicien, a Barbary faulcon. Tunicis, as l'herbe de
tunicis, frotly or spatling P^ppy; also the herb that bears sweet Williams.
Tuph, as tus in the N. D. also rubbish. Tupin, a pipkin, or earthen pot.
Turaulx, old mole-hills, overgrow^ with grass. Turbateur, a troubler,
disturber, disquieter. Turbation, a trouble, or troubling; a disturbance,
disquieting, or molestation. Turbe, as tourbe; also a Troop (consisting at the
least) of ten Witnesses; two such Troops being required to the approvement of
an unwritten Custom, and for the exposition of a written one. Turbentine, for
terebentine, Turpentine. Turbet, the name of a little Apple, a graft whereof
does streighten the crooked stock whereon it is set. Turbin, the shellfish
called a Welk, or Winkle. Turbine, a tempest, whirlwind, or boisterous weather.
Turbine, fa^hioned like a top, sharp at the bottom and broad at the top.
Turbulenter, to bluster, to storm; to vex, turmoil, or disquiet. Turcee de
raisins, a Cluster of grapes. Turci, a causey, or bank for the keeping back or
holding in of waters. Turcie, as turci; or the raising of such a cause y, or
bank. Turcot, the bird called a W^yneck. Tureaux, as turaulx. Turelureau, as
mon turelureau, my pretty knave. Turgent, swelling, rising, puffing up. Turgon,
a kind of red b^^ts which have with r s^^t nor sa^our. Turguet, a little
wimble; also amel-corn, or search-corn. Turlupin, a grub, mushr^^m (...) of no
value. Turme, for truse, Swi^^-bread. Turonde, a round p^ll^t (or piece) of
dough, ^a^^e, or bread, wherewith fowl is crammed; also a hawks casting. Turpe,
foul, ugly, filthy, dishonorable. Turpot, a certain piece of timber (whereof
there be four, two in the Forecastle, and two in the Stern of a Ship) fastened
unto the Varengues, and serving among other things to keep the Artillery from
recoyling too far back. Turquet, as turguet. Turrement, a violent shock, or
joult, as of an engine of Battery against a Wall. Turse, as turcee. Tursie, as
turcie. Turturelle, for tourterelle, a Turtle-dove. Turumber, an ancient
Arabian word, signifying the finest sort of Sugar. Tuse, pounded, brayed,
beaten, or bruised in a mortar. Tute, a hole, or berry made by a Coney. Tuthie,
a Medicinable stone, or dust, said to be the heavier foil of brass cleaving to
the upper sides and tops of brass-melting-houses. Tutsan, Park-leaves (an
herb.) Tutuyer, for tutoyer, to thou one. Tutye, as tuthie. Tyberiade, a
topography, the mode or draught of a place. Tymbre, and Tymbre, as timbre,
timbre in the N. D. Tymbree, fish (water, or brook) mint. Tympane, as tympanne.
Tympaner, Tympaniser, to play on a Tympan, Timbrel, or Taber; also to desame,
slander, traduce. Tympaniste, a Tympanist, a player on a Tympan, etc. also one
that has a Tympany. Tympanne, the panel, or flat square on the top or head of
a Pillar. Tyn, the herb Time. Tyne, as tine. Typhaine, as tiphaine. Typhe,
Water-torch, or Cats-tail. Typher, as tiffer. Typholope, a kind of a
hard-skinned blind worm, or Sloe-worm, which is not very venomous. Typhones,
great, or violent whirl-winds. Tyranneau, a petty Tyrant. Tyrasser, as
tirasser. Tyrepet, a great farter. Tyrer, as tirer in the N. D. Tyromantie,
divination by a cheese. Tyrouer, the flat piece behind the bridge of a Violin,
whereto the strings be fastened; also as tirouer. Tyrse, as tirse. Tyrsigere,
Ivy-bearing, or decked with Ivy.
V.
VAcabond, for vagabond, a Vagabond. Vacant, (Subst.) the revenue of a Benefice
during vacancy. Vachelette, a very little Cow. Vacherie, a herd of Kine; also a
Cow-house, or Stable for Kine. Vachette, a little Cow. Vachier, for Vacher, a
Cow-herd, or Keeper of Cows. Vacillation, a reeling, tottering, or staggering.
Vacille, reeled, tottered, staggered. Vaciller, to reel, totter, or stagger.
Vade, pass. Vagabonder, to wander, or loiter up and down. Vageux, as vagueux.
Vagine, a Sheath, Scabbard, Case, or Covering; also the husk, or cod of Corn.
Vagir, to cry like a little child. Vaguer, as vagabonder. Vagueur, and
Vagueux, full of waves. Vaillantise, for valeur, valor. Vainete, for vanite,
vanity. Vainqueresse, a vanquishing or victorious woman, a Conqueress. Vairie,
as Vavrie. Vairole, for verole, the Pox. Val, for vallee, a vale, valley, dale.
Valdimonie, a day of appearance, or a promise (or bond) for appearance at a
certain day. Valence, for vaillant, stort, valiant. Valentianes, as par
valentianes, by sits, by turns, but slowly forward. Valeriane, and Valerienne,
for valerine, Garden-valerian, Capons-tail, Setwall. Valetaille, a company of
Grooms, or meaner Servants; a ras ally crew of camp-following boys or drudges.
Valeter, to perform the part of a drudge, to stoop, or submit too much.
Valeton, a Bar-servant. Valette, made very common, prostituted unto the u^^ of
Grooms and meaned sort of Servants. Vileure, value rate, or price.
Val^ureusement, for vaillamment, valiantly courigiously. Valeureux, for
vaillant, valorous, valiant, (...). Validation, a ^^^ngti^^^g, or confirming;
an establishing, or ratifying. Vali-dir^, for Valet-de-pie, a Footman, or
Servant only for Errands. Valitude, health, strength, or welfare. Vailant, for
vaillant, valiant, Valletaille, Valleter, Valleton, and Vallidation. See them
with a single^. Vallois, a kind of Net wherewith fish as (forbidden to be)
caught. Valoir, (Subst.) value, worth, rate, or price. Valois, as vallois.
Valve, a folding (or two-leaved) door, or window. Value, value, worth,
goodness. Vandanger, as v^ndanger in the N. D. Vandoise, the Dace, or
Dare-fish. Vanereau, a young Lapwing. Vangeron, a little red-finn'd-fish in the
lake of Geneva. Vanier, as vannier. Vanne, Vanneau, Vanner, and Vanneur. See
them with a single n in the N. D. Vannerie, for Venerie, hunting. Vannet, for
vaneau, a Lapwing. Vanneure, a winnoning; also a chiding; also a scoffing, or
deriding. Vannier, a Sieve-maker; a Basket-maker. Vannures, winnowings, or
fistings of corn. Vanoyer, to vanish, to disappear; also to be vain, or play
vain parts. Vantance, for vanterie, a vaunting, boasting, or bragging.
Vanterolles, as venterolles. Vanteux, full of ostentation. Vapide, wasty, or
wasted; that sends up an id sum, that yields a stinking vapor. Vaquance, and
Vaquant, as vacance, and vacant in the N. D. Var, as bar. Varande, well dried
and seasoned, as a herring ready to be barrell'd up. Varander, to dry, and
season b^rrings for the barrel. Varaville, the name of a green sweet apple
fashioned like an egg. Varenne, a reddi h ^a^ti, whereof the M^^^ds of Founders
and G^^^s of P^tters be ordinarily (...). Varennes, lean and dry grounds, s^t
only to b^^r Oats and Rye. Varenneux, dry, lean, or barren. Vari^queux, the
veins of whose Temples, etc. (...) swollen with corrupt ^loud; also stradling,
going wide as^nder. Varig, s^ag, Sword-grass, Corn-slag. Varin, a wooden Engine
consisting of two vices and a screw, and serving to list up great pieces of
Timber, or of Artillery. Variner, a little Varin. Varioles, the Smallpox.
Variqueux, as varicqueux. Varlet, for Valet, an ordinary manservant; also a
youth, or stri^ling. Varletaille, Varleter, and Varleton, as Valetaille,
Valeter, Valeton. Varre, a certain long Italian measure. Vasche, for vache, a
cow. Vasois, a shore, or place often overflowed with water, and thereby full of
owze or mud. Vasquine, a petticoat; also a Spanish Vardingale. Vasquinier, a
maker of petticoats, or Spanish Vardingales. Vassaudie, for Vasselage,
Vassalage, or subjection. Vassausie, the Right which a Sovereign, or Landlord,
pretends to have over his Vassal, or Tenant. Vasseur, a Vassal; also a Villain.
Vastadour, a Pioneer, or digger; also a m^nder of highways. Vastation, a
wasting, spoiling, or ransacking. Vastibousier, a loggerhead. Vastines, waste
grounds. Vaticinateur, a Soothsayer, Diviner, or Foreteller of things to come.
Vaticination, a soothsaying, divining, or foretelling. Vaticiner, to soothsay,
divine, or foretell. Vatton, the latch of a door; also a lever. Vau, a Vale, or
Valley. Vavassoire, Vavassourie, the estate, land, or territory of a mesne
Lord, or under-Vassal. Vauche, the herb called Perwinkle. Vaucrer, to wander up
and down; to float, or wave up and down, to hold an uncertain course at Sea.
Vauderoute, as s'enfuir a vauderoute, to run headlong along. Mettre a
vauderoute, to put wholly to flight. Vaudeville, a Country-ballad, or Song;
also a vulgar Proverb. Vaudre, a kind of Vessel for Rhenish wine. Vauldeville,
as vaudeville. Vauldree, a maulkin. Vaulneant, an idle fellow, a rascal.
Vaultrait, Vaultre, a mungrel between a hound and a mastiff (fit for the chase,
or hunting of wild bears and boars.) Vaultrer, to hunt with a Vaultre; also,
to wallow as a swine. Vaultrey, a kennel, or hunt of Vaultres. Vaultroy, a
wild boar; or a lime-hound for the wild boar. Vayer, Vayrie, as Voyer,
Voyerie. Ubir, to rear; to make thrive, or grow by good usage, or good fare.
Uce, the Eyelid. Veaurre, the fleece of a ram. Veautreur, a wallower, or
tumbler in the dirt. Veautroir, a puddle, or slough wherein hogs use to wallow.
Vedat, as bedat. Vedeau, for Bedeau, a Verger. Vedel, for veau, a calf. Test
de vedel, a silly fellow. Vedille, a sucking Calf. Vedet, a blockhead. Vedelle,
the Navel-string of a newborn Infant. Vee, labor, toil, or pains. Vee,
forbidden. Veeurs, Witnesses, or Assistants in a view or survey of land. Vef,
Vefvage, and Vefve, as Veuf, Veuvage, and Veuve in the N. D. Vegade, a draught,
a bout, once, or one time. Vege, a kind of water-tree, or shrub. Vegetal,
vegetal, budding, or growing. Vegetation, a giving of life, increase, or growth
unto; a quickening, refre^hing, or comforting. Vegeter, to give life, increase,
or growth unto; to quicken, refresh, or comfort; also to grow, bud, or put
forth, as plants. Vegettes, vegetative, or growing parts. Veguade, as vegade.
Veguer, as beguer. Vehementement, vehemently. Veher, as Juge Veher, a Judge of
mean, or base Jurisdiction. Veherie, mean, or base Jurisdiction. Vejete,
lively, or full of mettle. Vejetter, as vegeter. Veillement, a waking, or
watching. Veillere, Bindweed, or Hedge-bells. Veillottes, the best and sweetest
kind of acorns, or mast growing on the small Oak Esculus. Vein, veined, or
full of veins. Veinelette, Veinette, a little vein. Veineux, Veinu, full of
veins. Vejove, a wicked Spirit, a God that can do no hurt, and will do no good.
Veirat, the Mackerel fish. Vela, as voila in the N. D. Velar, the herb called
Bank-cresses. Veleure, hairiness, nappiness. Velin, for venin, venom. Veller,
for voiler, to vail, to cover; and, for veeller, to calve. Vellication, a
plucking, pulling, or lugging; also a carping at. Velocite, speed, quickness,
nimbleness. Veloux, for velours, velvet. Veluate, as veluote, Veluette,
Pilosella, Mouse-ear. Veluote, Speedwel, female fluellin. Velute, for veloute,
made velvet-like. Vendengeoire, the basket, or panni^r whereinto Grapes are
gathered. Vendengeret, belonging to, or serving for Vintage. Venderesse, for
vendeuse, a woman that sells. Vendible, for vendable, to be sold. Vendiquer,
to vindicate; to claim, or challenge. Vendition, for vente, a sale, or selling.
Droict de Venditions, the T^ll which Lords of Markets and Fairs take for the
Sale of Wares and Merchandises therein. Vendoise, a Dace, or Dare-fish. Vendue,
for vente, a sale, or selling. Vene, as vein. Venefique, venomous. Venelle,
for ruelle, a narrow lane^ or yard. Venenosite, venomousness. Vener, for
chasser, to hunt. Vengeron, a Dace, or Dare-fish. Venise, for ceruse, ceruse,
or white lead. Venne, for vesse, a fizzle. Venneur, for vesseur, a fizzler.
Vennier, a kind of Pedlar, or seller of old iron-stuff. Venredi, for Vendredi,
Friday. Ventail, a childish toy of a Card cut cross, like the sails of a
Windmill, and put with a pin unto the end of a stick, and so held into the
wind, which makes it to twirl very fast about. Ventau, as ventail; also a fan.
Venteler, to blow a soft gale; to waver; to air in the wind; to fan, or winnow
corn; to toss, or canvas to and fro; to turn out of one hand into another.
Ventelet, a little wind, a gentle gale, a cool blast of wind. Ventelle, for
ventaille, the breathing part of a helmet. Venteroles, as Droict de Venteroles,
a certain Fine due to the Landlord from the Purchaser that undertakes to
discharge his selling Tenant of all Fines. Ventilation, a gentle blowing; also
a waving, or hovering in the air; a winnowing, or airing in the wind; also an
estimation, valuation, or prizing. Ventiler, as venteler; also to gather wind;
also to estimate, prize, or value. Ventoir, as ventail. Ventolin, a very small
wind. Ventose, and Ventoser, as ventouse, ventouser in the N. D. Ventrelet, a
little belly. Ventresque, the entrails of an edible creature; the belly-part of
a Tunny. Ventriere, a belly-band for a draught-horse. Ventripotent, having a
huge belly. se Ventrouiller, for se veautrer, to wallow in the dirt. Venture,
for aventure, an adventure. Veoir, for voir, to see. Veracee, the fullness, or
full measure of a certain vessel (som^what like a porr^nger) wherein
Caillebotes are usually put. Veraire, the herb called Hellebore, especially the
black one. Verangenes, mad (raging) apples. Verart, and Veratre, as veraire.
Verbalement, verbally, by word of mouth. Verbasce, Longwort. Verb, (Adj.)
stout, haughty, stomachful. Verbenique, vervine, pigeons cross, holy herb.
Verdales, a kind of grapes. Verdalle, for verdon, a Dunn^^k, or Hedge-sparrow.
Verdement, for vertement, briskly. Verdere, Verdereule, the little bird called
a Yellow-hammer, or Youlring. Verderie, the Office of a Verderer in a Forest.
Verderis, or Verdet, for verd de gris, verdigrease, or Spanish green.
Verdeureux, somewhat green. Verdillon, an unripe, or sour grape. Verdondaine,
Verdonille, two insignificant oaths. Verdot, greenish, a little green, young,
raw, or not yet ripe. Verdrier, as Verdere. Verducade, a closet, a hiding hole,
or corner. Verdun, the little rapier called a Tuck; also as verdere, and as
verdon in the N. D. Verdurer, to make, or become green. Verdurier, an herb-man,
one that furnishes a house with such green things as be in season. Verduriere,
an herb-woman. Vere, as voire. Verecond, demure, shamefaced, bashful. Veresque,
for varesque, a wrack of the Sea. Veret, a little worm. Vergadelle, a Pond-fish
like unto (but less than) the Saupe. Vergaland, a lusty Younker. Vergay, as
brouet vergay d'anguille, broth made of eels boiled in small pieces with
parsley, toasted bread, saffron, and ginger. Vergaye, a kind of dance. Verge,
made of rods, or twigs; also streaked with long and rod-like rays; also
worm-eaten. Vergee, a yard of, the length of a yard in; also a yard-land, or a
rood of land. se Verger, to be streaked all over. Vergeteux, as vergeux.
Vergettons, small twigs, or sprigs. Vergeux, full of rods, of, or like a rod.
Vergier, for Verger, an Orchard. Vergilies, the seven Stars. Vergne, the
Alder-tree. Vergobert, a Mayor, or Burgo-master. Vergongne, shame, bashfulness,
blushing; also the privy parts. Vergongner, to shame, or make ashamed, to dash
out of countenance. Se vergongner, to blush, or be ashamed at. Vergongneux,
shame-faced, bashful; also shameless, or brazen-faced. Veridique,
truth-telling. Verjettons, as vergettons. Verin, as varin. Verineux, full of
(or gnawn by) worms. Verisimilitude, for vraisemblance, likelihood. Verm, for
ver, a worm. Vermeillon, for vermillon, vermilion. Vermeler, a little worm.
Vermeniers, vermin. Vermerie, worms. Vermet, a little worm. Vermiculaire, wild
prick-madam, worm-grass. Vermiforme, fashioned like a worm. Vermiformes, two
worms, resembling parts of the Cervelet. Vermineux, full of vermin. Herb
vermineuse, moth-mullein. Vermineux, (Subst.) the name of a certain Spider,
whose body is full of spots. Verminiere, a worm-hill; or a place near a
Country House, wherein worms are bred on purpose for pullein. se Vermoulir, to
grow worm-eaten, moldy, rotten. Vermoulisseure, a being worm-eaten, or full of
worm-holes; rottenness, or mouldiness. Verne, as vergne. Vernede, a certain
charm, or charming prayer for the toothache. Vernicer, for vernisser, to
varnish. Vernillage, as ce n'est que vernillage, this is but a pidling.
Vernilles, trifles, things of no value. Verny, for vernis, varnish. Veroleux,
for verole, pocky. Verolique, of, or belonging to the pox. Verrate, a sow.
Verretre, a man's yard. Verreux, for vereux, wormy, or full of worms; also
worm-eaten, corrupted, putrified; also hot, choleric, hasty, hair-brained.
Fair le pois verreux, to play the hypocrite, to seem more honest than he is.
(So many worm-eaten pease do seem a great deal founder than they be.) Verri,
shining, or transparent like glass. Parchemin verri, clear, (or virgin)
par^^^ent. Verrin, glassy, or of glass. Medicament verrin, a blackish Medicine,
or Sal^e, made of burnt glasses, and good against the Stone. Verrine, a
glass-window. Verrueux, warty, full of wa^^s. Cichoree verrueuse, yellow
Gum-succory. Verrugue, for verrue, a want; also a hillock, or t^^ k^^p of a
^ill. Verry, a moldy Ch^^^^ when it is green, or any liquid thing which
gathers a mouldiness. Versal, as lettres versales, text (or great) letters.
Versane, a division, or part of a plowed ground, amounting to some 2^^ paces in
length. Versatil, quickly turning, easily turned, or poured out. Verselet, a
short, or little verse. Versure, the taking up of money to pay debts with.
Fair versure, to borrow of Peter to pay Paul. Versures, the remainder, or
leavings of draughts poured out of cups or glasses late drunk in, into some
vessel standing under the Cupboard, etc. for that purpose. Vertaper, to stop
with a bung. Vertau, a stopple, or bung; also as vertoil. Vertemoulte, as
Droict de vertemoulte, a certain Duty, or Fine, payable unto Lords in Normandy
by their Tenants that inn their corn out of their Manors. Vertevelles, the
great hinges of a ga^^. Vertigieux, Vertigineux, giddy, dizzy, troubled with
the swimming of the brain. Vertiginosite, a giddiness, dizziziness, or swimming
of the head or brain. Vertigne, worm-eaten. Vertiller, to swell, or increase,
as a woman's breasts do, when the Matrical veins are stretched by the m^^^trual
blood. Vertillons, the whirling, or round turning of a water. Vertir en quelque
lieu, to haunt, frequent, or be conversant in a place. Il n'y scauroit vertir,
he cannot fadge with, he cannot frame himself to it. Vertius, for verjus,
verjuice. Vertoeil, a kind of greeni^h brass, whereof great Ordinance is made.
Vertoil, the whirl of lead belonging to a spindle. Vertugadin, a little
Vardingale. Vertugalle, a Vardingale. Vertugoy, (an idle kind of oath.)
Vertumal, changeable at pleasure, to be altered at will, or when one list.
Vervaine, for vervene, Vervein, or Holy-herb. Verue, a brawling, jangling, or
jarring; also an odd humor in a man, a worm in the head, or brizze in the
tail. Il luy a priune verue, the magget ^iles (...). Verveil, a Sweep-n^t or
D^ag-n t. Verveleux, ^^moursum, fantastical, hair-brained. Verveul, as verveil.
Ver-volant, a ^ing-worm, or ^^^^ar. Vese, as ve^e. Vesialere, as F^mance
V^s^alere, a kind of O^ficer or Magistrate, within the Jurisd^^tio^ of la
Solle. Vesicatif, blistering, blister-raising. Vesicatoire, a Vesicatory.
Vesner, to frizzle. Vesperies, evening Exercises, or Disputations, among the
Sorbonists. Vesperise, chidden, checked, rebuked; also reviled, railed on,
derided. Vesperiser, to chide, check, or rebuke; also to revile, rail on, or
deride. Vespertin, of the evening, done in an evening. Vespree, the
evening-tide, or season. Vessaille, a sizzling; also a crew of sizzling
slovens, or sluts. Vesseron, for vesceron, the wild Vetch. Vessie, full of
blisters. Vessier, for vesseur, a sizzler. Vessier, (the Verb) to blister.
Vessiere, for veseuse, a sizzling woman. Vessiette, a little blister, or
bladder. Vessifier, to make break wind, or let a fizzle. Vessigons, windgals in
a horses legs. Vessir, for vesser, to sizzle. Vest, a Livery and Seisin made
unto a Purchaser, in some places by the Seller, but in most by the Lord Foncier
or Censier of whom the Land is held. Droict de Vest, power to make such Livery
and Seisin. Vesteure, for vetement, garment. Vestiaire, the V^^try in a Church.
Vesture, a clothing, or attiring; also a vesting, investing, or putting into
possession of. Vetade, the sil^etted Co^kle, (smooth, broad, and exceeding
hard-shelled.) Veterinaire, an old-beaten Soldier. Vettoine, for betoine,
Betony. Veu, for v^^u, a ^^w. Ve^ull^^, (...) clasping tendrels, or s^all
twining sprigs of a Vine. Veu^e, for foible, weak, faint, infirm; o^ertoiled
with heat, and labor; also hollow, loose, or light about a thing. Vexateur, a
vexer, or tormenter. Vexation, texation, or torment. Vex, vexed, tormented.
Vexer, to vex, or to torment. Vezarde, a great fear, dread, horror. Veze, gros
veze, a gorbelly, fatguts. Veze, a Bag-pipe. Jouer de la veze, to play on the
Bag-pipe; also to fizzle. Vezeur, a Bag-piper. Vezei, a carbuncle, or
blain-sore. Vezon, the breech. Vi, for vin, wine. Viable, likely to live.
Viage, as un viage, once, or one time. Viager, (a Verb) to enjoy during life,
to have an estate for life in. Viagerement, during life, only for life. Viaige,
a Tenant for life. Viaire, look, aspect, countenan^^; also an annuity, or
yearly pension for life. Viandier, of, or belonging to meat. Viateur, a
traveller, a wayfaring man. Vibrequin, for virebrequin, a wimble. Viburne, for
viorne, the wild Vine, or bend-with; or only the wayfaring tree. Vicarier, to
run up and down a Country. Vice-conte, for Vicomte, a Vicount. Vice-conte, a
Vicounty. Vicie, vitiated, marred, corrupted; blemi^hed, imperfect, unsound.
Vicier, to vitiate, mar, or corrupt; to blemish, or make imperfect. Vicinite,
neighborhood, nearness. Vicon, as mon petit Vicon, my little pilli^ock.
Victimaire, one that sold a beast for a Sacrifice, or one that assisted the
Sacrificer in the killing and dressing thereof. Victorial, of, or belonging to
Victory. Victorien, for Vainqueur, an overcomer. Victorienne, a victorious
woman. Victuailles, victuals. Vieugne, a horn-less wild beast in Peru, of
whose wool the Indians make excellent Coverlets. Vidime, confirmed, approved,
ratified, the goodness whereof is (after examination) warranted. Vidimer, to
confirm, approve, or warrant the goodness of a thing after an examination
thereof. Vidimus de lettre, an Examination of a Copy by the Original, signed by
a Secretary, Register, Notary, or Clark. Viduite, for Veuvage, Widowhood. Vie,
for parti, gone. Vie-vie, get you gone. Viedazer le nez a quelcun, to make a
fool of one, to baffle, or abuse him. Vieillement, Vieillessement, oldly,
anciently. Vieillot, elderly, somewhat old. Vieute, as vilete. Vif-argentin, of
Quicksilver. Vif-gage, a pawn of land, for the profits whereof he unto whom it
is pawned is accomptable. Vifs, les Vifs, the entrails, or guts. Vighier, as
Viguier in the N. D. Vigle, for bigle, squinting, or looking askew. Vignages,
as Droict de Vignages, a certain Toll or Fee taken (by Lords) of Merchants, or
Drovers, who with their Commodities, of Cattle, pass by their Territories.
Vignettement, Vignetterie, a bordering, or flourishing with branches, leaves,
flowers, etc. Vignol, Vignot, a kind of great Shellfish. Vignotte, and
Vignotter, as vignette, vignetter in the N. D. Vilainer, as vilener.
Vilbrequin, for virebrequin, a wimble. Vilein, as Vilain in the N. D.
Vilenaille, a pack of Rascals. Vilene, defiled; also abused, or disgraced.
Vilener, to defile; also to abuse, or disgrace. Vilenot, a little Villain; a
churli^h man; a clown. Vilete, for vilite, vi^^ness, ^^seness, ^n worthiness;
also c^^apne^^. Vilipender, to despise; also to slander, or traduc^.
Villanelle, a Country-dance, Round, or Song. Villainy, for vilenie, nastiness,
fordidne s. Villaquerie, villainy, or roguer^. Villatique, Country-like; of, or
belonging to the Country, Villebrequin, as vilbrequin. Villein, as vilain in
the N. D. Villenage, Villanage, or any eas^ and servile Tenure. Villenaille,
and Villenot, as Vilenaille, Vilenot. Villes de la Vigne, the tendrels, or
twining sprigs of a Vin^. Villiere, as veillere. Villon, a nimble Knave; a
pleasant Thief; also a kind of weed, wherewith bands to tie Vines are made.
Villonner, to play the cunning or witty Rogu^, the nimble Knave, or the
pleasant Tri^^. Villonnerie, a witty or cunning roguery, nimble knavery,
pleasant or merry thievery. Villote, a Cock of hay. Villoter, to range, or
wander from one Town to another. Villoteur, Villotier, a Vagabond. Villotier,
(Adj.) of, or belonging to the Town only; also homebred. Villotiere, a gadding
huswife; a gossipping woman; also a bawd. Vilonage, as Villenage. Vimaires,
Vimeres, storms, tempests; inundations, or breaking out of waters; ruins of
buildings, and the like, by earthquakes or thunderclaps; any such fearful and
fatal Accidents which no reason can foreset, no for^sight prevent. Viminal, apt
to wind, or bind, as twigs or o^^ers; also a belonging thereto. Vimpilon, a
holy water sp^inkle. Vinade, Droict de Vinade, t^^ u^^ and work of two yok^ of
O^^n, or of a Cart, all the time of Vintage. Vinage, a physical wine, or a
d^coction of herbs in wine, to be drunk for the ^^^ing of Vl^^rs and Wounds.
Droict de Vinage, 12 pence due to the Offi^^^s of (...) Court of Aides, upon a
^^^nd coming in for Wine ((...) Ca^^s^; also the portion of (...) due o^t of a
Vineyard unto a Lord Censier, in li^^ of (...) C^nsive, and to be allow, (...)
head of the Vat, before the (...) can lawfully draw any wi^^ (...) of it. At
Angiers, and in o^^^^^ places, this Duty is turned into a pecuriary and yearly
C^ns. Vi^^aigrette, Sorrel-s^^^e. Vinaigrettes, sall^t, or f^^^ s, whi h be
s^ason^d with (...) ^in^gar; (...) herbs, or fruits in pickle. Vinatier, a
Barberry-tree, or Barberry it self. Vineibosse, woodbind, ho ^ers^ckle.
Vindice, or Vindicte, for vengeance, revenge. Vindiquer, to r^deem, deliver,
ex^mpt, or save from; also to revenge. Vindo^er, a kind of long hook, or
cramp-iron full of not^^^ s. Vine, seasoned with, or for the ^olding of wine;
also tun^^d, as wine. Vinenotte, as vivelotte. Viner, to season with, or for
the holding of wine; also to tun wine. Vinetteux, a Vintner. Vineux, of, or
full of wine, proceeding from wine. Vingeron, as vengeron. Vinoble, for
Vignoble, a plot of ground consisting of Vineyards. Vinot, for vinet, small
wine, or hedge-wine; also a kind of little pear, the perry whereof does taste
like wine. Vinotier, a Vintu^r. Vinotier, (Adj) of, or belonging to wine; also
bringing, or yielding wine. Vintain, a twentieth, or the 2^th part of.
Vintenier, the Corporal to a foot-Company. Vin-verjus, (...) ma^^ of wild or a
^ipe grapes. Vioge, lusty, crank. Violable, ^io^^^^^. Violant, as le gri^
violant, mellow-^lower-colour, or a color between a gr y and ^^^l^^. Violat,
of violets. Violent^ment, for violemment, (...). Vi^lier, a Fild^^^; also a
violet r^^t, or plan^; a^^^ a flower-pot; also the cr^wn of o^^^r, etc. which
(...) o^^r ^^ts of Gillist^^ r, to strengthen the stalks ^^^^^of. Violier des
murailles, t^ plant that ^^^rs the Wall^^^^^^r, o^ W^^^^r-g^^^flowers. se
Vioner, (...) v^autrer, t^ wallow (...). Vionche, of long li^^; or as Vi^ge.
Viper^^re, Vi^ (...). Viperillon, a (...). Vi^^rin, (...) of a vi^ (...)
viperin, (...) H^^^y and (...), and with (...) and earthe^ pot, and (...) in a
fur^ace unt^ a con^^l^nce of coals. Viquerie, Vi^^^^^^. Virade, a whi^^ing,
(...) ab^ut. Viraire, as veraire. Vire, the arrow called a Qu^^^^^, of ^o^^^
for the Cross-^ow. Vire^ot, litl^^ ^^^^les, (...) ^^k^ts of grapes (...), and
there^^ (...). Virela^, a r^^^^, (...). Virelis, a (...) as N^^^^s. Virelon,
one of (...) and (...) r^c^^tacles for the Seawater, wh^^^of (...) made.
Vire-soli, a Turn-sol; also a Marigold. Vireson, a little Vire, or a fashion of
arrow-head like a scrue. Virevoulte, for Virevolte, a wheeling about.
Virevoulter, for virevolter, to wheel about. Virevouste, as virevoulte. Vireur,
a whirler, or turner of things often about. Vireux, rank, rammish, smelling
strong; also poisonous. Virgeal, or Virgineux, for virginal, maidenly.
Virgulte, a bunch of young and tender shoots. Viridique, as veridique. Virlis,
as virelis. Virolet, as ventail; also a shittle-cock, an arrow-head; a sword
with an indented edge; a piercer; a man's yard. Virolle, bound about with an
iron ring, or hoop. Virollette, a Sword with an indented edge. Viron, for
environ, about. Vironner, to turn, go, or wind about. Virulence, stench,
rankness, rammishness, poison, venemousness. Vis, for visage, the face. Au vis
le vice, our faults may be read in our faces. Visadmiral, for Vice-Amiral, a
Vice Admiral. Visc, misseldine; also bird-lime. Visceral, inward, of, or from
the bowels. Viscide, clammy, or cleaving like bird-lime. Viscidite, sliminess,
or clamminess. Viseneschal, an Vnder-Steward. Visme, a willow, or wicker-twig.
Viste-courant, swift, or light of foot, that seems to fly when he runs.
Vistempenard, a duster made of a fox tail fastened unto a staff. Vistempenarde,
dusted, or flapped with a fox-tail; also raggedly attired. Visual, visual, of,
or belonging to the sight; also carried by the sight, or extending as far as
the eye can carry it. Visum visu, for vis a vis, over against. Visure, the side
between the upper leather, and the sole of a corked shoe, the rand of a shoe.
Vitailler, to handle, or play with a man's yard. Vitault, a great tool, or one
that has a good tool; also a flattering word for a young Boy, like our, my
pretty Pillicock. Vite, for la nature d'une femme, a Woman's privy parts.
Vitellin, of, or belonging to the yolk of an egg. Cholere vitelline, a kind of
Choler bred by a rotten or unnatural heat, and resembling, both in color and
consistence, the yolks of eggs. Saulx vitelline, the cane-withy, or
yellow-harked willow. Vitette, a very little member, a bauble. Vitez, the Shrub
Agnus castus, Abraham's balm, chaste (or hemp) tree. Vitier, as vicier. Vitrage,
glass, or glass-work. Vitreau, a glass-window. Vitree, the bird called a
Whittail. Vitreole, small withywind, hedgebells, or bindweed; the black purging
bindweed. Vitrerie, a glazing, or glass-making. Vitreux, glassy, of glass, full
of glass; clear, transparent, or brittle as glass. Humeur vitreuse, the glassy
humor in the hinder part of the eye. Vitrice, a step-father, a father in law.
Vitrification, the making of glass. Vitrifier, to turn, or make into glass.
Vitriole, as vitreole. Vitriolique, like vitriol, or copperas. Vitte, as vite.
Vitulos, as tu auras du miserere jusques a vitulos, thou shall be soundly
whipped. Vituperable, blamable. Vituperation, a dispraising. Vitupere,
dispraise, discommendation, disparagement; blame, or reprehension. Vitupere,
blamed, dispraised. Vituperer, to blame, dispraise, or discommend; to
disparage, or find fault with. Vitupereur, a dispraiser, discommender,
disparager, disgracer; blamer, fault-finder. Vitus, as mal S. Vitus, a pleasant
disease wherein the patient leaps, dances, and laughs all the while his fit is
on him. Vivace, lively, lusty, strong, full of mettle. Vivelle, a huge kind of
Whale in the Indian Seas. Vivelote, as Droict de Vivelote, the dower which is
due to a Widow of a Cottier, or Tenant of Main-ferme. Vivenote, as Vivelote.
Viz, as vis. Ulceraire, crowfoot, also horehound. Uligineux, wet, plashy,
soaked, or grown soft by a long abode in water. Ulmeau, a young elm. Ulne, an
ell, or fadom; also a cubit. Ulophone, a venomous glue, or clammy substance,
made of misseltoe-berries. Ulpie, great, or wild garlic. Ultime, last, final,
the farthest. Ultion, a revenging, or taking vengeance of; a punishing.
Ululement, a howling, or yelling. Umbelle de fenouel, the round tuft, or head,
wherein fennel-seed grows. Umbilic, the navel, or middle of. Umbilical,
belonging to the navel. Umble, the Geneva trout, or salmon. Umble Chevalier,
the biggest sort thereof. Umbrage, Umbrager, as ombrage, ombrager in the N. D.
Umbre, for ombre, shade, or shadow; also a fish called an Omber, or Grayling.
Umbrette, a little Omber, or Grayling fish. Umbrine, a kind of Seafish.
Umbroyer, to be in the shadow; also to cast, or yield a shadow. Unde, and Unde,
as Onde, Onde in the N. D. Undecimestre, of eleven months. Undiculation, a
waving, or water-work, in Imagery, or Carving. Undimie, as Oedeme. Unguent, for
onguent, an ointment. Unguenteux, full of ointment, or salves; oily, greasy,
fatty. Uniement, an evening, or making level with another. Uniement, equally,
evenly, plainly, smoothly. Uniment, (Subst.) an uniting, joining, or knitting
together. Unipare, breeding, or bringing forth but one at once. Unisonnant,
sounding alike, of one and the same sound. Unisonnement, all with one sound,
voice, or accord, in good harmony. Unisson, for unite, unity, singleness,
loneliness, or being alone. Univoque, simple, of one only sense or
signification. Unziesme, for onzieme (Subst.) an eleventh, a rate or proportion
of eleven. Unziesme, (Adj.) the eleventh in number. Voarre, for verre, glass; a
glass. Voarrerie, a Glass-house. Voarrier, a Glass-maker. Voarriere, a
glass-window; also a Glass-house. Vocable, a word, a term. Vocal, vocal,
belonging to, or consisting in the voice; also well tuned, that makes a
distinct sound. Vocale, for voyelle, a vowel. Vocalize, made a vowel.
Vociferation, a loud crying. Vociferer, to cry out, to cry aloud. Vociter, to
call often. Voguement, a sailing forth, or forward; a parting, or passing along
under sail. Voilier, (Adj.) of a sail; or having sails. Voir, for verite,
truth, a true tale or matter. Voire, but, nay. Voirement, surely, certainly,
verily, forsooth, indeed. Voirie, for Justice, Jurisdiction. Voirifier, as
allez voirifier, trust to it if you will (a Parisian Equivocation for allez
vous fire, and used in detestation of a filthy, or dunghil-like thing.) Voirre,
for verre, glass. Voire dormant, as fenestre a voire dormant, a close
glass-window without any casement, a standing window not to be opened. Voirre,
glassy, of glass. Voirrier, a Glasier. Voirriere, glass-work, a glass-window.
Voirrin, glassy, of glass; also transparent. Voirrine, as voirriere.
Voirrinier, a Glasier; a glass-maker, a worker in glass. Voise, as qu'il s'en
voise, let him go. And in the Plural, qu'ils s'en voisent, let them go.
Voisinal, neighboring, or neighbourly. Voisinance, nearness, or neighborhood.
Voisine, as ceux du voisine, the Neighbors. Voisiner, to be neighbor; also to
gossip it, or to go visit neighbors. Voistrer, for se veautrer, to wallow in
the dirt. Volagement, lightly, giddily, fickly, rashly. Volagete, lightness,
giddiness, fickleness, rashness. Volante, a loose Jerkin, or Cassock, a
mandilion. Volatiliser, to fly, flicker, flit, waver. Vole, the palm, or
hollowness of an half-open hand; the joint, or muscle under the thumb.
Volement, a flying. le Voler, a certain trick used in prisons for the drawing
of drinking money from new-come Guests. Voleuse, a woman that flies; also a
woman-robber. Volier, for voliere, a great Cage, wherein Birds have room enough
to flutter. Vollatiliser, as volatiliser. Voller, to get never a trick at
cards. Volonteux, wilful, or wedded to his will. Volter, to vault, or tumble;
to bound, or corvet; also to turn, or make turn. Voltoline, the name of a Vine.
Voluble, voluble, easily rolled, turned, or tumbled; fickle, inconstant,
wavering. Voluble, (Subst.) withi-wind, bindweed, or roap-weed. Voluntaire,
Voluntairement, Volunte. See them with an o, instead of u, in the N. D.
Vomique, a secret and dangerous Impostumation full of mattar. Vomique, (Adj.)
as noix vomique, the vomiting nut, or fruit. Vomitaire, for Vomitif, that
provokes vomiting, apt to make one vomit. Vorace, ravenous. Voracite, voracity,
gluttony, excessive or greedy feeding. Vorage, a gulf, whirlpool, quagmire; a
swallowing, or unsatiable depth. Vortillemens, Vortillons, the round turnings
in a stream. Vote for voeu, a vow. Vou, a daughter in law, a sons wife. Vouade,
as bouade. Vouchement, a vouching in law. Voucher, to vouch; to call unto aid
in a suit. Vouerie, as voirie, Jurisdiction. Voueur, a wooer, or suitor.
Voulant, as bien voulant, friendly, or well-wisher to one. Voulceure, a
vaulting, or arching; also a vault, or an arch. Voulenteux, as volenteux.
Vouloir, for volonte, will, mind, fancy, desire. Voulrie, the authority which a
father and mother have over their Child; also the house, or dwelling of a
father. Voulsure, as voulceure. Voulteur, a maker of vaults, or of arches.
Voultis, the cieling of a room. Voulture, a vaulting, or arching. Vousse,
vaulted, arched. Vousure, as voulture. Voutoye, vaulted, arched, bowed.
Voutrer, for se veautrer, to wallow in the dirt. Vouture, as voulture. Voyable,
visible, perceivable. Voyagement, a traveling. Voyagere, a traveling woman.
Voy-cy, for voici, here, see, look, behold. Voyer, as Voyeur in the N. D.
Voyerie, as Voirie. Voy-la, for voila, there is, that is. Voyrement, as
voirement. Voyrie, as Voirie. Voyture, Voiturier. See them with an i, instead
of y, in the N. D. Upe, for hupe, the bird called a Whoop, or dunghill-cock.
Vrac, as hareng vrac, a herring well seasoned, and seasonably imbarrelled.
Uranopetes, goers to heaven. Uraque, the pipe, or passage whereby a
womb-infants urine is carried from it. Uraques, the name of certain ropes or
tacklings which belong unto sails. Vraybis, Vraybot, Vrayement, for vraiment,
verily, indeed. Urbanie, Urbanite, urbanity, or civility. Urbec, the
Vine-fretter, or Devils gold-ring (a worm.) Ure, the Vre-Ox. Ureder, to run
hastily. Urelepingue, a drink-spiller. Ureniller, to piss, or void urix. Urge,
for urne, an urn. Vrille, a gimblet, or piercer. Vrilles, hook-like edges, or
ends of leaves, sticking out in the upper parts of pillars, and of other pieces
of Architecture. Vrillonner un cable, to coil a cable, to wind it up round, or
lay it in a ring. Urinaire, Urinal, of, or belonging to urine; also
urinal-like. Urineux, full of urine; savouring, or smelling of urine. Urinier,
a Conduit passing to the middle of the navel, and carrying away the urine of an
infant, while it is in the womb. Uris, a rhyme, or white frost upon trees.
Vroesne, the herb wood-bind. Ursin, the Sea-urchin. Ursin, (Adj) of, or
belonging to a Bear; or Bear-like. Usager, (Adj.) common, for every body's use.
As s^mme usagere, a common whore. Usages, common Pastures, Woods, or
underwoods. Usagier, as Usager in the N. D. Usance, for usage, use, or usage.
Usement, as usance; also a wearing out, wasting, or consuming. Usucaption,
three years possession in a Movable (which in Law countervails a prescription)
or more generally, any prescription, or long possession, or the winning of a
thing thereby. Usuelles, pastures, and woody grounds, belonging in common unto
diverse Townships. Usufruictier, for Usufructuaire, one that has the use, and
reaps the profit of a thing, whereof the property rests in another. Utagues,
as Uragues. Utensile, as bien utensile, well furnished with utensils. Utopie,
an imaginary Place, or Country. Utrin, for uterin, of one belly, or born of one
mother. Vuaine, for gain, a sheath. Vuan, for began, a glove. Vuaranion, as
garagnon. Vuard, Vuarder, as gard', garder in the N. D. Vuaresque, as Varesque
in the N. D. Vuarisons, Advestures and Vuarisons, corn, grass, or other fruits
growing or standing, uncut, ungot, ungathered. Vuarloque, squint-eyed, looking
askew. Vuaudree, a maulkin, or the clowt wherewith an Oven is made clean.
Vuayves, waists, casualties, things left, abandoned, escheated, or unowned.
Vuedde, woad, garden (or tame) woad. Uvee, as membrane uvee, the
grappy-membrane of the eye. Vueil for volonte, will. Vuel, as venel. Vuerp, a
delivering, or giving over unto; also a Duty of 12 d. Paris. paid by a
Purchaser unto the Sheriffs, far their presence, when possession is by the
seller delivered unto him. Vuerpi, delivered, yielded, or given over unto.
Vuerpir, to deliver, yield, or give over unto. Veuil, for volonte, will.
Vuidangier, emptying, voiding, evacuating. Vuide-main, a quitting, yielding,
rendering, or giving up of. Vuidete, emptiness, bollowness, vacuit^. Vuideure,
an emptying, or draining. Vuiho, a Cuckold. Vuilles, as villes. Vulgal, as vif
argent vulgal, the basest kind of quicksilver, made of dung and hay.
Vulneraire, vulnerary, healing wounds, belonging unto wounds. Vulpin, of, or
belonging to a fox; or fox-like. Vulterne, the North-east wind. Vulve, the
womb-pipe, or privy passage; the way or entrance into the womb; also the
matrix, mother, or womb it self. Uvule, the uvula, or palate of the mouth.
Vuydange, Vuyde, Vuyde, Vuydement, and Vuyder. See them with an i, instead of
y, in the N. D. Vuydete, as vuidete. Vyt, for vit, a man's yard, or prick.
Vitaut, as vitault. Vyte, as vite. Uz, for coutume, custom.
X.
XIlaloe, lignum aloes. Xilobalseme, the wood of the balsam tree.
Y.
YEble, for hieble, wall-wort, or Dane-wort. If, for If, the Yew-tree. Image,
as image. Ypreau, the elm-tree. Yraigne, for aragnee, a spider. Ysard, the
Shamois, or wild Goat of whose skin Shamoy-leather is made. Ysse, hoised,
lifted up. Ysser, to hoise, or lift up. Yssir, to issue, to come forth. Issue,
for issue, an issue. Yve, as ive; also water. Yver, for hiver, winter.
Yvernade, a wintering. Yvernal, sit for, of, or belonging to the winter.
Yverner, for hiverner, to winter, to spend or pass away the winter; also to
dig, or dress a Vineyard in winter. Yvoirin, of ivory, or like ivory. Yvraison,
drunkenness, or the act of drunkenness. Yvraye, for yvroie, darnel, tares.
Yvrongnet, fuddled, or somewhat drunk.
Z.
ZAffre, a kind of exceeding dry sand, or gravel; or as Safre. Zagaye,
Zaguilles, a fashion of slender, long, and long-headed Pike, used by the
Moorish horsemen. Zain, a horse that is all of a dark color, without any star,
spot, or mark about him, and thereby commonly vicious. Zanit, a Vice to a
Tumbler, etc. or in a Play. Zarzeparille, the medicinable plant called
Zarzaparilla, or Sassaparilla, and rough bind-weed of Peru. Zebedee, a double
damask-rose. Zec, reed to thatch houses with. Zecchin, as Sequin in the N. D.
Zein, as Zain. Zelateur, a zealous, or jealous person. Zelatif, zealous, or
jealous. Zeler, to be zealous, or jealous of; to emulate, or envy; to affect
extremely, or desire eagerly. Zelote, Zelotype, jealous, or zealous. Zelotypie,
jealousy. Zigome, the outward part, or end of the cheek-bone, toward the ear.
Zimicch, a kind of Eagle which preys upon the Crane, and other less fowl. Zin,
or Zint, the twang, or twanging sound of the string of a hardbent bow.
Zinzembre, for gingembre, ginger. Zinziberine, powder of ginger. Zivette, for
Civete, a Civet-cat. Zizanie, ray, darnel. Zizolin, gingioline color. Zoette,
an Owl. Zon, the whisk, or sound of a switch, rod, or wand; also a jert, lash,
box, or blow. Zoophore, a painted (or carved) girdle, or border, about a Porch
or Pillar. Zoophytes, such things as be partly plants, and partly living
creatures, as spunges, etc. especially a plant that feeds upon all others
near it. Zoucet, a didopper. Zubeline, for Zibeline, a Sable. Zummach, the
Eagle that has on her head, or back, a kind of whiteness, which is a certain
sign of her perfect goodness.
FINIS.
Lately Published
A New French Grammar: or, a new Method for Learning of the French Tongue. To
which are added, for a help to young Beginners, a large Vocabulary, and a Store
of familiar Dialogues. Besides four curious Discourses of Cosmography, in
French, for proficient Learners to turn into English. By Guy Miege, Author of
the New French Dictionary, Professor of the French Tongue, and of Geography.
Sold by Thomas Basset, at the George near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.


