THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE Church of ENGLAND AND THE
Church of ROME; OR, An Account of the Books written on both sides. In a LETTER
to a Friend.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Needham,
May 7. 1686.


LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, James Adamson, and Tho. Newborough, 1687.

THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE Church of ENGLAND AND THE
Church of ROME, etc. In a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
IN pursuance of my promise made to you, to send you such an account as you
desire, of what has been lately published here, with reference to the Points in
Controversy between us and the Church of Rome; I now give you the trouble of
this Address.

It was you know the design of the Clergy of this City some years since, to
reduce the matters in debate with the Dissenting Party, to a certain number of
Cases, and in the plainest and most inoffensive manner that they could, to show
them how little cause they had to separate from our Communion upon any of those
pretenses, which were said to be the cause of Separation. I need not tell you
what their Performances were, for you have read their Tracts, and are therefore
able to judge, from your own knowledge, concerning them. As to the Success which
they have had, we that live here, have not only observed that our Churches have
been more charged since, but do also know, that several for whose sake those
Discourses were principally intended, have declared themselves abundantly
satisfied, both with the strength and temper that appeared in them.

When this first undertaking was finished, their next resolution was to run
through the principal Points of difference between the Papists and us after the
same manner, that those who had not the liesure or opportunity to consult
longer Books, might here in short be led to a true knowledge of the
Controversy, and stand the firmer in the truth, by being better acquainted
with the grounds of it. It was also hoped, that many who had hitherto been
detained in their Errors for want not so much of a Will to embrace the Truth,
as of Light to discern it by, might possibly take this opportunity of seeing
with their own eyes, and discover that way of Error in which their ignorance or
their prejudices had so long detained them.

But before they had finished this their second undertaking, the sudden and
unexpected Death of our late Royal Sovereign broke their measures, and from
thenceforth they thought fit to be of the Defensive side, and for some time
published no more Discourses of this kind, but waited to see whether the
Gentlemen of the Roman Communion would make any Attaques upon us, or be
contented that the Controversy shoud rest as it was.

But because you desire an Account of all that has been done of this nature, I
will let you know how far they advanced in their design, and give you a
Catalogue of their Tracts, tho not just in the order as they came out, yet in
that order which seems to have been designed, and is most natural for you to
peruse them. And in the first place, as a preparatory to all the rest, there is
a little Tract entitled,

I. A Persuasive to an ingenuous Trial of Opinions in Religion, etc. and which
they who know the unreasonable prejudices of those of the Roman Communion, as
to any free enquiry, cannot doubt to have been exceeding necessary. To which I
must add,

II. The difference of the Case between the separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.
For both these Tracts, as you may easily discern, were designed to remove such
Mistakes and Prejudices as are common to Papists and to Dissenters, and were
therefore thought to be a proper transition from the first undertaking to the
second.

Then follow those Treatises that relate to the Questions about the Church, and
for which our Adversaries of late seem the most concerned.

III. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church maintained in the Church
of England.

IV. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists, asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

V. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to three Questions, 1.
How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true sense of
Scripture? 2. Whether a Visible Succession from Christ to this day, makes a
Church which has this Visible Succession, an infallible Interpreter of
Scripture? 3. Whether the Church of England can make out such a Visible
Succession?


VI, VII. Two Discourses concerning the necessity of Reformation, with respect
to the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

Another sort of general Questions necessary to have been premised to the
particular Disputes, do refer to the principle on which we are to proceed in
the management of them.

And to this purpose there were published the two following Tracts,

VIII. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected.

IX. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith, with respect
especially to the Romish pretense of such a one as is infallible.

Thus far they proceeded upon general Points, and no farther, tho more were
designed to be debated, as one may see by the dividing and managing of the
Arguments which they finished, and as I my self have been told by some that
were best able to inform me.

But as these general Discourses were coming abroad into the World; the
particular Disputes were prepared, and those that follow were published.

X. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship; or, a Scripture
Proof of the unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any other Being
besides the Supreme God.

XI. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome, especially as
compared with those of the Church of England, in which it is shown, that
whatsoever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor
such rational provision for it, nor encouragement to it, as in the Church
established by Law amongst us.

XII. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of Saints.

XIII. Of Prayer in an unknown Tongue.

XIV. Of Auricular Confession, as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent.

XV. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

XVI. Of the Adoration of the Host.

These are the Tracts that were published in pursuance of that Design I
mentioned before, since which time, our Divines have kept themselves, as I told
you, upon the Defensive Part, their whole Work having been little else than to
answer such printed Books, or Papers scattered about in writing, as the
Romanists have from time to time sent abroad.

I need not tell you that at length we were surprised with a Book published by
some Romanist, which has made no little noise all over the Kingdom, and has
been the occasion of many more: But that which surprised us was this, that
there was not the least notice taken in it, of those Discourses now mentioned,
and not long before published in behalf of the Church of England against the
Church of Rome.

The discreet Persons of that Communion acknowledged they were above Contempt;
and it was the general persuasion of our Communion, that they would not admit
of any just and reasonable Answer; and for this very reason, some appearance of
an Answer was generally expected to save, if it might be, the reputation of the
Roman Cause, or at least of the Ability of our Adversaries to maintain it,
unless they should think fit to let the Controversy lie still, which if they
had done, I believe our Divines had thought themselves obliged by the example,
not to publish new Books upon it, but to content themselves with that diligence
in their Parochial Stations, that might be sufficient to countermine any secret
endeavors to draw People from the Communion of this Church: But it seems our
Adversaries thought fit to begin a Dispute, and that without taking the least
notice of what had been so lately done on our side: Which tho we wondered at, at
first, yet we have given over wondering at it now that we are something used to
their way of Controversy. For some of them (as the Representer knows) can
without blushing for the matter, drop the Defense of Arguments, and the
maintaining of Disputes begun by themselves; and yet they write on still, as if
the Cause went for them, and they had not made one false step in the management
of it.

But I must now give you a particular account how these Gentlemen began, and in
what manner they carried on that Assault, of which it is possible they may have
had some cause to repent them since.

The first that led the way, was one that calls himself R. L. with a Book full
of Cunning and Dissimulation, entitled*

A Papist Misrepresented and Represented. In which he runs through most of the
Points in Controversy between us in a twofold Character; in one of which he
pretends to show that which Papists are commonly misunderstood to be; in the
other, that which, as he says, they really are.

The real design of this Method, you must know is this. Popery in its proper
colors is so unlike Catholic Christianity, that it is in vain ever to hope to
promote it, if it appear in its own shape. It is necessary therefore, that the
Religion, like the Prophet, should come to us in Sheeps clothing, and the
Heresy to be made look as Orthodox as is possible. Some things are denied,
others mollified, all disguised, and a double benefit thereby obtaind: Popery
is to be received as a very innocent, harmless thing; and the Protestants,
especially the Ministers and first Reformers represented to the World, as a
sort of People that have supported themselves by Calumnies and Lies, and made a
noise about Errors and Corruptions, which are no where to be found, but in
their own Brains or Books, but which the Church of Rome detests no less than We.

But this Trick was quickly discovered, and the design laid open by an
excellent hand, in a Treatise which he called

I. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly represented; in
answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc.

In which the Author passes through every Point of his Characters, and truly
states the Question between us, and gives a short, yet sufficient account of
our Reasons against their Tenets.

I shall not need enlarge my self to give you any account of this Controversy
which has been lately summed up, to satisfy the World, that this Author has
taken as little care to defend his Characters, as he showed Sincerity in the
first drawing of them. The Books themselves that have passed on both sides are
these.

Reflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc. II. A Papist
not Misrepresented by Protestants, being a Reply to the Reflections, etc.
Papists protesting against Protestant Popery; in Answer to a Discourse
entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants.

III. An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery, containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux late Bishop of
Condom's Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles of
the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images. An Amicable Accommodation of
the difference between the Representer and the Answerer, in return to his last
reply.

IV. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Difference between the
Representer and the Answerer. A Reply to the Answer to the amicable
Accommodation.

To which has lately been returned,

V. A View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer,
with an Answer to the Representers last Reply. This is in short the Sum of what
has hitherto passed in this Dispute, the Misrepresenter not having yet taken
any notice of this new Antagonist, who it is thought by some, has summed up this
Controversy so effectually, as to put an end to it. As for his second Part
which he acted afterward under the Character of the Catholic Representer, I
shall have occasion to give you some farther account of it when I come to those
Pieces of our own Divines that have either been the occasion of, or the Answers
to his Sheets and half Sheets.

The next that appeared upon the Stage, was the famous Bishop of Condom, the
great Abettor, if not Founder of this new Sect of Expositors of their Religion,
and the occasion of his appearance this. Our Misrepresenter being answered the
first time, as has been said by the Learned Author of the Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome truly represented. The new Method of Expounding
and Representing, i. e. Dissembling the good Old Doctrine of the Church began
to sink; and the People who were principally designed to be seduced by it,
generally discovered the Snare that had been laid for them. It was now too late
to recede into the old Popery again. The Misrepresenter had not only forsaken,
but in good measure Anathematized that, and professed that they abhorred it no
less than we; and therefore to own it now, was in effect to confess that we had
reason to reform those Errors which themselves were once ashamed to abet: So
that what remained, was to put a good face upon the matter, and see if the
Original Pattern, the pompous Exposition of this Bishop, with the long Relation
of an Advertisement, and the glorious Trains of Briefs and Approbations before
and behind, might not possibly support the undertaking, and keep up the credit
of their new Popery, which must otherwise necessarily fall.

Such was the occasion, or rather the necessity of publishing this Bishpps
Book, which you have seen under the Title of,

The Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in matters of
Controversy.

To which there have been two Answers made, of one of which there has been no
notice taken by the other Party: It Is called

I. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, etc. with Refletions on his
Pastoral Letter. The only Excuse I can think of for the other Parties not
replying to this Answer, was because another came out before it, which is yet
but a lame pretense, since the Book is not only a direct and full Answer to all
that was offered by the Bishop of Condom, either in the way of Exposition or
Argument, but has also a considerable variety of useful Reflections, which
perhaps made it more advisable to let it alone, than to go about to consult it.
The other is,

II. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the Bishop of Condom, in his Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Catholic Faith This Answer was so exquisite in all its parts, that it
could not fail of gaining a general esteem; but the suddenness in which it was
dispatched, raised the admiration of all. And that which made it yet more taken
notice of, was the preface prefixed to it, in which the worthy Author (who had
the advantage of informing himself of these matters, by living some time in
France) gives a large account of this Bishops Exposition, and of a suppressed
Edition, which it seems had carried the Trick a little too far, and therefore
was not permitted to see the Light, together with some other matters of Fact
that very much laid open the Design.

But to those particulars wherewith you are already well acquainted, I beg
leave to add another piece of History which I have learned concerning this
matter.

You must understand then the project of Converting the French-Protestants,
which has been more or less carried on ever since Henry the Fourth's time, was
more especially agitated at the conclusion of the Pyrenean Treaty almost 30
years since: The Spaniards being apprehensive of the French Power, and willing
to divert it by an undertaking, which they thought might find them work at
home, and not leave them at leisure to disturb their Neighbors. It was
resolved there, at the same time that the Civil Power began to oppress them,
the Church should offer some Terms of a Reunion to them, and all possible
endeavors be used to incline them to accept it: To this end Money was secretly
given to several of the Ministers, to favor this Project; but the Design being
discovered by a Minister of Bas-Languedoc, the Synod of Nismes, Ann. 1662. and
that of Cevennes being assembled not long after, appeard so vigorously against
it, that they were forced to lay aside the Design for some time. About Ten
years after it broke out again; but the Ministers of Languedoc and the Synod of
the Isle of France opposing it, as those of Nismes and Cevennes had done
before, it came to nothing.

Now this second attempt was dated precisely at the same time that the Bishop
of Condom's Exposition began to see the Light: And that which convinces me that
it was purposely contrived for the advancing this Design is this, that the
Marshal de Turene, who was this Bishops Convert, and the principal Defender of
this Exposition, was also at the same time the great Undertaker for this
Project. It Is well known how to this end he sent a Person through the several
Provinces of France, with private Instructions to those Ministers, which he
thought he could most influence to close with it: And in effect he did obtain
several of their Subscriptions, whom when the Protestant Synods would
afterward have censured for their so doing, the Kings Commissioners took their
parts, and would not suffer them to do it.

And here I ought not to forget one particular which may be worth your
knowledge, and that is this. Among others to whom the Marshal sent, one was the
famous Monsieur le Blanc, he was at that time Prisoner at Sedan, and the
moderation that he showed in stating the Controversies of Grace, Free Will,
Predestination, etc. gave them great hopes that he might easily be drawn in to
the favoring their Project of an Accommodation with the Church of Rome, by
meeting one another half way. The Agent brought him a Letter from Monsieur de
Turene to this purpose, but was mightily surprised, when instead of what he
expected, he found him stiff and inflexible, and absolutely resolved not to
relax any thing. Indeed the very attempt that was made upon him, so disturbed
him, that he could not be satisfied with his private resentmeut of it, but in
the year 1673. published a Disputation to them, that the reunion which they
had attempted with the Lutherans made nothing to one with the Papists, which he
there shows to be impossible.

This with what you have read in the Preface to the Tract, which has occasiond
this Digression, may seem to satisfy you, what the Quality of the Bishop of
Condom's Exposition is, and what intreague it was designed to serve. You have
the Politiques of the Clergy of France, in which Book you may see the very
Propositions that were made for this Accommodation, and which are a pure
Original of New Popery, and so conformable to the French Expositor, and our
English Misrepresenter, that you cannot doubt but that they all designed to
carry on the same Design.

For the little value that is to be set upon the Approbations prefixed to it:
The Author of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, has I
think said enough to satifie you: To which you may add, that in the late
Divisions between the Jansenists and their Opposers in France, the Books on
both sides have been very solemnly approved, and the Jansenists above any. And
in the present Case, either the Approbations of the Bishop of Condom's
Exposition signify nothing, or those heretofore prefixed to Cardinal
Bellarmines Works, and their other learned Controvertists are become
super-annuated; for all these cannot possibly stand together.

But I run too far from my business, and must return to our Expositor, who was
not long without an Answer, entitled

IV. A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, with a Letter from the
said Bishop. I will not tire you with giving my own sense of the Performances
of any whose Titles I send you, and whose Books I leave you to judge of when you
read them. I will only observe to you, that we are very much beholding to the
Bishop, with confessing the particulars which his Adversary had charged him
with, and which there are many that before did hardly believe. And for his
Excuses which he makes, the truth is, they are so little to the purpose, that
he has gained but little credit even among his Friends by them. And if this be
as they say, the first notice he ever took of any Adversary that appeared
against him, he would do very well to have a care of setting out Vindications
of his Works, at which he appears to be so horribly unlucky.

But for all this you may recur to the Reply that has been made by the same
Author who wrote the Exposition of our Doctrine in his second undertaking, alled

V. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the Exceptions of the Bishop of Condom and his Vindicator. In which
besides an Answer to the Bishops Letter, and a particular review of all the
several Articles in debate, you will find in the Appendix some Pieces that will
gratify your Curiosity, relating to the Point of the Invocation of Saints. And
in the close of all, the Epistle of S. Chrysostom to Caesarius, which had been
indeed very basely suppressed by by them, but is now happily recovered, to the
everlasting reproach of those who have so often and confidently urged the
Authority of that Father for to support their new Heresy of
Transubstantiation, and which he here in as plain words speaks against, as if
Peter Martyr had not only first produced, but as some of them have said, had
written the Epistle for him.

And thus far this Controversy has proceeded, which at present stops here,
though the Reverend Father who writ the Vindication, had prepared us to expect
that it should not long do so, But we now begin to think, that both the
Vindicator and the Representer, are sensible that their design will not bear
being driven on any further.

But tho we have done with the business of the Exposition, yet we must not so
soon part with the Bishop. For since the Publication of that, these new
Poperymen, have favored the World with two other of his Pieces, the 1. A
Pastoral Letter to the New-Converts of his Diocese. The 2. A Treatise of
Communion under one kind.
The latter of these which had drawn in French an admirable Answer heretofore,
from that exact Historian, Monsieur Larroque; which it is said, the Bishop
himself thought too strong to be answered with any advantage; has also not long
since produced us a Treatise very worthy your perusing in our own Language,
entitled

A Discourse of the Communion in one Kind, in Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux, of Communion, etc. And in the two Discourses, I mean the
Bishops and the Answer, you may expect to find whatever Artifice and
Insincerity can do on one side, or Truth and Learning reply on the other.

For what concerns his Pastoral Letter, I have seen several Answers to it in
French, and one particularly very accurately done, called Reponse a Monsr.
L'Eveque de Meaux sur sa lettre Pastorale; which if you think fit, I will send
you: I do not know that any one has particularly undertaken it here, any
farther than what was done by the Author of the second Answer to his
Exposition, who made some Reflections upon the Pastoral Letter too.

In this Letter, there is one notable passage; and the account of which,
because you may not perhaps meet with elsewhere, I will run the hazard of
another Digression to offer it you here. In the 3d page, there is set in
Capital Letters, this notable Declaration, Not one of you has suffered
Violence, either in his Person or Goods. And page 4. So far, says he, have you
been from suffering Torments, that you have not so much as heard them
mentioned; I hear other Bishops affirm the same: You are returned peaceably to
us, you know it.

I doubt not but this Passage a little surprised you, as it did all the World
that ever read it; being so contrary to all the Accounts that have come from
thence. Indeed His M^j^sties Brief alone may serve for a Confutation to so
shameful an Assertion, and show us how little we can rely upon those Gentlemen,
when they talk to us of things that were done 12. or 14. years ago, that make
no scruple of dealing thus with us in a matter of Fact, in the sight of the
World, before whose Eyes these things are acted: Nay, to tell the very
Protestants themselves, that they had suffered no Violence, that they knew it,
when the contrary was as evident to them, as that their Host is not the Body of
a Man; and no doubt the Bishop might as easily be able to prove the one, as
with all his fine Words persuade the other.

But I will open to you the Mytery of this. You must know then, That, as far as
I can learn, the Dragoons were not lodged in the Bishopric of Meaux; but yet
they came up to the very Gates of the City. Being thus in sight of their
Danger, and expecting every minute when it would fall upon them, the Bishop
thought that certainly now, if ever, they would be disposed to compliance.

With this advantage he invites them to a Conference, appears more moderate
than even his own Exposition; and desires very little more of them than what
any one might venture to subscribe. Such advances backed with so good an
Authority as the Dragoons at the Gates, could not but prevail upon them; they
subscribed as he desired, and so the Dragoons were dismissed without doing them
any farther mischief.

In this state, they continued for about three months, when the Bishop began to
Visit his Diocese, and especially, those parts in which there were the most
Protestants. His carriage upon this review was very different from what it had
been before. He was now no longer the free, relaxing, good natured Bishop of
Meaux, that held the Conference with them, but rigid as any little Emissary. He
threatened those, who refused to go to Mass, and assist at the other Offices of
the Church; and tho several told him that this was not what he had promised
them, yet he took but little notice of it. Mons. de Soguier, Lord of Charmoi,
and Cousin to the late Chancellor Soguier, and several others more obstinate
than the rest, both had the Dragoons quartered upon them in his Diocese, and
are at this day Prisoners upon this Account. This I have read in some late
French Pieces, which have taken notice of it; but the main of what I send you,
is an extract of a Letter, which was written to a Friend of mine out of France;
and who being himself not long since there, confirmed to me several of those
Particulars, as to this Bishops Diocese.

I presume you have heard how this Bishop, who in his Pastoral Letter dated
March 24. denies, as you see, that there has been any thing of violence used to
the Protestants in France, did in another Letter to a Person of Quality that
had escaped thence, and whom he desired to draw back if possible to his
Country, and his Church, both own and justify the Persecution. This Letter was
dated but Apr. 4. after the other. This Honorable person had such indignation
against him for his double dealing, that he has permitted the Bishops Letter to
him, to be printed; and which agrees as well with his Pastoral Letter, as his
Exposition does with Cardinal Bellarmine's Controversies; the Old Popery from
whence we reformed, with the New by which they would now seduce us.

A third subject there has been for a more important Controversy than either
of the foregoing, occasioned by the Papers left by His Majesty concerning the
Authority of the Catholic Church; and the Method of which lies thus:

The two Papers written by the late King Charles the Second.

1. The Answer entitled, An Answer to some Papers lately printed concerning
the Authority of the Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation
of the Church of England.

To these there came out almost at the same time two Replies.

A Defense of the Papers written by the late King of Blessed Memory. In which
there is little remarkable besides the unhandsome levity of the style, and the
ungrateful drolls in a matter of so much seriousness.

A Reply to the Answer made upon the Three Royal Papers. This is much more to
be commended both for its strength and decency; and they would perhaps much
more have served the interest of their Cause, and shown their respect to His
late Majesty, had they suffered no other to appear.

But to both of them the same worthy Author who wrote the former Reply, has
very lately published a most Learned and Excellent Answer, and which I would
very much recommend to your careful consideration, Entitled,

2 A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. A Discourse so Learnedly and clearly written, that we ought to thank
our Adversaries for their importunity that has produced us so excellent a
Treatise in a Point of such importance.

I think I have now set down all the Disputes that have proceeded to any length
this last year: For the rest, they are either such as you may call Occasional
Treatises only, or such as are not advanced into any set and regular debates.

I. Of the former kind I understand these following:

First, concerning St. Peter's Supremacy, a Discourse Entitled,

A Sermon preached upon Saint Peter's Day, printed at the desire of some that
heard it, with some Enlargements. The Occasion of which was this: Dr. Godden
had the last year published a Sermon on this Subject which he preached in the Q.
Dowagers Chapel; whereupon the Reverend Author of this Discourse having
likewise preached on the same day, and upon the same Text, was prevailed with to
print his too.

Another Subject that has Occasionally produced us two or three very good
Treatises, is, The Worship of Saints: Our late Misrepresenter and the Bishop of
Meaux's Exposition having been pleased very much to palliate the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome as to this matter; and pretending that what they
now do is no more than what was done even in the Fourth Age of the Church; it
was necessary some particular discovery should be made of this Artifice, and it
has accordingly been done very effectually in the following Tracts.

2 Speculum B. Virginis; A Discourse of the due Praise and Honor of the Virg.
Mary. In which is clearly set forth what we allow, and what the bold
extravagancy of the Church of Rome has carried them to do in the Worship of the
Blessed Virgin.

3 A Discourse of the Worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, with an
account of the beginning and rise of it among Christians, in Answer to Monsieur
de Meaux's Appeal to the Fourth Age in his Exposition and Pastoral Letter. 4
Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin to Her indiscreet Worshippers. This
last is but a Translation: It was written originally by a Papist, one Mr.
Widenfelt, a Person of good Esteem and Reputation in his Country; who being
Scandalized at the extravagant Practices of his Church in this matter, wrote
this little Treatise to awaken their Consideration, and if possible, reduce the
People from their usual extravagance, to the Temper and Moderation of the
present Advocates for their Cause, as to this matter. But alas! He found them
too fond of their Old Popery, to leave it so easily: Instead of doing any good
upon them, his Book was censured in a very extraordinary manner, and the Honor
of the Blessed Virgin vindicated against these new Heretics, by her faithful
Champion Father Crasset the Jesuit: A short Specimen of whose Book you may see
at the end of the Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England; or if you had rather have it from their own Pens, as indeed none can
better expose their Extravagancies of this kind, than they have done
themselves, you may then consult a late Popish Book called,

Contemplations on the life and glory of Holy Mary the Mother of Jesus; With a
daily Office agreeing to each Mystery thereof. By J. C. D. D. To which he has
since added, An Apology for his Contemplations, etc. But of all this, you will
find a particular account in an excellent Preface prefixed to these Advices by
the Translator of it; who professes himself to be a Layman of our Church, and
has the character of a very worthy, as he has sufficiently shown himself to be
a very ingenious Gentleman.

It may be proper here to remark, that this Preface has been attacked by the
Catholic Representer; or the Misrepresenter transformed: in his 4th Chapter of
his Second part; and to which he has returned a smart Reply, called,

5. A Letter to the Misrepresenter of Papists. Another occasional Treatise came
forth not long since, entitled,

6. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in matters of Religion; With
an Address to wavering Protestants, showing what little Reason they have to
think of any change of their Religion. It was written in Answer to some Papers
that had been sent to the Learned Author, by a Person of Quality, asserting the
necessity of such a Judge. If I should tell you from whose Pen this Treatise
came, you would need no other inducement carefully to read it. And to encourage
you to it, I will only say thus much, that it has been generally received with
great Applause here, and does certainly as well deserve it, as any thing that
has hitherto been published among us.

Here has been published likewise a short Tract concerning the nature of the
Catholic Church, and the Authority of it.

It is not levelled against any particular Author; but designed to answer the
little captious Arguments now much in vogue; and therefore, necessary to have
been thus prevented: The chief points handled in it, are these three. 1. What
is the Nature of the Catholic Church. 2. That the Church of Rome is not the
Catholic Church. 3. That the Holy Scriptures, and not the Church, are the Rule
of Faith. The Title of this Treatise, is this,

7. A plain and Familiar Discourse by way of Dialogue, betwixt a Minister and
his Parishioner concerning the Catholic Church. To these I may add a Treatise,
concerning the defection of the Church of Rome from what it once was. It is an
Answer to a Popish Paper, which the Author has Printed at the beginning of his
Book, given about it seems by those of that party, and sent by way of Letter to
a Gentleman: It is called,

8. An Answer to a late Paper given about by some of the Church of Rome.
Another Subject that has occasionally been handled, is, concerning Schism and
Heresy: It is an Answer to some things in a Popish Pamphlet, called, Why, are
you a Catholic? The Author treats of the Nature of these two, and enquires to
which Church it is that they really do belong: In short, Whether the Papists or
we, are Schismatics and Heretics? The Title is this,

9. A Vindication of the Church of England from the foul Aspersions of Schism
and Heresy, unjustly cast upon Her by the Church of Rome. In two Parts. The
last Subject that has occasionally, but yet more copiously been handled, and
which upon that Account, I reserved to this place, is concerning the Worship of
Images, etc. It began by this means. A Reverend Divine of our Church, took
occasion from the late Pretenses of our Misrepresenting the Opinions of the
Papists, to set forth an excellent Catechism, called

10. A Catechism truly representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome, with an Answer unto them. It is not to be wondered that such a Book as
this should be thought proper to be set forth; When the whole business of those
of the other Communion, was to palliate by any means the true Doctrines and
Practices of their Church; it certainly became us to represent them to the
World, as indeed they are. This has here been done from their own Authors, and
with great Sincerity. But notwithstanding this, the Misrepresenter that then
was, in one of his Answers to the first great Controversy I have mentioned,
took him to task for it: In the close of a new Edition of this Catechism, an
answer was made to his Exceptions. Not long after this, the Misrepresenter
began a new undertaking, to oblige the World with a Sheet a week, first; called
the Second Part of the Papist Represented and Misrepresented; and after, of
half a Sheet, which he has continued to the number of sixteen Chapters, under
the new Character of the Catholic Representer. In his 1st, 2d, 5th and 6th
Sheets or Chapters, he falls upon the Author of this Catechism, with reference
to the Point of the Worship of Images, and of the Cross; which has produced us
three short, but yet excellent Answers, called 11. 1. The Papists Represented
and not Misrepresented, in Answer to the first Sheet of the Second part. 2. The
like to the Second. And 3. To the Fifth and Sixth.


The business of all which is the same, viz. to show what the true Doctrine of
the Church of Rome is in the Points hefore mentioned, Of the Worship of Images,
and of the Cross.

For the other sort of Tracts that have been written,

II. More immediately in Answer to some of their set Discourses. They have also
been on different Subjects: Such as these.

(1.) Concerning Transubstantiation. Upon which their late Attempts, either to
set up that, or to ruin the other Mysteries of the Gospel, but especially, that
of the Trinity, have occasioned several short, but accurate Discourses: I shall
send you the Titles of them.

1. The Answer to the Popish Dialogue between a new Catholic Convert and a
Protestant, to prove the Mystery of the Trinity to be as absurd a Doctrine as
Transubstantiation: By way of short Notes upon the said Dialogue.

2. The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, as to
Scripture, Reason, and Tradition: In Answer to the same, and in two Parts.

To which I will add for the Affinity of the Subject, two other Treatises, viz.

3. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the 6th Chapter of St. John,
showing that there is neither good Reason, nor sufficient Authority to suppose
that the Eucharist is discoursed of in that Chapter, much less to infer the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation from it.

4. An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation, written by an Author of the
Communion of the Church of Rome: Wherein is made appear, that according to the
Principles of that Church, this Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith.

To these Discourses upon this subject, we cannot more fitly add any thing,
than what has lately been done on another relating to the Holy Eucharist, viz.

(2.) Concerning the Real Presence, and Adoration of the Host. You ought to
know very well what gave occasion to this Controversy; viz. the two Discourses
set out by Mr. W -- at Oxford on this Subject. As for the Answer to them, it
was sent you into the Country, and bears this Title:

5. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and of the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to the two Discourses set
forth at Oxford on the same Subject. It was I believe expected that this
Controversy would have either exposed our Church, had we owned the extravagant
notion of the Real Presence Mr. W -- would put upon us, and which is indeed
Cousin German to Transubstantiation; or have raised, it may be, a Civil War
amongst us, if we did not. But I believe both their expectations will fail
them; for certainly whatever some particular persons may have believed
themselves, yet the Doctrine of the Church of England is plainly as the
Answerer has represented it; and as we expect it will be farther proved in the
other Reply which we are told is preparing at Oxford by an Eminent Person there
to the same Book.

There is prefixed to this extant, a very large Preface, which has properly
enough retorted Mr. W's -- Argument; and shown the World that if other Divines
(as he pretends) have believed a Substantial Presence of Christ's Natural Body
in the Holy Eucharist, it is more than many of the most Eminent of theirs have
done, who are here plainly discovered not to have believed Transubstantiation.

A third Subject that has given occasion to another Answer, is what they have
called a Protestants plea for a Socinian. The design was to prove, that in
interpreting Scripture by Reason, and not submitting to the Infallible
Interpretation of what they call the Church, we make an Apology for the
Socinians, and all other Heretics whatsoever. The falseness of this Pretense
has been at large shown in the Answer which an Eminent person of our Church has
lately put out to it, called,

6. The Difference between the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in Answer to a
Book, Entitled, A Protestants Plea for a Socinian. In which besides a full
account of this matter, you will find many other Curiosities relating to the
Method and Principles of the Socinians, which you have never it may be elsewhere
met with.

To these I may add the Answers that have been set forth by way of Notes on
some Papers called, Lucilla and Elizabeth, or the Donatist and Protestant
Schisms paralleled. And, A Request to Protestants to produce plain Scripture
directly authorizing certain Tenets, which he there subjoins. The Answers are
called,

7. A Protestant of the Church of England no Donatist. 8. An Answer to the
Request to Protestants, etc. Which last Answer has had a Reply called,
Protestancy destitute of Scripture Proof, against which there is, I am told, a
Defense of the Answer now in the Press.

There are some other little things which I ought not to forget, because they
have done a great deal of good.

As, The plain man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. And An Answer to the
Eighth Chapter of the Representers second Part in the first Dialogue between
him and his Lay-friend. Published by the Layman of whom I have spoken above.
As for the Conference at the D. of P. which you have heard of, one Mr* G. who
maintained the Roman side, tried to resolve the Infallibility of the Church
into Oral Tradition, and afterward boasted so unmeasurably of the Advantages
he had made of the Controversy, that he drew upon himself a just rebuke in a
Printed Paper called,

A Letter to Mr. G. concerning the Conference at the D. of P. Which having
produced two Letters from the other side, there presently came forth,

A second Letter to Mr. G. in Answer to Two Letters lately published concerning
the Conference at the D. of P. There is also lately published a Discourse by an
Ingenious and worthy Gentleman, concerning the Authority of Councils, etc. to
which is added a short but an effectual Answer to the Eighth Theses, by which
Mr. W. -- in his Part V. of Church Government pretends to try the English
Reformation. The Title is,

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality.
With an Answer to the Eight Theses laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation, in the Book that came last Week from Oxford. After which there
came forth a Discourse which is here exceedingly well received, and the Design
whereof is sufficiently explained by the Title, Viz.

An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England, in Answer to those who
reproach her with the English Heresies and Schisms, or suspect her not to be a
Catholic Church upon their account. I ought not to conceal the Answer to that
Libel upon the Reformation which you have seen, called Pax Vobis; though it is
not a just Answer to the Book, but a Preface rather to more that is to follow.
The Title is

Some Dialogues between Mr. G. and others, with Reflections upon a Book called
Pax Vobis. When the Answerer has finished his design, you may have what
remains, as I am told under the same Title.

I shall conclude your Trouble at present with telling you of a Set of
Discourses concerning the Notes of the Church, as they are laid down by
Bellarmine. Thus far the Design has proceeded already.

1. A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church, with some Reflections
on Cardinal Bellarmine's Notes. 2. Bellarmine's first Note of the Church,
concerning the Name of Catholic examined. 3. The 2d Note of the Church
examined, viz. Antiquity. 4. The 3d Note of the Church examined, viz. Duration.
I perceive we may expect the rest in Order. I am Sir,

Yours, etc.

THE END.
Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, [An Answer to the Representer's Reflections
upon the View of the Controversy, with a Reply to the Vindicator's Full
Answer.]

Jan. 21. 1687. H. Maurice, Rmo. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris.


