A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, AND Citizens of London. At
BOW-CHVRCH on the 29th of May 1682.

By BENJAMIN CALAMY, D. D. One of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir JOHN MOORE, Lord Mayor OF LONDON, And to the COURT
OF ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
THere is nothing in the following Sermon, that could recommend it to your
Lordships favorable Acceptance, besides its plainness and the honesty of its
design: nor could any other Consideration have prevailed with me to expose it
to the View and Censure of this peevish Age, but only fear of seeming to
contradict the Doctrine I taught, Of strict Obedience to the Command of
Superiors.

Right Honorable, Your most humble and Obedient Servant, BENJAMIN CALAMY.

A SERMON Preached May 29. 1682.
ON St JOHN 5.14. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto
him, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.
WHat this Person, to whom our Savior gave this good Counsel in my Text, was
doing in the Temple, is not very hard to determine. It was surely the most
proper place for him to be found in, having been lately blessed with such a
miraculous deliverance from an infirmity he had thirty eight Years labored
under, and after so long waiting, and many unsuccessful attempts of getting
into the Pool, even now despaired of ever being freed from it; till at the
powerful command of the Son of God, the impotent man received new strength and
vigor, took up his Bed, and hastened to the House of God, there to offer up, as
may well be guessed, his Sacrifice of praise for such a surprising mercy.

How much more becoming and Pious then is this our Solemn Anniversary
Appearance on this Day, in this place, to pay the Tribute of our devoutest
Acknowledgments, and most hearty Thanksgivings for a deliverance, as great and
stupendous, as ever Gods mighty Hand and outstretched Arm has wrought for any
People, or Nation under the Heavens: Which, if we either consider the Extremity
we were reduced unto, or the greatness of the Miseries we were redeemed from,
or the Means by which so prodigious a Work was achieved, or those manifold and
excellent Benefits that have since accrued to us from it, has the Characters
of the divine goodness and power so visibly impressed upon it, is so
illustrious an instance, such an astonishing effect of Gods wise and gracious
Providence over, and care of this Church and Kingdom, as no Age can parallel,
no History can show the like.

Our Nation had long lain languishing under miserable Oppression and Tyranny,
its blood and spirits exhausted in an unnatural Civil War, ending in the
Execrable Murder of the late King and Martyr of ever Blessed Memory; in the
banishment of his present Majesty and all the Royal Family; in the Subversion
of our ancient Monarchy, and inslaving this Land to the wills and lusts of the
basest and meanest of the People: Our Church so famous for its Primitive
Purity, excellent Government, wholesome Discipline, and decent Order laid in the
Dust; monstrous Errors and Heresies every where abounding, wild Enthusiasm and
blind Zeal justling out all sober Religion: This was our sad and piteous State,
when after many defeats and vain endeavors of the Loyal Party to rescue their
Native Country from such lawless Usurpation sand horrible distractions; when we
were at the lowest ebb, just ready to fall into utter Confusion; then (...),
God appeared in the Mount, infatuating the Counsels, strangely scattering the
mighty and victorious Forces of our Enemies, and by a wonderful train of
Providence, without War or Bloodshed, to the amazement of the whole World,
restored our most gracious Sovereign, the Light of our Eyes, the breath of our
Nostrils, to his Rights and Kingdoms, and placed him on the Imperial Throne of
his Fathers; (may his Reign be Long and Prosperous) and with him our equal Laws
and just Liberties, the glory of the English Subject; and which ought to be
especially mentioned in this place, the true reformed Religion with its
supports and encouragements, our Church re-established in its former Beauty and
Authority, and all these inestimable Blessings with great Peace and Plenty
continued to us, now these two and twenty Years. This surely was the Lords
doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes. This is a day the Lord has made and
ought to be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

The divine Providence is indeed extended to the minutest things, takes care of
Sparrows, and numbers the very hairs of our Heads; but yet it is more
especially and particularly engaged in ordering and managing public affairs,
such as are of great moment and benefit to Mankind, in the over-turning or
raising up of Empires, in grand revolutions of State, in alterations of
Government, in the protection of the sacred Persons of Sovereign Princes, the
chief Minsters of his Kingdom, his Vicegerents and Substitutes here on Earth,
on whose welfare whole Nations depend: And God Almighty seems on purpose so to
have contrived and accomplished the deliverance of this day, as that himself
might have the sole glory and praise of it. He would not admit any Rival or
sharer in the honor of this Renowned Work. It was effected neither by humane
force nor wisdom. It had all along much of Miracle in it; the Nation
contributing little else toward its own Salvation, besides the united wishes
and Prayers of all good men.

I am sure I speak now the sense we all had of this mercy, when it was first
vouchsafed to us; and shall we ever forget the triumphant shouts and joyful
Acclamations, with which his Majesty was welcomed into this City, (shall I
say?) or rather into the open Hearts and Breasts of all his Subjects? even
those that were obnoxious to his Justice, yet rejoicing and considing in what
they had heard of the goodness and clemency of his nature. Now after such
experience of his admirable mercifulness and God-like disposition to forgive,
(and perhaps never any one Man in the World had opportunity of showing greater)
after so long continuance of those manifold Blessings, which attended his
glorious Restoration; let us not suffer our thankfulness in the least to cool
and abate, or those impressions of Love and Loyalty, which the first sight of
his Royal Person (who was the desire of three Kingdoms) had stamped upon us, to
be in any measure worn out and defaced.

Indeed so regardless are some men of Gods Providence over this Nation, and so
forgetful of his great mercies, that they do not care to come nigh any place or
persons that do devoutly and solemnly own them, All the Liberty and Peace, all
the Wealth and excellent Religion which they enjoy, do not possess and affect
them comparably to the Fears and Jealousies of the loss of them all. They are
so willing and studious to put out of their minds all former deliverances, that
they talk, think of nothing but approaching Miseries and Confusions, and by
this means go the likeliest way to bring those Calamities upon us. But though I
thus speak, yet there is great cause to think better things of you here
present, who are now Assembled to bless God, not only for restoring to us our
Lawful Prince, but also for giving us such a Gracious King to Reign over us.

We have indeed a Country that is admirably fitted for Pleasure, Profit and
every thing that is desirable: and we have a Prince, that answers to all the
Gentleness, Mildness and Temper of our Climate. I know very well, people are
much inclined to run backward to famous men, and great Princes of Former Ages,
highly extolling those that have been long since dead and gone; when they have
a mind to disparage or undervalue those that are our present Governors. But,
if men would make a more just and impartial Comparison, let them look now into
the World, and see how other Nations are governed, and by whom; let them well
consider their Condition and Circumstances abroad, and ours under our Prince,
and try with themselves, whether they would be willing to remove into another
Country for the sake of a more easy and favorable Government; besides other
great advantages, both temporal and spiritual, we have so long enjoyed under
the benign influences of his happy Reign, and will, we hope, be continued to us
and our Children after us, unless by greater and new Provocations, or
impenitent perseverance in old, we run our selves into a worse, and if it be
possible, a more deplorable condition, than we were this day delivered from.

Thus behold, by the miraculous deliverance of this day we are made whole: I
beg your Patience, while I briefly apply the Exhortation in my Text to this
solemn occasion: Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; where be
pleased to observe these few plain things.

1. That Sin is generally the cause of temporal evils, which holds true
especially as to Nations and whole Societies, and Bodies Politic.

God often afflicts particular persons for their trial, for the increase and
exercise of their Virtues, to propound their example to the World, out of Love
and Fatherly affection to them: and sometimes notorious wicked men escape
punishment in this State, because the day of Judgment and recompense is to come
hereafter; but it is otherwise as to Communities of men, or the inflicting of
public National Judgments. Here God exercises a peculiar Providence over
Kingdoms and Nations in this Life. He uses other measures, than he does in
assigning the good or evil things of this World to private persons. In his
Providence to single persons he does not always consider their merit; but when
a Land is laid waste by a cruel War, when a potent State is overthrown, when
Rebellion is prosperous, when a flourishing People is given up to Slavery or
Captivity, we may then truly say, Behold the destruction and desolation that
sin has made.

The reason of which difference commonly given is this; that this Life is the
only time of punishing, or rewarding such Societies and Combinations of Men.
All such civil relations to one another cease in the other World. Every one
shall then answer and account for himself only; and so in this life alone can
Nations or Kingdoms, as such, be either punished or rewarded. We ought
therefore to give to God the glory of his Justice, and acknowledge that they
were the sins of the Nation, that gave success and victory to our Enemies;
which, notwithstanding the undoubted goodness of the late Kings Cause, the
undaunted Valor of his Friends, his own personal Innocence and exemplary
Virtue, yet betrayed him at last into their merciless hands, which so long kept
our present Sovereign from his rightful Possessions, and subjected the People
to that very Arbitrary Dominion, and Power of the Sword, the prevention of
which was the specious pretense of their first taking up Arms.

I shall not sully or eclipse the Glory and Joy of this day by enquiring into
the particular Sins, that brought the late Confusions upon us, but only say
thus much, That though his Majesty has graciously Pardoned them, as far as
concerns his Courts of Justice, nay has commanded us not so much as to mention
them to the disgrace, or damage of any persons guilty therein; yet surely it is
lawful, nay very expedient sometimes to call them to mind, yea often to
remember them, in order to the avoiding the like occasions or practices for the
future, which once proved so fatal to us: That we should never more give way to
such murmurings and discontents, such fears and vain surmises, such Divisions
and Factions, as then kindled those Flames, which laid both Church and State in
Ashes, till their happy Resurrection on this day.

2. Observe further, that though public National Judgments be always thus
inflicted according to the measure and proportion of our sins, yet the removal
of these does not always signify that the Nation is reformed, and made better,
or that God is reconciled with us, and has received us again into his favor.
For the true cause may be only this, that God would now use other methods,
would try other remedies; he alters his dispensation and prescription; finding
the inefficacy of Judgments to awaken and amend us, that we hardened our selves
the more under the strokes of his Vengeance, he now designs to melt and
dissolve us with an amazing kindness. So that the Miseries and Calamities of
the late Times, and the Deliverance of this day, do both teach us the same
Lesson, preach the same Doctrine, That we should sin no more.

After this manner God has been pleased in this Age most sigually to deal with
this Kingdom, by an intermixture of Judgments and Mercies, that either by fair
and gentle means, or by harsher and more severe usage we may be prevailed upon,
and engaged to our duty.

Pardon me if I say that God Almighty seems to have a great inclination to save
this Nation, and make us happy, if so be we would but yield to be such our
selves. He has not done so to other People; nay, what could he have done more
to oblige and reclaim us, than what has in the compass of a few Years been
done? He has visited us with Rods, and with Scorpions, a long Civil War, a
devouring Plague, and a Consuming Fire, and the like: and has not he showed us
greater mercies? that which we this day commemorate, the preservation of the
Kings Life to this time, the late Discovery and prevention of the Popish Plot,
the maintaining us hitherto in Peace and Tranquillity, notwithstanding our
present distractions and dangerous Convulsions. And therefore

3. If after all these various trials and means used by God, we still go on in
our Sins, this mightily aggravates the guilt, heightens the provocation, and
will certainly increase our punishment. For

1. We now sin after long and sad experience of the evil and miserable effects
of it. When we have soundly smarted for our faults, presently after a severe
correction to commit the same, or the like again; this argues an incurable
temper, or at least calls for the sharpest punishments to break such obstinacy
and stubbornness. One would surely think there needed no other Argument amongst
us against Rebellion or Sedition in the State, against Schism or Division in
the Church, than the bare remembrance of what this Nation has already suffered
by them; especially this should suffice in this present Age, when the memory of
it is fresh, and the Scars still remain. Ye have felt pretty well to your cost,
what it is to want Government, what it is by Violence to oppose just Authority;
Ye have your selves seen the horrid Consequences of Republican Principles,
unbridled Liberty, popular Reformation, and universal Toleration. Should we now
ever fall into the same sins again, nourish and foment the like discontents and
misunderstandings between the King and his People, take upon our selves in any
case to resist the Sovereign Power; we grossly offend against light and
knowledge, and fair warning given us, and late experience already had of the
evil of such doings. This is to brave God, and to Challenge him to do his
worst, when men will dare again to venture on any of those courses, which but
lately were so mischievous and deadly to these three Kingdoms.

2. As thus to sin after we have been so sorely punished for it, heightens the
offense; so to sin after such mercies received includes the guilt of
ingratitude, of all Vices the most heinous and provoking: and we do but very
ill requite the Lord, nay we highly displease him, if the sense of his goodness
this day manifested to us, does not render us, as more obedient to himself, so
also more dutiful to our Earthly Sovereign. For this glorious Restoration does
lay an Eternal Obligation upon us all, of continuing true and faithful to the
Government in all Points, and at all times; unless we will choose to provoke God
by our monstrous unthankfulness to find out new instruments of Vengeance, and
make experiment of what yet greater severities may avail for our amendment: Sin
no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

But some will be ready to say, What worse thing can happen to us? Can we
imagine a more wretched and Calamitous state of Affairs, greater Confusions,
Disorders, and Dangers, than what we this day were delivered from?

Though indeed it is not easily conceived what can be worse than what has
already befallen this Nation, yet we must not think that God wants new methods
of punishing and humbling us. His Vengeance is not yet quite exhausted, He has
still in reserve the dregs of the Cup of his Wrath. One King was basely
Murdered, and yet through the mercy of God we have seen the lawful Heir
Restored, and our selves redeemed from the Tyranny of Ungodly and Unreasonable
Men; let us now have a great care that we do not bring the Nation into
everlasting Slavery, by provokeing God to take away this so well constituted
Government for ever from us. God may next time deprive us of our King, and
never restore him again or if he does, it may be without an Act of Oblivion. He
may give us up as a Prey to a mighty Neighbor, or a Foreign Enemy. He may cut
us off from being a People, as he once did that ungovernable Nation of the
Jews, and make us an hissing and by word to all the Countries about us. He may
take away the glorious Light of the Gospel totally from us, and give it to a
Nation that shall bring forth much better Fruit: Especially as to you in this
great City, who during the late Troubles in England, felt not near so much as
what the poor Country suffered, it may now come to your Lot, for this place to
be the Scene on which the next bloody Tragedy may be acted. And if God should
once more for oue sins, (though we hope better things) suffer these present
Heats and Animosities and Contentions amongst us to ferment and ripen into
another bloody War, can we expect any other Issue, but that it should end in
the total destruction of such an ungrateful Generation?

To apply our Saviors words, St. Matthew. 12.43. If the Devil of Faction and
Sedition, which has been for some time purged but of this Nation; should
against return into his house from whence he came, and when he is come, find it
emply, swept and garnished, ready and prepared for its reception; He will then
take unto him seven other spirit worse than himself, and enter in and dwell
there, and the latter end of that Nation shall be worse then the beginning.

Give me leave the refore with that freedom and plainness, as becomes the place
I now stand in, and the service I am now called to, to recommend to you some
few things, which the deliverance we this day commemorate does more especially
oblige us all unto, by which we may best contribute toward the continuance of
those great mereies we now bless God for; and prevent our falling into the same
or greater mischiefs than those we not long ago labored under.

The first I shall mention is this.

1. Quiet and peaceable subjection to the Government on this Day restored and
re-established, and that for Conscience sake, out of fear of offending God.

I know the very naming of this will offend some men, who cannot endure to hear
this Doctrine out of the Pulpit. Such gravely bid us Preach Jesas Christ and
him Crucified, and not to meddle with state Affairs, or matters of Government.
By this test they tell you, you shall know those amongst us, that have a mind
to be soonest preferred, or who are Friends to Arbitrary Power, or strive to
please the Court, by Preaching up such strict Obedience to the King; that we
Ministers of Christ ought to be quiet and silent, and not concern our selves in
any public Transactions. This is the common objection and clamor against
Clergymen this day.

But truly I think this very excusable in them, if not highly commendable, were
there no better reason for it than this; That by this frequent and earnest
persuading people to exact submission and constant adherence to the present
Government, they make some amends for that great mischief that was done out of
Pulpits in the late Times, by contrary talk and infinuations.

But why, I pray, must we be the only men, whose Mouths must at such a time as
this be stopped? Let those, who are least guilty in this kind, throw the first
stone at us. For who is there amongst these wise men, that are so apt to be
displeased at Divines meddling with matters of Government, but himself takes the
free liberty on all occasions to canvass and censure all matters of State,
passing his shrewd Judgment, and descanting on every thing that is done or
ordered, though never so much above his Capacity; Correcting the Errors of the
King and his Council, of which he is by no means a Competent Judge; having his
head full of new projects and models of Reformation and Mountebank Receipts,
and Infallible Medicines to Cure and settle the Nation, which he vents in all
places and Companies with his notable remarks upon all Occurrences, though all
this while he be a person never so meanly bred, or little versed in humane
affairs. Indeed this is the Epidemical Disease of the times, and the Clergy
ought not to be too severely reprehended, if they have not wholly escaped the
general Contagion.

But in truth, the ground of all this Charge and Accusation is only this, That
the present Clergy of England take all occasions of showing their own Loyalty,
and of encouraging the People to the like. They teach their Hearers to be
obedient, and persuade them to Peace and Submission, and this they had need
speak often, and loudly too in such turbulent and boisterous times, as we now
live in. This is their great fault and crime, and God grant that we may all
live under this disgrace, and die under this Ignominy.

And in doing this, we preach no other Doctrine, but what our Savior and
Master did, than was taught by his Apostles, than was practiced by the
Primitive Christians, and owned in all the Churches of Christ (never
contradicted, but by the Papists, in order to the setting up of the Extravagant
Power of the Pope, and by some Sectaries since the Reformation, to make way for
the pretended Kingdom of Christ here upon Earth;) but especially maintained and
defended in our Church of England; viz. That Sovereign Princes are accountable
to God alone, That actual Obedience is due to them in all things, honest and
lawful; and, That in no Case by force or violence we may resist them:

Nay, we affirm further with equal truth, That we are bound to obey our Lawful
Superiors, not only for fear of punishment, not only for convenience, or out
of any temporal respect; but also out of sense of duty toward God, who has
enjoined it under pain of Damnation; who has invested Sovereign Kings and
Princes with some of his own divine Power and Authority.

Nay, it is not sufficient that we pay them all external Obedience, or outward
Respect; but inward Veneration and Honor is due to them (and that, though
themselves be vicious persens, debauched in their Lives, heretical in their
Opinions, or Tyrannical in their Government) yet we must pay them such inward
Respect and Reverence as is due to their high Calling, and that great Place,
and Character, and Image they bear here on Earth.

Nay further yet, we must not so much as speak, or think meanly, slightly or
rudely of them: Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; much more we ought
not upon any account to vilify or disparage their Persons or Government, nor
misrepresent or carp at their Proceedings, when they suit not with our present
humor or understanding; nor complain of, or saucily inveigh against their
Administration; nor do or say any thing that tends to lessen their Reputation,
to weaken their Authority, or to bring them into contempt; by which means they
become less able to serve those great ends, for which Government was instituted.

We ought not especially to lay all miscarriages or misfortunes of the times at
their Door. For though Kings and Princes be but men, and men of the same
Passions and Infirmities with other Mortals; yet the inconveniences and
troubles that at any time arise in a Kingdom, do not always proceed from the
unskilfulness or neglect of the Governors, but in a great part from the
perverse and unmanageable temper of the People. In a word, It is not more our
duty than our privilege and happiness to Obey. This is our grand Prerogative,
not to be troubled with the Cares, and yet to enjoy the blessed Fruits of
Government.

2. The next thing I would recommend to you is this, That every one of us
should first and chiefly mind his own private duty, that belongs to him in that
station Gods Providence has placed him in here; and to be sure to amend and
reform himself, before he goes about to reform others, or the public. Peace
and good order can never be preserved long without this; that every one should
keep his own proper rank, and follow his own work and calling, and act his own
part assigned him on this great Theater of the World, well and to the Life;
leaving public affairs to those who have authority and ability to manage them;
things sacred to those who are lawfully called to administer them; all private
persons keeping within their own bounds, and doing their own business they are
bred to and fitted for.

It is in all Societies as in an Army; wherein, it every inferior Officer
diligently minds his own Charge, and every single Soldier keeps his own Place;
and stoutly maintains his Ground and Post, and the General over looks and
governs the whole, every one being ready punctually to Execute, not dispute his
Commands; then is good order and discipline maintained, and such a Body cannot
be easily broken. But when every private Soldier shall neglect his own place
and duty to direct his Captain; and every Captain thinks himself wise enough to
Lead and Command the whole Army, and is advising his General, and leaves his
own Company to instruct his fellow Captains, not satisfied with their Conduct;
what can this breed, but sudden tumult and confusion, till they all become a
cheap prey to their Enemies? the Application is easy.

It has indeed never been well with us in this Nation, since this itch of
hearing and telling public News has so notoriously infected all sorts of men
amongst us. In which alone too many in this City scandalously spend so great a
part of their Life, to the irreparable loss of their precious time, neglect of
their Trades and Religious Duties, and oftentimes to the utter ruin of
themselves and Families; who whilst they should be in their Shops, following
their secular Professions, are busy in mending of the State, and reforming of
public abuses and grievances, which concern them not; and thus disorder the
ranks of men, and ruffle and pervert the due course of things, and as much as
in them lies, Dethrone, Depose those whom God has set over us for that very
end, to take care of the public Peace and Safety.

But alas, Gentlemen, you are too presumptuous and consident above your reach
and understandings. Let me tell you, this is impudence and ill manners, were
there no other vice or mischief in it, for every conceited Pedant as if he were
inspired with Politics, or pert Tradesman, that can but make a shift to spell
out a Gazetie, to undertake to wield Scepters and rule Kingdoms. You ought not
in modesty to pretend to Wit and Capacity enough to comprehend such affairs.
Matters of Policy, the Arts and Methods of Government, are things too sacred,
and venerable, and august, to be profaned by every unhallowed hand. They are
like the mysteries of Religion, which are not to be prostituted to the
Examination, and Disquisition of every capricious Brain, and vulgar
Understanding. These are out of the reach of those that hold the Plow, or that
drive Oxen, whose talk is of their Bullocks, who give their mind to make
Furrows, and are diligent to give the Kine Fodder. These are not to be
transacted at the Exchange, nor determined over our Cups, or at our ordinary
Entertainment. Not but that every good and honest man is, and ought to be
concerned for the preservation of his Prince, Religion and Country; yet always
within the limits of his Calling and Station; and when the Winds blow hard, and
the Storm is great and violent, no such certain way of Shipwracking the Vessel,
as when every Passenger leaves his private Gabbin, and will needs be Pilot.

We all complain of bad times, and evil days, and so indeed they are, and such
they will continue notwithstanding our complaints of them. But then we must
know, that they are only evil men that make evil days; and happy would it be
for us, if all those who complain most loudly of these evil days, would take
sufficient care not to contribute toward the rendering them such. And if
instead of vain and affected complaints, which only beat the air, men would in
the fear of the Lord take themselves to task, search out what is amiss in
themselves, first sweep their own Door, would spend their time and use their
Eyes more at home, be more curious and critical in observing themselves than
other men, and become more severe against their own faults than they are
against the miscarriages of others; the World would soon be much mended, and we
should suddenly have far better days. Thou have thy self in the first place
given thee in charge to look after. For that chiefly thou shall be accountable,
and not for public misfortunes; it behooves us then to take care, whilst we
are so busily employed in reforming others, we our selves do not become
Castaways.

Thus private persons in their several stations, inferior Magistrates
according to the Sphere of their Power and Authority, and no further, attending
every one conscientiously to his own proper work and business, would go very
far toward the maintaining of order and quiet, securing the public Peace, and
making the Government both easy and prosperous.

3. In order to the preventing any evils we fear, or the obtaining or
continuing of the greatest good, we must not use any unlawful or indirect
means. This is the most pernicious and damnable Doctrine of Rome, though not
always publicly owned, yet greedily swallowed amongst them; and proved
sufficiently from their unwearied practices; that in order to the propagation
of their Faith or Church, any thing, every thing becomes lawful; Killing and
Massacring no Murder, Lying and Perjury no sin or injury. That so good and
great an end will justify and sanctify all actions. Nay, have not we had
instances amongst our selves in this Kingdom of the greatest wickedness, and
villainies committed by pretended Protestants, for Gods glory and for setting up
the Gospel and pure worship of Christ? and indeed well meaning men, but of
great passions, are not a little apt to this. When they are secured of the
goodness and worthiness of their end, their minds are so intent upon it, and
they are so hot and eager in the prosecution of it, that they allow not
themselves leisure and patience to consider the lawfulness and expediency of
the means they use for the compassing of it.

But blessed be God, we have not so learned Christ. We are not to do the least
evil, though the greatest good may come by it. Our Religion teaches us to
suffer the greatest evils, rather than forsake or renounce it; but not to do
the least evil, even for the maintenance of it; and it will be our great glory
and commendation, nay I may add our interest and safety too, to hold true to
this principle, neither to do, nor to consent unto any unwarrantable action,
though it be to keep out Popery and Slavery, no, not to save three Kingdoms.
And thus doing and suffering we highly manifest our full trust in God, and
signally entitle our selves to his Protection.

The story of Vzzah is remarkable to this purpose. David with the chosen men of
Israel was conveighing the Ark of the Lord, in a new Cart from the House of
Abinadab, as you may see 2 Samuel 6. and Vzzah drove the Cart. Now the Oxen
chanced to stumble, and the Ark was shaken, so that it seemed ready to fall. It
was not lawful for Vzzah, (though what the particular reason was, is variously
disputed by learned men) to touch the Ark. Yet out of great zeal and good
meaning to prevent a thing so dishonorable to God and their Religion, as the
fall of the Ark to the ground would have been, he suddenly put forth his hand,
and took hold of it, and he died in the place. God would not suffer so much as
a ritual, ceremonial law to be openly broken, though it were to save the Ark,
the signal of his divine presence amongst them, from falling. God stood not in
need of Vzzah's help against his own Law and Command.

The interest of Religion it self is not to be kept up, or carried on by any
courses or practices that our Religion condemns. If we trust God and the
goodness of our cause, we must be sure no means in the defense of it, but such
as God does allow: or can we show greater diffidence in God, than when we think
to serve him by our iniquity and unrighteousness, by our sins to advance his
glory, as if God were at a loss in some circumstances to defend his tottering
Church and People, unless we helped him out a little in a time of great need,
by stretching our Consciences and venturing on something that he has forbid?
People must not take care of God and his cause against Gods mind.

Whenever therefore by projects of our own invention not approved of by God, we
contrive to avoid persecution, or preserve the Protestant Religion, which yet
we hope the necessity of the times, and exigency of the present State of
Affairs will excuse; when we endeavor after settlement and salvation by any
irregular, indirect means, we put our selves out of Gods way and protection,
renounce his care and providence over us; we declare that we are weary of
waiting upon him, are afraid to depend on him, choose rather to stand upon our
own Legs, or, as Saul did, when God had forsaken him, run to the Devil for help
and advice. Nay, this is the most ready way to lose, to betray our Religion,
when we attempt to secure it by unlawful means. God and his Church will stand,
but when men do overact it, and are over-eager and busy, they labor not so
much at Gods cause as their own.

Fourthly, In order to the continuance of these great mercies to us, which we
this day bless God for, I know nothing more effectual, than our Conscientious
and constant adhering to the Church, as it is now by Law established; a Church
reformed with the gravest and maturest deliberation, by the advice and with the
consent of the supreme power, according to the word of God, and the example of
the best and Primitive Ages; whose Doctrines are so Orthodox, its Liturgy so
devout, its Government so Apostolical, its Constitutions so reasonable and
useful, its Ceremonies so few and decent, that no one can refuse Communion with
it, but upon such principles, which if he holds to them, shall equally oblige
him to refuse Communion with all the settled Churches, that are or have been in
the Christian World, excepting some few little Commonwealth Churches, but of
very late Years first invented, and set up amongst us. A Church most admirably
fitted for the making of men substantially good and pious, just and loyal,
peaceable and charitable, that incroacheth not upon the Right of Princes, nor
imposes on the Faith of Christians; that has most remarkably run the fate of,
and stood or fell with the Monarchy; which is the terror of Rome and the
Bulwark of the Protestant Cause and Religion. And in all humane probability
nothing can keep Popery (of which we now stand in so much fear and danger,
which is the great evil that now so sorely threatens us) nothing, I say, can
keep it out of England so much as being firm and true to this present
establishment, till our Governors shall see fit to make any alterations.

And if ever that common Enemy again get entrance here, it must be through
those holes and breaches, which our needless Divisions and Separations from the
Church have made.

It is said of the old Britains, when the Romans first Conquered them, Dum
singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur: Their divided single Troops were presently
subdued by the united force of Caesar's disciplined Legions. And the same way
will the Romish Religion, if ever, gain admittance. It will soon surmount and
crush all little separated incoherent Congregations which might be resisted,
and kept out by a well constituted united National Church.

And therefore I cannot but say here, that none do serve Popery more
successfully, though, I believe, they know it not, nor design any such thing
themselves, than those, who are with both hands pulling down this present
Church of England, continually pelting her with peevish exceptions, and popular
scruples, libelling her Bishops and Governors, and laying all the evils of the
times to their Charge, slandering her Ministers, vilifying her divine Offices,
slighting her Censures, and deriding her Institutions. The faster and surer
this Church is established, the more Interest, Authority and Influence it has,
so much longer will Popish Idolatry be kept out of England.

For all that some ill men are apt to declaim against our Church, as if it were
Popishly affected, yet Heaven and Hell, Light and Darkness are not more
contrary one to the other, than the Doctrines of Popery and the Religion
professed and taught in the Church of England. And I pray God, he be not now by
his late Providence teaching all Protestants the difference between Popery and
Conformity, and showing us that the little Finger of Papal Tyranny is heavier
than the Loins of the English Episcopacy. If ever such a sad day happen in
England, (which God in his infinite mercy prevent) that Popery should be settled
by a Law, men will then see, what little reason they had to cry down our
present Church as Antichristian, or the Ministers of it as Papists in
Masquerade, or the public Prayers as the same with the Mass Book, or our
kneeling at the Holy Sacrament, as the same with the Adoration of the Host.
They will then gladly wish for these days again, that they might have but once
more the opportunity of serving God in public, though with all the Ceremonies
our Church enjoins. What an Happiness would they account that Liberty which now
they are too apt to call Persecution? thus the unreasonable suspicious and
groundless clamours of some men against our Church, as drawing too nigh, and
approaching daily nearer to Popery, may soon bring or provoke God justly to
inflict that great evil both upon themselves and us.

Now as there are two ways of securing a Town besieged by Enemies, weakening the
force of the Enemy without us, and strengthening and better fortifying our own
Walls, and increasing the number of our Soldiers and Defendants: So are there
two ways of keeping out Popery, not only discountenancing, executing the penal
Laws against all those of the Romish Faction; but also by daily adding to the
strength of our own Church by healing her wounds, and making up her Breaches,
by restoring due Authority to its Governors, and Reverence to its Ministers,
by the coming in of those who have dissented from and deserted her, and for our
common safety at least joining with us, sacrificing all petty interests and
bones of contention to the public Peace; and then through Gods blessing, and
the goodness of our Governors, we may be able to stand our ground,
notwithstanding the unwearied attempts and artifices of Rome against us.

It is the great Policy of the Church of Rome, that whatever differences arise
amongst them in matters of opinion, (and they are several, and those managed
with a great deal of heat and zeal, notwithstanding their pretense to
infalibillity) yet they all agree to adhere fast unto, and by all means to
promote Holy Church. Whereas our mischief and folly is, that every little
difference constitutes a new Party, and we divide in interest; and so that we
may but pull down those that oppose us, we care not though we let in those that
will devour us all.

Machiavel in his Discourses upon Livy lays it down for an error in Politics,
by force to invade any City or Kingdom, when there are great Divisions and
Seditions amongst the People; this being the most ready way to unite them all
against the common danger. Let them but alone, says he, or help a little to
increase and widen their differences, and they shall ruin and destroy
themselves without putting their Enemies to any trouble. And truly we may well
account our Dissensions and Divisions incurable, if our late and present fears
and dangers be not sufficient to put an end to them. When Hannibal is at the
Gates, it is no time surely for men to be squabling and jangling against a
Ceremony or a Form of Prayer.

In this all Parties agree, all sides teach and defend, that there is no likely
way of preserving our common Religion, but by all Protestants uniting together,
for the joint defense of those things they agree in. And yet notwithstanding
all this good talk, are not our Religious feuds and animosities greater, more
fierce at this day than ever? Do not our Divisions increase? Do not our
Separatists run further from us, keep at a greater distance, instead of
approaching as nigh as they could, or complying with us, as far as in their own
Consciences they judged lawful? Are not new terms of distinction, and
opprobrious nicknames Coined and pass current amongst us? Is not Victory and
Superiority sought more than Peace and Unity? to give Laws and prescribe to
others, rather than amicably to agree, and compose, or silence our difference?
These are things that forebode worse to our State and Nation, than Comets or
Prodigies. For the Civil Government it self can never be quiet, or secure, as
long as there are such endless Divisions and Separations amongst us, and the
Civil State will find it self wounded through the sides of the Church.

As we would therefore preserve the Peace of our Country, our excellent
Religion, and rid the Nation of these fears of Popery, lest a much worse thing
than what we have hitherto felt, come upon us, let us not only our selves
continue true and faithful to this Church we were baptized into, and have the
happiness to be Members of; but also endeavor by all the ways of Prudence and
Love, by all the Arts of Mildness and Gentleness, by all lawful compliances and
condescensions, to win over others into its Bosom and Communion.

Fifthly, In order to the engaging of God to the protection of our King, and
Church, and Nation, and the continuance of all those mercies we now enjoy above
any other People, let us all join our utmost endeavors to put a stop to that
Flood of Atheism, Profaneness and Irreligion, that has so strangely of late
Years prevailed amongst us.

Every Age, God knows, is wicked and sinful enough, and the present does always
appear to be the worst, because we are better acquainted with the evil of that
than of any other: yet surely never in any time, since Religion (shall I say?)
or Civility first entered into our Country, were men so impudent and barefaced
in sinning, in pleading for it, in defending of it, as in these days in which
our lot is fallen.

Heretofore men were sensual and debauched, but then they did all they could to
conceal their Vices, they sinned with Modesty, they would sometimes blush for
what they had done, and their Consciences often misgave them. But now men make
a mock and sport of sin, they glory and boast of it, they have entertained
wicked Principles agreeable to their practices; they not only neglect Religion,
but reproach and despise it; not only forget God, but deny him; do all they can
to banish him and his Providence out of the World; affront and blaspheme him;
burlesque his sacred Writings, exposing to ridicule and scorn all the most
serious and holy things or persons.

This drolling, scoffing humor, which spares not God himself, his Providence,
Laws and Government, seems to be the peculiar reigning sin of this Age;
insomuch that many are even afraid of appearing strict or Religious, lest they
should expose themselves to the buffoonry, and raillery of such men, who think
every thing wit, that is impudent and profane.

It cannot be denied, but that this open wickedness has increased much upon
us, since the Kings coming in; Atheism has got strange ground, and made many
Proselytes. And that there is an universal degeneracy and corruption both of
Principles and Manners amongst us, is the observation and complaint of all
sober persons.

The chief cause of which is not, as some would persuade us, the Restoration
of the King, and Church; but indeed the horrid Hypocrisy, and that great abuse
of Religion, which was so notorious in the late times, is one of the greatest
causes of the profaneness and contempt of all Religion in this; when so many
made show of the greatest demureness and tenderness of Conscience imaginable,
and yet were not afraid to do the most shameful and dishonorable things. This
was apt to make men think, that Religion was nothing else, but a crafty care to
abstain from some sins, to give our selves greater liberty in others, to commit
them with less suspicion. This has given occasion to many of loose Lives, to
look upon all Religious People as a pack of Hypocritical Pharisees, only some
to have better luck than others, in passing off the Stage undiscovered.

And yet all this while there is nothing in the World more unjust and
unreasonable than this. True Religion is not to answer for all that the
Army-Saints did, who only professed it to serve a turn, who took up the outward
garb and dress of it, by it to deceive the simple and unwary, and palliate
their lewd designs; whose chief godliness lay in making of Faces, turning up
their Eyes, in bold extemporary Effusions, and canting in Scripture style, and
Proclaiming a Fast before every Murder they committed. What such men did, ought
not in the least to prejudice us against unfeigned Piety, hearty and sober
Devotion, true Righteousness, Peaceableness and quietness of Temper, and
universal Goodness.

But whatever is the true cause of this growth of Atheism, and Irreligion
amongst us, this is certain that the public Peace and Government is in no
little danger from men of such Principles and practices. For when all is done,
Conscience is the best tie of Allegiance, and they will always prove the best
and quietest Subjects, who are most afraid of offending God. And they, who
regard not the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth, or his Laws, can never
give sufficient assurance of Loyalty to their Earthly Prince, or of Obedience
to his Commands, any longer than it is their interest so to do. So that we
cannot any better way serve the King, and the Government than by promoting
amongst all his People the fear of God, and a due sense of Religion.

So serviceable to the true interests of Kings, and the happiness and peace of
Societies, is true Religion, that the Atheists have looked upon it and exposed
it as a subtle invention of some airy Politicians to keep Subjects in awe and
order. So that whether they be true or false, yet by their own Confession the
Principles of Religion are very useful to mankind; and if they are not true,
yet it is great pity they are not; and Atheism ought to be prosecuted and
punished as destructive to public Peace and order. They are absolute Enemies
to the Government that would free men's minds from the dread of invisible
Powers; and ought to be avoided as the pests of human Society, who labor to
bring Religion into contempt.

And oh that I could now say something, that might be of force to persuade you
all, to adorn the King's and Churches Cause, which you have so happily
espoused, by innocence of Life, sobriety of Conversation, by a regular Devotion
and unaffected Piety, and unbounded Charity; that you would all take care to
give unto God as well as to Caesar his due.

Let us but all in our several places live better than our Kings or Churches
Enemies, and then let me tell you, we will neither fear their Swords, nor their
Pens, their Weapons, nor their Arguments. It is the profaneness and
debauchery, the Oaths and intemperance of too many amongst us, that would
pretend to be the greatest Lovers of the Crown and Church, that do really most
endanger both, that weaken our side, and encourage and harden our Adversaries.
Let this be but your task to wipe off this stain, to answer this Objection, to
remove this scandal from the Loyal Party; and I say it again, we need not be
concerned at what either Papists, or Fanatics can say or do against us. Oh let
not our heinous and crying sins a second time ruin and lose so just and
glorious a Cause, destroy so flourishing a Kingdom and Monarchy, overturn the
purest and best constituted Church in the World. Let not our selves prove our
own greatest Enemies and Betrayers.

It is not, believe me, wild huffing and hectoring, extravagant Swearing and
Drinking for the King and the Church; it is not our damning to the Pit of Hell
either Papists or Fanatics, that does us any service, or them any harm.

We could even wish all such men from amongst us, but that we still hope, at
last they may be brought to a better mind. Though they add to our numbers, yet
we lose and sink in our reputation by reason of them, besides that they provoke
God against us. We cannot wish worse to the Kings Enemies, than that all such,
as hate to be reformed, would go over to their side, and credit their Party. We
have already seen by woeful experience, how far the mask and disguise of
Religion only prevailed and succeeded. What would the effect be, if so good a
Cause were maintained and defended only by good men.

Lastly, Let us all add our constant and devout Prayers for the King, for the
preservation of his Life, the prosperity of his Affairs, and for a blessing
upon his Government. In doing of this we only pray most effectually for our
selves; this is a short compendious way of wishing all good and happiness to
our selves and Country, earnestly praying for the Kings Life. These words, Let
the King live, or God save the King, comprize in them all the outward public
blessings we can want, we can wish for. Then we pray for the maintenance of our
Religion, the defense of our Church, the enjoyment of our just Rights and
Liberties. We pray for the common welfare and safety, when we thus zealously
recommend our most gracious King to Gods most especial Protection.

This is a way, by which the meanest subject may oblige his Prince, benefit his
King; who may truly stand indebted for his Peace and Prosperity, in some
measure, to the Prayers of his poorest Vassal. Thus though our Station be never
so low and mean, our interest and influence small and narrow, our Authority
inconsiderable, yet we may prove great Benefactors to the public, and do great
good to three Kingdoms, by our faithful Intercessions at the Throne of Grace
for his most Excellent Majesty,

That God would preserve his Royal Person from all outward Violence, or any
inward Diseases; that he would continue his Strength and Health, would keep and
guard him from all Dangers, would Cloth all his Enemies with Shame, whilst on
his Head his Crown does flourish; that he would inspire him more and more with
Wisdom and Knowledge, to Rule and Govern this great People; that he would
direct and bless his Counsels, and prosper all that he takes in Hand; that
after a long and happy Reign here, he may late, very late be translated into
the Immortal and Invisible Kingdom.

And as we pray to God on his behalf, so ought we most especially this day, to
praise God for him and those manifold Blessings, which he has been the happy
Instrument under God, of transmitting down to us.

Blessed be the Day wherein he was born, and the Night when it was said, there
is a Manchild conceived.

Blessed be God, that saved him from those Bloody Hands, that so cruelly used
his Blessed Father, that covered his Head in the Day of Battle, that conveyed
him safe through Crowds of his Enemies, when his precious Life was put to sale;
and after innumerable Dangers, by a miraculous Escape, landed him safe on a
Foreign Shore.

Blessed be God, that preserved him all along during a tedious Exile, that
provided for him in the Wilderness, that kept him constant to that Religion and
Church which his Royal Father died in, notwithstanding great offers and
temptations to change it.

Blessed be God, that upon this day brought him back again to his desolate
People, and has hitherto continued him a public Blessing to this Nation.

Blessed be God, that has given the King the Hearts and Affections of all his
People.

God be praised for his merciful Disposition, for the unparalled sweetness
and benignity of his Temper, for the Mildness and Equity of his Government, his
Love to the Church, his Constancy to the Protestant Interest, his Fatherly Care
of his People.

For all which, and all other Blessings, let there be ascribed by us and all
men, to God Almighty, the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost, all possible Praise,
Thanksgiving, Adoration and Obedience, for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

