Mr. Chillingworth's Book CALLED THE Religion of Protestants A SAFE WAY TO
SALVATION, Made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England.

WITH An ADDITION of some genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's never before
Printed.

Isaac. Casaub. in Ep. ad Card. Perron. Reg. Jac. nomine scripta. Rex
arbitratur rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem non magnum esse numerum.
Quare existimat ejus Majestas, nullam ad ineundem concordiam breviorem viam
fore, quam fi diligenter separentur necessaria a non necessariis, and ut de
necessariis conveniat, omnis opera insumatur: in non necessariis libertati
Christianae locus detur, Simpliciter necessaria Rex appellat, quae vel express
verbum Dei praecipit credenda faciendave, vel ex verbo Dei necessaria
consequentia vetus Ecclesia esicuit. -- Si ad decidendas hodiernas
Controversias haec distinctio adhiberetur, and jus divinum a positivo se^
Ecclesiastico candide separatetur; non videtur de iis quae sunt absolute
necessaria, inter pios and moderatos viros, longa aut acris contentio futura.
Nam and pauca illa sunt, ut modo dicebamus, and fere ex aequo omnibus
probantur, qui se Christianos dici postulant. Atque istam distinctionem
Sereniss. Rex tanti putat esse momenti ad minuendas Controversias, quae body
Ecclesiam Dei tantopere exercent, ut omnium pacis studiosorum judicet officium
esse, diligentissime hanc explicare, docere, urgere.

London, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, C. Harper, at the Flower de-Luce in Fleetstreet, W. Crook, at the
Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, and J. Adamson at the Angel in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1687.

An Advertisement concerning this Edition.
I Hope I shall incur no blame from those who deservedly value this Excellent
BOOK of Mr. Chillingworth, for having made it of a lesser bulk and an easier
purchase than before, after I have told them my way of proceeding herein: I
have not Epitomized it in the usual way, by contracting any where his sense,
and giving it more briefly in words of my own; which would have been indeed an
injury to him, who knew so well how to express his own sense fully and
perspicuously beyond most men, without any redundancy of style; but by paring
off and leaving out some parts of it, which I thought might be well spared, and
make the Reading of his Book more pleasant, as well as more generally useful,
when his defense of the Protestant Doctrins and the cause of the Reformation
lay more closely together, not being interrupted with so many pages spent to
justify Dr. Potter in the personal contests betwixt him and his adversary; or
in detecting the sophistry, frauds and falsities of the Jesuit, where the
matter was not of common concern. But where I thought it was, I have been
scrupulously careful to omit nothing: so far from it, that I am apt upon a
review to think, that the pleasure of reading his admirable Confutation, has
bribed me to insert more than was needful, in pursuance of my first design.

The reason why the Jesuits Book which Mr. Chillingworth answers is not here
reprinted, was partly because it is too tedious and wordy, abounding in
impertinent cavils, and affecting to fetch a great compass to amuse and lose
the Reader before he comes to the point in Question, which he scarce ever
attempts closely to prove; and chiefly because Mr. Chillingworth has commonly
all along set down in a different Character, as much of his words, as was
needful to let the Reader see, what it is he makes a Reply to, and where I
found any omission of this kind, I have transcribed out of the Jesuits Book
such passages and citations, as might give further light to it: besides, that
every one who has a mind, or any doubt remaining about this matter, may easily
consult the Folio Edition and satisfy himself.

I have added a large Table of Contents at the end which was wanting before,
whereby the Reader may find any Argument or head of Discourse therein
contained, with little or no trouble; which Table will serve any Edition of the
Book, because the numbers after the Chapter refer to the divisions of the
Chapters at the side, not to the Pages at the top.

As for the Additional pieces that follow the Book, and were never before
printed, he that reads them will find by the clearness of expression, the close
way of arguing and strength of reasoning, sufficient to convince him that they
are not spurious, but the genuine productions of this great Man; but yet for
his further satisfaction he may know, that the Manuscript out of which most of
them were faithfully transcribed, is an Original of Mr. Chillingworths own
handwriting, and now in the custody of the Reverend Dr. Tennison, to whom he is
beholden for their present Publication.

TO THE Most High and Mighty PRINCE, CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
I Present, with all humility to Your most sacred Hands, a Defense of that
Cause which is and ought to be infinitely dearer to you, than all the world:
Not doubting but upon this Dedication I shall be censured for a double
boldness; both for undertaking so great a Work, so far beyond my weak
abilities, and again, for presenting it to such a Patron, whose judgment I
ought to fear more than any Adversary. But for the first, it is a satisfaction
to my self, and may be to others, that I was not drawn to it out of any vain
opinion of my self, (whose personal defects are the only thing which I presume
to know,) but undertook it in obedience to Him, who said, Tu Conversus confirma
fratres, not to S. Peter only but to all men: being encouraged also to it by
the goodness of the Cause, which is able to make a weak man strong. To the
belief hereof I was not led partially or by chance, as many are, by the
prejudice and prepossession of their Country, Education and such like
inducements, which if they lead to truth in one place, perhaps lead to error in
a hundred; but having with the greatest equality and indifferency, made enquiry
and search into the grounds on both sides, I was willing to impart to others
that satisfaction which was given to my self. For my inscribing to it your
Majesty's sacred Name, I should labor much in my excuse of it from high
presumption, had it not some appearance of Title to your Majesty's Patronage
and protection as being a Defense of that Book, which by special Order from
Your Majesty was written some years since chiefly for the general good, but
peradventure not without some aim at the recovery of One of your meanest
Subjects from a dangerous deviation, and so due unto your Majesty, as the fruit
of your own High humility and most Royal Charity. Besides, it is in a manner
nothing else, but a pursuance of, and a superstruction upon that blessed
Doctrine, wherewith I have adorned and armed the Frontispiece of my Book, which
was so earnestly recommended by your Royal Father of happy memory, to all the
lovers of Truth and Peace, that is to all that were like himself, as the only
hopeful means of healing the breaches of Christendom, whereof the Enemy of
souls makes such pestilent advantage. The luster of this blessed Doctrine I have
here endeavored to uncloud and unveil, and to free it from those mists and
fumes which have been raised to obscure it, by that Order, which envenoms even
poison it self, and makes the Roman Religion much more malignant and turbulent
than otherwise it would be; whose very Rule and Doctrine, obliges them to make
all men, as much as lies in them, subjects unto Kings, and servants unto
Christ, no farther than it shall please the Pope. So that whether Your Majesty
be considered, either as a pious Son toward your Royal Father K. James, or as
a tender hearted and compassionate Son toward your distressed Mother, the
Catholic Church, or as a King of your Subjects, or as a Servant unto Christ,
this work, (to which I can give no other commendation, but that it was intended
to do you service in all these capacities,) may pretend not unreasonably to
your Gracious acceptance. Lastly being a Defense of that whole Church and
Religion you profess, it could not be so proper to any Patron as to the great
Defender of it; which style Your Majesty has ever so exactly made good, both
in securing it from all dangers, and in vindicating it (by the well ordering
and rectifying this Church) from all the foul aspersions both of Domestic and
Foreign enemies, of which they can have no ground, but their own malice and want
of Charity. But it is an argument of a despairing and lost cause to support it
self with these impetuous outcries and clamors, the faint refuges of those that
want better arguments; like that Stoic in Lucian that cried (...), O damned
villain, when he could say nothing else. Neither is it credible the wiser sort
of them should believe this their own horrid assertion, That a God of goodness
should damn to eternal torments, those that love him and love truth, for errors
which they fall into through humane frailty! But this they must say, otherwise
their only great argument from their damning us, and our not being so
peremptory in damning them, because we hope unaffected Ignorance may excuse
them, would be lost: and therefore they are engaged to act on this Tragical
part, only to fright the simple and ignorant, as we do little children by
telling them that bites, which we would not have them meddle with. And truly
that herein they do but act a part, and know themselves to do so, and deal with
us here as they do with the King of Spain at Rome, whom they accurse and
Eccommunicate for fashion sake on Maundy-Thursday, for detaining part of S.
Peter's Patrimony, and absolve him without satisfaction on Good Friday, methinks
their faltring and inconstancy herein, makes it very apparent. For though for
the most part, they speak nothing but thunder and lightning to us, and damn us
all without mercy or exception, yet sometimes to serve other purposes, they can
be content to speak to us in a milder strain, and tell us, as my adversary
does, more than once, That they allow Protestants as much Charity as
Protestants allow them. Neither is this the only contradiction which I have
discovered in this uncharitable Work; but have showed that by forgetting
himself, and retracting most of the principal grounds he builds upon, he has
saved me the labor of a confutation; which yet I have not in any place found
any such labor or difficulty, but that it was undertakeable by a man of very
mean, that is, of my abilities. And the reason is, because it is Truth I plead
for; which is so strong an argument for it self, that it needs only light to
discover it: whereas it concerns Falsehood and Error to use disguises and
shadowings and all the fetches of Art and Sophistry, and therefore it stands in
need of abler men, to give that a color at least, which has no real body to
subsist by. If my endeavors in this kind may contribute any thing to this
discovery, and the making plain that Truth (which my Charity persuades me the
most part of them disaffect only, because it has not been well represented to
them,) I have the fruit of my labor, and my wish; who desire to live to no
other end, than to do service to Gods Church and Your most Sacred Majesty, in
the quality of

Your Majesty's most faithful Subject, and most humble and devoted Servant
WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH.

THE PREFACE TO THE AUTHOR OF Charity Maintained. With an Answer to his
Direction to N. N.
SIR,
UPON the first news of the publication of your Book, I used all diligence with
speed to procure it; and came with such a mind to the reading of it, as S.
Austin before he was a settled Catholic, brought to his conference with Faustus
the Manichee. For as he thought, that if any thing more then ordinary might be
said in defense of the Manichean Doctrine, Faustus was the man from whom it was
to be expected: So my persuasion concerning you was, Si Pergama dextra defendi
possunt, certe hac defensa videbo.
If Troy by any Power could stand,
'Twould be defended by your hand.


1. For I conceived that among the Champions of the Roman Church, the English
in Reason must be the best, or equal to the best, as being by most expert
Masters trained up purposely for this war, and perpetually practiced in it.
Among the English, I saw the Jesuits would yield the first place to none; and
Men so wise in their generation as the Jesuits were, if they had any Achilles
among them, I presumed, would make choice of him for this service. And besides,
I had good assurance that in the framing of this building, though you were the
only Architect, yet you wanted not the assistance of many diligent hands to
bring you in choice materials toward it; nor of many careful and watchful eyes
to correct the errors of your work, if any should chance to escape you. Great
reason therefore had I to expect great matters from you, and that your Book
should have in it the Spirit and Elixir of all that can be said in defense of
your Church and Doctrine; and to assure my self, that if my resolution not to
believe it, were not built upon the rock of evident grounds and reasons, but
only upon some sandy and deceitful appearances, now the Wind and Storm and
Floods were coming, which would undoubtedly overthrow it.

2. Neither truly were you more willing to effect such an alteration in me than
I was to have it effected. For my desire is to go the right way to Eternal
Happiness. But whether this way lie on the right hand or the left, or strait
forwards; whether it be by following a living Guide, or by seeking my
directions in a Book, or by hearkening to the secret whisper of some private
Spirit, to me it is indifferent. And he that is otherwise affected, and has not
a Travelers indifference, which Epictetus requires in all that would find the
truth, but much desires in respect of his ease, or pleasure, or profit, or
advancement, or satisfaction of friends, or any human consideration, that one
way should be true rather than another; it is odds but he will take his desire
that it should be so, for an assurance that it is so. But I for my part, unless
I deceive my self, was and still am so affected as I have made profession: not
willing I confess to take any thing upon trust, and to believe it without
asking my self why; no, nor able to command my self (were I never so willing)
to follow, like a sheep, every shepherd that should take upon him to guide me;
or every Flock that should chance to go before me: but most apt and most
willing to be led by reason to any way, or from it; and always submitting all
other Reasons to this one, God has said so, therefore it is true. Nor yet was
I so unreasonable as to expect Mathematical demonstrations from you in matters
plainly incapable of them, such as are to be believed, and if we speak
properly, cannot be known; such therefore I expected not. For as he is an
unreasonable Master, who requires a stronger assent to his conclusions than his
arguments deserve; so I conceive him a froward and undisciplined Scholar, who
desires stronger arguments for a conclusion than the matter will bear. But had
you represented to my understanding such reasons of your Doctrine, as being
weighed in an even balance, held by an even hand, with those on the other
side, would have turned the Scale, and have made your Religion more credible
than the contrary; certainly I should have despised the shame of one more
alteration, and with both mine arms and all my heart most readily have
embraced it. Such was my expectation from you, and such my preparation, which I
brought with me to the reading of your Book.

3. Would you know now what the event was, what effect was wrought in me by the
perusal and consideration of it? To deal truly and ingenuously with you, I fell
somewhat in my good opinion both of your sufficiency and sincerity: but was
exceedingly confirmed in the ill opinion of the Cause maintained by you. I
found every where Snares that might entrap, and Colors that might deceive the
Simple; but nothing that might persuade, and very little that might move an
understanding Man, and one that can discern between Discourse and Sophistry. In
short, I was verily perseaded that I plainly saw and could make it appear, to
all dis-passionate and unprejudicate Judges, that a vein of Sophistry and
Calumny did run clean through it from the beginning to the end. And this I
undertook with a full resolution to be an adversary to your Errors, but a
Friend and Servant to your Person: and so much the more a Friend to your
Person, by how much the severer and more rigid Adversary I was to your Errors.

4. In this work, my Conscience bears me witness, that I have according to your
advice proceeded always with this consideration, that I am to give a most
strict account of every line, and word that passes under my Pen; and therefore
have been precisely careful for the matter of my Book to defend truth only, and
only by Truth. And then scrupulously fearful of Scandalizing you or any Man
with the manner of handling it.

6. In your Pamphlet of Directions to N. N. you have loaded not only my person
in particular, but all the Learned and Moderate Divines of the Church of
England, and all Protestants in general, nay all wise Men of all Religions but
your own, with unworthy Contumelies, and a Mass of portentous and execrable
Calumnies.

7. To begin with the last, you stick not in the beginning of your first
Chapter, to fasten the imputation of Atheism and Irreligion upon all wise and
gallant Men, that are not of your own Religion. In which uncharitable and
unchristian Judgment, void of all color or shadow of probability, I know yet
by experience that very many of the Bigots of your Faction are partakers with
you. God forbid I should think the like of you! Yet if I should say, that in
your Religion there want not some temptations unto, and some Principles of
Irreligion and Atheism, I am sure I could make my Assertion much more probable
than you have done, or can make this horrible imputation.

8. For to pass by first, that which experience justifies, that where and when
your Religion has most absolutely commanded, there and then Atheism has most
abounded; To say nothing Secondly, of your notorious and confessed forging of
so many false Miracles, and so many lying Legends, which is not unlikely to
make suspicious men to question the truth of all: Nor to object to you Thirdly,
the abundance of your weak and silly Ceremonies and ridiculous Observances in
your Religion, which in all probability cannot but beget secret contempt and
scorn of it in wise and considering men, and consequently Atheism and Impiety,
if they have this persuasion settled in them (which is too rife among you, and
which you account a piece of Wisdom and Gallantry) that if they be not of your
Religion, they were as good be of none at all: Nor to trouble you Fourthly with
this, that a great part of your Doctrine, especially in the Points contested,
makes apparently for the temporal ends of the teachers of it; which yet I fear
is a great scandal to many Beaux Esprits among you: Only I should desire you to
consider attentively when you conclude so often from the differences of
Protestants, that they have no certainty of any part of their Religion, no not
of those Points wherein they agree, whether you do not that which so
magisterially you direct me not to do, that is, proceed a destructive way, and
object arguments against your adversaries, which tend to the overthrow of all
Religion? And whether as you argue thus, Protestants differ in many things,
therefore they have no certainty of any thing: So an Atheist or a Sceptick may
not conclude as well, Christians, and the Professors of all Religions differ in
many things, therefore they have no certainty of any thing? Again, I should
desire you to tell me ingenuously, whether it be not too probable that your
portentous Doctrine of Transubstantiation, joined with your forementioned
persuasion of, No Papists no Christians, has brought a great many others as
well as himself, to Averroes's resolution, Quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod
comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis? Forasmuch as the Christians worship
that which they eat, let my Soul be with the Philosophers. Whether your
requiring men upon only probable and Prudential motives, to yield a most
certain assent unto things in humane reason impossible, and telling them, as
you do too often, that they were as good not believe at all, as believe with
any lower degree of Faith, be not a likely way to make considering men scorn
your Religion, (and consequently all, if they know no other) as requiring
things contradictory, and impossible to be performed? Lastly, Whether your
pretense that there is no good ground to believe Scripture, but your Churches
infallibility, joined with your pretending no ground for this but some Texts of
Scripture, be not a fair way to make them that understand themselves, believe
neither Church nor Scripture?

9. Your Calumnies against Protestants in general are set down in these words,
Chap. 2.. 2. The very doctrine of Protestants, if it be followed closely, and
with coherence to it self, must of necessity induce Socinianism. This I say
confidently, and evidently prove, by instancing in one Error, which may well be
termed the Capital and Mother-heresie, from which all other must follow at
ease; I mean, their Heresy in affirming that the perpetual visible Church of
Christ, descended by a never interrupted Succession from our Savior to this
day, is not infallible in all that it proposes to be believed as revealed
truths.

For if the Infallibility of such a public Authority be once impeached; what
remains, but that every man is given over to his own wit and discourse? and
talk not here of holy Scripture, for if the true Church may err, in defining
what Scriptures be Canonical; or in delivering the sense and meaning thereof,
we are still devolved, either upon the private Spirit ( a foolery now exploded
out of England, which finally leaving every man to his own conceits, ends in
Socinianism) or else epon natural wit and judgment, for examining and
determining what Scriptures contain true or false Doctrine, and in that respect
ought to be received or rejected. And indeed, take away the authority of Gods
Church, no man can be assured, that any one Book or parcel of Scripture was
written by Divine Inspiration; or that all the Contents are infallibly true,
which are the direct Errors of Socinians. If it were but for this reason alone,
no man, who regards the eternal salvation of his Soul, would live or die in
Protestancy, from which, so vast absurdities as these of the Socinians must
inevitably follow. And it ought to be an unspeakable comfort to all us
Catholics, while we consider, that none can deny the infallible authority of
our Church, but jointly he must be left to his own wit and ways, and must
abandon all infused Faith and true Religion, if he do but understand himself
aright. In all which Discourse, the only true word you speak, is, This I say
confidently: As for proving evidently, that I believe you reserved for some
other opportunity: for the present I am sure you have been very sparing of it.

10. You say indeed confidently enough, that the denial of the Churches
infallibility is the Mother-heresie, from which all other must follow at ease;
which is so far from being a necessary truth, as you make it, that it is indeed
a manifest falsehood. Neither is it possible for the wit of man by any good, or
so much as probable consequence, from the denialaof the Churches Infallibility
to deduce any one of the ancient Heresies, or any one Error of the Socinians,
which are the Heresies here entreated of: For who would not laugh at him that
should argue thus, Neither the Church of Rome, nor any other Church is
infallible, Ergo, The Doctrine of Arrius, Pelagius, Eutyches, Nestorius,
Photinus, Manichaeus, was true Doctrine? On the other side, it may be truly
said, and justified by very good and effectual reason, that he that affirms
with you the Popes Infallibility, puts himself into his hands and power to be
led by him at his ease and pleasure into all Heresy, and even to Hell it self,
and cannot with reason say, (so long as he is constant to his grounds) Domine
cur it a facis? Sir, Why do you thus? but must believe white to be black, and
black to be white; virtue to be vice, and vice to be virtue; nay (which is a
horrible, but a most certain truth) Christ to be Antichrist, and Antichrist to
be Christ, if it be possible for the Pope to say so: Which I say and will
maintain, howsoever you daub and disguise it, is indeed to make men apostate
from Christ to his pretended Vicar, but real Enemy: For that name, and no
better, (if we may speak truth without offense) I presume he deserves, who
under pretense of interpreting the Law of Christ, (which Authority, without any
word of express warrant, he has taken upon himself) does in many parts
evacuate and dissolve it: So dethroning Christ from his dominion over men's
consciences, and instead of Christ setting up himself. In as much as he that
requires that his Interpretations of any Law should be obeyed as true and
genuine, seem they to men's understandings never so dissonant and discordant
from it, (as the Bishop of Rome does) requires indeed that his Interpretations
should be the Laws; and he that is firmly prepared in mind to believe and
receive all such Interpretations without judging of them, and though to his
private judgment they seem unreasonable, is indeed congruously disposed to hold
Adultery a venial sin, and Fornication no sin, whenever the Pope and his
adherents shall so declare. And whatsoever he may plead, yet either wittingly
or ignorantly he makes the Law and the Lawmakers both stales, and obeys only
the Interpreter. As if I should submit to the Laws of the King of England, but
should indeed resolve to obey them in that sense which the King of France
should put upon them whatsoever it were; I presume every understanding man
would say that I did indeed obey the King of France and not the King of
England. If I should pretend to believe the Bible, but that I would understand
it accordingly to the sense which the chief Mufty should put upon it, who would
not say that I were a Christian in pretense only, but indeed a Mahumetan?

11. Nor will it be to purpose for you to pretend that the precepts of Christ
are so plain that it cannot be feared, that any Pope should ever go about to
dissolve them and pretend to be a Christian: For, not to say that you now
pretend the contrary, (to wit), that the Law of Christ is obscure, even in
things necessary to be believed and done; and by saying so, have made a fair
way for any foul interpretation of any part of it: certainly that which the
Church of Rome has already done in this kind, is an evident argument, (that if
she once had this Power unquestioned and made expedite and ready for use, by
being contracted to the Pope) she may do what she pleases with it. Who that
had lived in the Primative Church, would not have thought it as utterly
improbable, that ever they should have brought in the Worship of Images and
Picturing of God, as now it is that they should legitimate Fornication? Why may
we not think they may in time take away the whole Communion from the Laity, as
well as they have taken away half of it? Why may we not think that any Text and
any sense may not be accorded, as well as the whole 14. Chapter of the Ep. of S.
Paul to the Corinth. is reconciled to the Latin service? How is it possible
any thing should be plainer forbidden, than the Worship of Angels, in the Ep.
to the Colossians? than the teaching for Doctrines Men's commands in the Gospel
of S. Mark? And therefore seeing we see these things done which hardly any man
would have believed, that had not seen them, why should we not fear that this
unlimited Power may not be used hereafter with as little moderation? Seeing
devices have been invented how Men may worship Images without Idolatry, and
Kill Innocent Men under pretense of Heresy without Murder, who knows not that
some tricks may not be hereafter devised, by which lying with other Men's Wives
shall be no Adultery, taking away other Men's Goods no Theft? I conclude
therefore, that if Solomon himself were here, and were to determine the
difference, which is more likely to be Mother of all Heresy, the denial of the
Churches, or the affirming of the Popes Infallibility, that he would certainly
say, this is the Mother, give her the Child.

12. You say again confidently, that if this Infallibility be once impeached,
every Man is given over to his own Wit and Discourse: which, if you mean,
Discourse, not guiding it self by Scripture, but only by principles of Nature,
or perhaps by prejudices and popular errors, and drawing consequences not by
rule but chance, is by no means true; if you mean by Discourse, right reason,
grounded on Divine revelation and common notions, written by God in the hearts
of all Men, and deducing, according to the never failing rules of Logic,
consequent deductions from them, if this be it, which you mean by Discourse, it
is very meet and reasonable and necessary that Men, as in all their actions, so
especially in that of greatest importance, the choice of their way to
happiness, should be left unto it: and he that follows this in all his opinions
and actions, and does not only seem to do so, follows always God; whereas he
that follows a Company of Men, may oftimes follow a Company of Beasts. And in
saying this, I say no more than S. John to all Christians in these words,
Dearly beloved, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be
of God, or no: and the rule he gives them to make this trial by, is to consider
whether they confess Jesus to be the Christ; that is, the Guide of their Faith,
and Lord of their actions; not whether they acknowledge the Pope to be his
Vicar: I say no more than S. Paul in exhorting all Christians, to try all
things and to hold fast that which is good; than S. Peter in commanding all
Christians, to be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them: than our
Savior himself in forewarning all his followers, that if they blindly followed
blind Guides, both leaders and followers should fall into the Ditch; and again
in saying even to the People, Yea and why of your selves Judge ye not what is
right? And though by passion, or precipitation, or prejudice; by want of
Reason, or not using that they have, Men may be and are oftentimes led into
Error and mischief; yet that they cannot be misguided by discourse truly so
called, such as I have described, you your self have given them security. For
what is discourse, but drawing conclusions out of premises by good consequence?
Now the principles which we have settled, to wit, the Scriptures, are on all
sides agreed to be infallibly true. And you have told us in the fourth chap. of
this Pamphlet, that from truth no man can by good consequence infer falsehood;
Therefore by discourse no Man can possibly be led to Error: but if he Err in
his conclusions, he must of necessity either Err in his principles, (which here
cannot have place,) or commit some Error in his discourse; that is indeed, not
discourse but seem to do so.

13. You say thirdly, with sufficient confidence, that if the true Church may
Err in defining what Scriptures be Canonical, or in delivering the sense
thereof, then we must follow either the private Spirit, or else natural wit and
Judgment, and by them examine what Scriptures contain true or false Doctrine,
and in that respect ought to be received or rejected: All which is apparently
untrue, neither can any proof of it be pretended. For though the present Church
may possibly Err in her judgment touching this matter, yet have we other
Directions in it, besides the private spirit, and the examination of the
Contents, (which latter way may conclude the negative very strongly, to wit,
that such or such a Book cannot come from God, because it contains
irreconcilable contradictions, but the affirmative it cannot conclude, because
the Contents of a Book may be all true, and yet the Book not written by Divine
inspiration:) other Direction therefore I say we have, besides either of these
three, and that is, the Testimony of the Primitive Christians.

14. You say Fourthly, with convenient boldness, That this infallible Authority
of your Church being denied, no man can be assured, that any parcel of
Scripture was written by Divine inspiration: Which is an untruth, for which no
proof is pretended, and besides, void of modesty and full of impiety. The
first, because the experience of innumerable Christians is against it, who are
sufficiently assured, that the Scripture is Divinely inspired, and yet deny the
infallible Authority of your Church or any other. The second, because if I
cannot have ground to be assured of the Divine Authority of Scripture, unless I
first believe your Church infallible, then I can have no ground at all to
believe it: because there is no ground, nor can any be pretended, why I should
believe your Church Infallible, unless I first believe the Scripture Divine.

16. Had I a mind to recriminate now, and to charge Papists (as you do
Protestants) that they lead Men to Socinianism, I could certainly make a much
fairer show of evidence than you have done. For I would not tell you, you deny
the Infallibility of the Church of England, Ergo, you lead to Socinianism,
which yet is altogether as good an Argument as this; Protestants deny the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Ergo, they induce Socinianism: Nor would I
resume my former Argument, and urge you, that by holding the Popes
Infallibility, you submit your self to that Capital and Mother Heresy, by
advantage whereof, he may lead you at ease to believe virtue vice, and vice
virtue, to believe Antichristianity Christianism, and Christianity
Antichristian; he may lead you to Socinianism, to Turcism, nay, to the Devil
himself if he have a mind to it: But I would show you that diverse ways the
Doctors of your Church do the principal and proper work of the Socinians for
them, undermining the Doctrine of the Trinity, by denying it to be supported by
those Pillars of the Faith, which alone are fit and able to support it, I mean
Scripture, and the Consent of the Ancient Doctors.

17. For Scripture, your Men deny very plainly and frequently, that this
Doctrine can be proved by it. See if you please, this plainly taught, and urged
very carnestly by Cardinal Hosius, De Author. Sac. Scrip. l. 3. p. 53. By
Gordonius Huntlaeus, Contr. Tom. 1. Controv. 1. De verbo Dei C. 19. by
Gretserus and Tanerus, in Colloquio Ratesbon: And also by Vega, Possevin,
Wiekus, and Others.

18. And then for the Consent of the Ancients, that that also delivers it not,
by whom are we taught but by Papists only? Who is it that makes known to all
the World, that Eusebius that great searcher and devourer of the Christian
Libraries was an Arrian? Is it not your great Achilles, Cardinal Perron, in his
3. Book 2. Chap. of his Reply to K. James? Who is it that informs us that
Origin (who never was questioned for any Error in this matter, in or near his
time) denied the Divinity of the Son and the Holy Ghost? Is it not the same
great Cardinal, in his Book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis. l. 2. c. 7?
Who is it that pretends that Irenaeus has said those things, which he that
should now hold, would be esteemed an Arrian? Is it not the same Perron in his
Reply to K. James, in the Fifth Chap. of his Fourth Observation? And does he
not in the same place peach Tertullian also, and in a manner give him away to
the Arrians? And pronounce generally of the Fathers before the Council of Nice,
That the Arrians would gladly be tried by them? And are not your fellow Jesuits
also, even the Prime Men of your Order, prevaricators in this point as well as
others? Does not your Friend M. Fisher, or M. Flued in his Book of the Nine
Questions proposed to him by K. James speak dangerously to the same purpose, in
his Discourse of the Resolution of Faith, toward the end? Giving us to
understand, That the new Reformed Arrians bring very many Testimonies of the
Ancient Fathers, to prove that in this Point they did contradict themselves,
and were contrary one to another: which places whosoever shall read will
clearly see, that to common People they are unanswerable, yea, that common
People are not capable of the Answers that Learned Men yield unto such obscure
passages. And has not your great Antiquary Petavius, in his Notes upon
Epiphanius in Haer. 69. been very liberal to the Adversaries of the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and in a manner given them for Patrons and Advocates, first Justin
Martyr, and then almost all the Fathers before the Council of Nice, whose
Speeches he says, touching this point, cum Orthodoxae fidei regula minime
consentiunt: Are no way agreeable to the rule of Orthodox Faith. Hereunto I
might add, that the Dominicans and Jesuits between them in another matter of
great importance, viz. Gods Prescience of future contingents, give the
Socinians the premises, out of which their conclusion does unavoidably follow.
For the Dominicans maintain on the one Side, that God can foresee nothing but
what he Decrees: The Jesuits on the other Side, that he does not Decree all
things: And from hence the Socinians conclude (as it is obvious for them to do)
that he does not foresee all things. Lastly, I might adjoyn this, that you
agree with one consent, and settle for a rule unquestionable, that no part of
Religion can be repugnant to Reason, whereunto you in particular subscribe
unawares in saying, From truth no Man can by good consequence infer falsehood,
which is to say in effect, that Reason can never lead any Man to Error: And
after you have done so, you proclaim to all the World (as you in this Pamphlet
do very frequently,) that if Men follow their Reason and Discourse, they will
(if they understand themselves) be led to Socinianism. And thus you see with
what probable matter I might furnish out and justify my accusation, if I
should charge you with leading Men to Socinianism! Yet I do not conceive that I
have ground enough for this odious imputation. And much less should you have
charged Protestants with it, whom you confess to abhor and detest it: and who
fight against it, not with the broken Reeds, and out of the Paper Fortresses of
an imaginary Infallibility, which were only to make sport for their
Adversaries; but with the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: of which we may
say most truly, what David said of Goliah's Sword, offered him by Abilech, non
est sicut iste, There is none comparable to it.

19. Thus Protestants in general, I hope, are sufficiently vindicated from your
Calumny: I proceed now to do the same service for the Divines of England; whom
you question first in point of Learning and Sufficiency, and then in point of
Conscience and Honesty, as prevaricating in the Religion which they profess,
and inclining to Popery. Their Learning (you say) consists only in some
superficial Talent of Preaching, Languages, and Elocution, and not in any deep
knowledge of Philosophy, especially of Metaphysics, and much less of that most
solid, profitable, subtle, and (O rem ridiculam Cato and jocosam!) succinct
method of School Divinity. Wherein you have discovered in your self the true
Genius and Spirit of detraction. For taking advantage from that wherein envy it
self cannot deny but they are very eminent, and which requires great
sufficiency of substantial Learning, you disparage them as insufficient in all
things else. As if Forsooth, because they dispute not eternally. Utrum Chimaera
bombinans in vacuo, possit comedere secundas Intentiones? Whether a Million of
Angels may not sit upon a Needles point? Because they fill not their Brains
with notions that fignifie nothing, to the utter extermination of all reason
and common sense, and spend not an Age in weaving and un-weaving subtle
Cobwebs, fitter to catch Flies than Souls; therefore they have no deep
knowledge in the Acroamatical part of Learning! But I have too much honored
the poorness of this detraction to take notice of it.

20. The other Part of your accusation strikes deeper, and is more
considerable: And that tells us that, Protestantism waxes weary of it self;
that the Professors of it, they especially of greatest Worth, Learning, and
Authority, love temper and moderation: and are at this time more unresolved
where to fasten, than at the Infancy of their Church: That their Churches begin
to look with a New Face: Their Walls to Speak a New Language: Their Doctrine to
be altered in many things, for which their Progenitors forsook the then Visible
Church of Christ: For example, the Pope not Antichrist: Prayer for the Dead:
Limbus Patrum: Pictures: That the Church has Authority in determining
Controversies of Faith, and to interpret Scripture; about Freewil,
Predestination, Universal Grace: That all our Works are not Sins: Merit of good
Works: Inherent Justice: Faith alone does not justify: Charity to be preferred
before knowledge: Traditions: Commandments possible to be kept: That their
thirty nine Articles are patient, nay ambitious of some sense wherein they may
seem Catholic: That to Allege the necessity of Wife and Children in these
days, is but a weak Plea for a Married Minister to compass a Benefice: That
Calvinism is at length accounted Heresy, and little less than Treason: That
Men in Talk and Writing use willingly the once fearful Names of Priests and
Altars: That they are now put in mind, that for exposition of Scripture, they
are by Canon bound to follow the Fathers: which if they do with sincerity, it
is easy to tell what Doom will pass against Protestants; seeing by the
confession of Protestants, the Fathers are on the Papists side, which the
Answerer to some so clearly demonstrated, that they remained convinced: In
fine, as the Samaritans saw in the Disciples countenances, that they meant to
go to Jerusalem, so you pretend it is even legible in the Foreheads of these
Men, that they are even going, nay making have to Rome. Which scurrilous Libel
void of all Truth, Discretion and Honesty, what effect it may have wrought,
what credit it may have gained with credulous Papists, (who dream what they
desire, and believe their own dreams,) or with ill-affected, jealous, and weak
Protestants, I cannot tell: But one thing I dare boldly say, that you your self
did never believe it.

21. The truth is, they that run to extremes in opposition against you, they
that pull down your Infallibility and set up their own, they that declaim
against your Tyranny, and exercise it themselves over others, are the
Adversaries that give you the greatest advantage, and such as you love to deal
with: whereas upon Men of temper and moderation, such as will oppose nothing
because you maintain it, but will draw as near to you, that they may draw you
to them, as the Truth will suffer them: such as require of Christians to
believe only in Christ, and will Damn no Man nor Doctrine without express and
certain warrant from Gods Word: upon such as these you know not how to fasten;
but if you chance to have conference with any such, (which yet as much as
possibly you can you avoid and decline,) you are very speedily put to silence,
and see the indefensible weakness of your cause laid open to all Men. And this
I verily believe is the true Reason that you thus rave and rage against them,
as foreseeing your time of prevailing; or even of subsisting, would be short,
if other adversaries gave you no more advantage than they do.

22. In which persuasion also I am much confirmed by consideration of the
Silliness and Poorness of those suggestions, and partly of the apparent vanity
and Falsehood of them, which you offer in justification of this wicked Calumny.
For what if out of Devotion toward God; out of a desire that He should be
Worshipped as in Spirit and Truth in the first place, so also in the Beauty of
Holiness? what if out of fear, that too much Simplicity and Nakedness in the
public Service of God may beget in the ordinary sort of Men a dull and stupid
irreverence, and out of hope that the outward State and Glory of it, being well
disposed and wisely moderated, may engender, quicken, increase and nourish the
inward reverence, respect and devotion which is due unto Gods Sovereign Majesty
and Power? What if out of a persuasion and desire that Papists may be won over
to us the sooner, by the removing of this Scandal out of their way; and out of
an Holy Jealousy, that the weaker sort of Protestants might be the easier
seduced to them by the Magnificence and Pomp of their Church Service in case it
were not removed? I say, what if out of these considerations, the Governors of
our Church, more of late than formerly, have set themselves to adorn and
beautify the places where Gods Honor dwells, and to make them as Heavenly as
they can with Earthly Ornaments? Is this a sign that they are warping toward
Popery? Is this Devotion in the Church of England, an argument that She is
coming over to the Church of Rome? Sir Edwin Sands, I presume every Man will
grant, had no inclination that way; yet He Forty Years since highly commended
this part of Devotion in Papists, and makes no scruple of proposing it to the
imitation of Protestants: little thinking that they who would follow his
Counsel, and endeavor to take away this disparagement of Protestants, and this
Glorying of Papists, should have been censured for it, as making way and
inclining to Popery. His Words to this purpose are excellent Words, and because
they show plainly, Survey of Religion.
that what is now practiced was approved by Zealous Protestants so long ago, I
will here set them down.

23. This one thing J cannot but highly commend in that sort and Order: They
spare nothing which either cost can perform in enriching, or skill in adorning
the Temple of God, or to set out his Service with the greatest Pomp and
magnificence that can be devised. And although, for the most part, much
Baseness and Childishness is predominant in the Masters and contrivers of their
Ceremonies, yet this outward State and Glory being well disposed, does
engender, quicken, increase, and nourish the inward reverence, respect and
Devotion, which is due unto Sovereign Majesty and Power. And although I am not
ignorant that many Men well reputed have embraced the thrifty Opinion of that
Disciple, who thought all to be wasted that was bestowed upon Christ in that
sort, and that it were much better bestowed upon him on the Poor, (yet with an
eye perhaps that themselves would be his quarter Almoners,) notwithstanding I
must confess, it will never sink into my Heart, that in proportion of Reason,
the allowance for furnishing out of the Service of God should be measured by
the scant and strict rule of mere necessity, (a proportion so low that Nature
to other most bountiful in matter of necessity, has not failed no not the most
ignoble Creatures of the World,) and that for our selves no measure of heaping
but the most we can get, no rule of expense but to the utmost Pomp we lift: Or
that God himself had so enriched the lower parts of the World with such
wonderful varieties of Beauty and Glory, thut they might serve only to the
Pampering of Mortal Man in his Pride; and that in the Service of the High
Creator Lord and giver, (the outward Glory of whose higher Palace may appear
by the very Lamps that we see so far off Burning gloriously in it) only the
Simpler, Baser, Cheaper, Less Noble, Less Beautiful, Less Glorious things
should be employed. Especially seeing as in Princes Courts, so in the Service
of God also, this outward State and Glory, being well disposed, does (as I have
said) engender, quicken, increase and nourish the inward reverence, respect and
Devotion, which is due to so Sovereign Majesty and Power. Which those whom the
use thereof cannot persuade unto, would easily by the want of it be brought to
confess; for which cause I crave leave to be excused by them herein, if in Zeal
to the common Lord of all, I choose rather to commend the virtue of an Enemy
than to flatter the vice and imbecility of a Friend. And so much for this
matter.

24. Again, what if the Names of the Priests and Altars so frequent in the
Ancient Fathers, though not in the now Popish sense, be now resumed and more
commonly used in England than of late times they were: that so the colorable
argument of their conformity, which is but nominal, with the Ancient Church,
and our inconformity, which the Governors of the Church would not have so much
as nominal, may be taken away from them; and the Church of England may be put
in a State, in this regard more justifiable against the Roman than formerly it
was, being hereby enabled to say to Papists (whenever these Names are
objected,) we also use the Names of Priests and Altars, and yet believe neither
the Corporal Presence, nor any Proper and propitiatory Sacrifice?

25. What if Protestants be now put in mind, that for exposition of Scripture,
they are bound by a Canon to follow the Ancient Fathers: which whosoever does
with sincerity, it is utterly impossible he should be a Papist? And it is most
falsely said by you, that you know that to some Protestants I clcarly
demonstrated, or ever so much as undertook, or wentabout to demonstrate the
contrary. What if the Centurists be censured somewhat roundly by a Protestant
Divine for affirming, that the keeping of the Lords day was a thing indifferent
for two Hundren Years? Is there in all this or any part of it any kind of proof
of this scandalous Calumny?

26. As for the points of Doctrine wherein you pretend that these Divines begin
of late to falter, and to comply with the Church of Rome, upon a due
examination of particulars it will presently appear, First, that part of them
always have been, and now are held constantly one way by them; as the Authority
of the Church in determining Controversies of Faith, though not the
Infallibility of it: That there is Inherent Justice, though so imperfect that
it cannot justify: That there are Traditions, though none necessary: That
Charity is to be preferred before knowledge: That good Works are not properly
meritorious: And lastly, that Faith alone justifies, though that Faith
justifies not which is alone. And Secondly, for the remainder that they, every
one of them, have been Anciently without breach of Charity disputed among
Protestants, such for example were the Questions about the Popes being the
Antichrist, the Lawfulness of some kind of Prayers for the Dead, the Estate of
the Fathers Souls, before Christ's Ascension; Freewil, Predestination, Universal
Grace: the Possibility of keeping Gods Commandments. The use of Pictures in the
Church: Wherein that there has been anciently diversity of opinion anongst
Protestants, it is justified to my hand by a witness, with you, beyond
exception, even your great Friend M. Brerely, whose care, exactness and
fidelity (you say in your Preface) is so extraordinary great. Consult him
therefore: Tract. 3. Sect. 7. of his Apology: And in the 9, 10, 11. 14. 24. 26.
27. 37. Subdivisions of that Section, you shall see as in a mirror, your self
proved an egregious calumniator, for charging Protestants with innovation and
inclining to Popery, under pretense forsooth, that their Doctrine begins of
late to be altered in these points. Whereas, M Brerely will inform you, they
have been anciently, and even from the begininng of the Reformation,
controverted amongst them, though perhaps the Stream and Current of their
Doctors run one way, and only some Brook or Rivulet of them the other.

27. It remains now in the last place, that I bring my self fairly off from
your foul Aspersions, that so my Person may not be any disparagement to the
Cause, nor any scandal to weak Christians.

28. First upon Hearsay, you charge me with a great number of false and impious
Doctrines, which I will not name in particular, because I will not assist you
so far in the spreading of my own undeserved defamation: but whosoever teaches
or holds them let him be Anathema! The Sum of them all is this, Nothing ought
or can be certainly believed, farther than it may be proved by evidence of
Natural Reason: (where I conceive Natural reason it opposed to supernatural
Revelation) and whosoever holds so let him be Anathema! And moreover to clear
my self once for all, from all imputations of this nature, which charge me
injuriously with denial of Supernatural Verities, I profess sincerely, that I
believe all those Books of Scripture, which the Church of England accounts
Canonical, to be the Infallible Word of God: I believe all things evidently
contained in them; all things evidently, or even probably deducible from them:
I acknowledge all that to be Heresy, which by the Act of Parliament primo of
Q. ELIZ. is declared to be so, and only to be so: And though in such points
which may be held diversely of diverse men salva Fidei compage. I would not take
any Man's Liberty from him, and humbly beseech all men, that they would not take
mine from me! Yet thus much I can say (which I hope will satisfy any man of
reason,) that whatsoever has been held necessary to Salvation, either by the
Catholic Church of all ages, or by the consent of Fathers, measured by
Vincentius Lyrinensis his rule, or is held necessary either by the Catholic
Church of this age, or by the consent of Protestants, or even by the Church of
England, that, against the Socinians, and all others whatsoever, I do verily
believe and embrace.

29. But what are all Personal matters to the business in hand? If it could be
proved that Cardinal Bellarmine was indeed a Jew, or that Cardinal Perron was
an Atheist, yet I presume you would not accept of this for an Answer to all
their writings in defense of your Religion. Let then my actions and intentions
and opinions be what they will, yet I hope truth is nevertheless Truth, nor
reason ever the less Reason because I speak it. And therefore the Christian
Reader, knowing that his Salvation or Damnation depends upon his impartial and
sincere judgment of these things, will guard himself I hope from these
Impostures, and regard not the Person but the cause and the reasons of it; not
who speaks but what is spoken: Which is all the favor I desire of him, as
knowing that I am desirous not to persuade him, unless it be truth whereunto I
persuade him.

30. The last Accusation is, That I answer out of Principles which Protestants
themselves will profess to detest: whch indeed were to the purpose if it could
be justified. But, besides that it is confuted by my whole Book, and made
ridiculous by the Approbations premised unto it, it is very easy for me out of
your own Mouth and Words to prove it a most injurious calumny. For what one
Conclusion is there in the whole Fabric of my Discourse, that is not naturally
deducible out of this one Principle, That all things necessary to Salvation are
evidently contained in Scripture? Or what one Conclusion almost of importance
is there in your Book, which is not by this one clearly confutable? Grant this,
and it will presently follow in opposition to your first Conclusion, and the
argument of your first Ch: that amongst men of different opinions, touching the
obscure and controverted Questions of Religion, such as may with probability be
disputed on both Sides (and such as are the disputes of Protestants;) Good men
and lovers of truth of all Sides may be saved; because all necessary things
being supposed evident, concerning them, with men so qualified, there will be
no difference: There being no more certain sign that a Point is not evident,
than that honest and understanding and indifferent men, and such as give
themselves liberty of judgment, after a mature consideration of the matter
differ about it.

31. Grant this, and it will appear, Secondly, that the means whereby the
revealed Truths of God are conveyed to our understanding, and which are to
determine all Controversies in Faith, necessary to be determined, may be, for
any thing you have said to the contrary, not a Church but the Scripture; which
contradicts the Doctrine of your Second Chapter.

32. Grant this, and the distinction of points Fundamental and not Fundamental,
will appear very good and pertinent. For those truths will be Fundamental,
which are evidently delivered in Scripture, and commanded to be Preached to all
men; Those not Fundamental which are obscure. And nothing will hinder, but that
the Catholic Church may Err in the latter kind of the said points: because
Truths not necessary to the Salvation, cannot be necessary to the being of a
Church; and because it is not absolutely necessary that God should assist his
Church any farther than to bring Her to Salvation; neither will there be any
necessity at all of any Infallible Guide, either to consign unwritten
Traditions, or to declare the obscurities of the Faith. Not for the former end,
be cause this Principle being granted true, nothing unwritten can be necessary
to be consigned. Nor for the latter, because nothing that is obscure can be
necessary to be understood, or not mistaken. And so the discourse of your whole
Third Chap: will presently vanish.

33. Fourthly, for the Creed's containing the Fundamentals of simple belief,
though I see not how it may be deduced from this principle, yet the granting of
this plainly renders the whole dispute touching the Creed necessary. For if all
necessary things of all sorts, whether of simple belief or practice be
confessed to be clearly contained in Scripture, what imports it whether those
of one sort be contained in the Creed?

34. Fifthly, let this be granted, and the immediate Corollary in opposition to
your Fifth Chap. will be and must be, That, not Protestants for rejecting, but
the Church of Rome for imposing upon the Faith of Christians, Doctrines
unwritten and unnecessary, and for disturbing the Churches Peace, and dividing
Unity for such matters, is in a high degree presumptuous and Schismatical.

35. Grant this, sixthly, and it will follow unavoidably that Protestants
cannot possibly be Heretics, seeing they believe all things evidently
contained in Scripture, which are supposed to be all that is necessary to be
believed: and so your Sixth Chapter is clearly confuted.

36. Grant this Lastly, and it will be undoubtedly consequent, in contradiction
of your Seventh Chapter, that no Man can show more Charity to himself than by
continuing a Protestant, seeing Protestants are supposed to believe, and
therefore may accordingly practice, at least by their Religion are not hindered
from practicing and performing all things necessary to Salvation.

37. So that the position of this one Principle, is the direct overthrow of
your whole Book, and therefore I needed not, nor indeed have I made use of any
other. Now this principle, which is not only the Cornerstone or chief Pillar,
but even the base, and adequate Foundation of my Answer; and which while it
stands firm and unmovable, cannot but be the supporter of my Book, and the
certain ruin of yours, is so far from being, according to your pretense,
detested by all Protestants, that all Protestants whatsoever, as you may see in
their Harmony of Confessions, unanimously profess and maintain it. And you your
self, C. 6. 30. plainly confess as much, in saying, The whole Edifice of the
Faith of Protestants is settled on these two Principles: These particular Books
are Canonical Scripture: And the sense and meaning of them is plain and evident
at least in all points necessary to Salvation.

38. And thus your Venom against me is in a manner spent, saving only that
there remain two little impertinences, whereby you would disable me from being
a fit advocate for the cause of Protestants. The first, because I refuse to
subscribe the Artic. of the Chapter of England: The second, because I have set down
in writing, motives which sometime induced me to forsake Protestantism, and
hitherto have not answered them.

39. By the former of which objections it should seem, that either you conceive
the 39 Articles the common Doctrine of all Protestants, and if they be, why
have you so often upbraided them with-their many and great differences? Or else
that it is the peculiar defense of the Church of England, and not the common
cause of all Protestants, which is here undertaken by me: which are certainly
very gross mistakes. And yet, why he who makes scruple of subscribing the truth
of one or two Propositions, may not yet be fit enough to maintain, that those
who do subscribe them, are in a saveable condition, I do not understand. Now
though I hold not the Doctrine of all Protestants absolutely true, (which with
reason cannot be required of me while they hold contradictions,) yet I hold it
free from all impiety, and from all Error destructive of Salvation, or in it
self damnable: And this I think in reason may sufficiently qualify me, for a
maintainer of this assertion, that Protestancy destroys not Salvation. For the
Church of England, I am persuaded that the constant Doctrine of it is so pure
and Orthodox, that whosoever believes it and lives according to it, undoubtedly
he shall be saved; and that there is no Error in it which may necessitate or
warrant any Man to disturb the peace or renounce the Communion of it. This in
my opinion is all intended by Subscription, and thus much if you conceive me
not ready to subscribe, your Charity I assure you is much mistaken.

40. Your other Objection is yet more impertinent and frivolous than the
former: Unless perhaps it be a just exception against a Physician, that himself
was sometimes in, and recovered himself from that Disease which he undertakes
to cure; or against a Guide in a way, that at first before he had experience,
himself mistook it, and afterward found his error and amended it. That noble
writer Michael de Montai'gne, was surely of a far different mind; for he will
hardly allow any Physician competent, but only for such Diseases as himself had
passed through: And a far greater than Montai'gne, even he that said, Tu
conversus confirma fratres, when thou art converted, strengthen by Brethren,
gives us sufficiently to understand, that they which have themselves been in
such a state as to need Conversion, are not thereby made incapable of, but
rather engaged and obliged unto, and qualified for this Charitable Function.

41. The Motives then, hitherto not answered, were these.

42. I. Because perpetual visible profession, which could never be wanting to
the Religion of Christ, nor any part of it, is apparently wanting to Protestant
Religion, so far as concerns the points in contestation.

II. Because Luther and his followers, separating from the Church of Rome,
separated also from all Churches, pure or impure, true or false then being in
the world; upon which ground I conclude, that either Gods promises did fail of
performance, if there were then no Church in the World, which held all things
necessary, and nothing repugnant to Salvation; or else that Luther and his
Sectaries, separating from all Churches then in the World, and so from the
true, if there were any true, were damnable Schismatics.

III. Because, if any credit may be given to as credible records, as any are
extant, the Doctrine of Catholics has been frequently confirmed; and the
opposite Doctrine of Protestants, confounded with supernatural and Divine
Miracles.

IV. Because many points of Protestant Doctrine, are the damned Opinions of
Heretics, condemned by the Primitive Church.

V. Because the Prophecies of the Old Testament, touching the Couversion of
Kings and Nations to the true Religion of Christ, have been accomplished in and
by the Catholic Roman Religion, and the Professors of it; and not by
Protestant Religion, and the Professors of it.

VI. Because the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is conformable, and the
Doctrine of Protestants contrary, to the Doctrine of the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, even by the Confession of Protestants themselves; I mean,
those Fathers, who lived within the compass of the first 600. years; to whom
Protestants themselves do very frequently, and very confidently appeal.

VII. Because the first pretended Reformers had neither extraordinary
Commission from God, nor ordinary Mission from the Church, to Preach Protestant
Doctrine.

VIII. Because Luther, to Preach against the Mass (which contains the most
material points now in controversy) was persuaded by reasons suggested to him
by the Devil himself, disputing with him. So himself professes in his Book de
Missa Privata. That all men might take heed of following him, who professes
himself to follow the Devil.

IX. Because the Protestant cause is now, and has been from the beginning,
maintained with gross falsifications, and Calumnies; whereof their prime
Controversy writers, are notoriously, and in high degree guilty.

X. Because by denying all humane Authority, either of Pope, or Councils, or
Church, to determine Controversies of Faith, they have abolished all possible
means of suppressing Heresy, or restoring Unity to the Church.

These are the Motives; now my Answers to them follow briefly and in order.

43. To the first: God has neither drecreed nor foretold, that his true
Doctrine should de facto be always visibly professed, without any mixture of
falsehood.

To the second: God has neither decreed nor foretold, that there shall be
always a visible Company of Men free from all Error in it self Damnable.
Neither is it always of necessity Schismatical to separate from the external
Communion of a Church, though wanting nothing necessary: For if this Church
supposed to want nothing necessary, require me to profess against my
Conscience, that I believe some Error, tho never so small and innocent, which I
do not believe, and will not allow me Her Communion, but upon this condition:
In this case, the Church for requiring this condition is Schismatical, and not
I for separating from the Church.

To the third: If any credit may be given to Records far more creditable than
these, the Doctrine of Protestants, that is, the Bible has been confirmed, and
the Doctrine of Papists, which is in many points plainly opposite to it
confounded with Supernatural and Divine Miracles, which for number and Glory,
outshine Popish pretended Miracles, as much as the Sun does an Ignis fatuus,
those I mean which were wrought by our Savior Christ and his Apostles: Now
this Book, by the Confession of all sides confirmed by innumerous Miracles,
foretells me plainly, that in after Ages, great Signs and Wonders shall be
wrought in confirmation of false Doctrine, and that I am not to believe any
Doctrine which seems to my understanding repugnant to the first, though an
Angel from Heaven should teach it; which were certainly as great a Miracle as
any that was ever wrought in attestation of any part of the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome: But that true Doctrine should in all Ages have the testimony of
Miracles, that I am no where taught; So that I have more reason to suspect and
be afraid of pretended Miracles, as signs of false Doctrine, then much to
regard them as certain arguments of the truth. Besides, setting aside the
Bible, and the Tradition of it, there is as good story for Miracles wrought by
those who lived and died in opposition to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, (as
by S. Cyprian, Colmannus, Columbanus, Aidanus and others,) as there is for
those that are pretended to be wrought by the Members of that Church. Lastly,
it seems to me no strange thing, that God in his Justice should permit some
true Miracles to be wrought to delude them, who have forged so many, as
apparently the Professors of the Roman Doctrine have to abuse the World.

To the Fourth: All those were not See this acknowledged by Bellar: de Scrip:
Eccles. in Philastrio: by Petavius Animad. in Epiph. de inscrip. operis: By S.
Austin. Lib. de Haeres. Haer. 80.
Heretics which by Philastrius, Epiphanius, or S. Austine were put in the
Catalogue of Heretics.

To the Fifth: Kings and Nations have been, and may be Converted by Men of
contrary Religions.

To the Sixth: The Doctrine of Papists, is confessed by Papists contrary to the
Fathers in many points.

To the Seventh: The Pastors of a Church cannot but have Authority from it, to
Preach against the abuses of it, whether in Doctrine or Practice, if there be
any in it: Neither can any Christian want an ordinary commission from God to do
a necessary work of Charity after a peacable manner, when there is no body else
that can or will do it. In extraordinary cases, extraordinary courses are not
to be disallowed. If some Christian Layman should come into a Country of
Infidels, and had ability to persuade them to Christianity, who would say he
might not use it for want of Commission!

To the Eighth: Luthers conference with the Devil might be, for ought I know,
nothing but a Melancholy Dream: If it were real, the Devil might persuade
Luther from the Mass, hoping by doing so to keep him constant to it: Or that
others would make his dissuasion from it an argument for it, (as we see Papists
do) and be afraid of following Luther, as confessing himself to have been
persuaded by the Devil.

To the Ninth: Illiacos intra muros peccatur and extra. Papists are more guilty
of this fault than Protestants. Even this very Author in this very Pamphlet,
has not so many leaves as falsifications and Calumnies.

To the Tenth: Let all Men believe the Scripture and that only, and endeavor
to believe it in the true sense, and require no more of others, and they shall
find this not only a better, but the only means to suppress Heresy, and
restore Unity. For he that believes the Scripture sincerely, and endeavors to
believe it in the true sense, cannot possibly be an Heretic: And if no more
than this were required of any Man, to make him capable of the Churches
Communion, then all Men so qualified, though they were different in opinion,
yet notwithstanding any such difference, must be of necessity one in Communion.

THE ANSWER TO THE PREFACE.
TO the First, and Second.. If beginnings be ominous (as they say they are,) D.
Potter has cause to look for great store of uningenuous dealing from you; the
very first words you speak of him, viz. That he has not so much as once truly
and really fallen upon the point in question, being a most unjust and immodest
imputation.

2. For the point in question was not that which you pretend, Whether both
Papists and Protestants can be saved in their several Professions? But, whether
you may without uncharitableness affirm that Protestancy unrepented destroys
Salvation? For there is no incongruity but that it may be true, That you and we
connot both be Saved: and yet as Ttrue, That without uncharitableness you
cannot pronounce us Damned. And therefore though the Author of Charity Mistaken
had proved as strongly as he has done weakly, that one Heaven could not
receive Protestants and Papists both, yet certainly, it was very hastily and
unwarrantably, and therefore uncharitably concluded, that Protestants were the
part that was to be excluded. As, though Jews and Christians cannot both be
saved, yet a Jew cannot justly, and therefore not charitably pronounce a
Christian Damned.

3. Neither may you or C. M. conclude him from hence (as covertly you do,) an
Enemy to Souls by deceiving them with ungrounded false hopes of Salvation;
seeing the hope of Salvation cannot be ungrounded, which requires and supposes
belief and practice of all things absolutely necessary to Salvation, and
repentance of those Sins and Errors which we fall into by humane frailty: Nor a
friend to indifferency in Religions, seeing he gives them only hope of pardon
of Errors who are desirous, and according to the proportion of their
opportunities and abilities industrious to find the truth, or at least truly
repentant, that they have not been so. Which Doctrine is very fit to excite men
to a constant and impartial search of truth, and very far from teaching them,
that it is indifferent what Religion they are of, and without all controversy
very honorable to the goodness of God, with which how it can consist, not to
be satisfied with his Servants true endeavors to know his will and do it,
without full and exact performance, I leave it to you and all good men to judge.

5. You say he was loath to affirm plainly, that generally both Catholics and
Protestants may be saved: which yet is manifest he does affirm plainly, of
Protestants throughout his Book; and of Erring Papists, that have sincerely
sought the truth and failed of it, and Die with a generalrepentance: p. 77.78.
And yet you deceive your self, if you conveive he had any other necessity to do
so, but only that he thought it true. For we may and do pretend that before
Luther there were many true Churches, besides the Roman, which agreed not with
her: in particular, The Greek Church. So that what you say is evidently true,
is indeed evidently false. Besides if he had had any necessity to make use of
you in this matter, he needed not for this end to say that now in your Church,
Salvation may be had; but only that before Luthers time it might be: Then when
your means of knowing the truth were not so great, and when your ignorance
might be more invincible, and therefore more excusable. So that you may see if
you please, it is not for ends, but for the love of truth, that we are thus
charitable to you.

6. Neither is it material what you allege, that they are not Fundamental
Errors, and then, what imports it whether we hold them or no, forasmuch as
concerns cur possibility to be Saved. As if we were not bound by the Love of
God and the love of truth, to be zealous in the defense of all Truths, that are
any way profitable, though not simply necessary to Salvation. Or as if any good
man could satisfy his Conscience with being so affected and resolved. Our
Savior himself having assured us, a That he that shall break one of his least
Commandments (some whereof you pretend are concerning venial sins, and
consequently the keeping of them not necessary to Salvation) and shall so teach
men, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. But then it imports very much, though not for the possibility that you may
be saved, yet for the probability that you will be so: because the holding of
these Errors, though it did not merit, migh yet occasion Damnation. As the
Doctrine of Indulgences may take away the fear of Purgatory, and the Doctrine
of Purgatory the fear of Hell; as you well know it does too frequently. So that
though a godly man might be saved with these Errors, yet by means of them, many
are made vicious and so damned. By them I say, though not for them. No godly
Layman who is verily persuaded that there is neither impiety nor superstition
in the use of your Latin Service, shall be Damned, I hope, for being present at
it; yet the want of that Devotion which the frequent hearing the Offices
understood, might happily beget in them, the want of that instruction and
edification which it might afford them, may very probably hinder the Salvation
of many which otherwise might have been saved. Besides, though the matter of an
Error may be only something profitable, not necessary, yet the neglect of it
may be a damnable Sin. As not to regard Venial Sins is in the Doctrine of your
Schools, mortal. Lastly, as Venial Sins, you say, dispose men to mortal; so the
erring from some profitable, though lesser truth, may dispose a man to Error in
greater matters. As for example: The Belief of the Popes Infallibility is, I
hope, not unpardonably damnable to every one that holds it; yet if it be a
falsehood (as most certainly it is) it puts a man into a very congruous
disposition to believe Antichrist, if he should chance to get into that See.

8. To the third ] In his distinction of points Fundamental and not
Fundamental, he may seem, you say, to have touched the point, but does not so
indeed. Because though he says there are some points so Fundamental, as that
all are obliged to believe them explicitly, yet he tells you not, whether a
man may disbelieve any other points of Faith, which are sufficiently presented
to his understanding, as Truths revealed by Almighty God. Touching this matter
of Sufficient Proposal, if you mean by sufficiently presented to his
understanding as revealed by God, that which, all things considered, is so
proposed to him, that he might and should and would believe it to be true and
revealed by God, were it not for some voluntary and avoidable fault of his that
interposeth it self between his understanding and the truth presented to it: if
you speak of truths thus proposed and rejected, let it be as damnable as you
please to deny or disbelieve them. But it amazes me to hear you say, that Dr.
Potter declines this Question, seeing the Light it self is not more clear, then
Dr. Potters Declaration of himself (p. 245, 246. etc. of his Book) beginning
his discourse thus. It seems Fundamental to the Faith, and for the Salvation of
every member of the Church, that he acknowledge and believe all such points of
Faith, as whereof he may be convinced that they belong to the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ.

To this conviction he requires three things. Clear Revelation; Sufficient
Proposition, and Capacity and understanding in the hearer. For want of clear
Revelation, he frees the Church before Christ and the Disciples of Christ from
any damnable Error, though they believed not those things which he that should
now deny were no Christian. To sufficient Proposition, he requires two things.
1. That the points be perspicuously laid open in themselves. 2. So forcibly, as
may serve to remove reasonable doubts to the contrary, and to satisfy a
teachable mind concerning it, against the Principles in which he has been bred
to the contrary. This Proposition he says is not limited to the Pope or Church,
but extended to all means whatsoever, by which a man may be convinced in
Conscience, that the matter proposed is Divine Revelation; which he professes
to be done sufficiently, not only when his Conscience does expressly bear
witness to the truth; but when it would do so, if it were not choked, and
blinded by some unruly and unmortified lust in the will. The difference being
not great between him that is wilfully blind, and him that knowingly gainsaieth
the Truth. The 3 thing he requires is Capacity and Ability to apprehend the
Proposal, and the Reasons of it: the want whereof excuses Fools and Madmen,
etc. But where there is no such impediment, and the will of God is sufficiently
propounded, there (says he) he that opposes is convinced of Error; and he who
is thus convinced is an Heretic: and Heresy is a work of the Flesh, which
excludes from Salvation, (he means without Repentance,) And hence it
follows, that it is Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary for his
Salvation, that he believe all revealed truths of God, whereof he may be
convinced that they are from God.

Again, it is almost as strange to me, why you should say, this was the only
thing in question, Whether a Man may deny or disbelieve any point of Faith,
sufficiently presented to his understanding as a truth revealed by God. For to
say, that any thing is a thing in question, methinks at the first hearing of
the words, imports, that it is by some affirmed, and denied by others. Now you
affirm I grant, but what Protestant ever denied, that it was a sin to give God
the lie? Which is the first and most obvious sense of these Words. Or which of
them ever doubted, that to disbelieve is then a fault, when the matter is so
proposed to a Man, that he might and should, and were it not for his own fault,
would believe it? Certainly he that questions either of these, justly deserves
to have his wits called in question. Produce any one Protestant that ever did
so, and I will give you leave to say it is the only thing in question. But then
I must tell you, that your ensuing Argument, viz: To deny a truth witnessed by
God is damnable, But of two that disagree, one must of necessity deny some such
truth, Therefore one only can be saved; is built upon a ground clean different
from this postulate. For though it be always a fault to deny what either I do
know, or should know, to be testified by God; yet that which by a cleanly
conveyance you put in the place hereof, To deny a Truth witnessed by God
simply, without the circumstance of being known or sufficienly proposed, is so
far from being certainly Damnable, that it may be many times done without any
the least fault at all. As if God should testify something to a man in the
Indies, I that had no assurance of this testification should not be obliged to
believe it. For in such cases the Rule of the Law has place, Idem est non esse
and non apparere: not to be at all and not to appear to me, is to me all one.
If I had not come and spoken unto you (says our Savior) you had had no sin.

10. As little necessity is there for that which follows: That of two
disagreeing in a matter of Faith one must deny some such truth. Whether by
[such] you understand, Testified at all by God; or testified and sufficiently
propounded. For it is very possible the matter in controversy may be such a
thing wherein God has not at all declared himself, or not so fully and clearly
as to oblige all Men to hold one way; and yet be so overvalued by the parties
in variance, as to be esteemed a matter of Faith, and one of those things of
which our Savior says, He that believes not shall be Damned. Who sees not
that it is possible two Churches may excommunicate and Damn each other for
keeping Christmas Ten days sooner or later; as well as Victor excommunicated
the Churches of Asia, for differing from him about Easter Day? And yet I
believe you will confess, that God had not then declared himself about Easter;
nor has now about Christmas. Anciently some good Catholic Bishops
excommunicated and Damned others for holding there were Antipodes: and in this
questiom I would fain know on which side was the sufficient proposal. The
contra-Remonstrants differ from the Remonstrants about the points of
Predetermination as a matter of Faith: I would know in this thing also, which
way God has declared himself; whether for Predetermination or against it.
Stephen Bishop of Rome held it as a matter of Faith and Apostolic tradition,
That Heretics gave true Baptism: Others there were, and they as good
Catholics as he, that held that this was neither matter of Faith nor matter of
Truth. Justin Martyr and Irenaeus held the Doctrine of the Millenaries as a
matter of Faith: and though Justin Martyr deny it, yet you, I hope, will
affirm, that some good Christians held the contrary. S. Augustine, I am sure,
held the communicating of Infants, as much Apostolic tradition, as the
Baptising of them: whether the Bishop and the Church of Rome of his time, held
so too, or held otherwise, I desire you to determine. But, sure I am, the
Church of Rome at this present holds the contrary. The same S. Austin held it
no matter of Faith, that the Bishops of Rome were Judges of Appeals from all
parts of the Church Catholic, no not in Major Causes and Major Persons:
whether the Bishop or Church of Rome did then hold the contrary do you resolve
me; but now I am resolved they do so. In all these differences, the point in
question is esteemed and proposed by one side at least as a matter of Faith,
and by the other rejected as not so: and either this is to disagree in matters
of Faith, or you will have no means to show that we do disagree. Now then to
show you how weak and sandy the Foundation is, on which the whole Fabric both
of your Book and Church depends, answer me briefly to this Dilemma. Either in
these oppositions one of the opposite Parts erred damnably, and denied Gods
truth sufficiently propounded or they did not. If they did, than they which do
deny Gods truth sufficiently propounded, may go to heaven; and then you are
rash and uncharitable in excluding us, though we were guilty of this fault. If
not, then there is no such necessity, that of two disagreeing about a matter of
Faith, one should deny Gods truth sufficiently propounded. And so the Major and
Minor of your Argument, are proved false. Yet, though they were as true as
Gospel, and as evident as Mathematical Principles, the conclusion (so
impertinent is it to the Premises) might still be false. For that which
naturally issues from these propositions is not. Therefore one only can be
saved: But, Therefore one of them does something that is damnable. But with
what Logic or what Charity you can infer either as the immediate production of
the former premises, or as a Corollary from this conclusion, Therefore one only
can be saved, I do not understand; unless you will pretend that this
consequence is good, such a one does something damnable, therefore he shall
certainly be damned: which whether it be not to overthrow the Article of our
Faith, which promises remission of sins upon repentance, and consequently to
ruin the Gospel of Christ, I leave it to the Pope and the Cardinals to
determine. For if against this it be alleged, that no man can repent of the
sin wherein he Dies: This muce I have already stopped, by showing that if it be
a sin of Ignorance, this is no way incongruous.

13. Ad 6..] In your sixth Parag. I let all pass saving only this, That a
persuasion that men of different Religions (you must mean Christians of
different Opinions or Communions) may be saved, is a most pernicious Heresy,
and even a ground of Atheism. What strange extractions Chemistry can make I
know not; but sure I am, he that by reason would infer this Conclusion, That
there is no God; from this ground, That God will save men in different
Religions, must have a higher strain of Logic, than you or I have hitherto
made show of. In my apprehension, the other part of the contradiction, That
there is a God, should much rather follow from it; and I say and will maintain,
that to say, That Christians of different Opinions and Communions (such I mean,
who hold all those things that are simply necessary to Salvation) may not
obtain Pardon for the Errors wherein they Die ignorantly, by a general
Repentance; is so far from being a ground of Atheism, that to say the contrary,
is to cross in Diameter a main Article of our Creed, and to overthrow the
Gospel of Christ.

14. Ad 7..] To what you say, of some Protestants that hold it necessary to be
able to prove a perpetual Visible Church distinct from Yours. I answer, Some
perhaps undertake to do so, as a matter of courtesy; but I believe you will be
much to seek for any one that holds it necessary. For though you say that
Christ has promised there shall be a Perpetual Visible Church; yet you your
selves do not pretend that he has promised there shall be Histories and
Records always extant of the Professors of it in all Ages: nor that he has any
where enjoined us to read those Histories that we may be able to show them.

17. To your ensuing demands, though some of them be very captious and
ensnaring; yet I will give you as clear and plain and Ingenuous Answers as
possibly I can.

18. Ad 11..] To the First then, about the Perpetuity of the visible Church, my
Answer is: That I believe our Savior, ever since his Ascension, has had in
some place or other a Visible true Church on Earth: I mean a Company of Men,
that professed at least so much truth as was absolutely necessary for their
Salvation. And I believe that there will be somewhere or other such a Church to
the Worlds end. But the contrary Doctrine I do at no hand believe to be a
damnable Heresy.

19. Ad 12..] To the Second, what Visible Church there was before Luther
disagreeing from the Roman? I answer, that before Luther there were many
Visible Churches in many things disagreeing from the Roman: But not that the
whole Catholic Church disagreed from Her, because She her self was a Part of
the Whole, though much corrupted. And to undertake to name a Catholic Church
disagreeing from Her, is to make her no Part of it, which we do not, nor need
not pretend. And for men agreeing with Protestants in all points, we will then
produce them, when you shall either prove it necessary to be done, which you
know we absolutely deny; or when you shall produce a perpetual succession of
Professors, which in all points have agreed with you, and disagreed from you in
nothing. But this my promise, to deal plainly with you, I conceive, and so
intended it to be very like his, who undertook to drink up the Sea, upon
condition, that he, to whom the promise was made, should first stop the Rivers
from running in. For this unreasonable request which you make to us is to your
selves so impossible, that in the very next Age after the Apostles, you will
never be able to name a Man, whom you can prove to have agreed with you in all
things, nay (if you speak of such, whose Works are extant and unquestioned)
whom we cannot prove to have disagreed from you in many things. Which I am so
certain of, that I will venture my Credit, and my Life upon it.

20. Ad 13..] To the Third, Whether, seeing there cannot be assigned any
Visible true Church distinct from the Roman, it follows not that She Erred not
Fundamentally. I say, in our sense of the word Fundamental, it does follow. For
if it be true, that there was then no Church distinct from the Roman, then it
must be, either because there was no Church at all, which we deny: Or because
the Roman Church was the whole Church, which we also deny: Or because She was a
Part of the Whole, which we grant. And if She were a true Part of the Church
than She retained those truths which were simply necessary to Salvation, and
held no Errors which were inevitably and unpardonably destructive of it. For
this is precisely necessary to constitute any man or any Church a member of the
Church Catholic. In our sense therefore of the Word Fundamental, I hope She
erred not Fundamentally: but in your sense of the word, I fear she did. That
is, She held something to be Divine Revelation, which was not; something not to
be which was.

21. Ad 14..] To the Fourth. How it could be damnable to maintain her Errors,
if they were not Fundamental? I answer. 1. Though it were not damnable, yet if
it were a fault, it was not to be done. For a Venial sin, with you is not
damnable; yet you say, it is not to be committed for the procuring any good.
Non est faciendum malum vel minimum, ut eveniat bonum vel maximum. 2. It is
damnable to maintain an error against Conscience, though the error in it self,
and to him that believes it, be not damnable. Nay, the profession not only of
an error, but even of a truth, if not believed, when you think on it again, I
believe you will confess to be a mortal sin; unless you will say, Hypocrisy
and Simulation in Religion is not so. 3. Though we say, the Errors of the Roman
Church were not destructive of Salvation, but pardonable even to them that Dyed
in them, upon a general repentance: yet we deny not but in themselves they were
damnable. Nay, the very saying they were pardonable, implies they needed
pardon, and therefore in themselves were damnable: damnable meritoriously,
though not effectually. As a poison may be deadly in it self, and yet not kill
him, that together with the Poison takes an Antidote: or as Felony may deserve
Death, and yet not bring it on him that obtains the Kings Pardon.

22. Ad 15. ] To the Fifth. How they can be excused from Schism, who forsook
her Communion upon pretense of Errors which were not damnable! I answer. All
that we forsake in you, is only the Belief, and Practice, and profession of
your Errors. Hereupon, you cast us out of your Communion. And then with a
strange, and contradictious and ridiculous Hypocrisy, complain that we forsake
it. As if a man should thrust his friend out of doors, and then be offended at
his departure. But for us not to forsake the belief of your Errors, having
discovered them to be Errors, was impossible; and therefore to do so could not
be damnable, believing them to be Errors. Not to forsake the practice and
profession of them, had been damnable Heresy; supposing that (which you vainly
run away with, and take for granted) those Errors in themselves were not
damnable. Now to do so, and as matters now stand, not to forsake your
Communion, is apparently contradictious: seeing the condition of your Communion
is, that we must profess to believe all your Doctrines, not only not to be
damnable Errors (which will not content you,) but also to be certain and
necessary and revealed truths. So that to demand why we forsake your Communion
upon pretense of Errors which were not damnable, is in effect to demand why we
forsook it upon our forsaking it! For to pretend that there are Errors in your
Church though not damnable, is ipso facto to forsake your Communion, and to do
that which both in your account, and as you thin^ in Gods account, puts him as
does so, out of your Communion. So that either you must free your Church from
requiring the belief of any Error whatsoever, damnable and not damnable, or
whether you will or no, you must free us from Schism. For Schism there cannot
be in leaving your Communion, unless we were obliged to continue in it. Man
cannot be obliged by Man, but to what either formally or virtually he is
obliged by God, for all just power is from God. God the Eternal truth neither
can nor will oblige us to believe any the least and the most innocent falsehood
to be a Divine truth, that is, to Err; nor, to profess a known Error, which is
to lie. So that if you require the belief of any Error among the conditions of
your Communion, our obligation to communicate with you cease, and so the
imputation of Schism to us, vanishes into nothing: but lies heavy upon you for
making our separation from you just and necessary, by requiring unnecessary and
unlawful conditions of your Communion. Hereafter therefore, I entreat you, let
not your demand be, how could we forsake your Communion without Schism, seeing
you Erred not damnably? But how we could do so without Schism, seeing you Erred
not at all? which if either you do prove, or we cannot disprove it, we will (I
at least will for my part) return to your Communion, or subscribe my self
Schismatic. In the mean time, (...), we continue where we are.

23. Yet notwithstanding all your Errors we do not renounce your Communion
totally and absolutely, but only leave Communicating with you in the practice
and profession of your Errors. The trial whereof will be to propose some form
of worshipping God, taken wholly out of Scripture; and herein if we refuse to
join with you, then, and not till then, may we justly say we have utterly and
absolutely abandoned your Communion.

25. Ad 17..] To the Seventh, Whether Error against any one truth sufficiently
propounded as testified by God, destroy not the Nature and Unity of Faith, or
at least, is not a grievous ^ffence excluding Salvation! I answer, if you
suppose, as you seem to do the proposition so sufficient, that the party to
whom it is made is convinced that it is from God, so that the denial of it
involves also with it the denial of Gods veracity; any such Error destroys both
Faith and Salvation. But if the Proposal be only so sufficient, not, that the
party to whom it is made is convinced, but only that he should, and but for his
own fault would have been convinced of the Divine verity of the Doctrine
proposed: The crime then is not so great, for the belief of Gods veracity may
well consist with such an Error. Yet a fault I confess it is and (without
Repentance) damnable, if all circumstances considered the proposal be
sufficient. But then I must tell you that the proposal of the present Roman
Church is only pretended to be sufficient for this purpose, but is not so:
especially all the Rays of the Divinity, which they pretend to shine so
conspicuously in her proposals, being so darkened and even extinguished with a
cloud of contradiction, from Scripture, Reason, and the Ancient Church.

26. Ad 18..] To the Eighth. How of disagreeing Protestants, both parts may
hope for Salvation, seeing some of them must needs Err against some Truth
testified by God? I answer, 1. The most disagreeing Protestants that are, yet
thus far agree, that these Books of Scripture which were never doubted of in
the Church, are the undoubted Word of God, and a perfect rule of Faith. 2. That
the sense of them, which God intended, whatsoever it is, is certainly true. So
that they believe implicitly even those very truths against which they Err;
and why an implicit Faith in Christ and his Word, should not suffice as well as
an implicit Faith in your Church, I have desired to be resolved by many of your
Side, but never could.

3. That they are to use their best endeavors to believe the Scripture in the
true sense and to live according to it. This if they perform (as I hope many on
all Sides do) truly and sincerely, it is impossible but that they should
believe aright in all things necessary to Salvation: that is, in all those
things which appertain to the Covenant between God and man in Christ, for so
much, is not only plainly but frequently contained in Scripture. And believing
aright touching the Covenant, if they for their parts perform the condition
required of them, which is sincere obedience, why should they not expect that
God will perform his promise and give them Salvation? For, as for other things
which lie without the Covenant, and are therefore less necessary, if by reason
of the seeming conflict which is oftentimes between Scripture and Reason, and
Authority on the one side, and Scripture, Reason, and Authority on the other;
if by reason of the variety of tempers, Abilities, Educations, and unavoidable
prejudices, whereby men's understandings are variously formed and fashioned,
they do embrace several Opinions, whereof some must be erroneous; to say that
God will Damn them for such Errors, who are lovers of him, and lovers of truth,
is to rob man of his comfort, and God of his goodness; it is to make Man
desperate and God a Tyrant. But they deny Truths testified by God, and
therefore shall be Damned. Yes, if they knew them to be thus testified by him,
and yet would deny them, that were to give God the lie, and questionless
damnable. But if you should deny a truth which God had testified but only to a
Man in the Indies, (as I said before) and this testification you had never
heard of, or at least had no sufficient reason to believe that God had so
testified, would not you think it a hard case to be Damned for such a denial?
Yet consider I pray a little more attentively the difference between them, and
you will presently acknowledge, the question between them is not at any time,
or in any thing, Whether God says true or no? or whether he says this or no?
But supposing he says this, and says true, whether he means this or no? As for
example, between Lutherans, Calvinists, and Zwinglians, it is agreed that
Christ spoke these Words, This is my Body; and that whatsoever he meant in
saying so is true: But what he meant and how he is to be understood, that is the
question. So that though some of them deny a truth by God intended, yet you can
with no reason or justice accuse them of denying the truth of Gods Testimony,
unless you can plainly show that God has declared, and that plainly and
clearly, what was his meaning in these Words. I say plainly and clearly. For he
that speaks obscurely and ambiguously, and no where declares himself plainly,
sure he has no reason to be much offended if he be mistaken. When therefore
you can show, that in this and all other their Controversies, God has
interposed his Testimony on one side or other; so that either they do see it,
and will not; or were it not for their own voluntary and avoidable fault, might
and should see it and do not; let all such Errors be as damnable as you please
to make them. In the mean while, if they suffer themselves neither to be
betrayed into their Errors, nor kept in them by any sin of their will; if they
do their best endeavor to free themselves from all Errors, and yet fail of it
through humane frailty; so well am I persuaded of the goodness of God, that if
in me alone, should meet a confluence of all such Errors of all the Protestants
in the World, that were thus qualified, I should not be so much afraid of them
all, as I should be to ask pardon for them. For, whereas that which you
affright us with of calling Gods Veracity in Question, is but a Panick fear, a
fault that no man thus qualified, is, or can be guilty of; to ask pardon of
simple and purely involuntary errors is tacitly to imply that God is angry
with us for them, and that to impute to him the strange Tyranny of requiring
Brick, when he gives no Straw; of expecting to gather, where he strewed not; to
reap where he sowed not: of being offended with us for not doing what he knows
we cannot do. This I say upon a supposition, that they do their best endeavors
to know Gods will and do it; which he that denis to be possible, knows not what
he says; for he says in effect, that Men cannot do, what they can do; for to do
what a Man can do, is to do his best endeavor. But because this supposition,
though certainly possible, is very rare, and admirable, I say secondly, that I
am verily persuaded, that God will not impute Errors to them, as sins, who use
such a measure of industry, in finding truth, as humane prudence and ordinary
discretion (their abilities and opportunities, their distractions and
hindrances, and all other things considered) shall advise them unto, in a
matter of such consequence. But if herein also we fail, then our Errors begin
to be malignant, and justly imputable, as offenses against God, and that love
of his truth which he requires in us. You will say then, that for those Erring
Protestants, which are in this case, which evidently are far the greater part,
they sin damnably in Erring, and therefore there is little hope of their
Salvation. To which I answer, that the consequence of this Reason, is somewhat
strong against a Protestant; but much weakened by coming out of the Mouth of a
Papist. For all Sins with you are not damnable. But yet out of courtesy to
you, we will remove this rubb out of your way; and for the present suppose them
mortal Sins; and is there then no hope of Salvation, for him that commits them?
Not, you will say, if he Die in them without repentance; and such Protestants
you speak of, who without Repentance Die in their Errors. Yea but what if they
Die in their Errors with Repentance? than I hope you will have Charity enough
to think they may be saved. Charity Mist. takes it indeed for granted, In the
place above quoted.
that this supposition is distructive of it self; and that it is impossible,
and incongruous, that a Man should repent of those Errors wherein he Dies; or
Die in those whereof he repents. But it was wisely done of Him to take it for
granted; for most certainly He could not have spoken one word of sense for the
confirmation of it. For seeing Protestants believe, as well as you, Gods
infinite and most admirable perfections in himself, more than most worthy of
all possible love: seeing they believe, as well as you, his infinite goodness
to them, in Creating them of nothing; in Creating them according to his own
Image; in Creating all things for their use and benefit; in streaming down his
Favors on them every moment of their Lives; in designing them, if they serve
him, to infinite and Eternal Happiness; in Redeeming them, not with corruptible
things, but the Precious Blood of his beloved Son: seeing they believe, as well
as you, His infinite goodness, and Patience toward them, in expecting their
Conversion; in Wooing, Alluring, Leading, and by all means, which his Wisdom
can Suggest unto him, and Man's nature is capable of, drawing them to Repentance
and Salvation: Seeing they believe these things as well as you, and for ought
you know, consider them as much as you, (and if they do not, it is not their
Religion, but they that are to blame,) what can hinder, but that the
consideration of Gods most infinite goodness to them, and their own almost
infinite wickedness against him, Gods Spirit cooperating with them, may raise
them to a true and sincere and a cordial love of God? And seeing sorrow for
having injured or offended the Person beloved, or when we fear we may have
offended him, is the most natural effect of true love; what can hinder, but
that love which has oftimes constrained them, to lay down their lives for God
(which our Savior assures us is the noblest Sacrifice we can offer,) may
produce in them an universal sorrow for all their sins, both which they know
they have committed, and which they fear they may have? In which number, their
being negligent, or not dispassionate, or not unprejudicate enough in seeking
the truth, and the effect thereof, their Errors, if they be sins, cannot but be
comprised. In a word, what should hinder, but that, that Prayer -- Delicta sua
quis intelligit? who can understand his faults? Lord cleanse thou me from my
secret sins, may be heard and accepted by God, as well from a Protestant that
Dies in some Errors, as from a Papist that Dies in some other sins of
Ignorance, which perhaps he might more easily have discovered to be sins, than
a Protestant could his Errors to be Errors? As well from a Protestant, that
held some Error, which (as he conceived) Gods Word and his Reason, (which is
also in some sort Gods Word) led him unto; as from a Dominican, who perhaps
took up his opinion upon trust, not because he had reason to believe it true,
but because it was the opinion of his Order; for the same man if he had light
upon another Order, would in all probability, have been of the other Opinion.
For what else is the cause, that generally all the Dominicans are of one
Opinion, and all the Jesuits of the other? I say, from a Dominican who took up
his Opinion upon trust; and that such an Opinion (if we believe the writers of
your Order) as if it be granted true, it were not a point matter, what Opinions
any man held, or what actions any man did, for the best would be as bad as the
worst, and the worst as good as the best. And yet such is the partiality of
your Hypocrisy, that of disagreeing Papists, neither shall deny the truth
testified by God, but both may hope for Salvation: but of disagreeing
Protestants (though they differ in the same thing,) one side must deny Gods
Testimony and be incapable of Salvation. That a Dominican through culpable
negligence, living and dying in his Error, may repent of it, though he knows it
not; or be saved though he do not: But if a Protestant do the very same thing,
in the very same point, and Die in his Error, his case is desperate. The Sum of
all that has been said to this Demand is this. 1. That no Erring Protestant
denis any truth testified by God, under this formality, as testified by him;
nor which they know or believe to be testified by him. And therefore it is a
horrible Calumny in you to say, They call Gods Veracity in question. For Gods
undoubted and unquestioned Veracity, is to them the ground, why they hold all
they do hold: neither do they hold any Opinion so stiffly, but they will forgo
it rather than this one, That all which God says is true. 2. God has not so
clearly and plainly declared himself in most of these things which are in
controversy between Protestants, but that an honest man, whose heart is right
to God, and one that is a true lover of God, and of his truth, may by reason of
the conflict of contrary Reasons on both sides, very easily, and therefore
excusably mistake, and embrace Error for Truth, and reject Truth for Error. 3.
If any Protestant or Papist be betrayed into, or kept in any Error, by any sin
of his will (as it is to be feared many Millions are) such Error is, as the
cause of it, sinful and damnable: yet not exclusive of all hope of Salvation,
but pardonable if discovered, upon a particular explicit repentance; if not
discovered, upon a general and implicit repentance for all Sins known and
unknown: in which number all sinful Errors must of necessity be contained.

27. Ad 19..] To the Ninth. Wherein you are so urgent for a particular
Catalogue of Fundamentals: I answer almost in your own words, that we also
constantly urge and require to have a particular Catalogue of your
Fundamentals, whether they be written Verities, or unwritten Traditions, or
Church Definitions? all which, you say integrate the material Object of your
Faith: In a word of all such Points as are defined and sufficiently proposed;
so that whosoever denis, or doubts of any of them, is certainly in the state of
damnation. A Catalogue I say in particular of the Proposals: and not only some
general definition, or description, under which you lurk deceitfully, of what,
and what only is sufficiently proposed: wherein yet you do not very well agree.
This great diversity of Opinions among you, touching this matter, if any man
doubt of it, let him read Franciscus Picus Mirandula in l. Theorem. in Exposit.
Theor. quarti. and Tho. Waldensis. Tom. 3. De Sacramentalibus. doct. 3. fol. 5.
and he shall be fully satisfied that I have done you no injury.
For many of you hold the Popes Proposal Ex Cathedra, to be sufficient and
obliging: Some a Council without a Pope: Some, of neither of them severally,
but only both together: Some not this neither in matter of manners, which
Bellarmine acknowledges, and tells us it is all one in effect, as if they
denied it sufficient in matter of Faith: Some not in matter of Faith, neither
think this Proposal Infallible, without the acceptance of the Church
Universal: Some deny the Infallibility of the Present Church, and only make the
Tradition of all Ages the Infallible Propounder. Yet if you were agreed what
and what only is the Infallible Propounder, this would not satisfy us; nor yet
to say, that All is Fundamental which is propounded sufficiently by him. For
though agreeing in this, yet you might still disagree whether such or such a
Doctrine were propounded or not: or if propounded, whether sufficiently, or
only insufficiently. And it is so known a thing, that in many points you do so,
that I assure my self you will not deny it. Therefore we constantly urge and
require a particular and perfect Inventory of all these Divine Revelations,
which you say are sufficiently propounded, and that such a one to which all of
your Church will subscribe as neither redundant, nor deficient; which when you
give in with one hand, you shall receive a particular Catalogue of such Points
as I call Fundamental with the other. Neither may you think me unreasonable in
this demand, seeing upon such a particular Catalogue of your sufficient
Proposals as much depends, as upon a particular Catalogue of our Fundamentals.
As for example. Whether or no a man do not Err in some point defined and
sufficiently proposed: and whether or no those that differ among you, differ in
Fundamentals; which if they do One Heaven (by your own Rule) cannot receive
them All. Perhaps you will here complain, that this is not to satisfy your
demand, but to avoid it, and to put you off as the Areopagites did hard Causes
ad diem longissimum, and bid you come again a Hundred Years hence: To deal
truly, I did so intend it should be. Neither can you say, my dealing with you
is injurious, seeing I require nothing of you, but that, what you require of
others, you should show it possible to be done, and just and necessary to be
required. For, for my part, I have great reason to suspect, it is neither the
one nor the other. For whereas the Verities which are delivered in Scripture,
may be very fitly divided into such as were written because they were necessary
to be believed, Of which rank are those only which constitute and make up the
Covenant between God and Man in Christ: and then such as are necessary to be
believed not in themselves but only by accident, because they were written. Of
which rank are many matters of History, of Prophecy, of Mystery, of Policy, of
Economy, and such like, which are evidently not intrinsecal to the Covenant.
Now to sever exactly and punctally these Verities one from the other: what is
necessary in it self and antecedently to the writing, from what is but only
profitable in it self, and necessary only because written, is a business of
extreme great difficulty, and extreme little necessity. For first he that will
go about to distinguish especially in the story of our Savior, what was
written because it was profitable, from what was written because necessary,
shall find an intricate piece of business of it, and almost impossible that he
should be certain he has done it, when he has done it. And then it is
apparently unnecessary to go about it, seeing he that believes all, certainly
believes all that is necessary. And he that does not believe all (I mean all
the undoubted parts of the undoubted Books of Scripture) can hardly believe
any, neither have we reason to believe he does so. So that, that Protestants
give you not a Catalogue of Fundamentals, it is not from Tergiversation (as you
suspect, who for want of Charity to them always suspect the worst,) but from
Wisdom and Necessity. For they may very easily Err in doing it; because though
all which is necessary be plain in Scripture, yet all which is plain is not
therefore written because it was necessary. For what greater necessity was
there that I should know S. Paul left his Cloak at Troas, than those Worlds of
Miracles, which our Savior did, which were never written. And when they had
done it, it had been to no purpose; There being as matters now stand, as great
necessity, of believing those truths of Scripture, which are not Fundamental,
as those that are. You see then what reason we have to decline this hard
labor, which you a rigid Task-master have here put upon us. Yet instead of
giving you a Catalogue of Fundamentals, with which I dare say you are resolved
before it come, never to be satisfied, I will say that to you, which if you
please may do you as much service; and this it is. That it is sufficient for
any Man's Salvation that he believe the Scripture: That he endeavor to believe
it in the true sense of it, as far as concerns his Duty: And that he conform
his Life unto it either by Obedience or Repentance. He that does so (and all
Protestants according to the Doctamen of their Religion should do so,) may be
secure that he cannot Err Fundamentally. And they that do so cannot differ in
Fundamentals. So that notwithstanding their differences, and your presumption,
the same Heaven may receive them All.

28. Ad 20..] Your Tenth and last request is, to know distinctly what is the
Doctrine of the Protestant English Church, in these points; and what my private
Opinion. Which shall be satisfied when the Church of England has expressed her
self in them; or when you have told us what is the Doctrine of your Church, in
the Question of Predetermination, or the Immaculate Conception.

29. Ad 21. and 22..] These answers I hope in the judgment of indifferent men
are satisfactory to your Questions though not to you, For I have either
answered them, or given you a reason why I have not. Neither, for ought I can
see, have I flitted from things considered in their own nature, to accidental
or rare Circumstances, But told you my Opinion plainly what I thought of your
Errors in themselves: and what as they were qualified or malignified with good
or bad Circumstances.

CHAP. I. The ANSWER to the First CHAPTER.
Showing that the Adversary grants the Old Question and proposes a New one.
And that there is no reason, why among Men of different Opinions and
Communions, one Side only can be saved.

1. AD 1..] Protestants are here accused of uncharitableness while they accuse
you of it: and you make good this charge in this manner. Protestants charge the
Roman Church with many and great Errors, judge reconciliation of their Doctrine
and ours impossible, and that for them who are convicted in Conscience of her
Errors, not to forsake her in them, or to be reconciled unto her, is damnable.
Therefore if Roman Catholics be convicted in Conscience of the Errors of
Protestants, they may and must judge a reconciliation with them damnable, and
consequently, to judge so is no more uncharitable in them, than it is in
Protestants to judge as they do.

CHIL. All this I grant; nor would any Protestant accuse you of want of Charity
if you went no further. If you be persuaded in Conscience that our Religion is
erroneous, the profession of it, though in it self most true, to you would be
damnable. For it is no uncharitableness to judge Hypocrisy a damnable Sin. Let
Hypocrite then and Dissemblers on both Sides pass. It is not toward them, but
good Christians; not to Protestant Professors but Believers that we require
your Charity. What think you of those that believe so verily the truth of our
Religion, that they are resolved to Die in it, and if occasion were to Die for
it? What Charity have you for them? What think you of those that in the Days of
our Fathers, laid down their Lives for it? are you content that they shall be
saved, or do you hope they may be so? Will you grant that notwithstanding their
Errors, there is good hope they might Die with Repentance? and if they did so,
certainly they are saved. If you will do so, this Controversy is ended. No man
will hereafter charge you with want of Charity. This is as much as either we
give you, or expect of you, while you remain in your Religion. But then you
must leave abusing silly People, with telling them (as your fashion is) that
Protestants confess Papists may be saved, but Papists confess not so much of
Protestants; therefore yours is the safer way, and in Wisdom and Charity to our
own Souls we are bound to follow it. For granting this, you grant as much hope
of Salvation to Protestants, as Protestants do to you. If you will not, but
still affirm, as C. M. does, that Protestants (not dissemblers but believers)
without a particular Repentance of their Religion cannot be saved: This I say,
is a want of Charity.

But I pray Sir what dependence is there between these Propositions: We that
hold Protestant Religion false should be damned if we should profess it,
Therefore they also shall be damned, that hold it true? Just as if you should
conclude, Because he that doubts is Damned if he Eat, Therefore he that does
not doubt is damned also if he Eat. And therefore though your Religion to us,
or ours to you, if professed against Conscience would be damnable; yet may it
well be uncharitable to define it shall be so, to them that profess either this
or that according to Conscience.

3. Ad 3.4.5.6..] C. M. Our meaning is not, that we give Protestants over to
reprobation; that we offer no Prayers in hope of their Salvation; that we hold
their Case desperate. God forbid, etc.

CHIL. I wish with all my Heart that you had expressed your self in this matter
more fully and plainly. Yet that which you say, does plainly enough afford us
these Corollaries. 1. That whatsoever Protestant wants Capacity, or having
it, wants sufficient means of instruction to convince his Conscience of the
falsehood of his own, and the truth of the Roman Religion, by the confession of
his most rigid Adversaries, may be saved, notwithstanding any Error in his
Religion. 2. That nothing hinders but that a Protestant Dying a Protestant may
Die with contrition for all his Sins. 3. That if he Die with Contrition, he may
and shall be saved.

4. All these acknowledgments we have from you, while you are, as you say,
stating, but, as I conceive granting the very point in question. So that
according to your Doctrine, the heavy sentence shall remain upon such only, as
either were, or but for their own fault, might have been sufficiently convinced
of the truth of your Religion, and the falsehood of their own, and yet Die in it
without contrition. Which Doctrine if you would stand to, and not pull down,
and pull back with one hand, what you give and build with the other, this
controversy were ended; and I should willingly acknowledge, that which follows
in your fourth paragraph; That you allow Protestants as much Charity as D.
Potter allows you. But then I must entreat you to alter the argument of this
Chapter, and not to go about to give us reasons, why amongst Men of different
Religions, one side only can be saved absolutely, which your Reasons drive at:
But you must temper the crudeness of your Assertion by saying, One Side only
can be saved, unless want of Conviction, or else Repentance excuse the other.
Besides you must not only abstain from damning any Protestant in particular,
but from affirming in general, that Protestants Dying in their Religion cannot
be saved; for you must always remember to add this caution, unless they were
excusably ignorant of the falsehood of it, or Died with contrition. And then
considering that you cannot know, whether or no, all things considered, they
were convinced sufficiently of the truth of your Religion and the falsehood of
their own, you are obliged by Charity to judge the best, and hope they are not.
Considering again, that notwithstanding their Errors, they may Die with
contrition, and that it is no way improbable that they do so, and the contrary
you cannot be certain of, You are bound in Charity to judge and hope they do
so. Considering thirdly and lastly, that if they Die not with Contrition, yet
it is very probable they may Die with Attrition, and that this pretense of
yours, that Contrition will serve without actual Confession, but Attrition will
not, is but a Nicety or Fancy, or rather to give it the true name, a Device
of your own, to serve ends and purposes; (God having no where declared himself,
but that wheresoever he will accept of that Repentance, which you are pleased
to call Contrition, he will accept of that which you call Attrition; For though
he like best the bright Flaming Holocaust of Love, yet he rejects not, he
quenches not the smoking Flax of that Repentance (if it be true and effectual)
which proceeds from hope and fear:) These things I say, considered, (unless you
will have the Charity of your Doctrine rise up in judgment against your
uncharitable Practice) you must not only not be peremptory, in damning
Protestants, but you must hope well of their Salvation: and out of this hope,
you must do for them as well as others, those, as you conceive, Charitable
offices, of Praying, giving Alms and offering Sacrifice, which usually you do,
for those of whose Salvation you are well and Charitably persuaded; (for I
believe you will never conceive so well of Protestants, as to assure your
selves they go directly to Heaven.) These things when you do I shall believe
you think as Charitably as you speak. But until then, as he said in the Comedy,
Quid verba audiam cum facta videam? so may I say to you, Quid verba audiam cum
facta non videam? To what purpose should you give us Charitable Words, which
presently you retract again, by denying us your Charitable Actions. And as
these things you must do, if you will stand to and make good this pretended
Charity, so must I tell you again and again, that one thing you must not do; I
mean you must not affright poor People out of their Religion, with telling
them, that by the Confession of both sides, your way is safe, but in your
judgment, ours undoubtedly damnable. Seeing neither you deny Salvation to
Protestants Dying with repentance, nor we promise it to you, if ye Die without
it. For to deal plainly with you, I know no Protestant that has any other hope
of your Salvation, but upon these grounds, that unaffected ignorance may excuse
you, or true repentance obtain pardon for you; neither do the heavy censures
which Protestants (you say) pass upon your Errors, any way hinder but they may
hope as well of you, upon repentance, as I do. For the fierce Doctrine, which,
God knows who, teaches, that Christ for many Ages before Luther had no visible
Church upon Earth; will be mild enough, if you conceive them to mean (as
perhaps they do) by no visible Church, none pure and free from corruptions,
which in your judgment is all one with no Church. But the truth is the
corruption of the Church, and the destruction of it, is not all one. For if a
particular man or Church may (as you confess they may) hold some particular
Errors, and yet be a member of the Church Universal: why may not the Church
hold some Universal Error, and yet be still the Church? especially, seeing you
say, it is nothing but opposing the Doctrine of the Church, that makes an Error
damnable, and it is impossible that the Church should oppose the Church, I mean
that the present Church should oppose it self. And then for the English
Protestants, though they censure your Errors deeply, yet, by your favor, with
their deepest censures it may well consist that invincible ignorance may excuse
you from damnation for them. For you your self confess that ignorance may
excuse Errors, even in Fundamental Articles of Faith: so that a man so erring
shall not offend at all in such his ignorance or Error; they are your own
words. p. 19. And again with their heaviest censures it may well consist, that
your Errors though in themselves damanble, yet may prove not damning to you, if
you Die with true repentance, for all your sins known and unknown.

5. Thus much Charity therefore, if you stand to what you have said, is
interchangeably granted by each Side to the other, that Neither Religion is so
fatally destructive, but that by ignorance or repentance Salvation may be had
on both Sides: though with a difference that keeps Papists still on the more
uncharitable Side. For whereas we conceive a lower degree of repentance (that
which they call Attrition) if it be true, and effectual, and convert the Heart
of the Penitent, will serve in them: They pretend (even this Author which is
most charitable toward us,) that without Contrition there is no hope for us:
But though Protestants may not obtain this purchase at so easy a rate as
Papists, yet (even Papists being Judges) they may obtain it; and though there
is no entrance for them but at the only door of Contrition, yet they may enter,
Heaven is not inaccessible to them. Their Errors are no such impenetrable
Istmus's between them and Salvation, but that Contrition may make a way through
them. All their Schism and Heresy is no such fatal Poison, but that if a man
join with it the Antidote of a general repentance, he may Die in it, and live
for ever. Thus much then being acknowledged, I appeal to any indifferent
reader, whether C. M. be not by his Hyperaspist forsaken in the plain Field,
and the point in question granted to D. Potter, viz. That Protestancy even
without a particular repentance, is not destructive of Salvation; so that all
the Controversy remaining now, is, not simply whether Protestancy unrepented
destroys Salvation? as it was at first proposed, but Whether Protestancy in it
self (that is abstracting from ignorance and contrition) destroys Salvation? So
that as a foolish Fellow who gave a Knight the Lie, desiring withal leave of
him to set his Knighthood aside, was answered by him, that he would not suffer
any thing to be set aside that belonged unto him: So might we justly take it
amiss, that conceiving as you do Ignorance and Repentance such necessary things
for us, you are not more willing to consider us with them, than without them.
For my part such is my Charity to you, that considering what great necessity
You have, as much as any Christian Society in the World, that these Sanctuaries
of Ignorance and Repentance should always stand open, I can very hardly
persuade my self so much as in my most secret consideration to divest you of
these so needful qualifications: But whenever your Errors, superstitions and
impieties come into my mind, (and besides the general bonds of humanity and
Christianity, my own particular Obligations to many of you, such and so great,
that you cannot perish without a part of my self,) my only comfort is amidst
these Agonies, that the Doctrine and Practice too of Repentance, is yet
remaining in your Church: And that though you put on a Face of confidence of
your Innocence in point of Doctrine, yet you will be glad to stand in the Eye
of Mercy as well as your fellows, and not be so stout, as to refuse either Gods
pardon or the Kings.

6. But for the present, Protestancy is called to the Bar, and though not
sentenced by you to Death without Mercy, yet arraigned of so much natural
malignity (if not corrected by Ignorance or Contrition) as to be in it self
destructive of Salvation. Which controversy I am content to dispute with you;
only remembering you, that the adding of this limitation [in it self] has made
this a new Question, and that this is not the conclusion for which you were
charged with want of Charity.

7. Ad 7. and 8..] C. M. Now this is our gradatio nof reasons. Almighty God
having ordained mankind to a supernatural end of Eternal Felicity, has in his
providence settled competent Means, etc.

CHIL. In your gradation I shall rise so far with you as to grant, that Christ
founded a visible Church, stored with all helps necessary to Salvation,
particularly with sufficient means to beget and conserve Faith, to maintain
Unity, and compose Schisms, to discover and condemn Heresies, and to determine
all controversies in Religion, which were necessary to be determined. For all
these purposes, he gave at the beginning (as we may see in the Ep. to the
Ephesians) Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors: who by word
of mouth taught their contemporaries, and by writings (wrote indeed by some,
but approved by all of them) taught their Christian posterity to the Worlds
End, how all these ends, and that which is the End of all these ends,
Salvation, is to be achieved. And these means the Providence of God has still
preserved, and so preserved, that they are sufficient for all these intents. I
say sufficient, though, through the Malice of Men, not always effectual, for
that the same means may be sufficient for the compassing an end, and not
effectual, you must not deny, who hold that God gives all men sufficient means
of Salvation, and yet that all are not saved. I said also, sufficient to
determine all controversies, which were necessary to be determined. For if some
controversies may for many Ages be undetermined, and yet in the mean while men
be saved; why should, or how can the Churches being furnished with effectual
means to determine all Controversies in Religion be necessary to Salvation, the
end it self, to which these means are ordained being as experience shows not
necessary? Plain sense will teach every man, that the necessity of the means
must always be measured by, and can never exceed the necessity of the end. As
if eating be necessary, only that I may live, then certainly if I have no
necessity to live, I have no necessity to eat. If I have no need to be at
London, I have no need of a Horse to carry me thither. If I have no need to
Fly, I have no need of Wings. Answer me then I pray directly, and
Categorically, Is it necessary that all Controversies in Religion should be
determined, or is it not? If it be, why is the question of Predetermination, of
the immaculate conception, of the Popes indirect power in temporalties, so long
undetermined? if not, what is it but Hypocrisy to pretend such great necessity
of such effectual means, for the archieving that end, which is it self not
necessary. Christians therefore have and shall have means sufficient (though
not always effectual) to determine not all controversies but all necessary to
be determined. I proceed on farther with you, and grant that this means to
decide controversies in Faith and Religion, must be endued with an Universal
Infallibility in whatsoever it propounds for a Divine truth. For if it may be
false in any one thing of this nature, in any thing which God requires men to
believe, we can yield unto it but a wavering and fearful assent in any thing.
These grounds therefore I grant very readily, and give you free leave to make
your best advantage of them. And yet, to deal truly, I do not perceive how from
the denial of any of them it would follow that Faith is Opinion: or from the
granting them, that it is not so. But for my part, whatsoever clamor you have
raised against me, I think no otherwise of the Nature of Faith, I mean
Historical Faith, than generally both Protestants and Papists do; for I
conceive it an assent to Divine Revelations upon the Authority of the revealer.
Which though in many things it differ from Opinion, (as commonly the Word
Opinion is understood) yet in some things, I doubt not but you will confess,
that it agrees with it. As first, that as Opinion is an Assent, so is Faith
also. Secondly, that as Opinion, so Faith is always built upon less evidence
than that of Sense or Science. Which assertion you not only grant but mainly
contend for in your sixth Chapter Thirdly and lastly, that as Opinion, so Faith
admits degrees; and that as there may be a strong and weak Opinion, so there
may be a strong and weak Faith. These things if you will grant (as sure if you
be in your right mind you will not deny any of them) I am well contented that
this ill-sounding Word, Opinion, should be discarded, and that among the
Intellectual habits you should seek out some other Genus for Faith. For I will
never contend with any man about Words, who grants my meaning.

8. But though the Essence of Faith exclude not all weakness and imperfection,
yet may it be enquired, whether any certainty of Faith, under the highest
degree may be sufficient to please God and attain Salvation. Whereunto I
answer, that though men are unreasonable, God requires not any thing but
Reason. They will not be pleased without a down weight, but God is contented if
the Scale be turned. They pretend, that Heavenly things cannot be seen to any
purpose, but by the mid-day-light: But God will be satisfied, if we receive any
degree of light which makes us leave the Works of Darkness and walk as Children
of the Light. They exact a certainty of Faith above that of Sense or Science,
God desires only that we believe the conclusion, as much as the premises
deserve, that the strength of our Faith be equal or proportionable to the
credibility of the Motives to it. Now though I have and ought to have an
absolute certainty of this Thesis, All which God reveals for truth is true,
being a proposition that may be demonstrated, or rather so evident to any one
that understands it, that it needs it not; Yet of this Hypothesis, That all the
Articles of our Faith were revealed by God, we cannot ordinarily have any
rational and acquired certainty, more than moral, founded upon these
considerations: First that the goodness of the precepts of Christianity, and
the greatness of the promises of it, shows it, of all other Religions, most
likely to come from the Fountain of goodness. And then that a constant, famous
and very general Tradition, so credible, that no Wise Man doubts of any other,
which has but the Fortieth part of the credibility of this, such and so
credible a Tradition, tells us, that God himself has set his Hand and Seal to
the Truth of this Doctrine, by doing great, and glorious, and frequent miracles
in confirmation of it. Now our Faith is an assent to this conclusion, that the
Doctrine of Christianity is true, which being deduced from the former Thesis,
which is Metapyhsically certain, and from the former Hypothesis, whereof we can
have but a Moral certainty, we cannot possibly by natural means be more certain
of it than of the weaker of the premises; as a River will not rise higher than
the Fountain from which it flows. For the conclusion always follows the worser
part, if there be any worse: and must be Negative, Particular, Contingent, or
but Morally certain, if any of the Propositions, from whence it is derived be
so: Neither can we be certain of it in the highest degree, unless we be thus
certain of all the principles whereon it is grounded. As a man cannot go or
stand strongly, if either of his Legs be weak. Or as a building cannot be
stable, if any one of the necessary Pillars thereof be infirm and instable. Or
as, If a meassage be brought me, from a man of absolute credit with me, but by
a messenger that is not so, my confidence of the Truth of the Relation, cannot
but be rebated and lessened, by my diffidence in the Relator.

9. Yet all this I say not as if I doubted, that the Spirit of God, being
implored by devout and humble Prayer and sincere obedience, may, and will by
degrees, advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence,
beyond their certainty of evidence. But what God gives as a reward to
believers, is one thing: and what he requires of all men, as their duty, is
another: and whathe will accept of out of grace and favor, is yet another. To
those that believe and live according to their Faith, he gives by degrees the
spirit of obsignation and confirmation, which makes them know (though how they
know not) what they did but believe: And to be as fully and resolutely assured
of the Gospel of Christ, as those which heard it from Christ himself with their
Ears, which saw it with their Eyes, which looked upon it, and whose hands
handled the Word of Life. He requires of all, that their Faith should be (as I
have said) proportionable to the motives and Reasons enforcing to it; he will
accept of the weakest and lowest degree of Faith, if it be living and effectual
unto true obedience. For he it is that will not quench the smoking Flax, nor
break the bruised Reed. He did not reject the Prayer of that distressed man
that cried unto him, Lord I believe, Lord help my unbelief. He commands us to
receive them that are weak in Faith, and thereby declares that he receives
them. And as nothing avails with him, but Faith which works by love: So any
Faith, if it be but as a grain of Mustard seed, if it work by love, shall
certainly avail with him and be accepted of him. Some experience makes me fear,
that the Faith of considering and discoursing men, is like to be cracked with
too much straining: And that being possessed with this false Principle, that it
is in vain to believe the Gospel of Christ, with such a kind or degree of
assent, as they yield to other matters of Tradition: And finding that their
Faith of it, is to them undiscernable, from the belief they give to the truth
of other Stories; are in danger either not to believe at all, thinking not at
all as good as to no purpose, or else, though indeed they do believe it, yet to
think they do not, and to cast themselves into wretched agonies and
perplexities, as fearing they have not that, without which it is impossible to
please God and obtain Eternal happiness. Consideration of this advantage, which
the Devil probably may make of this Fancy, made me willing to insist somewhat
largely upon the Refutation of it.

10. I return now thither from whence I have digressed, and assure you,
concerning the grounds afore-laid, which were, that there is a Rule of Faith,
whereby controversies may be decided, which are necessary to be decided, and
that this rule is Universally infallible, That notwithstanding any Opinion I
hold, touching Faith, or any thing else, I may, and do believe them, as firmly
as you pretend to do. And therefore you may build on, in Gods name, for by Gods
help, I shall always embrace, whatsoever structure is naturally and rationally
laid upon them, whatsoever conclusion may, to my understanding, be evidently
deduced from them. You say, out of them it undeniably follows, That of two
disagreeing in matter of Faith, the one cannot be saved, but by Repentance or
Ignorance. I answer by distinction of those terms, two dissenting in a matter
of Faith. For it may be either in a thing which is indeed a matter of Faith, in
the strictest sense, that is, something, the Belief whereof God requires under
pain of damnation: And so the conclusion is true, though the Consequence of it
from your former premises either is none at all, or so obscure, that I can
hardly discern it. Or it may be as it oftens falls out concerning a thing which
being indeed no matter of Faith, is yet overvalued by the Parties at variance,
and esteemed to be so. And in this sense it is neither consequent nor true. The
untruth of it I have already declared in my examination of your Preface. The
inconsequence of it is of it self evident; for who ever heard of a wilder
Collection than this -- God has provided means sufficient to decide all
Controversies in Religion, necessary to be decided; This means is Universally
infallible, Therefore of two, that differ in any thing which they esteem a
matter of Faith, one cannot be saved.


He that can find any connection between these Propositions, I believe will be
able to find good coherence between the Deaf Plantiff's Accusation, in the
Greek Epigram, and the Deaf Defendants Answer, and the Deaf Judges Sentence:
And to contrive them all into a formal Categorical Syllogism.

11. Indeed if the matter in agitation were plainly decided, by this infallible
means of deciding Controversies, and the Parties in variance knew it to be so,
and yet would stand out in their dissension; this were in one of them, direct
opposition to the Testimony of God, and undoubtedly a damnable sin. But if you
take the liberty to suppose what you please, you may very easily conclude what
you list. For who is so foolish as to grant you these unreasonable Postulates,
that every emergent Controversy of Faith, is plainly decided by the means of
dicision which God has appointed, and that of the Parties litigant, one is
always such a convicted Recusant as you pretend! Certainly, if you say so,
having no better warrant than you have, or can have for it, this is more proper
and formal uncharitableness, than ever was charged upon you. Methinks, with
much more Reason, and much more Charity, you might suppose, that many of these
Controversies which are now disputed among Christians (all which profess
themselves lovers of Christ, and truly desirous to know his Will and do it) are
either not decidable by that means which God has provided, and so not
necessary to be decided: Or if they be, yet not so plainly and evidently, as to
oblige all men to hold one way: or Lastly, if decidable, and evidently decided,
yet you may hope that the erring part, by reason of some Vail before his Eyes,
some excusable ignorance or unavoidable prejudice, does not see the Question to
be decided against him, and so opposes not that which He does know to be the
word of God, but only that which You know to be so, and which he might know,
were he void of prejudice. Which is a fault I confess, but a fault which is
incident even to good and honest men very often: and not of such a gigantick
disposition as you make it, to fly directly upon God Almighty, and to give him
the Lie to his Face.

12. Ad 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16..] In all this long discourse you only
tell us what you will do, but do nothing, but reserve them to the Chapters
following, and there they shall be examined. The Sum of all collected by your
self,. 16. is this.

That the Infallible means of determining Controversies, is the Visible Church.
That the distinction of points Fundamental, and not Fundamental, makes nothing
to the present Question. That to say the Creed contains all Fundamentals, is
neither pertinent nor true. That whosoever persist in Division from the
Communion and Faith of the Roman Church are guilty of Schism and Heresy. That
in regard of the Precept of Charity toward one self, Protestants are in state
of Sin, while they remain divided from the Roman Chruch.
To all these Assertions I will content my self for the present to oppose this
one, That not one of them all is true. Only I may not omit to tell you, that if
the first of them were as true as the Pope himself desires it should be, yet
the Corollary which you deduce from it, would be utterly inconsequent, That
whosoever denis any point proposed by the Church, is injurious to Gods Divine
Majesty, as if he could deceive, or be deceived. For though your Church were
indeed as Infallible a Propounder of Divine Truths as it pretends to be, yet if
it appeared not to me to be so, I might very well believe God most true, and
your Church most false. As though the Gospel of S. Matthew be the Word of God,
yet if I neither knew it to be so, nor believed it, I might believe in God, and
yet think that Gospel a Fable. Hereafter therefore I must entreat you to
remember, that our being guilty of this impiety, depends not only upon your
being, but upon our knowing that you are so. Neither must you argue thus, The
Church of Rome is the Infallible Propounder of Divine Verities, therefore he
that opposes Her calls Gods Truth in Question: But thus rather; The Church of
Rome is so, and Protestants know it to be so, therefore in opposing Her, they
impute to God, that either he deceives them, or is deceived himself. For as I
may deny something which you upon your knowledge have affirmed, and yet never
disparage your honesty, if I never knew that you affirmed it: So I may be
undoubtedly certain of Gods Omniscience, and Veracity, and yet doubt of
something which he has revealed, provided I do not know, nor believe that he
has revealed it. So, that though your Church be the appointed witness of Gods
Revelations; yet until you know, that we know she is so, you cannot without
foul Calumny impute to us, That we charge God blasphemously with deceiving, or
being deceived. You will say perhaps, That this is directly consequent from our
Doctrine, That the Church may Err, which is directed by God in all Her
proposals. True, if we knew it to be directed by him, otherwise not; much less
if we believe, and know the contrary. But then if it were consequent from our
Opinion, have you so little Charity as to say, that men are justly chargeable
with all the consequences of their Opinions.; Such consequences, I mean, as
they do not own but disclaim, and if there were a necessity of doing either,
would much rather forsake their Opinion than embrace these Consequences? What
Opinion is there that draws after it such a Train of portentous Blasphemies, as
that of the Dominicans, by the judgment of the best Writers of your own Order?
And will you say now that the Dominicans are justly chargeable with all these
Blasphemies? If not, seeing our case (take it at the worst) is but the same,
why should not your judgment of us be the same? I appeal to all those
Protestants that have gone over to your Side; whether when they were most
averse from it, they did ever deny or doubt of Gods omniscience or veracity;
whether they did ever believe, or were taught, that God did deceive them, or
was deceived himself. Nay, I provoke to you your self, and desire you to deal
truly, and to tell Us whether you do in your Heart believe, that we do indeed
not believe the Eternal Veracity of the Eternal Verity? And if you judge so
strangely of us, having no better ground for it, than you have or can have, we
shall not need any farther proof of your uncharitableness toward us, this
being the extremity of true uncharitableness. If not, then I hope having no
other ground but this (which sure is none at all) to pronounce us damnable
Heretics, you will cease to do so; and hereafter (as, if your ground be true,
you may do with more truth and Charity) Collect thus, They only Err damnably,
who oppose what they know God has testified, But Protestants sure do not
oppose what they know God has testified, at least we cannot with Charity say
they do, Therefore they either do not Err damnably, or with Charity we cannot
say they do so.

13. Ad 17..] Protestants (you say) according to their own grounds must hold
that of Persons contrary in whatsoever point of belief one part only can be
saved, therefore it is strangely done of them to charge Papists with want of
Charity for holding the same. The consequence I acknowledge, but wonder much
what it should be that lays upon Protestants any necessity to do so! You tell
us it is their holding Scripture the sole Rule of Faith: for this, you say,
obliges them to pronounce them damned, that oppose any least point delivered
in Scripture. This I grant, If they oppose it after sufficient declaration, so
that either they know it to be contained in Scripture, or have no just probable
Reason, and which may move an honest man to doubt whether or no it be there
contained. For to oppose in the first Case in a man that believes the Scripture
to be the Word of God, is to give God the Lie. To oppose in the second, is to
be obstinate against Reason, and therefore a sin though not so great as the
former. But then this is nothing to the purpose of the necessity of damning all
those that are of contrary belief; and that for these Reasons. First, because
the contrary belief may be touching a point not at all mentioned in Scripture;
and such points, though indeed they be not matters of Faith, yet by men in
variance are often over-valued and esteemed to be so. So that, though it were
damnable to oppose any point contained in Scripture; yet Persons of a contrary
belief (as Victor and Polycrates, S. Cyprian, and Stephen) might both be saved,
because their contrary belief was not touching any point contained in
Scripture. Secondly, because the contrary belief may be about the sense of some
place of Scripture which is ambiguous, and with probability capable of diverse
Senses; and in such Cases it is no marvel, and sure no Sin, if several men go
several ways. Thirdly, because the contrary belief may be concerning points
wherein Scripture may with so great probability be alleged on both sides,
(which is a sure note of a point not necessary) that men of honest and upright
Hearts, true lovers of God and of truth, such as desire, above all things, to
know Gods Will and to do it, may, without any fault at all, some go one way,
and some another, and some (and those as good men as either of the former)
suspend their judgments, and expect some Elias to solve doubts, and reconcile
repugnances. Now in all such Questions one side or other (which soever it is)
holds that which indeed is opposite to the sense of the Scripture, which God
intended; for it is impossible that God should intend Contradictions. But then
this intended Sense is not so fully declared, but that they which oppose it may
verily believe that they indeed maintain it, and have great show of reason to
induce them to believe so; and therefore are not to be damned, as men opposing
that which they either know to be a truth delivered in Scripture, or have no
probable Reason to believe the contrary; but rather in Charity to be acquitted
and absolved, as men who endeavor to find the Truth, but fail of it through
humane frailty.

This ground being laid, the Answer to your ensuing Interrogatories, which you
conceive impossible, is very obvious and easy.

14. To the first, Whether it be not in any man a grievous sin to deny any any
one Truth contained in holy Writ? I answer, Yes, if he knew it to be so, or
have no probable Reason to doubt of it: otherwise not.

15. To the second, Whether there be in such denial any distinction between
Fundamental and not Fundamental sufficient to excuse from Heresy? I answer,
Yes, There is such a distinction. But the Reason is, because these points,
either in themselves, or by accident, are Fundamental, which are evidently
contained in Scripture, to him that knows them to be so: Those not Fundamental
which are there-hence deducible but probably only, not evidently.

16. To the third, Whether it be not impertinent to allege the Creed as
containing all Fundamental points of Faith, as if believing it alone we were at
Liberty to deny all other Points of Scripture? I answer, It was never alleged
to any such purpose; but only as a sufficient, or rather more than a sufficient
Summary of those points of Faith, which were of necessity to be believed
actually and explicitly; and that only of such which were merely and purely
Credenda, and not Agenda.

17. To the fourth, drawn as a Corollary from the former, Whether this be not
to say, that of Persons contrary in belief, one part only can be saved? I
answer, By no means. For they may differ about points not contained in
Scripture: They may differ about the sense of some ambiguous Texts of
Scripture: They may differ about some Doctrines, for and against which
Scriptures may be alleged with so great probability, as may justly excuse
either Part from Heresy, and a self-condemning obstinacy. And therefore,
though D. Potter do not take it ill, that you believe your selves may be saved
in your Religion; yet notwithstanding all that has yet been pretended to the
contrary, he may justly condemn you, and that out of your own principles, of
uncharitable presumption, for affirming as you do, that no man can be saved out
of it.

CHAP. II. The ANSWER to the Second CHAPTER.
Concerning the means, whereby the revealed Truths of God are conveyed to our
understanding; and which must determine Controversies in Faith and Religion.

C. M. Of our estimation, respect and reverence to holy Scripture, even
Protestants themselves give Testimony, while they possess it from us, and take
it upon the integrity of our custody, etc.

CHIL. Ad. 1.] He that would Usurp an absolute Lordship and Tyranny over any
People, need not put himself to the trouble and difficulty of abrogating and
disanulling the Laws, made to maintain the Common Liberty; for he may frustrate
their intent, and compass his own design as well, if he can get the Power and
Authority to interpret them as he pleases, and add to them what he pleases, and
to have his interpretations and additions stand for Laws; if he can rule his
People by his Laws, and his Laws by his Lawyers. So the Church of Rome, to
establish Her Tyranny over men's Consciences, needed not either to abolish or
corrupt the Holy Scriptures, the Pillars and Supporters of Christian Liberty
(which in regard of the numerous multitude of Copies dispersed through all
places, Translated into almost all Languages, guarded with all sollicitous care
and industry, had been an impossible attempt;) But the more expedite way, and
therefore more likely to be successful, was to gain the opinion and esteem of
the public and authorized interpreter of them, and the Authority of adding to
them what Doctrine she pleased under the Title of Traditions or Definitions.
For by this means, she might both serve her self of all those causes of
Scripture, which might be drawn to cast a favorable countenance upon Her
ambitious pretenses, which in case the Scripture had been abolished, she could
not have done; and yet be secure enough of having either her Power limited, or
her corruptions and abuses reformed by them; this being once settled in the
minds of men, that unwritten Doctrines, if proposed by her, were to be received
with equal reverence to those that were written: and that the sense of
Scripture was not that which seemed to men's reason and understanding to be so,
but that which the Church of Rome should declare to be so, seemed in never so
unreasonable, and incongruous. The matter being once thus ordered, and the holy
Scriptures being made in effect not your Directors and Judges (no farther than
you please) but your Servants and Instruments, always pressed and in readiness to
advance your designs, and disabled wholly with minds so qualified to prejudice
or impeach them; it is safe for you to put a Crown on their head, and a Reed in
their Hands, and to bow before them, and cry, Hail King of the Jews! to pretend
a great deal of esteem, and respect, and reverence to them, as here you do. But
to little purpose is verbal reverence without entire submission and sincere
obedience; and, as our Savior said of some, so the Scripture, could it speak,
I believe would say to you, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not that which I
command you? Cast away the vain and arrogant pretense of Infallibility, which
makes your Errors incurable. Leave Picturing God, and Worshipping him by
Pictures. Teach not for Doctrine the Commandments of men. Debar not the Laity
of the Testament of Christ's Blood. Let your public Prayers, and Psalms and
Hymes be in such Language as is for the Edification of the Assistants. Take not
from the Clergy that Liberty of Marriage which Christ has left them. Do not
impose upon men that Humility of Worshipping Angels which S. Paul condemns.
Teach no more proper Sacrifices of Christ but one. Acknowledge them that Die in
Christ to be blessed, and to rest from their Labors. Acknowledge the Sacrament
after Consecration, to be Bread and Wine, as well as Christ's Body and Blood.
Acknowledge the gift of continency without Marriage not to be given to all. Let
not the Weapons of your Warfare be Carnal; such as are Massacres, Treasons,
Persecutions, and in a word all means either violent or fraudulent: These and
other things, which the Scripture commands you, do, and then we shall willingly
give you such Testimony as you deserve; but till you do so, to talk of
estimation, respect, and reverence to the Scripture, is nothing else but talk.

2. For neither is that true which you pretend, That we possess the Scripture
from you, or take it upon the integrity of your Custody, but upon Universal
Tradition, of which you are but a little part. Neither, If it were true that
Protestants acknowledged, The integrity of it to have been guarded by your
alone Custody, were this any argument of your reverence toward them. For
first, you might preserve them entire, not for want of Will, but of Power to
corrupt them, as it is a hard thing to Poison the Sea. And then having
prevailed so far with men, as either not to look at all into them, or but only
through such spectacles as you should please to make for them, and to see
nothing in them, though as clear as the Sun, if it any way made against you,
you might keep them entire, without any thought or care to conform your
Doctrine to them, or reform it by them (which were indeed to reverence the
Scriptures) but out of a persuasion, that you could qualify them well enough
with your glosses and interpretations, and make them sufficiently conformable
to your present Doctrine, at least, in their judgment, who were prepossessed
with this persuasion, that your Church was to judge of the sense of Scripture,
not to be judged by it.

3. Whereas you say, No cause imaginable could avert your will from giving the
function of Supreme and sole judge to holy Writ, but that the thing is
impossible, and that by this means controversies are increased and not ended.
What indifferent and unprejudiced man may not easily conceive another cause
which (I do not say does, but certainly) may prevert your Wills, and avert your
understandings from submitting your Religion and Church to a Trial by
Scripture. I mean the great and apparent and unavoidable danger which by this
means you would fall into, of losing the Opinion which men have of your
Infallibility, and consequently your Power and Authority over men's Consciences,
and all that depends upon it; so that though Diana of the Ephesians be cried
up, yet it may be feared that with a great many among you (though I censure or
judge no man) the other cause which wrought upon Demetrius and the Craftsmen,
may have with you also the more effectual, though more secret influence: and
that is, that by this craft we have our living; by this craft, I mean of
keeping your Proselytes from an indifferent Trial of your Religion by
Scripture, and making them yield up and captivate their judgment unto yours.

As for the impossibility of Scriptures being the sole Judge of Controversies,
that is, the sole rule for man to judge them by (for we mean nothing else) you
only affirm it without proof, as if the thing were evident of it self. And
therefore I, conceiving the contrary to be more evident, might well content my
self to deny it without refutation. Yet I cannot but desire you to tell me, If
Scripture cannot be the Judge of any Controversy, how shall that touching the
Church and the Notes of it be determined? And if it be the sole Judge of this
one, why may it not of others? Why not of All? Those only excepted wherein the
Scripture it self is the subject of the Question, which cannot be determined
but by natural reason, the only Principle, beside Scripture, which is common to
Christians.

4. Then for the Imputation of increasing contentions and not ending them,
Scripture is innocent of it; as also this Opinion; That Controversies are to be
decided by Scripture. For if men did really and sincerely submit their
judgments to Scripture, and that only, and would require no more of any man but
to do so, it were impossible but that all Controversies, touching things
necessary and very profitable should be ended: and if others were continued or
increased, it were no matter.

5. In the next Words we have direct Boyes-play; a thing given with one hand
and taken away with the other; an acknowledgment made in one line, and
retracted in the next. We acknowledge (say you) Scripture to be a perfect rule,
for as much as a writing can be a Rule, only we deny that it excludes unwritten
Tradition. As if you should have said, we acknowledge it to be as perfect a
Rule as a writing can be; only we deny it to be as perfect a Rule as a writing
may be. Either therefore you must revoke your acknowledgment, or retract your
retractation of it; for both cannot possibly stand together. For if you will
stand to what you have granted, That Scripture is as perfect a Rule of Faith as
a Writing can be: you must then grant it both so Complete, that it needs no
addition, and so evident, that it needs no interpretation: For both these
properties are requisite to a perfect rule; and a Writing is capable of both
these properties.

6. That both these Properties are requisite to a perfect rule, it is apparent:
Because that is not perfect in any kind which wants some parts belonging to its
integrity: As he is not a perfect man that wants any part appertaining to the
Integrity of a Man; and therefore that which wants any accession to make it a
perfect rule, of its self is not a perfect Rule. And then, the end of a rule is
to regulate and direct. Now every instrument is more or less perfect in its
kind, as it is more or less fit to attain the end for which it is ordained: But
nothing obscure or unevident while it is so, is fit to regulate and direct them
to whom it is so: Therefore it is requisite also to a rule (so far as it is a
Rule) to be evident; otherwise indeed it is no rule, because it cannot serve
for direction. I conclude therefore, that both these properties are required to
a perfect Rule: both to be so complete as to need no Addition; and to be so
evident as to need no Interpretation.

7. Now that a Writing is capable of both these perfections, it is so plain,
that I am even ashamed to prove it. For he that denies it must say, That
something may be spoken which cannot be written. For if such a complete and
evident rule of Faith may be delivered by word of mouth, as you pretend it may,
and is; and whatsoever is delivered by word of mouth may also be written; then
such a complete and evident rule of Faith may also be written. If you will have
more light added to the Sun, answer me then to these Questions. Whether your
Church can set down in writing all these, which she pretends to be Divine
unwritten Traditions, and add them to the verities already written? And whether
she can set us down such interpretations of all obscurities in the Faith as
shall need no farther interpretations? If she cannot, then she has not that
power which you pretend she has, of being an Infallible Teacher of all Divine
verities, and an infallible interpreter of obscurities in the Faith: for she
cannot teach us all Divine verities, if she cannot write them down; neither is
that an interpretation which needs again to be interpreted: If she can; Let her
do it, and then we shall have a writing, not only capable of, but, actually
endowed with both these perfections, of being both so complete as to need no
Addition, and so evident as to need no Interpretation. Lastly, whatsoever your
Church can do or not do, no man can without Blasphemy deny, that Christ Jesus,
if he had pleased, could have writ us a rule of Faith so plain and perfect, as
that it should have wanted neither any part to make up its integrity, nor any
clearness to make it sufficiently intelligible: And if Christ could have done
this, then the thing might have been done; a writing there might have been
endowed with both these properties. Thus therefore I conclude, a writing may be
so perfect a Rule, as to need neither Addition nor Interpretation; But the
Scripture you acknowledge a perfect Rule for as much as a writing can be a
Rule, therefore it needs neither Addition nor Interpretation.

8. You will say, that though a writing be never so perfect a Rule of Faith,
yet it must be beholden to Tradition to give it this Testimony, that it is a
Rule of Faith, and the Word of God. I answer: First, there is no absolute
necessity of this. For God might, if he thought good, give it the attestation
of perpetual Miracles. Secondly, that it is one thing to be a perfect Rule of
Faith, another to be proved so unto us. And thus though a writing could not be
proved to us to be a perfect rule of Faith, by its own saying so, for nothing
is proved true by being said or written in a Book, but only by Tradition which
is a thing credible of it self; yet it may be so in it self, and contain all
the material Objects, all the particular Articles of our Faith, without any
dependence upon Tradition; even this also not excepted, that this Writing does
contain the rule of Faith. Now when Protestants affirm against Papists, that
Scripture is a perfect rule of Faith, their meaning is not, that by Scripture
all things absolutely may be proved, which are to be believed: For it can never
be proved by Scripture to a gainsayer, that there is a God, or that the Book
called Scripture is the Word of God; For he that will deny these Assertions
when they are spoken, will believe them never a whit the more because you can
show them written: But their meaning is, that the Scripture, to them which
presuppose it Divine, and a Rule of Faith, as Papists and Protestants do,
contains all the material Objects of Faith; is a complete and Total, and not
only an imperfect and a partial Rule.

9. But every Book and Chapter, and Text of Scripture is Infallible and wants
no due perfection, and yet excludes not the Addition of other Book, of
Scripture; Therefore the perfection of the whole Scripture excludes not the
Addition of unwritten Tradition. I answer; Every Text of Scripture though it
have the perfection belonging to a Text of Scripture, yet it has not the
perfection requisite to a perfect Rule of Faith; and that only is the
perfection which is the subject of our discourse. So that this is to abuse your
Reader with the ambiguity of the word Perfect. In effect, as if you should say,
a Text of Scripture may be a perfect Text, though there be others beside it;
therefore the whole Scripture may be a perfect Rule of Faith, though there be
other parts of this Rule, besides the Scripture, and though the Scripture be
but a part of it.

10. The next Argument to the same purpose is, for Sophistry, Cousin German to
the former. When the first Books of Scripture were written, they did not
exclude unwritter Tradition: Therefore now also, that all the Books of
Scripture are written, Traditions are not excluded. The sense of which Argument
(if it have any) must be this. When only a part of the Scripture was written,
then a part of the Divine Doctrine was unwritten; Therefore now when all the
Scripture is written, yet some part of the Divine Doctrine is yet unwritten. If
you say, your conclusion is not that it is so, but without disparagement to
Scripture, may be so: without disparagement to the truth of Scripture, I grant
it; but without disparagement to the Scriptures being a perfect Rule, I deny
it. And now the Question is not of the Truth, but the perfection of it; which
are very different things, though you would fain confound them. For Scripture
might very well be all true, though it contain not all necessary Divine Truth.
But unless it do so, it cannot be a perfect Rule of Faith; for that which wants
any thing is not perfect. For I hope you do not imagine, that we conceive any
Antipathy between Gods Word Written and unwritten, but that both might very
well stand together. All that we say is this, that we have reason to believe
that God de Facto, has ordered the matter so, that all the Gospel of Christ,
the whole Covenant between God and Man, is now Written. Whereas if he had
pleased, he might so have disposed it, that part might have been written, and
part unwritten: but then he would have taken order, to whom we should have had
recourse, for that part of it which was not written; which seeing he has not
done (as the Progress shall demonstrate) it is evident he has left no part of
it unwritten. We know no man therefore that says, It were any injury to the
written Word to be joined with the unwritten, if there were any wherewith it
might be joined; but that we deny. The fidelity of a Keeper may very well
consist with the Authority of the thing committed to his Custody. But we know
no one Society of Christians that is such a faithful Keeper as you pretend. The
Scripture it self was not kept so faithfully by you, but that you suffered
infinite variety of Readings to creep into it; all which could not possibly be
Divine, and yet, in several parts of your Church, all of them, until the last
Age, were so esteemed. The interpretations of obscure places of Scripture,
which without Question, the Apostles taught the Primitive Christians are wholly
lost; there remains no certainty scarce of any one. Those Worlds of Miracles,
which our Savior did, which were not written, for want of writing are vanished
out of the memory of men. And many profitable things which the Apostles taught
and writ not, as that which S. Paul glances at, in his second Epistle to the
Thesalon. of the cause of the hindrance of the coming of Antichrist, are wholly
lost and extinguished. So unfaithful or negligent has been this keeper of
Divine verities; whose eyes, like the Keepers of Israel (you say) have never
Slumbred nor Slept. Lastly, we deny not but a Judge and a Law might well stand
together, but we deny that there is any such Judge of Gods appointment. Had he
intended any such Judge, he would have named him, lest otherwise (as now it is)
our Judge of Controversies should be our greatest Controversy.

11. Ad 2, 3, 4, 5, 6..] In your second Paragraph, you sum up those arguments
wherewith you intend to prove, that Scripture alone cannot be Judge in
Controversies. Wherein I profess unto you before hand, that you will fight
without an Adversary. For though Protestants, being warranted by some of the
Fathers, have called Scripture the Judge of Controversies; and you in saying
here, That Scripture alone cannot be Judge, imply that it may be called in some
sense a Judge, though not alone: Yet to speak properly (as men should speak
when they write of Controversies in Religion) the Scripture is not a Judge of
Controversies, but a Rule only and the only Rule for Christians to judge them
by. Every man is to Judge for himself with the Judgment of Discretion, and to
choose either his Religion first, and then his Church, as we say: or as you,
his Church first, and then his Religion. But by the consent of both sides,
every man is to judge and choose: and the Rule whereby he is to guide his
choice, if he be a natural man, is Reason, if he be already a Christian,
Scripture, which we say is the Rule to judge Controversies by. Yet not all
simply, but all the Controversies of Christians, of those, that are already
agreed upon This first Principle that, the Scripture is the Word of God. But
that there is any man, or any company of men appointed to be judge for all men,
that we deny, and that I believe you will never prove. The very truth is, we
say no more in this matter, than evidence of Truth has made you confess in
plain terms in the beginning of this chap. viz That Scripture is a perfect Rule
of Faith, for as much as a writing can be a Rule. So that all your reasons
whereby you labor to dethrone the Scripture from this office of Judging, we
might let pass as impertinent to the conclusion which we maintain, and you have
already granted; yet out of courtesy we will consider them.

12. Your first is this; a Judge must be a person fit to end Controversies, but
the Scripture is not a person, nor fit to end Controversies, no more than the
Law would be without the Judges, therefore though it may be a Rule it cannot be
a Judge. Which conclusion I have already granted. Only my request is, that you
will permit Scripture to have the properties of a Rule, that is, to be fit to
direct every one that will make the best use of it, to that end for which it
was ordained. And that is as much as we need desire. For as if I were to go a
Journey and had a guide which could not Err, I needed not to know my way: so on
the other side, if I know my way or have a plain rule to know it by, I shall
need no guide. Grant therefore Scripture to be such a Rule, and it will quickly
take away all necessity of having an Infallible guide. But without a living
Judge it will be no fitter (you say) to end Controversies, than the Law alone
to end Suits. I answer, if the Law were plain and perfect, and men honest and
desirous to understand aright, and obey it, he that says it were not fit to end
Controversies, must either want understanding himself, or think the World wants
it. Now the Scripture, we pretend, in things necessary is plain and perfect,
and men, we say, are obliged, under pain of Damnation, to seek the true sense
of it, and not to wrest it to their preconceived Phansies. Such a Law therefore
to such men cannot but be very fit to end all Controversies, necessary to be
ended. For others that are not so, they will end when the World ends, and that
is time enough.

13. Your next encounter is with them, who acknowledging the Scripture a Rule
only and not a Judge, make the Holy Ghost, speaking in Scripture, the judge of
Controversies. Which you disprove by saying, That the Holy Ghost speaking only
in Scripture is no more intelligible to us, than the Scripture in which he
speaks. But by this reason neither the Pope, nor a Council can be a Judge
neither. For first, denying the Scriptures, the writings of the Holy Ghost, to
be Judges, you will not I hope offer to pretend, that their decrees, the
writings of men are more capable of this function: the same exceptions at
least, if not more, and greater lying against them as do against Scripture. And
then what you Object against the Holy Ghost, speaking in Scripture, to exclude
him from this office, The same I return upon them and their decrees, to debar
them from it; that they speaking unto us only in their decrees, are no more
intelligible than the decrees in which they speak. And therefore if the Holy
Ghost speaking in Scripture may not be a judge for this reason; neither may
they, speaking in their decrees, be Judges for the same Reason. If the Popes
decrees (you will say) be obscure, he can explain himself, and so the Scripture
cannot. But the Holy Ghost, that speaks in Scripture, can do so, if he please,
and when he is pleased will do so. In the mean time it will be fit for you to
wait his leisure, and to be content, that those things of Scripture which are
plain should be so, and those which are obscure should remain obscure, until he
please to declare them. Besides he can (which you cannot warrant me of the Pope
or a Coucil) speak at first so plainly, that his Words shall need no farther
explanation; and so in things necessary we believe he has done. And if you say,
the Decrees of Councils touching Controversies, though they be not the Judge,
yet they are the Judges Sentence: So, I say, the Scripture, though not the
Judge, is the Sentence of the Judge. When therefore you conclude, That to say a
Judge is necessary for deciding Controversies, about the meaning of Scripture,
is as much as to say, he is necessary to decide what the Holy Ghost speaks in
Scripture: This I grant is true, but I may not grant that a Judge (such a one
as we dispute of) is necessary either to do the one, or the other. For if the
Scripture (as it is in things necessary) be plain, why should it be more
necessary to have a judge to interpret them in plain places, than to have a
judge to interpret the meaning of a Councils decrees, and others to interpret
their Interpretations, and others to interpret theirs, and so on for ever? And
where they are not plain, there if we, using diligence to find the truth, do
yet miss of it and fall into Error, there is no danger in it. They that Err,
and they that do not Err may both be saved. So that those places which contain
things necessary, and wherein Error were dangerous, need no Infallible
interpreter because they are plain: and those that are obscure need none
because they contain not things necessary, neither is Error in them dangerous.

The Lawmakers speaking in the Law, I grant it, is no more easily understood
than the Law it self, for his Speech is nothing else but the Law: I grant it
very necessary, that besides the Lawmakers speaking in the Law, there should be
other Judges to determine Civil and Criminal Controversies, and to give every
man that Justice which the Law allows him. But your Argument drawn from hence
to show a necessity of a visible Judge in Controversies of Religion. I say is
Sophistical: and that for many Reasons.

14. First, Because the variety of Civil cases is infinite, and therefore there
cannot be possibly Laws enough provided for the determination of them: and
therefore there must be a Judge to supply out of the Principles of Reason the
interpretation of the Law, where it is defective. But the Scripture (we say) is
a perfect Rule of Faith, and therefore needs no supply of the defects of it.

15. Secondly, To execute the Letter of the Law, according to rigor, would be
many times unjust, and therefore there is need of a Judge to moderate it;
whereof in Religion there is no use at all.

16. Thirdly, In Civil and Criminal causes the parties have for the most part
so much interest, and very often so little honesty, that they will not submit
to a Law though never so plain, if it be against them; or will not see it to be
against them, though it be so never so plainly: whereas if men were honest, and
the Law were plain and extended to all cases, there would be little need of
Judges. Now in matters of Religion, when the Question is, whether every man be
a fit Judge and chooser for himself, we suppose men honest, and such as
understand the difference between a Moment and Eternity. And such men, we
conceive, will think it highly concerns them to be of the true Religion, but
nothing at all that this or that Religion should be the true. And then we
suppose that all the necessary points of Religion are plain and easy, and
consequently every man in this cause to be a competent Judge for himself;
because it concerns himself to judge right as much as Eternal happiness is
worth. And if through his own default he judge amiss he alone shall suffer for
it.

17. Fourthly, in Civil Controversies we are obliged only to external passive
obedience, and not to an internal and active. We are bound to obey the Sentence
of the Judge, or not to resist it, but not always to believe it just. But in
matters of Religion, such a Judge is required whom we should be obliged to
believe, to have judged right. So that in Civil Controversies every honest
understanding man is fit to be a Judge; But in Religion none but he that is
infallible.

18. Fifthly, in Civil Causes there is means and power, when the Judge has
decreed, to compel men to obey his Sentence: otherwise, I believe, Laws alone,
would be to as much purpose, for the ending of differences, as Laws and Judges
both. But all the Power in the World is neither fit to convince, nor able to
compel a man's Conscience to consent to any thing. Worldly terror may prevail so
far as to make men profess a Religion which they believe not, (such men I mean,
who know not that there is a Heaven provided for Martyrs, and a Hell for those
that dissemble such truths as are necessary to be professed:) But to force,
either any man to believe what he believes not, or any honest man to dissemble
what he does believe (if God commands him to profess it,) or to profess what he
does not believe, all the Powers in the World are too weak, with all the Powers
of Hell, to assist them.

19. Sixthly, in Civil Controversies the case cannot be so put, but there may
be a Judge to end it, who is not a party: In Controversies of Religion, it is
in a manner impossible to be avoided but the Judge must be a party. For this
must be the first, whether he be a Judge or no, and in that he must be a party.
Sure I am, the Pope, in the Controversies of our time, is a chief party; for it
highly concerns him, even as much as his Popedom is worth, not to yield any one
point of his Religion to be Erroneous. And he is a man subject to like passions
with other men. And therefore we may justly decline his Sentence, for fear
temporal respects should either blind his judgment, or make him pronounce
against it.

20. Seventhly, in Civil Controversies, it is impossible Titius should hold the
land in question and Sempronius too: and therefore either the Plantiff must
injure the Defendant, by disquieting his possession, or the Defendant wrong the
Plantiff by keeping his right from him. But in Controversies of Religion the
Case is otherwise. I may hold my Opinion and do you no wrong, and you yours and
do me none. Nay we may both of us hold our Opinion, and yet do our selves no
harm; provided, the difference be not touching any thing necessary to
Salvation, and that we love truth so well, as to be diligent to inform our
Conscience, and constant in following it.

21. Eighthly, For the ending of Civil Controversies, who does not see it is
absolutely necessary, that not only Judges should be appointed, but that it
should be known and unquestioned who they are? Thus all the Judges of our Land
are known men, known to be Judges, and no man can doubt or question, but these
are the Men. Otherwise if it were a disputable thing, who were these Judges,
and they had no certain warrant for their Authority, but only some Topical
congruities, would not any man say such Judges, in all likelihood, would rather
multiply Controversies, then end them?

22. Ninthly, and lastly, For the deciding of Civil Controversies men may
appoint themselves a judge. But in matters of Religion, this office may be
given to none but whom God has designed for it: who does not always give us
those things which we conceive most expedient for our selves.

23. So likewise if our Savior, the King of Heaven, had intended that all
Controversies in Religion should be by some Visible Judge finally determined,
who can doubt, but in plain terms he would have expressed himself about this
matter? He would have said plainly. The Bishop of Rome I have appointed to
decide all emergent Controversies. For that our Savior designed the Bishop of
Rome to this Office, and yet would not say so, nor cause it to be written -- ad
Rei memoriam -- by any of the Evangelists or Apostles, so much as once; but
leave it to be drawn out of uncertain Principles, by thirteen or fourteen more
uncertain consequences, He that can believe it, let him. All these Reasons, I
hope, will convince you, that though we have, and have great necessity of,
Judges in Civil and Criminal causes: yet you may not conclude from thence, that
there is any public authorized Judge to determine Controversies in Religion,
nor any necessity there should be any.

24. But the Scripture stands in need of some watchful and unerring eye to
guard it, by means of whose assured vigilance we may undoubtedly receive it
sincere and pure. Very true, but this is no other than the watchful Eye of
Divine providence: the goodness whereof will never suffer, that the Scriptures
should be depraved and corrupted, but that in them should be always extant a
conspicuous and plain way to Eternal happiness. Neither can any thing be more
palpably unconsistent with his goodness, than to suffer Scripture to be
undiscernably corrupted in any matter of moment, and yet to exact of men the
belief of those verities, which without their fault, or knowledge, or
possibility of prevention, were defaced out of them. So that God requiring of
men to believe Scripture in its purity, ingages himself to see it preserved in
sufficient purity, and you need not fear but he will satisfy his engagement.
You say, we can have no assurance of this but your Churches Vigilance. But if
we had no other we were in a hard case; for who could then assure us that your
Church has been so vigilant, as to guard Scripture from any the least
alteration? There being various Lections in the ancient Copies of your Bibles,
what security can your new raised Office of Assurance give us, that, that
reading is true which you now receive, and that false which you reject?
Certainly they that anciently received and made use of these diverse Copies,
were not all guarded by the Churches vigilance from having their Scripture
altered from the purity of the Original in many places. For of different
readings, it is not in nature impossible that all should be false, but more
than one cannot possibly be true. Yet the want of such a protection was no
hindrance to their Salvation, and why then shall the having of it be necessary
for ours? But then this Vigilance of your Church, what means have we to be
ascertained of it? First, the thing is not evident of it self; which is
evident, because many do not believe it. Neither can any thing be pretended to
give evidence to it, but only some places of Scripture; of whose incorruption
more than any other what is it that can secure me? If you say the Churches
vigilance, you are in a Circle, proving the Scriptures uncorrupted by the
Churches vigilance, and the Churches vigilance by the incorruption of some
places of Scripture, and again the incorruption of those places by the Churches
vigilance. If you name any other means, than that means which secures me of the
Scriptures incorruption in those places, will also serve to assure me of the
same in other places. For my part, abstracting from Divine Providence, which
will never suffer the way to Heaven to be blocked up or made invisible, I know
no other means (I mean no other natural and rational means) to be assured
hereof, than I have that any other Book is uncorrupted. For though I have a
greater degree of rational and humane Assurance of that than this, in regard of
diverse considerations which make it more credible, That the Scripture has been
preserved from any material alteration; yet my assurance of both is of the same
kind and condition, both Moral assurances, and neither Physical or Mathematical.

25. To the next argument the Reply is obvious; That though we do not believe
the Books of Scripture to be Canonical because they say so, (For other Books
that are not Canonical may say they are, and those that are so may say nothing
of it:) yet we believe not this upon the Authority of your Church, but upon the
Credibility of Universal Tradition, which is a thing Credible of it self, and
therefore fit to be rested on; whereas the Authority of your Church is not so.
And therefore your rest thereon is not rational but merely voluntary. I might
as well rest upon the judgment of the next man I meet, or upon a chance of a
Lottery for it. For by this means I only know I might Err, but by relying on
you I know I should Err. But yet (to return you one suppose for another)
suppose I should for this and all other things submit to her direction, how
could she assure me that I should not be misled by doing so? She pretends
indeed infallibility herein, but how can she assure us that she has it? What,
by Scriptures. That you say cannot assure us of its own Infallibility, and
therefore not of yours. What then, by Reason? That you say may deceive in other
things, and why not in this? How then will she assure us hereof, By saying so?
Of this very affirmation there will remain the same Question still, How it can
prove it self to be infallibly true. Neither can there be an end of the like
multiplied Demands, till we rest in something evident of it self, which
demonstrates to the World that this Church is infallible. And seeing there is
no such Rock for the Infallibility of this Church to be settled on, it must of
necessity, like the Island of Delos, flote up and down for ever. And yet upon
this point according to Papists all other Controversies in Faith depend.

26. To the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,.] The sum and substance of the
Ten next Paragraphs is this, That it appears, by the Confessions of some
Protestants, and the Contentions of others, that the Questions about the Canon
of Scripture, what it is: and about the Various reading and Translations of it,
which is true and which not, are not to be determined by Scripture, and
therefore that all Controversies of Religion are not decidable by Scripture.

27. To which I have already answered saying, That when Scripture is affirmed
to be the rule by which all Controversies of Religion are to be decided, Those
are to be excepted out of this generality which are concerning the Scripture it
self. For as that general saying of Scripture, He has put all things under his
Feet, is most true, though yet S. Paul tells us, That when it is said, he has
put all things under him, it is manifest he is excepted who did put all things
under him: So when we say that all Controversies of Religion are decidable by
the Scripture, it is manifest to all, but Cavillers, that we do and must except
from this generality, those which are touching the Scripture it self. Just as a
Merchant showing a Ship of his own, may say, all my substance is in this Ship;
and yet never intended to deny, that his Ship is part of his substance, nor yet
to say that his Ship is in it self. Or as a man may say, that a whole House is
supported by the Foundation, and yet never mean to exclude the Foundation from
being a part of the House, or to say that it is supported by it self. Or as you
your selves use to say, that the Bishop of Rome is head of the whole Church,
and yet would think us but Captious Sophisters should we infer from hence, that
either you made him no part of the whole, or else made him head of himself.
Your negative conclusion therefore, that these Questions touching Scripture,
are not decidable by Scripture, you needed not have cited any Authorities, nor
urged any reason to prove it; it is evident of it self, and I grant it without
more ado. But your Corollary from it, which you would insinuate to your unwary
reader, that therefore they are to be decided by your, or any Visible Church,
is a mere inconsequence, and very like his collection, who because Pamphilus
was not to have Glycerium for his Wife, presently concluded that he must have
her; as if there had been no more men in the World but Pamphilus and himself.
For so you as if there were nothing in the World capable of this Office, but
the Scripture, or the present Church, having concluded against Scripture, you
conceive, but too hastily, that you have concluded for the Church. But the
truth is, neither the one nor the other have any thing to do with this matter.
For first, the Question whether such or such a Book be Canonical Scripture,
though it may be decided negatively out of Scripture, by showing apparent and
irreconcilable contradictions between it and some other Book confessedly
Canonical; yet affirmatively it cannot but only by the Testimonies of the
ancient Churches: any Book being to be received as undoubtedly Canonical, or to
be doubted of as uncertain, or rejected as Apocryphal, according as it was
received, or doubted of, or rejected by them. Then for the Question, of various
readings which is the true, it is inreason evident and confessed by your own
Pope, that there is no possible determination of it, but only by comparison
with ancient Copies. And lastly for Controversies about different Translations
of Scripture, the Learned have the same means to satisfy themselves in it, as
in the Questions which happen about the Translation of any other Author, that
is, skill in the Language of the Original, and comparing Translations with it.
In which way if there be no certainty, I would know what certainty you have,
that your Doway Old, and Rhemish New Testament are true Translations? And then
for the unlearned those on your Side are subject to as much, nay the very same
uncertainty with those on ours. Neither is there any reason imaginable, why an
ignorant English Protestant may not be as secure of the Translation of our
Church, that it is free from Error, if not absolutely, yet in matters of
moment, as an ignorant English Papist can be of his Rhemish Testament, or Doway
Bible. The best direction I can give them is to compare both together, and
where there is no real difference (as in the Translation of controverted places
I believe there is very little) there to be confident, that they are right;
where they differ, therefore to be prudent in the choice of the guides they
follow. Which way of proceeding, if it be subject to some possible Error, is it
the best that either we, or you have; and it is not required that we use any
better than the best we have.

28. You will say, Dependence on your Churches infallibility is a better. I
answer, it would be so, if we could be infallibly certain, that your Church is
infallible, that is, if it were either evident of it self, and seen by its own
light, or could be reduced unto and settled upon some Principle that is so. But
seeing you your selves do not so much as pretend, to enforce us to the belief
hereof, by any proofs infallible and convincing, but only to induce us to it,
by such as are, by your confession, only probable, and prudential motives;
certainly it will be to very little purpose, to put off your uncertainty for
the first turn, and to fall upon it at the second: to please your selves in
building your House upon an imaginary Rock, when you your selves see and
confess, that this very Rock stands it self at the best but upon a frame of
Timber. I answer secondly, that this cannot be a better way, because we are
infallibly certain that your Church is not infallible, and indeed has not the
real prescription of this privilege, but only pleases her self with a false
imagination and vain presumption of it: as I shall hereafter demonstrate by may
unanswerable arguments.

31. But, seeing the belief of the Scripture is a necessary thing, and cannot
be proved by Scripture, how can the Church of England teach, as she does, Art.
6. That all things necessary are contained in Scripture?

32. I have answered this already. And here again I say, That all but Cavillers
will easily understand the meaning of the Article to be, That all the Divine
Verities, which Christ revealed to his Apostles, and the Apostles taught the
Churches, are contained in Scripture. That is, all the material Objects of our
Faith; whereof the Scripture is none, but only the means of conveying them unto
us: which we believe not finally, and for it self, but for the matter contained
in it. So that if men did believe the Doctrine contained in Scripture, it
should no way hinder their Salvation, not to know whether their were any
Scripture or no. Those Barbarous Nations Irenaeus speaks of were in this case,
and yet no doubt but they might be saved. The end that God aims at, is the
belief of the Gospel, the Covenant between God and Man; the Scripture he has
provided as a means for this end, and this also we are to believe, but not as
the last Object of our Faith, but as the instrument of it. When therefore we
subscribe to the 6. Art. you must understand that, by Articles of Faith, they
mean the final and ultimate Objects of it, and not the means and instrumental
Objects;

33. But, Protestants agree not in assigning the Canon of Holy Scripture.
Luther and Illyricus reject the Epistle of S. James. Kemnitius, and other Luth.
the second of Peter, the second and third of John. The Epistle to the Heb. the
Epistle of James, of Jude, and the Apocalypse. Therefore without the Authority
of the Church, no certainty can be had what Scripture is Canonical.

34. So also the Ancient Fathers, and not only Fathers, but whole Churches
differed about the certainty of the Authority of the very same Books: and by
their difference showed, they knew no necessity of conforming themselves herein
to the judgment of your or any Church. For had they done so, they must have
agreed all with that Church, and consequently among themselves. Now I pray tell
me plainly, Had they sufficient certainty what Scripture was Canonical, or had
they not? If they had not, it seems there is no such great harm or danger in
not having such a certainty whether some Books be Canonical or no, as you
require: If they had, why may not Protestants, notwithstanding their
differences, have sufficient certainty hereof, as well as the Ancient Fathers
and Churches, notwithstanding theirs?

35. You proceed. And whereas the Protestants of England in the 6. Art. have
these Words, In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those Books, of
whose Authority was never any doubt in the Church; you demand, what they mean
by them? Whether that by the Churches consent they are assured what Scriptures
be Canonical? I Answer for them. Yes, they are so. And whereas you infer from
hence, This is to make the Church Judge: I have told you already, That of this
Controversy we make the Church the Judge; but not the present Church, much
less the present Roman Church, but the consent and Testimony of the Ancient and
Primitive Church. Which though it be but a highly probable inducement, and no
demonstrative enforcement, yet methinks you should not deny but it may be a
sufficient ground of Faith: Whose Faith, even of the Foundation of all your
Faith, your Churches Authority, is built lastly and wholly upon Prudential
Motives.

36. But by this Rule the whole Book of Esther must quit the Canon; because it
was excluded by some in the Church: by Melito, Athanasius, and Gregory
Nazianzen. Then for ought I know he that should think he had reason to exclude
it now, might be still in the Church as well as Melito, Athanasius, Nazianzen
were. And while you thus inveigh against Luther, and charge him with Luciferian
Heresies, for doing that which you in this very place confess that Saints in
Heaven before him have done, are you not partial and a Judge of evil thoughts?

37. Luther's censures of Ecclesiastes, Job, and the Prophets, though you make
such Tragedies with them, I see none of them but is capable of a tolerable
construction, and far from having in them any Fundamental Heresy. He that
condemns him for saying, the Book of Ecclesiastes is not full, That it has
many abrupt things, condemns him, for ought I can see, for speaking truth. And
the rest of the censure is but a bold and blunt expression of the same thing.
The Book of Job may be a true History, and yet as many true Stories are, and
have been an Argument of a Fable to set before us an example of Patience. And
though the Books of the Prophets were not written by themselves, but by their
Disciples, yet it does not follow that they were written casually: (Though I
hope you will not damn all for Heretics, that say, some Books of Scripture
were written casually.) Neither is there any reason they should the sooner be
called in question for being written by their Disciples, seeing being so
written they had attestation from themselves. Was the Prophecy of Jeremy the
less Canonical, for being written by Baruch? Or because S. Peter the Master
dictated the Gospel, and S. Mark the Scholar writ it, is it the more likely to
be called in Question?

38. But leaving Luther, you return to our English Canon of Scripture; And tell
us, that in the New Testament, by the above mentioned rule, (of whose Authority
was never any doubt in the Church) diverse Books must be discanonized. Not so.
For I may believe even those questioned Books to have been written by the
Apostles and to be Canonical: but I cannot in Reason believe this of them so
undoubtedly, as of those Books which were never questioned. At least I have no
warrant to damn any man that shall doubt of them or deny them now: having the
example of Saints in Heaven, either to justify, or excuse such their doubting
or denial.

39. You observe in the next place, that our sixth Article, specifying by name
all the Books of the Old Testament, shuffles over these of the New with this
generality -- All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly
received, we do receive, and account them Canonical: And in this you fancy to
your self a mystery of iniquity. But if this be all the shuffling that the
Church of England is guilty of, I believe the Church, as well as the King, may
give for her Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. For all the Bibles which since
the Composing of the Articles have been used and allowed by the Church of
England, do testify and even proclaim to the World, that by -- Commonly
received, they meant, received by the Church of Rome, and other Churches before
the Reformation. I pray take the pains to look in them, and there you shall
find the Books which the Church of England counts Apocryphal marked out and
severed from the rest, with this Title in the beginning, The Books called
Apocrypha; and with this close or Seal in the End, The End of the Apocrypha.
And having told you by name, and in particular, what Books only She Esteems
Apocryphal, I hope you will not put Her to the trouble of telling you that the
rest are in Her judgment Canonical.

40. But if by Commonly received, She meant, by the Church of Rome; Then by the
same reason, must She receive diverse Books of the Old Testament which She
rejects.

41. Certainly a very good Consequence. The Church of England receives the
Books of the New Testament, which the Church of Rome receives; Therefore she
must receive the Books of the Old Testament which she receives. As if you
should say, If you will do as we, in one thing, you must in all things. If you
will pray to God with us, you must pray to Saints with us. If you hold with us,
when we have reason on our side, you must de so, when we have no reason.

43. But, with what Coherence can we say in the former part of the Article,
That by Scripture we mean those Books that were never doubted of; and in the
latter say, We receive all the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly
received, whereas of them many were doubted? I answer. When they say, of whose
Authority there was never any doubt in the Church, They mean not, those only of
whose Authority there was simply no doubt at all, by any man in the Church; But
such as were not at any time doubted of by the whole Church, or by all
Churches, but had attestation, though not Universal, yet at least sufficient to
make considering men receive them for Canonical. In which number they may well
reckon those Epistles which were sometimes doubted of by some, yet whose number
and Authority was not so great, as to prevail against the contrary suffrages.

44. But, if to be commonly received, pass for a good Rule to know the Canon of
the New Testament by, why not of the Old? You conclude many times very well,
but still when you do so, it is out of principles which no man grants. For who
ever told you, that to be commonly received is a good Rule to know the Canon of
the New Testament by? Have you been trained up in Schools of subtilty, and
cannot you see a great difference, between these two, We receive the Books of
the New Testament as they are commonly received, and we receive those that are
commonly received, because they are so? To say this, were indeed to make, being
commonly received, a Rule or Reason to know the Canon by. But to say the
former, does no more make it a Rule, than you should make the Church of England
the rule of your receiving them, if you should say, as you may, The Books of
the New Testament we receive for Canonical, as they are received by the Church
of England.

45. You demand, upon what infallible ground we agree with Luther against you,
in some, and with you against Luther in others? And I also demand upon what
infallible ground you hold your Canon, and agree neither with us, nor Luther?
For sure your differing from us both, is of it self no more apparently
reasonable, than our agreeing with you in part, and in part with Luther. If you
say, your Churches Infallibility is your ground: I demand again some Infallible
ground both for the Churches Infallibility, and for this, that Yours is the
Church; and shall never cease multiplying demands upon demands, until you
settle me upon a Rock; I mean, give such an answer, whose Truth is so evident
that it needs no further evidence. If you say, This is Universal Tradition: I
reply, your Churches Infallibility is not built upon it, and that the Canon of
Scripture, as we receive it, is. For we do not profess our selves so
absolutely, and undoubtedly certain; neither do we urge others to be so, of
those Books, which have been doubted, as of those that never have.

46. The Conclusion of your Tenth.. is, That the Divinity of a writing cannot
be known from it self alone, but by some extrinsecal Authority: Which you need
not prove, for no Wise Man denies it. But then this authority is that of
Universal Tradition, not of your Church. For to me it is altogether as (...),
that the Gospel of Saint Matthew is the Word of God, as that all which your
Church says is true.

47. That Believers of the Scripture, by considering the Divine matter, the
excellent precepts, the glorious promises contained in it, may be confirmed in
their Faith, of the Scriptures Divine Authority; and that among other
inducements and inforcements hereunto, internal arguments have their place and
force, certainly no man of understandeng can deny. For my part I profess, if
the Doctrine of the Scripture were not as good, and as fit to come from the
Fountain of goodness, as the Miracles, by which it was confirmed, were great, I
should want one main pillar of my Faith, and for want of it, I fear should be
much staggered in it. Now this and nothing else did the Doctor mean in saying,
The Believer sees, by that glorious beam of Divine light which shines in
Scripture, and by many internal Arguments, that the Scripture is of Divine
Authority. By this (says he) he sees it, that is, he is moved to, and
strengthened in his belief of it: and by this partly, not wholly; by this, not
alone, but with the concurrence of other Arguments. He that will quarrel with
him for saying so, must find fault with the Master of the Sentences, and all
his Scholars, for they all say the same.

48. In the next Division, out of your liberality, you will suppose, that
Scripture, like to a corporal light, is by it self alone able to determine and
move our understanding to assent: yet notwithstanding this supposal, Faith
still (you say) must go before Scripture, because as the light is visible only
to those that have eyes: so the Scripture only to those that have the Eye of
Faith. But to my understanding, if Scripture do move and determine our
Understanding to assent, then the Scripture, and its moving must be before this
assent, as the cause must be before its own effect; now this very assent is
nothing else but Faith, and Faith nothing else than the Understandings assent.
And therefore (upon this supposal) Faith does, and must originally proceed from
Scripture, as the effect from its proper cause: and the influence and efficacy
of Scripture is to be presupposed before the assent of Faith, unto which it
moves and determines, and consequently if this supposition of yours were true,
there should need no other means precedent to Scripture to beget Faith,
Scripture it self being able (as here you suppose) to determine and move the
understanding to assent, that is to believe them, and the Verities contained in
them. Neither is this to say, that the Eyes with which we see, are made by the
light by which we see. For you are mistaken much, if you conceive that in this
comparison, Faith answers to the Eye. But if you will not pervert it, the
Analogy must stand thus-; Scripture must answer to light; The Eye of the Soul,
that is the Understanding, or the faculty of assenting, to the bodily Eye; And
lastly assenting or believing to the Act of seeing. As therefore the light,
determining the Eye to see, though it presupposes the Eye which it determines,
as every Action does the Object on which it is employed, yet it self is
presupposed and antecedent to the Act of seeing, as the cause is always to its
effect: So, if you will suppose that Scripture, like light, moves the
understanding to assent, The Understanding (that is the Eye and Objection which
it works) must be before this influence upon it; But the Assent, that is the
belief whereof the Scripture moves, and the understanding is moved, which
answers to the Act of seeing, must come after. For if it did assent already, to
what purpose should the Scripture do that which was done before? Nay indeed how
were it possible it should be so, any more than a Father can beget a Son that
he has already? Or an Architect build an House that is built already? Or than
this very world can be made again before it be unmade? Transubstantiation
indeed is fruitful of such Monsters. But they that have not sworn themselves to
the defense of Error, will easily perceive, that Jam factum facere, and Factum
infectum facere, are equally impossible. But I digress.

49. The close of this Paragraph, is a fit cover for such a Dish. There you
tell us, That if there must be some other means precedent to Scripture to beget
Faith, this can be no other than the Church. By the Church, we know you do, and
must understand the Roman Church: so that in effect you say, no man can have
Faith, but he must be moved to it by your Churches Authority. And that is to
say, that the King and all other Protestants, to whom you write, though they
verily think they are Christians and believe the Gospel, because they assent to
the truth of it, and would willingly Die for it, yet indeed are Infidels and
believe nothing. The Scripture tells us, The Heart of man knows no Man, but
the Spirit of Man which is in him. And who are you, to take upon you to make us
believe, that we do not believe, what we know we do? But if I may think verily
that I believe the Scripture, and yet not believe it; how know you that you
believe the Roman Church? I am as verily, and as strongly persuaded that I
believe the Scripture, as you are that you believe the Church. And if I may be
deceived, why may not you? Again, what more ridiculous, and against sense and
experience, than to affirm, That there are not Millions amongst you and us that
believe, upon no other reason than their Education, and the authority of their
Parents and Teachers, and the Opinion they have of them? The tenderness of the
subject, and aptness to receive impressions, supplying the defect and
imperfection of the Agent! And will you proscribe from Heaven all those
believers of your own Creed, who do indeed lay the Foundation of their Faith
(for I cannot call it by any other name) no deeper than upon the Authority of
their Father, or Master, or Parish Priest? Certainly, if these have no true
Faith, your Church is very full of Infidels. Suppose Xaverius by the Holiness
of his Life had converted some Indians to Christianity, who could (for so I
will suppose) have no knowledge of your Church but from him, and therefore must
last of all build their Faith of the Church upon their Opinion of Xaverius: Do
these remain as very Pagans after their Conversion, as they were before? Are
they brought to assent in their Souls, and obey in their Lives the Gospel of
Christ, only to be Tantalized and not saved, and not benefited but deluded by
it, because, forsooth, it is a man and not the Church that begets Faith in
them? What if their motive to believe be not in reason sufficient? Do they
therefore not believe what they do believe, because they do it upon sufficient
motives? They choose the Faith imprudently parhaps, but yet they do choose it.
Unless you will have us believe that, that which is done, is not done, because
it is not done upon good reason: which is to say, that never any man living
ever did a foolish action. But yet I know not why the Authority of one Holy
Man, which apparently has no ends upon me, joined with the goodness of the
Christian Faith, might not be a far greater and more rational motive to me to
embrace Christianity, than any I can have to continue in Paganism. And
therefore for shame, if not for Love of Truth, you must recant this fancy when
you write again: and suffer true Faith to be many times, where your Churches
Infallibility has no hand in the begetting of it. And be content to tell us
hereafter, that we believe not enough, and not go about to persuade us, we
believe nothing, for fear with telling us what we know to be manifestly false,
you should gain only this, Not to be believed when you speak truth. Some pretty
Sophisms you may happily bring us to make us believe, we believe nothing: but
Wise men know that Reason against Experience is always Sophistical. And
therefore as he that could not answer Zeno's subtilties against the existence
of Motion, could yet confute them by doing that, which he pretended could not
be done: So if you should give me a hundred Arguments to persuade me, because I
do not believe Transubstantiation, I do not believe in God, and the Knots of
them I could not unty, yet I should cut them in pieces with doing that, and
knowing that I do so, which you pretend I cannot do.

53. It is superfluous for you to prove out of S. Athanasius, and Austine that
we must receive the sacred Canon upon the credit of Gods Church. Understanding
by Church, as here you explain your self, The Credit of Tradition. And that not
the Tradition of the Present Church, which we pretend may deviate from the
Ancient, but such a Tradidition, which involves an evidence of Fact, and from
Hand to Hand, from Age to Age, bringing us up to the times and Persons of the
Apostles, and our Savior Himself, comes to be confirmed by all these
Miracles, and other Arguments, whereby they convinced their Doctrine to be
true. Thus you. Now prove the Canon of Scripture which you receive by such
Tradition and we will allow it. Prove your whole Doctrine, or the Infallibility
of your Church by such a Tradition, and we will yield to you in all things.
Take the alleged places of S. Athanasius, and S. Austin, in this sense, (which
is your own,) and they will not press us any thing at all. We will say, with
Athanasius, That only four Gospels are to be received, because the Canons of
the Holy and Catholic Church (understand of all Ages since the perfection of
the Canon) have so determined.

54. We will subscribe to S. Austin, and say, That we also would not believe
the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church did move us, (meaning
by the Church, the Church of all Ages, and that succession of Christians which
takes in Christ himself and his Apostles.) Neither would Zwinglius have needed
to cry out upon this saying, had he conceived as you now do, that by the
Catholic Church, the Church of all Ages, fince Christ, was to be understood.
As for the Council of Carthage, it may speak not of such Books only, as were
certainly Canonical, and for the regulating of Faith, but also of those which
were only profitable, and lawful to be read in the Church. Which in England is
a very slender Argument that the Book is Canonical, where every body knows that
Apocryphal Books are read as well as Canonical. But howsoever, if you
understand by Fathers, not only their immediate Fathers and Predecessors in the
Gospel, but the succession of them from the Apostles; they are right in the
Thesis, that whatsoever is received from these Fathers, as Canonical, is to be
so esteemed; Though in the application of it, to this or that particular Book
they may happily Err, and think that Book received as Canonical, which was only
received as Profitable to be read; and think that Book, received always, and
by all, which was rejected by some, and doubted of by many.

55. But we cannot be certain, in what Language the Scriptures remain
uncorrupted. CHIL. Not so certain, I grant, as of that which we can
demonstrate: But certain enough, morally certain, as certain as the nature of
the thing will bear. So certain we may be, and God requires no more. We may be
as certain as S. Austin was, who in his second Book of Baptism, against the
Donatists, c. 3. plainly implies, the Scripture might possibly be corrupted. He
means sure in matters of little moment, such as concertain not the Covenant
between God and Man. But thus he says. The same S. Austin in his 48. Epist.
clearly intimates, Neque enim sic posuit integritas atque notitia literarum
quamlibet illustris Episcopi, c^stodiri, quemadmodam scriptura Canonica tot
linguarum literis and ordine and successione celebrationis Ecclesiasticae
custoditur; contra quam non defuerunt tamen, qui sub nominibus Apostolorum
multa confingerent. Frustra quidem; Quia illa sic commendata, sic celebrata,
sic nota est. Verum quid possit adversus literas non Canonica authoritate
fundatas etiam hinc demonstrabit impiae conatus audaciae, quod and adversus eos
quae tanta notitiae mole firmatae sunt, sese erigere non praetermisit. Aug. ep.
48. ad Vincent. contra Donat and Rogat.
That in his judgment, the only preservative of the Scriptures integrity, was
the Translating it into so many Languages, and the general and perpetual use
and reading of it in the Church: for want whereof the works of particular
Doctors were more exposed to danger in this kind; but the Canonical Scripture
being by this means guarded with Universal care and diligence was not
obnoxious to such attempts. And this assurance of the Scriptures incorruption,
is common to us with him; we therefore are as certain hereof as S. Austin was,
and that I hope was certain enough. Yet if this does not satisfy you, I say
farther, We are as certain hereof as your own Pope Sixtus Quintus was. He in
his Preface to his Bible tells us, In hac Germani textus pervestigatione, satis
perspicue inter omnes constat, nullum argumentum esse certius ac firmius, quam
antiquorem probatorum codicum latinorum fidem, etc. sic Sixtus in praefat.
That in the prevestigation of the true and genuine Text, it was perspicuously
manifest to all men, that there was no Argument more firm and certain to be
relied upon, than the Faith of Ancient Books. Now this ground we have to build
upon as well as He had: and therefore our certainty is as great, and stands
upon as certain ground as his did.

56. This is not all I have to say in this matter. For I will add moreover,
that we are as certain in what Language the Scripture is uncorrupted, as any
man in your Church was, until Clement the 8th set forth your own approved
Edition of your Vulgar Translation. For you do not, nor cannot, without extreme
impudence deny, that until then, there was great variety of Copies current in
diverse parts of your Church, and those very frequent in various lections: all
which Copies might possibly be false in some things, but more than one sort of
them, could not possibly be true in all things. Neither were it less impudence
to pretend, that any man in your Church, could until Clements's time have any
certainty what that one true Copy and reading was (if there were any one
perfectly true.) Some indeed that had got Sixtus his Bible, might after the
Edition of that very likely think themselves cock-sure of a perfect true
uncorrupted Translation, without being beholden to Clement; but how foully they
were abused and deceived that thought so, the Edition of Clemens, differing
from that of Sixtus in a great multitude of places, does sufficiently
demonstrate.

57. This certainty therefore in what Language the Scripture remains
uncorrupted, is it necessary to have it, or is it not? If it be not, I hope we
may do well enough without it. If it be necessary, what became of your Church
for 1500 Years together? All which time you must confess she had no such
certainty: no one man being able truly and upon good ground to say, This or
that Copy of the Bible is pure, and perfect, and uncorrupted in all things. And
now at this present, though some of you are grown to a higher degree of
Presumption in this point, yet are you as far as ever, from any true and real,
and rational assurance of the absolute purity of your Authentic Translation:
which I suppose my self to have proved unanswerably in diverse places.

58. Ad 16..] C. M. Objects to Protestants, That their Translations of the
Scripture are very different, and by each other mutually condemned. Luthers
Translation by Zwinglius, and others: That of the Zwinglians by Luther. The
Translation of Oecolampadius, by the Divines of Basil: that of Castalio by
Beza: That of Beza by Castalio. That of Calvin, by Carolus Molinaeus. That of
Geneva by M. Parks, and King James. And lastly one of our Translations by the
Puritans.

59. CHIL. All which might have been as justly objected against that great
variety of Translations extant in the Primitive Church, and made use of by the
Fathers and Doctors of it. For which I desire not that my word, but S. Austins
may be taken. They which have Translated the Scriptures out of the Hebrew into
Greek, may be numbered, but the Latin Interpreters are innumerable. For
whenever any one, in the first times of Christianity, met with a Greek Bible,
and seemed to himself to have some ability in both Languages, he presently
ventured upon an Interpretation. So He, in his second Book of Christian
Doctrine. Cap. 11. Of all these, that which was called the Italian Translation
was esteemed best; so we may learn from the same S. Austin in the 15. Chap. of
the same Book. Amongst all these Interpretations (says he) let the Italian be
preferred: for it keeps closer to the Letter, and is perspicuous in the sense.
Yet so far was the Church of that time from persuming upon the absolute purity
and perfection, even of this best Translation, that S. Hierome thought it
necessary to make a new Translation of the Old Testament, out of the Hebrew
Fountain, (which himself testifies in his Book de Viris Illustribus,) And to
correct the vulgar version of the New Testament, according to the truth of the
Original Greek; amending many Errors which had crept into it, whether by the
mistake of the Author, or the negligence of the Transcribers; which work he
undertook and performed at the request of Damasus, Bishop of Rome. You
constrain me (says he) to make a new Work of an old: that after the Copies of
the Scriptures have been dispersed through the whole World, I should sit as it
were an Arbitrator amongst them, and because they vary among themselves, should
determine what are those things (in them) which consent with the Greek verity.
And after: Therefore this present Preface promises the four Gospels only
corrected by collation with Greek Copies. But that they might not be very
dissonant from the Custom of the Latin reading, I have so tempered with my
style, the Translation of the Ancients, that, those things amended which did
seem to change the sense, other things I have suffered to remain as they were.
So that in this matter Protestants must either stand or fall with the Primitive
Church.

62. C. M. But the Faith of Protestants relies upon Scripture alone; Scripture
is delivered to most of them by Translations; Translations depend upon the
skill and honesty of Men, who certainly may Err because they are Men, and
certainly do Err, at least some of them, because their Translations are
contrary. It seems then the Faith, and consequently the Salvation of
Protestants relies upon fallible and uncertain grounds.

63. CHIL. This Objection, though it may seem to do you great service for the
present; yet I fear you will repent the time that ever you urged it against us
as a fault, that we make men's salvation depend upon uncertainties. For the
Objection returns upon you many ways, as first thus; The Salvation of many
Millions of Papists (as they suppose and teach) depends upon their having the
Sacrament of Penance truly administered unto them. This again upon the
Minister's being a true Priest. That such or such a man is Priest, not himself,
much less any other can have any possible certainty: for it depends upon a
great many contingent and uncertain supposals. He that will pretend to be
certain of it, must undertake to know for a certain all these things that
follow.

64. First that he was Baptized with due matter. Secondly, with the due form of
Words, (which he cannot know, unless he were both present and attentive.)
Thirdly, he must know that he was Baptized with due Intention, and that is,
that the Minister of his Baptism was not a secret Jew, nor a Moore, nor an
Atheist, (of all which kinds, I fear experience gives you just cause to fear,
that Italy and Spain have Priests not a few,) but a Christian in Heart, as well
as Profession; (otherwise believing the Sacrament to be nothing, in giving it
be could intend to give nothing.) nor a Samosatenian, nor an Arrian: but one
that was capable of having due intention, from which they that believe not the
Doctrine of the Trinity are excluded by you. And lastly, that he was neither
Drunk not Distracted at the administration of the Sacrament, nor out of
negligence or malice omitted his intention.

65. Fourthly, he must undertake to know, that the Bishop which ordained him
Priest, ordained him completely with due Matter, Form and Intention: and
consequently, that he again was neither Jew, nor Moore, nor Atheist, nor liable
to any such exception, as is unconsistent with due Intention in giving the
Sacrament of Orders.

66. Fifthly, he must undertake to know, that the Bishop which made him Priest,
was a Priest himself, for your rule is, Nihil dat quod non habet: And
consequently, that there was again none of the former nullities in his Baptism,
which might make him incapable of Ordination; nor no invalidity in his
Ordination, but a true Priest to ordain him again, the requisite matter and
form and due intention all concurring.

67. Lastly, he must pretend to know the same of him that made him Priest, and
him that made Him Priest, even until he comes to the very Fountain of
Priesthood. For take any one in the whole train and succession of Ordainers,
and suppose him, by reason of any defect, only a supposed and not a true
Priest, then according to your Doctrine he could not give a true, but only a
supposed Priesthood; and they that receive it of him, and again, they that
derive it from them, can give no better than they received; receiving nothing
but a name and shadow, can give nothing but a name and shadow: and so from Age
to Age, from Generation to Generation being equivocal Fathers, beget only
equivocal Sons; No Principle in Geometry being more certain than this, That the
unsuppliable defect of any necessary Antecedent, must needs cause a nullity of
all those Consequences which depend upon it. In fine, to know this one thing,
you must first know Ten Thousand others, whereof not any one is a thing that
can be known; there being no necessity that it should be true, which only can
qualify any thing for an Object of Science, but only, at the best, a high
degree of probability that it is so. But then, that of Ten Thousand probables
no one should be false; that of Ten Thousand requisites, whereof any one may
fail, not one should be wanting, this to me is extremely improbable, and even
Cousin-german to Impossible. So that the assurance hereof is like a Machine
composed of an innumerable multitude of pieces, of which it is strangely
unlikely but some will be out of order; and yet if any one be so, the whole
Fabric of necessity falls to the ground. And he that shall put together, and
maturely consider all the possible ways of lapsing, and nullifying a Priesthood
in the Church of Rome, I believe will be very inclinable to think, that it is
an hundred to one, that amongst a hundred seeming Priests, there is not one
true one. Nay, that it is not a thing very improbable, that amongst those many
millions, which make up the Romish Hierarchy, there are not twenty true. But be
the truth in this what it will be, once this is certain, that They which makes
men's Salvation (as you do) depend upon Priestly Absolution, and this again (as
you do) upon the Truth and reality of the Priesthood that gives it, and this
lastly upon a great multitude of apparent uncertainties, are not the fittest
men in the World, to object to others as a horrible crime, That they make men's
Salvation depend upon fallible and uncertain Foundations. And let this be the
first retortion of your Argument.

68. But suppose this difficulty assoiled, and that an Angel from Heaven should
ascertain you (for other assurances you can have none) that the Person, you
make use of, is a true Priest, and a competent Minister of the Sacrament of
Penance; yet still the doubt will remain, whether he will do you that good
which he can do, whether he will pronounce the absolving words with intent to
absolve you! For perhaps he may bear you some secret malice, and project to
himself your damnation, for a complete Italian revenge. Parhaps (as the tale is
of a Priest that was lately burnt in France) he may upon some conditions have
compacted with the Devil to give no Sacraments with Intention. Lastly, he may
be (for ought you can possibly know) a secret Jew, or Moor, or
Anti-Trinitarian, or perhaps such a one as is so far from intending your
forgiveness of sins and Salvation by this Sacrament, that in his heart he
laughs at all these things, and thinks Sin nothing, and Salvation a word. All
these doubts you must have clearly resolved (which can hardly be done but by
another Revelation,) before you can upon good grounds assure your self, that
your true Priest gives you true and effectual absolution. So that when you have
done as much as God requires for your Salvation, yet can you by no means be
secure, but that you may have the ill luck to be Damned: which is to make
Salvation a matter of chance, and not of choice, and which a man may fail of,
not only by an ill life, but by ill Fortune. Verily a most comfortable Doctrine
for a considering man lying upon Death bed, who either feels or fears that his
repentance is but attrition only, and not contrition, and consequently believes
that if he be not absolved really by a true Priest, he cannot possibly escape
damnation. Such a man for his comfort, you tell, first (you that will have men's
Salvation depend upon no uncertainties,) that though he verily believe that his
sorrow for sins is a true sorrow, and his purpose of amendment a true purpose;
yet he may deceive himself, perhaps it is not, and if it be not, he must be
damned. Yet you bid him hope well: But Spes est rei incertae nomen. You tell
him secondly, that though the party he confesses to, seem to be a true Priest,
yet for ought he knows, or for ought himself knows, by reason of some secret
undiscernable invalidity in his Baptism or Ordination, he may be none: and if
he be none, he can do nothing. This is a hard saying, but this is not the
worst. You tell him thirdly, that he may may be in such a state that he cannot,
or if he can, that he will not give the Sacrament with due Intention: and if he
does not, all is in vain. Put case a man by these considerations should be cast
into some agonies; what advice, what comfort would you give him? Verily I know
not what you could say to him, but this; that first for the Qualification
required on his part, he might know that he desired to have true sorrow, and
that that is sufficient. But then if he should ask you, why he might not know
his sorrow to be a true sorrow, as well as his desire to be sorrowful, to be a
true desire, I believe you would be put to silence. Then secondly, to quiet his
fears, concerning the Priest and his intention you should tell him, by my
advice, that Gods goodness (which will not suffer him to damn men for not doing
better than their best,) will supply all such defects as to humane endeavors
were unavoidable. And therefore though his Priest were indeed no Priest, yet to
him he should be as if he were one: and if he gave Absolution without
Intention, yet in doing so he should hurt himself only and not his penitent.
This were some comfort indeed, and this were to settle men's Salvation upon
reasonable certain grounds. But this I fear you will never say; for this were
to reverse many Doctrines established by your Church, and besides to degrade
your Priesthood from a great part of their honor, by lessening the strict
necessity of the Laities dependence upon them. For it were to say, that the
Priests Intention is not necessary to the obtaining of absolution; which is to
say, that it is not in the Parsons power to damn whom he will in his Parish,
because by this Rule, God should supply the defect which his malice had caused.
And besides it were to say, that Infants dying without Baptism might be saved,
God supplying the want of Baptism which to them is unavoidable. But beyond all
this, it were to put into my mouth a full and satisfying answer to your
Argument, which I am now returning, so that in answering my objection you
should answer your own. For then I should tell you, that it were altogether as
abhorrent from the goodness of God, and as repugnant to it, to suffer an
ignorant Lay-mans Soul to perish, merely for being misled by an undiscernable
false Translation, which yet was commended to him by the Church, which (being
of necessity to credit some in this matter) he had reason to rely upon either
above all other, or as much as any other, as it is to damn a penitent sinner
for a secret defect in that desired Absolution, which his Gostly Father perhaps
was an Atheist and could not give him, or was a villiain and would not. This
answer therefore, which alone would serve to comfort your penitent in his
perplexities, and to assure him that he cannot fail of Salvation if he will
not, for fear of inconveniences you must forbear. And seeing you must, I hope
you will come down from the Pulpit, and Preach no more against others for
making men's Salvation depend upon fallible and uncertain grounds, lest by
judging others, you make your selves and your own Church inexcusable, who are
strongly guilty of this fault, above all the men and Churches of the World:
whereof I have already given you two very pregnant demonstrations, drawn from
your presumptions tying God and Salvation to your Sacraments; And the efficacy
of them to your Priests Qualifications and Intentions.

69. Your making the Salvation of Infants depend on Baptism a Casual thing, and
in the power of man to confer, or not confer, would yield me a Third of the
same nature. And your suspending the same on the Baptizers intention a Fourth.
And lastly your making the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist depend upon
the casualties of the Consecrators true Priesthood and Intention, and yet
commanding men to believe it for certain that he is present, and to adore the
Sacrament, which according to your Doctrine, for ought they can possibly know,
may be nothing else but a piece of Bread, so exposing them to the danger of
Idolatry, and consequently of Damnation, does offer me a Fisth demonstration of
the same conclusion, if I thought fit to insist upon them. But I have no mind
to draw any more out of this Fountain; neither do I think it Charity to cloy
the Reader with uniformity, when the Subject affords variety.

70. Sixthly, therefore I return it thus. The Faith of Papists relies alone
upon their Churches infallibility. That there is any Church infallible, and
that theirs is it, they pretend not to believe, but only upon prudential
motives. Dependence upon prudential motives they confess to be obnoxious to a
possibility of erring. What then remains but Truth, Faith, Salvation, and all
must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain ground!

71. Seventhly, The Faith of Papists relies upon the Church alone. The Doctrine
of the Church is delivered to most of them by their Parish Priest, or Ghostly
Father, or at least by a company of Priests, who for the most part sure, are
men and not Angels, in whom nothing is more certain than a most certain
possibility to Err. What then remains but that Truth, Faith, Salvation and
all, must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain ground.

72. Eighthly thus. It is apparent and undeniable, that many Thousands there
are, who believe your Religion upon no better grounds, than a man may have for
the belief almost of any Religion. As some believe it, because their
Forefathers did so, and they were good People. Some, because they were
Christened, and brought up in it. Some, because it is the Religion of their
Country, where all other Religions are persecuted and profcribed. Some, because
Protestants cannot show a perpetual succession of Professors of all their
Doctrine. Some, because the service of your Church is more stately, and
pompous, and magnificent. Some, because they find comfort in it. Some, because
your Religion is farther spread, and has more Professors of it, than the
Religion of Protestants. Some, because your Priests compass Sea and Land to
gain Proselytes to it. Lastly, an infinite number, by chance, and they know not
why, but only because they are sure they are in the right. This which I say is
a most certain experimented Truth, and if you will deal ingeniously, you will
not deny it. And without question he that builds his Faith upon our English
Translation, goes upon a more prudent ground than any of these can, with
reason, be pretended to be. What then can you allege but that, with you,
rather than with us, Truth and Faith and Salvation and all relies upon fallible
and uncertain grounds.

73. Ninthly. Your Rhemish and Doway Translations are delivered to your
Proselytes, (such I mean that are dispensed with for the reading of them,) for
the direction of their Faith and Lives. And the same may be said of your
Translations of the Bible into other national Languages, in respect of those
that are Licensed to read them. This I presume you will confess. And moreover,
that these Translations came not by inspiration, but were the productions of
humane Industry; and that not Angels, but men were the Authors of them. Men I
say, mere men, subject to the same Passions and to the same possibility of
erring with our Translators. And then how does it not unavoidably follow, that
in them which depend upon these Translations for their direction, Faith, and
Truth, and Salvation, and all relies upon fallible and uncertain grounds?

74. Tenthly and lastly (to lay the Axe to the Root of the Tree,) the Helena
which you so fight for, your vulgar Translation, though some of you believe, or
pretend to believe, it to be in every part and particle of it, the pure and
uncorrupted Word of God; yet others among you, and those as good and zealous
Catholics as you, are not so confident hereof.

75. First, for all those who have made Translations of the whole Bible or any
part of it different many times in sense from the Vulgar, as Lyranus, Cajetan,
Pagnine, Arias, Erasmus, Valla, Steuchus, and others, it is apparent and even
palpable, that they never dreamt of any absolute perfection and authentical
Infallibility of the Vulgar Translation. For if they had, why did they in many
places reject it and differ from it?

76. Vega was present at the Council of Trent, when that decree was made, which
made the Vulgar Edition (then not extant any where in the World) authentical,
and not to be rejected upon any pretense whatsoever. At the forming this decree
Vega I say was present, understood the mind of the Council, as well as any man,
and professes that he was instructed in it by the President of it, the Cardinal
S. Cruce. And yet he has written that the Council in this decree, meant to
pronounce this Translation free (not simply from all Error) but only from such
Errors, out of which any opinion pernicious to Faith and Manners might be
collected. This, Andradius in his defense of that Council reports of Vega, and
assents to it himself. Driedo, in his Book of the Translation of Holy
Scripture, has these Words very pregnant and pertinent to the same purpose;
The Sea Apostolic, has approved or accepted Hieroms Edition, not as so wholly
consonant to the Original, and so entire and pure and restored in all things,
that it may not be lawful for any man, either by comparing it with the Fountain
to examine it, or in some places to doubt, whether or no Hierome did understand
the true sense of the Scripture; but only as an Edition to be preferred before
all others then extant, and no where deviating from the Truth in the Rules of
Faith and good Life. Mariana, even where he is a most earnest Advocate for the
Vulgar Edition, yet acknowleges the imperfection of it in these Words, Pro
Edit. vulg. c. 21. p. 99.
The faults of the Vulgar Edition are not approved by the Decree of the Council
of Trent, a multitude whereof we did collect from the variety of Copies. And
again, We maintain that the Hebrew and Greek, were by no means rejected by the
Trent Fathers: And that the Latin Edition is indeed approved, yet not so, as if
they did deny that some places might be Translated more plainly, some more
properly; whereof it were easy to produce innumerable examples. And this he
there professes to have learnt of Laines the then General of the Society: who
was a great part of that Council, present at all the Actions of it, and of very
great authority in it.

77. To this so great authority he adds a reason of his opinion, which with all
indifferent men will be of a far greater authority. If the Council (says he)
had purposed to approve an Edition in all respects, and to make it of equal
authority and credit with the Fountains, certainly they ought with exact care
first to have corrected the Errors of the Interpreter: which certainly they did
not.

78. Lastly Bellarmine himself, Bell. de verbo Dei l. 2. c. 11. p. 120.
though he will not acknowledge any imperfection in the Vulgar Edition, yet he
acknowledges that the case may, and does oft-times so fall out, that it is
impossible to discern which is the true reading of the Vulgar Edition, but only
by recourse unto the Originals, and dependence upon them.

79. From all which it may evidently be collected, that though some of you
flatter your selves with a vain imagination of the certain absolute purity and
perfection of your Vulgar Edition; yet the matter is not so certain, and so
resolved, but that the best Learned men amongst you are often at a stand, and
very doubtful sometimes whether your Vulgar Translation be true, and sometimes
whether this or that be your Vulgar Translation, and sometimes undoubtedly
resolved that your Vulgar Translation is no true Translation, nor consonant to
the Original, as it was at first delivered. And what then can be alleged, but
that out of your own grounds it may be inferred and enforced upon you, that not
only in your Laymen, but your Clergymen and Scholars, Faith and Truth and
Salvation and all depends upon fallible and uncertain grounds? And thus by Ten
several retortions of this one Argument, I have endeavored to show you, how
ill you have complied with your own advice, which was to take heed of urging
Arguments that might be returned upon you. I should now by a direct answer,
show that it presses not us at all: but I have in passing done it already, in
the end of the second retortion of this Argument, and thither I refer the
Reader.

80. Whereas therefore, you exhort them that will have assurance of true
Scriptures, to fly to your Church for it: I desire to know (if they should
follow your advice) how they should be assured that your Church can give them
any such assurance; which has been confessedly so negligent, as to suffer many
whole Books of Scripture to be utterly lost. Again, in those that remain,
confessedly so negligent, as to suffer the Originals of these that remain to be
corrupted. And lastly, so careless of preserving the integrity of the Copies of
her Translation, as to suffer infinite variety of Readings to come in to them,
without keeping any one perfect Copy, which might have been as the Standard,
and Polycletus his Canon to correct the rest by. So that which was the true
reading, and which the false, it was utterly undiscernable, but only by
comparing them with the Originals, which also she pretends to be corrupted.

84. Ad 17..] In this Division you charge us with great uncertainty, concerning
the true meaning of Scripture. Which has been answered already, by saying,
That if you speak of plain places, (and in such all things necessary are
contained,) we are sufficiently certain of the meaning of them, neither need
they any Interpreter: If of obscure and difficult places, we confess we are
uncertain of the sense of many of them. But then we say there is no necessity
we should be certain. For if Gods Will had been we should have understood him
more certainly, he would have spoken more plainly. And we say besides, that as
we are uncertain, so are You too; which he that doubts of, let him read your
Commentators upon the Bible, and observe their various and dissonant
Interpretations, and he shall in this point need no further satisfaction.

85. Obj. But seeing there are contentions among us, we are taught by nature
and Scripture, and experience (so you tell us out of M. Hooker) to seek for the
ending of them, by submiting unto some Judicical sentence, whereunto neither
part may refuse to stand.

Answ. This is very true. Neither should you need to persuade us to seek such a
means of ending all our Controversies, if we could tell where to find it. But
this we know, that none is fit to pronounce, for all the World, a judicial
definitive obliging Sentence in Controversies of Religion, but only such a Man,
or such a society of Men, as is authorized thereto by God. And besides we are
able to demonstrate, that it has not been the pleasure of God to give to any
Man, or Society of Men any such authority. And therefore though we wish
heartily that all Controversies were ended, as we do that all sin were
abolisht, yet we have little hope of the one, or the other, till the World be
ended. And in the mean while, think it best to content our selves with, and to
persuade others unto an Unity of Charity and mutual Toleration; seeing God has
authorized no man to force all men to Unity of Opinion. Neither do we think it
fit to argue thus, To us it seems convenient there should be one Judge of all
Controversies for the whole World, therefore God has appointed one: But more
modest and more reasonable to collect thus, God has appointed no such Judge of
Controversies, therefore, though it seems to us convenient there should be one,
yet it is not so: Or though it were convenient for us to have one, yet it has
pleased God (for Reasons best known to himself) not to allow us this
convenience.

87. Ad 18..] That the true Interpretation of the Scripture ought to be
received from the Church, you need not prove, for it is very easily granted by
them, who profess themselves very ready to receive all Truths, much more the
true sense of Scripture, not only from the Church, but from any Society of men,
nay from any man whatsoever.

88. That the Churches Interpretation of Scripture is always true, that is it
which you would have said: and that in some sense may be also admitted. viz. If
you speak of that Church (which before you speak of in the 14..) that is, of
the Church of all Ages since the Apostles. Upon the Tradition of which Church,
you there told us, We were to receive the Scripture, and to believe it to be
the Word of God. For there you teach us, that our Faith of Scripture depends on
a Principle which requires no other proof, And that, such is Tradition, which
from Hand to Hand, and Age to Age bring us up to the Times and Persons of the
Apostles and our Savior himself, comes to be confirmed by all those Miracles,
and other Arguments whereby they convinced their Doctrine to be true. Wherefore
the Ancient Fathers avouch that we must receive the Sacred Scripture upon the
Tradition of this Church. The Tradition then of this Church you say must teach
us what is Scripture: and we are willing to believe it. And now if you make it
good unto us, that the same Tradition down from the Apostles, has delivered
from Age to Age, and from Hand to Hand, any Interpretation of any Scripture, we
are ready to embrace that also. But now, if you will argue thus: The Church in
one sense, tells us what is Scripture, and we believe, therefore if the Church
taken in another sense, tell us, this or that is the meaning of the Scripture,
we are to believe that also; this is too transparent Sophistry, to take any but
those that are willing to be taken.

89. If there be any Traditive Interpretation of Scripture, produce it, and
prove it to be so; and we embrace it. But the Tradition of all Ages is one
thing; and the authority of the present Church, much more of the Roman Church,
which is but a Part, and a corrupted Part of the Catholic Church, is another.
And therefore though we are ready to receive both Scripture and the sense of
Scripture upon the authority of Original Tradition, yet we receive neither the
one, nor the other, upon the Authority of your Church.

90. First for the Scripture, how can we receive them upon the Authority of
your Church: who hold now those Books to be Canonical, which formerly you
rejected from the Canon? I instance, in the Book of Macchabees, and the Epistle
to the Hebrews. The first of these you held not to be Canonical in S. Gregory's
time, or else he was no member of your Church, for it is apparent See Greg.
Mor. l. 19. c. 13.
He held otherwise. The second you rejected from the Canon in S. Hieroms time,
as it is evident out of Thus he testifies. Com. in Esa. c. 6. in these words.
Vnde and Paulus Apost. in Epist. ad Heb. quam Latina consuetudo non recipit:
and again in c. 8. in these, In Ep. quae ad Hebraeos scribitur, ^licet eam
^a^ina Consuetudo inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipiat.) etc.
many places of his Works.

91. If you say (which is all you can) that Hierom spoke this of the particular
Roman Church, not of the Roman Catholic Church; I answer, there was none such
in his time, None that was called so. Secondly, what he spoke of the Roman
Church, must be true of all other Churches, if your Doctrine of the necessity
of the Conformity of all other Churches to that Church were then Catholic
Doctrine. Now then choose whether you will, either that the particular Roman
Church, was not then believed to be the Mistress of all other Churches
(notwithstanding, Ad hanc Ecclesiam necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc
est, omnes qui sunt undique fideles,; which Card. Perron, and his Translatress
so often translates false:) Or if you say she was, you will run into a greater
inconvenience, and be forced to say, that all the Churches of that time,
rejected from the Canon the Epistle to the Hebrews, together with the Roman
Church. And consequently that the Catholic Church may Err in rejecting from
the Canon Scriptures truly Canonical.

92. Secondly, How can we receive the Scripture upon the authority of the Roman
Church, which has delivered at several times Scriptures in many places,
different and repugnant, for Authentical and Canonical? which is most evident
out of the place of Malacby, which is so quoted for the Sacrifice of the Mass,
that either all the Ancient Fathers had false Bibles, or yours is false. Most
evident likewise from the comparing of the story of Jacob in Genesis, with that
which is cited out of it, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, according to the
vulgar Edition. But above all, to any one, who shall compare the Bibles of
Sixtus and Clement, so evident, that the wit of man cannot disguise it.

93. Thus you see what reason we have to believe your Antecedent, That your
Church it is which must declare, what Books be true Scripture. Now for the
consequence, that certainly is as liable to exception as the Antecedent. For if
it were true, that God had promised to assist you, for the delivering of true
Scripture, would this oblige him, or would it follow from hence that He had
obliged himself, to teach you, not only sufficiently, but effectually and
irrisistably the true sense of Scripture? God is not defective in things
necessary: neither will he leave himself without witness, nor the World without
means of knowing his will and doing it. And therefore it was necessary that by
his Providence he should preserve the Scripture from any undiscernable
corruption, in those things which he would have known: otherwise it is
apparent, it had not been his will, that these things should be known, the only
means of continuing the knowledge of them being perished. But now neither is God
lavish in superfluities, and therefore having given us means sufficient for our
direction, and power sufficient to make use of these means, he will not
constrain or necessitate us to make use of these means. For that were to cross
the end of our Creation, which was to be glorified by our free obedience:
whereas necessity and freedom cannot stand together. That were to reverse the
Law which he has prescribed to himself in his dealing with men, and that is,
to set Life and Death before him, and to leave him in the hands of his own
Counsel. God gave the Wisemen a Star to lead them to Christ, but he did not
necessitate them to follow the guidance of this Star: that was left to their
liberty. God gave the Children of Israel a Fire to lead them by Night, and a
Pillar of Cloud by Day, but he constrained no man to follow them: that was left
to their liberty. So he gives the Church, the Scripture: which in those things
which are to be believed or done, are plain and easy to be followed, like the
Wisemens Star. Now that which he desires of us on our part, is the Obedience of
Faith, and love of the Truth, and desire to find the true sense of it, and
industry in searching it, and humility in following, and Constancy in
professing it: all which if he should work in us by an absolute irresistible
necessity, he could no more require of us, as our duty, than he can of the Sun
to shine, of the Sea to Ebb and Flow, and of all other Creatures to do those
things which by mere necessity they must do, and cannot choose. Besides, what
an impudence is it to pretend that your Church is infallibly directed
concerning the true meaning of the Scripture, whereas there are Thousands of
places of Scripture, which you do not pretend certainly to understand, and
about the Interpretation whereof, your own Doctors differ among themselves? If
your Church be infallibly directed concerning the true meaning of Scripture,
why do not your Doctors follow her infallible direction? And if they do, how
comes such difference among them in their Interpretations?

94. Again, why does your Church thus put her Candle under a Bushel, and keep
her Talent of interpreting Scripture infallibly, thus long wrapped up in Napkins?
Why sets she not forth Infallible Commentaries or Expositions upon all the
Bible? Is it because this would not be profitable for Christians, that
Scripture should be Interpreted? Is it blasphemous to say so. The Scripture it
self tells us, All Scripture is profitable. And the Scripture is not so much
the Words as the Sense. And if it be not profitable, why does she employ
particular Doctors to interpret Scriptures fallibly? unless we must think that
fallible Interpretations of Scripture are profitable, and infallible
Interpretations would not be so?

95. If you say the Holy Ghost, which assists the Church in interpreting, will
move the Church to interpret when he shall think fit, and that the Church will
do it when the Holy Ghost shall move her to do it: I demand whether the Holy
Ghosts moving of the Church to such works as these be resistible by the Church,
or irresistible. If resistible, then the Holy Ghost may move, and the Church
may not be moved. As certainly the Holy Ghost does always move to an Action,
when he shows us plainly that it would be for the good of men, and Honor of
God. As he that has any sense will acknowledge that an infallible exposition
of Scripture could not but be, and there is no conceivable reason, why such a
work should be put off a day, but only because you are conscious to your
selves, you cannot do it, and therefore make excuses. But if the moving of the
Holy Ghost be irresistible, and you are not yet so moved to go about this work;
then I confess you are excused. But then I would know, whether those Popes
which so long deferred the calling of a Council for the Reformation of your
Church, at length pretended to be effected by the Council of Trent, whether
they may excuse themselves, for that they were not moved by the Holy Ghost to
do it? I would know likewise, as this motion is irresistible when it comes, so
whether it be so simply necessary to the moving of your Church to any such
public Action, that it cannot possibly move without it? That is, whether the
Pope now could not, if he would, seat himself in Cathedra, and fall to writing
expositions upon the Bible for the directions of Christians to the true sense
of it? If you say he cannot, you will make your self ridiculous. If he can,
then I would know, whether he should be infallibly directed in these
expositions, or no? If he should, then what need he to stay for irresistible
motion? Why does he not go about this noble work presently? If he should not,
How shall we know that the calling of the Council of Trent was not upon his own
voluntary motion, or upon humane importunity and suggestion, and not upon the
motion of the Holy Ghost? And consequently how shall we know whether he were
assistant to it or no, seeing he assists none but what he himself moves to? And
whether he did move the Pope to call this Council, is a secret thing, which we
cannot possibly know, nor perhaps the Pope himself.

96. If you say, your meaning is only, That the Church shall be infallibly
guarded from giving any false sense of any Scripture, and not
infalliblyassisted positively to give the true sense of all Scripture: I put to
you your own Question, why should we believe the Holy Ghost will stay there?
Or, why may we not as well think he will stay at the first thing, that is, in
teaching the Church what Books be true Scripture? For if the Holy Ghosts
assistance be promised to all things profitable, then will he be with them
infallibly, not only to guard them from all Errors, but to guide them to all
profitable truths, such as the true senses of all Scripture would be. Neither
could he stay there, but defend them irresistibly from all Vices; Nor there
neither, but infuse into them irresistibly all Virtues: for all these things
would be much for the benefit of Christians. If you say, he cannot do this
without taking away their free will in living; I say neither can he necessitate
men to believe aright, without taking away their free will in believing and in
professing their belief.

97. Obj. To the place of S. Austin, ( I would not believe the Gospel, unless
the Authority of the Church did move me. Contr. ep. Fund. c. 5.)

Answ. I answer, That not the Authority of the present Church, much less of a
Part of it (as the Roman Church is) was that which alone moved Saint Austin to
believe the Gospel, but the perpetual Tradition of the Church of all Ages.
Which you your self have taught us to be the only Principle by which the
Scripture is proved, and which it self needs no proof; and to which you have
referred this very saying of S. Austin, Ego vero Evangelio non crederem nisi,
etc. p. 55. And in the next place which you cite out of his Book De Util. Cred.
c. 14. he shows, that his motives to believe, were, Fame, Celebrity, Consent,
Antiquity. And seeing this Tradition, this Consent, this Antiquity did as fully
and powerfully move him not to believe Manichaeus, as to believe the Gospel,
(the Christian Tradition being as full against Manichaeus as it was for the
Gospel) therefore he did well to conclude upon these grounds, that he had as
much reason to disbelieve Manichaeus, as to believe the Gospel. Now if you can
truly say, that the same Fame, Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity, that the same
Universal and Original Tradition, lies against Luther and Calvin, as did
against Manichaeus, you may do well to apply the Argument against them;
otherwise it will be to little purpose to substitute their names instead of
Manichaeus, unless you can show the things agrees to them as well as him.

98. If you say, that S. Austin speaks here of the Authority of the Present
Church, abstracting from consent with the Ancient, and therefore you, seeing
you have the present Church on your side against Luther and Calvin, as S.
Austin against Manichaeus, may urge the same words against them which S. Austin
did against him;

99. I answer, First that it is a vain presumption of yours that the Catholic
Church is of your side. Secondly, that if S. Austin speak here of that present
Church, which moved him to believe the Gospel, without consideration of the
Antiquity of it, and its both Personal and Doctrinal succession from the
Apostles; His Argument will be like a Buskin that will serve any leg. It will
serve to keep an Arrian, or a Grecian from being a Roman Catholic, as well as
a Catholic from being an Arrian, or a Grecian? In as much as the Arrians and
Grecians, did pretend to the Title of Catholics, and the Church, as much as
the Papists now do. If then you should have come to an Ancient Goth or Vandal,
whom the Arrians converted to Christianity, and should have moved him to your
Religion; might he not say the very same words to you as S. Austin to the
Manichaeans? I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church
did move me. Them therefore whom I obeyed, saying believe the Gospel, why
should I not obey saying to me, do not believe the Homoousians? Choose what
thou please: If thou shall say believe the Arrians, they warn me not to give
any Credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If thou
say do not believe the Arrians, thou shall not do well to force me to the Faith
of the Homoousians, because by the Preaching of the Arrians I believed the
Gospel it self. If you say, you did well to believe them, commending the
Gospel, but you did not well to believe them discommending the Homoousians:
Do thou think me so very foolish, that without any reason at all, I should
believe what thou will, and not believe what thou will not? It were easy to
put these words into the mouth of a Grecian, Abyssine, Georgian, or any other
of any Religion. And I pray bethink your selves, what you would say to such a
one in such a case, and imagine that we say the very same to you.

101. And whereas you say, S. Austin may seem to have spoken Prophetically
against Protestants, when he said, Why should I not most diligently inquire,
what Christ commanded, of them before all others, by whose Authority I was
moved to believe, that Christ Commanded any good thing?

Answ. I answer, Until you can show that Protestants believe that Christ
commanded any good thing, that is, That they believe the truth of Christian
Religion upon the Authority of the Church of Rome, this place must be wholly
impertinent to your purpose; which is to make Protestants believe your Church
to be the infallible expounder of Scriptures and judge of Controversies: nay
rather is it not directly against your purpose? For why may not a member of the
Church of England, who received his Baptism, Education and Faith from the
Ministry of this Church, say just so to you as S. Austin here to the Manichees?
Why should I not most diligently inquire, what Christ commanded, of them (the
Church of England) before all others, by whose authority I was moved to
believe, that Christ commandded any good thing, Can you, F. or K. or whosoever
you are, better declare to me what he said, whom I would not have thought to
have been or to be, if the belief thereof had been recommended by you to me?
This therefore (that Christ Jesus did those miracles, and taught that Doctrine
which is contained evidently in the undoubted Books of the New Testament) I
believed by Fame, strengthened with Celebrity and Consent, (even of those which
in other things are at infinite variance one with another,) and lastly by
Antiquity (which gives an Universal and a constant attestation to them) But
every one may see that you, so few (in comparison of all those upon whose
consent we ground our belief of Scripture,) so turbulent, (that you damn all to
the Fire, and to Hell, that any way differ from you; that you profess it is
lawful for you, to use violence and power whenever you can have it, for the
planting of your own Doctrine, and the extirpation of the contrary;) lastly so
new in many of your Doctrines, (as in the lawfulness, and expedience of
debarring the Laity the Sacramental Cup; the lawfulness and expedience of your
Latin Service, Transubstantiation, Indulgences, Purgatory, the Popes
infallibility, his Authority over Kings, etc) so new I say, in comparison of
the undoubted Books of Scripture, which evidently contains, or rather is our
Religion, and the sole, and adequate object of our Faith: I say every one may
see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce nothing deserving
authority (with wise and considerate men) What madness is this? Believe them
the consent of Christians which are now, and have been ever since Christ in the
World, that we ought to believe Christ; but learn of us what Christ said, which
contradict and damn all other parts of Christendom. Why I beseech you? Surely
if they were not at all, and could not teach me any thing, I would more easily
persuade my self, that I were not to believe in Christ, than that I should
learn any thing concerning him, from any other, than them by whom I believed
him: at least, than that I should learn what his Religion was from you, who
have wronged so exceedingly his Miracles and his Doctrine, by forging so
evidently so many false Miracles for the Confirmation of your new Doctrine;
which might give us just occasion, had we no other assurance of them but your
Authority, to suspect the true ones. Who with forging so many false Stories,
and false Authors, have taken a fair way to make the Faith of all Stories
questionable; if we had no other ground for our belief of them but your
Authority: who have brought in Doctrines plainly and directly contrary to that
which you confess to be the Word of Christ, and which, for the most part, make
either for the honor or profit of the Teachers of them: which (if there were
no difference between the Christian and the Roman Church) would be very apt to
make suspicious men believe that Christian Religion was a humane invention,
taught by some cunning Impostors, only to make themselves rich and powerful;
who make a profession of corrupting all sorts of Authors: a ready course to
make it justly questionable whether any remain uncorrupted. For if you take
this Authority upon you, upon the six Ages last past; how shall we know, that
the Church of that time, did not Usurp the same Authority upon the Authors of
the six last Ages before them, and so upwards until we come to Christ himself?
Whose questioned Doctrines, none of them came from the Fountain of Apostolic
Tradition, but have insinuated themselves into the Streams, by little and
little, some in one Age, and some in another, some more Anciently, some more
lately, and some yet are Embrio's, yet hatching, and in the Shell; as the Popes
Infallibility, the Blessed Virgins immaculate conception, the Popes power over
the Temporalities of Kings, the Doctrine of Predetermination, etc. all which
yet are, or in time may be imposed upon Christians under the Title of Original
and Apostolic Tradition; and that with that necessity, that they are told,
they were as good believe nothing at all, as not believe these things to have
come from the Apostles, which they know to have been brought in but yesterday:
which whether it be not a ready and likely way to make men conclude thus with
themselves -- I am told, that I were as good believe nothing at all, as believe
some points which the Church teaches me, and not others: and some things which
she teaches to be Ancient and Certain, I plainly see to be New and False,
therefore I will believe nothing at all. Whether I say the foresaid grounds be
not a ready and likely way to make men conclude thus, and whether this
conclusion be not too often made in Italy, and Spain, and France, and in
England too, I leave it to the judgment of those that have Wisdom and
Experience. Seeing therefore the Roman Church is so far from being a sufficient
Foundation for our belief in Christ, that it is in sundry regards a dangerous
temptation against it; why should I not much rather conclude, Seeing we receive
not the knowledge of Christ and Scriptures from the Church of Rome, neither from
her must we take his Doctrine, or the Interpretation of Scripture?

102. Ad. 19. In this number, this Argument is contained. The Judge of
Controversies ought to be intelligible to learned and unlearned; The Scripture
is not so, and the Church is so; Therefore the Church is the Judge, and not the
Scripture.

103. To this I answer: As to be understandible is a condition requisite to a
Judge, so is not that alone sufficient to make a Judge; otherwise you might
make your self Judge of Controversies, by arguing; The Scripture is not
intelligible by all, but I am, therefore I am Judge of Controversies. If you
say your intent was to conclude against the Scripture, and not for the Church:
I demand why then, but to delude the simple with Sopistry, did you say in the
close of this. Such is the Church, and the Scripture is not such? but that you
would leave it to them to infer in the end, (which indeed was more than you
undertook in the beginning) Therefore the Church is Judge and the Scripture
not. I say Secondly; that you still run upon a false supposition: that God has
appointed some Judge of all Controversies that may happen among Christians,
about the sense of obscure Texts of Scripture: whereas he has left every one to
his liberty herein, in those words of S. Paul, Quisque abundet in sensu suo,
etc. I say Thirdly. Whereas some Protestants make the Scripture Judge of
Controversies, that they have the Authority of Fathers to warrant their manner
of speaking: as of Contra Parmen. l. 5. in Prin.
Optatus.

104. But speaking truly and properly the Scripture is not a Judge nor cannot
be, but only, a sufficient Rule, for those to judge by, that believe it to be
the word of God (as the Church of England and the Church of Rome both do,) what
they are to believe, and what they are not to believe. I say sufficiently
perfect, and sufficiently intellible in things necessary, to all that have
understanding, whether they be learned or unlearned. And my reason hereof is
convincing and demonstrative; because nothing is necessary to be believed, but
what is plainly revealed. For to say, that when a place of Scripture, by reason
of ambiguous terms, lies indifferent between diverse senses, whereof one is
true, and the other is false, that God obliges men under pain of damnation, not
to mistake through error and humane frailty, is to make God a Tyrant, and to
say that he requires us certainly to attain that end, for the attaining whereof
we have no certain means; which is to say, that, like Pharaoh, he gives no
straw, and requires brick; that he reaps where he sows not; that he gathers
where he strews not, that he will not be pleased with our utmost endeavors to
please him, without full and exact and never failing performance; that his will
is we should do what he knows we cannot do; that he will not accept of us
according to that which we have, but requires of us what we have not. Which
whether it can consist with his goodness, with his wisdom, and with his word, I
leave it to honest men to judge. If I should send a Servant to Paris, or Rome,
or Jerusalem, and he using his utmost diligence not to mistake his way, yet
notwithstanding, meeting often with such places where the road is divided into
several ways, whereof every one is as likely to be true, and as likely to be
false as any other, should at length mistake and go out of the way; would not
any man say that I were an impotent, foolish and unjust Master, if I should be
offended with him for doing so? And shall we not tremble to impute that to God,
which we would take in foul scorn, if it were imputed to our selves? Certainly,
I for my part fear I should not love God if I should think so strangely of him.

105. Again, When you say, that unlearned, and ignorant men cannot understand
Scripture, I would desire you to come out of the Clouds, and tell us what you
mean: Whether, that they cannot understand all Scripture, or that they cannot
understand any Scripture, or that they cannot understand so much as is
sufficient for their direction to Heaven. If the first; I believe the Learned
are in the same Case. If the Second; every man's experience will confute you:
for who is there that is not capable of a sufficient understanding of the
Story, the Precepts, the Promises, and the Threats of the Gospel? If the Third;
that they may understand something, but not enough for their Salvations; I ask
you, first. Why then does Saint Paul say to Timothy, The Scriptures are able to
make him wise unto Salvation? Why does Saint Austin say, Ea quae manifest
posita sunt in sacris Scripturis, omnia continent quae pertinent ad Fidem
Moresque vivendi? Why does every one of the four Evangelists Entitle their Book
The Gospel, if any necessary and essential part of the Gospel were left out of
it? Can we imagine, that either they omitted something necessary, out of
ignorance not knowing it to be necessary? Or knowing it to be so, maliciously
concealed it? Or out of negligence, did the work they had undertaken by halfes?
If none of these things can without Blasphemy be imputed to them, considering
they were assisted by the Holy Ghost in this work, then certainly it most
evidently follows, that every one of them writ the whole Gospel of Christ; I
mean all the essential and necessary parts of it. So that if we had no other
Book of Scripture, but one of them alone, we should not want any thing
necessary to Salvation. And what one of them has more than another, it is only
profitable, and not necessary. Necessary indeed to be believed, because
revealed; but not therefore revealed, because necessary to be believed.

106. Neither did they write only for the Learned, but for all men. This being
one especial means of the Preaching of the Gospel, which was commanded to be
Preached, not only to Learned men but to all men. And therefore, unless we will
imagine the Holy Ghost and them to have been wilfully wanting to their own
desire and purpose, we must conceive, that they intended to speak plain, even
to the capacity of the simplest; at least touching all things necessary to be
published by them, and believed by us.

107. And whereas you pretend it is so easy, and obvious both for the Learned
and the ignorant, both to know which is the Church, and what are the Decrees of
the Church, and what is the sense of those Decrees: I say, this is a vain
pretense.

108. For First; How shall an unlearned man whom you have supposed now ignorant
of Scripture, how shall he know which of all the Societies of Christians is
indeed the Church? You will say perhaps, he must examine them by the notes of
the Church, which are perpetual Visibility, Succession, Conformity with the
ancient Church, etc. But how shall he know, first, that these are the notes of
the Church, unless by Scripture, which you say he understands not? You may say
perhaps, he may be told so. But seeing men may deceive, and be deceived, and
their words are no demonstrations, how shall he be assured that what they say
is true? So that at the first he meets with an impregnable difficulty, and
cannot know the Church but by such notes, which whether they be the notes of
the Church he cannot possibly know. But let us suppose this Isthmus dug
through, and that he is assured these are the notes of the true Church: How can
he possibly be a competent Judge, which Society of Christians has Title to
these notes, and which has not? Seeing this Trial of necessity requires a
great sufficiency of knowledge of the monuments of Christian Antiquity, which
no unlearned can have, because he that has it cannot be unlearned. As for
example, how shall he possibly be able to know whether the Church of Rome has
had a perpetual Succession of Visible Professors, which held always the same
Doctrine which they now hold, without holding any thing to the contrary; unless
he has first examined, what was the Doctrine of the Church in the first Age,
what in the second, and so forth? And whether this be not a more difficult
work, than to stay at the first Age, and to examine the Church by the
conformity of her Doctrine, with the Doctrine of the first Age, every man of
ordinary understanding may Judge.

Let us imagine him advanced a step farther, and to know which is the Church:
how shall he know what that Church has Decreed, seeing the Church has not
been so careful in keeping of her Decrees, but that many are lost, and many
corrupted? Besides, when even the Learned among you are not agreed concerning
diverse things, whether they be De Fide or not; how shall the unlearned do? Then
for the sense of the Decrees, how can he be more capable of the understanding
of them, then of plain Texts of Scripture, which you will not suffer him to
understand? Especially, seeing the Decrees of diverse Popes and Councils are
conceived so obscurely, that the Learned cannot agree about the sense of them.
And then they are written all in such Languages which the ignorant understand
not, and therefore must of necessity rely herein upon the uncertain and
fallible authority of some particular men, who inform them that there is such a
Decree. And if the Decrees were Translated into Vulgar Languages, why the
Translators should not be as fallible as you say the Translators of Scripture
are, who can possibly imagine?

109. Lastly, how shall an unlearned man, or indeed any man, be assured of the
certainty of that Decree, the certainty whereof depends upon suppositions which
are impossible to be known whether they be true or no? For it is not the Decree
of a Council, unless it be confirmed by a true Pope. Now the Pope cannot be a
true Pope if he came in by Simony: which whether he did or no, who can answer
me? He cannot be a true Pope unless he were Baptized, and Baptized he was not,
unless the Minister had due Intention. So likewise he cannot be a true Pope,
unless he were rightly ordained Priest, and that again depends upon the
Ordainers secret Intention, and also upon his having the Episcopal Character.
All which things, as I have formerly proved, depend upon so many uncertain
suppositions, that no humane judgment can possibly be resolved in them. I
conclude therefore, that not the learned man amongst you all, no not the Pope
himself, can, according to the grounds you go upon, have any certainty, that
any Decree of any Council is good and valid, and consequently, not any
assurance that it is indeed the Decree of a Council.

110. Ad. 20.] C. M. By referring Controversies to Scripture alone, all is
finally reduced to the internal private Spirit.

CHIL. If by a private Spirit, you mean, a particular persuasion that a
Doctrine is true, which some men pretend, but cannot prove to come from the
Spirit of God: I say, to refer Controversies to the Scripture, is not to refer
them to this kind of private Spirit. For is there not a manifest difference
between saying, the Spirit of God tells me that this is the meaning of such a
Text (which no man can possibly know to be true, it being a secret thing) and
between saying, these and these Reasons I have to show, that this or that is
true Doctrine, or that this or that is the meaning of such a Scripture? Reason
being a public and certain thing and exposed to all men's Trial and
Examination. But now if by private Spirit you understand every Man's particular
Reason, then your first and second inconvenience will presently be reduced to
one, and shortly to none at all.

111. Ad. 21.] C. M. By taking the Office of Judicature from the Church, it is
Conferred upon every particular Man.

CHIL. And does not also giving the Office of Judicature to the Church, come to
confer it upon every particular Man? For before any man believes the Church
Infallible, must he not have reason to induce him to believe it to be so? and
must he not judge of those reasons, whether they be indeed good and firm, or
Captious and Sophistical? Or would you have all men believe all your Doctrine
upon the Churches Infallibility, and the Churches Infallibility they know not
why?

112. Secondly, supposing they are to be guided by the Church, they must use
their own particular reason to find out which is the Church. And to that
purpose you your selves give a great many Notes, which you pretend first to be
Certain Notes of the Church, and then to be peculiar to your Church, and
agreeable to none else; but you do not so much as pretend, that either of those
pretenses is evident of it self, and therefore you go about to prove them both
by reasons; and those reasons I hope every particular man is to judge of,
whether they do indeed conclude and convince that which they are alleged for:
that is, that these marks are indeed certain Notes of the Church, and then that
your Church has them, and no other.

113. One of these Notes, indeed the only Note of a true and uncorrupted
Church, is conformity with Antiquity; I mean the most Ancient Church of all,
that is the Primitive and Apostolic. Now how is it possible any man should
examine your Church by this Note, but he must by his own particular judgment,
find out what was the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and what is the
Doctrine of the present Church, and be able to answer all these Arguments which
are brought to prove repugnance between them? otherwise he shall but pretend to
make use of this Note for the finding the true Church, but indeed make no use
of it, but receive the Church at a venture, as the most of you do; not one in a
Hundred being able to give any tolerable reason for it. So that instead of
reducing Men to particular reason, you reduce them to none at all, but to
chance and passion, and prejudice and such other ways, which if they lead one
to the Truth, they lead Hundreds, nay Thousands to Falsehood. But it is a pretty
thing to consider, how these men can blow Hot and Cold out of the same mouth to
serve several purposes. Is there hope of gaining a Proselyte? Then they will
tell you, God has given every every man Reason to follow; and if the Blind
lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. That it is no good reason for a
man's Religion, that he was Born and brought up in it: For then a Turk should
have as much reason to be a Turk, as a Christian to be a Christian. That every
man has a judgment of Discretion; which if they will make use of, they shall
easily find: that the true Church has always such and such marks, and that
their Church has them, and no other but theirs. But then if any of theirs be
persuaded to a sincere and sufficient Trial of their Church, even by their own
Notes of it, and to try whether they be indeed so conformable to Antiquity as
they pretend, then their Note is changed: you must not use your own reason nor
your judgment, but refer all to the Church, and believe her to be conformable
to Antiquity, though they have no reason for it, nay though they have evident
reason to the contrary. For my part I am certain that God has given us our
Reason to discern between Truth and Falsehood, and he that makes not this use of
it, but believes things he knows not why, I say it is by chance that he
believes the Truth, and not by choice: and that I cannot but fear, that God
will not accept of this Sacrifice of Fools.

114. But you that would not have men follow their Reason, what would you have
them to follow? their Passion? Or pluck out their eyes and go blindfold? No,
you say you would have them follow Authority. On Gods name let them; we also
would have them follow Authority; for it is upon the Authority of Universal
Tradition, that we would have them believe Scripture. But then as for the
Authority which you would have them follow, you will let them see reason why
they should follow it. And is not this to go a little about? to leave reason
for a short turn, and then to come to it again, and to do that which you
condemn in others? It being indeed a plain impossibility for any man to submit
his reason but to reason: for he that does it to Authority, must of necessity
think himself to have greater reason to believe that Authority. Therefore the
confession cited by Brerely, you need not think to have been extorted from
Luther and the rest. It came very freely from them, and what they say, you
practice as much as they.

115. And whereas you say that a Protestant admits of Fathers, Councils,
Church, as far as they agree with Scripture, which upon the matter is himself:
I say you admit neither of them, nor the Scripture it self, but only so far as
it agrees with your Church: and your Church you admit because you think you
have reason to do so: so that by you as well as by Protestants all is finally
resolved into your own reason.

116. Nor do Heretics only but Romish Catholics also set up as many Judges,
as there are Men and Women in the Christian World. For do not your Men and
Women Judge your Religion to be true, before they believe it, as well as the
Men and Women of other Religions? Oh but you say, They receive it not because
they think it agreeable to Scripture, but because the Church tells them so. But
then I hope they believe the Church because their own reason tells them they
are to do so. So that the difference between a Papist and a Protestant is this,
not that the one judges and the other does not judge, but that the one judges
his guide to be infallible, the other his way to be manifest. This same
pernicious Doctrine is taught by Brentius, Zanchius, Cartwright, and others. It
is so in very deed: But it is taught also by some others, whom you little think
of. It is taught by S. Paul, where he says, Try all things, hold fast that
which is good. It is taught by S. John, in these words, Believe not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God or no. It is taught by S.
Peter, in these, Be ye ready to render a reason of the hope that is in you.
Lastly, this very pernicious Doctrine is taught by our Savior, in these words,
If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. And why of your
selves Judge you not what is right? All which speeches, if they do not advise
men to make use of their Reason for the choice of their Religion, I must
confess my self to understand nothing. Lastly, not to be infinite, it is taught
by M. Knot himself, not in one Page only, or Chapter of his Book, but all his
Book over; the very writing and publishing whereof, supposes this for certain,
that the Readers are to be Judges, whether his Reasons which he brings, be
strong and convincing; of which sort we have hitherto met with none: or else
captious, or impertinences, as indifferent men shall (as I suppose) have cause
to judge them.

117. But you demand, What good Statesmen would they be, who should ideate, or
fancy such a Commonwealth, as these men have framed to themselves a Church?
Truly if this be all the fault they have, that they say. Every man is to use
his own judgment in the choice of his Religion, and not to believe this or that
sense of Scripture, upon the bare Authority of any Learned man or men, when he
conceives he has reasons to the contrary, which are of more weight than their
Authority: I know no reason, but notwithstanding all this, they might be as
good Statesmen as any of the Society. But what has this to do with
Commonwealths, where men are bound only to external obedience, unto the Laws
and Judgments of Courts, but not to an internal approbation of them, no nor to
conceal their Judgment of them, if they disapprove them? As if I conceived I
had reason to mislike the Law of punishing simple Theft with Death, as Sir
Thomas Moore did, I might profess lawfully my judgment, and represent my
reasons to the King or Commonwealth in a Parliament, as Sir Thomas Moore did,
without committing any fault, or fearing any punishment.

118. To that place of S. Austin you cite (lib. 32. cont. Faust. You see that
you go about to overthrow all Authority of Scripture, and that every man's mind
may be to himself a Rule, what he is to allow or disallow in every Scripture:)
I shall need give no other Reply, but only to desire you to speak like an
honest man, and to say, whether it be all one for a man, to allow and disallow
in every Scripture what he pleases, which is, either to dash out of Scripture
such Texts or such Chapters, because they cross his opinion? or to say (which
is worse,) Though they be Scripture they are not true? Whether, I say, for a
man thus to allow and disallow in Scripture what he pleases, be all one, and no
greater fault, than to allow that sense of Scripture which he conceives to be
true and genuine, and deduced out of the words, and to disallow the contrary?
for Gods sake, Sir, tell me plainly; In those Texts of Scripture, which you
allege for the infallibility of your Church, do not you allow what sense you
think true, and disallow the contrary? And do you not this by the direction of
your private reason? If you do, why do you condemn it in others? If you do not,
I pray you tell me what direction you follow? or whether you follow none at
all? If none at all, this is like drawing Lots, or throwing the Dice for the
choice of a Religion. If any other: I beseech you tell me what it is. Perhaps
you will say, the Churches Authority; and that will be to dance finely in a
round, thus, To believe the Churches Infallible Authority, because the
Scriptures avouch it; and to believe that Scriptures say and mean so, because
they are so expounded by the Church. Is not this for a Father to beget his Son,
and the Son to beget his Father? For a foundation to support the house, and the
house to support the foundation? Would not Campian have cried out at it, Ecce
quos gyros, quos Maeandros? And to what end was this going about, when you
might as well at first have concluded the Church infallible because she says
so; as thus to put in Scripture for a mere stale, and to say, the Church is
infallible because the Scripture says so, and the Scripture means so because
the Church says so, which is infallible? Is it not most evident therefore to
every intelligent man, that you are enforced of necessity to do that your self,
which so Tragically you declaim against in others? The Church, you say, is
Infallible; I am very doubtful of it: How shall I know it? The Scripture you
say affirms it, as in the 59. of Esau, My spirit that is in thee, etc. Well I
confess I find there these words: but I am still doubtful, whether they be
spoken of the Church of Christ: and if they be, whether they mean as you
pretend. You say, the Church says so, which is infallible. Yea but that is the
Question, and therefore not to be begged but proved. Neither is it so evident
as to need no proof: otherwise why brought you this Text to prove it? Nor is it
of such a strange quality, above all other Propositions, as to be able to prove
it self. What then remains but that you say, Reasons drawn out of the
Circumstances of the Text, will evince that this is the sense of it. Perhaps
they will. But Reasons cannot convince me, unless I judge of them by my Reason;
and for every man or woman to rely on that, in the choice of their Religion,
and in the interpreting of Scripture, you say is a horrible absurdity; and
therefore must neither make use of your own in this matter, nor desire me to
make use of it.

119. But Universal Tradition (you say, and so do I too,) is of it self
credible: and that has in all Ages taught the Churches Infallibility with full
consent. If it have, I am ready to believe it. But that it has I hope you would
not have me take upon your word: for that were to build my self upon the
Church, and the Church upon You. Let then the Tradition appear; for a secret
Tradition is somewhat like a silent Thunder. You will perhaps produce, for the
confirmation of it, some sayings of some Fathers, who in every Age taught this
Doctrine; (as Gualterius in his Chronology undertakes to do, but with so ill
success, that I heard an able Man of your Religion profess, that in the first
three Centuries, there was not one Authority pertinent:) but how will you
warrant that none of them teach the contrary? Again, how shall I be assured
that the places have indeed this sense in them? Seeing there is not one Father
for 500 years after Christ, that does say in plain terms, The Church of Rome is
Infallible. What, shall we believe your Church that this is their meaning? But
this will be again to go into the Circle, which made us giddy before; To prove
the Church Infallible because Tradition says so, Tradition to say so, because
the Fathers say so, The Fathers to say so, because the Church says so, which is
Infallible. Yea, but reason will show this to be the meaning of them. Yes, if
we may use our Reason, and rely upon it. Otherwise, as light shows nothing to
the Blind, or to him that uses not his eyes; so reason cannot prove any thing
to him that either has not, or uses not his reason to judge of them.

120. Thus you have excluded your self from all proof of your Churches
Infallibility from Scripture or Tradition. And if you fly lastly to Reason it
self for succor, may not it justly say to you, as Jephte said to his Brethren,
Ye have cast me out and banished me, and do you now come to me for succor? But
if there be no certainty in Reason, how shall I be assured of the certainty of
those which you aledge for this purpose? Either I may judge of them, or not: if
not, why do you propose them? If I may, why do you say I may not, and make it
such a monstrous absurdity, That men in the choice of their Religion should
make use of their Reason? which yet, without all question, none but
unreasonable men can deny, to have been the chiefest end why Reason was given
them.

121. Ad. 22.] An Heretic he is (says D. Potter) who opposes any truth,
which to be a Divine Revelation, he is convinced in Conscience by any means
whatsoever: Be it by a Preacher or Layman, be it by reading Scripture, or
hearing them read. And from hence you infer, that he makes all these safe
propounders of Faith. A most strange and illogical deduction! For may not a
private man by evident reason convince another man, that such or such a
Doctrine is Divine Revelation, and yet though he be a true propounder in this
point, yet propound another thing falsely, and without proof, and consequently
not be a safe propounder in every point? Your Preachers in their Sermons, do
they not propose to men Divine Revelations, and do they not sometimes convince
men in Conscience, by evident proof from Scripture, that the things they speak
are Divine Revelations? And whosoever being thus convinced, should oppose this
Divine Revelation, should he not be an Heretic, according to your own grounds,
for calling Gods own Truth into question? And would you think your self well
dealt with, if I should collect from hence, that you make every Preacher a
safe, that is, an infallible Propounder of Faith? Be the means of Proposal what
it will, sufficient or insufficient, worthy of credit, or not worthy, though it
were, if it were possible, the barking of a Dog, or the chirping of a Bird, or
were it the Discourse of the Devil himself, yet if I be, I will not say
convinced, but persuaded, though falsely, that it is a Divine Revelation, and
shall deny to believe it, I shall be a formal, though not a material Heretic.
For he that believes, though falsely any thing to be Divine Revelation, and yet
will not believe it to be true, must of necessity believe God to be false,
which according to your own Doctrine, is the formality of an Heretic.

122. And how it can be any way advantageous to Civil Government, that men
without warrant from God should Usurp a Tyranny over other men's Consciences,
and prescribe unto them without reason, and sometimes against reason, what they
shall believe, you must show us plainer if you desire we should believe. For to
say, Verily I do not see but that it must be so, is no good demonstration. For
whereas you say, that a Man may be a passionate and Seditious Creature, from
whence you would have us infer, that he may make use of his interpretation to
satisfy his Passion, and raise Sedition: There were some color in this
consequence, if we (as you do) made private men infallible interpreters for
others; for then indeed they might lead Disciples after them, and use them as
Instruments for their vile purposes: But when we say they can only interpret
for themselves, what harm they can do by their passionate or seditious
interpretations, but only endanger both their Temporal and Eternal happiness, I
cannot imagine. For though we deny the Pope or Church of Rome to be an
infallible Judge, yet we do not deny, but that there are Judges which may
proceed with certainty enough against all Seditious Persons, such as draw men
to disobedience either against Church or State, as well as against Rebels, and
Traitors, and Thieves, and Murderers.

123. Ad. 23.] The next argues thus: For many Ages there was no Scripture in
the World: and for many more, there was none in many places of the World: yet
men wanted not then and there some certain direction what to believe: Therefore
there was then an Infallible Judge. Just as if I should say, York is not my way
from Oxford to London, therefore Bristol is: Or a Dog is not a Horse, therefore
he is a Man. As if God had no other ways of revealing himself to men, but only
by Scripture and an infallible Church. See Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Mat. Isidor.
Pelus. l. 3. ep. 106. and also Basil. in Ps. 28. and then you shall confess
that by other means besides these, God did communicate himself unto men and
made them receive and understand his Laws: see also to the same purpose Heb.
1.1.
S. Chrysostom and Isidorus Pelusiota conceived he might use other means. And
S. Paul tells us that the (...) might be known by his Works; and that they
had the Law written in their Hearts. Either of these ways might make some
faithful men without either necessity of Scripture or Church.

124. But D. Potter says (you say,) In the Jewish Church there was a living
Judge, endowed with an absolute infallible direction in cases of moment: as all
points belonging to Divine Faith are. And where was that infallible direction
in the Jewish Church when they should have received Christ for their Messiah,
and refused him? Or perhaps this was not a case of moment. D. Potter indeed
might say very well, not that the high Priest was infallible, (for certainly he
was not) but that his determination was to be of necessity obeyed, though for
the justice of it there was no necessity that it should be believed. Besides,
it is one thing to say, that the living judge in the Jewish Church, had an
infallible direction: another, that he was necessitated to follow this
direction. This is the privilege which you challenge. But it is that, not
this, which the Doctor attributes to the Jews. As a man may truly say, the Wise
men had an infallible direction to Christ, without saying or thinking that they
were constrained to follow it, and could not do otherwise.

125. But either the Church retains still her infallibility, or it was divested
of it upon the receiving of Holy Scripture; which is absurd. An Argument
methinks like this, Either you have Horns or you have lost them: but you never
lost them, therefore you have them still. If you say you never had Horns; so
say I, for ought appears by your reasons, the Church never had infallibility.

126. But some Scriptures were received in some places and not in others:
therefore if Scriptures were the Judge of Controversies, some Churches had one
Judge and some another. And what great inconvenience is there in that, that one
part of England should have one Judge, and another another? especially seeing
the Books of Scripture which were received by those that received fewest, had
as much of the Doctrine of Christianity in them, as they all had which were
received by any; all the necessary parts of the Gospel being contained in every
one of the four Gospels, as I have proved: So that they which had all the Books
of the New Testament had nothing superfluous: For it was not superfluous but
profitable, that the same thing should be said diverse times, and be testified
by diverse witnesses: And they that had but one of the four Gospels wanted
nothing necessary: and therefore it is vainly inferred by you, that with Months
and Years, as new Canonical Scriptures grew to be published, the Church altered
her rule of Faith and judge of Controversies.

127. Heresies, you say, would arise after the Apostles time and after the
writing of Scriptures: These cannot be discovered, condemned and avoided,
unless the Church be Infallible; Therefore there must be a Church infallible.
But I pray tell me, Why cannot Heresies be sufficiently discovered, condemned,
and avoided, by them which believe Scripture to be the rule of Faith? If
Scripture be sufficient to inform us what is the Faith, it must of necessity be
also sufficient to teach us what is Heresy: seeing Heresy is nothing but a
manifest deviation from, and an opposition to the Faith. That which is straight
will plainly teach us what is crooked; and one contrary cannot but manifest the
other. If any one should deny, that there is a God: That this God is
omnipotent, omniscient, good, just, true, merciful, a rewarder of them that
seek him, a punisher of them that obstinately offend him; that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and the Savior of the World: that it is he by obedience to
whom men must look to be saved: If any man should deny either his Birth, or
Passion, or Resurrection, or Ascension, or sitting at the right Hand of God:
his having all Power given him in Heaven and Earth: That it is he whom God has
appointed to be Judge of the Quick and the Dead: that all men shall Rise again
at the last Day: That they which believe and repent shall be saved: That they
which do not believe or repent shall be damned: If a man should hold, that
either the keeping of the Mosaical Law is necessary to Salvation: or that good
works are not necessary to Salvation: In a word, if any man should obstinatly
contradict the truth of any thing plainly delivered in Scripture, who does not
see, that every one which believes the Scripture, has a sufficient means to
discover, and condemn, and avoid that Heresy, without any need of an
infallible guide? If you say, that the obscure places of Scripture contain
matters of Faith: I answer, that it is a matter of Faith to believe that the
sense of them, whatsoever it is, which was intended by God is true; for he that
does not do so calls Gods Truth into question. But to believe this or that to
be the true sense of them, or, to believe the true sense of them, and to avoid
the false, is not necessary either to Faith or Salvation. For if God would have
had his meaning in these places certainly known, how could it stand with his
wisdom, to be so wanting to his own will and end, as to speak obscurely? or how
can it consist with his Justice, to require of men to know certainly the
meaning of those words, which he himself has not revealed? Suppose there were
an absolute Monarch, that in his own absense from one of his Kingdoms, had
written Laws for the Government of it, some very plainly, and some very
ambiguously, and obscurely, and his Suctjects should keep those that were
plainly written with all exactness, and for those that were obscure, use their
best diligence to find his meaning in them, and obey them according to the
sense of them which they conceived? should this King either with justice or
wisdom be offended with these Subjects, if by reason of the obscurity of them,
they mistook the sense of them, and fail of performance, by reason of their
Error?

128. But, It is more useful and fit, you say, for the deciding of
Controversies, to have besides an infallible Rule to go by, a living infallible
Judge to determine them: and from hence you conclude, that certainly there is
such a Judge. But why then may not another say, that it is yet more useful for
many excellent purposes, that all the Patriarchs should be infallible, than
that the Pope only should? Another, that it would be yet more useful, that all
the Archbishops of every Province should be so, than that the Patriarchs only
should be so. Another, that it would be yet more useful, if all the Bishops of
every Diocese were so. Another, that it would be yet more available, that all
the Parsons of every Parish should be so. Another, that it would be yet more
excellent, if all the Fathers of Families were so. And lastly, another, that it
were much more to be desired that every Man and every Woman were so: just as
much as the prevention of Controversies, is better than the decision of them,
and the prevention of Heresies better than the condemnation of them; and upon
this ground conclude, by your own very consequence, That not only a general
Council, nor only the Pope, but all the Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops,
Pastors, Fathers, nay all the men in the World are infallible. If you say now,
as I am sure you will, that this conclusion is most gross, and absurd against
sense and experience, then must also the ground be false, from which it
evidently and undeniably follows, viz. that, That course of dealing with men
seems always more fit to Divine Providence, which seems most fit to humane
reason.

129. And so likewise, That there should men succeed the Apostles, which could
show themselves to be their successors, by doing of Miracles, by speaking all
kind of Languages, by delivering men to Satan, as S. Paul did Hymenaeus, and
the incestuous Corinthian, it is manifest in human reason it were incomparably
more fit and useful for the decision of Controversies, than that the successor
of the Apostles should have none of these gifts, and for want of the signs of
Apostleship, be justly questionable whether he be his successor or no: and will
you now conclude, That the Popes have the gift of doing Miracles, as well as
the Apostles had?

130. It were in all reason very useful and requisite, that the Pope should, by
the assistance of Gods Spirit, be freed from the vices and passions of men,
lest otherwise, the Authority given him for the good of the Church, he might
employ (as diverse Popes you well know have done) to the disturbance, and
oppression and mischief of it. And will you conclude from hence, That Popes are
not subject to the sins and passions of other men? That there never have been
ambitious, covetous, lustful, tyrannous Popes.

131. Who sees not that for men's direction it were much more beneficial for the
Church, that Infallibility should be settled in the Popes Person, than in a
general Council: That so the means of deciding Controversies might be speedy,
easy and perpetual, whereas that of general Councils is not so. And will you
hence infer, that not the Church Representative, but the Pope is indeed the
infallible Judge of Controversies? certainly if you should, the Sorbon Doctors
would not think this a good conclusion.

132. It had been very commodious (one would think) that, seeing either Gods
pleasure was the Scripture should be translated, or else in his Providence he
knew it would be so, that he had appointed some men for this business, and by
his Spirit assisted them in it, that so we might have Translations as
Authentical as the Original: yet you see God did not think fit to do so.

133. It had been very commodious (one would think) that the Scripture should
have been, at least for all things necessary, a Rule, plain and perfect: And
yet you say, it is both imperfect and obscure, even in things necessary.

134. It had been most requisite (one would think) that the Copies of the
Bibles, should have been preserved free from variety of Readings, which makes
men very uncertain in many places, which is the Word of God, and which is the
error or presumption of man: and yet we see God has not thought fit so to
provide for us.

135. Who can conceive, but that an Apostolic Interpretation of all the
difficult places of Scripture, would have been strangely beneficial to the
Church, especially there being such danger in mistaking the sense of them, as
is by you pretended, and God in his providence foreseeing that the greatest
part of Christians, would not accept of the Pope for the Judge of
Controversies? And yet we see God has not so ordered the matter.

136. Who does not see, that supposing the Bishop of Rome, had been appointed
Head of the Church, and Judge of Controversies, that it would have been
infinitely beneficial to the Church, perhaps as much as all the rest of the
Bible, that in some Book of Scripture which was to be undoubtedly received,
this one Proposition had been set down in Terms, The Bishops of Rome shall be
always Monarchs of the Church, and they either alone, or with their adherents,
the Guides of Faith, and the Judges of Controversies that shall arise amongst
Christians? This, if you will deal ingenuously, you cannot but acknowledge; for
then all true Christians would have submitted to him, as willingly as to Christ
himself, neither needed you and your fellows, have troubled your self to invent
so many Sophisms for the proof of it. There would have been no more doubt of it
among Christians, than there is of the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection or
Ascension of Christ. You were best now rub your forehead hard, and conclude
upon us, that because this would have been so useful to have been done,
therefore it is done. Or if you be (as I know you are) too ingenuous to say so,
then must you acknowledge, that the ground of your Argument, which is the very
ground of all these absurdities, is most absurd; and that it is our duty to be
humbly thankful for those sufficient, nay abundant means of Salvation, which
God has of his own goodness granted us: and not conclude, he has done that
which he has not done, because forsooth, in our vain judgments it seems
convenient he should have done so.

137. But you demand what repugnance there is betwixt infallibility in the
Church, and existence of Scripture, that the production of the one must be the
destruction of the other? Out of which words I can frame no other argument for
you than this. There is no Repugnance between the Scriptures existence, and the
Churches infallibility, therefore the Church is infallible. Which consequence
will then be good, when you can show, that nothing can be untrue, but that only
which is impossible; that whatsoever may be done, that also is done. Which, if
it were true, would conclude both you and me to be infallible, as well as
either your Church, or Pope: in as much as there is no more repugnance between
the Scriptures existence and our infallibility, than there is between theirs.

138. Obj. But if Protestants will have the Scripture alone for their Judge,
let them first produce some Scripture, affirming, that by the entrance thereof,
infallibility went out of the Church.

Ans. This Argument put in form runs thus. No Scripture affirms that by the
entering thereof, infallibility went out of the Church: Therefore there is an
infallible Church, and therefore the Scripture alone is not Judge, that is, the
Rule to judge by. But as no Scripture affirms that by the entering of it,
Infallibility went out of the Church, so neither do we, neither have we any
need to do so. But we say, that it continued in the Church even together with
the Scriptures, so long as Christ and his Apostles were living, and then
departed: God in his providence having provided a plain and infallible Rule, to
supply the defect of living and infallible Guides.

141. But the Jewish Church retained Infallibility in her self; and therefore
it is unjust to deprive the Church of Christ of it.

Ans. That the Jews had sometimes an infallible miraculous direction from God,
in some cases of moment, he does affirm and had good warrant: but that the
Synagogue was absolutely Infallible, he no where affirms, and therefore it is
unjustly and unworthily done of you to obtrude it upon him. And indeed how can
the Infallibility of the Synagogue be conceived, but only by settling it in the
High Priest, and the company adhering and subordinate unto him? And whether the
High Priest was Infallible, when he believed not Christ to be the Messiah, but
condemned and excommunicated them that so professed, and caused him to be
crucified for saying so, I leave it to Christians to judge. But then suppose
God had been so pleased to do as he did not, to appoint the Synagouge an
infallible guide: Could you by your rules of Logic constrain him, to appoint
such a one to Christians also, or say unto him, that, in wisdom he could not do
otherwise? Vain man that will be thus always tying God to your imaginations! It
is well for us that he leaves us not without directions to him, but if he will
do this sometime by living Guides, sometime by written Rules, what is that to
you? may not he do what he will with his own?

144. Ad. 24. Neither is this Discourse (if you mean your Conclusion, that Your
Church is the infallible Judge in Controversies) confirmed by Irenaeus at all (
Iren. l. 3. c. 3.) For neither has Irenaeus one syllable to this purpose,
neither can it be deduced out of what he says, with any color of consequence.
For first in saying, What if the Apostles had not left Scripture, ought we not
to have followed the Order of Tradition? And in saying, That to this Order many
Nations yield assent, who believe in Christ, having Salvation written in their
hearts, by the Spirit of God, without Letters or Ink, and diligently keeping
ancient Tradition: Does he not plainly show, that the Tradition he speaks of,
is nothing else, but the very same that is written: nothing but to believe in
Christ? To which, whether Scripture alone to them that believe it, be not a
sufficient guide, I leave it to you to judge. And are not his words just as if
a man should say, If God had not given us the light of the Sun, we must have
made use of Candles and Torches: If we had had no Eyes, we must have felt out
our way: If we had no Legs, we must have used Crutches. And does not this in
effect import, that while we have the Sun, we need no Candles? While we have
our Eyes, we need not feel out our way? While we enjoy our Legs, we need not
Crutches? And by like reason, Irenaeus in saying, If we had no Scripture, we
must have followed Tradition, and they that have none, do well to do so, does
he not plainly import, that to them that have Scripture, and believe it,
Tradition is unnecessary? which could not be, if the Scripture did not contain
evidently the whole tradion. Which whether Irenaeus believed or no, these words
of his may inform you, Non enim per alios etc. we have received the disposition
of our Salvation from no others, but from them, by whom the Gospel came unto
us. Which Gospel truly, the Apostles first preached, and afterward by the will
of God, delivered in writing to us, to be the Pillar and Foundation of our
Faith. Bellarm. de verbo Dei l. 4 c. 11.
Upon which place Bellarmine's two observations, and his acknowledgment ensuing
upon them, are very considerable, and as I conceive, as home to my purpose as I
would wish them. His first Notandum is, That in the Christian Doctrine, some
things are simply necessary for the Salvation of all men; as the knowledge of
the Articles of the Apostles Creed; and besides the knowledge, of the ten
Commandments, and some of the Sacraments. Other things not so necessary, but
that a man may be saved, without the explicit knowledge and belief, and
profession of them. His Second Note is, That those things which were simply
necessary, the Apostles were wont to preach to all men; But of other things not
all to all, but something to all, to wit, those things which were profitable
for all, other things only to Prelates and Priests. These things premised, he
acknowledges, That all those things were written by the Apostles, which are
necessary for all, and which they were wont openly to preach to all; But that
other things were not all written: And therefore, when Irenaeus says that the
Apostles wrote what they Preach in the World, it is true, says he, and not
against Traditions, because they preached not to the People all things, but
only those things, which were necessary or profitable for them.

145. So that at the most, you can infer from hence, but only a suppositive
necessity of having an infallible Guide, and that grounded upon a false
supposition, In case we had no Scripture, but an absolute necessity hereof, and
to them who have and believe the Scripture, which is your assumption, cannot
with any color from hence be concluded, but rather the contrary.

146. Neither because (as he says) it was then easy to receive the Truth from
Gods Church, then, in the Age next after the Apostles, Then, when all the
ancient and Apostolic Churches were at an agreement about the Fundamentals of
Faith: Will it therefore follow that now, 1600 years after, when the ancient
Churches are divided almost into as many Religions as they are Churches, every
one being the Church to it self, and heretical to all other, that it is as
easy, but extremely difficult or rather impossible, to find the Church first
independently of the true Doctrine, and then to find the truth by the Church.

148. Neither will the Apostles depositing with the Church, all things
belonging to truth, be any proof that the Church shall certainly keep this
depositum, entire, and sincere, without adding to it, or taking from it; for
this whole depositum was committed to every particular Church, nay, to every
particular Man, which the Apostles converted. And yet no man, I think, will
say, that there was any certainty, that it should be kept whole and inviolate
by every man, and every Church. It is apparent out of Scripture, it was
committed to Timothy, and by him consigned to other faithful men: and yet S.
Paul thought it not superfluous, earnestly to exhort him to the careful keeping
of it: which exhortation you must grant had been vain and superfluous, if the
not keeping of it had been impossible. And therefore though Irenaeus says, The
Apostles fully deposited in the Church all truth, yet he says not, neither can
we infer from what he says, that the Church should always infallibly keep this
depositum, entire without the loss of any truth, and sincere without the
mixture of any falsehood.

149. Ad. 25.] C. M. proceeds and tells us, That beside all this, the Doctrine
of Protestants is destructive of it self. For either they have certain and
infallible means not to Err in interpreting; or not. If not, Scripture to them
cannot be a sufficient ground for infallible Faith: If they have, and so cannot
Err in interpreting Scripture, then they are able with infallibility to hear
and determine all Controversies of Faith; and so they may be, and are Judges of
Controversies, although they use the Scripture as a Rule. And thus against
their own Doctrine, they constitute another Judge of Controversies besides
Scripture alone.

C. H. And may not we with as much reason substitute Church and Papists,
instead of Scripture and Protestants, and say unto you, Besides all this, the
Doctrine of Papists is destructive of it self. For either they have certain and
infallible means not to Err, in the choice of the Church, and interpreting her
decrees, or they have not: If not, then the Church to them cannot be a
sufficient (but merely a fantastical) ground for infallible Faith, nor a meet
Judge of Controversies: (For unless I be infallibly sure that the Church is
infallible, how can I be upon her Authority infallibly sure, that any thing she
says is infallible?) If they have certain infallible means, and so cannot Err
in the choice of their Church, and in interpreting her decrees, then they are
able with Infallibility to hear, examine, and determine all Controversies of
Faith, although they pretend to make the Church their Guide, And thus against
their own Doctrine, they constitute another Judge of Controversies, besides the
Church alone. Nay every one makes himself a chooser of his own Religion, and of
his own sense of the Churches decrees, which very thing in Protestants they so
highly condemn: and so in judging others, condemn themselves.

150. Neither in saying thus have I only cried quittance with you: but that you
may see how much you are in my debt, I will show unto you, that for your
Sophism against our way, I have given you a Demonstration against yours. First,
I say, your Argument against us, is a transparent fallacy. The first part of it
lies thus: Protestants have no means to interpret, without Error, obscure and
ambiguous places of Scripture; therefore plain places of Scripture cannot be to
them a sufficient ground of Faith. But though we pretend not to certain means
of not Erring, in interpreting all Scripture, particularly such places as are
obscure and ambiguous, yet this methinks should be no impediment but that we
may have certainmeans of not Erring in and about the sense of those places,
which are so plain and clear that they need no Interpreters; and in such we say
our Faith is contained. If you ask me how I can be sure that I know the true
^^aning of these places? I ask you again, can you be (...) that you understand
what I, or any man else says? They that heard our Savior and the Apostles
Preach, could they have sufficient assurance, that they understood at any time,
what they would have them do? if not, to what end did they hear them? If they
could, why may we not be as well assured, that we understand sufficiently, what
we conceive plain in their writings?

151. Again I pray tell us, whether you do certainly know the sense of these
Scriptures, with which you pretend you are led to the knowledge of your Church?
If you do not, how know you that there is any Church Infallible, and that these
are the Notes of it, and that, this is the Church that has these Notes? If you
do, then give us leave to have the same means, and the same abilities to know
other plain places, which you have to know these. For if all Scripture be
obscure, how come you to know the sense of these places? If some places of it
be plain, why should we stay here?

152. And now, to come to the other part of your dilemma; in saying, If they
have certain means, and so cannot Err, methinks you forget your self very much,
and seem to make no difference, between, having certain means to do a thing,
and the actual doing of it. As if you should conclude, because all men have
certain means of Salvation, therefore all men certainly must be saved, and
cannot do otherwise; as if whosoever had a Horse must presently get up and
Ride; Whosoever had means to find out a way, could not neglect those means and
so mistake it, God be thanked, that we have sufficient means to be certain
enough of the truth of our Faith. But the Privilege of not being in
possibility of Erring, that we challenge not, because we have as little reason
as you to do so: and you have none at all. If you ask, seeing we may possibly
Err, how can we be assured we do not? I ask you again, seeing your Eyesight
may deceive you, how can you be sure you see the Sun, when you do see it?
Perhaps you may be in a dream, and perhaps you, and all the men in the World
have been so, when they thought they were awake, and then only awake, when they
thought they Dreamt. But this I am sure of, as sure as that God is good, that
he will require no impossibilities of us: not an Infallible, nor a certainly --
unerring belief, unless he has given us certain means to avoid Error; and if
we use those which we have, will never require of us, that we use that which we
have not.

153. Now from this mistaken ground, that it is all one to have means of
avoiding Error, and to be in no danger nor possibility of Error; You infer upon
us as an absurd conclusion, That we make our selves able to determine
Controversies of Faith with Infallibility, and Judges of Controversies. For the
latter part of this inference, we acknowledge and embrace it. We do make our
selves Judges of Controversies: that is, we do make use of our own
understanding in the choice of our Religion. But this, if it be a crime, is
common to us with you, (as I have proved above) and the difference is, not that
we are choosers, and you not choosers, but that we, as we conceive, choose
wisely, but you being wilfully blind choose to follow those that are so too;
not remembering what our Savior has told you, when the Blind lead the Blind,
both shall fall into the Ditch. But then again I must tell you, you have done
ill to confound together, Judges, and infallible Judges; unless you will say,
either that we have no Judges in our Courts of Civil judicature, or that they
are all Infallible.

154. Thus have we cast off your dilemma, and broken both the Horns of it. But
now my retortion lies heavy upon you, and will not be turned off. For first you
content not your selves with a moral certainty of the things you believe, nor
with such a degree of assurance of them, as is sufficient to produce obedience
to the condition of the new Covenant, which is all that we require. Gods
Spirit, if he please, may Work more, and certainty of adherence beyond a
certainty of evidence. But neither God does, nor man may require of us, as our
Duty, to give a greater assent to the conclusion than the premises deserve; to
build an infallible Faith upon Motives that are only highly credible, and not
infallible, as it were a great and heavy building upon a Foundation that has
not strength proportionable. But though God require not of us such unreasonable
things, You do, and tell men they cannot be saved, unless they believe your
Proposals with an infallible Faith. To which end they must believe also your
Propounder, your Church, to be simply Infallible. Now how is it possible for
them to give a rational assent to the Churches infallibility, unless they have
some infallible means to know that she is infallible? Neither can they
infallibly know the infallibility of this means, but by some other, and so on
for ever: unless they can dig so deep as to come at length to the Rock, that
is, to settle all upon something evident of it self, which is not so much as
pretended. But the last resolution of all is into Motives, which indeed upon
examination will scarce appear probable, but are not so much as avouched to be
any more than very credible. For example, if I ask you why you do believe
Transubstantiation? What can you answer, but because it is a Revelation of the
prime Verity. I demand again, how can you assure your self or me of that, being
ready to embrace it if it may appear to be so? And what can you say, but that
you know it to be so, because the Church says so, which is Infallible. If I
ask, what mean You by your Church? You can tell me nothing, but the Company of
Christians which adhere to the Pope. I demand then lastly: Why should I believe
this Company to be the Infallible Propounder of Divine Revelation? And then you
tell me, that there are many Motives to induce a Man to this belief. But are
these Motives lastly infallible? No say you, but very credible. Well, let them
pass for such, because now we have not leisure to examine them. Yet methinks
seeing the Motives to believe the Churches infallibility, are only very
credible, it should also be but as credible that your Church is Infallible, and
as credible, and no more, perhaps somewhat less, that her Proposals,
particularly Transubstantiation, are Divine Revelations. And methinks You
should require only a Moral, and Modest assent to them, and not a Divine as you
call it, and Infallible Faith. But then of these Motives to the Churches
Infallibility, I hope you will give us leave to consider, and judge whether
they be indeed Motives, and sufficient; or whether they be not Motives at all,
or not sufficient; or whether these Motives or Inducements to your Church be
not impeached, and opposed with Compulsives, and enforcements, from it; or
lastly, whether these Motives which You use, be not indeed only Motives to
Christianity, and not to Popery: give me leave for distinction sake to call
your Religion so. If we may not judge of these things, how can my judgment be
moved with that which comes not within its cognizance? If I may, then at least
I am to be a Judge of all these Controversies. 1. Whether every one of these
Motives be indeed a Motive to any Church? 2. If to some, whether to Yours? 3.
If to Yours, whether sufficient, or insufficient? 4. Whether other Societies
have not as many, and as great Motives to draw me to them? 5. Whether I have
not greater reason to believe you do Err, than that you cannot? And now Sir I
pray let me trouble You with a few more Questions. Am I a sufficient Judge of
these Controversies, or no? If of these, why shall I stay here, why not of
others? Why not of all? Nay does not the true examining of these few, contain
and lay upon me the examination of all? What other Motives to your Church have
you, but your Notes of it? Bellarmine gives some 14. or 15. And one of these
fifteen contains in it the examination of all Controversies, and not only so,
but of all uncontroverted Doctrines. For how shall I, or can I know the Church
of Romes conformity with the Ancient Church, unless I know first what the
Ancient Church did hold, and then what the Church of Rome does hold; and
lastly, whether they be conformable, or if in my judgment they seem not
conformable, I am then to think the Church of Rome not to be the Church, for
want of the Note which she pretends is proper, and perpetual to it. So that for
ought I can see, Judges we are and must be of all sides, every one for himself,
and God for us all.

155.. 26.] C. M. I ask, whether this Assertion (Scripture alone is Judge of
all Controversies in Faith) be a Fundamental point of Faith or no?

CHIL. I answer; This assertion, that Scripture alone is Judge of all
Controversies in Faith, if it be taken properly, is neither a Fundamental nor
Unfundamental point of Faith, nor no point of Faith at all, but a plain
falsehood. It is not a Judge of Controversies but a Rule to Judge them by; and
that not an absolutely perfect Rule, but as perfect as a written Rule can be;
which must always need something else, which is either evidently true, or
evidently credible to give attestation to it, and that in this case is
Universal Tradition. So that Universal Tradition is the Rule to judge all
Controversies by. But then because nothing besides Scripture, comes to us with
as full a stream of Tradition as Scripture, Scripture alone, and no unwritten
Doctrine, nor no Infallibility of any Church, having attestation from Tradition
truly Universal; for this reason we conceive, as the Apostles persons while
they were living were the only Judges of Controversies, so their Writings, now
they are dead, are the only Rule for us to judge them by: There being nothing
unwritten, which can go in upon half so fair Cards, for the Title of Apostolic
Tradition, as these things which by the confession of both Sides are not so: I
mean the Doctrine of the Millinaries, and of the necessity of the Eucharist for
Infants.

156. Yet when we say, the Scripture is the only Rule to Judge all
Controversies by, methinks you should easily conceive, that we would be
understood of all those that are possible to be Judged by Scripture, and of
those that arise among such as believe the Scripture. For if I had a
Controversy with an Atheist whether there were a God or no, I would not say,
that the Scripture were a Rule to judge this by: seeing that doubting whether
there be a God or no, he must needs doubt whether the Scripture be the Word of
God: or if he does not, he grants the Question, and is not the man we speak of.
So likewise, if I had a Controversy about the Truth of Christ with a Jew, it
would be vainly done of me, should I press him with the Authority of the New
Testament which he believes not, until out of some Principles common to us
both, I had persuaded him that it is the Word of God. The New Testament
therefore while he remains a Jew would not be a fit Rule to decide this
Controversy; In as much as that which is doubted of it self, is not fit to
determine other doubts. So likewise if there were any that believed Christian
Religion, and yet believed not the Bible to be the Word of God, though they
believed the matter of it to be true, (which is no impossible supposition, for
I may believe a Book of S. Austines, to contain nothing but the Truth of God,
and yet not to have been inspired by God himself,) against such men therefore
there were no disputing out of the Bible; because nothing in question can be a
proof to it self. When therefore we say the Scripture is a sufficient means to
determine all Controversies, we say not this, either to Atheists, Jews, Turks,
or such Christians (if there be any such) as believe not Scripture to be the
Word of God. But among such men only, as are already agreed upon this, That the
Scripture is the Word of God, we say all Controversies that arise about Faith,
are either not at all decidable and consequently not necessary to be believed
one way or other, or they may be determined by Scripture. In a Word, That all
things necessary to be believed are evidently contained in Scripture, and what
is not there evidently contained, cannot be necessary to be believed. And our
reason hereof is convincing; because nothing can Challenge our belief, but what
has descended to us from Christ by Original and Universal Tradition: Now
nothing but Scripture has thus descended to us, Therefore nothing but
Scripture can Challenge our belief. Now then to come up closer to you, and to
answer to your Question, not as you put it, but as you should have put it: I
say, That this position, Scripture alone is the Rule whereby they which believe
it to be Gods Word are to judge all Controversies in Faith, is no fundamental
point. Though not for your Reasons: For your first and strongest reason you see
is plainly voided and cut off by my stating of the Question as I have done, and
supposing in it that the parties at variance are agreed about this, That the
Scripture is the Word of God; and consequently that this is none of their
Controversies. To your second, That Controversies cannot be ended without some
living Authority, We have said already, that necessary Controversies may be and
are decided. And if they be not ended, this is not through defect of the Rule,
but through the default of Men. And for these that cannot thus be ended, it is
not necessary they should be ended. For if God did require the ending of them,
he would have provided some certain means for the ending of them. And to your
Third, I say, that your pretense of using these means is but hypocrital: for
you use them with prejudice, and with a settled resolution not to believe any
thing which these means happily may suggest into you, if it any way cross your
pre-conceived persuasion of your Churches infallibility. You give not your
selves liberty of judgment in the use of them, nor suffer your selves to be led
by them to the Truth, to which they would lead you, would you but be as willing
to believe this consequence, Our Church does oppose Scripture, therefore it
does err, therefore it is not Infallible, as you are resolute to believe this,
The Church is Infallible, therefore it does not err, and therefore it does not
oppose Scripture, though it seem to do so never so plainly.

157. You pray, but it is not that God would bring you to the true Religion,
but that he would confirm you in your own. You confer places, but it is that
you may confirm, or color over with plausible disguises your erroneous
doctrine, not that you may judge of them and forsake them if there be reason
for it. You consult the Originals, but you regard them not when they make
against your Doctrine or Translation.

159. Notwithstanding, though not for these reasons, yet for others, I conceive
this Doctrine not Fundamental: Because if a man should believe Christian
Religion wholly, and entirely, and live according to it, such a man, though he
should not know or not believe the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, no nor to
be the Word of God, my opinion is he may be saved; and my reason is, because he
performs the entire condition of the new Covenant, which is, that we believe
the matter of the Gospel, and not that it is contained in these or these Books.
So that the Books of Scripture are not so much the objects of our Faith, as the
instruments of conveying it to our understanding; and not so much of the being
of the Christian Doctrine, as requisite to the well-being of it. Iraeneus tells
us (as M. K. acknowledges) of some barbarous Nations, that believed the
Doctrine of Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture to be the Word of God,
for they never heard of it, and Faith comes by hearing: But these barbarous
people might be saved: therefore men might be saved without believing the
Scripture to be the Word of God; much more without believing it to be a Rule,
and a perfect Rule of Faith. Neither doubt I, but if the Books of Scripture had
been proposed to them by the other parts of the Church, where they had been
before received, and had been doubted of, or even rejected by those barbarous
Nations, but still by the bare belief and practice of Christianity, they might
be saved: God requiring of us under pain of damnation, only to believe the
verities therein contained, and not the divine Authority of the Books wherein
they are contained. Not but that it were now very strange and unreasonable, if
a man should believe the matter of these Books, and not the Authority of the
Books: and therefore if a man should profess the not believing of these, I
should have reason to fear he did not believe that. But there is not always an
equal necessity for the belief of those things, for the belief whereof there is
an equal reason. We have I believe as great reason to believe there was such a
man as Henry the VIII. King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under
Pontius Pilate: yet this is necessary to be believed, and that is not so. So
that if any man should doubt of or disbelieve that, it were most unreasonably
done of him, yet it were no mortal sin, nor no sin at all: God having no where
commanded men under pain of damnation to believe all which reason induces them
to believe. Therefore as an Executor, that should perform the whole Will of the
dead, should fully satisfy the Law, though he did not believe that Parchment
to be his written Will, which indeed is so: So I believe, that he who believes
all the particular doctrines which integrate Christianity, and lives according
to them, should be saved, though he neither believed nor knew that the Gospels
were written by the Evangelists, or the Epistles by the Apostles.

160. This discourse whether it be rational and concluding or no, I submit to
better judgment; But sure I am, that the corollary which you draw from this
position, that this point is not Fundamental, is very inconsequent; that is,
that we are uncertain of the truth of it, because we say the whole Church, much
more particular Churches and private men may err in points not Fundamental. A
pretty Sophism, depending upon this Principle, that whosoever possibly may err,
he cannot be certain that he does not err. And upon this ground, what shall
hinder me from concluding, that seeing you also hold, that neither particular
Churches, nor private men are Infallible even in Fundamentals, that even the
Fundamentals of Christianity, remain to you uncertain? A Judge may possibly err
in judgment, can he therefore never have assurance that he has judged right? A
Traveller may possibly mistake his way, must I therefore be doubtful whether I
am in the right way from my Hall to my Chamber? Or can our London Carrier have
no certainty, in the middle of the day, when he is sober and in his wits, that
he is in the way to London? These you see are right worthy consequences, and
yet they are as like your own, as an Egg to an Egg, or Milk to Milk.

163. Ad. 27.] C. M. S. Austin plainly affirms that to oppose the Churches
definitions is to resist God himself (speaking of the Controversy of
Rebaptization de Unit. Eccl. cap. 22.) where he says that Christ bears witness
to his Church, and whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church,
does resist our Savior himself, who by his testimony recommends the Church,
etc.

CHIL. I Answer, First that in many things you will not be tried by S.
Augustines judgment, nor submit to his authority; not concerning Appeals to
Rome, not concerning Transubstantiation, not touching the use and worshipping of
Images, not concerning the State of Saints souls before the day of judgment,
not touching the Virgin Mary's freedom from actual and original sin, not
touching the necessity of the Eucharist for Infants, not touching the damning
Infants to Hell that die without Baptism, not touching the knowledge of Saints
departed, not touching Purgatory, not touching the fallibility of Councils,
even general Councils, not touching perfection and perspicuity of Scripture in
matters necessary to Salvation, not touching Auricular Confession, not touching
the half Communion, not touching Prayers in an unknown tongue; In these things,
I say, you will not stand to S. Austines judgment, and therefore can with no
reason or equity require us to do so in this matter. 2. To S. Augustine in heat
of disputation against the Donatists, and ransacking all places for arguments
against them, we oppose S. Austine out of this heat, delivering the doctrine of
Christianity calmly, and moderately; where he says, In iis quae aperte posita
sunt in sacris Scriptur is, omnia ea reperiuntur quae continent fidem, moresque
vivendi. 3. We say, he speaks not of the Roman but the Catholic Church, of far
greater extent, and therefore of far greater credit and authority than the
Roman Church. 4 He speaks of a point not expressed, but yet not contradicted by
Scripture; whereas the errors we charge you with, are contradicted by
Scripture. 5. He says not that Christ has recommended the Church to us for an
Infallible definer of all emergent controversies, but for a credible witness of
Ancient Tradition. Whosoever therefore refuses to follow the practice of the
Church (understand of all places and ages) though he be thought to resist our
Savior, what is that to us, who cast off no practiecs of the Church, but such
as are evidently post-nate to the time of the Apostles, and plainly contrary to
the practice of former and purer times. Lastly it is evident, and even to
impudence it self undeniable, that upon this ground, of believing all things
taught by the present Church as taught by Christ, Error was held, for example,
the necessity of the Eucharist for Infants, and that in S. Austines time, and
that by S. Austine himself: and therefore without controversy this is no
certain ground for truth, which may support falsehood as well as truth.

164. To the Argument wherewith you conclude, I Answer, That though the visible
Church shall always without fail propose so much of Gods revelation, as is
sufficient to bring men to Heaven, for otherwise it will not be the visible
Church, yet it may sometimes add to this revelation things superfluous, nay
hurtful, nay in themselves damnable, though not unpardonable; and sometimes
take from it things very expedient and profitable, and therefore it is
possible, without sin, to resist in some things the Visible Church of Christ.
But you press us farther, and demand, what Visible Church was extant, when
Luther began, whether it were the Roman or Protestant Church? As if it must of
necessity either be Protestant or Roman, or Roman of necessity, if it were not
Protestant! yet this is the most usual fallacy of all your disputers, by some
specious Arguments to persuade weak men that the Church of Protestants cannot
be the true Church; and thence to infer, that without doubt it must be the
Roman. But why may not the Roman be content to be a part of it, and the Grecian
another? And if one must be the whole, why not the Greek Church, as well as the
Roman? there being not one Note of your Church which agrees not to her as well
as to your own; unless it be, that she is poor, and oppressed by the Turk, and
you are in glory and splendour.

CHAP. III. The ANSWER to the Third CHAPTER.
Wherein it is maintained, That the distinction of points Fundamental and not
Fundamental, is in this present Controversy good and pertinent: And that the
Catholic Church may err in the latter kind of the said points.

1. This distinction is employed by Protestants to many purposes, and therefore
if it be pertinent and good, (as they understand and apply it) the whole
Edifice built thereon, must be either firm and stable, or if it be not, it
cannot be for any default in this distinction.

2. If you object to them discords in matter of faith without any means of
agreement, They will answer you, that they want not good and solid means of
agreement in matters necessary to salvation, viz. Their belief of all those
things which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture; which who so
believes, must of necessity believe all things necessary to salvation: and
their mutual suffering one another, to abound in their several sense, in
matters not plainly and undoubtedly there delivered. And for their agreement in
all Controversies of Religion, either they have means to agree about them, or
not: If you say they have, why did you before deny it? If they have not means,
why do you find fault with them, for not agreeing?

3. You will say, that their fault is, that by remaining Protestants they
exclude themselves from the means of agreement, which you have, and which by
submission to your Church they might have also. But if you have means of
agreement, the more shame for you that you still disagree. For who, I pray, is
more inexcusably guilty, for the omission of any duty; they that either have no
means to do it, or else know of none they have, which puts them in the same
case as if they had none: or they which profess to have an easy and expedite
means to do it, and yet still leave it undone? If you had been blind (says our
Savior to the Pharisees) you had had no sin, but now you say you see,
therefore your sin remains.

4. If you say, you do agree in matters of Faith, I say this is ridiculous: for
you define matters of Faith to be those wherein you agree. So that to say, you
agree in matters of Faith, is to say, you agree in those things wherein you do
agree. And do not Protestants do so likewise? Do not they agree in those
things, wherein they do agree?

5. But you are all agreed that only those things wherein you do agree are
matters of Faith. And Protestants if they were wise, would do so too. Sure I am
they have reason enough to do so: seeing all of them agree with explicit Faith
in all those things, which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture,
that is, in all which God has plainly revealed: and with an implicit Faith,
in that sense of the whole Scripture which God intended whatsoever it was.
Secondly, That which you pretend is false; for else, why do some of you hold it
against Faith, to take or allow the Oath of Allegiance, others as learned and
honest as they, that it is against Faith and unlawful to refuse it and allow
the refusing of it? Why do some of you hold, that it is de Fide, that the Pope
is Head of the Church by divine Law, others the contrary? Some hold it de Fide,
that the Blessed Virgin was free from Actual sin, others that it is not so.
Some, that the Popes indirect power over Princes in temporalties is de Fide,
Others the contrary. Some, that it is Universal Tradition, and consequently de
Fide, that the Virgin Mary was conceived in original sin, others the contrary.

6. But what shall we say now, if you be not agreed touching your pretended
means of agreement, how then can you pretend to Unity either Actual or
Potential more than Protestants may? Some of you say, the Pope alone without a
Council may determine all Controversies: But others deny it. Some, that a
General Council without a Pope may do so: Others deny this. Some, Both in
conjunction are infallible determiners: Others again deny this. Lastly, some
among you, hold the Acceptance of the decrees of Councils by the Universal
Church to be the only way to decide Controversies: which others deny, by
denying the Church to be Infallible. And indeed what way of ending Cotroversies
can this be, when either part may pretend, that they are part of the Church,
and they receive not the decree, therefore the whole Church has not received
it?

7. Again, Means of agreeing differences are either Rational and well grounded
and of Gods appointment, or voluntary and taken up at the pleasure of men.
Means of the former nature, we say, you have as little as we. For where has
God appointed, that the Pope, or a Council, or a Council confirmed by the Pope,
or that Society of Christians which adhere to him, shall be the Infallible
Judge of Controversies. I desire you to show any one of these Assertions
plainly set down in Scripture, (as in all Reason a thing of this nature should
be) or at least delivered with a full consent of Fathers, or at least taught in
plain terms by any one Father for four Hundred years after Christ. And if you
cannot do this (as I am sure you cannot) and yet will still be obtruding your
selves upon us for our Judges, who will not cry out, -- perisse frontem de
rebus? that you have lost all modesty?

8. But then for means of the other kind, such as yours are, we have great
abundance of them. For besides all the ways which you have devised, which we
may make use of when we please, we have a great many more, which you yet have
never thought of, for which we have as good color out of Scripture as you have
for yours. For first, we could if we would, try it by Lots, whose Doctrine is
true, and whose false. And you know it is written, Prove. 16.33.
The Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole disposition of it is from the
Lord. 2. We could refer them to the King, and you know it is written: Prove.
16.10.
A Divine sentence is in the Lips of the King, his mouth transgresses not in
judgment. Prove. 21.1.
The Heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord. We could refer the matter to
any assembly of Christians assembled in the name of Christ, seeing it is
written, where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. We may refer it to any Priest, because it is written, Mat. 2.7.
The Priests Lips shall preserve knowledge. Mat. 25.2.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, etc. To any Preacher of the
Gospel, to any Pastor, or Doctor, for to every one of them Christ has promised
Mat. 28.20.
he will he with them always even to the end of the World: and of every one of
them it is said, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you hears me, etc. To any Bishop or Prelate, for it is
written, Heb. 13.17.
Obey your Prelates, and again Ephesians. 4.11.
he has given Pastors and Doctors, etc. lest we should be carried about with
every wind of Doctrine. To any particular Church of Christians, seeing it is a
particular Church which is called 1 Timothy 3.15.
The House of God, a Pillar and ground of Truth: and seeing of any particular
Church it is written Mat. 18.17.
He that hears not the Church let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a
Publican. We might refer it to any man that prays for Gods Spirit, for it is
written, Mat. 7.8.
Every one that asks receives: and again, Jam. 1.5.
If any man want Wisdom let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not. Lastly, we might refer it to the Jews, for without all
doubt of them it is written, Isai. 59.21.
my Spirit that is in thee, etc. All these means of agreement, whereof not any
one but has as much probability from Scripture, Mat. 18.20.
as that which you obtrude upon us, offer themselves upon a sudden to me:
happily many more might be thought on, if we had time, but these are enough to
show, that would we make use of voluntary and devised means to determine
differences, we had them in great abundance. And if you say these would fail
us, and contradict themselves; so, as we pretend, have yours. There have been
Popes against Popes: Councils against Councils: Councils confirmed by Popes,
against Councils confirmed by Popes: Lastly, the Church of some Ages against
the Church of other Ages.

9. Lastly, whereas you find fault, That Protestants upbraided with their
discords, answer that they differ only in points not Fundamental, I desire you
tell me whether they do so, or do not so; If they do so, I hope you will not
find fault with the Answer: If you say they do not so, but in points
Fundamental also; then they are not members of the same Church one with
another, no more than with you: And therefore why should you object to any of
them, their differences from each other, any more than to your selves, their
more and greater differences from you?

10. But they are convinced sometime even by their own confessions, that the
Ancient Fathers taught diverse points of Popery: and then they reply, those
Fathers may nevertheless be saved, because those Errors were not Fundamental.
And may not you also be convinced by the confessions of your own men, that the
Fathers taught diverse points held by Protestants against the Church of Rome,
and diverse against Protestants and the Church of Rome? Do not your Purging
Indexes, clip the Tongues, and seal up the Lips of a great many for such
confessions? And is not the above cited confession of your Doway Divines, plain
and full to the same purpose? And do not you also, as freely as we, charge the
Fathers with Errors, and yet say they were saved? Now what else do we
understand by an unfundamental Error, but such a one with which a man may
possibly be saved? So that still you proceed in condemning others for your own
faults, and urging arguments against us, which return more strongly upon your
selves.

11. But your will is, we should remember that Christ must always have a
visible Church. Answ. Your pleasure shall be obeyed, on condition you will not
forget, that there is a difference between perpetual Visibility, and perpetual
Purity. As for the answer, which you make for us, true it is, we believe the
Catholic Church cannot perish, yet that she may, and did Err in points not
Fundamental; and that Protestants were obliged to forsake these Errors of the
Church, as they did, though not the Church for her Errors, for that they did
not, but continued still members of the Church. For it is not all one (though
you perpetually confound them) to forsake the Errors of the Church, and to
forsake the Church: or to forsake the Church in her Errors, and simply to
forsake the Church: No more than it is for me to renounce my Brothers or my
Friends Vices or Errors, and to renounce my Brother or my Friend. The former
then was done by Protestants, the latter was not done. Nay not only not from
the Catholic, but not so much as from the Roman, did they separate per omnia,
but only in those practices which they conceived superstitious or impious. If
you would at this time propose a form of Liturgy, which both Sides hold lawful,
and then they would not join with you in this Liturgy, you might have some
color then to say, they renounce your communion absolutely. But as things are
now ordered, they cannot join with you in prayers, but they must partake with
you in unlawful practices, and for this reason, they (not absolutely, but thus
far) separate from your communion. And this, I say, they were obliged to do
under pain of damnation. Not as if it were damnable to hold an Error not
damnable, but because it is damnable outwardly to profess and maintain it, and
to join with others in the practice of it, when inwardly they did not hold it.
Now had they continued in your communion, that they must have done, vid. have
professed to believe and externally practiced your Errors, whereof they were
convinced that they were Errors: which though the matters of the Errors had
been not necessary, but only profitable, whether it had not been damnable
dissimulation and Hypocrisy, I leave it to you to Judge. You your self tell us
within two pages after this, that you are obliged never to speak any one least
lie against your knowledge,, 2. now what is this but to live in a perpetual lie?

12. As for that which in the next place you seem so to wonder at, That both
Catholics and Protestants, according to the opinion of Protestants, may be
saved in their several professions, because forsooth, we both agree in all
Fundamental points: I Answer, this proposition so crudely set down, as you have
here set it down, I know no Protestant will justify. For you seem to make them
teach, that it is an indifferent thing, for the attainment of Salvation,
whether a man believe the Truth or the Falsehood; and that they care not in
whether of these Religions a man live or die, so he die in either of them:
whereas all that they say is this, That those amongst you which want means to
find the Truth and so die in Error, or use the best means they can with
industry, and without partiality to find the Truth, and yet die in Error, these
men, thus qualified, notwithstanding these Errors may be saved. Secondly, for
those that have means to find the Truth, and will not use them, they conceive,
though their case be dangerous, yet if they die with a general repentance for
all their sins, known and unknown, their Salvation is not desperate. The Truths
which they hold, of Faith in Christ, and Repentance, being as it were an
Antidote against their Errors, and their negligence in seeking the Truth.
Especially seeing by confession of both sides we agree in much more than is
simply, and indispensably necessary to salvation.

13. Obj. But seeing we make such various use of this distinction, is it not
prodigiously strange that we will never be induced to give in a particular
Catalogue what points be Fundamental?

Answ. And why I pray is it so prodigiously strange that we give no answer to
an unreasonable demand? God himself has told us, Luke 12.48.
That where much is given, much shall be required; where little is given,
little shall be required. To Infants, Deaf-men, Madmen, nothing for out we
know, is given, and if it be so, of them nothing shall be required. Others
perhaps may have means only given them to believe, Heb. 6.11.
That God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him; and to whom thus
much only is given, to them it shall not be damnable, that they believe but
only thus much. Which methinks is very manifest from the Apostle, in the Epist.
to the Heb. where having first said, that without Faith it is impossible to
please God, he subjoyns as his reason, for whosoever comes unto God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. Where in
my opinion, this is plainly intimated, that this is the minimum quod sic, the
lowest degree of Faith, wherewith, in men capable of Faith, God will be
pleased: and that with this lowest degree he will be pleased, where means of
rising higher are deficient. Besides, if without this belief, that God is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, God will not be pleased, then his
will is that we should believe it. Now his will it cannot be, that we should
believe a falsehood: It must be therefore true, that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him. Now it is possible that they which never heard of Christ, may
seek God, therefore it is true that even they shall please him, and be rewarded
by him; I say rewarded, not with bringing them immediately to Salvation without
Christ, but with bringing them according to his good pleasure, first, to Faith
in Christ, and so to Salvation. To which belief the story of Cornelius in the
10. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles, and S. Peter's Words to him, are to me a
great inducement. For first it is evident he believed not in Christ, but was a
mere Gentile, and one that knew not but men might be worshipped, and yet we are
assured that his Prayers and Alms (even while he was in that state) came up for
a memorial before God; That his Prayer was heard, and his Alms had in
remembrance in the sight of God. v. 4. that upon this, Then fearing God and
working righteousness, (such as it was) he was accepted with God. But how
accepted? Not to be brought immediately to Salvation, but to be promoted to a
higher degree of the knowledge of Gods will: For so it is in the 4. and 5. v.
Call for Simon whose firname is Peter, he shall tell thee what thou ought to
do, and at the 33. verse. We are all here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God. So that though even in his Gentilism, he was
accepted in his present state, yet if he had continued in it, and refused to
believe in Christ after the sufficient Revelation of the Gospel to him, and
Gods will to have him believe it, he that was accepted before, would not have
continued accepted still; for then that condemnation had come upon him, than
light was come unto him, and he loved Darkness more that Light. So that (to
proceed a step farther) to whom Faith in Christ is sufficiently propounded, as
necessary to Salvation, to them it is simply necessary and Fundamental to
believe in Christ, that is, to expect remission of sins, and Salvation from
him, upon the performance of the conditions he requires; among which conditions
one is, that we believe what he has revealed ed, when it is suficiently
declared, to have been revealby him: For by doing so, we set to our Seal, that
God is true, and that Christ was sent by him. Now that may be sufficiently
declared to one (all things considered,) which, (all things considered) to
another is not sufficiently declared: and consequently that may be Fundamental
and necessary to one, which to another is not so. Which Variety of
circumstances, makes it impossible to set down an exact Catalogue of
Fundamentals, and proves your request as reasonable, as if you should desire us
(according to the Fable) to make a Coat to fit the Moon in all her changes; or
to give you a Garment that will fit all statures; Or to make you a Dyal to
serve all Meridians; or to design particularly, what Provision will serve an
Army for a Year: whereas there may be an Army of Ten Thousand, there may be of
100000. And therefore without seting down a Catalogue of Fundamentals in
particular (because none that can be given, can Universally serve for all men,
God requiring more of them to whom he gives more, and less of them to whom he
gives less) we must content our selves by a general description to tell you
what is Fundamental. And to warrant us in doing so, we have your own example,.
19. where being engaged to give us a Catalogue of Fundamentals, instead thereof
you tell us only in general, that all is Fundamental, and not to be disbelieved
under pain of damnation, which the Church has defined. As you therefore think
it enough to say in general, that all is Fundamental which the Church has
defined, without setting down in particular a complete Catalogue of all things,
which in any Age the Church has defined (which I believe you will not undertake
to do, and if you do, it will be contradicted by your Fellows:) So in reason
you might think it enough for us also to say in general, that it is sufficient
for any man's Salvation, to believe that the Scripture is true, and contains all
things necessary for Salvation; and to do his best endeavor to find and
believe the true sense of it: without delivering any particular Catalogue of
the Fundamentals of Faith.

14. Neither does the want of such a Catalogue leave us in such a perplexed
uncertainty as you pretend. For though perhaps we cannot exactly distinguish in
the Scripture, what is revealed because it is necessary, from what is necessary
consequently and accidentally, merely because it is revealed: yet we are sure
enough, that all that is necessary any way is there, and therefore in believing
all that is there, we are sure to believe all that is necessary. And if we Err
from the true and intended sense of some, nay of many obscure or ambiguous
Texts of Scripture, yet we may be sure enough, that we Err not damnably:
because, if we do indeed desire and endeavor to find the Truth, we may be sure
we do so, and as sure that it cannot consist with the revealed goodness of God,
to damn him for Error, that desires and endeavors to find the Truth.

15. Ad. 2.] The effect of this Paragraph (for as much as concerns us) is this,
that for any man to deny belief to any one thing be it great or small known by
him, to be revealed by Almighty God for a truth, is in effect to charge God
with falsehood: for it is to say that God affirms that to be Truth, which he
either knows to be not a Truth, or which he does not know to be a Truth: and
therefore without all Controversy this is a damnable sin. To this I subscribe
with Hand and Heart: adding withal, that not only he which knows, but he which
believes (nay though it be erroneously) any thing to be revealed by God, and
yet will not believe it, nor assent unto it, is in the same case, and commits
the same sin of derogation from Gods most perfect and pure Veracity.

16. Ad. 3.] I said purposely (known by himself, and believes himself) For as,
without any disparagement of a man's Honesty, I may believe something to be
false, which he affirms, of his certain knowledge to be true, provided I
neither know nor believe that he has so affirmed: So without any the least
dishonor to Gods Eternal never failing Veracity, I may doubt of, or deny some
truth revealed by him, if I neither know nor believe it to be revealed by him.

19. But ignorance of what we are expressly bound to know, is it self a fault,
and therefore cannot be an excuse: and therefore if you could show the
Protestants differ in those points, the truth whereof (which can be but one)
they were bound expressly to know, I should easily yield that one side must of
necessity be in a mortal Crime. But for want of proof of this, you content your
self only to say it; and therefore I also might be contented only to deny it,
yet I will not, but give a reason for my denial. And my reason is, because our
obligation expressly to know any Divine Truth, must arise from Gods manifest
revealing of it, and his revealing unto us that he has revealed it, and that
his will is, we should believe it: Now in the points controverted among
Protestants, he has not so dealt with us, therefore he has not laid any such
obligation upon us. The major of this Syllogism is evident, and therefore I
will not stand to prove it. The minor also will be evident to him that
considers, that in all the Controversies of Protestants, there is a seeming
conflict of Scripture with Scripture, Reason with Reason, Authority with
Authority: which how it can consist with the manifest revealing of the truth of
either Side, I cannot well understand. Besides, though we grant that Scripture,
Reason and Authority, were all on one side, and the apparences of the other
side all answerable: yet if we consider the strange power that education and
prejudices instilled by it, have over even excellent understandings, we may
well imagine, that many truths which in themselves are revealed plainly enough,
are yet to such or such a man, prepossest with contrary opinions, not revealed
plainly. Neither doubt I but God, who knows whereof we are made, and what
passions we are subject unto, will compassionate such infirmities, and not
enter into judgment with us for those things, which, all things considered,
were unavoidable.

20. Obj. But till Fundamentals (say you) be sufficiently proposed (as revealed
by God) it is not against Faith to reject them; or rather it is not possible
prudently to believe them: And points unfundamental being thus sufficiently
proposed as divine Truths, may not be denied; Therefore you conclude there is
no difference between them: Answ. A Circumstantial point, may by accident
become Fundamental, because it may be so proposed that the denial of it, will
draw after it the denial of this Fundamental truth, that all which God says is
true. Notwithstanding in themselves there is a main difference between them:
Points Fundamental being those only which are revealed by God, and commanded to
be Preached to all, and believed by all. Points circumstantial being such, as
though God has revealed them, yet the Pastors of the Church are not bound
under pain of Damnation particularly to teach them unto all men every where,
and the People may be securely ig-norant of them.

21. Obj. You say, Not Erring in points Fundamental, is not sufficient for the
preservation of the Church; because any Error maintained by it against Gods
Revelation is destructive. I answer. If you mean against Gods Revelation known
by the Church to be so, it is true; but impossible that the Church should do
so, for ipso Facto in doing it, it were a Church no longer. But if you mean
against some Revelation, which the Church by error thinks to be no Revelation,
it is false. The Church may ignorantly disbelieve such a Revelation, and yet
continue a Church; which thus I prove. That the Gospel was to be preached to
all Nations, was a Truth revealed before our Saviors Ascension, in these
words, Go and teach all Nations. Mat. 29.19. Yet through prejudice or
inadvertence, or some other cause, the Church disbelieved it, as it is apparent
out of the 11. and 12. Chap. of the Acts, until the conversion of Cornelius,
and yet was still a Church. Therefore to disbelieve some divine Revelation, not
knowing it to be so, is not destructive of salvation, or of the being of the
Church. Again, It is a plain Revelation of God, that 1 Cor. 11.2^.
the Sacrament of the Eucharist should be administered in both kinds; and 1 Cor.
14, 15, 16.26.
that the public Hymns and Prayers of the Church should be in such a language
as is most for edification; yet these Revelations the Church of Rome not
seeing, by reason of the veil before their eyes, their Churches supposed
infallibility, I hope the denial of them shall not be laid to their charge, no
otherwise than as building hay and stubble on the Foundations, not overthrowing
the Foundation it self.

24. Ad. 5. This Paragraph, if it be brought out of the Clouds, will I believe
have in it these Propositions. 1. Things are distinguished by their different
natures. 2. The Nature of Faith is taken, not from the matter believed, for
then they that believed different matters should have different Faiths, but
from the Motive to it. 3. This Motive is Gods Revelation. 4. This Revelation is
alike for all objects. 5. Protestants disagree in things equally revealed by
God: Therefore they forsake the formal motive of Faith: and therefore have no
faith nor unity therein. Which is truly a very proper and convenient argument
to close up a weak discourse, wherein both the Propositions are false for
matter, confused and disordered for the form, and the conclusion utterly in
consequent. First for the second Proposition, who knows not that the Essence of
all Habits (and therefore of Faith among the rest) is taken from their Act, and
their Object? If the Habit be general, from the Act and Object in general, if
the Habit be special, from the Act and Object in special. Then for the motive
to a thing, that it cannot be of the Essence of the thing to which it moves,
who can doubt, that knows that a motive is an efficient cause: and that the
efficient is always extrinsecal to the effect? For the fourth, that Gods
Revelation is alike for all Objects, It is ambiguous: and if the sense of it
be, that his Revelation is an equal Motive to induce us to believe all objects
revealed by him, it is true, but impertinent: If the sense of it be, that all
objects revealed by God are alike (that is, alike plainly and undoubtedly)
revealed by him, it is pertinent, but most untrue. Witness the great diversity
of Texts of Scripture, whereof some are so plain and evident, that no man of
ordinary sense can mistake the sense of them. Some are so obscure and
ambiguous, that to say this or this is the certain sense of them, were high
presumption. For the 5. Protestants disagree in things equally revealed by God!
In themselves perhaps, but not equally to them: whose understandings by reason
of their different Educations are fashioned, and shaped for the entertainment
of various Opinions, and consequently some of them, more inclined to believe
such a sense of Scripture, others to believe another; which to say that God
will not take into his consideration in judging men's Opinions, is to disparage
his goodness. But to what purpose is it, that these things are equally revealed
to both, (as the light is equally revealed to all blind men,) if they be not
fully revealed to either? The sense of this Scripture, Why are they then
baptized for the dead? and this, He shall be saved, yet so as by fire, and a
thousand others, is equally revealed to you and to another interpreter, that is
certainly to neither. He now conceives one sense of them, and you another; and
would it not be an excellent inference, if I should conclude now as you do;
That you forsake the formal motive of Faith, which is Gods Revelation, and
consequently lose all faith and unity therein? So likewise the Jesuits and
Dominicans, the Franciscans and Dominicans disagree about things equally
revealed by Almighty God: and seeing they do so, I beseech you let me
understand, why this reason will not exclude them as well as Protestants from
all faith and unity therein? Thus you have failed of your undertaking in your
first part of your Title, and that is a very ill omen, especially in points of
so straight mutual dependence, that we shall have but slender performance in
your second assumpt. Which is, That the Church is Infallible in all her
Definitions, whether concerning points Fundamental, or not Fundamental.

26. Ad. 9.10, 11. I grant that the Church cannot without damnable sin, either
deny any thing to be true, which she knows to be Gods truth: or propose any
thing as his truth, which she knows not to be so. But that she may not do this
by ignorance or mistake, and so without damnable sin, that you should have
proved, but have not. But, say you this excuse cannot serve: for if the Church
be assisted only for points fundamental, she cannot but know that she may err
in points not fundamental. Ans. It does not follow, unless you suppose, that
the Church knows that she is assisted no farther. But if, being assisted only
so far, she yet did conceive by error her assistance absolute and unlimited, or
if knowing her assistance restrained to fundamentals, she yet conceived by
error, that she should be guarded, from proposing any thing but what was
fundamental, then the consequence is apparently false. But at least she cannot
be certain that she cannot err, and therefore cannot be excused from headlong
and pernicious temerity in proposing points not fundamental, to be believed by
Christians as matters of Faith. Ans. Neither is this destruction worth any
thing; unless it be understood of such fundamental points, as she is not
warranted to propose by evident Text of Scripture. Indeed if she propose such,
as matters of Faith certainly true, she may well be questioned, Quo Warranto?
She builds without a foundation, and says thus says the Lord, when the Lord
does not say so: which cannot be excused from rashness and high presumption;
such a presumption, as an Ambassador should commit, who should say in his
Masters name that for which he has no commission. Of the same nature, I say,
but of a higher strain: as much as the King of Heaven, is greater than any
earthly King. But though she may err in some points not fundamental, yet may
she have certainty enough in proposing others; as for example, these, That
Abraham begat Isaac, that S. Paul had a Cloak, that Timothy was sick; because
these, though not fundamental, i. e. no essential parts of Christianity, yet
are evidently, and undeniably set down in Scripture, and consequently, may be
without all rashness proposed by the Church as certain divine Revelations.
Neither is your Argument concluding when you say, If in such things she may be
deceived, she must be always uncertain of all such things. For my sense may
sometimes possibly deceive me, yet I am certain enough that I see what I see,
and feel what I feel. Our Judges are not infallible in their judgments, yet are
they certain enough, that they judge aright, and that they proceed according to
the evidence that is given, when they condemn a Thief, or a Murderer to the
Gallows. A Travelleris not always certain of his way, but often mistaken; and
does it therefore follow that he can have no assurance that Charing Cross is
his right way from the Temple to White Hall? The ground of your error here, is
your not distinguishing, between actual certainty and absolute infallibillty.
Geometricians are not infallible in their own Science: yet they are very
certain of those things, which they see demonstrated. And Carpenters are not
infallible, yet certain of the straightness of those things which agree with
their Rule and Square. So though the Church be not infallibly certain, that in
all her definitions, whereof some are about disputable and ambiguous matters,
she shall proceed according to her Rule, yet being certain of the infallibility
of her Rule, and that in this or that thing she does manifestly proceed
according to it, she may be certain of the Truth of some particular Decrees,
and yet not certain that she shall never decree but what is true.

27. Ad. 12. Obj. But if the Church may err in points not fundamental, she may
err in proposing Scripture, and so we cannot be assured whether she have not
been deceived already.

Ans. The Church may err in her proposition or custody of the Canon of
Scripture, if you understand by the Church, any present Church of one
denomination, for example, the Roman, the Greek, or so. Yet have we sufficient
certainty of Scripture, not from the bare testimony of any present Church, but
from Universal Tradition, of which the testimony of any present Church is but a
little part. So that here you fall into the Fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter. For in effect this is the sense of your Argument: Unless
the Church be infallible, we can have no certainty of Scripture from the
authority of the Church: Therefore unless the Church be infallible, we can have
no certainty hereof at all. As if a man should say; If the Vintage of France
miscarry, we can have no Wine from France: Therefore if that Vintage miscarry
we can have no Wine at all. And for the incorruption of Scripture, I know no
other rational assurance we can have of it, than such as we have of the
incorruption of other ancient Books, that is, the consent of ancient Copies:
such I mean for the kind, though it be far greater for the degree of it. And if
the Spirit of God give any man any other assurance hereof, this is not rational
and discursive, but supernatural and infused. An assurance it may be to
himself, but no argument to another. As for the Infallibility of the Church, it
is so far from being a proof of the Scriptures incorruption, that no proof can
be pretended for it, but incorrupted places of Scripture: which yet are as
subject to corruption as any other, and more likely to have been corrupted (if
it had been possible) than any other, and made to speak as they do, for the
advantage of those men, whose ambition it has been a long time, to bring all
under their authority. Now then, if any man should prove the Scriptures
uncorrupted, because the Church says so which is infallible: I would demand
again touching this very thing, that there is an infallible Church, seeing it
is not of it self evident, how shall I be assured of it? And what can he
answer, but that the Scripture says so in these and these places? Hereupon I
would ask him, how shall I be assured, that the Scriptures are incorrupted in
those places? seeing it is possible, and not altogether improbable, that these
men, which desire to be thought infallible, when they had the government of all
things in their own hands, may have altered them for their purpose. If to this
he answer again, that the Church is infallible, and therefore cannot do so. I
hope it would be apparent, that he runs round in a circle, and proves the
Scriptures incorruption, by the Churches infallibility, and the Churches
infallibility by the Scriptures incorruption, and that is in effect the
Churches infallibility, by the Churches infallibility, and the Scriptures
incorruption by the Scriptures incorruption.

28. Now for your observation, that some Books, which were not always known to
be Canonical, have been afterward received for such. But never any book or
syllable defined for Canonical, was afterward questioned or rejected for
Apocryphal: I demand, touching the first sort, whether they were commended to
the Church by the Apostles as Canonical or not? If not, seeing the whole Faith
was preached by the Apostles to the Church, and seeing after the Apostles, the
Church pretends to no new Revelations, how can it be an Article of Faith to
believe them Canonical? And how can you pretend, that your Church which makes
this an Article of Faith, is so assisted as not to propose any thing as a
divine Truth which is not revealed by God? If they were, how then is the Church
an infallible keeper of the Canon of Scripture, which has suffered some Books
of Canonical Scripture, to be lost? and others to lose for a long time their
being Canonical, at least, the necessity of being so esteemed, and afterward,
as it were by the law of Postliminium has restored their Authority and
Canonicalness unto them? If this was delivered by the Apostles to the Church,
the point was sufficiently discussed, and therefore your Churches omission to
teach it for some ages, as an article of faith, nay degrading it from the
number of articles of faith, and putting it among disputable problems, was
surely not very laudable. If it were not revealed by God to the Apostles, and
by the Apostles to the Church, then can it be no Revelation, and therefore her
presumption in proposing it as such, is inexcusable.

29. And then for the other part of it, that never any book or syllable defined
for Canonical, was afterward questioned or rejected for Apocryphal: Certainly
it is a bold asseveration, but extremely false. For I demand; The Book of
Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom, the Epistle of S. James, and to the Hebrews, were
they by the Apostles approved for Canonical, or no? If not, with what face dare
you approve them, and yet pretend that all your doctrine is Apostolical?
Especially seeing it is evident that this point is not deducible by rational
discourse from any other defined by them. If they were approved by them, this I
hope was a sufficient definition: and therefore you were best rub your forehead
hard, and say, that these Books were never questioned. But if you do so, then I
shall be bold to ask you, what Books you meant in saying before, Some Books
which were not always known to be Canonical, have been afterward received?
Then for the Book of Macchabes, I hope you will say, it was defined for
Canonical before S. Gregory's time: and yet he, lib. 19. Moral, c. 13. citing a
testimony out of it, prefaceth to it after this matter, Concerning which matter
we do not amiss if we produce a testimony out of Books although not Canonical,
yet set forth, for the edification of the Church. For Eleazar in the Book of
Machabees, etc. Which if it be not to reject it from being Canonical, is
without question, at least to question it. Moreover, because you are so
punctual, as to talk of words and syllables, I would know whether before Sixtus
Quintus his time, your Church had a defined Canon of Scripture, or not? If not,
then was your Church surely a most vigilant keeper of Scripture, that for 1500.
years had not defined what was Scripture, and what was not. If it had, then I
demand, was it that, set forth by Sixtus, or that, set forth by Clement, or a
third different from both? If it were that set forth by Sixtus, then is it now
condemned by Clement: if that of Clement, it was condemned I say, but sure you
will say contradicted and questioned by Sixtus; If different from both, then
was it questioned and condemned by both, and still lies under the condemnation.
But then lastly, suppose it had been true, That both some Book not known to be
Canonical had been received, and that never any after receiving had been
questioned: How had this been a sign that the Church is infallibly assisted by
the Holy Ghost? In what mood or figure, would this conclusion follow out of
these Premises? Certainly your flying to such poor signs, as these are, is to
me a great sign, that you labor with penury of better arguments: and that,
thus to catch at shadows and bulrushes, is a shrewd sign of a sinking cause.

30. Ad. 13. We are told here, That the general promises of Infallibility to
the Church, must not be restrained only to points fundamental: Because then the
Apostles words and writings may also be so restrained.

Ans. This also may be done, but if it be done, may easily be confuted. It is
done to our hand in this very Paragraph, by five words taken out of Scripture,
All Scripture is divinely inspired. Show but as much for the Church: Show where
it is written, That all the decrees of the Church are divinely inspired; and
the Controversy will be at an end. Besides, there is not the same reason for
the Churches absolute Infallibility, as for the Apostles and Scriptures. For if
the Church fall into error, it may be reformed by comparing it with the rule of
the Apostles doctrine and Scripture. But if the Apostles have erred in
delivering the doctrine of Christianity, to whom shall we have recourse, for
the discovering and correcting their error? Again, there is not so much
strength required in the Edifice as in the Foundation: and if but wise men have
the ordering of the building, they will make it much a surer thing, that the
foundation shall not fail the building, than that the building shall not fall
from the foundation. And though the building be to be of Brick or Stone, and
perhaps of Wood, yet if it may be possibly, they will have a Rock for their
foundation, whose stability is a much more indubitable thing, than the
adherence of the structure to it. Now the Apostles and Prophets, and Canonical
Writers, are the foundation of the Church, according to that of S. Paul, built
upon the foundation of Apostles and Prophets; therefore their stability, in
reason ought to be greater than the Churches, which is built upon them. Again,
a dependent Infallibility (especially if the dependence be voluntary) cannot be
so certain, as that on which it depends: But the Infallibility of the Church,
depends upon the Infallibility of the Apostles, and the streightness of the
thing regulated, upon the streightness of the Rule: and besides this dependence
is voluntary, for it is in the power of the Church to deviate from this Rule;
being nothing else but an aggregation of men, of which every one has free will,
and is subject to passions and error: Therefore the Churehes infallibility, is
not so certain as that of the Apostles.

31. Lastly, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? If you be so infallible as
the Apostles were, show it as the Apostles did; They went forth (says S. Mark)
and Preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming their
words with Signs following. It is impossible that God should lie, and that the
eternal Truth should set his hand and seal to the confirmation of a falsehood,
or of such Doctrine as is partly true and partly false. The Apostles Doctrine was
thus confirmed, therefore it was entirely true, and in no part either false or
uncertain. I say in no part of that which they delivered constantly, as a
certain divine Truth, and which had the Attestation of Divine Miracles. For
that the Apostles themselves, even after the sending of the Holy Ghost, were,
and through inadvertence or prejudice, continued for a time in an error,
repugnant to a revealed Truth, it is as I have already noted unanswerably
evident, from the story of the Acts of the Apostles. For notwithstanding our
Saviors express warrant and injunction, to go and preach to all Nations, yet
until S. Peter was better informed by a vision from Heaven, and by the
conversion of Cornelius, both he and the rest of the Church, held it unlawful
for them, to go or preach the Gospel to any but the Jews.

32. And for those things which they profess to deliver as the dictates of
human reason and prudence, and not as divine Revelations, why we should take
them to be divine revelations, I see no reason; nor how we can do so, and not
contradict the Apostles, and God himself. Therefore when S. Paul says, in the
first Epistle to the Corinth. 7.12. To the rest speak I, not the Lord; And
again, concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, but I deliver my
Judgment: If we will pretend, that the Lord did certainly speak, what S. Paul
spoke, and that his judgment was Gods commandment, shall we not plainly
contradict S. Paul, and that spirit by which he wrote? which moved him to
Write, as in other places divine Revelations, which he certainly knew to be
such, so in this place, his own judgment, touching some things which God had
not particularly revealed unto him.

34. Obj. But if the Apostles were Infallible, in all things proposed by them
as divine Truths, the like must be affirmed of the Church, because Protestants
teach the promise (of leading into all Truth) to be verified in the Church.

Ans. It Is true that to the Apostles the promise was made, and to them only,
yet the words are true also of the Church. But they agree to the Apostles in a
higher, to the Church in a lower sense: to the Apostles in more absolute, to
the Church in a more limited sense. To the Apostles absolutely, for the
Churches direction: to the Church Conditionally by adherence to that direction,
and so far as she does adhere to it. In a word, the Apostles were led into all
Truths by the Spirit, efficaciter: The Church is led also into all Truth by the
Apostles writings, sufficienter. So that the Apostles and the Church, may be
fitly compared to the Star and the Wisemen. The Star was directed by the finger
of God, and could not but go right to the place where Christ was: But the
Wisemen were led by the Star to Christ; led by it, I say, not efficaciter, or
irresistibiliter, but sufficienter, so that if they would they might follow it,
if they would not, they might choose. So was it between the Apostles writing
Scriptures, and the Church. They in their writing were infallibly assisted to
propose nothing as a divine Truth, but what was so. The Church is also led into
all Truth, but it is by the intervening of the Apostles writings: But it is, as
the Wisemen were led by the Star, or as a Traveller is directed by a Mercurial
Statue, or as a Pilot by his Card and Compass: led sufficiently, but not
irresistibly: led so that she may follow, not so that she must. For seeing the
Church is a society of men, whereof every one (according to the Doctrine of the
Romish Church) has free will in believing, it follows, that the whole
aggregate has freewill in believing. And if any man say that at least it is
morally impossible, that of so many whereof all may believe aright, not any
should do so: I answer, It is true, if they did all give themselves any liberty
of judgment. But if all (as the case is here) captivate their understandings to
one of them, all are as likely to err as that one. And he more likely to err
than any other, because he may err and thinks he cannot, and because he
conceives the Spirit absolutely promised to the succession of Bishops, of which
many have been notoriously and confessedly wicked men, Men of the World:
whereas this Spirit is the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because he sees him not, neither knows him.

38. Ad. 16. To this Paragraph, which pretends to show, that if the Catholic
Church be fallible in some points, it follows, that no true Protestant can with
assurance believe the Universal Church in any one point of Doctrine.

I Answer. Though the Church being not Infallible, I cannot believe her in
every thing she says, yet I can and must believe her in every thing she proves,
either by Scripture, Reason, or Universal Tradition, be it Fundamental, or be
it not Fundamental. This you say, we cannot, in points not Fundamental, because
in such we believe she may err. But this I know, we can: because though she may
err in some things, yet she does not err in what she proves, though it be not
Fundamental. Again you say, we cannot do it in Fundamentals, because we must
know what points be Fundamental, before we go to learn of her. Not so, but I
must learn of the Church, or of some part of the Church, or I cannot know any
thing Fundamental or not Fundamental. For how can I come to know, that there
was such a Man as Christ, that he taught such Doctrine, that he and his Apostles
did such miracles in confirmation of it, that the Scripture is Gods Word,
unless I be taught it. So then the Church is, though not a certain Foundation
and proof of my Faith, yet a necessary introduction to it.

39. But the Churches infallible direction, extending only to Fundamentals,
unless I know them before I go to learn of her, I may be rather deluded than
instructed by her. The reason and connection of this consequence, I fear neither
I nor you do well understand. And besides I must tell you, you are too bold in
taking that which no man grants you, that the Church is an infallible directer
in Fundamentals. For if she were so, then must we not only learn Fundamentals
of her, but also learn of her what is fundamental, and take all for fundamental
which she delivers to be such. In the performance whereof, if I knew any one
Church to be infallible, I would quickly be of that Church. But good Sir, you
must needs do us this favor, to be so acute, as to distinguish between, being
infallible in fundamentals, and being an infallible guide in fundamentals. That
there shall be always a Church infallible in fundamentals, we easily grant; for
it comes to no more but this, that there shall be always a Church. But that
there shall be always such a Church, which is an infallible Guide in
fundamentals, this we deny. For this cannot be without settling a known
infallibility in some one known society of Christians, (as the Greek or the
Roman, or some other Church) by adhering to which Guide, men might be guided to
believe aright in all Fundamentals. A man that were destitute of all means of
communicating his thoughts to others, might yet in himself, and to himself be
infallible, but he could not be a Guide to others. A man or a Church that were
invisible, so that none could know how to repair to it for direction, could not
be an infallible guide, and yet he might be in himself infallible. You see then
there is a wide difference between these two, and therefore I must beseech you
not to confound them, nor to take the one for the other.

40. But they that know what points are Fundamental, otherwise than by the
Churches authority, learn not of the Church: Yes, they may learn of the Church,
that the Scripture is the word of God, and from the Scripture, that such points
are fundamental, others are not so; and consequently learn, even of the Church,
even of your Church, that all is not fundamental, nay all is not true, which
the Church teaches to be so. Neither do I see what hinders, but a man may
learn of a Church, how to confute the Errors of that Church which taught him:
as well as of my Master in Physic, or the Mathematics, I may learn those
rules and principles, by which I may confute my Masters erroneous conclusions.

41. But you ask, If the Church be not an infallible teacher, why are we
commanded to hear, to seek, to obey the Church? I Answer. For commands to seek
the Church, I have not yet met with any, and I believe you, if you were to show
them, would be your self to seek. But yet if you could produce some such, we
might seek the Church to many good purposes, without supposing her a Guide
infallible. And then for hearing and obeying the Church, I would fain know,
whether none may be heard and obeyed, but those that are infallible? Whether
particular Churches, Governors, Pastors, Parents, be not to be heard and
obeyed? Or whether all these be Infallible? I wonder you will thrust upon us so
often, these worn-out Objections, without taking notice of their Answers.

42. Your Argument from S. Austine's first place, is a fallacy, A dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. If the whole Church practice any of these
things (matters of order and decency, for such only there he speaks of,) to
dispute whether that ought to be done, is insolent madness. And from hence you
infer, If the whole Church practice any thing, to dispute whether it ought to
be done, is insolent madness. As if there were no difference between any thing,
and any of these things? Or as if I might not esteem it pride and folly, to
contradict and disturb the Church for matter of order, pertaining to the time
and place, and other circumstances of Gods worship; and yet account it neither
pride nor folly, to go about to reform some errors, which the Church has
suffered to come in, and to vitiate the very substance of Gods worship. It was
a practice of the whole Church in Saint Austines time, and esteemed an
Apostolic Tradition, even by Saint Austine himself, That the Eucharist should
be administered to Infants: Tell me Sir, I beseech you; Had it been insolent
madness to dispute against this practice, or had it not? If it had, how
insolent and mad are you, that have not only disputed against it, but utterly
abolished it? If it had not, then as I say, you must understand Saint Austines
words, not simply of all things, but (as indeed he himself restrained them) of
these things, of matter of Order, Decency, and Uniformity.

44. Obj. But the Doctrines, that Infants are to be baptized, and those that
are baptized by Heretics, are not to be rebaptized, are neither of them to be
proved by Scripture: And yet according to S. Austine they are true Doctrins,
and we may be certain of them upon the Authority of the Church, which we could
not be, unless the Church were Infallible; therefore the Clurch is Infallible.
I answer, that there is no repugnance but we may be certain enough, of the
Universal Traditions of the ancient Church, such as in S. Austin's account,
these were which here are spoken of, and yet not be certain enough, of the
definitions of the present Church. Unless you can show (which I am sure you can
never do) that the Infallibility of the present Church, was always a Tradition
of the ancient Church. Now your main business is to prove the present Church
Infallible, not so much in consigning ancient Traditions, as in defining
emergent controversies. Again, it follows not, because the Churches Authority,
is warrant enough for us to believe some Doctrine, touching which the Scripture
is silent, therefore it is Warrant enough to believe these, to which the
Scripture seems repugnant. Now the Doctrins which S. Austin received upon the
Churches Authority, were of the first sort; the Doctrins for which we deny your
Churches Infallibility are of the second. And therefore though the Churches
Authority, might be strong enough, to bear the weight which S. Austin laid upon
it, yet happily it may not be strong enough, to bear that which you lay upon
it. Though it may support some Doctrines without Scripture, yet surely not
against it. And last of all, to deal ingeniously with you and the world, I am
not such an Idolater of S. Austin, as to think a thing proved sufficiently
because he says it, nor that all his sentences are Oracles; and particularly in
this thing, that whatsoever was practiced or held by the Universal Church of
his time, must needs have come from the Apostles. Though considering the
nearness of his time to the Apostles, I think it a good probable way, and
therefore am apt enough to follow it, when I see no reason to the contrary. Yet
I profess I must have better satisfaction, before I can induce my self to hold
it certain and infallible. And this, not because Popery would come in at this
door, as some have vainly feared, but because by the Church Universal of some
time, and the Church Universal of other times, I see plain contradictions held
and practiced. Both which could not come from the Apostles, for then the
Apostles had been teachers of falsehood. And therefore the belief or practice
of the present Universal Church, can be no infallible proof, that the Doctrine
so believed, or the custom so practiced came from the Apostles. I instance in
the Doctrine of the Millenaries, and the Eucharists necessity for Infants: both
which Doctrines have been taught by the consent of the eminent Fathers of some
ages, without any opposition from any of their Contemporaries: and were
delivered by them, not as Doctors, but as Witnesses, not as their own Opinions,
but as Apostolic Traditions. And therefore measuring the Doctrine of the Church
by all the Rules which Cardinal Perron gives us for that purpose, both these
Doctrines must be acknowledged to have been the Doctrines of the Ancient Church
of some age, or ages; And that the contrary Doctrines were Catholic at some
other time, I believe you will not think it needful for me to prove. So that
either I must say, the Apostles were fountains of contradictious Doctrines, or
that being the Universal Doctrine of the present Church, is no sufficient proof
that it came originally from the Apostles. Besides, who can warrant us, that
the Universal Traditions of the Church were all Apostolical? seeing in that
famous place for Traditions, in Tertullian, De Corona Militis, c 3. and 4.
Where having recounted sundry unwritten Traditions then observed by Christians,
many whereof, by the way, (notwithstanding the Council of Trents profession, to
receive them and the written Word with the like affection of Piety) are now
rejected and neglected by the Church of Rome: For example Immersion in Baptism;
Tasting a mixture of Milk and Honey presently after; Abstaining from Bathes for
a week after; Accounting it an impiety to pray kneeling on the Lords day, or
between Easter and Pentecost: I say, having reckoned up these and other
Traditions in the 3. chap. He adds another in the fourth, of the Veiling of
Women; And then adds, Since I find no law for this, it follows that Tradition
must have given this observation to custom, which shall gain in time,
Apostolic authority by the interpretation of the reason of it. By these
examples therefore it is declared, that the observing of unwritten Tradition,
being confirmed by custom, may be defended. The perseverance of the observation
being a good testimony of the goodnest of the Tradition. Now custom even in
civil affairs where a law is wanting, passes for a law. Neither is it material
whether it be grounded on Scripture, or reason; seeing reason is commendation
enough for a law. Moreover if law be grounded on reason, all that must be law,
which is so grounded. -- A quocunque productum -- Whosoever is the producer of
it. Do ye think it is not lawful, Omni fideli, for every faithful man to
conceive and constitute? Provided he constitute only what is not repugnant to
Gods will, what is conducible for discipline and available to salvation? seeing
the Lord says, why even of our selves, judge ye not what is right? And a little
after, This reason now demand, saving the respect of the Tradition, -- A
quocunque Traditore censetur, nec auctorem respiciens sed Auctoritatem; From
whatsoever Traditor it comes; neither regard the Author but the Authority.
Quicunque traditor, any Author whatsoever is founder good enough for them. And
who can secure us, that Humane inventions, and such as came a quocunque
Traditore, might not in a short time, gain the reputation of Apostolic! Seeing
the direction then was, Hier.
Precepta majorum Apostolicas Traditiones quisque existimat.

46. But let us see what S. Chrysostom says, They (the Apostles) delivered not
all things in writing (who denies it?) but many things also without writing,
(who doubts of it?) and these also are worthy of belief. Yes, if we knew what
they were. But many things are worthy of belief, which are not necessary to be
believed: As that Julius Caesar was Emperor of Rome is a thing worthy of
belief, being so well testified as it is, but yet it is not necessary to be
believed; a man may be saved without it. Those many works which our Savior did
(which S. John supposes, would not have been contained in a World of Books) if
they had been written, or if God by some other means had preserved the
knowledge of them, had been as worthy to be believed, and as necessary as those
that are written. But to show you how much a more faithful keeper Records are
than report, those few that were written are preserved and believed, those
infinity more that were not written, are all lost and vanished out of the
memory of men. And seeing God in his providence, has not thought fit to
preserve the memory of them, he has freed us from the obligation of believing
them: for every obligation ceases, when it becomes impossible. Who can doubt
but the Primitive Christians, to whom the Epistles of the Apostles were
written, either of themselves understood, or were instructed by the Apostles,
touching the sense of the obscure places of them? These Traditive
interpretations, had they been written and dispersed, as the Scriptures were,
had without question been preserved, as the Scriptures are. But to show how
excellent a Keeper of the Tradition, the Church of Rome has been, or even the
Catholic Church, for want of writing they are all lost, nay were all lost,
within a few Ages after Christ. So that if we consult the Ancient Interpreters,
we shall hardly find any two of them agree about the sense of any one of them.
Cardinal Perron, in his discourse of Traditions, having alleged this place for
them, Hold the Traditions, etc. tell us we must not answer, that S. Paul speaks
here, only of such Traditions, which (though not in this Epist. to the
Thessalonians) yet were afterward witten, and in other Books of Scripture:
because it is upon occasion of Tradition (touching the cause of the hinderance
of the coming of Antichrist,) which was never written, that he lays this
injunction upon them, to hold the Traditions. Well, let us grant this Argument
good, and concluding; and that the Church of the Thessalonians, or the
Catholic Church (for what S. Paul writ to one Church he writ to all,) were to
hold some unwritten Traditions, and among the rest, what was the cause of the
hinderance of the coming of Antichrist. But what if they did not perform their
duty in this point, but suffered this Tradition to be lost out of the memory of
the Church? Shall we not conclude, that seeing God would not suffer any thing
necessary to Salvation to be lost, and he has suffered this Tradition to be
lost, therefore the knowledge or belief of it, though it were a profitable
thing, yet it was not necessary? I hope you will not challenge such authority
over us, as to oblige us to impossibilities, to do that which you cannot do
your selves. It is therefore requisite that you make this command possible to
be obeyed, before you require obedience unto it. Are you able then to instruct
us so well, as to be fit to say unto us, Now ye know what withholdeth? Or do
you your selves know that ye may instruct us? Can ye, or dare you say, this or
this was this hindrance which S. Paul here meant, and all men under pain of
damnation are to believe it? Or if you cannot, (as I am certain you cannot) go
then, and Vaunt your Church, for the only Watchful, Faithful, Infallible Keeper
of the Apostles Traditions; when here this very Tradition, which here in
particular was deposited with the Thessalonians and the Premitive Church, you
have utterly lost it, so that there is no Footstep or print of it remaining,
which with Divine Faith we may rely upon. Blessed therefore be the goodness of
God, who seeing that what was not written, was in such danger to be lost, took
order, that what was necessary should be written! S. Chrysostoms counsel
therefore, of accounting the Churches Traditions worthy of belief, we are
willing to obey: And if you can of any thing make it appear, that it is
Tradition, we will seek no farther. But this we say withal, that we are
persuaded we cannot make this appear in any thing, but only the Canon of
Scripture, and that there is nothing now extant, and to be known by us, which
can put in so good Plea, to be the unwritten Word of God, as the unquestioned
Books of Canonical Scripture, to be the written Word of God.

47. You conclude this Paragraph with a sentence of S. Austin's who says, The
Church does not approve, nor dissemble, nor do these things which are against
Faith or good Life: and from hence you conclude, that it never has done so,
nor never can do so. But though the argument hold in Logic a non posse, ad non
esse, yet I never heard, that it would hold back again, a non esse, ad non
posse. The Church cannot do this, therefore it does it not, follows with good
consequence: but the Church does not this, therefore it shall never do it, nor
can never do it, this I believe will hardly follow. In the Epistle next before
to the same Januarius, writing of the same matter, he has these words, It
remains that the thing you inquire of, must be of that third kind of things,
which are different in diverse places. Let every one therefore do, that which he
finds done in the Church to which he comes, for none of them is against Faith
or good manners. And why do you not infer from hence, that no particular Church
can bring up any Custom that is against Faith or good manners? Certainly this
consequence has as good reason for it as the former. If a man say of the Church
of England, (what S. Austin of the Church) that she neither approves, nor
dissembles, nor does any thing against Faith or good manners, would you collect
presently, that this man did either make or think the Church of England
infallible? Furthermore, it is observable out of this, and the former Epistle,
that this Church which did not (as S. Austin according to you, thought) approve
or dissemble, or do any thing against Faith or good Life, did yet tolerate and
dissemble vain superstitions, and humane presumptions, and suffer all places to
be full of them, and to be exacted, as, nay more severely than the commandments
of God himself. This S. Austin himself professes in this very Epistle. This
(says he) I do infinitely grieve at, that many most wholesome precepts of the
Divine Scripture, are little regarded; and in the mean time, all is so full of
so many presumptions, that he is more grievously found fault with, who during
his octaves, touches the Earth with his naked Foot, than he that shall bury
his Soul in Drunkenness. Of these he says, that they were neither contained in
Scripture, decreed by Councils, nor corroborated by the Custom of the Universal
Church. And though not against Faith, yet unprofitable burdens of Christian
Liberty, which made the condition of the Jews more tolerable than that of
Christians. And therefore he professes of them, Approbare non possum, I cannot
approve them. And ubi facultas tribuitur, resecanda existimo, I think they are
to be cut off, wheresoever we have power. Yet so deeply were they rooted, and
spread so far, through the indiscreet devotion of the People, always more prone
to superstion than true Piety, and through the connivence of the Governors, who
should have strangled them at their Birth, that himself, though he grieved at
them, and could not allow them, yet for fear of offense he durst not speak
against them, multa hujusmodi propter nonnullarum vel sanctarum vel
turbulentarum personarum scandala devitanda liberius improbare non audeo. Many
of these things for fear of scandalizing many holy persons, or provoking those
that are turbulent, I dare not freely disallow. Nay, the Catholic Church it
self, did see and dissemble, and tolerate them; for these are the things of
which he presently says after, the Church of God (and you will have him speak
of the true Catholic Church) placed between Chafe and Tares, tolerates many
things. Which was directly against the command of the Holy Spirit, given the
Church by S. Paul; To stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made her
free, and not to suffer her self to be brought in bondage to these survile
burdens. Our Savior tells the Scribes and Pharisees, that in vain they
Worshipped God, teaching for Doctrines men's Commandments: For that laying aside
the Commandments of God, they held the Traditions of men, as the washing of
Pots, and Cups, and many other such like things. Certainly that which S. Austin
complains of, as the general fault of Christians of his time, was parallel to
this: Multa (says he) quae in divinis libris saluberrima praecepta sunt, minus
curantur; This I suppose I may very well render in our Saviors Words, The
commandments of God are laid aside; and then; tam multis presumptionibus sic
plena sunt omnia, all things, or all places, are so full of so many
presumptions, and those exacted with such severity, nay with Tyranny, that he
was more severely censured, who in the time of his Octaves touched the Earth
with his naked Feet, than he which drowned and buried his Soul in Drink.
Certainly, if this be not to teach for Doctrines men's Commandments, I know not
what is. And therefore these superstitious Christians might be said, to Worship
God in vain, as well as Scribes and Pharisees. And yet great variety of
superstitions of this kind, were then already spread over the Church, being
different in diverse place. This is plain from these Words of S. Austin of them,
diversorum locorum diversis moribus innumerabiliter variantur; and apparent,
because the stream of them was grown so violent, that he durst not oppose it,
liberius improbare non audeo, I dare not freely speak against them. So that to
say, the Catholic Church tolerated all this, and for fear of offense, durst
not abrogate or condemn it, is to say (if we Judge rightly of it) that the
Church with silence and connivence generally tolerated Christians to worship
God in vain. Now how this tolerating of Universal superstition in the Church,
can consist with the assistance and direction of Gods omnipotent spirit to
guard it from superstition, and with the accomplishment of that pretended
Prophecy of the Church, I have set Watchmen upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem, which
shall never hold their peace Day nor Night; besides how these superstitions
being thus nourished, cherished, and strengthened by the practice of the most,
and urged with great violence upon others as the commandments of God, and but
fearfully opposed or contradicted by any, might in time take such deep Root,
and spread their Branches so far, as to pass for Universal Customs of the
Church, he that does not see, sees nothing. Especially, considering the
catching and contagious nature of this sin, and how fast ill Weeds spread, and
how true and experimented that rule is of the Historian, Exempla non confistunt
ubi incipiunt, sed quamlibet in tenuem recepta tramitem latissime evagandi sibi
faciunt potestatem. Examples do not stay where they begin, but tho at first
pent up in a narrow Tract, they make themselves room for extravagant wanderings.
Nay that some such superstition had not already even in S. Austins time,
prevailed so far, as to be Consuetudine universae Ecclesiae roboratum,
confirmed by the Custom of the Universal Church, who can doubt that considers,
that the practice of Commiunicating Infants, had even then got the credit, and
authority, not only of an Universal Custom, but also of an Apostolic Tradition.

49. But now after all this ado, what if S. Austin says not this which is
pretended of the Church, viz. That she neither approves, nor dissembles, nor
practices any thing against Faith or good Life, but only of good men in the
Church? Certainly, though some Copies read as you would have it, yet you should
not have dissembled, that others read the place otherwise, vix. Ecclesia multa
tolerat, and tamen, quae sunt contra Fidem and bonam vitam, nec bonus approbat,
etc. The Church tolerates many things; and yet what is against Faith or good
Life, a good man will neither approve, nor dissemble, nor practice.

50. Ad. 17. That Abraham begat Isaacc, is a point very far from being
Fundamental; and yet I hope you will grant, that Protestants believing
Scripture to be the Word of God, may be certain enough of the truth and
certainty of it. For what if they say that the Catholic Church, and much more
themselves may possibly Err in some unfundamental points, it is therefore
consequent, they can be certain of none such? What if a wiser man than I may
mistake the sense of some obscure place of Aristotle, may I not therefore
without any arrogance or inconsequence, conceive my self certain that I
understand him in some plain places, which carry their sense before them? And
then for points Fundamental, to what purpose do you say, That we must first
know what they be, before we can be assured that we cannot Err in understanding
the Scripture; when we pretend not at all to any assurance that we cannot Err,
but only to a sufficient certainty, that we do not Err, but rightly understand
those things that are plain, whether Fundamental or not Fundamental? That God
is, and is a rewarder of them that seek him: That there is no Salvation but by
Faith in Christ: That by repentance and Faith in Christ Remission of sins may
be obtained: That there shall be a Resurrection of the Body: These we conceive
both true, because the Scripture says so, and Truths Fundamental; because they
are necessary parts of the Gospel, whereof our Savior says, Qui non
crediderit, damnabitur. All which we either learn from Scripture immediately,
or learn of those that learn it of Scripture, so that neither Learned nor
Unlearned pretend to know these things independently of Scripture. And
therefore in imputing this to us, you cannot excuse your self from having done
us a palpable injury.

52. Ad. 19.] To that which is here urged of the differences amongst
Protestants concerning many points: I answer, that those differences between
Protestants concerning Errors damnable and not damnable, Truths Fundamental and
not Fundamental, may be easily reconciled. For either the Error they speak of
may be purely and simply involuntary, or it may be in respect of the cause of
it voluntary. If the cause of it be some voluntary and avoidable fault, the
Error is it self sinful, and consequently in its own nature damnable; As if by
negligence in seeking the Truth, by unwillingness to find it, by Pride, by
obstinacy, by desiring that Religion should be true which suits best with my
ends, by fear of men's ill opinion, or any other worldly fear, or any other
worldly hope, I betray my self to any Error contrary to any Divine revealed
Truth, that Error may be justly styled a sin, and consequently of it self to
such a one damnable. But if I be guilty of none of these faults, but be
desirous to know the Truth, and diligent in seeking it, and advise not at all
with Flesh and Blood about the choice of my opions, but only with God, and that
Reason that he has given me, if I be thus qualified, and yet through human
infirmity fall into Error, that Error cannot be damnable. Again, the party
erring may be conceived either to die with contrition for all his sins known
and unknown, or without it; If he die without it, this Error in it self
damnable, will be likewise so unto him: If he die with contrition (as his Error
can be no impediment but he may) his Error though in it self damnable, to him
according to your Doctrine, will not prove so. And therefore some of those
Authors whom you quote, speaking of Errors whereunto men were betrayed, or
wherein they were kept by their Fault, or Vice, or Passion (as for the most
part men are:) Others speaking of them, as Errors simply and purely
involuntary, and the effects of human infirmity; some as they were retracted by
Contrition (to use your own phrase) others, as they were not; no marvel though
they have past upon them, some a heavier, and some a milder, some an absolving,
and some a condemning sentence. The least of all these Errors, which here you
mention, having malice enough too frequently mixed with it, to sink a man deep
enough into Hell: and the greatest of them all, being according to your
Principles, either no fault at all, or very Venial, where there is no malice of
the will conjoined with it. And if it be, yet as the most malignant poison,
will not poison him that receives with it a more powerful Antidote: so I am
confident your own Doctrine will force you to confess, that whosoever dies with
Faith in Christ, and Contrition for all sins known and unknown (in which heap
all his sinful Errors must be comprised,) can no more be hurt by any the most
malignant and pestilent Error, than S. Paul by the Viper which he shook off
into the fire. Now touching the necessity of Repentance from Dead works, and
Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God, and Savior of the World, they all agree;
and therefore you cannot deny, but they agree about all that is simply
necessary. Moreover, though, if they should go about to choose out of Scripture
all these Propositions and Doctrines which integrate and make up the Body of
Christian Religion, peradventure there would not be so exact agreement amongst
them, as some say there was between the 70. Interpreters, in Translating the
Old Testament; yet thus far without Controversy they do all agree, that in the
Bible all these things are contained, and therefore, that whosoever does truly
and sincerely believe the Scripture, must of necessity either in Hypothesi, or
at least in thesi, either formally, or at least virtually, either explicitly,
or at least implicitly, either in Act or at least in preparation of mind,
believe all things Fundamental: It being not Fundamental, nor required of
Almighty God, to believe the true sense of Scripture in all places, but only
that we should endeavor to do so, and be prepared in mind to do so, whenever
it shall be sufficiently propounded to us. Suppose a man in some disease were
prescribed a Medicine consisting of twenty ingredients, and he advising with
Physicians, should find them differing in Opinion about it, some of them
telling him, that all the ingredients were absolutely necessary; some, that
only some of them were necessary, the rest only profitable, and requisite ad
melius esse, lastly some, that some only were necessary, some profitable, and
the rest superfluous, yet not hurtful; Yet all with one accord agreeing in
this, That the whole receipt had in it all things necessary for the recovery of
his health, and that if he made use of it, he should infallibly find it
successful: what wise man would not think they agreed sufficiently for his
direction to the recovery of his health? Just so, these Protestant Doctors,
with whose discords you make such Tragedies, agreeing in Thesi thus far, that
the Scripture evidently contains all things necessary to Salvation, both for
matter of Faith and of practice, and that whosoever believes it, and endeavors
to find the true sense of it, and to conform his Life unto it, shall certainly
perform all things necessary to Salvation, and undoubtedly be saved; agreeing I
say thus far, what matters it for the direction of men to Salvation, though
they differ in opinion, touching what points are absolutely necessary, and what
not? What Errors absolutely repugnant to Salvation, and what not? Especially
considering that although they differ about the Question of the necessity of
these Truths, yet for the most part they agree in this that Truths they are,
and profitable at least, though not simply necessary. And though they differ in
the Question, whether the contrary Errors be destructive of Salvation, or no,
yet in this they consent, that Errors they are, and hurtful to Religion, though
not destructive of Salvation. Now that which God requires of us is this; That
we should believe the Doctrines of the Gospel to be Truths, not all, necessary
Truths, for all are not so, and consequently, the repugnant Errors to be
falsehoods; yet not all such falsehoods, as unavoidably draw with them damnation
upon all that hold them, for all do not so.

53. Yea but you say, it is very requisite we should agree upon a particular
Catalogue of Fundamental points, for without such a Catalogue, no man can be
assured whether or no, he has Faith sufficient to Salvation. This I utterly
deny as a thing evidently false, and I wonder you should content your self
magisterially to say so, without offering any proof of it. I might much more
justly, think it enough barely to deny it, without refutation, but I will not.
Thus therefore I argue against it. Without being able to make a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, I may be assured of the Truth of this Assertion, if it be true,
That the Scripture contains all necessary points of Faith, and know that I
believe explicitly all that is expressed in Scripture, and implicitly all that
is contained in them: Now he that believes all this, must of necessity believe
all things necessary; Therefore without being able to make a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, I may be assured that I believe all things necessary, and
consequently that my Faith is sufficient. I said, of the truth of this
Assertion, if it be true: Because I will not here enter into the Question of
the truth of it, it being sufficient for my present purpose, that it may be
true, and may be believed without any dependence upon a Catalogue of
Fundamentals. And therefore if this be all your reason, to demand a particular
Catalogue of Fundamentals, we cannot but think your demand unreasonable.
Especially having your self expressed the cause of the difficulty of it, and
that is, Because Scripture does deliver Divine Truths, but seldom qualifies
them, or declares whether they be or be not absolutely necessary to Salvation.
Yet not so seldom, but that out of it I could give you an abstract of the
Essential parts of Christianity, if it were necessary, but I have showed it not
so, by confuting your reason, pretended for the necessity of it, and at this
time I have no leisure to do you courtesies that are so troublesome to my self.
Yet thus much I will promise, that when you deliver a particular Catalogue of
your Church Proposals with one hand, you shall receive a particular Catalogue
of what I conceive Fundamental, with the other. For as yet, I see no such fair
proceeding as you talk of, nor any performance on your own part of that which
so clamorously you require on ours. For as for the Catalogue which here you
have given us, in saying. You are obliged under pain of damnation to believe
whatsoever the Catholic visible Church of Christ proposes as revealed by
Almighty God, it is like a covey of one Patridg, or a flock of one sheep, or a
Fleet composed of one Ship, or an Army of one man. The Author of Charity
Mistaken, demands a particular Cataloge of Fundamental points; And We (say you)
again and again demand such a Catalogue. And surely, if this one Proposition,
which here you think to stop our mouths with, be a Catalogue, yet at least such
a Catalogue it is not, and therefore as yet you have not performed what you
require. For if to set down such a Proposition, wherein are comprised all
points taught by us to be necessary to Salvation, will serve you instead of a
Catalogue, you shall have Catalogues enough. As, we are obliged to believe all
under pain of damnation which God commands us to believe. There Is one
Catalogue. We are obliged under pain of damnation, to believe all, whereof we
may be sufficiently assured, that Christ taught it his Apostles, his Apostles
the Church. There Is another. We are obliged under pain of damnation to believe
Gods Word, and all contained in it to be true. There Is a third. If these
generalities will not satisfy you, but you will be importuning us to tell you
in particular, what they are which Christ taught his Apostles, and his Apostles
the Church, what points are contained in Gods Word; Then I beseech you do us
reason, and give us a particular and exact Inventory of all your Church
Proposals, without leaving out, or adding any, such a one which all the Doctors
of your Church will subscribe to, and if you receive not then a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, I for my part will give you leave to proclaim us Banckrupts.

54. Besides this deceitful generality of your Catalogue (as you call it,)
another main fault we find with it, that it is extremely ambiguous; and
therefore to draw you out of the Clouds, give me leave to propose some
Questions to you concerning it. I would know therefore, whether by believing,
you mean explicitly or implicitly? If you mean implicitly, I would know
whether your Churches infallibility be under pain of damnation to be believed
explicitly, or no? Whether any one point or points besides this, be under the
same penalty, to be believed explicitly, or no? And if any, what they be? I
would know what you esteem the Proposals of the Catholic Visible Church? In
particular, whether the Decree of a Pope ex Cathedra, that is, with an intent
to oblige all Christians by it, be a sufficient and an obliging proposal?
Whether men without danger of damnation may examine such a Decree, and if they
think they have just cause, refuse to obey it? Whether the Decree of a Council,
without the Popes confirmation, be such an obliging Proposal, or no? Whether it
be so in case there be no Pope, or in case it be doubtful who is Pope? Whether
the Decree of a general Council confirmed by the Pope, be such a Proposal, and
whether he be an Heretic that thinks otherwise? Whether the Decree of a
particular Council confirmed by the Pope, be such a Proposal? Whether the
General uncondemned practice of the Church for some Ages be such a sufficient
Proposition? Whether the consent of the most eminent Fathers of any Age,
agreeing in the affirmation of any Doctrine, not contradicted by any of their
Contemporaries, be a sufficient Proposition? Whether the Fathers testifying
such or such a Doctrine or Practice to be Tradition, or to be the Doctrine or
Practice of the Church, be a sufficient assurance that it is so? Whether we be
bound under pain of damnation, to believe every Text of the Vulgar Bible, now
Authorized by the Roman Church, to be the true Translation of the Originals of
the Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles, without any the least alteration?
Whether they that lived when the Bible of Sixtus was set forth, were bound
under pain of damnation to believe the same of that? And if not of that, of
what Bible they were bound to believe it? Whether the Catholic Visible Church
be always that Society of Christians which adheres to the Bishop of Rome?
Whether every Christian, that has ability and opportunity, be not bound to
endeavor to know Explicitly the Proposals of the Church? Whether Implicit
Faith in the Churches Veracity, will not save him that Actually and Explicitly
disbelieves some Doctrine of the Church, not knowing it to be so; and Actually
believes some damnable Heresy, as that God has the shape of a man? Whether an
ignorant man be bound to believe any point to be decreed by the Church, when
his Priest or Ghostly Father assures him it is so? Whether his Ghostly Father
may not Err in telling him so, and whether any man can be obliged under pain of
damnation, to believe an Error? Whether he be bound to believe such a thing
defined, when a number of Priests, perhaps Ten or Twenty tell him it is so? And
what assurance he can have, that they neither Err, nor deceive him in this
matter? Why Implicit Faith in Christ, or the Scriptures should not suffice for
a man's Salvation, as well as implicit Faith in the Church? Whether when you
say, Whatsoever the Church proposes, you mean all that ever she proposed, or
that only which she now proposes; and whether she now proposes all that ever
she did propose? Whether all the Books of Canonical Scripture were sufficiently
declared to the Church to be so, and proposed as such by the Apostles? And if
not, from whom the Church had this declaration afterward? If so, whether all
men ever since the Apostles time, were bound under pain of damnation to believe
the Epistle of S. James, and the Epistle to the Hebrews to be Canonical; at
least, not to disbelieve it, and believe the contrary? Lastly, why it is not
sufficient for any man's Salvation to use the best means he can to inform his
Conscience, and to follow the direction of it? To all these demands when you
have given fair and ingenious answers, you shall hear further from me.

55. Ad. 20.] At the first entrance into this Parag. from our own Doctrine,
That the Church cannot Err in Points necessary, it is concluded if we are wise,
we must forsake it in nothing, least we should forsake it in something
necessary. To which I answer, First, that the supposition as you understand it,
is falsely imposed upon us, and as we understand it will do you no service. For
when we say, that there shall be a Church always, somewhere or other, unerring
in Fundamentals, our meaning is but this, that there shall be always a Church,
to the very being whereof it is repugnant that it should Err in Fundamentals;
for if it should do so, it would want the very essence of a Church, and
therefore cease to be a Church. But we never annexed this privilege to any one
Church of any one Denomination, as the Greek or the Roman Church: which if we
had done, and set up some settled certain Society of Christians, distinguishable
from all others by adhering to such a Bishop for our Guide in Fundamentals,
then indeed, and then only might you with some color, though with no
certainty, have concluded that we could not in Wisdom, forsake this Church in
any point, for fear of forsaking it in a necessary point. But now that we say
not this of any one determinate Church, which alone can perform the Office of
Guide or Director, but indefinitely of the Church, meaning no more but this,
That there shall be always in some place or other, some Church that Errs not
in Fundamentals; will you conclude from hence, that we cannot in Wisdom forsake
this or that, the Roman or the Greek Church, for fear of Erring in Fundamentals?

56. Yea, but you may say (for I will make the best I can of all your
Arguments,) That this Church thus unerring in Fundamentals, when Luther arose,
was by our confession the Roman; and therefore we ought not in Wisdom to have
departed from it in any thing. I answer: First, that we confess no such thing,
that the Church of Rome was then this Church, but only a Part of it, and that
the most corrupted and most incorrigible. Secondly, that if by adhering to the
Church, we could have been thus far secured, this Argument had some show of
reason. But seeing we are not warranted thus much by any privilege of that
Church, that she cannot Err Fundamentally, but only from Scripture, which
assures us that she does Err very heinously, collect our hope, that the Truths
she retains and the practice of them, may prove an Antidote to her, against the
Errors which she maintains in such Persons, as in simplicity of Heart follow
this Absalom; we should then do against the light of our Conscience, and so sin
damnably if we should not abandon the profession of her Errors though not
Fundamental. Neither can we thus conclude, we may safely hold with the Church
of Rome in all her points, for she cannot Err damnably; For this is false, she
may, though perhaps she does not: But rather thus, These points of
Christianity, which have in them the nature of Antidotes against the Poison of
all Sins and Errors, the Church of Rome, though otherwise much corrupted, still
retains; therefore we hope she Errs not Fundamentally, but still remains a Part
of the Church. But this can be no warrant to us to think with her in all
things: seeing the very same Scripture, which puts us in hope she Errs not
Fundamentally, assures us that in many things, and those of great moment she
Errs very greviously. And these Errors though to them that believe them, we
hope they will not be pernicious, yet the professing of them against
Conscience, could not but bring us to certain damnation. As for the fear of
departing from some Fundamental Truths withal, while we depart from her Errors,
Happily it might work upon us, if adhering to her might secure us from it, and
if nothing else could: But both these are false. For first, adhering to her in
all things cannot secure us from erring in Fundamentals: Because though de
facto we hope she does not Err, yet we know no privileges she has, but she may
Err in them her self: and therefore we had need have better security hereof
than her bare Authority. Then secondly, without dependence on her at all, we
may be secured that we do not Err Fundamentally; I mean by believing all those
things plainly set down in Scripture, wherein all things necessary, and most
things profitable are plainly delivered. Suppose I were Traveling to London,
and knew two ways thither, the one very safe and convenient, the other very
inconvenient, and dangerous, but yet a way to London: and that I overtook a
Passenger on the way, who himself believed, and would fain persuade me, there
was no other way but the worse, and would persuade me to accompany him in it,
because I confessed his way, though very inconvenient, yet a way; so that going
that way we could not fail of our Journies end, by the consent of both Parties:
but he believed, my way to be none at all; and therefore I might justly fear,
lest out of a desire of leaving the worst way, I left the true, and the only
way: If now I should not be more secure upon my own knowledge, than frighted by
this fallacity, would you not beg me for a Fool? Just so might you think of us,
if we would be frighted out of our own knowledge by this bugbear. For the only
and the main reason why we believe you not to Err in Fundamentals, is your
holding the Doctrines of Faith in Christ and Repentance: which knowing we hold
as well as you, notwithstanding our departure from you, we must needs know that
we not Err in Fundamentals, as well as we know that you do not Err in some
Fundamentals, and therefore cannot possibly fear the contrary. Yet let us be
more liberal to you, and grant that which can never be proved, that God had
said in plain terms, The Church of Rome shall never destroy the Foundation, but
withal had said, that it might and would lay much Hay and Stubble upon it; That
you should never hold any Error destructive of Salvation, but yet many that
were prejudicial to Edification: I demand, might we have dispensed with our
selves in the believing and professing these Errors in regard of the smalness
of them? Or had it not been a damnable sin to do so, though the Errors in
themselves were not damnable? Had we not had as plain Direction to depart from
you in some things profitable, as to adhere to you in things necessary? In the
beginning of your Book, when it was for your purpose to have it so, the
greatness or smalness of the matter was not considerable, the Evidence of the
Revelation was all in all. But here we must err with you in small things, for
fear of loosing your direction in greater: and for fear of departing too far
from you, not go from you at all, even where we see plainly that you have
departed from the Truth.

57. Beyond all this, I say, that this which you say in wisdom we are to do, is
not only unlawful, but, if we will proceed according to reason, impossible. I
mean to adhere to you in all things, having no other ground for it, but because
you are (as we will now suppose) Infallible in some things, that is, in
Fundamentals. For, whether by skill in Architecture a large structure may be
supported by a narrow foundation, I know not; but sure I am, in reason, no
conclusion can be larger than the Principles on which it is founded. And
therefore if I consider what I do, and be persuaded, that your infallibility,
is but limited, and particular, and partial, my adherence upon this ground,
cannot possibly be Absolute and Universal and Total. I am confident, that
should I meet with such a man amongst you (as I am well assured there be many)
that would grant your Church Infallible only in Fundamentals, which what they
are he knows not, and therefore upon this only reason adheres to you in all
things: I say that I am confident, that it may be demonstrated, that such a man
adheres to you, with a fiducial and certain assent in nothing. To make this
clear (because at the first hearing it may seem strange) give me leave, good
Sir, to suppose you the man, and to propose to you a few questions, and to give
for you such answers to them, as upon this ground you must of necessity give,
were you present with me. First, supposing you hold your Church Infallible in
Fundamentals, obnoxious to Error in other things, and that you know not what
points are Fundamental, I demand, C. Why do you believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation? K. because the Church has taught it, which is Infallible.
C. What? Infallible in all things, or only in Fundamentals? K. in Fundamentals
only. C. Then in other points she may err? K. she may. C. and do you know what
Points are Fundamental, what not? K. No, and therefore I believe her in all
things, least I should disbelieve her in fundamentals. C. How know you then,
whether this be a fundamental point or no? K. I know not. C. It may be then
(for ought you know) an unfundamental point? K. yes, it may be so. C. And in
these you said the Church may err? K. yes I did so. C. Then possibly it may err
in this? K. It may do so. C. Then what certainty have you, that it does not err
in it? K. None at all, but upon this supposition, that this is a Fundamental.
C. And this supposition you are uncertain of? K. Yes, I told you so before. C.
And therefore, you can have no certainty of that, which depends upon this
uncertainty, saving only a suppositive certainty, if it be a Fundamental truth,
which is in plain English to say, you are certain it is true, if it be both
true and necessary. Verily Sir, if you have no better Faith than this, you are
no Catholic. K. good words I pray! I am so, and God willing will be so. C. You
mean, in outward profession and practice, but in belief you are not, no more
than a Protestant is a Catholic. For every Protestant yields such a kind of
assent to all the proposals of the Church, for surely they believe them true,
if they be Fundamental Truths. And therefore you must either believe the Church
Infallible in all her proposals, be they foundations, or be they
superstructions, or else you must believe all Fundamental which she proposes,
or else you are no Catholic. K. But I have been taught, that seeing I believed
the Church Infallible in points necessary, in wisdom I was to believe her in
every thing. C. That was a pretty plausible inducement, to bring you hither,
but now you are here, you must go farther, and believe her Infallible in all
things, or else you were as good go back again, which will be a great
disparagement to you, and draw upon you both the bitter and implacable hatred
of our part, and even with your own, the imputation of rashness and levity. You
see, I hope, by this time, that though a man did believe your Church Infallible
in Fundamentals, yet he has no reason to do you the courtesy, of believing all
her proposals; nay if he be ignorant what these Fundamentals are, he has no
certain ground to believe her, upon her Authority in any thing. And whereas you
say, it can be no imprudence to err with the Church; I say, it may be very
great imprudence, if the question be, Whether we should err with the present
Church, or hold true with God Almighty.

60. Whereas you add, That that visible Church which cannot err in Fundamental,
propounds all her definitions without distinction to be believed under
Anathema's: Ans. Again you beg the question, supposing untruly, that there is,
any that Visible Church, I mean any Visible Church of one Denomination, which
cannot err in points Fundamental. Secondly, proposing definitions to be
believed under Anathema's, is no good argument, that the Propounders conceive
themselves infallible; but only, that they conceive the Doctrine they condemn
is evidently damnable. A plain proof hereof is this, that particular Councils,
nay particular men, have been very liberal of their Anathema's, which yet were
never conceived infallible, either by others or themselves. If any man should
now deny Christ to be the Savior of the world, or deny the Resurrection, I
should make no great scruple of Anathematizing his Doctrine, and yet am very
far from dreaming of Infallibility.

62. The effect of the next Argument is this, I cannot without grievous sin
disobey the Church, unless I know she commands those things which are not in
her power to command: and how far this power extends, none can better inform me
than the Church. Therefore I am to obey, so far as the Church requires my
obedience. I Answer, First, That neither has the Catholic Church, but only a
corrupt part of it declared her self, nor required our obedience, in the points
contested among us. This therefore is falsely, and vainly supposed here by you,
being one of the greatest questions amongst us. Then Secondly, That God can
better inform us, what are the limits of the Churches power, than the Church
her self, that is, than the Roman Clergy, who being men subject to the same
passions with other men, why they should be thought the best Judges in their
own cause, I do not well understand! But yet we oppose against them, no human
decisive Judges, not any Sect or Person, but only God and his Word. And
therefore it is in vain to say, That in following her, you shall be sooner
excused, than in following any Sect or Man applying Scriptures against her
Doctrine: In as much as we never went about to arrogate to our selves that
Infallibility or absolute Authority, which we take away from you. But if you
would have spoken to the purpose, you should have said, that in following her
you should sooner have been excused, than in cleaving to the Scripture, and to
God himself.

63. Whereas you say, The fearful examples of innumerable persons, who
forsaking the Church, upon pretense of her errors, have failed even in
fundamental points, ought to deter all Christians from opposing her in any one
doctrine or practice; This is, just as if you should say, diverse men have
fallen into Scylla, with going too far from Charybdis, be sure therefore ye
keep close to Charybdis: diverse leaving prodigality, have fallen into
covetousness, therefore be you constant to prodigality; many have fallen from
worshipping God perversely and foolishly, not to worship him at all, from
worshipping many Gods, to worship none; this therefore ought to deter men, from
leaving Superstition or Idolatry, for fear of falling into Atheism and Impiety.
This is your counsel and Sophistry: but God says clean contrary; Take heed you
swerve not, either to the right hand or to the left: you must not do evil that
good may come thereon; therefore neither that you may avoid a greater evil, you
must not be obstinate in a certain error, for fear of an uncertain. What if
some, forsaking the Church of Rome, have forsaken Fundamental Truths? Was this
because they forsook the Church of Rome? No sure, this is non causa pro causa:
for else all that have forsaken that Church should have done so, which we say
they have not. But because they went too far from her, the golden mean, the
narrow way is hard to be found, and hard to be kept; hard, but not impossible:
hard, but yet you must not please your self out of it, though you err on the
right hand, though you offend on the milder part, for this is the only way that
leads to life, and few there be that find it. It is true, if we said, there
were no danger in being of the Roman Church, and there were danger in leaving
it, it were madness to persuade any man to leave it. But we protest and
proclaim the contrary, and that we have very little hope of their Salvation,
who either out of negligence in seeking the truth, or unwillingness to find it,
live and die in the errors and impieties of that Church: and therefore cannot
but conceive those fears to be most foolish and ridiculous, which persuade men
to be constant in one way to hell, lest happily if they leave it, they should
fall into another.

64. Obj. Some Protestants, pretending to reform the Church, are come to affirm
that she perished for many Ages, which others cannot deny to be a Fundamental
Error against the Article of the Creed, I believe the Catholic Church, and
affirm the Donatists erred Fundamentally in confining it to Africa.

To this I Answer, First, that the error of the Donatists was not, that they
held it possible that some, or many, or most parts of Christendom, might fall
away from Christianity, and that the Church may loose much of her amplitude,
and be contracted to a narrow compass in comparison of her former extent; which
is proved not only possible but certain, by irrefragable experience. For who
knows not, that Gentilism, and Mahumetism, man's wickedness deserving it, and
Gods providence permitting it, have prevailed to the utter extirpation of
Christianity, upon far the greater part of the world? And S. Austin when he was
out of the heat of Disputation, confesses the Militant Church to be like the
Moon, sometimes increasing, and sometimes decreasing. This therefore was no
error in the Donatists, that they held it possible, that the Church, from a
larger extent, might be contradicted to a lesser: or that they held it possible
to be reduced to Africa; (For why not to Africa then, as well as within these
few ages, you pretend it was to Europe?) But their error was, that they held de
facto, this was done when they had no just ground or reason to do so; and so
upon a vain pretense which they could not justify, separated themselves from
the communion of all other parts of the Church: and that they required it as a
necessary condition to make a man a member of the Church, that he should be of
their Communion, and divide himself from all other Communions from which they
were divided: which was a condition both unnecessary and unlawful to be
required, and therefore the exacting of it was directly opposite to the
Churches Catholicism; in the very same nature with their Errors who required
Circumcision, and the keeping of the Law of Moses as necessary to salvation.
For whosoever requires harder or heavier conditions of men, than God requires
of them, he it is that is properly an Enemy of the Churches Universality, by
hindering either Men or Countries from adjoining themselves to it; which, were
it not for these unnecessary and therefore unlawful conditions, in probability
would have made them members of it. And seeing the present Church of Rome
persuades men they were as good (for any hope of Salvation they have) not to be
Christians as not to be Roman Catholics, believe nothing at all, as not to
believe all which they impose upon them: Be absolutely out of the Churches
Communion, as be out of their Communion, or be in any other, whether they be
not guilty of the same crime, with the Donatists and those Zelots of the
Mosaical Law, I leave it to the judgment of those that understand reason! This
is sufficient to show the vanity of this Argument. But I add moreover, that you
neither have named those Protestants who held the Church to have perished for
many ages; who perhaps held not the destruction but the corruption of the
Church; not that the true Church, but that the pure Church perished: or rather
that the Church perished not from its life and existence, but from its purity
and integrity, or perhaps from its splendour and visibility. Neither have you
proved by any one reason, but only affirmed it, to be a fundamental Error, to
hold that the Church Militant may possibly be driven out of the world, and
abolished for a time from the face of the earth.

69. Ad. 23. In all these Texts of Scripture, which are here alleged in this
last Section of this Chapter, or in any one of them, or in any other, does God
say clearly and plainly, The Bishop of Rome and that Society of Christians
which adheres to him shall be ever the infallible guide of Faith? You will
confess, I presume, he does not, and will pretend, it was not necessary. Yet if
the King should tell us the Lord Keeper should judge such and such causes, but
should either not tell us at all, or tell us but doubtfully who should be
Lord Keeper, should we be any thing the nearer for him to an end of
contentions? Nay rather would not the dissentions about the Person who it is,
increase contentions, rather than end them? Just so it would have been, if God
had appointed a Church to be Judge of Controversies, and had not told us which
was that Church. Seeing therefore God does nothing in vain, and seeing it had
been in vain, to appoint a Judge of Controversies, and not to tell us plainly
who it is, and seeing lastly, he has not told us plainly, no not at all who it
is, is it not evident he has appointed none? Obj. But (you will say perhaps)
if it be granted once, that some Church of one denomination, is the Infallible
guide of Faith, it will be no difficult thing to prove, that yours is the
Church, seeing no other Church pretends to be so. Ans. Yes, the Primitive and
the Apostolic Church pretends to be so. That assures us, that the spirit was
promised, and given to them, to lead them into all saving truth, that they
might lead others. Obj. But that Church is not now in the world, and how then
can it pretend to be the guide of Faith? Ans. It is now in the world
sufficiently, to be our guide: not by the persons of those men that were
members of it, but by their Writings which do plainly teach us, what truth they
were led into, and so lead us into the same truth. Obj. But these Writings,
were the Writings of some particular men, and not of the Church of those times:
how then does that Church guide us by these Writings? Now these places show
that a Church is to be our guide, therefore they cannot be so avoided. Ans. If
you regard the conception and production of these Writings, they were the
Writings of particular men: But if you regard the reception, and approbation of
them, they may be well called the Writings of the Church, as having the
attestation of the Church, to have been written by those that were inspired,
and directed by God. As a Statute, though penned by some one man, yet being
ratified by the Parliament, is called the Act, not of that man, but of the
Parliament. Obj. But the words seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church,
the present Church of every Age, is Universally infallible. Ans. For my part, I
know I am as willing and desirous, that the Bishop or Church of Rome should be
Infallible, (provided I might know it) as they are to be so esteemed. But he
that would not be deceived must take heed, that he take not his desire that a
thing should be so, for a reason that it is so. For if you look upon Scripture,
through such Spectacles as these, they will appear to you, of what color
pleases your fancies best: and will seem to say, not what they do say, but what
you would have them. As some say the Manna, wherewith the Israelites were fed
in the Wilderness, had in every man's mouth, that very taste which was most
agreeable to his palate. For my part I profess, I have considered them a
thousand times, and have looked upon them (as they say,) on both sides, and yet
to me they seem to say no such matter.

70. Not the First, Mat. 16.18.) For the Church may err, and yet the gates of
Hell not prevail against her. It may err, and yet continue still a true Church,
and bring forth Children unto God, and send Souls to Heaven. And therefore this
can do you no service, without the plain begging of the point in Question. Viz.
That every Error is one of the gates of Hell. Which we absolutely deny, and
therefore, you are not to suppose, but to prove it. Neither is our denial
without reason. For seeing you do, and must grant, that a particular Church may
hold some error, and yet be still a true member of the Church: why may not the
Universal Church, hold the same error, and yet remain the true Universal?

71. Not the Second or Third. ( John 14.16, 17. John 16.13.) For the spirit of
Truth, may be with a Man, or a Church for ever, and teach him all Truth: And
yet he may fall into some error, if this, all, be not simply all, but all of
some kind.

Secondly, he may fall into some Error, even contrary to the truth which is
taught him, if it be taught him only sufficiently, and not irresistibly, so
that he may learn it if he will, not so that he must and shall, whether he will
or no. Now who can assertain me, that the Spirits teaching is not of this
nature? Or how can you possibly reconcile it, with your Doctrine of free will
in believing, if it be not of this nature? Besides, the word in the Original is
(...), which signifies, to be a guide and director only, not to compel or
necessitate. Who knows not, that a guide may set you in the right way, and you
may either negligently mistake, or willingly leave it? And to what purpose does
God conplain so often, and so earnestly of some, that had eyes to see and would
not see, that stopped their Ears, and closed their Eyes, lest they should hear
and see? Of others that would not understand, lest they should do good: that
the Light shined, and the Darkness comprehended it not: That he came unto his
own, and his own received him not: That light came into the World, and Men
loved Darkness more than Light: To what purpose should he wonder, so few
believed his report, and that to so few his Arm was revealed: And that when he
comes, he should find no Faith upon Earth; If his outward teaching were not of
this nature, that it might be followed, and might be resisted? And if it be,
then God may teach, and the Church not learn: God may lead, and the Church be
refractory and not follow. And indeed, who can doubt, that has not his Eyes
veiled with prejudice, that God has taught the Church of Rome plain enough in
the Epistle to the Corinthians, that all things in the Church are to be done
for edification, and that, in any public Prayers, or Thanks-givings, or Hymns,
or Lessons of instruction, to use a Language, which the assistants generally
understand not, is not for edification? Though the Church of Rome will not
learn this, for fear of confessing an Error, and so overthrowing her Authority,
yet the time will come, when it shall appear, that not only by scripture, they
were taught this sufficiently, and commanded to believe, but by reason and
common sense. And so for the Communion, in both kinds, who can deny but they
are taught it by our Savior John 6. in these Words, according to most of your
own expositions, Unless you Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his
Blood, you have no Life in you. (If our Savior speak there of the Sacrament,
as to them he does, because they conceive he does so) Though they may pretend,
that receiving in one kind, they receive the Blood together with the Body, yet
they can with no Face pretend that they drink it: And so obey not our Saviors
injunction according to the letter, which yet they profess it literally, always
to be obeyed, unless some impiety, or some absurdity force us to the contrary:
and they are not yet arrived to that impudence to pretend, that either there is
impiety or absurdity in receiving the Communion in both kinds. This therefore
they if not others, are plainly taught by our Savior in this place. But by S.
Paul all without exception, when he says, Let a man examine himself, and so let
him Eat of this Bread and Drink of this Chalice. This (a Man) that is to
examine himself, is every man, that can do it: as is confessed on all hands.
And therefore it is all one, as if he had said, let every man examine himself,
and so let him Eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup. They which acknowledge
Saint Paul's Epistes, and Saint John's Gospel to be the Word of God, one would
think should not deny, but that they are taught these two Doctrines plain
enough. Yet we see they neither do, nor will learn them. I conclude therefore,
that the Spirit may very well teach the Church, and yet the Church fall into
and continue in Error, by not regarding what she is taught by the Spirit.

72. But all this I have spoken upon a supposition only, and showed unto you,
that though these promises, had been made unto the present Church of every Age
(I might have said though they had been to the Church of Rome by name,) yet no
certainty of her Universal Infallibility could be built upon them. But the
plain truth is, that these Promises are vainly arrogated by you, and were never
made to you, but to the Apostles only. I pray deal ingenuously and tell me, who
were they of whom our Savior says, These things have I spoken unto you, being
present with you. c. 14.25. But the comforter, shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have told you v. 26? Who are
they to whom he says, I go away and come again unto you; and I have told you
before it come to pass: v. 28.29. You have been with me from the beginning: c.
15. v. 27? And again, these things I have told you, that when the time shall
come, you may remember that I told you of them: and these things I said not to
you at the beginning, because I was with you, c. 16.4. And because I said these
things unto you, sorrow has filled your Hearts, v. 6? Lastly, who are they of
whom he says, v. 12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them now? Do not all these circumstances appropriate this whole discourse
of our Savior to his Disciples, that were then with him, and consequently,
restrain the Promises of the Spirit of truth, which was to lead them into all
truth, to their Persons only? And seeing it is so, is it not an impertinent
arrogance and presumption, for you to lay claim unto them, in the behalf of
your Church? Had Christ been present with your Church? Did the Comforter bring
these things to the Remembrance of your Church, which Christ had before taught
and she had forgotten? Was Christ then departing from your Church? And did he
tell of his departure before it came to pass? Was your Church with him from the
beginning? Was your Church filled with sorrow, upon the mentioning of Christ's
departure? Or lastly, did he, or could he have said to your Church, which then
was not extant, I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now? as he speaks in the 13. verse. immediately before the words by you quoted.
And then goes on, Howbeit when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you
into all Truth. Is it not the same You he speaks to, in the 13. verse. and that
he speaks to in the 14? And is it not apparent to any one that has but half an
Eye, that in the 13. he speaks only to them that then were with him? Besides in
the very Text by you alleged, there are things promised, which your Church
cannot with any modesty pretend to. For there it is said, the Spirit of Truth,
not only will guide you into all Truth, but also will show you things to come.
Now your Church (for ought I could ever understand) does not so much as pretend
to the Spirit of Prophecy, and knowledge of future events: And therefore has
as little cause to pretend to the former promise, of being led by the Spirit
into all truth. And this is the Reason, why both You in this place, and
generally, your writers of Controversies, when they entreat of this Argument,
cite this Text perpetually by halfs, there being in the latter part of it, a
clear, and convincing Demonstration, that you have nothing to do with the
former. Unless you will say, which which is most ridiculous, that when our
Savior said, He will teach you, etc. and he will show you, etc. He meant one
You in the former clause, and another You in the latter.

73. Obj. But this is to confine Gods Spirit to the Apostles only, or to the
Disciples, that then were present with him: which is directly contrary to many
places of Scripture. Ans. I confess, that to confine the Spirit of God to those
that were then present with Christ is against Scripture. But I hope it is easy
to conceive a difference, between confining the Spirit of God to them: and
confining the Promises made in this place to them. God may do many things which
he does not Promise at all: much more, which he does not promise in such or
such a place.

74. Obj. But it is promised in the 14. Chap. that this Spirit shall abide with
them for ever: Now they in their persons were not to abide for ever; and
therefore the Spirit could not abide with them, in their Persons for ever,
seeing the coexistence of two things, supposes of necessity, the existence of
either. Therefore the promise was not made to them only in their Persons, but
by them to the Church, which was to abide for ever. Ans. Your Conclusion is,
not to them only, but your Reason concludes, either nothing at all, or that
this Promise of abiding with them for ever, was not made to their Persons at
all; or if it were, that it was not performed. Or if you will not say (as I
hope you will not) that it was not performed, nor that it was not made to their
Persons at all; then must you grant, that the Word for ever, is here used in a
sense restrained, and accommodated to the subject here entreated of; and that
it signifies, not Eternally, without end of time, but perpetually without
interruption, for the time of their lives. So that the force, and sense of the
Words is, that they should never want the Spirits assistance, in the
performance of their function: And that the Spirit would not (as Chirst was to
do,) stay with them for a time, and afterward leave them, but would abide with
them, if they kept their station, unto the very end of their lives, which is
man's for ever. Neither is this use of the word, for ever, any thing strange,
either in our ordinary speech, wherein we use to say, this is mine for ever,
this shall be yours for ever, without ever dreaming of the Eternity, either of
the thing or Persons. And then in Scripture, it not only will bear, but
requires this sense very frequently, as Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy. 15.17. his Master
shall bore his Ear through with an Awl, and he shall serve him for ever. Psalm.
52.9. I will praise thee for ever. Psalm. 61.4. I will abide in thy Tahernacle
for ever. Psalm. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as mine Heritage for
ever: and lastly in the Epistle to Philemon, He therefore departed from thee
for a time, that thou should receive him for ever.

75. And thus, I presume, I have showed sufficiently, that this for ever,
hinders not, but that the promise may be appropriated to the Apostles, as by
many other circumstances I have evinced it must be. But what now, if the place
produced by you, as a main pillar of your Churches Infallibility, prove upon
Trial, an Engine to batter and overthrow it, at least, (which is all one to my
purpose) to take away all possibility of our assurance of it? This will seem
strange news to you at first hearing, and not far from a prodigy. And I
confess, as you here in this place, and generally all your Writers of
Controversy, by whom this Text is urged, order the matter, it is very much
disabled, to do any service against you in this question. For with a bold
sacriledg, and horrible impiety, somewhat like Procrustes his cruelty, you
perpetually cut off the Head and Foot, the beginning and end of it; and
presenting to your confidents, who usually read no more of the Bible, than is
alleged by you, only these words, I will ask my Father, and he shall give you
another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
Truth, conceal in the mean time, the words before, and the words after; that
so, the promise of Gods Spirit, may seem to be absolute, whereas it is indeed
most clearly and expressly conditional: being both in the words before,
restrained to those only, that love God and keep his commandments: and in the
words after, flatly denied to all, whom the Scriptures style by the name of the
World, that is, as the very Antithesis give us plainly to understand, to all
wicked and worldly men. Behold the place entire, as it is set down in your own
Bible. If ye love me keep my Commandments, and I will ask my Father, and he
shall give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
spirit of the Truth, whom the. World cannot receive. Now from the place there
restored and vindicated from your mutilation, thus I argue against your
pretense. We can have no certainty of the Infallibility of your Church, but
upon this suposition, that your Popes are infallible in confirming the Decrees
of General Councils: we can have no certainty hereof, but upon this
supposition, that the Spirit of truth is promised to him, for his direction in
this work. And of this again we can have no certainty, but upon supposal, that
he performs the condition, whereunto the promise of the Spirit of truth is
expressly limited, viz. That he love God and keep his Commandments; and of this
finally, not knowing the Popes Heart, we can have no certainty at all;
therefore from the first to the last, we can have no certainty at all of your
Churches Infallibibility. This is my first Argument: From this place another
follows, which will charge you as home as the former. If many of the Roman See,
were such men as could not receive the Spirit of Truth, even men of the World,
that is Worldly, Wicked, Carnal, Diabolical men, then the Spirit of Truth, is
not here promised, but flatly denied them: and consequently we can have no
certainty, neither of the Decrees of Councils, which these Popes confirm, nor
of the Churches Infallibility, which is guided by these Decrees: But many of
the Roman See, even by the confession of the most zealous Defenders of it, were
such men: therefore the Spirit of truth is not here promised but denied them,
and consequently we can have no certainty, neither of the Decrees which they
confirm, nor of the Churches Infallibility, which guides her self by these
Decrees.

76. You may take as much time as you think fit, to answer these Arguments. In
the mean while I proceed to the consideration of the next Text alleged for
this purpose by you: out of S. Paul 1. Epistle to Timothy: cap. 3.15. where he
says, as you say the Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, But the truth
is you are somewhat to bold with S. Paul. For he says not in formal terms, what
you make him say, the Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, neither is it
certain that he means so: for it is neither impessible nor improbable, that the
words the Pillar and Gonnd of truth, may have reference not to the Church, but
to Timothy, the sense of the place that thou may know how to behave thy
self, as a Pillar and ground of truth, in the Church of God, which is the house
of the living God, which exposition offers no violence at all to the words, but
only supposes an Ellipsis of the Particle (...), in the Greek very ordinary.
Neither wants it some likelihood, that S. Paul comparing the Church to a House,
should here exhort Timothy, to carry himself, as a Pillar in that House should
do, according as he had given other Principal men in the Church, the name of
Pillars; rather than, having called the Church a House, to call it presently a
Pillar; which may seem somewhat heterogeneous. Yet if you will needs have S.
Paul refer this not to Timothy but the Church, I will not contend about it any
farther, than to say, possibly it may be otherwise. But then secondly, I am to
put you in mind, that the Church which S. Paul here speaks of, was that in
which Timothy conversed, and that was a Particular Church, and not the Roman;
and such you will not have to be Universally Infallible.

77. Thirdly, if we grant you out of Courtesy (for nothing can enforce us to
it) that he both speaks of the Universal Church, and says this of it, then I am
to remember you, that many Attributes in Scripture are not Notes of Performance
but of Duty, and teach us not what the thing or Person is of necessity, but
what it should be. Ye are the Salt of the Earth, said our Savior to his
Disciples: not that this quality was inseparable from their Persons, but
because it was their Office to be so. For if they must have been so of
necessity, and could not have been otherwise, in vain had he put them in fear
of that which follows, If the Salt has lost his savor, wherewith shall it be
Salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast forth, and to be
trodden under Foot. So the Church may be by Duty, the Pillar and Ground, that
is, the Teacher of Truth, of all truth, not only necessary but profitable to
Salvation; and yet she may neglect and violate this Duty, and be in fact, the
teacher of some Error.

78. Fourthly and lastly, if we deal most liberally with you, and grant that
the Apostle here speaks of the Catholic Church, calls it the Pillar and ground
of Truth, and that not only because it should, but because it always shall and
will be so, yet after all this, you have done nothing; your Bridge is too
short, to bring you to the Bank where you would be, unless you can show that by
truth here, is certainly meant, not only all necessary to Salvation, but all
that is profitable, absolutely and simply All. For that the true Church always
shall be the maintainer and teacher of all necessary truth, you know we grant
and must grant, for it is of the essence of the Church to be so, and any
company of Men were no more a Church without it, than any thing can be a Man,
and not be reasonable. But as a Man may be still a Man, though he want a Hand
or an Eye, which yet are profitable parts, so the Church may be still a Church,
though it be defective in some profitable truth. And as a Man may be a Man,
that has some Boyls and Botches on his Body, so the Church may be the Church,
though it have many corruptions both in Doctrine and practice.

79. And thus you see we are at liberty from the former places; having showed
that the sense of them, either must or may be such as will do your Cause no
service. But the last you suppose, will be a Gordian knot, and ties us fast
enough: The words are, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, etc. to the consummation of Saints, to the work of the Ministry, etc.
Until we all meet into the Unity of Faith, etc. That we be not hereafter
Children, wavering and carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine. Out of
which words, this is the only argument which you collect, or I can collect for
you. There is no means to conserve unity of Faith, against every wind of
Doctrine, unless it be a Church universally Infallible. But it is impious to
say there is no means to conserve unity of Faith against every wind of
Doctrine: Therefore there must be a Church universally Infallible. Whereunto I
answer, that your major is so far from being confirmed, that it is plainly
confuted, by the place alleged. For that tells us of another means for this
purpose, to wit, the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and
Doctors, which Christ gave upon his Ascension, and that their consummating the
Saints, doing the work of the Ministry, and Edifying the body of Christ, was
the means to bring those (which are there spoken of, be they who they will,) to
the unity of Faith, and to perfection in Christ, that they might not be
wavering, and carried about, with every wind of false Doctrine. Now the
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Doctors, are not the
present Church; therefore the Church is not the only means for this end, nor
that which is here spoken of.

80. Peradventure by, he gave, you conceive, is to be understood, he promised
that he would give unto the worlds end. But what reason have you for this
conceit? Can you show that the word, (...), has this signification in other
places, and that it must have it in this place? Or will not this interpretation
drive you presently to this blasphemous absurdity, that God has not performed
his promise? Unless you will say, which for shame I think you will not, that
you have now, and in all Ages since Christ have had Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists: for as for Pastors, and Doctors alone, they will not serve the
turn. For if God promised to give all these, then you must say he has given
all, or else that he has broke his promise. Neither may you pretend, that the
Pastors and Doctors were the same with the Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists, and therefore having Pastors and Doctors, you have all. For it is
apparent, that by these names, are denoted several O^ders of men, clearly
distinguished and diversified by the Original Text; but much more plainly by
your own Translations, for so you read it, some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors: and yet more
plainly in the parallel place, 1 Cor. 12. to which we are referred by your
Vulgar Translation, God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, therefore this subterfuge is stopped
against you. Obj. But how can they, which died in the first Age, keep us in
Unity, and guard us from Error, that live now, perhaps in the last? This seems
to be all one, as if a Man should say, that Alexander, or Julius Caesar should
quiet a mutiny in the King of Spains Army. Ans. I hope you will grant, that
Hippocrates, and Galen, and Euclid, and Aristotle, and Salust, and Caesar, and
Livie, were dead many Ages since; and yet that we are now preserved from Error
by them, in a great part of Physic, of Geometry, of Logic, of the Roman
story. But what if these men had writ by divine Inspiration, and writ complete
bodies of the Sciences they professed, and writ them plainly and perspicuously?
You would then have granted, I believe, that their works had been sufficient to
keep us from error, and from dissension in these matters. And why then should
it be incongruous to say, that the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and
Pastors, and Doctors, which Christ gave upon his Ascension, by their writings,
which some of them writ but all approved, are even now sufficient means, to
conserve us in Unity of Faith, and guard us from Error? Especially seeing these
writings are, by the confession of all parts, true and divine, and as we
pretend and are ready to prove, contain a plain and perfect Rule of Faith; and
as the Perron.
Chiefest of you acknowledge, contain immediately, all the Principal and
Fundamental points of Christianity, referring us to the Church and Tradition
only for some minute particularities. But tell me I pray, the Bishops that
composed the Decrees of the Council of Trent, and the Pope that confirmed them,
are they means to conserve you in Unity, and keep you from Error, or are they
not? Peradventure you will say, their Decrees are, but not their Persons: but
you will not deny I hope, that you owe your unity, and freedom from Error, to
the Persons that made these Decrees: neither will you deny, that the writings
which they have left behind them, are sufficient for this purpose. And why may
not then the Apostles writings be as fit for such a purpose, as the Decrees of
your Doctors? Surely their intent in writing was to conserve us in unity of
Faith, and to keep us from Error, and we are sure God spoke in them; but your
Doctors from whence they are, we are not so certain. Was the Holy Ghost then
unwilling, or unable to direct them so, that their writings should be fit and
sufficient to attain that end they aimed at in writing? For if he were both
able and willing to do so, then certainly he did do so. And then their writings
may be very sufficient means, if we would use them as we should do, to preserve
us in unity, in all necessary points of Faith, and to guard us from all
pernicious Error.

81. If yet you be not satisfied, but will still pretend that, all these words
by you cited, seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church is Universally
infallible, without which Unity of Faith could not be conserved against every
wind of Doctrine: I Ans. That to you, which will not understand, that there can
be any means to conserve the unity of Faith, but only that which conserves your
authority over the Faithful, it is no marvel that these words seem to prove,
that the Church, nay that your Church is universally Infallible. But we that
have no such end, no such desires, but are willing to leave all men to their
liberty, provided they will not improve it to a Tyranny over others, we find it
no difficulty to discern between dedit and promisit, he gave at his Ascension,
and he promised to the Worlds end. Besides, though you whom it concerns, may
happily flatter your selves, that you have not only Pastors, and Doctors, but
Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists, and those distinct from the former
still in your Church; yet we that are disinteressed persons, cannot but smile
at these strange imaginations. Lastly, though you are apt to think your selves
such necessary instruments for all good purposes, and that nothing can be well
done unless you do it; that no unity or constancy in Religion can be
maintained, but inevitably Christendom must fall to ruin, and confusion, unless
you support it: yet we that are indifferent and impartial, and well content,
that God should give us his own favors, by means of his own appointment, not
of our choosing, can easily collect out of these very words, that not the
Infallibility of your, or of any Church, but the Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists, etc. which Christ gave upon his Ascension, were designed by him,
for the compassing all these excellent purposes, by their preaching while they
lived, and by their writings for ever. And if they fail hereof, the Reason is
not any insufficiency or invalidity in the means, but the voluntary perverseness
of the Subjects they have to deal with: who, if they would be themselves, and
be content that others should be, in the choice of their Religion the servants
of God and not of men; if they would allow, that the way to Heaven is no
narrower now, than Christ left it, his yoke no heavier than he made it; that
the belief of no more difficulties, is required now to Salvation, than was in
the Primitive Church; that no Error is in it self destructive, and exclusive
from Salvation now, which was not then; if instead of being zealous Papists,
earnest Calvinists, rigid Lutherans, they would become themselves, and be
content that others should be plain and honest Christians; if all men would
believe the Scripture, and freeing themselves from prejudice and passion, would
sincerely endeavor to find the true sense of it, and live according to it, and
require no more of others, but to do so; nor denying their Communion to any
that do so, would so order their public service of God, that all which do so
may without scruple, or hypocrisy, or protestation against any part of it,
join with them in it: who does not see that (seeing as we suppose here, and
shall prove hereafter,) all necessary Truths, are plainly and evidently set
down in Scripture, there would of necessity be among all men, in all things
necessary, unity of Opinion? And notwithstanding any other differences that are
or could be, unity of Communion and Charity and mutual Toleration? By which
means, all Schism and Heresy, would be banished the World, and those wretched
contentions which now rend and tear in pieces, not the Coat, but the Members
and Bowels of Christ, which mutual pride and Tyranny, and cursing, and killing,
and damning, would fain make immortal, should speedily receive a most blessed
Catastrophe. But of this hereafter, when we shall come to the question of
Schism, wherein I persuade my self, that I shall plainly show, that the most
vehement accusers, are the greatest offenders, and that they are indeed at this
time, the greatest Schismatics, who make the way to Heaven narrower, the yoke
of Christ heavier, the differences of Faith greater, the conditions of
Ecclesiastical Communion harder, and stricter, than they were made at the
beginning by Christ and his Apostles: they who talk of Unity, but aim at
Tyranny, and will have peace with none, but with Slaves and Vassals. In the
mean while, though I have showed how Unity of Faith, and Unity of Charity too,
may be preserved without your Churches Infallibility, yet seeing you modestly
conclude from hence, not that your Church is, but only seems to be universally
Infallible, meaning to your self, of which you are a better judge than I:
Therefore I willingly grant your conclusion, and proceed.

86. As for your pretense, That to find the meaning of those places, you confer
diverse Texts, you consult Originals, you examine Translations, and use all the
means by Protestants appointed, I have told you before, that all this is vain
and hypocritical, if (as your manner and your doctrine is) you give not your
self liberty of judgment in the use of these means; if you make not your selves
Judges of, but only Advocates for the doctrine of your Church, refusing to see
what these means show you, if it any way make against the doctrine of your
Church, though it be as clear as the light at noon. Remove prejudice, even the
balance, and hold it even, make it indifferent to you which way you go to
heaven, so you go the true, which Religion be true so you be of it, then use
the means and pray for Gods assistance, and as sure as God is true, you shall
be lead into all necessary Truth.

88. Whereas you say, that it were great impiety to imagine that God, the lover
of Souls, has left no certain infallible means to decide both this and all
other differences arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon any
other occasion: I desire you to take heed, you commit not an impiety in making
more impieties than Gods Commandments make. Certainly God is no way obliged
either by his promise or his love to give us all things, that we may imagine
would be convenient for us, as formerly I have proved at large. It is
sufficient that he denies us nothing necessary to Salvation. Deus non deficit
in necessariis, nec redundat in superfluis: So D. Stapleton. But that the
ending of all Controversies, or having a certain means of ending them, is
necessary to Salvation, that you have often said and supposed, but never
proved, though it be the main pillar of your whole discourse. So little care
you take how slight your foundations are, so your building make a fair show.
And as little care, how you commit those faults your self, which you condem in
others. For you here charge them with great impiety, who imagine that God the
lover of Souls has left no infallible means to determine all differences
arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon any other occasion: And
yet afterward being demanded by D. Potter, why the Questions between the
Jesuits and Dominicans remain undetermined? You return him this cross
interrogatory, Who has assured you that the point wherein these learned men
differ, is a revealed Truth, or capable of definition, or is not rather by
plain Scripture indeterminable, or by any Rule of Faith? So then when you say,
it were great impiety to imagine that God has not left infallible means to
decide all differences; I may answer, It seems you do not believe your self.
For in this controversy, which is of as high consequence as any can be, you
seem to be doubtful whether there be any means to determine it. On the other
side, when you ask D. Potter, who assured him that there is any means to
determine this Controversy? I answer for him, that you have, in calling it a
great impiety to imagine that there is not some infallible means to decide this
and all other differences arising about the Interpretation of Scripture, or
upon any other occasion. For what trick you can devise to show that this
difference, between the Dominicans and Jesuits, which includes a difference
about the sense of many Texts of Scripture, and many other matters of moment,
was not included under this and all other differences, I cannot imagine. Yet if
you can find out any, thus much at least we shall gain by it, that general
speeches are not always to be understood generally, but sometimes with
exceptions and limitations.

89. But if there be any infallible means to decide all differences, I beseech
you name them. You say it is to consult and hear Gods Visible Church with
submissive acknowledgment of her Infallibility. But suppose the difference be
(as here it is) whether your Church be Infallible, what shall decide that? If
you would say (as you should do) Scripture and Reason, then you foresee that
you should be forced to grant that these are fit means to decide this
Controversy, and therefore may be as fit to decide others. Therefore to avoid
this, you run into a most ridiculous absurdity, and tell us that this
difference also, whether the Church be Infallible, as well as others, must be
agreed by a submissive acknowledgment of the Churches Infallibility. As if you
should have said, My Brethren, I perceive this is a great contention amongst
you, whether the Roman Church be Infallible? If you will follow my advice, I
will show you a ready means to end it; you must first agree that the Roman
Church is Infallible, and then your contention whether the Roman Church be
Infallible, will quickly be at an end. Verily a most excellent advice, and most
compendious way of ending all Controversies, even without troubling the Church
to determine them! For why may not you say in all other differences, as you
have done in this? Agree that the Pope is supreme head of the Church: That the
substance of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is turned into the body, and blood
of Christ: That the Communion is to be given to Laymen but in one kind: That
Pictures may be worshipped: That Saints are to be invocated; and so in the
rest, and then your differences about the Popes Supremacy, Transubstantiation,
and all the rest will speedily be ended. If you say, the advice is good in
this, but not in other cases, I must request you not to expect always, to be
believed upon your word, but to show us some reason, why any one thing, namely
the Churches Infallibility, is fit to prove it self; and any other thing, by
name the Popes Supremacy, or Transubstantiation is not as fit? Or if for shame
you will at length confess, that the Churches Infallibility is not fit to
decide this difference, whether the Church be infallible, then you must confess
it is not fit to decide all: Unless you will say, it may be fit to decide all,
and yet not fit to decide this, or pretend that this is not comprehended under
all. Besides if you grant that your Churches infallibility cannot possibly be
well grounded upon, or decided by it self, then having professed before, that
there is no possible means besides this, for us to agree hereupon, I hope you
will give me leave to conclude, that it is impossible upon good ground for us
to agree that the Roman Church is Infallible. For certainly light it self, is
not more clear than the evidence of this syllogism: If there be no other means
to make men agree upon your Churches Infallibility, but only this, and this be
no means, then it is simply impossible for men upon good grounds to agree that
your Church is Infallible: But there is (as you have granted) no other possible
means to make men agree hereupon, but only a submissive acknowledgment of her
Infallibility, And this is apparently no means; Therefore it is simply
impossible for men upon good grounds to agree that your Church is Infallible.

90. Lastly to the place of S. Austin, wherein we are advised to follow the way
of Catholic Discipline, which from Christ himself by the Apostles has come
down even to us, and from us shall descend to all posterity: I answer, That the
way which S. Austin speaks of, and the way which you commend, being diverse
ways, and in many things clean contrary, we cannot possibly follow them both;
and therefore for you to apply the same words to them is a vain equivocation.
Show us any way, and do not say, but prove it to have come from Christ and his
Apostles down to us; and we are ready to follow it. Neither do we expect
demonstration hereof, but such reasons as may make this more probable than the
contrary. But if you bring in things into your now Catholic Discipline, which
Christians in S. Austins time held abominable, (as the Picturing of God,) and
which you must confess to have come into the Church Seven Hundred Years after
Christ: if you will bring in things, as you have done the half Communion, with
a non obstante, notwithstanding Christ Institution, and the practice of the
Primitive Church were to the contrary: If you will do such things as these, and
yet would have us believe, that your whole Religion came from Christ and his
Apostles, this we conceive a request too unreasonable for modest men to make,
or for wise Men to grant.

CHAP. IV. The ANSWER to the Fourth CHAPTER.
Wherein is showed, that the Creed contains all necessary points of mere Belief.

AD. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.] Concerning the Creeds containing the Fundamentals of
Christiany, this is D. Potters assertion, delivered in the 207. p. of his Book.
The Creed of the Apostles (as it is explained in the latter Creeds of the
Catholic Church) is esteemed a sufficient summary or Catalogue of
Fundamentals, by the best learned Romanists and by Antiquity.

2. By Fundamentals he understands not the Fundamental rules of good Life and
Action, (though every one of these is to be believed to come from God, and
therefore virtually includes an Article of Faith;) but the Fundamental
Doctrines of Faith; such, as though they have influence upon our lives, as
every essential Doctrine of Christianinity has, yet we are commanded to
believe them, and not to do them. The assent of our understandings is required
to them, but no obedience from our wills.

3. But these speculative Doctrines again he distinguishes out of Aquinas,
Occham, and Canus and others, into two kinds: of the first are those which are
the Objects of Faith, in, and for themselves, which by their own nature and
Gods prime intention, are essential parts of that Gospel: such as the Teachers
in the Church, cannot without Mortal sin omit to teach the Learners: such as
are intrinsecal to the Covenant between God and Man; and not only plainly
revealed by God, and so certain truths, but also commanded to be preached to all
men, and to be believed distinctly by all, and so necessary truths. Of the
second sort are Accidental, Circumstantial, Occasional objects of Faith;
Millions whereof there are in Holy Scripture; such as are to be believed, not
for themselves, but because they are joined with others, that are necessary to
be believed, and delivered by the same Authority which delivered these. Such as
we are not bound to know to be Divine Revelations, (for without any fault we
may be Ignorant hereof, nay believe the contrary;) such as we are not bound to
examine, whether or no they be Divine Revelations: such as Pastors are not
bound to teach their Flock, nor their Flock bound to know and remember: no nor
the Pastors themselves to know them, or believe them, or not to disbelieve them
absolutely and always; but then only when they do see, and know them to be
delivered in Scripture, as Divine Revelations.

4. I say when they do so, and not only when they may do. For to lay an
obligation upon us of believing, or not disbelieving any Verity, sufficient
Revelation on Gods part, is not sufficient: For then seeing all the express
Verities of Scripture are either to all men, or at least to all learned men
sufficiently revealed by God, it should be a damnable sin, in any learned men
actually to disbelieve any one particular Historical verity contained in
Scripture, or to believe the contradiction of it, though he knew it not to be
there contained. For though he did not, yet he might have known it; it being
plainly revealed by God, and this revelation being extant in such a Book,
wherein he might have found it recorded, if with diligence he had perused it.
To make therefore any points necessary to be believed, it is requisite, that
either we actually know them to be Divine Revelations: and these though they be
not Articles of Faith, nor necessary to be believed, in and for themselves, yet
indirectly, and by accident, and by consequence, they are so: The necessity of
believing them, being enforced upon us, by a necessity of believing this
Essential, and Fundamental Article of Faith, That all Divine Revelations are
true, which to disbelieve, or not to believe, is for any Christian not only
impious, but impossible. Or else it is requisite that they be, First actually
revealed by God. Secondly, commanded under pain of damnation, to be
particularly known (I mean known to be Divine Revelations,) and distinctly to
be believed. And of this latter sort of speculative Divine Verities, D. Potter
affirmed, that the Apostles Creed was a sufficient summary: yet he affirmed it,
not as his own opinion, but as the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, and your
own Doctors. And besides, he affirmed it not as absolutely certain, but very
probable.

5. In brief, all that he says is this: It is very probable, that according to
the judgment of the Roman Doctors, and the Ancient Fathers, the Apostles Creed
is to be esteemed a sufficient summary of all those Doctrines which being
merely Credenda, and not Agenda, all men are ordinarily, under pain of
Damnation, bound particularly to believe.

6. Now this assertion (you say) is neither pertinent to the question in hand,
nor in it self true. Your Reasons to prove it impertinent, put into form and
divested of impertinencies are these. 1. Because the question was not, what
points were necessary to be explicitly believed, but what points were
necessary not to be disbelieeved after sufficient proposal. And therefore to
give a Catalogue of points, necessary to be explicitly believed is impertinent.

7. Secondly, because Errors may be damnable, though the contrary truths be not
of themselves Fundamental; as that Pontius Pilate was our Saviors Judge, is
not in it self a Fundamental truth, yet to believe the contrary were a damnable
Error. And therefore to give a Catalogue of Truths in themselves Fundamental,
is no pertinent satisfaction to this demand, what Errors are damnable?

8. Thirdly, because if the Church be not Universally infallible, we cannot
ground any certainty upon the Creed, which we must receive upon the Credit of
the Church: and if the Church be Universally Infallible, it is damnable to
oppose her declaration in any thing, though not contained in the Creed.

9. Fourthly, Because not to believe the Articles of the Creed in the true
sense is damnable, therefore it is frivolous to say the Creed contains all
Fundamentals, without specifying in what sense the Articles of it are
Fundamental.

10. Fifthly, because the Apostles Creed ( as D. Potter himself confesses) was
not a sufficient Catalogue, till it was explained by the first Council; nor
then until it was declared in the second, etc. by occasion of emergent
Heresies: Therefore now also as new Heresies may arise, it will need particular
explanation, and so is not yet, nor ever will be a complete Catalogue of
Fundamentals.

11. Now to the first of these objections I say: First, that your distinction
between points necessary to be believed, and necessary not to be disbelieved,
is more subtle than sound, a distinction without a difference: There being no
point necessary to be believed, which is not necessary not to be disbelieved:
Nor no point to any man, at any time, in any circumstances necessary not to be
disbelieved, but it is to the same man, at the same time, in the same
circumstances, necessary to be believed. Yet that which (I believe) you would
have said, I acknowledge true, that many points which are not necessary to be
believed absolutely, are yet necessary to be believed upon a supposition, that
they are known to be revealed by God: that is, become then necessary to be
believed, when they are known to be Divine Revelations. But then I must needs
say, you do very strangly, in saying, that the question was, what points might
lawfully be disbelieved, after sufficient Proposition that they are Divine
Revelations. You affirm, that none may, and so does D. Potter, and with him all
Protestants, and all Christians. And how then is this the question? Who ever
said or thought, that of Divine Revelations, known to be so, some might safely
and lawfully be rejected, and disbelieved, under pretense that they are not
Fundamental? which of us ever taught, that it was not damnable, either to deny,
or so much as doubt of the Truth of any thing, whereof we either know, or
believe that God has revealed it? What Protestant ever taught that it was not
damnable, either to give God the lie, or to call his Veracity into question?
Yet you say, The demand of Charity mistaken was, and it was most reasonable,
that a list of Fundamentals, should be given, the denial whereof destroys
Salvation, whereas the denial of other points may stand with Salvation,
although both kinds be equally proposed, as revealed by God.

12. Let the reader peruse Charity Mistaken, and he shall find that this
qualification, although both kinds of points be equally proposed as revealed by
God, is your addition, and no part of the demand. And if it had, it had been
most unreasonable, seeing he and you know well enough, that (though we do not
presently without examination, fall down and worship all your Churches
proposals, as Divine Revelations) yet, we make no such distinction of known
Divine Revelations, as if some only of them were necessary to be believed, and
the rest might safely be rejected. So that to demand a particular minute
Catalogue of all points that may not be disbelieved after sufficient
Proposition, is indeed to demand a Catalogue of all points that are or may be,
in as much as none may be disbelieved, after sufficient Proposition, that it is
a Divine Revelation. At least it is to desire us, Frst, to Transcribe into this
Catalogue, every Text of the whole Bible. Secondly, to set down distinctly,
those innumerous Millions of negative and positive consequences, which may be
evidently deduced from it: For these we say, God has revealed. And indeed you
are not ashamed in plain terms to require this of us. For having first told us,
that the demand was, what points were necessary not to be disbelieved, after
sufficient proposition that they are Divine Truths: you come to say, Certainly
the Creed contains not all these. And this you prove by asking, how many Truths
are there in Holy Scripture, not contained in the Creed, which we are not bound
to know and believe, but are bound under pain of damnation not to reject, as
scon as we come to know that they are found in Holy Scripture? So that in
requiring a particular Catalogue of all points, not to be disbelieved, after
sufficient Proposal, you require us to set you down all points contained in
Scripture, or evidently deducible from it. And yet this you are pleased to call
a reasonable, nay, a most reasonable Demand: whereas having engaged your self
to give a Catalogue of your Fundamentals, you conceive your engagement very
well satisfied by saying, all is Fundamental which the Church proposes, without
going about, to give us an endless Inventory of her Proposals. And therefore
from us, instead of a perfect particular of Divine Revelations of all sorts,
(of which with a less hyperbole than S. John uses, we might say, If they were
to be written, the World would not hold the Books that must be written;)
methinks you should accept of this general, All Divine Revelations are true,
and to be believed.

13. The very truth is, the main Question in this business is not, what Divine
Revelations are necessary to be believed, or not rejected when they are
sufficiently proposed: for all without exception, all without question are so;
But what Revelations are simply and absolutely necessary to be proposed to the
belief of Christians, so that that Society, which does propose, and indeed
believe them, has for matter of Faith, the essence of a true Church; that
which does not, has not. Now to this question, though not to yours, D. Potter's
assertion (if it be true) is apparently very pertinent. And though not a full
and total satisfaction to it, yet very effectual, and of great moment toward
it. For the main question being, what points are necessary to Salvation: and
points necessary to Salvation, being of two sorts, some of simple belief, some
of Practice and Obedience, he that gives you a sufficient summary, of the first
sort of necessary points, has brought you half way toward your Journies end.
And therefore that which he does, is no more to be slighted, as vain and
impertinent, than an Architects work is to be thought impertinent toward the
making of a House, because he does it not all himself. Sure I am, if his
assertion be true, as I believe it is, a Corollary may presently be deduced
from it, which if it were embraced, cannot in all reason, but do infinite
service, both to the truth of Christ, and the peace of Christendom. For seeing
falsehood and Error could not long stand against the power of truth, were they
not supported by Tyranny and worldly advantages, he that could assert
Christians to that liberty which Christ and his Apostles left them, must need
do Truth a most Heroical service. And seeing the overvaluing of the differences
among Christians, is one of the greatest maintainers of the Schism of
Christendom, he that could demonstrate that only these points of Belief, are
simply necessary to Salvation, wherein Christians generally agree, should he
not lay a very fair and firm Foundation of the peace of Christendom? Now the
Corollary which I conceive would produce these good effects, and which flows
naturally from D. Potters Assertion, is this, That what Man or Church soever
believes the Creed, and all the evident consequences of it sincerely and
heartily, cannot possibly (if also he believe the Scripture) be in any Error of
simple belief which is offenfive to God; nor therefore deserve for any such
Error to be deprived of his Life, or to be cut off from the Churches Communion,
and the hope of Salvation. And the production of this again would be this
(which highly concerns the Church of Rome to think of,) That whatsoever Man or
Church does for any Error of simple belief, deprive any man so quallified as
above, either of his temporal life, or livelihood or liberty, or of the
Churches Communion, and hope of Salvation, is for the first unjust, cruel, and
Tyrannous: Schismatical, presumptuous, and uncharitable for the second.

14. Neither yet is this (as you pretend) to take away the necessity of
believing those Verities of Scripture, which are not contained in the Creed,
when once we come to know that they are written in Scripture, but rather to lay
a necessity upon men of believing all things written in Scripture, when once
they know them to be there written. For he that believes not all known Divine
Revelations to be true, how does he believe in God? Unless you will say, that
the same man, at the same time may not believe God, and yet believe in him. The
greater difficulty is, how it will not take away the necessity of believing
Scripture to be the Word of God? But that it will not neither. For though the
Creed be granted a sufficient summary of Articles of mere Faith, yet no man
pretends that it contains the Rules of Obedience, but for them, all men are
referred to Scripture. Besides, he that pretends to believe in God, obliges
himself to believe it necessary to obey that which reason assures him to be the
Will of God. Now reason will assure him that believes the Creed, that it is the
Will of God he should believe the Scripture: even the very same Reason which
moves him to believe the Creed: Universal, and never failing Tradition, having
given this Testimony both to Creed and Scripture, that they both by the works
of God were sealed, and testified to be the words of God. And thus much be
spoken in Answer to your first Argument; the length whereof will be the more
excusable, If I oblige my self to say but little to the rest.

15. I come then to your second. And in Answer to it, deny flatly, as a thing
destructive of it self, that any Error can be damnable, unless it be repugnant
immediately or mediatly, directly or indirectly, of it self or by accident, to
some Truth for the matter of it fundamental. And to your example of Pontius
Pilat's being Judge of Christ, I say the denial of it in him that knows it to
be revealed by God, is manifestly destructive of this Fundamental truth, that
all Divine Revelations are true. Neither will you find any Error so much as by
accident damnable, but the rejecting of it will be necessarily laid upon us, by
a real belief of all Fundamentals, and simply necessary Truths. And I desire
you would reconcile with this, that which you have said. 15. Every Fundamental
Error must have a contrary Fundamental Truth, because of two Contradictory
propositions in the same degree, the one is false, the other must be true, etc.

16. To the Third I Answer; That the certainty I have of the Creed, That it was
from the Apostles, and contains the principles of Faith, I ground it not upon
Scripture, and yet not upon the Infallibility of any present, much less of your
Church, but upon the Authority of the Ancient Church, and written Tradition,
which (as D. Potter has proved) gave this constant Testimony unto it. Besides
I tell you, it is guilty of the same fault which D. Potter's Assertion is here
accused of: having perhaps some color toward the proving it false, but none at
all to show it impertinent.

17. To the Fourth, I Answer plainly thus, That you find fault with D. Potter
for his Virtues: you are offended with him for not usurping the Authority which
he has not; in a word for not playing the Pope. Certainly if Protestants be
faulty in this matter, it is for doing it too much, and not too little. This
presumptuous imposing of the senses of men upon the words of God, the special
senses of men upon the general words of God, and laying them upon men's
consciences together, under the equal penalty of death, and damnation; this
vain conceit that we can speak of the things of God, better than in the word of
God: This Deifying our own Interpretations, and Tyrannous enforcing them upon
others; This restraining of the word of God from that latitude and generality,
and the understandings of men from that liberty, wherein Christ and the
Apostles left them, This persuasion is no singularity of mine but the Doctrine
which I have learnt from Divines of great learning and judgment. Let the Reader
be pleased to peruse the seventh book of Acontius de Stratag. Satanae. And
Zanchius his last Oration delivered by him after the composing of the discord
between him and Amerbachius, and he shall confess as much.
is, and has been the only fountain of all the Schisms of the Church, and that
which makes them immortal: the common incendiary of Christendom, and that which
(as I said before) tears into pieces, not the coat, but the bowels, and members
of Christ: Ridente Turca nec dolente Judaeo. Take away these Walls of
separation, and all will quickly be one. Take away this Persecuting, Burning,
Cursing, Damning of men for not subscribing to the words of Men, as the words
of God; Require of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no man master
but him only: Let those leave claiming Infallibility that have no title to it,
and let them that in their words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their
actions; In a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devils instrument to
support errors, and superstitions, and impieties, in the several parts of the
World, which could not otherwise long withstand the power of Truth, I say take
away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full liberty of
captivating their understanding to Scripture only, and as Rivers when they have
a free passage, run all to the Ocean, so it may well be hoped by Gods blessing,
that Universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom to Truth
and Unity. These thoughts of peace (I am persuaded) may come from the God of
peace, and to his blessing I commend them, and proceed.

18. Your fifth and last objection stands upon a false and dangerous
supposition: That new Heresies may arise. For an Heresy being in it self
nothing else but a Doctrine Repugnant to some Article of the Christian Faith,
to say that new Heresies may arise, is to say, that new Articles of Faith may
arise: and so some great ones among you stick not to profess in plain terms,
who yet at the same time are not ashamed to pretend that your whole Doctrine is
Catholic and Apostolic. So Salmeron: Non omnibus omnia dedit Deus, ut
quaelibet aetas suis gaudeat veritatibus, quas prior aetas ignoravit. God has
not given all things to All: So that every age has its proper Verities, which
the former age was ignorant of: Disp. 57. In Ep. ad Romans And again in the
Margent: Habet Unumquodque saeculum peculiares Revelationes Divinas, Every age
has its peculiar Divine Revelations. Where that he speaks of such Revelations
as are, or may by the Church be made matters of Faith, no man can doubt that
reads him; an example whereof, he gives us a little before in these words.
Unius Augustini doctrina Assumptionis B. Deiparae cultum in Ecclesiam
introduxit. The Doctrine of Augustine only, has brought in to the Church the
Worship of the Assumption of the Mother of God, etc. Others again mince and
palliate the matter with this pretense, that your Church undertakes not to coin
new Articles of Faith, but only to declare those that want sufficient
declaration. But if sufficient declaration be necessary to make any Doctrine an
Article of Faith, then this Doctrine which before wanted it, was not before an
Article of Faith; and your Church by giving it the Essential form, and last
complement of an Article of Faith, makes it, though not a Truth, yet certainly
an Article of Faith. But I would fain know, whether Christ and his Apostles
knew this Doctrine, which you pretend has the matter, but wants the form of an
Article of Faith, that is, sufficient declaration, whether they knew it to be a
necessary Article of the Faith, or no! If they knew it not to be so: then
either they taught what they knew not, which were very strange; or else they
taught it not: and if not, I would gladly be informed, seeing you pretend to no
new Revelations from whom you learnt it? If they knew it, then either they
concealed or declared it. To say they concealed any necessary part of the
Gospel, is to charge them with far greater Sacriledg, than what was punished in
Ananias and Saphira. It is to charge these glorious Stewards, and dispensers of
the Mysteries of Christ, with want of the great virtue requisite in a Steward,
which is Fidelity. It is to charge them with presumption for denouncing
Anathema's, even to Angels, in case they should teach any other doctrine, than
what they had received from them, which sure could not merit an Anathema, if
they left any necessary part of the Gospel untaught. It is in a word, in plain
terms to give them the lie, seeing they profess plainly and frequently, that
they taught Christians the whole Doctrine of Christ. If they did know and
declare it, then was it a full and formal Article of Faith; and the contrary a
full and formal Heresy, without any need of further declaration: and then
their Successors either continued the declaration of it, or discontinued: If
they did the latter, how are they such faithful depositaries of Apostolic
Doctrine as you pretend? Or what assurance can you give us, that they might not
bring in new and false Articles, as well as suffer the old and true ones to be
lost? If they did continue the declaration of it, and deliver it to their
Successors, and they to theirs, and so on perpetually, then continued it still
a full and formal Article of faith, and the repugnant doctrine a full and formal
Heresy, without and before the definition or declaration of a Council. So that
Councils, as they cannot make that a truth or falsehood, which before was not
so: so neither can they make or declare that to be an Article of Faith, or an
Heresy, which before was not so. The supposition therefore on which this
argument stands, being false and ruinous, whatsoever is built upon it, must
together with it fall to the ground. This explication therefore, and
restriction of this doctrine, (whereof you make your advantage) was to my
understanding unnecessary. The Fathers of the Church in after times might have
just cause to declare their judgment, touching the sense of some general
Articles of the Creed: but to oblige others to receive their declarations under
pain of damnation, what warrant they had I know not. He that can show, either
that the Church of all Ages was to have this Authority; or that it continued in
the Church for some Ages, and then expired: He that can show either of these
things let him: for my part I cannot. Yet I willingly confess the judgment of a
Council, though not infallible, is yet so far directive and obliging that
without apparent reason to the contrary, it may be sin to reject it, at least
not to afford it an outward submission for public peace sake.

20. Ad. 7.8, 9. I come now to show that you also have requited D. Potter with
a mutual courteous acknowledgment of his assertion, That the Creed is a
sufficient summary of all the necessary Articles of Faith, which are merely
Credenda.

21. First then,. 8. You have these words, That it cannot be denied that the
Creed is most full and complete to that purpose, for which the holy Apostles,
inspired by God, meant that it should serve, and in that manner as they did
intend it, which was, not to comprehend all particular points of Faith, but
such general heads as were most befitting and requisite for preaching the Faith
of Christ, to Jews and Gentiles, and might be briefly, and compendiously set
down, and easily learnt and remembered. These words I say, being fairly
examined, without putting them on the rack, will amount, to a full
acknowledgment of D. Potters Assertion. But before I put them to the question,
I must crave thus much right of you, to grant me this most reasonable
postulate, that the doctrine of repentance from dead works, which S. Paul says,
was one of the two only things which he preached, and the doctrine of Charity,
without which (the same S. Paul assures us that) the knowledge of all
mysteries, and all faith is nothing, were doctrins more necessary and
requisite, and therefore more fit to be preached to Jews and Gentiles, than
these, under what judge our Savior suffered, that he was buried, and what time
he rose again: which you have taught us cap. 3.. 2. for their matter and nature
in themselves not to be Fundamental.

22. And upon this grant, I will ask no leave to conclude, that, whereas you
say, the Apostles Creed was intended for a comprehension, of such heads of
faith, as were most befitting and requisite, for preaching the faith of Christ,
etc. You are now, for fear of too much debasing those high doctrines as
Repentance and Charity, to restrain your assertion, as D. Potter does his, (and
though you speak indefinitely) to say you meant it, only of those heads of
faith, which are merely Credenda. And then the meaning of it, (if it have any,)
must be this, That the Creed is full for the Apostles intent, which was to
comprehend all such general heads of faith, which being points of simple
belief, were most fit and requisite, to be preached to Jews and Gentiles, and
might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easily learned and remembered.
Neither I nor you, I believe, can make any other sense of your words than this.
And upon this ground thus I subsume. But all the points of belief, which were
necessary, under pain of damnation, for the Apostles to preach, and for those
to whom the Gospel was preached, particularly to know and believe, were most
fit and requisite, nay more than so, necessary to be preached to all both Jews
and Gentiles, and might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easy
learned and remembered: therefore the Apostles intent by your confession, was in
this Creed, to comprehend all such points. And you say, the Creed is most full
and complete, for the purpose which they intended. The Major of this Syllogism
is your own. The Minor I should think needs no proof, yet because all men may
not be of my mind, I will prove it by its parts; and the first part thus, There
is the same necessity, for the doing of these things, which are commanded to be
done, by the same Authority, under the same penalty: But the same Authority,
viz. Divine, under the same penalty, to wit, of damnation, commanded the
Apostles, to preach all these Doctrines which we speak of, and those to whom
they were preached, particularly to know and believe them: For we speak of
those only, which were so commanded, to be preached and believed: Therefore all
these points were alike necessary to be preached to all both Jews and Gentiles.
Now that all these doctrines we speak of, may be briefly and compendiously set
down, and easily learned and remembered, he that remembers, that we spoke only
of such Doctrines as are necessary to be taught and learned, will require
hereof no farther demonstration. For, (not to put you in mind of what the Poet
says, Non sunt longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis,) who sees not, that
seeing the greatest part of men are of very mean capacities, that it is
necessary that that may be learnt easily, which is to be learned of all? What
then can hinder me from concluding thus, all the Articles of simple belief,
which are fit and requisite to be preached, and may easily be remembered, are by
your confession comprised in the Creed: but all the necessary Articles of Faith
are requisite to be preached, and easy to be remembered; therefore they are all
comprised in the Creed? Secondly, from grounds granted by you, I argue thus,
Points of belief in themselves fundamental, are more requisite to be preached
than those which are not so: (this is evident.) But the Apostles have put into
their Creed some points that are not in themselves fundamental: (so you
confess, ubi supra.) Therefore if they have put in all, most requisite to be
preached, they have put in all, that in themselves are fundamental. Thirdly and
lastly, from your own words Sect. 26. thus I conclude my purpose, The Apostles
intention was, particularly to deliver in the Creed such Articles as were
fittest for those times, concerning the Deity, Trinity, and Messiah; (thus you,
now I subsume,) but all points simply necessary, by virtue of Gods command, to
be preached and believed in particular, were as fit for those times as these
here mentioned; therefore their intention was, to deliver in it particularly
all the necessary points of belief.

23. And certainly he that considers the matter advisedly, either must say that
the Apostles were not the Authors of it, or that this was their design in
composing it, or that they had none at all. For whereas you say, their intent
was, to comprehend in it such general heads as were most besitting and
requisite for preaching the faith; and elsewhere, Particularly to deliver such
Articles as were fittest for those times; Every wise man may easily see that
your desire here was, to escape away in a cloud of indefinite terms. For
otherwise, instead of such general heads, and such Articles, why did not you
say plainly, all such, or some such? This had been plain dealing, but I fear,
cross to your design: which yet you have failed of. For that which you have
spoken (though you are loath to speak out,) either signifies nothing at all; or
that which I and D. Potter affirm: viz. That the Apostles Creed contains all
those points of belief, which were by Gods command, of necessity to be preached
to all, and believed by all. Neither when I say so, would I be so mistaken, as
if I said, that all points in the Creed are thus necessary: For Punies in
Logic, know that universal affirmatives, are not simply converted. And
therefore it may be true, that all such necessary points, are in the Creed;
though it be not true, that all points in the Creed are thus necessary: which I
willingly grant, of the points by you mentioned. But this rather confirms, than
any way invalidates my assertion. For how could it stand with the Apostles
wisdom, to put in any points circumstantial and not necessary, and at the same
time, to leave out any that were essential and necessary for that end, which
you say they proposed to themselves, in making the Creed, that is, The
preaching of the Faith, to Jews and Gentiles?

31. Ad. 11.12, 13, 14, 15. Obj. Summaries and Abstracts are not intended to
specify all the particulars of the science or subject to which they belong.

Ans. Yes if they be intended for perfect Summaries, they must not omit any
necessary doctrine of that Science whereof they are Summaries; though the
Illustration and Reasons of it they may omit. If this were not so, a man might
set down forty or fifty of the Principal definitions and divisions, and rules
of Logic, and call it a Summary or Abstract of Logic. But sure, this were no
more a Summary, than that were the picture of a man in little, that wanted any
of the parts of a man; or that a total sum wherein all the particulars were not
cast up. Now the Apostles Creed you here intimate that it was intended for a
Summary: otherwise why talk you here of Su^maries, and tell us that they need
not contain all the particulars of their Science? And of what I pray may it be
a Summary, but of the Fundamentals of Christian Faith? Now you have already
told us, That it is most full and complete to that purpose for which it was
intended. Lay all this together, and I believe the product will be; That the
Apostles Creed is a perfect Summary of the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith:
and what the duty of a perfect Summary is, I have already told you.

32. Whereas therefore to disprove this Assertion, in diverse particles of this
Chapter, but especially the Fourteenth, you muster up whole Armies of
Doctrines, which you pretend are necessary, and not contained in the Creed; I
answer very briefly thus: That the Doctrines you mention, are either concerning
matters of practice, and not simple belief; or else they are such Doctrines
wherein God has not so plainly revealed himself, but that honest and good men,
true Lovers of God and of Truth, those that desire above all things to know his
will and do it, may Err, and yet commit no sin at all, or only a sin of
infirmity, and not destructive of Salvation; or lastly, they are such Doctrines
which God has plainly revealed, and so are necessary to be believed when they
are known to be Divine, but not necessary to be known and believed, not
necessary to be known for Divine, that they may be believed. Now all these
sorts of Doctrines are impertinent to the present Question.

33. First, the Questions touching the Conditions to be performed by us to
obtain remission of sins; the Sacraments; the Commandments, and the possibility
of keeping them, the necessity of imploring the Assistance of Gods Grace and
Spirit for the keeping of them: how far obedience is due to the Church: Prayer
for the Dead: The cessation of the Old Law: are all about Agenda, and so cut
off upon the first consideration.

34. Secondly, the Question touching Fundamentals, is profitable but not
Fundamental. He that believes all Fundamentals, cannot be damned for any Error
in Faith, though he believe more or less to be Fundamental than is so. That
also of the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son: of
Purgatory: of the Churches Visibility: of the Books of the New Testament which
were doubted of by a considerable part of the Primitive Church: (until I see
better reason for the contrary than the bare authority of men,) I shall esteem
of the same condition.

35. Thirdly, These Doctrines that Adam and the Angels sinned: that there are
Angels good and bad: that those Books of Scripture which were never doubted of
by any considerable part of the Church, are the word of God: that S. Peter had
no such primacy as you pretend: that the Scripture is a perfect rule of Faith,
aad consequently that no necessary Doctrine is unwritten: that there is no one
Society or succession of Christians absolutely Infallible: These to my
understanding are truths plainly revealed by God, and necessary to be believed
by them who know they are so. But not so necessary, that every Man and Woman is
bound under pain of damnation particularly to know them to be Divine
Revelations, and explicitly to believe them. And for this reason, these with
innumerable other points, are to be referred to the third sort of Doctrines
above mentioned, which were never pretended to have place in the Creed. There
remains one only point of all that Army you Mustred together, reducible to none
of these Heads, and that is, that God is, and is a Remunerator, which you say
is questioned by the denial of merit. But if there were such a necessary
indissoluble coherence between this point and the Doctrine of merit, methinks
with as much reason, and more charity you might conclude, That we hold merit,
because we hold this point; Then that we deny this point, because we deny
merit. Beside, when Protestants deny the Doctrine of Merits, you know right
well, for so they have declared themselves a thousand times, that they mean
nothing else, but with David, that their well doing extends not, is not truly
beneficial to God: with our Savior, when they have done all which they are
commanded, they have done their duty only, and no courtesy: And lastly, with
S. Paul, that all which they can suffer for God (and yet suffering is more than
doing) is not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed. So
that you must either misunderstand their meaning in denying Merit, or you must
discharge their Doctrine of this odious consequence, or you must charge it upon
David and Paul and Christ himself. Nay you must either grant their denial of
true Merit just and reasonable, or you must say, that our good actions are
really profitable to God: that they are not debts already due to him, but
voluntary and undeserved Favors: and that they are equal unto and well worthy
of Eternal Glory which is prepared for them. As for the inconvenience which you
so much fear, That the denial of Merit makes God a giver only, and not a
rewarder; I tell you, good Sir, you fear where no fear is, and that it is both
most true on the one side, that you in holding good Works meritorious of
Eternal Glory make God a rewarder only and not a giver, contrary to plain
Scripture, affirming that The gift of God is Eternal Life; And that it is most
false on the other side, that the Doctrine of Protestants makes God a giver
only and not a rewarder: In as much as their Doctrine is, That God gives not
Heaven but to those which do something for it, and so his gift is also a
Reward; but withal that whatsoever they do is due unto God beforehand, and
worth nothing to God, and worth nothing in respect of Heaven, and so Man's work
is no Merit, and Gods reward is still a Gift.

36. Put the case the Pope, for a reward of your Service done him in writing
this Book, had given you the Honor and means of a Cardinal, would you not, not
only in humility but in sincerity have professed, that you had not merited such
a reward? And yet the Pope is neither your Creator nor Redeemer, nor Preserver,
nor perhaps your very great Benefactor, sure I am, not so great as God
Almighty, and therefore has no such right and title to your Service as God
has in respect of precedent obligations. Besides, the work you have done him
has been really advantageous to him: and lastly, not altogether
unproportionable to the forementioned reward. And therefore if by the same work
you will pretend that either you have or hope to have deserved immortal
Happiness, I beseech you consider well whether this be not to set a higher
value upon a Cardinals Cap, than a Crown of immortal Glory, and with that
Cardinal to prefer a part in Paris before a part in Paradise.

37. As for your distinction, between Heresies that have been, and Heresies
that are, and Heresies that may be, I have already proved it vain; and that
whatsoever may be an Heresy, that is so; and whatsoever is so, that always
has been so, ever since the publication of the Gospel of Christ. The Doctrine
of your Church may like a Snow-ball increase with rouling, and again if you
please melt away and decrease: But as Christ Jesus, so his Gospel, is yesterday
and to day, and the same for ever.

38. Our Savior sending his Apostles to preach, gave them no other Commission
than this: Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you. These were the bounds of their Commission. If your Church have
any larger, or if she have a Commission at large, to teach what she pleases,
and call it the Gospel of Christ, let her produce her Letters patents, from
Heaven for it. But if this be all you have, then must you give me leave to
esteem it both great sacriledg in you to forbid any thing, be it never so small
or ceremonious, which Christ has commanded: as the receiving of the Communion
in both kinds: and as high a degree of presumption, to enjoin men to believe,
that there are or can be any other Fundamental Articles of the Gospel of
Christ, than what Christ himself commanded his Apostles to teach all men; or
any damnable Heresies, but such as are plainly repugnant to these prime
Verities.

39. Ad. 16, 17.] The saying of the most Learned Prelate and excellent man the
Archbishop of Armach (which shall be set down at the end of N. 43.) is as
great and as good a Truth, and as necessary for these miserable times as can
possibly be uttered: For this is most certain, and I believe you will easily
grant it, that to reduce Christians to Unity of Communion, there are but two
ways that may be conceived probable: The one, by taking away diversity of
opinions touching matters of Religion: The other by showing that the diversity
of Opinions, which is among the several Sects of Christians, ought to be no
hindrance to their Unity in Communion.

40. Now the former of these is not to be hoped for without a miracle, unless
that could be done, which is impossible to be performed, though it be often
pretended; that is, unless it could be made evident to all men, that God has
appointed some visible Judge of Controversies, to whose judgment all men are to
submit themselves. What then remains, but that the other way must be taken, and
Christians must be taught to set a higher value upon these high points of Faith
and obedience wherein they agree, than upon these matters of less moment
wherein they differ, and understand that agreement in those, ought to be more
effectual to join them in one Communion, than their difference in other things
of less moment to divide them? When I say, in one Communion, I mean, in a
common Profession of those articles of Faith, wherein all consent: A joint
worship of God, after such a way as all esteem lawful; and a mutual performance
of all those works of Charity, which Christians owe one to another. And to such
a Communion what better inducement could be thought of, than to demonstrate
that what was Universally believed of all Christians, if it were joined with a
love of truth, and with holy obedience, was sufficient to bring men to Heaven?
For why should men be more rigid than God? Why should any Error exclude any man
from the Churches Communion, which will not deprive him of Eternal Salvation?
Now that Christians do generally agree in all those points of Doctrine, which
are necessary to Salvation, it is apparent, because they agree with one accord,
in believing all those Books of the Old and New Testament, which in the Church
were never doubted of to be the undoubted Word of God. And it is so certain
that in all these Books, all necessary Doctrines are evidently contained, that
of all the four Evangelists this is very probable, but of S. Luke most
apparent, that in every one of their Books they have comprehended the whole
substance of the Gospel of Christ. For what reason can be imagined, that any of
them should leave out any thing which he knew to be necessary, and yet (as
apparently all of them have done) put in many things which they knew to be only
profitable and not necessary? What wise and honest man that were now to write
the Gospel of Christ, would do so great a work of God after such a negligent
fashion? Suppose Xaverius had been to write the Gospel of Christ for the
Indians, think you he would have left out any Fundamental Doctrine of it? If
not, I must beseech you to conceive as well of S. Matthew, and S. Mark, and S.
Luke, and S. John, as you do of Xaverius. Besides, if every one of them have
not in them all necessary Doctrines, how have they complied with their own
design, which was, as the Titles of their Books show, to write the Gospel of
Christ, and not a part of it? Or how have they not deceived us, in giving them
such Titles? By the whole Gospel of Christ, I understand not the whole History
of Christ, but all that makes up the Covenant between God and Man. Now if this
be wholly contained in the Gospel of Saint Mark and Saint John, I believe every
considering man will be inclinable to believe that then without doubt, it is
contained, with the advantage of many other very profitable things, in the
larger Gospels of Saint Matthew, and Saint Luke. And that Saint Marks Gospel
wants no necessary Article of this Covenant, I presume you will not deny, if
you believe Irenaeus when he says, Matthew to the Hebrews in their Tongue
published the Scripture of the Gospel: When Peter and Paul did Preach the
Gospel, and found the Church or a Church at Rome, or of Rome, and after their
departure Mark the Scholar of Peter, delivered to us in writing those things
which had been Preached by Peter; and Luke, the follower of Paul, compiled in a
Book the Gospel which was Preached by him: And afterward John, residing in
Asia, in the City of Ephseus, did himself also set forth a Gospel.

41. In which words of Irenaeus, it is remarkable that they are spoken by him
against some Heretics, Lib. 3. c. 2.
that pretended (as you know who do now adays) that some necessary Doctrines
of the Gospel were unwritten, and that out of the Scriptures, truth (he must
mean sufficient truth,) cannot be found by those which know not Tradition.
Against whom to say, that part of the Gospel which was Preached by S Peter was
written by S Mark, and so other necessary parts of it omitted, had been to
speak impertinently, and rather to confirm than confute their Error. It is
plain therefore, that he must mean, as I pretend, that all the necessary
Doctrine of the Gospel, which was Preached by Saint Peter, was written by Saint
Mark. Now you will not deny, I presume, that Saint Peter, Preached all,
therefore you must not deny that S. Mark wrote all.

42. Our next inquiry let it be touching S. John's intent in writing his Gospel,
whether it were to deliver so much truth, as being believed and obeyed would
certainly bring men to Eternal Life, or only part of it, and to leave part
unwritten? A great man there is, but much less than the Apostle, who says,
that writing last, he purposed to supply the defects of the other Evangelists,
that had wrote before him: which (if it were true) would sufficiently justify
what I have undertaken, that at least all the four Evangelists have in them,
all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ. Neither will I deny, but S.
John's secondary intent might be to supply the defects of the former three
Gospels, in some things very profitable. But he that pretends, that any
necessary Doctrine is in S. John which is in none of the other Evangelists,
has not so well considered them as he should do, before he pronounce sentence
of so weighty a matter. And for his prime intent in writing his Gospel, what
that was, certainly no Father in the World understood it better than himself.
Therefore let us hear him speak: Many other signs (says he) also did Jesus in
the sight of his Disciples, which are not written in this Book: But these are
written, that you may believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and that
believing you may have Life in his name. By (these are written) may be
understood, either these things are written, or these signs are written. Take
it which way you will, this conclusion will certainly follow, That either all
that which S. John wrote in his Gospel, or less than all, and therefore all
much more was sufficient to make them believe that which being believed with
lively Faith, would certainly bring them to Eternal Life.

43. This which has been spoken (I hope) is enough to justify my undertaking
to the full, that it is very probable that every one of the four Evangelists
has in his Book the whole substance, all the necessary parts of the Gospel of
Christ. But for Saint Luke, that he has written such a perfect Gospel, in my
judgment it ought to be with them that believe him, no manner of question.
Consider first the introduction to his Gospel, where he declares what he
intends to write, in these Words, For as much as many have taken in hand to set
forth in order a Declaration of those things, which are most surely believed
amongst us, even as they delivered unto us, which from the beginning were
Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word, it seemed good to me also, having had
perfect understanding of things from the first, to write to thee in order, most
excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the certainty, of those things
wherein thou have heen instructed. Add to this place, the entrance to his
History of the Acts of the Apostles: The former Treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in
which he was taken up. Weigh well these two places, and then answer me freely
and ingenuously to these demands. 1. Whether S. Luke does not undertake the
very same thing which he says, many had taken in hand? 2. Whether this were not
to set forth in order, a Declaration of those things which are most surely
believed amongst Christians? 3. Whether the whole Gospel of Christ, and every
necessary Doctrine of it, were not surely believed among Christians? 4. Whether
they which were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word from the beginning,
delivered not the whole Gospel of Christ? 5. Whether he does not undertake to
write in order these things whereof he had perfect understanding from the
first? 6. Whether he had not perfect understanding of the whole Gospel of
Christ? 7. Whether he does not undertake to write to Theophilus of all those
things wherein he had been instructed? 8. And whether he had not been
instructed in all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ? 9. Whether in
the other Text, All things which Jesus began to do and teach, must not at least
imply, all the principal and necessary things? 10. Whether this be not the very
interpretation of your Rhemish Doctors, in their Annotation upon this place?
11. Whether all these Articles of the Christian Faith, without the belief
whereof, no man can be saved, be not the principal and most necessary things
which Jesus taught? 12. And lastly, whether many things which S. Luke has wrote
in his Gospel, be not less principal, and less necessary than all and every one
of these? When you have well considered these proposals, I believe you will be
very apt to think (if S. Luke be of credit with you) That all things necessary
to salvation, are certainly contained in his writings alone. And from hence you
will not choose but conclude, that seeing all the Christians in the world,
agree in the belief of what S. Luke has written, and not only so, but in all
other Books of Canonical Scripture, which were never doubted of in and by the
Church, the Learned Archbishop had very just, and certain ground to say, That
in these Propositions, which without Controversy are universally received in
the whole Christian world, so much truth is contained, as being joined with
holy obedience, may be sufficient to bring a man to everlasting Salvation; and
that we have no cause to doubt, but that as many as walk according to this
rule, neither overthrowing that which they have builded, by superinducing any
damnable Heresy thereupon, nor otherwise vitiating their holy faith, with a
lewd and wicked conversation, peace shall be upon them, and upon the Israel of
God.

44. Against this, you object two things. The one, that by this Rule, seeing
the Doctrine of the Trinity is not received universally among Christians, the
denial of it shall not exclude Salvation. The other, that the Bishop
contradicts himself, in supposing a man may believe all necessary Truths, and
yet superinduce some damnable Heresies.

45. To the first I answer, what I conceive he would, whose words I here
justify, that he has declared plainly in this very place, that he meant, not
an absolute, but a limited Universality, and speaks not of propositions
universally believed by all Professions of Christianity that are, but only, by
all those several Professions of Christianity, that have any large spread in
any part of the world. By which words he excludes from the universality here
spoken of, the denyers of the Doctrine of the Trinity, as being but a handful of
men, in respect of all, nay in respect of any of these professions which
maintain it. And therefore it was a great fault in you, either willingly to
conceal these words, which evacuate your objection, or else negligently to
oversee them.

46. Now for the foul Contradiction, wherein I pray does it lie? In supposing
(say you) a man may believe all Truths necessary to salvation, and yet
superinduce a damnable Heresy. I answer, It is not certain that his words do
suppose this: neither if they do, does he contradict himself. I say it is not
certain that his words import any such matter. For ordinarily men use to speak
and write so as here he does, when they intend not to limit or restrain, but
only to repeat and press and illustrate what they have said before.

S. Athanasius in his Creed tells us, The Catholic Faith is this, that we
worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the
Persons nor dividing the Substance; and why now do you not tell him that he
contradicts himself, and supposes that we may worship a Trinity of Persons, and
one God in substance, and yet confound the Persons, or divide the Substance;
which yet is impossible, because Three remaining Three, cannot be confounded,
and One remaining One cannot be divided? If a man should say unto you, he that
keeps all the Commandments of God, committing no sin either against the love of
God, or the love of his neighbor, is a perfect man: Or thus, he that will live
in constant health had need be exact in his diet, neither eating too much, nor
too little: Or thus, he that will come to London must go on straight forward in
such a way, und neither turn to the right hand or to the left; I verily believe
you would not find any contradiction in his words, but confess them as coherent
and consonant as any in your Book. And certainly if you would look upon this
saying of the Bishop with any indifference, you would easily perceive it to be
of the very same kind, and capable of the very same construction. And therefore
one of the grounds of your accusation is uncertain; Neither can you assure us,
that the Bishop supposes any such matter as you pretend. Neither if he did
suppose this (as perhaps he did) were this to contradict himself. For though
there can be no damnable Heresy, unless it contradict some necessary Truth,
yet there is no contradiction but the same man may at once believe this Heresy
and this Truth; because there is no contradiction that the same man, at the
same time, should believe contradictions. For, first, whatsoever a man believes
true, that he may and must believe; but there have been some who have believed
and taught that contradictions might be true, against whom Aristotle disputes
in the third of his Metaphysics; Therefore it is not impossible that a man may
believe contradictions. Secondly, they which believe there is no certainty in
Reason, must believe that contradictions may be true: For otherwise there will
be certainty in this Reason; This contradicts Truth, therefore it is false. But
there be now diverse in the world who believe there is no certainty in reason,
(and whether you be of their mind or no, I desire to be informed;) Therefore
there be diverse in the world who believe contradictions may be true. Thirdly,
They which do captivate their understandings to the belief of those things
which to their understanding seem irreconcilable contradictions, may as well
believe real contradictions: (For the difficulty of believing arises not from
their being repugnant, but from their seeming to be so:) But you do captivate
your understandings to the belief of those things which seem to your
understandings irreconcilable contradictions; therefore it is as possible and
easy for you to believe those that indeed are so. Fourthly, some men may be
confuted in their Errors, and persuaded out of them; but no man's Error can be
confuted, who together with his Error does not believe and grant some true
principle that contradicts his Error: for nothing can be proved to him who
grants nothing, neither can there be (as all men know) any rational discourse
but out of grounds agreed upon by both parts. Therefore it is not impossible
but absolutely certain, that the same man at the same time may believe
contradictions. Fifthly, It is evident, neither can you without extreme madness
and uncharitableness, deny, that we believe the Bible, those Books I mean which
we believe Canonical: Otherwise why dispute you with us out of them, as out of
a common Principle? Either therefore you must retract your opinion, and
acknowledge that the same man at the same time may believe contradictions, or
else you will run into a greater inconvenience, and be forced to confess, that
no part of our Doctrine contradicts the Bible. Sixthly, I desire you to
vindicate from contradiction these following Assertions: That there should be
Length, and nothing long: Breadth, and nothing broad: Thickness, and nothing
thick: Whiteness, and nothing white: Roundness, and nothing round: Weight, and
nothing heavy: Sweetness, and nothing sweet: Moisture, and nothing moist:
Fluidness, and nothing flowing: many Actions, and no Agent: many Passions, and
no Patient: That is, that there should be a long, broad, thick, white, round,
heavy, sweet, moist, flowing, active, passive, nothing! That Bread should be
turned into the substance of Christ, and yet not any thing of the Bread become
any thing of Christ; neither the matter, nor the form, nor the Accidents of
Bread, be made either the matter or the Form, or the Accidents of Christ. That
Bread should be turned into nothing, and at the same time with the same action
turned into Christ, and yet Christ should not be nothing. That the same thing
at the same time should have its just dimensions, and just distance of its
parts, one from another, and at the same time not have it, but all its parts
together in one and the self same point. That the body of Christ, which is much
greater, should be contained wholly and in its full dimensions without any
alteration, in that which is lesser, and that not once only, but as many times
over as there are several points in the bread and wine. That the same thing at
the same time should be wholly above it self, and wholly below it self, within
it self, and without it self, on the right hand, and on the left hand, and
round about it self. That the same thing at the same time should move to and
from it self, and lie still: Or that it should be carried from one place to
another through the middle space, and yet not move. That it should be brought
from Heaven to Earth, and yet not come out of Heaven, nor be at all in any of
the middle space between Heaven and Earth. That to be one, should be to be
undivided from it self, and yet that one and the same thing should be divided
from it self. That a thing may be, and yet be no where. That a Finite thing may
be in all places at once. That a Body may be in a place, and have there its
dimensions, and color, and all other qualities, and yet that it is not in the
power of God to make it visible, and tangible there, nor capable of doing or
suffering any thing. That there should be no certainty in our senses, and yet
that we should know something certainly, and yet know nothing but by our
senses. That that which is, and was long ago, should now begin to be. That that
is now to be made of nothing, which is not nothing but something. That the same
thing should be before and after it self. That it should be truly and really in
a place, and yet without Locality. Nay, that He which is Omnipotent should not
be able to give it Locality in this place, where it is, as some of you hold: or
if he can, as others say he can, that it should be possible, that the same man,
for example You or I, may at the same time, be awake at London, and not awake
but asleep at Rome: There run or walk, here not run or walk, but stand still,
sit, or lie along: There study or write, here do neither, but dine or sup:
There speak, here be silent. That he may in one place freez for cold, in
another burn with heat. That he may be drunk in one place, and sober in
another: Valiant in one place, and a Coward in another: A thief in one place,
honest in another. That he may be a Papist and go to Mass in Rome; A Protestant
and go to Church in England. That he may die in Rome, and live in England: or
dying in both places may go to Hell from Rome, and to Heaven from England. That
the Body and Soul of Christ should cease to be where it was, and yet not go to
another place, nor be destroyed. All these, and many other of the like nature
are the unavoidable, and most of them the acknowledged consequences of your
doct^in of Transubstantiation, as is explained one where or other by your
Schoolmen. Now I beseech you, Sir, to try your skill, and if you can compose
their repugnance, and make peace between them; Certainly, none but you shall be
Catholic Moderator. But if you cannot do it, and that after an intelligible
manner, then you must give me leave to believe, that either you do not believe
Transubstantiation, or else that it is no contradiction, that men should
subjugate their understandings to the belief of contradictions.

48. Ad. 18. This Paragraph consists of two immodest untruths, obtruded upon us
without show, or shadow of reason: and an evident sophism grounded upon an
affected mistake of the sense of the word Fundamental.

49. The first untruth is, that some Protestants make a Church, of men scarcely
agreeing in one point of faith; of men concurring in some one or few Articles
of belief, and in the rest holding conceits plainly contradictory: agreeing
only in this one Article, that Christ is our Savior; etc.

Ans. This is a shameless Calumny; because even these men to the constituting
of the very essence of a Church, in the lowest degree, require not only Faith
in Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of the World, but also submission to
his Doctrine in mind and will. Now I beseech you Sir, tell me ingenuously,
whether the Doctrine of Christ may be called without blasphemy, scarcely one
point of Faith? Or whether it consists only, of some-one or few Articles of
belief? Or whether there be nothing in it, but only this Article, That Christ
is our Savior? Is it not manifest to all the world, that Christians of all
Professions do agree with one consent, in the belief of all those Books of
Scripture, which were not doubted of in the ancient Church, without danger of
damnation? Nay is it not apparent, that no man at this time, can without
hypocrisy, pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity he must do so?
Seeing he can have no reason to believe in Christ, but he must have the same to
believe the Scripture. I pray then read over the Scripture once more, or if
that be too much labor, the New Testament only: and then say whether there be
nothing there, but scarcely one point of Faith? But some one or two Articles of
belief? Nothing but this Article only, that Christ is our Savior? Say whether
there be not there an infinite number of Divine Verities, Divine precepts,
Divine promises, and those so plainly and undoubtedly delivered, that if any
sees them not, it cannot be because he cannot, but because he will not! So
plainly, that whosoever submits sincerely to the Doctrine of Christ, in mind and
will, cannot possibly but submit to these in act and performance. And in the
rest, which it has pleased God, for reasons best known to himself, to deliver
obscurely or ambiguously, yet thus far at least they agree, that the sense of
them intended by God, is certainly true, and that they are without passion or
prejudice to endeavor to find it out: The difference only is, which is that
true sense which God intended. Neither would this long continue, if the walls
of separation, whereby the Devil hopes to make their Divisions eternal, were
pulled down; and Error were not supported against Truth, by human advantages.
But for the present, God forbid the matter should be so ill as you make it! For
whereas you looking upon their points of difference and agreement, through I
know not what strange glasses, have made the first innumerable, and the other
scarce a number: the Truth is clean contrary; that those divine Verities,
Speculative and Practical, wherein they universally agree (which you will have
to be but a few, or but one, or scarcely one) amount to many millions, (...) if
an exact account were taken of them:) And on the other side, the Points in
variance, are in comparison but few, and those not of such a quality, but the
Error in them may well consist with the belief and obedience of the entire
Covenant, ratified by Christ between God and man. Yet I would not be so
mistaken, as if I thought the Errors even of some Protestants unconsiderable
things, and matters of no moment. For the truth is, I am very fearful, that
some of their opininions, either as they are, or as they are apt to be
mistaken, (though not of themselves so damnable, but that good and holy men may
be saved with them, yet) are too frequent occasions of our remissness, and
slackness, in running the race of Christian Perfection, of our deferring
Repentance, and conversion to God, of our frequent relapses into sin, and not
seldom of security in sinning; and consequently, though not certain causes, yet
too frequent occasions of many men's damnation: and such I conceive all these
Doctrines which either directly or obliquely, put men in hope of Eternal
happiness, by any other means saving only the narrow way of sincere and
Universal obedience, grounded upon a true and lively Faith. These Errors
therefore, I do not elevate or extenuate: and on condition the ruptures made by
them might be composed, do heartily wish, that the cement were made of my
dearest Blood, and only not to be an Anathema from Christ! Only this I say,
that neither are their points of agreement so few, nor their differences so
many, as you make them, nor so great as to exclude the opposite Parties from
being members of one Church Militant, and Joint Heirs of the Glory of the
Church Triumphant.

50. Your other palpable untruth is, that Protestants are far more bold to
disagree even in matters of Faith, than Catholic Divines (you mean your own,]
in Questions merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church. For neither
do they differ at all, in matters of Faith, if you take the word in the highest
sense, and mean by matters of Faith, such Doctrines as are absolutely necessary
to Salvation, to be believed or not to be disbelieved. And then in those
wherein they do differ, with what col^^r or shadow of Argument, can you make
good, that they are more bold to disagree, than you are in Questions merely
Philosophical, or not determined by the Church? For is there not as great
repugnancy between your assent and dissent, your affirmation and negation, your
Est Est, Non Non, as there is between theirs? You follow your Reason, in those
things which are not determined by your Church; and they theirs, in things not
plainly determined in Scripture. And wherein then consists their greater, their
far greater boldness? And what if they in their contradictory opininions,
pretend both to rely upon the truth of God, does this make their contradictions
ever a whit the more repugnant? I had always thought, that all contradictions
had been equally contradictions, and equally repugnant; because the least of
them are as far asunder, as Est and Non Est can make them, and the greatest are
no farther. But then you in your differences, (by name, about Predetermination,
the Immaculate Conception, the Popes Infallibility,) upon what other motive do
you rely? Do not you cite Scripture, or Tradition, or both, on both sides? And
do you not pretend, that both these are the infallible Truths of Almighty God?

51. You close up this Section with a fallacy, proving forsooth, that we
destroy, by our confession, the Church which is the House of God, because we
stand only upon Fundamental Articles, which cannot make up the whole Fabric of
the Faith, no more than the Foundation of a House alone can be a House.

52. But I hope, Sir, you will not be difficult in granting, that that is a
House which has all the necessary parts belonging to a House: now by
Fundamental Articles, we mean all those which are necessary; and then I hope
you will grant that we may safely expect Salvation in a Church, which has all
things Fundamental to Salvation; Unless you will say, that more is necessary,
than that which is necessary.

53. Ad. 19.] This long discourse is to show that Protestants give unavoidable
occasion of desperation to poor Souls, and brings in a Man desirous to save his
Soul, asking Questions of D. P. and makes answers for him. As first, if he
required, whose directions he might rely upon? He says, the Doctor's Answer
would be, upon the truly Catholic Church.

But I suppose upon better reason, because I know his mind, that he would
advise him to call no man Master upon Earth, but according to Christ's command,
to rely upon the direction of God himself. If he ask, where he should find this
direction? he would answer him, In his Word contained in Scripture. If he
should inquire what assurance he might have that the Scripture is the Word of
God? He would answer him, that the Doctrine it self is very fit and worthy to
be thought to come from God, (nec vox hominem sonat) and that they which wrote
and delivered it, confirmed it to be the Word of God, by doing such works as
could not be done, but by Power from God himself. For assurance of the Truth
hereof, he would advise him to rely upon that which all Wise Men, in all
matters of belief rely upon; and that is, the consent of Ancient records, and
Universal Tradition. No Wise Man doubts but there was such a man as Julius
Caesar, or Cicero, that there are such Cities as Rome or Constantinople, though
he have no other assurance for the one or the other, but only the speech of
People. This Tradition therefore he would counsel him to rely upon, and to
believe that the Book which we call Scripture, was confirmed abundantly by the
Works of God, to be the Word of God. Believing it the Word of God, he must of
necessity believe it true: and if he believe it true, he must believe it
contains all necessary directions unto Eternal Happiness, because it affirms it
self to do so. Nay he might tell him, that so far is the whole Book, from
wanting any necessary direction to his Eternal Salvation, that one only Author,
that has writ but two little Books of it, Saint Luke by name in the beginning
of his Gospel, and in the beginning of his Story, shows plainly that he alone
has written at least so much as is necessary. And what they wrote, they wrote
by Gods direction, for the direction fo the World, not only for the Learned,
but for all that would do their true endeavor to know the will of God, and to
do it; therefore you cannot but conceive, that writing to all and for all, they
wrote so as that in things necessary they might be understood by all. Besides
that, here he should find, that God himself has engaged himself by promise,
that if he would love him, and keep his Commandments, and pray earnestly for
his Spirit, and be willing to be directed by it, he should undoubtedly receive
it, even the Spirit of Truth which shall lead him into all Truth; that is
certainly, into all necessary Truths, and suffer him to fall into no pernicious
Error. The sum of his whole direction to him briefly would be this, Believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God, use your true endeavor to find the true sense
of it, and to live according to it, and then you may rest securely that you are
in the true way to Eternal Happiness. This is the substance of that Answer
which the Doctor would make to any man in this case; and this is a way so
plain, that Fools, unless they will, cannot Err from it. Because not knowing
absolutely all truth, nay not all profitable truth, and not being free from
Error; but endeavoring to know the truth and obey it, and endeavoring to be
free from Error, is by this way made the only condition of Salvation.

56. Neither is this to drive any man to desparation; unless it be such a one
as has such a strong affection to this word, Church, that he will not go to
Heaven, unless he has a Church to lead him thither. For what though a Council
may Err, and the whole Church cannot be consulted with, yet this is not to send
you on the Fools Pilgrimage for Faith, and bid you go and confer with every
Christian Soul, Man and Woman, by Sea and (...) Land, close Prisoner, or at
Liberty, as you dilate the man (...): But to tell you very briefly, that
Universal Tradition directs you to the Word of God, and the Word of God directs
you to Heaven.

57. To the next demand, How stall I know whether he hold all Fundamental
points or no? When Protestants answer, If he truly believe the undoubted Books
of Canonical Scripture, he cannot but believe all Fundamentals, and that it is
very probable that the Creed contains all the Fundamentals of simple belief:
The Jesuit takes no notice of the former, but takes occasion from the latter
to ask. Shall I hazard my Soul on Probabilities, or even Wagers? As if
whatsoever is but probable, though in the highest degree of Probability, were
as likely to be false as true! or because it is but Morally, not Mathematically
certain, that there was such a Woman as Q. Elizabeth, such a man as Hen. the
8th. that is in the highest degree probable, therefore it were an even Wager
there were none such! By this Reason seeing the truth of your whole Religion
depends finally upon Prudential motives, which you do but pretend to be very
credible, it will be an even Wager that your Religion is false. And by the same
Reason, or rather infinitely greater, seeing it is impossible for any man
(according to the grounds of your Religion) to know himself, much less another
to be a true Pope, or a true Priest; nay to have a Moral certainty of it,
because these things are obnoxious to innumerable secret and undiscernable
nullities, it will be an even Wager, nay (if we proportion things
indifferently, a hundred to one, that every Consecration and Absolution of
yours is void, and that whenever you adore the Host, you and your Assistants
commit Idolatry: That there is a nullity in any decree that a Pope shall make,
or any Decree of a Council which he shall confirm: Particularly it will be at
least an even Wager, that all the decrees of the Council of Trent are void,
because it is at most but very probable that the Pope which confirmed them was
true Pope.

62. Obj. But unless this Question be answered, (what points of the ^^^ed are,
and what are not Fundamentals?) the Prote^^e^t Doctrine serves only either to
make men despare, or else to have recourse to those called Papists.

Answ. It seems a little thing will make you despair, if you be so sullen as to
do so, because men will not trouble themselves to satisfy your curious
questions. And I pray be not offended with me for so esteeming it, because as
before I told you, if you will believe all the points of the Creed, you cannot
choose but believe all the points of it that are Fundamental, though you be
ignorant which are so, and which are not so. Now I believe your desire to know
which are Fundamentals, proceeds only from a desire to be assured that you do
believe them; which seeing you may be assured of, without knowing which they
be, what can it be but curiosity to desire to know it? Neither may you think to
mend your self herein one whit by having recourse to them whom we call Papists;
for they are as far to seek as we in this point, which of the Articles of the
Creed are, for their nature and matter, Fundamental, and which are not.
Particularly, you will scarce meet with any amongst their Doctors, so
adventurous, as to tell you for a certain, whether or no the conception of
Christ by the Holy Ghost, his being born of a Virgin, his Burial, his descent
into Hell, and the Communion of Saints, be points of their own nature and
matter Fundamental. Such I mean, as without the distinct and explicit
knowledge of them no man can be saved.

63. Obj. We give this certain Rule, that all points defined by Christ's Visible
Church, belong to the Foundation of Faith, in this sense, that to deny any
such, cannot stand with Salvation.

Answ. So also Protestants give you this more certain rule, That whosoever
believes heartily those Books of Scripture, which all the Christian Churches in
the World acknowledge to be Canonical, and submits himself indeed to this, as
to the rule of his belief, must of necessity believe all things Fundamental,
and if he live according to his Faith, cannot fail of Salvation. But besides,
what certainty have you, that that rule of Papists is so certain? By the
visible Church it is plain, they mean only their own: and why their own only
should be the Visible Church, I do not understand: and as little, why all
points defined by this Church should belong to the Foundation of Faith. These
things you had need see well and substantially proved, before you rely upon
them, otherwise you expose your self to danger of embracing damnable Errors
instead of Fundamental Truths.

67. Ad. 23, 24, 25.] D. P. demands, How it can be necessary for any Christian,
to have more in his Creed than the Apostles bad. And this he enforces with many
Arguments thus. May the Church of after Ages make the narrow way to heaven,
narrower than our Savior left it? Shall it be a fault to straiten and encomber
the Kings high way with public nuisances; and is it lawful by adding new
Articles to the Faith, to retrench any thing from the Latitude of the King of
Heavens high way to Eternal happiness? The Yoke of Christ, which he said was
easy, may it be justly made heavier by the Governors of the Church in after
Ages? The Apostles profess they revealed to the Church the whole Counsel of
God, keeping back nothing needful for our Salvation. What Tyranny then to
impose any new unnecessary matters on the Faith of Christians, especially ( as
the late Popes have done) under the high commanding form, Qui non crediderit,
damnabitur? He that believes not, shall be damned. If this may be done, why
then did our Savior reprehend the Pharisees so sharply, for binding heavy
burdens, and laying them on men's shoulders? And why did he teach them, that in
vain they worshipped God, teaching for Doctrines men's Traditions? And why did
the Apostles call it tempting of God, to lay those things upon the Necks of
Christians, that were not necessary?

68. All which interrogations seem to me to contain so many plain and
convincing Arguments of the premised Assertion; and if you can devise no fair
and satisfying answer to them, then be so ingenuous as to grant the Conclusion,
That no more can be necessary for Christians to believe now, than was in the
Apostles time. A conclusion of great importance, for the deciding of many
Controversies, and the disburdening of the Faith of Christ from many
encumbrances.

70. The Doctor to make good this conclusion argues further thus, S. Paul
declared to the Ephesians the whole Counsel of God touching their Salvation.
Therefore that which S. Paul did not declare, can be no part of the Counsel of
God, and therefore not necessary. And again; S. Paul kept back nothing from the
Ephesians that was profitable; Therefore he taught them all things necessary to
Salvation.

71. Neither is it material, that these words were particularly directed by S.
Paul, to the Pastors of the Church: For (to say nothing that the point here
issuable, is not, Whom he taught, whether Priests or Laymen? But how much he
taught, and whether all things necessary?) it appears plainly out of the Text,
and I wonder you should read it so negligently as not to observe it, that
though he speaks now to the Pastors, yet he speaks of what he taught not only
them, but also the Laity as well as them. I have kept back nothing (says S.
Paul) that was profitable, but have showed, and have taught you publicly, and
from House to House; Testifying (I pray observe) both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And
a little after, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone Preaching the
Kingdom of God, shall see my Face no more: Wherefore I take you to record this
day, that I am Innocent from the Blood of all men; for I have kept nothing
back, but have showed you all the Counsel of God. And again, Remember that by
the space of three Years I ceased not to warn every one Night and Day with
Tears. Certainly though he did all these things to the Pastors among the rest,
nay above the rest, yet without Controversy, they whom he taught publicly,
and from House to House: The Jews and Greeks to whom he Testified (i. e.)
Preached Faith and Repentance: Those all, amongst whom he went preaching the
Kingdom of God: Those, Every one, whom for three Years together he warned, were
not Bishops and Pastors only.

72. Neither is this to say, that the Apostles taught Christians nothing but
their Creed, nothing of the Sacraments, Commandments, etc. for that is not here
the point to be proved: but only, that they taught them all things necessary,
so that nothing can be necessary which they did not teach them. But how much of
this they put into their Creed, whether all the necessary points of simple
belief, as we pretend, or only as you say, I know not what, is another Question
now to be examined.

73. We urge against you, That if all necessary points of simple belief be not
comprised in the Creed, it can no way deserve the name of the Apostles Creed,
as not being their Creed in any sense, but only a part of it.

To this you say, That the Faith of the Apostles is of larger extent, than
their Creed. Answer, It is very true that their whole Faith was of a larger
extent, but that was not the Question; but whether all points of simple belief
which they taught as necessary to be explicitly believed, be not contained in
it? And if thus much at least of Christian Religion be not comprised in it, I
again desire you to inform me how it could be called the Apostles Creed?

74. To other Reasons grounded upon the practice of the Ancient Church;
appointing her Infants to be instructed (for matters of simple belief,) only in
the Creed: From her admitting Catechumens unto Baptism: and of Strangers unto
her Communion, upon their only profession of the Creed, you have not, that I
perceive, thought fit to make any kind of answer.

75. Ad. 26.] In this Section you practice that trick of a Caviller, which is
to answer Objections by other Objections; an excellent way to make
Controversies endless! D. Potter desires to be resolved, Why amongst many
things of equal necessity to be believed, the Apostles should distinctly set
down some in the Creed, and be altogether silent of others? Instead of
resolving him in this difficulty, you put another to him, and that is, Why are
some points not Fundamental expressed in it, rather than others of the same
quality? Which demand is so far from satisfying the former doubt, that it makes
it more intricate. For upon this ground it may be demanded, How was it possible
that the Apostles should leave out any Articles simply necessary, and put in
others not necessary, especially if their intention were (as you say it was) to
deliver in it such Articles as were fittest for those times? Unless (which were
wondrous strange) unnecessary Articles were fitter for those times, than
necessary. But now to your Question, the Answer is obvious: These unnecessary
things might be put in, because they were circumstances of the necessary,
Pontius Pilate of Christ's passion, The third day of the Resurrection; neither
does the adding of them make the Creed ever a whit the less probable, the less
fit to be understood, and remembered. And for the contrary reasons, other
unnecessary things might be left out. Besides, who sees not that the addition
of some unnecessary circumstances is a thing that can hardly be avoided without
affection! And therefore not so great a fault, nor deserving such a censure, as
the omission of any thing essential to the work undertaken, and necessary to
the end proposed in it.

76. You demand again (as it is no hard matter to multiply demands,) why our
Saviors descent into Hell, and Burial was expressed, and not his circumcision,
his manifestation to the three Kings, and working of Miracles? I answer: His
Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God, are very great
Miracles, and they are expressed. Besides, S. John assures us, That the
Miracles which Christ did, were done and written not for themselves that they
might be believed, but for a further end, that we might believe that Jesus was
the Christ, and believing have eternal life. He therefore that believes this
may be saved, though he have no explicit and distinct Faith of any Miracle
that our Savior did. His Circumcision and Manifestation to the Wise men (for I
know not upon what grounds you call them Kings) are neither things simply
necessary to be known, nor have any near relation to those that are so. As for
his Descent into Hell, it may (for ought you know) be put in as a thing
necessary of it self to be known. If you ask why more than his Circumcision, I
refer you to the Apostles for an answer, who put that in, and left this out of
their Creed: and yet sure, were not so forgetful after the receiving of the
Holy Ghost, as to leave out any prime and principal foundation of the faith,
which are the very words of your own Gordonius Huntlaeus, Cont. 2. c. 10. number.
10. Likewise his Burial was put in perhaps as necessary of it self to be known.
But though it were not, yet has it manifestly so near relation to these that
are necessary, (his Passion and Resurrection, being the Consequent of the one,
and the Antecedent of the other,) that it is no marvel if for their sakes it
was put in. For though I verily believe that there is no necessary point of
this nature, but what is in the Creed, yet I do not affirm, because I cannot
prove it, that there is nothing in the Creed but what is necessary. You demand
thirdly, Why did they not express Scriptures, Sacraments, and all Fundamental
points of faith tending to practice, as well as those which rest in Belief? I
answer; Because their purpose was to comprize in it only those necessary points
which rest in belief: which appears, because of practical points there is not
in it so much as one.

77. We affirm, That if your Doctrine were true, this short Creed, viz. I
believe the Roman Church to be Infallible, would have been better, that is,
more effectual to keep the believers of it from Heresy, and in the true Faith,
than this Creed which now we have. A proposition so evident, that I cannot see
how either you, or any of your Religion, or indeed any sensible man can from
his heart deny it. Yet because you make a show of doing so, or else, which I
rather hope, do not rightly apprehend the force of the Reason, I will endeavor
briefly to add some light and strength to it, by comparing the effects of these
several supposed Creeds.

78. The former Creed therefore would certainly produce these effects in the
believers of it: An impossibility of being in any formal Heresy: A necessity
of being prepared in mind to come out of all Error in Faith, or material
Heresy; which certainly you will not deny, or if you do, you pull down the
only pillar of your Church and Religion, and deny that which is in effect the
only thing you labor to prove through your whole Book.

79. The latter Creed which now we have, is so uneffectual for these good
purposes, that you your self tell us of innumerable, gross, damnable Heresies,
that have been, are, and may be, whose contrary Truths are neither explicitly,
nor by consequence comprehended in this Creed: So that no man by the belief of
this Creed without the former, can be possibly guarded from falling into them,
and continuing obstinate in them. Nay, so far is this Creed from guarding them
from these mischiefs, that it is more likely to ensnare them into them, by
seeming and yet not being a full comprehension of all necessary points of
Faith: which is apt (as experience shows,) to misguide men into this pernicious
error, That believing the Creed, they believe all necessary points of faith,
whereas indeed they do not so. Now upon these grounds I thus conclude: That
Creed which has great commodities and no danger, would certainly be better
then that which has great danger, and wants many of these great commodities;
But the former short Creed proposed by me, I believe the Roman Church to be
Infallible, (if your doctrine be true,) is of the former condition, and the
latter, that is, the Apostles Creed, is of the latter, Therefore the former (if
your doctrine be true) would without controversy be better than the latter.

83. Whereas you say, If the Apostles had expressed no Article but that of the
Catholic Church, she must have taught us the other Articles in particular by
Creeds, or other means: This is very true, but no way repugnant to the truth of
this which follows, that the Apostles (if your doctrine be true) had done better
service to the Church, though they had never made this Creed of theirs which
now we have, if instead thereof, they had commanded in plain terms that for
men's perpetual direction in the faith, this short Creed should be taught all
men, I believe the Roman Church shall be for ever Infallible. Yet you must not
so mistake me, as if I meant, that they had done better not to have taught the
Church the substance of Christian Religion; for then the Church not having
learnt it of them, could not have taught it us. This therefore I do not say:
but supposing they had written these Scriptures as they have written, wherein
all the Articles of their Creed are plainly delivered, and preached that
Doctrine which they did preach, and done all other things as they have done,
besides the composing their Symbol: I say, if your doctrine were true, they had
done a work infinitely more beneficial to the Church of Christ, if they had
never composed their Symbol, which is but an imperfect comprehension of the
necessary points of simple belief, and no distinctive mark (as a Symbol should
be) between those that are good Christians, and those that are not so; but
instead thereof, had delivered this one Proposition, which would have been
certainly effectual for all the aforesaid good intents and purposes, The Roman
Church shall be forever Infallible in all things, which she proposes as matters
of Faith.

84. Whereas you say, If we will believe we have all in the Creed, when we have
not all, it is not the Apostles fault but our own: I tell you plainly, if it be
a fault, I know not whose it should be but theirs. For sure it can be no fault
in me to follow such Guides whether soever they lead me: Now I say, they have
led me into this persuasion, because they have given me great reason to believe
it, and none to the contrary. The reason they have given me to believe it, is,
because it is apparent and confessed, they did propose to themselves in composing
it, some good end or ends: As that Christians might have a form, by which (for
matter of Faith) they might profess themselves Catholics, So Putean out of
Thomas Aquinas: That the faithful might know, what the Christian people is to
believe explicitly, So Vincent Filiucius: That being separated into diverse
parts of the world, they might preach the same thing: And that that might serve
as a mark to distinguish true Christians from Infidels, So Cardinal Richlieu.
Now for all these and for any other good intent, I say, it will be plainly
uneffectual, unless it contain at least all points of simple belief, which are
in ordinary course, necessary to be explicitly known by all men. So that if it
be a fault in me to believe this, it must be my fault to believe the Apostles,
wise and good men: which I cannot do if I believe not this. And therefore what
Richardus de sancto Victore says of God himself, I make no scruple at all to
apply to the Apostles, and to say, Si error est quod credo, a vobis deceptus
sum: If it be an Error which I believe, it is you, and my reverend esteem of
you and your actions that has led me into it. For as for your suspicion, That
we are led into this persuasion, out of a hope that we may the better maintain
by it some opinions of our own, It is plainly uncharitable. I know no opinion I
have, which I would not as willingly forsake as keep, if I could see sufficient
reason to induce me to believe, that it is the will of God I should forsake it.
Neither do I know any opinion I hold against the Church of Rome, but I have
more evident grounds than this whereupon to build it. For let but these Truths
be granted: That the authority of the Scripture is independent on your Church,
and dependent only in respect of us upon universal Tradition; That Scripture is
the only Rule of Faith: That all things necessary to salvation are plainly
delivered in Scripture: Let I say these most certain and divine Truths be laid
for foundations, and let our superstructions be consequent and coherent to
them; and I am confident Peace would be restored, and Truth maintained against
you, though the Apostles Creed were not in the world.

CHAP. V. The ANSWER to the Fifth CHAPTER.
Showing that the separation of Protestants from the Roman Church, being upon
just and necessary causes, is not any way guilty of Schism.

1. AD. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. In the seven first Sections of this Chapter, there
be many things said and many things supposed by you which are untrue, and
deserve a censure. As

2. First, That Schism could not be a Division from the Church, or that a
Division from the Church could not happen, unless there always had been and
should be a visible Church. Which Assertion is a manifest falsehood: For
although there never had been any Church Visible or Invisible before this age,
nor should be ever after, yet this could not hinder, but that a Schism might
now be, and be a Division from the present Visible Church. As though in France
there never had been until now a lawful Monarch, nor after him ever should be,
yet this hinders not, but that now there might be a Rebellion, and that
Rebellion might be an Insurrection against Sovereign Authority.

3. That it is a point to be granted by all Christians, that in all ages there
has been a visible Congregation of faithful people. Which Proposition
howsoever you understand it, is not absolutely certain. But if you mean by
Faithful, (as it is plain you do) free from all error in faith, then you know
all Protestants with one consent affirm it to be false; and therefore without
proof to take it for granted is to beg the Question.

4. That supposing Luther and they which did first separate from the Roman
Church were guilty of Schism, it is certainly consequent, that all who persist
in this division must be so likewise. Which is not so certain as you pretend.
For they which alter without necessary cause the present government of any
state Civil or Ecclesiastical, do commit a great fault; whereof notwithstanding
they may be innocent who continue this alteration, and to the utmost of their
power oppose a change though to the former state, when continuance of time has
once settled the present. Thus have I known some of your own Church condemn the
Low-country-men who first revolted from the King of Spain, of the sin of
Rebellion, yet absolve them from it who now being of your Religion there, are
yet faithful maintainers of the common liberty against the pretenses of the
King of Spain.

5. That all those which a Christian is to esteem neighbors do concur to make
one company, which is the Church. Which is false: for a Christian is to esteem
those his neighbors, who are not members of the true Church.

6. That all the members of the Visible Church, are by charity united into one
Mystical body. Which is manifestly untrue; for many of them have no Charity.

7. That the Catholic Church, signifies one company of faithful people, which
is repugnant to your own grounds. For you require not true faith, but only the
Profession of it, to make men members of the Visible Church.

8. That every Heretic is a Schismatic. Which you must acknowledge false in
those, who though they deny, or doubt of some point professed by your Church,
and so are Heretics: yet continue still in the Communion of the Church.

9. That all the members of the Catholic Church, must of necessity be united
in external Communion. Which though it were much to be desired it were so, yet
certainly cannot be perpetually true. For a man unjustly excommunicated, is not
in the Churches Communion, yet he is still a member of the Church: and diverse
times it has happened, as in the case of Chrisostom and Epiphanius, that
particular men, and particular Churches, have upon an overvalued difference,
either renounced Communion mutually, or one of them separated from the other,
and yet both have continued members of the Catholic Church. These things are
in those seven Sections, either said or supposed by you untruly, without all
show, or pretense of proof. The rest is an impertinent common place, wherein
Protestants and the cause in hand, are absolutely unconcerned. And therefore I
pass to the eighth Section.

10. Ad.. 8.] Here you obtrude upon us, a double fallacy; One, in supposing and
taking for granted, that whatsoever is affirmed by three Fathers, must be true;
whereas your selves make no scruple of condemning many things of falsehood,
which yet are maintained, by more than thrice three Fathers. Another, in
pretending their words to be spoken absolutely, which by them are limited and
restrained to some particular cases. Thus the words of S. Austin (cap. 11. lib.
2. cont. Parm.) That there is no necessity to divide Unity; are not spoken
absolutely, that there never is, nor can be any necessity to divide Unity
(which only were for your purpose) but only in such a special case as he there
sets down: That is, When good men tolerate bad men, which can do them no
spiritual hurt, to the intent they may not be separated from those, who are
spiritually good: Then (says he) there is no necessity to divide Unity. Which
very words do clearly give us to understand, that it may fall out (as it does
in our case) that we cannot keep Unity with bad men, without spiritual hurt, i.
e. without partaking with them in their impieties, and that then there is a
necessity to divide Unity from them: I mean, to break off conjunction with them
in their impieties. Which that it was S. Austins mind, it is most evident out
of the 21. c. of the same book: where to Parmenian demanding, how can a man
remain pure, being joined with those that are corrupted? He answers, Very true,
this is not possible, if he be joined with them, that is, if he commit any evil
with them, or favor them which do commit it. But if he do neither of these, he
is not joined with them. And presently after, these two things retained, will
keep such men pure and uncorrupted; that is, neither doing ill, nor approving
it. And therefore seeing you impose upon all men of your Communion, a necessity
of doing or at least approving many things unlawful, certainly there lies upon
us an unavoidable necessity of dividing Unity, either with you, or with God;
and whether of these is rather to be done, be ye judges.

11. Iraeneus also says not simply (which only would do you service, (there
cannot possibly be any so important Reformation, as to justify a Separation
from them who will not reform: But only, they cannot make any corruption so
great, as is the pernitiousness of a Schism: Now, They, here is a relative, and
has an antecedent expressed in Iraeneus, which if you had been pleased to take
notice of, you would easily have seen, that what Irenaeus says, falls heavy
upon the Church of Rome, but touches Protestants nothing at all. For the men
he speaks of, are such as Propter modicas and quaslibet causas, for trifling or
small causes, divide the body of Christ; such as speak of peace and make war;
such as strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels. And these says he, can make no
reformation of any such importance, as to countervail the danger of a division.
Now seeing the causes of our separation from the Church of Rome, are (as we
pretend, and are ready to justify,) because we will not be partakers with her
in Superstition, Idolatry, Impiety, and most cruel Tyranny, both upon the
bodies and souls of men. Who can say, that the causes of our separation, may be
justly esteemed Modicae and quaelibet causae? On the other side, seeing the
Bishop of Rome, who was contemporary to Irenaeus, did as much (as in him lay)
cut off from the Churches unity, many great Churches, for not conforming to him
in an indifferent matter, upon a difference, Non de Catholico dogmate, sed de
Ritu, vel Ritus potius tempore, not about any Catholic Doctrine, but only a
Ceremony, or rather about the time of observing it; so Petavius values it:
which was just all one, as if the Church of France should excommunicate those
of their own Religion in England, for not keeping Christmas upon the same day
with them: And seeing he was reprehended sharply and bitterly for it, by most
of the Bishops of the World, as Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 24. Perron. Replic. l. 3.
c. 2.
Eusebius testifies, and (as Cardinal Perron though mincing the matter, yet
confesses) by this very Irenaeus himself in particular admonished, that for so
small a cause (propter tam modicam causam,) he should not have cut off so many
Provinces from the Body of the Church: and lastly, seeing the Eccesiastical
story of those times, mentions no other notable example of any such
Schismatical presumption, but this of Victor: certainly we have great
inducement to imagine, that Irenaeus in this place by you quoted, had a special
aim at the Bishop and Church of Rome. Once, this I am sure of, that the place
fits him, and many of his successors, as well as if it had been made purposely
for them. And this also, that he which finds fault with them who separate upon
small causes, implies clearly, that he conceived, their might be such causes as
were great and sufficient: And that then a Reformation was to be made,
notwithstanding any danger of division that might ensue upon it.

12. Lastly, S. Denis of Alexandria, says indeed and very well, that all things
should be rather endured, than we should consent to the division of the Church:
I would add, Rather than consent to the continuation of the division, if it
might be remedied. But then, I am to tell you, that he says not All things
should rather be done, but only, All things should rather be endured or
suffered: wherein he speaks not of the evil of Sin, but of Pain and Misery: Not
of tolerating either Error or Sin in others (though that may be lawful,) much
less of joining with others for quietness sake, (which only were to your
purpose) in the profession of Error and practice of sin: but of suffering any
affliction, nay even Martyrdom in our own persons, rather than consent to the
division of the Church. Omnia incommoda, so your own Christophorson, enforced
by the circumstances of the place, translates Dionysius his words, All miseries
should rather be endured, then we should consent to the Churches division.

13. Ad. 9.] In this Paragraph you tell us first, that the Doctrine of the
total deficiency of the visible Church, maintained by many chief Protestants
implies in it vast absurdity, or rather sacrilegious Blasphemy.

Answ. But neither do the Protestants alleged by you, maintain the deficiency
of the Visible Church, but only of the Churches Visibility, or of the Church as
it is visible; neither do they hold that the Visible Church has failed totally
from its essence, but only from its purity; and that it fell into many
corruptions, but yet not to nothing. You say secondly, that the Reason which
cast them upon this wicked Doctrine, was a desperate voluntary necessity,
because they were resolved not to acknowledge the Roman to be the true Church,
and were convinced by all manner of evidence, that for diverse Ages before
Luther there was no other. But this is not to dispute but to Divine, and take
upon you the property of God which is to know the Hearts of Men. For why I
pray, might not the Reason hereof rather be, because they were convinced by all
manner of evidence, as Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, that all the Visible
Churches in the World, but above all the Roman, had degenerated from the purity
of the Gospel of Christ, and thereupon did conclude there was no Visible
Church, meaning by no Church, none free from corruption, and conformable in all
things to the Doctrine of Christ.

14. Ad. 10. Neither is there any repugnance (but in words only) between these
(as you are pleased to style them) exterminating Spirits, and those other, whom
out of courtesy you entitle, in your 10.. more moderate Protestants. For these
affirming the Perpetual Visibility of the Church, yet neither deny, nor doubt
of her being subject to manifold and grievous corruptions, and those of such a
nature, as were they not mitigated by invincible, or at least a very probable
ignorance, none subject to them could be saved. And they on the other side,
denying the Churches Visibility, yet plainly affirm, that they conceive very
good hope of the Salvation of many, of their ignorant and honest Forefathers.
Thus declaring plainly, though in words they denied the Visibility of the true
Church, yet their meaning was not to deny the perpetuity, but the perpetual
purity and incorruption of the Visible Church.

17. Ad. 11.] You ask, To what Congregation shall a man have recourse for the
affairs of his Soul; if upon Earth there be no visible Church of Christ?

Answ. If some one Christian lived alone among Pagans in some Country, remote
from Christendom, shall we conceive it impossible for this man to be saved,
because he cannot have recourse to any Congregation for the affairs of his
Soul? Will it not be sufficient, for such a ones Salvation, to know the
Doctrine of Christ, and live according to it?

18. Obj. To imagine a company of Men believing one thing in their Heart, and
with their Mouth professing the contrary (as they must be supposed to do, for
if they had professed what they believed, they would have become visible) is to
dream of a damned crew of dissembling Sycophants, but not to conceive aright of
the Church of Christ. Answ. What is this to the Visibility of the Church? May
not the Church be Invisible, and yet these that are of it profess their Faith?
No, say you: Their profession will make them visible. Very true, visible in the
places where, and in the times when they live, and to those persons, unto whom
they have necessary occasion, to make their profession: But not visible to all,
or any great, or considerable part of the World while they live, much less
conspicuous to all Ages after them. Now it is a Church thus illustriously and
conspicuously visible that you require: by whose splendor, all men may be
directed and drawn to repair to her, for the affairs of their Souls: Neither is
it the Visibility of the Church absolutely, but this degree of it, which the
most rigid Protestants deny: which is plain enough out of the places of Napper,
cited by you in your 9. Part. of this chapt. Where his words are, God has
withdrawn his visible Church from open Assemblies, to the Hearts of particular
godly men. And this Church which had not open Assemblies, he calls The latent
and Invisible Church. Now I hope Papists in England will be very apt to grant,
men may be so far Latent and Invisible, as not to profess their Faith in open
Assemblies, nor to proclaim it to all the World, and yet not deny, nor
dissemble it; nor deserve to be esteemed a damned crew of dissembling
Sycophants.

Obj. But Preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, cannot
but make a Church Visible: and these are inseparable Notes of the Church. I
answer, they are so far inseparable, that wheresoever they are, there a Church
is: But not so, but that in some cases there may be a Church, where these Notes
are not. Again, these Notes will make the Church visible: But to whom?
certainly not to all men, nor to most men: But to them only to whom the Word is
Preached, and the Sacraments are administered. They make the Church Visible to
whom themselves are visible, but not to others. As where your Sacraments are
administered, and your Doctrine Preached, it is visible, that there is a Popish
Church. But this may perhaps be visible to them only, who are present at these
performances, and to others, as secret, as if they had never been performed.

20. Obj. But S. Austin says, it is an impudent, abominable, detestible
speech, etc. to say the Church has Perished. Answ. 1. All that S. Austin says
is not true. 2. Though this were true, it were nothing to your purpose, unless
you will conceive it all one not to be, and not to be conspicuously visible. 3.
This very speech that the Church Perished, might be false and impudent in the
Donatists, and yet not so in the Protestants. For there is no incongruity, that
what has lived 500. Years, may perish in 1600.

21. Obj. While Protestants deny the perpetuity of a visible Church, they
destroy their own present Church. Answ. I do not see, how the Truth of any
present Church depends upon the perpetual Visibility, nay nor upon the
perpetuity of that which is past or future. For what sense is there, that it
should not be in the power of God Almighty, to restore to a flourishing Estate,
a Church which oppression has made Invisible? to repair that which is ruined;
to reform that which was corrupted, or to revive that which was dead? Nay what
reason is there, but that by ordinary means this may be done, so long as the
Scriptures by Divine Providence are preserved in their integrity and Authority?
As a Commonwealth though never so far collapsed and overrun with disorders, is
yet in possibility of being reduced unto its Original State, so long as the
Ancient Laws, and Fundamental Constitutions are extant, and remain inviolate,
from whence men may be directed how to make such a Reformation. But S. Austin
urges this very Argument against the Donatists, and therefore it is good. I
answer, that I doubt much of the Consequence, and my Reason is, because you
your selves acknowledge, that even general Councils (and therefore much more
particular Doctors) though Infallible in their determinations, are yet in their
Reasons and Arguments, whereupon they ground them, subject to like Passions and
Errors with other men.

22. Obj. Lastly whereas you say, That all Divines define Schism a Division
from the true Church, and from thence collect, That there must be a known
Church from which it is possible for men to depart. Answer, I might very justly
question your Antecedent, and desire you to consider, whether Schism be not
rather, or at least be not as well a division of the Church, as from it? A
separation not of a part from the whole, but of some parts from the other. And
if you liked not this definition, I might desire you to inform me in those many
Schisms, which have happened in the Church of Rome, which of the parts was the
Church, and which was divided from it. But to let this pass, certainly your
consequence is most unreasonable. For though whenever there is a Schism, it
must necessarily suppose a Church existent there, yet sure we may define a
Schism, that is, declare what the word signifies (for Defining is no more)
though at this present there were neither Schism nor Church in the World.
Unless you will say, that we cannot tell wat a Rose is, or what the word Rose
signifies, but only in the Summer when we have Roses: or that in the World to
come, when men shall not Marry, it is impossible to know, what it is to Marry:
or that the Plague is not a Disease, but only when some Body is infected: or
that Adultery is not a sin, unless there be Adulterers: or that before Adam had
a Child, he knew not, and God could not have told him, what it was to be a
Father. Certainly Sir, you have forgot your Metaphysics, which you so much
glory in, if you know not, that the connexions of essential predicates with
their subjects, are Eternal, and depend not at all upon the actual existence in
the thing defined. This Definition therefore of Schism, concludes not the
existence of a Church, even when it is defined: much less the perpetual
continuance of it, and least of all the continuance of it in perpetual
visibility and purity, which is the only thing that we deny, and you are to
prove.

23. Ad. 12.47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. The remainder of this Chapter,
offers Arguments to convince Luther and all that follow him to be Schismatics.

24. First then to prove us Schismatics, you urge from the nature of Schism
thus.

Whosoever leave the external Communion of the visible Church, are
Schismatics: But Luther and his followers left the external Communion of the
visible Church of Christ: Therefore they are Schismatics.

The Minor or second Proposition of this Argument, you prove by two other. The
first is this.

They which forsook the external Communion of all Visible Churches, must needs
forsake the external Communion of the true visible Church of Christ. But Luther
and his followers forsook the external Communion of all Visible Churches:
Therefore they forsook the external Communion of the true visible Church.

The Second Argument stands thus.

The Roman Church, when the separation was made by Luther, etc. was the true
Visible Church of Christ.

But Luther, etc. forsook the external Communion of the Roman Church. Therefore
they forsook the external Communion of the true Visible Church of Christ.

The Proposition you confirm by these Reasons.

1. The Roman Church had the Notes of the Church assigned by Protestants, viz.
The true Preaching of the Word, and due administration of Sacraments: Therefore
she was the true Church.

2. Either the Roman Church was the true visible Church, or Protestants can
name and prove some other disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing with
Protestants, in their particular Doctrine: or else they must say there was no
visible Church: But they will not say, there was no Church: They cannot name
and prove any other disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing with the
Protestants in their particular Doctrines; because this cannot be the Greek
Church, nor that of the Waldenses, Wicklifites, Hussites, nor that of the
Muscovites, Armenians, Georgians, Aethiopians, (which you confirm by several
Arguments:) Therefore they must grant, that the Roman Church was the true
Visible Church.

25. Now to all this I briefly answer thus: That you have played the unwise
builder, and erected a stately structure upon a false Foundation. For whereas
you take for granted as an undoubted Truth, That whosoever leave the external
Communion of the visible Church, are Schismatical, I tell you Sir, you presume
too much upon us, and would have us grant, that which is the main point in
Question. For either you suppose the external Communion of the Church
corrupted, and that there was a necessity for them, that would Communicate with
this Church, to Communicate in her corruptions: Or you suppose her Communion
uncorrupted. If the former, and yet will take for granted, that all are
Schismatics, that leave her Communion though it be corrupted, you beg the
Question in your proposition. If the latter, you beg the Question in your
supposition, for Protestants, you know, are Peremptory and Unanimous in the
Denial of both these things: Both that the Communion of the Visible Church, was
then uncorrupted; And that they are truly Schismatics, who leave the Communion
of the Visible Church, if corrupted; especially, if the case be so (and Luthers
was so) that they must either leave her Communion or of necessity Communicate
with her in her corruptions.

26. Besides although it were granted Schism, to leave the external Communion
of the Visible Church in what state or case so ever it be, and that Luther and
his followers were Schismatics, for leaving the external Communion of all
Visible Churches: yet you fail exceedingly of clearing the other necessary
point undertaken by you, That the Roman Church was then the Visible Church. For
neither do Protestants (as you mistake) make the true preaching of the Word,
and due administration of the Sacraments, the notes of the Visible Church, but
only of a Visible Church: now these you know are very different things, the
former signifying the Church Catholic, or the whole Church: the latter a
Particular Church, or a part of the Catholic. And therefore suppose out of
courtesy, we should grant, what by argument you can never evince, that your
Church had these notes, yet would it by no means follow, that your Church were
the Visible Church, but only a Visible Church: not the whole Catholic, but
only a part of it.

27. Lastly, whereas you say, that Protestants must either grant that your
Church then was the Visible Church, or name some other, disagreeing from yours
and agreeing with Protestants in their particular doctrine, or acknowledge there
was no Visible Church. It is all one as if (to use S. Paul's similitude) the
head should say to the foot, either you must grant that I am the whole body, or
name some other member that is so, or confess that there is no body. To which
the foot might answer; I acknowledge there is a body: and yet, that no member
beside you is this body: nor yet that you are it, but only a part of it. And in
like manner say we. We acknowledge a Church there was, corrupted indeed
universally, but yet such a one as we hope by Gods gracious acceptance, was
still a Church. We pretend not to name any one Society that was this Church,
and yet we see no reason, that can enforce us to confess that yours was the
Church but only a part of it, and that one of the worst then extant in the
World. In vain therefore have you troubled your self in proving, that we cannot
pretend, that either the Greeks, Waldenses, Wickliffites, Hussites, Muscovites,
Armenians, Georgians, Abyssines, were then the Visible Church. For all this
discourse proceeds from a false and vain supposition, and begs another point in
Question between us, which is, that some Church of one denomination and one
Communion (as the Roman, the Greek, etc.) must be always, exclusively to all
other Communions, the whole Visible Church. And though perhaps some weak
Protestant having this false principle settled in him, that there was to be
always some Visible Church of one denomination, pure from all error in doctrine,
might be wrought upon, and prevailed with by it, to forsake the Church of
Protestants: yet why it should induce him to go to yours, rather than the Greek
Church, or any other, which pretends to perpetual succession as well as yours,
that I do not understand; unless it be for the reason which Aeneas Sylvius
gave, why more held the Pope above a Council, than a Council above the Pope:
which was because Popes did give Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks, but Councils
gave none, and therefore suing in Forma Pauperis,, were not like to have their
cause very well maintained. For put the case, I should grant of mere favor,
that there must be always some Church of one Denomination and Communion, free
from all errors in doctrine, and that Protestants had not always such a Church:
it would follow indeed from thence, that I must not be a Protestant: But that I
must be a Papist, certainly it would follow by no better consequence than this;
if you will leave England, you must of necessity go to Rome. And yet with this
wretched fallacy, have I been sometimes abused my self, and known many other
poor souls seduced, not only from their own Church and Religion, but unto
yours. I beseech God to open the eyes of all that love the truth, that they may
not always be held captive, under such miserable delusions.

28. Let us come now to the Arguments which you build upon D. Potters own
words, out of which you promise unanswerable reasons to convince Protestants of
Schism.

29. But these reasons will easily be answered, if the Reader will take along
with him these three short Memorandums.

30. First, That not every separation, but only a causeless separation from the
external Communion of any Church, is the Sin of Schism.

31. Secondly, That imposing upon men under pain of Excommunication a necessity
of professing known errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a sufficient
and necessary cause of separation, and that this is the cause the Protestants
allege to justify their separation from which Church of Rome.

32. Thirdly, That to leave the Church, and to leave the external Communion of
a Church, is not the same thing: That being done by ceasing to be a member of
it, by ceasing to have those requisites which constitute a man a member of it,
as faith and obedience: This by refusing to communicate with any Church in her
Liturgies and public worship of God. This Armor if it be rightly placed, will
repel all those Batteries which you threaten us with all.

33. Ad. 13.14, 15.] The first is a sentence of S. Austin against Donatus,
applied to Luther thus. If the Church perished, what Church brought forth
Donatus, ( you say Luther?) If she could not perish, what madness moved the
sect of Donatus to separate, upon pretense to avoid the Communion of bad men?
Whereunto, one fair answer (to let pass many others) is obvious out of the
second observation: That this sentence though it were Gospel, as it is not, is
impertinently applied to Luther and Lutherans. Whose pretense of separation (be
it true or be it false, was not (as that of the Donatists,) only to avoid the
Communion of bad men: but to free themselves from a necessity (which but by
separating was unavoidable,) of joining with bad men in their impieties.

34. Ad. 16. Your second onset drives only at those Protestants, who hold the
true Church was invisible for many ages. Which Doctrine (if by the true Church
be understood, the pure Church, as you do understand it) is a certain truth,
and it is easier for you to declaim (as you do) than to dispute against it. But
these men you say must be Heretics because they separated from the Communion
of the Visible Church: and therefore also from the Communion of that which they
say was invisible: In as much as the invisible Church communicated with the
visible.

35. Ans. I might very justly desire some proof of that which so confidently
you take for granted: That, there were no persecuted and oppressed maintainers
of the Truth in the days of our Forefathers, but only such as dissembled their
opinions, and lived in your Communion. And truly if I should say there were
many of this condition, I suppose I could make my Affirmative much more
probable, than you can make your Negative. We read in Scripture, that Elias
conceived there was none left besides himself in the whole Kingdom of Israel,
who had not revolted from God: and yet God himself assures us that he was
deceived. And if such a man, a Prophet, and one of the greatest, erred in his
judgment touching his own time, and his own Country, why may not you, who are
certainly but a man, and subject to the same passions as Elias was, mistake in
thinking, that in former ages, in some Country or other, there were not always
some good Christians, which did not so much as externally bow their knees to
your Baal? But this answer I am content you shall take no notice of, and think
it sufficient to tell you, that if it be true, that this supposed invisible
Church did hypocritically communicate with the visible Church, in her
corruptions, then Protestants had cause, nay necessity, to forsake their
Communion also, for otherwise they must have joined with them in the practice
of impieties: and seeing they had such cause to separate, they presume their
separation cannot be Schismatical.

36. Yes, you reply, to forsake the external Communion of them with whom they
agree in faith, is the most formal and proper sin of Schism. Answ. Very true,
but I would fain know wherein. I would gladly be informed, whether I be bound
for fear of Schism, to communicate with those that believe as I do, only in
lawful things, or absolutely in every thing; whether I am to join with them in
Superstition and Idolatry, and not only in a common profession of the Faith
wherein we agree, but in a common dissimulation or abjuration of it. This is
that which you would have them do, or else, forsooth, they must be
Schismatics. But hereafter I pray remember, that there is no necessity of
communicating even with true Believers in wicked actions. Nay that there is a
necessity herein to separate from them. And then I dare say, even you being
their judge, the reasonableness of their cause to separate shall, according to
my first observation, justify their separation from being Schismatical.

37. Arg. But the property of Schism according to D. Potter is to cut off from
the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates: And these
Protestants have this property, therefore they are Schismatics.

38. Ans. I deny the Syllogism, it is no better than this: One Smptom of the
Plague is a Fever, but such a man has a Fever, therefore he has the Plague.
The true conclusion which issues out of these Premises, should be this.
Therefore he has one Symptom of the plague. And so likewise in the former,
therefore they have one property or one quality of Schismatics. And as in the
former instance, The man that has one sign of the plague, may by reason of the
absence of other requisites, not have the plague: So these Protestants may have
something of Schismatics, and yet not be Schismatics. A Tyrant sentencing a
man to death for his pleasure, and a just judge that condemns a malefactor, do
both sentence a man to death, and so for the matter do both the same thing: yet
the one does wickedly, the other justly. What Is the reason? because the one
has cause, the other has not. In like manner Schismatics, either always or
generally denounce damnation to them from whom they separate. The same do these
Protestants, and yet are not Schismatics. The Reason: because Schismatics do
it, and do it without cause, and Protestants have cause for what they do. The
impieties of your Church, being, generally speaking, damnable, unless where
they are excused by ignorance, and expiated at least by a general repentance.
In fine, though perhaps it may be true, that all Schismatics do so yet
universal affirmatives are not converted, and therefore it follows not by any
good Logic, that all that do so, when there is just cause for it, must be
Schismatics. The cause in this matter of separation is all in all, and that
for ought I see, you never think of. But if these rigid Protestants have just
cause to cut off your Church from the hope of salvation: How can the milder
sort allow hope of salvation to the Members of this Church? Ans. Distinguish
the quality of the Persons censured, and this seeming repugnance of their
censures will vanish into nothing. For your Church may be considered either in
regard of those, in whom, either negligence, or pride, or worldly fear, or
hopes, or some other voluntary sin, is the cause of their ignorance, which I
fear is the case of the generality of men amongst you: or in regard of those
who owe their Errors from Truth, to want of capacity, or default of
instruction; either in respect of those that might know the truth and will not,
or of those who would know the truth but (all things considered) cannot: In
respect of those that have eyes to see, and will not see, or those that would
gladly see, but want eyes, or light. Consider the former sort of men, (which
your more rigid censures seem especially to reflect upon,) and the heaviest
sentence will not be too heavy. Consider the latter, and the mildest will not
be too mild. So that here is no difference but in words only, neither are you
flattered by the one, nor uncharitably censured by the other.

39. Your next blow is directed against the milder sort of Protestants, who you
say involve themselves in the sin of Schism by communicating with those (as you
call them) exterminating Spirits, whom you conceive your self to have proved
Schismatics: And now load them further with the crime of Heresy. For, say
you, if you held your selves obliged under pain of damnation, to forsake the
Communion of the Roman Church by reason of her Errors, which yet you confess
were not fundamental: shall it not be much more damnable, to live in
confraternity with these, who defend an Error of the failing of the Church,
which in the Donatists you confess to have been properly Heretical?

40. Ans. You mistake in thinking that Protestants hold themselves obliged not
to communicate with you, only or principally by reason of your Errors and
Corruption. For the true reason according to my third observation, is not so
much because you maintain Errors and Corruptions, as because you impose them:
and will allow your Communion to none but to those that will hold them with
you; and have so ordered your Communion, that either we must communicate with
you in these things, or nothing. And for this very reason, though it were
granted, that these Protestants held this Doctrine which you impute to them; And
though this Error were as damnable and as much against the Creed as you
pretend: Yet after all this, this disparity between you and them, might make it
more lawful for us to communicate with them than you: because what they hold,
they hold to themselves, and refuse not (as you do) to communicate with them
that hold the contrary.

41. Thus we may answer your Argument, though both your former Suppositions
were granted, But then for a second answer, I am to tell you that there is no
necessity of granting either of them. For neither do these Protestants hold the
failing of the Church from its being, but only from its visibility: which if
you conceive all one, then must you conceive that the Stars fail every day, and
the Sun every night. Neither is it certain that the Doctrine of the Churches
failing is repugnant to the Creed. For as the truth of the Article of the
Remission of sins, depends not upon the actual remission of any man's sins, but
upon Gods readiness and resolution to forgive the sins of all that believe and
repent; so that, although unbelief or impenitence should be universal, and the
Faithful should absolutely fail from the children of men, and the son of man
should find no faith on the earth, yet should the Article still continue true,
that God would forgive the sins of all that repent: In like manner, it is not
certain that the truth of the Article of the Catholic Church depends upon the
actual existence of a Catholic Church, but rather upon the right, that the
Church of Christ, or rather (to speak properly) the Gospel of Christ has to be
universally believed. And therefore the Article may be true, though there were
no Church in the world. In regard, this notwithstanding, it remains still true
that there ought to be a Church, and this Church ought to be Catholic. For as,
of these two Propositions, There is a Church in America, and, There should be a
Church in America, The truth of the latter depends not upon the truth of the
former, so neither does it in these two: There is a Church diffused all the
world over, and, There should be a Church diffused all the world over.

44. Ad. 17. The next Section in three long leaves delivers us this short
sense. That those Protestants which say they have not left the Churches
external Communion, but only her corruptions pretend to do that which is
impossible. Because these corruptions were inherent in the Churches external
Communion: and therefore he that forsakes them cannot but forsake this.

45. Ans. But who are they that pretend, they forsook the Churches corruptions,
and not her external communion? Some there be that say, they have not left the
Church, that is, not ceased to be members of the Church, but only left her
corruptions: some, that they have not left the communion, but the corruptions
of it; meaning the internal communion of it, and conjunction with it by faith
and obedience: which disagree from the former only in the manner of speaking:
for he that is in the Church, is in this kind of communion with it: and he that
is not in this internal communion, is not in the Church. Some perhaps, that
they left not your external communion in all things; meaning, that they left it
not voluntarily being not fugitivi but fugati, Casaubon in Ep. ad Card. Perron.
as being willing to join with you in any act of piety; but were by you
necessitated and constrained to do so, because you would not suffer them to do
well with you, unless they would do ill with you. Now to do ill that you may do
well, is against the will of God, which to every good man is a high degree of
necessity. But for such Protestants, as pretend that de facto, they forsook
your corruptions only and not your external communion, that is, such as pretend
to communicate with you in your Confessions and Liturgies, and participation of
Sacraments, I cannot but doubt very much, that neither you nor I have ever met
with any of this condition. And if perhaps you were led into error, by thinking
that to leave the Church, and to leave the external communion of it, was all
one in sense and signification, I hope by this time you are disabused, and
begin to understand, that as a man may leave any fashion or custom of a
College, and yet remain still a member of the College; so a man may possibly
leave some opinion or practice of a Church formerly common to himself and
others, and continue still a member of that Church: Provided that what he
forsakes be not one of those things wherein the essence of the Church consists.
Whereas peradventure this practice may be so involved with the external
communion of this Church, that it may be simply impossible, for him to leave
this practice, and not to leave the Churches external communion.

46. You will reply perhaps, That the difficulty lies as well against those who
pretend to forsake the Churches corruptions and not the Church: as against
those who say, they forsook the Churches corruptions, and not her external
communion. And that the reason is still the same: because these supposed
corruptions, were inherent in the whole Church, and therefore by like reason
with the former, could not be forsaken, but if the whole Church were forsaken.

47. Ans. A pretty Sophism, and very fit to persuade men that it is impossible
for them, to forsake any Error they hold, or any Vice they are subject to,
either peculiar to themselves, or in common with others: Because forsooth, they
cannot forsake themselves, and Vices and Errors are things inherent in
themselves. The deceit lies, in not distinguishing between a Local and a Moral
forsaking of any thing. For as it were an absurdity, fit for the maintainers of
Transubstantiation to defend, that a man may locally and properly depart from
the accidents of a subject, and not from the subject it self: So is it also
against reason to deny, that a man may (by an usual phrase of speech) forsake
any custom, or quality, good or bad, either proper to himself, or common to
himself with any company, and yet never truly or properly forsake either his
company or himself. Thus if all the Jesuits in the Society, were given to
write Sophistically, yet you might leave this ill custom, and yet not leave
your Society. If all the Citizens of a City, were addicted to any vanity, they
might either, all, or some of them forsake it, and yet not forsake the City. If
all the parts of a man's Body were dirty or filthy, nothing hinders but that all
or some of them might cleanse themselves, and yet continue parts of the Body.
And what reason then in the World is there, if the whole visible Church were
overcome with Tares and Weeds of superstitions; and corruptions, but that some
members of it might reform themselves, and yet continue still true members of
the Body of the Church, and not be made no members, but the better by their
Reformation?

50. We acknowledge, that we cannot (as matters now stand) Separate from your
corruptions, but we must depart from your External Communion. For you have so
ordered things, that whosoever will Communicate with you at all, must
Communicate with you, in your corruptions. But it is you that will not perceive
the difference, between, being a part of the Church, and being in external
Communion with all the other parts of it: taking for granted, that which is
certainly false, that no two men or Churches, divided in external Communion,
can be both true parts of the Catholic Church.

51. We are not to learn the difference between Schism and Heresy, for Heresy
we conceive, an obstinate defense of any Error, against any necessary Article
of the Christian Faith: And Schism, a causless separation of one part of the
Church from another. But this we say, That if we convince you of Errors and
corruptions, professed and practiced in your Communion, then we cannot be
Schismatics, for refusing to join with you in the profession of these Errors,
and the practice of these corruptions. And therefore you must free your selves
from Error, or us from Schism.

52. Lastly, whereas you say, That you have demonstrated against us, that
Protestants divided themselves from the external Communion of the Visible
Church, add, which external communion was corrupted, and we shall confess the
accusation, and glory in it. But this is not that Quod erat demonstrandum, but
that we divided our selves from the Church, that is, made our selves Outlaws
from it, and no members of it. And moreover, in the Reason of your separation
from the external Communion of your Church you are mistaken: for it was not so
much because she, your Church, as because your Churches external Communion was
corrupted, and needed Reformation.

53. That a pretense of Reformation will acquit no man from Schism, we grant
very willingly, and therefore say, that it concerns every man who separates
from any Churches Communion, even as much as his Salvation is worth, to look
most carefully to it, that the cause of his separation be just and necessary:
For unless it be necessary, it can very hardly be sufficient. But whether a
true Reformation of our selves from Errors, superstitions and impieties, will
not justify our separation in these things; our separation, I say, from them
who will not reform themselves, and as much as in them lies, hinder others from
doing so: This is the point you should have spoken to, but have not. As for the
sentences of the Fathers to which you refer us, for the determination of this
Question, I suppose by what I have said above, the Reader understands, by
alleging them you have gained little credit to your cause or person. And that,
if they were competent Judges of this Controversy, their sentence is against
you much rather than for you.

56. But your Argument you conceive, will be more convincing, if we consider
that when Luther appeared, there were not two distinct Visible true Churches,
one Pure, the other Corrupted, but one Church only. Ans. The ground of this is
no way certain, nor here sufficiently proved. For, whereas you say, Histories
are silent of any such matter: I answer, there is no necessity, that you or I
should have read all Histories, that may be extant of this matter; nor that all
should be extant that were written, much less extant uncorrupted: especially
considering your Church, which had latly all power in her hands, has been so
pernitiously industrious, in corrupting the monuments of Antiquity that made
against her; nor that all Records should remain which were written; nor that
all should be recorded which was done.

Lastly, whereas you say, that supposing a visible pure Church, Luther must be
a Schismatic, who separated from all visible Churches: I tell you, if you will
suppose a Visible Church extant before and when Luther arose, conformable to
him in all points of Doctrine, necessary and profitable, then Luther separated
not from this Church, but adjoined himself to it: Not indeed in place, which
was not necessary, not in external Communion which was impossible, but by the
Union of Faith and Charity. Upon these grounds I say, that the ground of this
Argument is no way made certain, yet because it is not manifestly false, I am
content to let it pass. And for ought I see, it is very safe for me to do so:
for you build nothing upon it, which I may not fairly grant. For what do you
conclude from hence, but that seeing there was no Visible Church but corrupted,
Luther forsaking the external Communion of the corrupted Church, could not but
forsake the external Communion of the Catholic Church? Well, let this also be
granted, what will come of it? What, that Luther must be a Schismatic? By no
means: For not every separation, but only a causeless separation from the
Communion of the Church we maintain to be Schismatical. Hereunto may be added,
that though the whole Church were corrupted, yet properly speaking, it is not
true, that Luther and his Followers forsook the whole corrupted Church, or the
external Communion of it: But only that he forsook that Part of it which was
corrupted, and still would be so, and forsook not, but only reformed another
Part, which Part they themselves were, and I suppose you will not go about to
persuade us, that they forsook themselves or their own Communion. And if you
urge that they joined themselves to no other part, therefore they separated
from the whole: I say it follows not, in as much as themselves were a part of
it, and still continued so: and therefore could no more separate from the whole
than from themselves. Thus though there were no part of the People of Rome, to
whom the Plebeians joined themselves, when they made their Secession into the
Aventine Hill, yet they divided themselves from the Patricians only, and not
from the whole People, because themselves were a part of this People, and they
divided not from themselves.

57. Ad. 18.] Here you prove that which no man denies, that corruption in
manners yields no sufficient cause to leave the Church: yet sure it yields
sufficient cause to cast them out of the Church, that are after the Churches
public admonition obstinate in notorious impieties. Neither does the cutting
off such men from the Church, lay any necessity upon us, either to go out of
the World, or out of the Church, but rather puts these men out of the Church
into the World, where we may converse with them freely, without scandal to the
Church, Our Blessed Savior foretold, you say, that there should be in the
Church Tares with choice Corn. Look again I pray, and you shall see, that the
field he speaks of, is not the Church, but the World; and therefore neither do
You obey our Saviors command, Let both grow up till the Harvest, who teach it
to be lawful to root these Tears (such are Heretics) out of the World: neither
do Protestants disobey it, if they eject manifest Heresies and notorious
sinners out of the Church.

58. Ad. 19.] In the 19. you are so courteous as to suppose corruptions in your
Doctrine, and yet undertake to prove that, neither could they afford us any
sufficient cause, or colorable necessity to depart from them. Your reason is,
because damnable Errors there were none in your Church, by D. Potters
confession, neither can it be damnable in respect of Error, to remain in any
Churches Communion, whose Errors are not damnable. For if the Error be not
damnable, the belief thereof cannot. Answ. D. Potter confesses no such matter:
but only that he hopes that your Errors, though in themselves sufficiently
damnable, yet by accident did not damn all that held them: such he means and
says, as were excusably ignorant of Truth, and amongst the number of their
unknown sins, repented daily of their unknown Errors. The truth is, he thinks
as ill of your Errors and their desert, as you do of ours: only he is not so
peremptory and presumptuous in judging your persons, as you are in judging
ours, but leaves them to stand or fall to their own Master, who is infinitely
merciful, and therefore will not damn them for mere Errors, who desire to find
the truth and cannot: and withal infinitely just, and therefore (is it to be
feared) will not pardon them, who might easily have come to the knowledge of
the truth, and either through Pride, or obstinacy, or neligence would not.

59. To your minor also, I answer almost in your own Words,. 42. of this Chap.
I thank you for your courteous supposal, that your Church may Err, and in
recompense thereof, will do you a Charity, by putting you in mind, into what
Labyrinths you cast your self, by supposing that the Church may Err in some of
her Proposals, and yet denying it lawful for any man though he know this, which
you suppose, to oppose her judgment, or leave her communion. Will you have such
a man dissemble against his Conscience, or externally deny that which he knows
true? No, that you will not, for them that do so, you your self have pronounced
A damned Crew of dissembling Sycophants. Or would you have him continue in your
Communion, and yet profess your Church to Err? This you your selves have made
to him impossible. Or would you have him believe those things true, which
together with him you have supposed to be Errors? This in such a one, as is
assured or persuaded of that, which you here suppose, that your Church does
Err, (and such only we say, are obliged to forsake your Communion,) is, as
Schoolmen speak, Implicatio in terminis, a contradiction so plain, that one
word destroys another; as if one should say, a living dead man. For it is to
require that they which believe some part of your Doctrine false, should withal
believe it all true. Seeing therefore, for any man to believe your Church in
Error, and profess the contrary, is damnable Hypocrisy; to believe it and not
believe it, a manifest repugnancy; and thirdly, to profess it and to continue
in your Communion (as matters now stand) a plain impossibility; what remains,
but that whosoever is supposed to have just reason to disbelieve any Doctrine
of your Church, must of necessity forsake her Communion? Unless you would remit
so far from your present rigor, as to allow them your Churches Communion, who
publicly profess that they do not believe every Article of her established
Doctrine. Indeed, if you would do so, you might with some coherence suppose
your Church in Error, and yet find fault with men for abandoning her Communion,
because they might continue in it, and suppose her in Error. But to suppose
your Church in Error, and to excommunicate all those that believe your own
supposition, and then to complain that they continue not in your Communion, is
the most ridiculous incongruity that can be imagined. And therefore though your
corruptions in Doctrine, in themselves (which yet is false) did not, yet your
obliging us, to profess your Doctrine uncorrupted against knowledge and
Conscience, may induce an obligation to depart from your Communion. As if there
were any Society of Christians, that held there were no Antipodes;
notwithstanding this Error I might communicate with them. But if I could not do
so, without professing my self of their belief in this matter, then I suppose I
should be excused from Schism, if I should forsake their Communion, rather than
profess my self to believe that which I do not believe. Neither is there any
contradiction, or shadow of contradiction, that it may be necessary for my
Salvation to depart from this Churches Communion: And that this Church (though
Erring in this matter) wants nothing necessary to Salvation.

60. That there might be necessary cause to depart from the Church of Rome in
some Doctrine and practices, though she wanted nothing necessary to Salvation
as Dr. Potter holds, and you call a contradiction, will appear by setting down
his Words, which are these; To forsake the Errors of that Church, and not to
join with her in those practices which we account erroneous, we are enforced by
necessity. For though in the issue they are not damnable to them which believe
as they profess, yet for us to profess and avow by Oath ( as the Church of Rome
enjoins) what we believe not, were without question damnable. And they with
their Errors, by the grace of God might go to Heaven, when we for our
Hypocrisy and dissimulation (he might have added, and Perjury) stould
certainly be condemned to Hell.

61. Ad. 20.] Obj. But a Church not Erring in Fundamentals, though Erring in
other matters, does what our Savior exacts at her hands, does as much as lies
in her power to do: Therefore the Communion of such a Church is not upon
pretense of Error to be forsaken. The consequence is manifest. The Antecedent
is proved, because God, by D. Potters confession, has promised his assistance
no^ further, Page 151.155.
nor is it in her power to do more than God does assist her to do. Answ. The
promise of Divine Assistance is twofold: Absolute, or Conditional. That there
shall be by Divine providence preserved in the World to the Worlds end, such a
company of Christians, who hold all things precisely and indispensably
necessary to Salvation, and nothing inevitably destructive of it: This and no
more the Doctor affirms that God has promised absolutely. Yet he neither
doubts nor denis, but that a farther assistance is conditionally promised us,
even such an assistance as shall lead us, if we be not wanting to it and our
selves, into all not only necessary, but very profitable truth, and guard us
from all not only destructive, but also hurtful Errors. This, I say, he neither
denies nor questions. And should he have done so, he might have been confuted
by evident and express Texts of Scripture. When therefore you say, That a
Church not Erring in Fundamentals, does as much as by Gods assistance lies in
her power to do; This is manifestly untrue. For Gods assistance is always
ready to promote her farther. It is ready, I say, but on condition the Church
does implore it: on condition, that when it is offerred in the Divine
directions of Scripture and reason, the Church be not negligent to follow it.
If therefore there be any Church, which retaining the foundation, builds Hay
and Stubble upon it: which believing what is precisely necessary, Errors
shamefully and dangerously in other things very profitable: This by no means
argues defect of Divine assistance in God, but neglect of this assistance in
the Church. Neither is there any reason, why such a Church should please her
self too much, for retaining Fundamental truths, while she remains so
regardless of others. For though the simple defect of some truths profitable
only and not simply necessary, may consist with Salvation; Yet who is there
that can give her sufficient assurance, that the neglect of such truths is not
damnable? Besides, who is there that can put her in sufficient caution, that
these Errors about profitable matters may not according to the usual fecundity
of Error, bring forth others of a higher quality, such as are pernicious and
pestilent, and undermine by secret consequences the very foundations of
Religion and Piety? Lastly, who can say that she has sufficiently discharged
her duty to God and man by avoiding only Fundamental Heresies, if in the mean
time she be negligent of others, which though they do not plainly destroy
Salvation, yet obscure and hinder, and only not block up the way to it? Which
though of themselves and immediately they damn no man, yet are causes and
occasions that many men run the race of Christian Piety more remisly than they
should, many defer their repentance, many go on securely in their sins, and so
at length are damned by means and occasion of these Errors, though not for
them. Such Errors as these (though those of the Roman Church be much worse,
even in themselves damnable, and by accident only pardonable) yet I say such
Errors as these, if any Church should tolerate, dissemble and suffer them to
reign, and neglect to reform them, and not permit them to be freely, yet
peaceably, opposed and impugned; will any wise man say, that she has
sufficiently discharged her duty to God and man? That she has with due
fidelity dispensed the Gospel of Christ? That she has done what she could, and
what she ought? What shall we say then, if these Errors be taught by her, and
commanded to be taught? What if she thunder out her curses against those that
will not believe them? What if she rave and rage against them, and persecute
them with Fire and Sword, and all kinds of most exquisite torments? Truly I do
much fear, that from such a Church (though it hold no Error absolutely
unconsistent with Salvation,) the Candlestick of God, either is already
removed, or will be very shortly, and because she is negligent of profitable
truths, that she will lose those that are Necessary, and because she will not
be led into all truths, that in short time she shall be led into none. And
although this should not happen, yet what mortal man can secure us, that not
only a probable unaffected ignorance, nor only a mere neglect of profitable
truths, but also a wretchless supine negligence, manifest contempt,
Dissimulation, Opposition, Oppression of them, may consist with Salvation? I
truly for my part, though I hope very well of all such as seeking all truth,
find that which is necessary; who endeavoring to free themselves from all
Errors, any way contrary to the purity of Christianity, yet fail of performance
and remain in some: yet if I did not find in my self a love and desire of all
profitable truth; If I did not put away idleness, and prejudice, and worldly
affections, and so examine to the bottom all my opinions of Divine matters,
being prepared in mind to follow God, and God only which way soever he shall
lead me; If I did not hope, that I either do, or endeavor to do these things,
certainly I should have little hope of obtaining Salvation.

62. Obj. But to oblige any man under pain of damnation to forsake a Church by
reason of such Errors, against which Christ thought it superfluous to promise
his assistance, and for which he neither denies his grace here, nor his glory
hereafter, what is it but to make the narrow way to Heaven, narrower than
Christ left it? Answ. It is not: for Christ himself has obliged us hereunto:
He has forbidden us under pain of damnation to profess what we believe not,
and consequently under the same penalty, to leave that Communion, in which we
cannot remain without this hypocritical profession of those things, which we
are convinced to be erroneous. But then besides, it is here falsely supposed,
(as has been showed already) that Christ has not promised assistance to those
that seek it, but only in matters simply necessary. Neither is there any
reason, why any Church, even in this World, should despair of Victory over all
Errors pernicious or noxious; provided she humbly and earnestly implore Divine
assistance, depend wholly upon it, and be not wanting to it. Though a Triumph
over all sin and Error, that is, security that she neither does nor can Err, be
rather to be desired than hoped for on Earth, being a felicity reserved for
Heaven.

63. Ad. 21.] Obj. But at least the Roman Church is as infallible as
Protestants, and Protestants as fallible as the Roman Church: therefore to
forsake the Roman Church for Errors, what is it but to flit from one Erring
Society to another? Ans. The inconsequence of this Argument is too apparent:
Protestants may Err as well as the Church of Rome, therefore they did so! Boys
in the Schools know, that a Posse ad Esse, the Argument follows not. He is
equally fallible that believes twice two to be four, as he that believes them
to be twenty: yet in this, he is not equally deceived, and he may be certain
that he is not so. One Architect is no more infallible than another, and yet he
is more secure that his work is right and straight who has made it by the
level, than he which has made it by guess and by chance. So he that forsakes
the Errors of the Church of Rome, and therefore renounceth her Communion, that
he may renounce the profession of her Errors, though he knows himself fallible,
as well as those whom he has forsaken, yet he may be certain (as certain as
the nature of the thing will bear) that he is not herein deceived: because he
may see the Doctrine forsaken by him repugnant to Scripture, and the Doctrine
embraced by him consonant to it. At least, this he may know, that the Doctrine
which he has chosen to him seems true, and the contrary which he has
forsaken, seems false: And therefore without remorse of Conscience, he may
profess that, but this he cannot.

64. Obj. But we are to remember, that according to Doctor Potter the Visible
Church has a blessing not to Err in Fundamentals, in which any private
Reformer may fail, therefore there was no necessity of forsaking the Church,
out of whose Communion they were exposed to danger of falling into many more,
and even into damnable Errors. Answ. The Visible Church is free indeed from all
Errors absolutely destructive and unpardonable, but not from all Error which in
it self is damnable: not from all which will actually bring damnation upon
them, that keep themselves in them, by their own voluntary and avoidable fault.

Besides, any private man who truly believes the Scripture, and seriously
endeavors to know the will of God, and to do it, is as secure as the Visible
Church, more secure than your Church from the danger of Erring in Fundamentals:
for it is impossible, that any man so quallified should fall into any Error
which to him will prove damnable. For God requires no more of any man to his
Salvation, but his true endeavor to be saved. Lastly, abiding in your Churches
Communion is so far from securing me or any man from damnable Error, that if I
should abide in it, I am certain I could not be saved. For abide in it I
cannot, without professing to believe your entire Doctrine true: profess this I
cannot, but I must lie perpetually, and exulcerate my Conscience. And though
your Errors were not in themselves damnable, yet to resist the known Truth, and
to continue in the profession of known Errors were not in themselves damnable,
yet to resist the known Truth, and to continue in the profession of known
Errors and falsehoods, is certainly a capital sin, and of great affinity with
the sin which shall never be forgiven.

65. Obj. But neither is the Protestant Church free from corruptions and
Errors: And what man of Judgment will be a Protestant, since that Church is
confessedly a corrupted one?

Answ. And yet you your self make large discourses in this very Chapter, to
persuade Protestants to continue in the Church of Rome, though supposed to have
some corruptions. And why I pray, may not a man of judgment continue in the
Communion of a Church confessedly corrupted, as well as in a Church supposed to
be corrupted? Especially when this Church supposed to be corrupted, requires
the belief and profession of her supposed corruptions, as the condition of her
Communion: which this Church confessedly corrupted, does not. What man of
judgment will think it any disparagement, to his judgment, to prefer the
better, though not simply the best, before that which is stark naught? To
prefer indifferrent good health, before a diseased and corrupted state of Body?
To prefer a field not perfectly weeded, before a field that is quite overrun
with Weeds and Thorns? and therefore though Protestants have some Errors, yet
seeing they are neither so great as yours, nor imposed with such Tyranny, nor
maintained with such obstinacy; he that conceives it any disparagement to his
judgment, to change your Communion for theirs, though confessed to have some
corruptions, it may well be presumed that he has but little judgment.

66. Ad. 22.] Obj. But Protestants say, it is comfort enough for the Church to
be secured from all capital dangers (which can only arise from Error in
Fundamental points) and not hope to Triumph over all sin and Error, till she be
in Heaven; why therefore were not the first Reformers content with enough, but
would dismember the Church, out of greediness of more than enough?

Answ. I have already showed sufficiently, how capital danger may arise from
Errors, though not Fundamental. I add now, that what may be enough for men in
ignorance, may be to knowing men not enough: according to that of the Gospel,
to whom much is given, of him much shall be required: That the same Error may
be not capital to those who want means of finding the truth, and capital to
others who have means, and neglect to use them: That to continue in the
profession of Error discovered to be so, may be damnable, though the Error be
not so. These I presume are reasons enough, and enough why the first Reformers
might think, and justly, that not enough for themselves, which yet to some of
their Predecessors they hope might be enough. This very Argument was objected
to S. Cyprian: Ep. 63. In these words. Siquis de antecessoribus nostris, vel
igneranter vel simpliciter non hoc observavit, and tenuit quod nos Dominus
facere exemplo and Magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati ejus de
indulgentia Domini, venia concedi: nobis vero non potest ignosci, qui nunc a
Domino admoniti and instructi sumus.
S. Cyprian upon another occasion, and also by the Wilfridus, to Abbat Colman
alleging that he followed the example of his predecessors famous for Holiness,
and famous for Miracles, in these Words, De Patre Vestro Columba and sequacibus
ejus, quorum santitatem vos imitari and regulam ac praecepta coelestibus signis
confirmata sequi perhibetis, possum respondere; Quia multis in judicio
dicentibus Domino Quod in nomine ejus prophetaverint and daemonia ejecerint,
and virtutes multas fecerint, responsurus sit Dominus, quia nunquam eos
noverit. Sed absit ut de patribus vestris hoc dicam, quia justius multo est de
incognitis bonum credere quam malum. Vnde and illos Dei famulos and Deo
dilectos esse non nego, qui simplicitate ructica, sed intention pia Deum
dilexerunt: Neque illis multum obesse Paschae talem reor observantiam, quandiu
nullus advenerat qui eis instituti perfectioris decreta quae sequerentur,
ostenderet. Quos utique credo, si qui tunc ad eos Catholicus calculator
adveniret, sic ejus monita fuisse secuturos, quomodo ea quae noverant ac
didicerunt Dei mandata, probantur fuisse secuti. Tu autem and socii tui si
audita decreta sedis Apostolicae, imo universalis Ecclesiae and haec literis
sacris confirmata contemnitis, absque ulla dubietate peccatis.
British Quartodecimans, to the maintainers of the Doctrine of your Church;
and Beda: lib. 3. Eccl. Hist. c. 25.
by both this very answer was returned; and therefore I cannot but hope that
for their sakes you will approve it.

67. Obj. But if no Church may hope to Triumph over Error, till she be in
Heaven, then we must either grant, that Errors not Fundamental cannot yield
sufficient cause to forsake the Church, or affirm that all communities may and
ought to be forsaken.

Answ. We do not say, that no Church may hope to be free from all Error, either
pernicious or any way noxious: But that no Church may hope to be secure from
all Error simply, for this were indeed truly to triumph over all. But then we
say not, that the Communion of any Church is to be forsaken for Errors
unfundamental, unless it exact with all either a dissimulation of them being
noxious; or a Profession of them against the dictate of Conscience, if they be
mere Errors. This if the Church does (as certainly yours does,) then her
Communion is to be forsaken, rather than the sin of Hypocrisy to be committed.
Whereas to forsake the Churches of Protestants for such Errors, there is no
necessity, because they Err to themselves, and do not under pain of
Excommunication exact the profession of their Errors.

68. Obj. But the Church may not be left by reason of sin, therefore neither by
reason of Errors not Fundamental: in as much as both sin and Error are
impossible to be avoided till she be in Heaven. Answ. The reason of the
consequence does not appear to me: But I answer to the Antecedent: Neither for
sin or Errors, ought a Church to be forsaken, if she does not impose and join
them: but if she do, (as the Roman does,) then we must forsake men rather than
God; leave the Churches Communion rather than commit sin, or profess known
Errors, to be Divine truths. For the Prophet Ezekiel has assured us, that to
say, the Lord has said so, when the Lord has not said so, is a great sin and
a high presumption, be the matter never so small.

69. Ad. 23.] Obj. But neither the Quality nor the number of your Churches
Errors, could warrant our forsaking of it. Not the Quality, because we suppose
them not Fundamental. Not the number because the Foundation is strong enough to
support them. Answ. Here again you vainly suppose, that we conceive your Errors
in themselves not damnable: Though we hope they are not absolutely
unpardonable: but to say they are pardonable, is indeed to suppose them
damnable. Secondly, though the Errors of your Church did not warrant our
departure, yet your Tyrannous imposition of them, would be our sufficient
justification. For this lays necessity on us, either to forsake your company,
or to profess what we know to be false.

70. Obj. Our Blessed Savior has declared his Will, that we forgive a private
offender Seventy Seven times, that is, without limitation of quantity of time,
or quality of Trespasses; and then how dare we allege his command, that we
must not pardon his Church for Errors acknowledged to be not Fundamental? Answ.
He that commands us to pardon our Brother sinning against us so often, will not
allow us for his sake to sin with him, so much as once. He will have us do any
thing but sin, rather than offend any man. But his will is also, that we offend
all the World, rather than sin in the least matter. And therefore though his
will were, and it were in our power (which yet is false) to pardon the Errors
of an Erring Church; yet certainly it is not his will, that we should Err with
the Church, or if we do not, that we should against Conscience profess the
Errors of it.

71. Ad. 24.] Obj. But Schismatics from the Church of England or any other
Church, with this very Answer, that they forsake not the Church but the Errors
of it, may cast off from themselves the imputation of Schism. Answ. True, they
may make the same Answer, and the same defense as we do, as a Murderer can cry
not guilty, as well as an Innocent person, but not so truly nor so justly. The
question is, not what may be pretended, but what can be proved by Schismatics.
They may object Errors to other Churches, as well as we do to yours, but that
they prove their accusation so strongly as we can, that appears not. To the
Priests and Elders of the Jews, imposing that sacred silence mentioned in the
Acts of the Apostles, S. Peter and S. John answered they must obey God rather
than men. The three Children to the King of Babylon, gave in effect the same
answer. Give me now any factious Hypocrite, who makes Religion the pretense and
Cloak of his Rebellion, and who sees not that such a one may answer for
himself, in those very formal words, which the Holy Apostles and Martyrs made
use of. And yet I presume no Christian will deny, but this answer was good, in
the mouth of the Apostles and Martyrs, though it were obnoxious to be used, by
Traitors and Rebels. Certainly therefore, it is no good consequence to say,
Schismatics may make use of this Answer, therefore all that do make use of it
are Schismatics. But moreover, it is to be observed, that the chief part of
our defense, that you deny your Communion to all that deny or doubt of any part
of your Doctrine, cannot with any color be employed against Protestants: who
grant their Communion to all who hold with them, not all things, but things
necessary, that is, such as are in Scripture plainly delivered.

72. Obj. But the forsaking the Roman Church opens a way to innumerable Sects
and Schisms, and therefore it must not be forsaken. Answ. We must not do evil
to avoid evil: neither are all courses presently lawful, by which
inconveniences may be avoided. If all men would submit themselves to the chief
Mufty of the Turks, it is apparent, there would be no divisions; yet Unity is
not to be purchased at so dear a rate. It were a thing much to be desired, that
there were no divisions: yet difference of opinions touching points
controverted, is rather to be chosen, than unanimous concord in damned Errors:
As it is better for men to go to Heaven by diverse ways, or rather by diverse
Paths of the same way, than in the same path to go on peaceably to Hell. Amica
Pax, magis amica Veritas! Peace is dear to me, but Truth is dearer.

74. Ad. 26.27.] Here you make D. Potter to say, that Protestants did well to
forsake the Church of Rome, because they judged she retained all means
necessary to Salvation. Answ. Who was ever so stupid as to give this ridiculous
reason? D. Potter Vindicates Protestants for Schism two ways: The one is,
because they had just and great and necessary cause to separate, which
Schismatics never have; because they that have it are no Schismatics: For
Schism is always a causeless separation. The other is, because they did not
join with their separation, an uncharitable damning of all those from whom they
did divide themselves, as the manner of Schismatics is. Now that which he
intends for a circumstance of our separation, you make him make the cause of
it, and the motive to it. And whereas he says, though we separate from you in
some things, yet we acknowledge your Church a member of the Body of Christ, and
therefore are not Schismatics: You make him say most absurdly, we did well to
forsake you, because we judged you a member of the Body of Christ. Just as if a
Brother should leave his Brothers company in some ill courses, and should say
to him, Herein I forsake you, yet I leave you not absolutely, for I acknowledge
you still to be my Brother, and shall use you as a Brother: And you perverting
his speech, should pretend that he had said, I leave your company in these ill
courses, and I do well to do so, because you are my Brother: so making that the
cause of his leaving him, which indeed is the cause that he left him no farther.

75. Obj. But you say, The very reason for which he acquitteth himself for
Schism, is because he holds that the Church which they forsook, is not cut off
from the Body of Christ.

Ans. This is true: But can you not perceive a difference between justifying
his separation from Schism by this reason, and making this the reason of his
separation? If a man denying obedience in some unlawful matter to his lawful
Sovereign, should say to him, herein I disobey you, but yet I am no Rebel,
because I acknowledge you my Sovereign Lord, and am ready to obey you in all
things lawful, should not he be an egregious Sycophant, that should accuse him
as if he had said, I do well to disobey you, because I acknowledge you my
lawful Sovereign? Certainly he that joins this acknowledgment with his
necessitated disobedience, does well; but he that makes this consideration the
reason of his disobedience, does ill.

76. Obj. It is an unspeakable comfort to Catholics (you say) that we cannot
clear our selves from Schism otherwise, than by acknowledging that we do not,
nor cannot cut off your Church from the hope of salvation.

Ans. I beseech you to take care that this false comfort cost you not too dear.
For why this good opinion of God Almighty, that he will not damn men for error,
who were without their own fault ignorant of the truth, should be any
consolation to them, who having the key of knowledge, will neither use it
themselves, nor permit others to use it; who have eyes to see and will not see,
who have ears to hear and will not hear! this I assure you passes my capacity
to apprehend. Neither is this to make our salvation depend on yours, but only
ours and yours not desperately inconsistent. Nor to say we must be damned unless
you may be saved; but that we assure our selves, if our lives be answerable, we
shall be saved by our knowledge. And that we hope (and I tell you again Spes
est rei incertae nomen,) that some of you may possibly be the rather saved by
occasion of their unaffected Ignorance.

80. Ad. 28.29. Whereas D. Potter says, There is a great difference between a
Schism from them, and a Reformation of our selves: this you say is a quaint
subtilty by which all Schism and sin may be as well excused.

Ans. It seems then in your judgment, that Thieves and Adulterers, and
Murderers, and Traitors may say with as much probability as Protestants, that
they did no hurt to others, but only reform themselves. But then methinks it is
very strange, that all Protestants should agree with one consent in this
defense of themselves from the imputation of Schism: and that to this day,
never any Thief or Murderer should have been heard of to make use of this
Apology! And then for Schismatics I would know, whether Victor Bishop of Rome,
who excommunicated the Churches of Asia for not conforming to his Church in
keeping Easter; whether Novatian that divided from Cornelius, upon pretense
that himself was elected Bishop of Rome, when indeed he was not; whether
Felicissimus and his Crew, that went out of the Church of Carthage, and set up
altar against altar, because having fallen in persecution, they might not be
restored to the peace of the Church presently, upon the intercession of the
Confessors; whether the Donatists, who divided from, and damned all the world,
because all the world would not excommunicate them who were accused only and
not convicted to have been Traditors of the sacred Books; whether they which
for the slips and infirmity of others, which they might and ought to tolerate,
or upon some difference in matters of Order and Ceremony, or for some error in
Doctrine, neither pernicious nor hurtful to faith or piety, separate themselves
from others, or others from themselves; or lastly, whether they that put
themselves out of the Churches unity and obedience, because their opinions are
not approved there, but reprehended and confuted, or because being of impious
conversation, they are impatient of their Churches censure: I would know I say,
whether all, or any of these, may with any face or without extreme impudency,
put in this plea of Protestants, and pretend with as much likelihood as they,
that they did not separate from others, but only reform themselves? But suppose
they were so impudent as to say so in their own defense falsely, does it follow
by any good Logic, that therefore this Apology is not to be employed by
Protestants, who may say so truly? We make (say they) no Schism from you, but
only a reformation of our selves: This, you reply, is no good justification,
because it may be pretended by any Schismatic. Very true, any Schismatic that
can speak may say the same words, (as any Rebel that makes conscience the cloak
of his impious disobedience, may say with S. Peter and S. John, we must obey
God rather than men;) But then the question is, whether any Schismatic may say
so truly? And to this question you say just nothing: but conclude, because this
defense may be abused by some, it must be used by none. As if you should have
said, S. Peter and S. John did ill to make such an answer as they made, because
impious Hypocrites might make use of the same to palliate their disobedience
and rebellion against the lawful commands of lawful Authority.

81. Obj. But seeing their pretended Reformation consisted in forsaking the
Churches corruptions, their Reformation of themselves, and their division from
you, falls out to be one and the same thing.

Ans. Just as if two men having been a long while companions in drunkenness,
one of them should turn sober; this Reformation of himself, and disertion of
his companion, in this ill custom, would be one and the same thing, and yet
there is no necessity that he should leave his love to him at all, or his
society in other things. So Protestants forsaking their own former corruptions,
which were common to them with you, could not choose but withal forsake you in
the practice of these corruptions: yet this they might, and would have done
without breach of Charity toward you; and without a renunciation of your
company in any act of piety and devotion, confessedly lawful. And therefore
though both these were by accident joined together, yet this hinders not but
that the end they aimed at, was not a separation from you, but a reformation of
themselves.

82. Neither does their disagreement in the particulars of the Reformation,
(which yet when you measure it without partiality, you will find to be far short
of infinite) nor their symbolizing in the general of forsaking your
corruptions, prove any thing to the contrary, or any way advantage your design
or make for your purpose. For it is not any sign at all, much less an evident
sign, that they had no settled design, but only to forsake the Church of Rome:
for nothing but malice can deny, that their intent at least was, to reduce
Religion to that original purity from which it was fallen. The declination from
which, some conceiving to have begun (though secretly) in the Apostles times,
(the mystery of iniquity being then in work;) and after their departure to have
showed it self more openly: others again believing, that the Church continued
pure for some Ages after the Apostles, and then declined: And consequently some
aiming at an exact conformity with the Apostolic times: Others thinking they
should do God and men good service, could they reduce the Church to the
condition of the fourth and fifth ages: Some taking their direction in this
work of Reformation, only from Scripture; others from the Writings of Fathers,
and the Decrees of Councils of the first five Ages: certainly it is no great
marvel, that there was, as you say, disagreement between them, in the
particulars of their Reformation; nay morally speaking, it was impossible it
should be otherwise. Yet let me tell you, the difference between them
(especially in comparison of your Church and Religion,) is not the difference
between good and bad, but between good and better: And they did best that
followed Scripture, interpreted by Catholic written Tradition: which rule the
Reformers of the Church of England, proposed to themselves to follow.

83. Ad 30.31, 32.] D. Potter, p. 81.82. of his Book, speak thus. If a
Monastery should reform it self, and should reduce into practice ancient good
discipline, when others would not: In this case could it be charged with Schism
from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and order? So in a society of men
universally infected with some disease, they that should free themselves from
it, could they be therefore said to separate from the society? He presumes they
could not, and from hence concludes, That neither can the Reformed Churches be
truly accused for making a Schism, (that is separating from the Church, and
making themselves no members of it) if all they did was (as indeed it was) to
reform themselves.

84. Now instead of these two instances, which plainly showed it possible in
other societies, and consequently in that of the Church, to leave the faults of
a Society, and not leave being of it, you disingenuously foist in two other
instances, clean cross to the Doctors purpose, of men under color of faults,
abandoning the Society wherein they lived.

85. But that no suspicion of tergiversation may be fastened upon me, I am
content to deal with you a little, at your own weapons. Put the case then,
though not just as you would have it, yet with as much favor to you, as in
reason you can expect, That a Monastery did observe her substantial vows, and
all principal statutes, but yet did generally practice, and also enjoin the
violation of some lesser, yet obliging observances, and had done so time out of
mind. And that some inferior Monks more conscientious than the rest,
discovering this abuse, should first with all earnestness solicit their
Superiors for a general and orderly reformation of these, though small and
venial corruptions, yet corruptions: But finding they hoped and labored in
vain to effect this, should reform these faults in themselves, and refuse to
join in the practice of them, with the rest of their Confraternity, and
persisting resolutely in such a refusal, should by their Superiors be cast out
of their Monastery, and being not to be readmitted without a promise of
remitting from their stiffness in these things, and of condescending to others
in the practice of their small faults, should choose rather to continue exiles,
than to re-enter upon such conditions: I would know whether you would condemn
such men of Apostasy from the Order? Without doubt if you should, you would
find the stream of your Casuists against you, and besides, involve S. Paul in
the same condemnation, who plainly tells, that we may not do the least evil,
that we may do the greatest good. Put case again, you should be part of a
Society universally infected with some disease, and discovering a certain
remedy for this disease, should persuade the whole company to make use of it,
but find the greatest part of them so far in love with their disease, that they
were reslved to keep it; and besides, should make a decree, that whosoever
would leave it, should leave their company. Suppose now that your self and some
few others, should notwithstanding their injunction to the contrary, free your
selves from this disease, and thereupon they should absolutely forsake and
reject you: I would know in this case who deserves to be condemned, whether you
of uncharitable desertion of your company, or they of a tyrannical peevishness?
And if in these cases you will (as I verily believe you will,) acquit the
inferiors and condemn the superiors, absolve the minor part and condemn the
major, then can you with no reason condemn Protestants, for choosing rather to
be ejected from the communion of the Roman Church, than with her to persist (as
of necessity they were to do, if they would continue in her Communion) in the
profession of Errors, though not destructive of salvation, yet hindering
edification, and in the practice, or at least approbatiof many, (suppose not
mortal) but venial corruptions.

86. Besides, you censure too partially the corrupt estate of your Church in
comparing it to a Monastery, which did confessedly observe their substantial
Vows, and all principal Statutes of their order; and moreover was secured by an
infallible assistance, for the avoiding of all substantial corruptions: for of
your Church we confess no such matter, but say plainly, That she not only might
fall into substantial corruptions, but did so; that she did not only generally
violate, but of all the members of her Communion, either in act or approbation,
require and exact the violation of many substantial Laws of Christ, both
Ceremonial and Moral, which though we hope it was pardonable in them, who had
not means to know their error, yet of its own nature, and to them who did or
might have known their error, was certainly damnable. And that it was not the
Tything of Mint and Annise, and Cummin, the neglect whereof we impute unto you,
but the neglect of judgment, justice, and the weightier matters of the Law.

87. Again, you compare Protestants to such a Company as acknowledge that
themselves, as soon as they were gone out of the Monastery that deferred to
reform, must not hope to be free from those or the like Errors and Corruptions
for which they left their Brethren. Which is very strange, seeing this very
hope and nothing else, moved them to leave your Communion: and this speech of
yours, so far as it concerns the same Errors, plainly destroys it self. For how
can they possibly fall into the same Errors by forsaking your Communion, which
that they may forsake they do forsake your Communion? And then for other errors
of the like nature and quality, or more enormous than yours, though they deny
it not possible, but by their negligence and wickedness they may fall into
them, yet they are so far from acknowledging that they have no hope to avoid
this mischief, that they proclaim to all the world, that it is most prone and
easy to do so, to all those that fear God and love the truth; and hardly
possible for them to do otherwise, without supine negligence and extreme
impiety.

89. Obj. But when Luther began, he being but one, opposed himself to all, as
well Subjects as Superiors.

Ans. If he did so in the cause of God, it was heroically done of him. This had
been without hyperbolizing, Mundus contra Athanasium, and Athanasius contra
Mundum; the world against Athanasius, and Athanasius against the world: neither
is it impossible, that the whole world should so far lie in wickedness (as S.
John speaks) that it may be lawful and noble for one man to oppose the world.
But yet were we put to our Oaths, we should surely not testify any such thing
for you; for how can we say properly and without streining, that he opposed
himself to All, unless we could say also, that All opposed themselves to him?
And how can we say so, seeing the world can witness, that so many thousands,
nay millions followed his standard as soon as it was advanced.

90. But none that lived immediately before him thought or spoke as he did. This
first is nothing to the purpose. The Church was then corrupted, and sure it was
no dishonor to him to begin the Reformation. In the Christian warfare, every
man ought to strive to be foremost. Secondly, it is more than you can justify.
For though no man before him lifted up his voice like a Trumpet, as Luther did,
yet who can assure us, but that many before him, both thought and spoke in
lower voice of Petitions and Remonstrances, in many points, as he did?

91. Obj. Many chief learned Protestants, are forced to confess the Antiquity
of your Doctrine and practice.

Ans. Of many Doctrins and practices of yours this is not true; for I pray
inform me, what confessions of Protestants have you, for the Antiquity of the
Doctrine of the Communion in one kind: the lawfulness and expedience of the
Latin Service: For the present use of Indulgences: For the Popes power in
Temporalties over Princes: For the picturing of the Trinity: For the lawfulness
of the worship of Pictures: For your Beads and Rosary, and Ladies Psalter; and
in a word, for your whole worship of the Blessed Virgin: For your oblations by
way of consumption, and therefore in the quality of Sacrifices to the Virgin
Mary and other Saints: For your saying of Pater nosters, and Creeds to the
honor of Saints, and of Ave-Maries to the honor of other Saints besides the
Blessed Virgin: For infallibility of the Bishop or Church of Rome: For your
prohibiting the Scripture to be read publicly in the Church, in such Languages
as all may understand: For your Doctrine of the Blessed Virgins immunity from
actual sin; and for your doctrine and worship of her Imaculate conception: For
the necessity of Auricular Confession: For the necessity of the Priests
intention to obtain benefit by any of your Sacraments: And lastly (not to
trouble my self with finding out more) for this very doctrine of Licentiousness,
That though a man live and die without the practice of Christian virtues, and
with the habits of many damnable sins unmortified, yet if he in the last moment
of life, have any sorrow for his sins, and join confession with it, certainly
he shall be saved? Besides, though some Protestants confess some of your
Doctrine to be Ancient, yet this is nothing, so long as it is evident, even by
the confession of all sides, that many Errors, I instance in that of the
Millenaries, and the Communicating of Infants, were more Ancient. Not any
antiquity thereof, unless it be absolute and primitive, is a certain sight of
true Doctrine. For if the Church were obnoxious to corruption (as we pretend it
was,) who can possible warrant us that part of this corruption, might not get
in and prevail in the 5. or 4. or 3. or 2. Age? Especially seeing the Apostles
assure us that the mystery of iniquity was working, though more secretly even
in their times. If any man ask how could it become Universal in so short a
time? Let him tell me how the Error of the Millenaries, and the Communicating
of Infants, became so soon Universal, and then he shall acknowledge, what was
done in some, was possible in others. Lastly, to cry quittance with you: As
there are Protestants who confess the Antiquity, but always post-nate to
Apostolic, of some points of your Doctrine: so there want not Papists who
acknowledge as freely, the novelty of many of them, and the Antiquity of ours.
A collection of whose Testimony, we have (without thanks to you) in your
Indices expurgatoris: The Divine Providence, blessedly abusing for the readier
manifestation of the Truth this Engine intended by you for the subversion and
suppression of it. Here is no place to stand upon particulars: only one general
ingenuous confession of that great Erasmus, may not be passed over in silence.
Non desunt magni Theologi, Erasm. Ep. lib. 15. Ep. ad Godeschalcum. Ros.
qui non verentur affirmare, nihil esse in Luthero, quin per probatos authors
defendi possit. There want not great Divines, which stick not to affirm, that
there is nothing in Luther, which may not be defended by good and allowed
authors.

92. After this you compose a heap of vain suppositions, pretended to be
grounded on our confessions. As first, that your Deseases which we forsook,
neither were nor could be mortal: whereas we assure our selves, and are ready
to justify, that they are and were mortal in themselves, and would have been
so to us, if when light came to us we had loved Darkness more than Light.
Secondly, that we had no hope to avoid other Diseases like those for which we
forsook your company, nor to be secure out of it from damnable Errors: whereas,
in truth, the hope hereof was the only motive of our departure; and we assure
our selves that the means to be secured from damnable Error, is not to be
secure as you are, but carefully to use those means of avoiding it, to which
God has promised, and will never fail to give a blessing. Thirdly, that those
innumerable mischiefs which followed upon the departure of Protestants, were
caused by it as by a proper cause: whereas their Doctrine was no otherwise the
occasion of them, than the Gospel of Christ was of the division of the World.
The only Fountain of all these mischiefs, being indeed no other than your
pouring out a Flood of persecutions against Protestants, only because they
would not sin and be damned with you for company. Unless we may add the
impatience of some Protestants, who not enduring to be Torn in pieces like
Sheep by a company of Wolves without resistance, chose rather to die like
Soldiers than Martyrs.

96. Obj. But-they endeavored to force the Society whereof they were parts to
be healed and reformed as they were; and if it refused, they did, when they had
power drive them away, even their superiors both Spiritual and Temporal as is
notorious. The proofs hereof are wanting and therefore I might defer my answer
until they were produced; yet take this beforehand: If they did so, then
herein, in my opinion, they did amiss; for I have learnt from the Ancient
Fathers of the Church, that nothing is more against Religion than to force
Religion, and of S. Paul, the Weapons of the Christian Warfare are not carnal.
And great reason: For humane violence may make men counterfeit, but cannot make
them believe, and is therefore fit for nothing but to breed form without, and
Atheism within. Besides, if this means of bringing men to embrace any Religion
were generally used (as if it may be justly used in any place by those that
have power, and think they have truth, certainly they cannot with reason deny
but that it may be used in every place, by those that have power as well as
they, and think they have truth as well as they,) what could follow but the
maintenance perhaps of truth, but perhaps only of the profession of it in one
place, and the oppression of it in a hundred? What will follow from it but the
preservation peradventure of Unity, but peradventure only of uniformity in
particular States and Churches; but the immortallizing the greater and more
lamentable divisions of Christendom and the World? And therefore what can
follow from it, but perhaps in the judgment of carnal policy, the temporal
benefit and tranquillity of temporal States and kingdoms, but the infinite
prejudice, if not the desolation of the kingdom of Christ? And therefore it
well becomes them who have their portions in this life, who serve no higher
State than that of England, or Spain, or France, nor this neither any further
than they may serve themselves by it; who think of no other happiness but the
preservation of their own fortunes and tranquillity in this World; who think of
no other means to preserve States, but humane power and Machiavillian policy;
and believe no other Creed but this, Regi aut Civitati imperium habenti nihil
injustum, quod utile! that to a King or City that has Ruling Power, nothing
that is profitable is unjust. Such men as these it may become to maintain by
worldly power and violence their State-instrument, Religion. For if all be vain
and false, (as in their judgment it is) the present whatsoever, is better than
any, because it is already settled: and alteration of it may draw with it change
of States, and the change of State the subversion of their fortune. But they
that are indeed Servants and lovers of Christ, of Truth, of the Church, and of
Mankind, ought with all courage to oppose themselves against it, as a common
Enemy of all these. They that know there is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
by whose will and pleasure Kings and Kingdoms stand and fall, they know, that
to no King or State any thing can be profitable which is unjust; and that
nothing can be more evidently unjust, than to force weak men by the profession
of a Religion which they believe not, to lose their own Eternal Happiness, out
of a vain and needless fear, lest they may possibly disturb their temporal
quietness. There is no danger to any state from any man's opinion; unless it be
such an opinion by which disobedience to authority, or impiety is taught or
licenced, which sort, I confess may justly be punished as well as other faults;
or unless this sanguinary Doctrine be joined with it, that it is lawful for him
by humane violence to enforce others to it. Therefore if Protestants did offer
violence to other Men's Consciences and compel them to embrace their
Reformation, I excuse them not: much less if they did so to the sacred Persons
of Kings, and those that were in authority over them, who ought to be so
secured from violence, that even their unjust and Tyrannous violence, though it
may be avoided (according to that of our Savior, When they persecute you in
one City fly into another,) yet may it not be resisted by opposing violence
against it. Protestants therefore that were guilty of this crime, are not to be
excused, and blessed had they been, had they chosen rather to be Martyrs than
Murderers, and to die for their Religion rather than to fight for it. But of
all the men in the World you are the most unfit to accuse them hereof, against
whom the Souls of Martyrs from under the Altar cry much louder than against all
their other Persecutors together: Who for these many Ages together have daily
sacrificed Hecatombs of Innocent Christians, under the name of Heretics, to
your blind zeal and furious superstition. Who teach plainly, that you may
propagate your Religion whenever you have power by deposing of Kings and
Invasion of Kingdoms, and think when you kill the Adversaries of it, you do God
good service. But for their departing corporally from them, whom mentally they
had forsaken: For their forsaking the external Communion and company of that
part of the unreformed part of the Church, in their superstitions and
impieties: thus much of your accusation we embrace and glory in it; And say
though some Protestants might offend in the manner or the degree of their
separation, yet certainly their separation it self was not Schismatical, but
Innocent, and not only so, but just and necessary.

99. Ad. 36.] What you cite out of Optatus ( l. 2. cont. Parm. Thou can not
deny but that thou know, that in the City of Rome there was first an
Episcopal Chair placed for Peter wherein Peter the head of the Apostles sat,
whereof also he was called Cephas; in which one Chair Unity was to be kept by
all, lest the other Apostles might attribute to themselves each one his
particular Chair; and that he should be a Schismatic and sinner, who against
that one single Chair should erect another. All this is impertinent, if it be
well looked into. The truth is the Donatists had set up at Rome a Bishop of
their faction: not with intent to make him Bishop of the whole Church but of
that Church in particular. Now Optatus going upon S. Cyprians ground of one
Bishop in one Church, proves them Schismatic for so doing, by this Argument:
S. Peter was first Bishop of Rome, neither did the Apostles attribute to
themselves each one his particular Chair, (viz. in that City, for in other
places others I hope had Chairs besides S. Peter) and therefore he is a
Schismatic, who against that one single Chair erects another (viz. in that
place) making another Bishop of that Diocese besides him who was lawfully
elected to it.

100. Obj. But he styles S. Peter Head of the Apostles, and says that from
thence he was called Cephas.

Answ. Perhaps he was abused into this opinion, by thinking Cephas derived from
the Greek word (...) a head: whereas it is a Syriack word and signifies a
Stone. Besides S. Peter might be head of the Apostles, that is first in order
and honor among them, and not have supreme Authority over them. And indeed
that S. Peter should have authority over all the Apostles, and yet exercise no
one Act of Authority over any one of them, and that they should show to him no
sign of subjection, methinks is as strange, as that a King of England for
twenty five years should do no Act of Regality, nor receive any one
acknowledgment of it. As strange methinks it is, that you so many Ages after,
should know this so certainly, as you pretend to do, and that the Apostles
(after that those words were spoken in their hearing, by virtue whereof S.
Peter is pretended to have been made their Head,) should still be so ignorant
of it, as to question which of them should be the greatest? yet more strange,
that our Savior should not bring them out of their Error, by telling them S.
Peter was the man, but rather confirm it by saying, the Kings of the Gentiles
exercise authority over them, but it should not be so among them. No less a
wonder was it that S. Paul should so far forget S. Peter and himself, as that
first mentioning him often, he should do it without any Title of Honor.
Secondly, speaking of the several degrees of men in the Church, he should not
give S. Peter the highest, but place him in equipage with the rest of the
Apostles, and say, God has appointed (not first Peter, then the rest of the
Apostles, but) first Apostles, secondly Prophets. Certainly if the Apostles
were all first, to me it is very probable, that no one of them was before the
rest. For by First, all men understand either that which is before all, or that
before which is nothing. Now in the former sense, the Apostles could not be all
first, for then every one of them must have been before every one of the rest.
And therefore they must be First in the other sense. And therefore, No man, and
therefore not S. Peter, must be before any of them. Thirdly and Lastly, that
speaking of himself in particular, and perhaps comparing himself with S. Peter
in particular, rather than any other, he should say in plain terms, I am in
nothing inferior to the very Chiefest Apostles. But besides all this, though we
should grant against all these probabilities and many more, that Optatus meant
that S. Peter was head of the Apostles, not in our but in your sense, and that
S. Peter indeed was so; yet still you are very far from showing, that in the
judgment of Optatus, the Bishop of Rome, was to be at all, much less by Divine
right, successor to S. Peter in this his Headship and Authority. For what
incongruity is there, if we say, that he might succeed S. Peter in that part of
his care, the Government of that particular Church, (as sure he did even while
S. Peter was living,) and yet that neither he nor any man was to succeed him in
his Apostleship, nor in his Government of the Church Universal? Especially
seeing S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles, by laying the Foundations of the
Church, were to be the Foundations of it, and accordingly are so called in
Scripture. And therefore as in a building it is incongruous that Foundations
should succeed Foundations: So it may be in the Church, that any other Apostle
should succeed the first.

101. Ad. 37.] Obj. What you here cite out of S. Austin; if it be applied to
Luther's Separation, is impertinent. For it is one thing to separate from the
Communion of the whole World, another to separate from all the Communions in
the World: One thing to divide from them who are United among themselves,
another to divide from them who are divided among themselves. Now the Donatists
separated from the whole World of Christians, United in one Communion,
professing the same Faith, serving God after the same manner, which was a very
great Argument, that they could not have just cause to leave them: according to
that of Tertullian, Variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum, quod autem apud multos
unum est, non est Erratum sed Traditum. But Luther and his followers did not
so. The World, I mean of Christians and Catholics, was divided and subdivided
long before he divided from it; and by their divisions had much weakened their
own Authority, and taken away from you this Plea of S. Austin, which stands
upon no other Foundation, but the Unity of the whole Worlds Communion.

102. Ad. 38.] Obj. If Luther were in the right, most certain those Protestants
that differed from him were in the wrong.

Answ. But that either he or they were Schismatics, it follows not. Or if it
does, then either the Jesuits are Schismatics from the Dominicans, or they
from the Jesuits; The Canonists from the Jesuits, or the Jesuits from the
Canonists: The Scotists from the Thomists, or they from the Scotists: The
Franciscans from the Dominicans, or the Dominicans from the Franciscans. For
between all these the World knows, that in point of Doctrine, there is plain
and irreconcilable contradiction, and therefore one Part must be in Error, at
least not Fundamental. Thus your Argument returns upon your self, and if it be
good, proves the Roman Church in a manner to be made up of Schismatics. But
the answer to it is, that it begs this very false and vain supposition; That
whosoever Errs in any point of Doctrine is a Schismatic.

103. Ad. 39.] In the next place you number up your Victories, and tell us,
that out of these premises, this conclusion follows, That Luther and his
followers were Schismatics from the Visible Church, the Pope, the Diocese
wherein they were baptized, from the Bishop under whom they lived, from the
Country to which they belonged, from their Religious order, wherein they were
professed, from one another, and lastly, from a man's self: Because the self
same Protestant is convicted to day, that his yesterdays opinion was an Error.
To which I answer, that Luther and his followers separated from many of these,
in some opinions and practices: But that they did it without cause, which only
can make them Schismatics, that was the only thing you should have proved, and
to that you have not urged one reason of any moment. All of them for weight and
strength, were cousin-germans to this pretty device, wherewith you will prove
them Schismatics from themselves, because the self same Protestant to day is
convicted in Conscience, that his yesterdays opinion was an Error. It seems
then that they that hold Errors, must hold them fast, and take especial care of
being convicted in Conscience, that they are in Error, for fear of being
Schismatics! Protestants must continue Protestants, and Puritans Puritans, and
Papists Papists, nay Jews, and Turks, and Pagans, must remain Jews, and Turks,
and Pagans, and go on constantly to the Devil, or else forsooth they must be
Schismatics, and that from themselves. And this perhaps is the cause that
makes Papists so obstinate, not only in their common superstition, but also in
adhering to the proper fancies of their several Sects, so that it is a miracle
to hear of any Jesuit, that has forsaken the opinion of the Jesuits: or any
Dominican that has changed his or the Jesuits.

But sure the forsaking of error cannot be a sin, unless to be in error be a
virtue. And therefore, to do as you do, to damn men for false opinions, and to
call them Schismatics for leaving them; to make pertinacy in error, that is,
an unwillingness to be convicted, or a resolution not to be convicted, the form
of Heresies, and to find fault with men, for being convicted in conscience that
they are in error, is the most incoherent and contradictious injustice that
ever was heard of. But Sir, if this be a strange matter to you, that which I
shall tell you will be much stranger. I know a man that of a moderate
Protestant turned a Papist, and the day that he did so, (as all things that are
done are perfected some day or other,) was convicted in conscience, that his
yesterdays opinion was an error, and yet thinks he was no Schismatic for doing
so, and desires to be informed by you, whether or no he was mistaken? The same
man afterward upon better consideration, became a doubting Papist, and of a
doubting Papist, a confirmed Protestant. And yet this man thinks himself no
more to blame for all these changes, than a Traveller, who using all diligence
to find the right way to some remote City, where he never had been, (as the
party I speak of had never been in Heaven,) did yet mistake it, and after find
his error, and amend it. Nay he stands upon his justification so far, as to
maintain that his alterations, not only to you, but also from you by Gods
mercy, were the most satisfactory actions to himself, that ever he did, and the
greatest victories that ever he obtained over himself, and his affections to
those things which in this world are most precious; as wherein for Gods sake
and (as he was verily persuaded,) out of love to the Truth, he went upon a
certain expectation of those inconveniences, which to ingenuous natures are of
all most terrible. So that though there were much weakness in some of these
alterations, yet certainly there was no wickedness. Neither does he yield his
weakness altogether without apology, seeing his deductions were rational, and
out of Principles commonly received by Protestants as well as Papists, and
which by his education had got possession of his understanding.

107. Ad. 41.] Obj. Though the first Reformers had conceived their own opinions
to be true, yet they might and ought to have doubted, whether they were
certain; since they affirm, that Infallibility was not promised to particular
persons or Churches.

Ans. This is to say, that they ought to have doubted of the certainty of
Scripture, which in formal and express terms, contains many of these opinions.
And your reason is vain; for though they had not an absolute infallibility
promised unto them, yet may they be of some things infallibly certain. As
Euclide sure was not infallible, yet he was certain enough, that twice two were
four, and that every whole was greater than a part of that whole. And so though
Calvin and Melancton were not infallible in all things, yet they might and did
know well enough, that your Latin-Service was condemned by S. Paul, and that
the Communion in both kinds was taught by our Savior.

Obj. But your Church was in peaceable possession (you must mean of her Doctrine
and the Professors of it) and enjoyed prescription for many Ages.

Ans. The possession which the Governors of your Church held for some ages, of
the party governed, was not peaceable, but got by fraud and held by violence.

108. Obj. You say that a pretense of Conscience will not serve to justify
separation from being Schismatical.

Ans. This is very true but little to the purpose, seeing it is not an
erroneous persuasion, much less an hypocritical pretense, but a true and well
grounded conviction of Conscience, which we allege to justify Protestants
from being Schismatical. And therefore though Seditious men in Church and
State, may pretend conscience for a cloak of their rebellion: yet this I hope
hinders not, but that an honest man ought to obey his rightly informed
conscience, rather than the unjust commands of his Tyrannous Superiors.
Otherwise with what color can you defend either your own refusing the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy? Or the ancient Martyrs, and Apostles, and Prophets,
who oftentimes disobeyed the commands of men in authority, and for their
disobedience made no other but this Apology, We must obey God rather than men?
It is therefore most apparent that this answer must be merely impertinent:
seeing it will serve against the Martyrs and Apostles and Prophets, and even
against your selves, as well as against Protestants. To as little purpose is
your rule out of Lyrinensis against them that followed Luther, seeing they
pretend and are ready to justify, that they forsook not, with the Doctors, the
faith, but only the corruption of the Church. As vain altogether is that which
follows: That in cases of uncertainty we are not to leave our Superior, or cast
off his obedience, nor publicly oppose his decrees. From whence it will follow
very evidently, that seeing it is not a matter of faith, but a disputed
question among you, whether the Oath of Allegiance be lawful: that either you
acknowledge not the King your Superior, or do against conscience, in opposing
his and the kingdoms decree, requiring the taking of this Oath. This good use,
I say, may very fairly be made of it, and is by men of your own Religion.

109 Ad. 42.] Obj. It is not fit, you say, for any private man to oppose his
judgment to the public.

Ans. Not his own judgment and bare authority; but occasions may happen,
wherein it may be very warrantable, to oppose his reason or the authority of
Scripture against it: and is not then to be esteemed to oppose his own judgment
to the public, but the judgment of God to the judgment of men.

Neither will Mr. Hookers words you cite do you any service. For though he says
( Pref. to Eccles. polit. see 6. page 28.) that men are bound to do whatsoever
the sentence of judicial and final decision shall determine; as it is plain men
are bound to yield such an obedience to all Courts of civil judicature: yet he
says not, they are bound to think that determination lawful and that sentence
just. Nay it is plain he says, that they must do according to the Judges
sentence, though in their private opinion it seem unjust. As if I be wrongfully
cast in a suit at Law, and sentenced to pay an hundred pound, I am bound to pay
the money, yet I know no Law of God or man, that binds me in conscience to
acquit the Judge of error in his sentence. Neither is there any necessity, as
you say, that he must either acknowledge the Universal Infallibility of the
Church, or drive men into dissembling against their Conscience; seeing nothing
hinders, but I may obey the sentence of a Judge, paying the money he awards me
to pay, or forgoing the house or land which he has judged from me, and yet
withal plainly profess, that in my Conscience I conceive his Judgment
erroneous. To which purpose they have a saying in France, that whosoever is
cast in any cause, has liberty for ten days after, to rail at his Judges.

110. But observe, I pray, that Mr. Hooker says not absolutely and in all their
causes; but only in litigious causes, of the quality of those whereof he there
treats; In such matters as have plain Scripture or reason neither for them nor
against them, and wherein men are persuaded this or that way, upon their own
only probable collection; in such cases, This persuasion (says he) ought to be
fully settled in men's hearts, that the will of God is, that they should not
disobey the certain commands of their lawful Superiors, upon uncertain grounds:
But do that which the sentence of judicial and final decision shall determine.
For the purpose, a Question there is, whether a Surplice may be worn in Divine
Service: The authority of Superiors injoyns this Ceremony, and neither
Scripture nor reason plainly forbids it. Sempronius notwithstanding, is by some
inducements, which he confesses to be only probable, lead to this persuasion
that the thing is unlawful. The quaere is, whether he ought for matter of
practice follow the injunction of authority, or his own private and only
probable persuasion? M. Hooker resolves for the former, upon this ground, that
the certain commands of the Church we live in, are to be obeyed in all things,
not certainly unlawful.

As for requiring a blind and an unlimited obedience, to Ecclesiastical
decisions universally and in all cases, even when plain Text or reason seems to
control them, M. Hooker is as far from making such an Idol of Ecclesiastical
Authority, as the Puritans whom he writes against. I grant (says he,) that
proof derived from the authority of man's judgment, is not able to work that
assurance which does grow by a stronger proof. And therefore although ten
thousand General Councils would set down one and the same definitive sentence,
concerning any point of Religion whatsoever, yet one demonstrative reason
alleged, or one manifest testimony cited from the word of God himself, to the
contrary, could not choose but over-weigh them all: in as much as for them to
be deceived it is not impossible, it is that Demonstrative Reason, or Divine
Testimony should deceive. And again, Whereas it is thought, that especially
with the Church, and those that are called, man's authority ought not to
prevail: It must and does prevail even with them, yea with them especially, as
far as equity requires, and farther we maintain it not. For men to be tied and
led by authority, as it were with a kind of captivity of judgment, and though
there be reason to the contrary, not to listen to it, but to follow like
beasts, the first in the Herd, this were brutish. Again, that authority of men
should prevail with men either against or above reason, is no part of our
belief. Companies of learned men, be they never so great and reverend, are to
yield unto reason, the weight whereof, is no whit prejudiced by the simplicity
of his person which does allege it, but being found to be sound and good, the
bare opinion of men to the contrary, must of necessity stoop and give place.
Thus M. Hooker in his Seventh Section of his Second Book.

112. Ad. 43.] The next Section has in it some objections against Luthers
person, but none against his cause, which alone I have undertaken to justify,
and therefore I pass it over. Yet this I promise, that when you, or any of your
side, shall publish a good defense, of all that your Popes have said and done,
especially of them whom Bellarmine believes, in such a long train to have gone
to the Devil: then you shall receive an ample Apology for all the actions and
words of Luther. In the mean time, I hope all reasonable and equitable Judges,
will esteem it not unpardonable in the great and Heroical spirit of Luther, if
being oposed, and perpetually baited with a world of Furies, he were
transported sometimes, and made somewhat furious. As for you, I desire you to
be quiet, and to demand no more, whether God be wont to send such Furies to
preach the Gospel? Unless you desire to hear of your killing of Kings:
Massacring of Peoples; Blowing up of Parliaments: and have a mind to be ask't,
whether it be probable, that that should be Gods cause, which needs to be
maintained by such Devilish means?

CHAP. VI. The ANSWER to the Sixth CHAPTER.
Showing that Protestants are not Heretics.

Ad. 1. HE that will accuse any one man, much more any great multitude of men
of any great and horrible crime, should in all reason and justice take care
that the greatness of his evidence do equal, if not exceed the quality of the
crime. And such an accusation you would here make show of, by pretending,
first, to lay such grounds of it, as are either already proved, or else yielded
on all sides: and after to raise a firm and stable structure of convincing
arguments upon them. But both these I find to be mere and vain pretenses, and
having considered this Chapter also without prejudice or passion, as I did the
former, I am enforced by the light of Truth, to pronounce your whole discourse,
a painted and ruinous Building upon a weak and sandy foundation.

2. Ad. 2, 3. First for your grounds, a great part of them, is falsely said to
be either proved or granted. It is true indeed that Man by his natural wit and
industry could never have attained to the knowledge of Gods will to give him a
supernatural and eternal happiness, nor of the means by which his pleasure was
to bestow this happiness upon him. And therefore your first ground is good,
That it was requisite his understanding should be enabled to apprehend that end
and means by a knowledge supernatural. I say this is good, if you mean by
knowledge, an apprehension or belief.

3. But then whereas you add, that if a such a knowledge were no more than
probable, it could not be able sufficiently to overbear our will, and encounter
with human probabilities, being backed with the strength of flesh and blood,
and therefore conclude, that it was farther necessary, that this supernatural
knowledge should be most certain and infallible: To this I answer, that I do
heartily acknowledge and believe the Articles of our Faith be in themselves
Truths; as certain and infallible as the very common Principles of Geometry and
Metaphysics. But that there is required of us a knowledge of them, and an
adherence to them, as certain as that of sense or science, that such a
certainty is required of us under pain of damnation, so that no man can hope to
be in the state of salvation, but he that finds in himself such a degree of
faith, such a strength of adherence: This I have already demonstrated to be a
great error, and of dangerous and pernicious consequence. And because I am more
and more confirmed in my persuasion that the Truth which I there delivered, is
of great and singular use, I will here confirm it with more reasons. And to
satisfy you that this is no singularity of my own my Margent presents you with
a M. Hooker in his answer to Travers his supplication. -- I have taught that
the assurance of things which we believe by the word, is not so certain as of
that we perceive by sense. And is it as certain? Yea I taught, that the things
which God does promise in his word are surer unto us than any thing we touch,
handle or see. But are we so sure and certain of them? If we be, why does God
so often prove his promises unto us, as he does by arguments taken from our
sensible experience? We must be surer of the proof than the thing proved,
otherwise it is no proof. How is it that if ten men do all look upon the Moon,
every one of them knows it as certainly to be the Moon as another: but many
believing one and the same promises all have not one and the same fullness of
persuasion? How falls it out that men being assured of any thing by sense,
can be no surer of it than they are? whereas the strongest in faith that lives
upon the earth, had always need to labor, and strive, and pray, that his
assurance concerning heavenly and spiritual things may grow, increase, and be
augmented.
Protestant Divine of great authority, and no way singular in his opinions, who
has long since preached and justified the same doctrine.

4. I say that every Text of Scripture which makes mention of any that were
weak, or of any that were strong in faith: of any that were of little, or any
that were of great faith: of any that abounded, or any that were rich in says:
of increasing, growing, rooting, grounding, establishing, confirming in faith:
Every such Text, is a demonstrative refutation of this vain fancy: proving that
faith, even true and saving faith, is not a thing consisting in such an
indivisible point of perfection as you make it, but capable of augmentation and
diminution. Every Prayer you make to God to increase your faith (or if you
conceive such a prayer derogatory from the perfection of your faith, ( The
Apostles praying to Christ to increase their Faith, is a convincing argument of
the same conclusion. Moreover if this doctrine of yours were true, then seeing
not any the least doubting can consist with a most infallible certainty, it
will follow that every least doubting in any matter of faith, though resisted
and involuntary, is a damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long as it
lasts, of all true and saving faith: which you are so far from granting, that
you make it no sin at all, but only an occasion of merit: and if you should
esteem it a sin, then must you acknowledge, contrary to your own Principles,
that there are Actual sins merely involuntary. The same is furthermore
invincibly confirmed by every deliberate sin that any Christian commits; by any
progress in Charity that he makes. For seeing, as S. John assures us, our faith
is the victory which overcomes the world, certainly if the faith of all true
Believers were perfect, (and if true faith be capable of no imperfection, if
all faith be a knowledge most certain and infallible, all faith must be
perfect, for the most imperfect that is, according to your doctrine, if it be
true, must be most certain, and sure the most perfect that is, cannot be more
than most certain,) then certainly their victory over the World, and therefore
over the flesh, and therefore over sin, must of necessity be perfect, and so it
should be impossible for any true believer to commit any deliberate sin, and
therefore he that commits any sin, must not think himself a true believer.
Besides seeing Faith works by Charity, and Charity is the effect of Faith:
certainly if the cause were perfect, the effect would be perfect, and
consequently as you make no degrees in Faith, so there would be none in
Charity, and so no man could possibly make any progress in it, but all true
believers should be equally in Charity, as in Faith you make them equal: and
from thence it would follow unavoidably, that whosoever finds in himself any
true Faith, must presently persuade himself that he is perfect in Charity: and
whosoever on the other side, discovers in his Charity any imperfection, must
not believe that he has any true Faith. These you see are strange and
portentous consequences, and yet the deduction of them from your Doctrine is
clear and apparent; which shows this Doctrine of yours, which you would fain
have true, that there might be some necessity of your Churches Infallibility,
to be indeed plainly repugnant not only to Truth but even to all Religion and
Piety, and fit for nothing but to make men negligent of making any Progress in
Faith or Charity.

5. As for that one single reason which you produce to confirm it, it will
appear upon examination to be resolved finally into a groundless Assertion of
your own, contrary to all Truth and experience, and that is, That no degree of
Faith, less than a most certain and infallible knowledge, can be able
sufficiently to overbear our will and encounter with humane probabilities,
being backed with the strength of Flesh and Blood. For who sees not that many
Millions in the World forgo many times their present ease and pleasure,
undergo great and toilsom labors, encounter great difficulties, adventure upon
great dangers, and all this not upon any certain expectation, but upon a
probable hope of some future gain and commodity, and that not infinite and
Eternal, but finite and temporal? Who sees not that many men abstain from many
things they exceedingly desire, not upon any certain assurance, but a probable
fear of danger that may come after? What man ever was there so madly in love
with a present penny, but that he would willingly spend it upon any little
hope, that by doing so he might gain an hundred thousand pound? And I would
fain know what gay probabilities you could devise to dissuade him from this
Resolution. And if you can devise none, what reason then, or sense is there,
but that a probable hope of infinite and Eternal Happiness, provided for all
those that obey Christ Jesus, and much more a firm Faith, though not so
certain, in some sort, as sense or science, may be able to sway our will to
obedience, and encounter with all those temptations which Flesh and Blood can
suggest to avert us from it? Men may therefore talk their pleasure of an
absolute and most infallible certainty, but did they generally believe that
obedience to Christ were the only way to present and eternal felicity, but as
firmly and undoubtedly as that there is such a City as Constantinople, nay but
as much as Caesar's Commentaries, or the History of Salust, I believe the lives
of most men, both Papists and Protestants would be better than they are. Thus
therefore out of your own Words I argue against you: He that requires to true
Faith, an absolute and infallible certainty, for this only Reason, because any
less degree could not be able to overbear our will, etc. imports, that if a
less degree of Faith were able to do this, then a less degree of Faith may be
true and Divine and saving Faith: But experience shows, and reason confirms,
that a firm Faith, though not so certain as sense or science, may be able to
encounter and overcome our will and affections: And therefore it follows from
your own reason, that Faith which is not a most certain and infallible
knowledge may be true and Divine and saving Faith.

6. All these Reasons I have employed to show that such a most certain and
infallible Faith as here you talk of, is not so necessary, but that without
such a high degree of it, it is possible to please God. And therefore the
Doctrines delivered by you. 25. are most presumptuous and uncharitable: viz.
That such a most certain and Infallible Faith is necessary to Salvation,
necessitate Finis, or Medii, so necessary, that after a man is come to the use
of reason, no man ever was or can be saved without it. Wherein you boldly
intrude into the judgment seat of God, and damn men for breaking Laws, not of
Gods, but your own making. But withal, you clearly contradict your self, not
only where you affirm, That your Faith depends finally upon the Tradition of
Age to Age, of Father to Son, which cannot be a fit ground, but only for a
Moral Assurance; nor only, where you pretend, that not alone Hearing and
Seeing, but also Histories, Letters, Relations of many (which certainly are
things not certain and infallible,) are yet Foundations good enough to support
your Faith; Which Doctrine, if it were good and allowable, Protestants might
then hope that their Histories and Letters and Relations might also pass for
means sufficient of a sufficient Certainty, and that they should not be
excluded from Salvation for want of such a Certainty. But indeed the pressure
of the present difficulty compelled you to speak here, what I believe you will
not justify, and with a pretty tergiversation to show D. Potter your means of
moral certainty; whereas the Objection was that you had no means or possibility
of infallible certainty, for which you are plainly at as great a loss and as
far to seek as any of your Adversaries. And therefore it concerns you highly
not to damn others for want of it, lest you involve your selves in the same
condemnation; according to those terrible Words of S. Paul, Inexcusabilis es,
etc. In this therefore you plainly contradict your self. And lastly most
plainly, in saying as you do here, you contradict and retract your pretense of
Charity to Protestants in the beginning of your Book: For there you make
profession, that you have no assurance but that Protestants dying Protestants,
may possibly die with contrition, and be saved: And here you are very
Peremptory, that they cannot but want a means absolutely necessary to
Salvation, and wanting that cannot but be damned.

7. The third Condition you require to Faith, is, that our assent to Divine
Truths should not only be unknown and unevident by any humane discourse, but
that absolutely also it should be obscure in it self, and ordinarily speaking,
be void even of supernatural evidence. Which words must have a very favorable
construction, or else they will not be sense. For who can make any thing of
these words taken properly, that Faith must be an unknown unevident assent, or
an assent absolutely obscure? I had always thought that known and unknown,
obscure and evident had been affections, not of our Assent, but the Object of
it, not of our belief, but the thing believed. For well may we assent to a
thing unknown, obscure, or unevident; but that our assent it self should be
called therefore unknown or obscure, seems to me as great an impropriety, as if
I should say, your sight were green or blew, because you see something that is
so. In other places therefore I answer your words, but here I must answer your
meaning: which I conceive to be, That it is necessary to Faith that the Objects
of it, the points which we believe should not be so evidently certain, as to
necessitate our understandings to an Assent, that so their might be some merit
in Faith, as you love to speak (who will not receive no not from God himself,
but a pennyworth for a penny,) but as we, some obedience in it, which can
hardly have place where there is no possibility of disobedience, as there is
not where the understanding does all, and the will nothing. Now seeing the
Religion of Protestants, though it be much more credible than yours, yet is not
pretended to have the absolute evidence of sense or demonstration; therefore I
might let this Doctrine pass without exception, for any prejudice that can
redound to us by it. But yet I must not forbear to tell you, that your
discourse proves indeed this condition requisite to the merit, but yet not to
the essence of Faith: without it Faith were not an act of obedience, but yet
Faith may be Faith without it; and this you must confess, unless you will say
either the Apostles believed not the whole Gospel which they preached, or that
they were not eyewitnesses of a great part of it: unless you will question S.
John for saying that which we have seen with our Eyes, and which our hands have
handled, etc. declare we unto you: nay our Savior himself for saying, Thomas
because thou see thou believe, Blessed are they which have not seen and yet
have believed. Yet if you will say that in respect of the things which they
saw, the Apostles assent was not pure and proper and mere Faith, but somewhat
more; an assent containing Faith but superadding to it, I will not contend with
you, for it will be a contention about words. But then again I must crave leave
to tell you, that the requiring this condition, is in my judgment a plain
revocation of the former. For had you made the matter of Faith either naturally
or supernaturally evident, it might have been a fitly attempered and duly
proportioned object for an absolute certainty natural or supernatural: But
requiring as you do, that Faith should be an absolute knowledge of a thing not
absolutely known, an infallible certainty of a thing which though it is in it
self, yet is it not made appear to us to be infallibly certain, to my
understanding you speak impossibilities. And truly for one of your Religion to
do so, is but a good Decorum. For the matter and object of your Faith being so
full of contradictions, a contradictious Faith may very well become a
contradictious Religion. Your Faith therefore, if you please to have it so, let
it be a free, necessitated, certain, uncertain, evident, obscure, prudent and
foolish, natural and supernatural unnatural assent. But they which are
unwilling to believe nonsense themselves, or to persuade others to do so, it is
but reason they should make the Faith wherewith they believe, an intelligible,
compossible, consistent thing, and not define it by repugnances. Now nothing is
more repugnant, than that a man should be required to give most certain credit
unto that which cannot be made apppear most certainly credible: and if it
appear to him to be so, then is it not obscure that it is so. For if you speak
of an acquired, rational, discursive Faith, certainly these Reasons which make
the object seem credible, must be the cause of it, and consequently the
strength and firmity of my assent must rise and fall together with the apparent
credibility of the object. If you speak of a supernatural infused Faith, then
you either suppose it infused by the former means, and then that which was said
before must be said again: for whatsoever effect is wrought merely by means,
must bear proportion to, and cannot exceed the virtue of the means, by which it
is wrought: As nothing by water can be made more cold than water, nor by fire
more hot than fire, nor by honey more sweet than honey, nor by gall more bitter
than gall: Or if you will suppose it infused without means, then that power
which infuseth into the understanding assent which bears Analogy to sight in
the eye, must also infuse evidence, that is, Visibility into the Object: and
look what degree of assent is infused into the understanding, at least the same
degree of evidence must be infused into the Object. And for you to require a
strength of credit beyond the appearance of the Objects credibility, is all one
as if you should require me to go Ten Miles an hour upon a Horse that will go
but five: to discern a man certainly through a mist or cloud that makes him not
certainly discernable; To hear a sound more clearly than it is audible; to
understand a thing more fully than it is intelligible: and he that does so, I
may well expect that his next injunction will be, that I must see something
that is invisible, hear something inaudible, understand something that is
wholly unintelligible. For he that demands ten of me, knowing I have but five,
does in effect, as if he demanded five, knowing that I have none: and by like
reason, you requiring that I should see things farther than they are visible,
require I should see something invisible, and in requiring that I believe
something more firmly than it is made to me evidently credible, you require in
effect that I believe something which appears to me incredible, and while it
does so. I deny not but that I am bound to believe the truth of many Texts of
Scripture the sense whereof is to me obscure and the Truth of many Articles of
Faith the manner whereof is obscure, and to humane understandings
incomprehensible; But then it is to be observed, that not the sense of such
Texts, not the manner of these things is that which I am bound to believe, but
the truth of them. But that I should believe the Truth of any thing, the truth
whereof cannot be made evident with an evidence proportionable to the degree of
Faith required of me, this I say for any man to be bound to, is unjust and
unreasonable, because to do it is impossible.

8. Ad. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.] Yet though I deny that it is required of
us to be certain in the highest degree, infallibly certain of the truth of the
things which we believe, for this were to know and not believe, neither is it
possible unless our evidence of it, be it natural or supernatural, were of the
highest degree; yet I deny not but that we are to believe the Religion of
Christ, we are and may be infallibly certain. For first, this is most certain,
that we are in all things to do according to wisdom and reason rather than
against it. Secondly, this is as certain, That wisdom and reason require that
we should believe these things which are by many degrees more credible and
probable than the contrary. Thirdly, this is as certain, that to every man who
considers impartially what great things may be said for the truth of
Christianity, and what poor things they are which may be said against it,
either for any other Religion or for none at all, it cannot but appear by many
degrees more credible, that Christian Religion, is true than the contrary. And
from all these premises, this conclusion evidently follows, that it is
infallibly certain, that we are firmly to believe the truth of Christian
Religion.

9. Your discourse therefore touching the fourth requisite to Faith which is
Prudence, I admit so far as to grant. 1. That if we were required to believe
with certainty (I mean a Moral certainty,) things no way represented as
infallible and certain, (I mean Morally,) an unreasonable obedience were
required of us. And so likewise were it, were we required to believe as
absolutely certain, that which is no way represented to us as absolutely
certain. 2. That whom God obliges to believe any thing, he will not fail to
furnish their understandings with such inducements, as are sufficient (it they
be not negligent or perverse) to persuade them to believe. 3. That there is an
abundance of Arguments exceedingly credible, inducing men to believe the Truth
of Christianity: I say so credibile, that though they cannot make us evidently
see what we believe, yet they evidently convince that in true Wisdom and
Prudence, the Articles of it deserve credit, and ought to be accepted as things
revealed by God. 4. That without such reasons and inducements, our choice even
of the true Faith, is not to be commended as prudent, but to be condemned of
rashness and levity.

10. But then for your making Prudence, not only a commendation of a believer,
and a justification of his Faith, but also essential to it, and part of the
definition of it, in that, questionless you were mistaken, and have done as if
being to say what a man is, you should define him, A Reasonable creature that
has skill in Astronomy. For as all Astronomers are men, but all men are not
Astronomers, and therefore Astronomy ought not to be put into the definition of
men, where nothing should have place, but what agrees to all men: So though all
that are truly wise (that is, wise for Eternity,) will believe aright, yet many
may believe aright which are not wise. I could wish with all my Heart as Moses
did, that all the Lords People could Prophecy: That all that believe the true
Religion were able (according to S. Peter's injunction) to give a reason of the
hope that is in them, a reason why they hope for Eternal Happiness by this way
rather than any other! neither do I think it any great difficulty that men of
ordinary capacities, if they would give their mind to it, might quickly be
enabled to do so. But should I affirm that all true believers can do so, I
suppose it would be as much against experience and modesty, as it is against
Truth and Charity, to say as you do, that they which cannot do so, either are
not at all, or to no purpose true believers. And thus we see that the
foundations you build upon, are ruinous and deceitful, and so unfit to support
your Fabric that they destroy one another. I come now to show that your
Arguments to prove Protestants Heretics are all of the same quality with your
former grounds: which I will do by opposing clear and satisfying Answers in
order to them.

11. Ad. 13.) To the first then, delivered by you. 13. That Protestants must be
Heretics, because they opposed diverse Truths propounded for Divine by the
Visible Church: I Answer, It is not Heresy to oppose any Truth propounded by
the Church, but only such a Truth as is an essential part of the Gospel of
Christ. 2. The Doctrines which Protestants opposed, were not Truths, but plain
and impious falsehoods: Neither thirdly, were they propounded as Truths by the
Visible Church, but only by a Part of it, and that a corrupted Part.

12. Ad. 14. The next Argument, in the next Particle tells us, That every error
against any doctrine revealed by God is damnable Heresy: Now either Protestants
or the Roman Church must err against the word of God: But the Roman Church we
grant (perforce) does not err damnably, neither can she, because she is the
Catholic Church, which we (you say) confess cannot err damnably: Therefore
Protestants must err against Gods word, and consequently are guilty of formal
Heresy. Whereunto I answer plainly, that there be in this argument almost as
many falsehoods as assertions. For neither is every error against any Doctrine
revealed by God a damnable Heresy, unless it be revealed publicly, and
plainly with a command that all should believe it. 2. D. Potter no where
grants, that the Errors of the Roman Church are not in themselves damnable,
though he hopes by accident they may not actually damn some men amongst you:
and this you your self confess in diverse places of your book, where you tell
us, that he allows no hope of Salvation to those amongst you, whom ignorance
cannot excuse. 3. You beg the Question twice in taking for granted, First that
the Roman Church is the truly Catholic Church; which without much favor can
hardly pass for a part of it: And again, that the Catholic Church cannot fall
into any error of it self damnable: for it may do so, and still be the
Catholic Church, if it retain those Truths which may be an antidote against
the malignity of this error, to those that held it out of a simple un-affected
ignorance. Lastly, though the thing be true, yet I might well require some
proof of it from you, that either Protestants or the Roman Church must err
against Gods word. For if their contradiction be your only reason, then also
you or the Dominicans must be Heretics, because you contradict one another as
much as Protestants and Papists.

13. Ad. 15. The third Argument pretends that you have showed already, that the
Visible Church is Judge of Controversies, and therefore Infallible; from whence
you suppose that it follows, that to oppose her, is to oppose God. To which I
answer, that you have said only, and not showed that the Visible Church is
Judge of Controversies. And indeed how can she be judge of them if she cannot
decide them? And how can she decide them, if it be a question whether she be
judge of them? That which is questioned it self, cannot with any sense be
pretended to be fit to decide other questions; and much less this question,
whether it have Authority to judge and decide all questions? 2. If she were
judge, it would not follow that she were infallible, for we have many Judges in
our Courts of Judicature, yet none infallible. Nay you cannot with any modesty
deny, that every man in the world ought to judge for himself, what Religion is
truest, and yet you will not say that every man is infallible. 3. If the Church
were supposed Infallible, yet it would not follow at all, much less manifestly,
that to oppose her declaration is to oppose God: unless you suppose also that
as she is infallible, so by her opposers, she is known or believed to be so.
Lastly, If all this were true (as it is all most false) yet were it to little
purpose, seeing you have omitted to prove that the Visible Church is the Roman.

14. Ad. 16. Instead of a fourth Argument this is presented to us, That if
Luther were an Heretic, then they that agreed with him must be so. And that
Luther was a formal Heretic, you endeavor to prove by this most formal
Syllogism; To say the Visible Church is not Universal, is properly an Heresy:
but Luthers Reformation was not Universal, Therefore it cannot be excused from
formal Heresy. Whereunto I Answer, first to the first part, that it is no way
impossible that Luther, had he been the inventer and first broacher of a false
Doctrine, (as he was not) might have been a formal Heretic, and yet that those
who follow him may be only so materially and improperly, and indeed no
Heretics. Your own men out of S. Augustine distinguish between Haeretici and
Haereticorum sequaces: And you your self though you pronounce the leaders among
the Arrians formal Heretics, yet confess that Salvian was at least doubtful
whether these Arrians, who in simplicity followed their Teachers, might not be
excused by ignorance. And about this suspension of his you also seem suspended,
for you neither approve nor condemn it. Secondly, to the second part I say,
that had you not presumed upon our ignorance in Logic as well as Metaphysics
and School Divinity, you would never have obtruded upon us this rope of sand
for a formal Syllogism. It is even Cousin-German to this, To deny the
Resurrection is properly an Heresy, But Luthers Reformation was not Universal,
Therefore it cannot be excused from formal Heresy! Or to this, To say the
Visible Church is not Universal is properly an Heresy: But the preaching of
the Gospel at the beginning was not Universal; therefore it cannot be excused
from formal Heresy. For as he whose Reformation is but particular, may yet not
deny the Resurrection, so may he also not deny the Churches Universality. And
as the Apostles who preached the Gospel in the beginning, did believe the
Church Universal, though their preaching at the beginning was not so: So Luther
also might and did believe the Church Universal, though his Reformation were
but particular. I say he did believe it Universal, even in your own sense, that
is, Universal de jure, though not de facto. And as for universality in fact, he
believed the Church much more Universal than his Reformation: For he did
conceive (as appears by your own Allegations out of him) that only the Part
reformed was the true Church, but also that they were Part of it who needed
reformation. Neither did he ever pretend to make a new Church but to reform the
old one. Thirdly and lastly, to the first proposition of this unsyllogistical
syllogism, I answer, That to say the true Church is not always de facto
universal, is so far from being an Heresy, that it is a certain Truth known to
all those that know the world, and what Religions possess far the greater part
of it. Donatus therefore was not to blame, for saying, that the Church might
possibly be confined to Africa; but for saying without ground, that then it was
so. And S. Austin, as he was in the right, in thinking that the Church was then
extended farther than Africa; so was he in the wrong if he thought that of
necessity it always must be so; but most palpably mistaken in conceiving that
it was then spread over the whole earth, and known to all nations, which if
passion did not trouble you, and make you forget how lately almost half the
world was discovered, and in what estate it was then found, you would very
easily see and confess.

16. The Donatists might do ill in calling the Chair of Rome the Chair of
Pestilence, and the Roman Church an Harlot, and yet the state of the Church
being altered, Protestants might do well to do so, and therefore though, S.
Austin might perhaps have reason to persecute the Donatists for detracting from
the Church, and calling her Harlot, when she was not so; yet you may have none
to threaten D. Potter that you would persecute him (as the Application of this
place intimates you would,) if it were in your power: plainly showing that you
are a cursed Cow though your horns be short, seeing the Roman Church is not now
what it was in S. Austins time. And hereof the conclusion of your own book
affords us a very pregnant testimony: where you tell us out of Saint Austin,
that one grand impediment, which among many kept the seduced followers of the
faction of Donatus from the Churches Communion, was a visible calumny raised
against the Catholics, that they did set some strange thing upon their Altar.
To how many (says Saint Austin) did the reports of ill Tongues shut up the way
to enter, who said, that we put, I know not what upon the Altar? Out of
detestation of the calumny, and just indignation against it, he would not so
much as name the impiety wherewith they were charged, and therefore by a
Rhetorical figure calls it, I know not what. But compare with him Optatus,
writing of the same matter, and you shall plainly perceive that this (I know
not what) pretended to be set upon the Altar, was indeed a picture, which the
Donatists (knowing how detestable a thing it was to all Christians at that
time, to set up any pictures in a Church to worship them, as your new fashion
is) bruited abroad to be done in the Churches of the Catholic Church. But what
answer do S. Austin and Optatus make to this accusation? Do they confess and
maintain it? Do they say, as you would now, It is true we do set Pictures upon
our Altar, and that not only for ornament or memory, but for worship also; but
we do well to do so, and this ought not to trouble you, or affright you from
our Communion? What other answer your Church could now make to such an
objection, is very hard to imagine: And therefore were your Doctrine the same
with the Doctrine of the Fathers in this point, they must have answered so
likewise. But they to the contrary not only deny the crime, but abhor and
detest it. To little purpose therefore do you hunt after these poor shadows of
resemblances between us and the Donatists: unless you could show an exact
resemblance between the present Church of Rome and the Ancient: which seeing by
this, and many other particulars it is demonstrated to be impossible; that
Church which was then a Virgin may be now a Harlot, and that which was
detraction in the Donatists, may be in Protestants a just accusation.

18. But the main point you say is, that since Luthers Reformed Church was not
in being for diverse Centuries before Luther, and yet was in the Apostles time,
they must of necessity affirm heretically with the Donatists, that the true
unspotted Church of Christ perished, and that she which remained on earth, was
(O Blasphemy!) an Harlot. By which words it seems you are resolute perpetually
to confound True and Unspotted; and to put no difference between a corrupted
Church and none at all. But what is this, but to make no difference between a
diseased and a dead man? Nay what is it but to contradict your selves, who
cannot deny but that sins are as great stains and spots and deformities in the
sight of God, as errors; and confess your Church to be a Congregation of men,
whereof every particular, not one excepted, (and consequently the generality
which is nothing but a collection of them) is polluted and defiled with sin?

19. You ask, How can the Church more truly be said to perish, than when she is
permitted to maintain a damnable Heresy? I Answer, she may be more truly said
to perish, when she is not only permitted to do so, but de facto does maintain
a damnable Heresy. Again, she may be more truly said to perish, when she falls
into an Heresy, which is not only damnable in it self, and ex natura rei, as
you speak, but such an Heresy, the belief of whose contrary Truth is
necessary, not only necessitate praecepti but medii, and therefore the Heresy
so absolutely and indispensably destructive of salvation, that no ignorance can
excuse it, nor any general repentance, without a dereliction of it, can beg a
pardon for it. Such an heresy if the Church should fall into, it might be more
truly said to perish, than if it fell only into some heresy of its own nature
damnable. For in that state all the members of it, without exception, all
without mercy must needs perish for ever: In this, although those that might
see the truth and would not, cannot upon any good ground hope for salvation,
yet without question, it might send many souls to heaven, who would gladly have
embraced the Truth, but that they wanted means to discover it. Thirdly and
lastly, she may yet more truly be said to perish when she Apostates from Christ
absolutely, or rejects even those Truths out of which her Heresies may be
reformed; as if she should directly deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the
Scripture to be the Word of God. Toward which state of Perdition it may well
be feared that the Church of Rome does somewhat incline, by her superinducing
upon the rest of her Errors the Doctrine of her own Infallibility, whereby her
errors are made incurable; and by her pretending that the Scripture is to be
interpreted according to her doctrine, and not her doctrine to be judged of by
Scripture, whereby she makes the Scripture uneffectuall for her Reformation.

20. Ad. 18. I was very glad when I heard you say The Holy Scripture and
ancient Fathers do assign Separation from the Visible Church as a mark of
Heresy: for I was in good hope, that no Christian would so belie the
Scripture, as to say so of it, unless he could have produced some one Text at
least, wherein this was plainly affirmed, or from whence it might be
undoubtedly and undeniably collected. For assure your self, good Sir, it is a
very heinous crime to say, thus says the Lord, when the Lord does not say so.
I expected therefore some Scripture should have been alleged, wherein it
should have been said, whosoever separates from the Roman Church is an
Heretic: or the Roman Church is infallible, or the guide of Faith: or at
least, There shall be always some Visible Church infallible in matters of
Faith. Some such direction as this I hoped for: And I pray consider whether I
had not reason! The Evangelists and Apostles who wrote the New Testament, we
all suppose were good men, and very desirous to direct us the surest and
plainest way to Heaven; we suppose them likewise very sufficiently instructed
by the Spirit of God in all the necessary points of the Christian Faith, and
therefore certainly not ignorant of this Unum Necessarium, this most necessary
point of all others, without which as you pretend and teach, all faith is no
Faith, that is, that the Church of Rome was designed by God the guide of Faith.
We suppose them lastly wise men, especially being assisted by the spirit of
wisdom, and such as knew that a doubtful and questionable guide was for men's
direction as good as none at all. And after all these suppositions, which I
presume no good Christian will call into question, is it possible that any
Christian heart can believe, that not one amongst them all should ad rei
memoriam write this necessary doctrine plainly so much as once? Certainly in all
reason they had provided much better for the good of Christians if they had
wrote this, though they had writ nothing else. Methinks the Evangelists
undertaking to write the Gospel of Christ, could not possibly have omitted, any
one of them, this most necessary point of faith, had they known it necessary,
(S. Luke especially, who plainly professes that his intent was to write all
things necessary.) Methinks S. Paul writing to the Romans could not but have
congratulated this their Privilege to them! Methinks instead of saying, Your
Faith is spoken of all the world over (which you have no reason to be very
proud of, for he says the very same thing to the Thessalonians,) he could not
have failed to have told them once at least in plain terms, that their Faith
was the Rule for all the World for ever. But then sure he would have forborne to
put them in fear of an impossibility, as he does in his eleventh Chap. that
they also, nay the whole Church of the Gentiles if they did not look to their
standing, might fall away to infidelity as the Jews had done. Methinks in all
his other Epistles, at least in some, at least in one of them, he could not
have failed to have given the world this direction, had he known it to be a
true one, that all men were to be guided by the Church of Rome, and none to
separate from it under pain of damnation. Methinks writing so often of
Heretics and Antichrist, he should have given the world this (as you pretend)
only sure preservative from them. How was it possible that S. Peter writing two
Catholic Epistles, mentioning his own departure, writing to preserve
Christians in the Faith, should in neither of them commend them to the guidance
of his pretended Successors, the Bishops of Rome? How was it possible that S.
James, and S. Jude in their Catholic Epistles should not give this Catholic
direction? Methinks S. John instead of saying, he that believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God, (The force of which direction, your glosses do
quite enervate, and make unavailable to discern who are the sons of God,)
should have said, He that adheres to the doctrine of the Roman Church, and lives
according to it, he is a good Christian, and by this Mark ye shall know him!
What man not quite out of his wits, if he consider as he should, the pretended
necessity of this doctrine, that without the belief hereof no man ordinarily can
be saved, can possibly force himself to conceive that all these good and holy
men, so desirous of men's salvation, and so well assured of it (as it is
pretended,) should be so deeply and affectedly silent in it, and not one say it
plainly so much as once, but leave it to be collected from uncertain
principles, by many more uncertain consequences? Certainly he that can judge so
uncharitably of them, it is no marvel if he censure other inferior servants of
Christ as Atheists, and Hypocrites, and what he pleases. Plain places therefore
I did and had reason to look for, when I heard you say, the holy Scripture
assigns Separation from the visible Church as a mark of Heresy. But instead
hereof what have you brought us, but mere impertinences? S. John says of some
who pretended to be Christians and were not so, and therefore when it was for
their advantage forsook their Profession, They went out from us, but they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us. Of some, who before the decree of the Council to the contrary, were
persuaded and accordingly taught, that the convert Gentiles were to keep the
Law of Moses, it is said in the Acts, Some who went out from us. And again S.
Paul in the same Book forewarns the Ephesians that out of them should arise men
speaking perverse things. And from these places which it seems are the plainest
you have, you collect that separation from the Visible Church is assigned by
Scripture as a Mark of Heresy. Which is certainly a strange and unheard of
strain of Logic. Unless you will say that every Text wherein it is said, that
some Body goes out from some Body, affords an Argument for this purpose! For
the first place there is no certainty that it speaks of Heretics, but, no
Christians, of Antichrists, of such as denied Jesus to be the Christ: See the
place and you shall confess as much. The second place, it is certain, you must
not say it speaks of Heretics, for it speaks only of some who believed and
taught an Error, while it was yet a question and not evident, and therefore
according to your Doctrine, no formal Heresy. The third says indeed, that of
the Professors of Christianity, some shall arise that shall teach Heresy: But
not one of them all that says or intimates, that whosoever separates from the
Visible Church, in what state soever, is certainly an Heretic. Heretics I
confess do always do so; But they that do so are not always Heretics, for
perhaps the State of the Church may make it necessary for them to do so; as
Rebels always disobey the command of their King, yet they which disobey a Kings
Command (which perhaps may be unjust) are not presently Rebels.

22. In the 19.. We have the Authority of eight Fathers urged to prove that the
separation from the Church of Rome as it is the Sea of S. Peter (I conceive you
mean as it is the Particular Church) is the mark of Heresy. Which kind of
Argument I might well refuse to answer, unless you would first promise me, that
whenever I should produce as plain sentences, of as great a number of
Fathers, as Ancient, for any Doctrine whatsoever, that you will subscribe to
it, though it fall out to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Roman Church. For
I conceive nothing in the World more unequal or unreasonable, than that you
should press us with such Authorities as these, and think your selves at
liberty from them; and that you should account them Fathers when they are for
you, and Children when they are against you. Yet I would not you should
interpret this as if I had not great assurance, that it is not possible for you
ever to gain this cause at the Tribunal of the Fathers, nay not of the Fathers
whose sentences are here alleged. Let us consider them in order, and I doubt
not to make it appear that far the greater part of them, nay all of them that
are nay way considerable fall short of your purpose.

23. Obj. S. Hierome (you say Ep. 57. ad Damasum) professes, I am in the
Communion of the Chair of Peter, etc. But then I pray consider he says it to
Pope Damasus: and this will much weaken the Authority, with them who know how
great over-truths men usually write to one another in letters. Consider again,
that he says only, that he was then in Communion with the Chair of Peter, Not
that he always would, or of necessity must be so: for his resolution to the
contrary is too evident out of that which he says elsewhere which shall be
produced hereafter. He says that the Church at that present was built upon that
Rock; but not that only, Nor that always. Nay his judgment as shall appear is
express to the contrary. And so likewise the rest of his expressions (if we
mean to reconcile Hierome with Hierome) must be conceived as intended by him,
of that Bishop and Sea of Rome, at that present time, and in the present State,
and in respect of that Doctrine which he there entreats of. For otherwise had
he conceived it necessary for him and all men to conform their judgments in
matters of Faith, to the judgment of the Bishop and Church of Rome, how came it
to pass that he chose rather to believe the Epistle to the Hebrews Canonical,
upon the Authority of the Eastern Church, than to reject it from the Canon upon
the Anthority of the Roman? How comes it to pass that he dissented from the
Authority of that Church, touching the Canon of the Old Testament? For if you
say, that the Church, then consented with S. Hierome, I fear you will lose your
Fort by maintaining your Outworks, and by avoiding this, run into a greater
danger of being forced to confess the present Roman Church opposite herein to
the Ancient. How was it possible, Hierom. de scrip. Eccle. tit. Fortunatianus.
that he should ever believe that Liberius Bishop of Rome either was or could
have been wrought over by the solicitation of Fortunatianus Bishop of
Aquileia, and brought after two Years Banishment to subscribe Heresy? Which
Act of Liberius though some fondly question, being so vain as to expect we
should rather believe them that lived but yesterday, thirteen hundred Years
almost after the thing is said to be done, and speaking for themselves in their
own Cause, rather than the dis-interessed time-fellows or immediate Successors
of Liberius himself: yet I hope they will not proceed to such a degree of
immodesty, as once to question whether S. Hierome though so. And if this cannot
be denied, I demand then if he had lived in Liberius his time, could he or
would he have written so to Liberius as he does to Damasus? would he have said
to him, I am in the Communion of the Chair of Peter, I know that the Church is
built upon this Rock, Whosoever gathers not with thee scatters. Would he
then have said, the Roman Faith and the Catholic were the same: or, that the
Roman Faith received no delusions, no not from an Angel? I suppose he could not
have said so with any coherence to his own belief; and therefore conceive it
undeniable that what he said then to Damasus, he said it (though perhaps he
strained too high) only of Damasus, and never conceived that his words would
have been extended to all his Predecessors and all his Successors.

24. Obj. S. Ambrose (de obitu Satyri fratris) says of his Brother Satyrus,
that inquiring for a Church wherein to give thanks for his delivery from
Shipwreck, he called to him the Bishop, and he asked him whether he agreed with
the Catholic Bishops, that is, with the Roman Church? And when he understood
that he was a Schismatic, that is, Separated from the Roman Church, he
abstained from Communicating with him.

Answ. No more can be certainly concluded from it, but that the Catholic
Bishops and the Roman Church were then at Unity; so that whosoever agreed with
the latter could not then but agree with the former. But that this Rule was
perpetual, and that no man could ever agree with the Catholic Bishops, but he
must agree with the Roman Church, this he says not, nor gives you any ground to
conclude from him. Athanasius when he was excommunicated by Liberius, agreed
very ill with the Roman Church, and yet you will not gainsay, but he agreed
well enough with the Catholic Bishops.

24. Obj. S. Cyprian says ( Epist. 55. ad Cornel.) They are bold to Sail to
the Chair of S. Peter, and to the principal Church, from whence Priestly Unity
has sprung. Neither do they consider that they are Romans, whose Faith was
commended by the Preaching of the Apostle, to whom falsehood cannot have access.

Answ. For S. Cyprian all the World knows that he It is confessed by Baronius
Anno. 238. N. 41. By Bellarm. l. 4. de R. Pont. c. 7.. Tertia ratio.
resolutely opposed a Decree of the Roman Bishop, and all that adhered to him
in the point of Re-baptizing, which that Church at that time delivered as a
necessary tradition. So necessary, that by the Bishop of Rome Firmilianus and
other Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia and Galatia, and generally all who
persisted in the contrary opinion, Confessed by Baronius An, 258. N. 14. and
15. By Card. Perron. Repl. l. 1. c. 25. Ibid.
were therefore deprived of the Churches Communion, (which excommunication
could not but involve S. Cyprian, who defended the same opinion as resolutely
as Firmilianus, though Cardinal Perren magisterially and without all color of
proof affirm the contrary,) and Cyprian in particular so far cast off, as for
it to be pronounced by Stephen a false Christ. Again so necessary that the
Bishops which were sent by Cyprian from Africa to Rome, were not admitted to
the Communion of ordinary conference: But all men who were subject to the
Bishop of Romes Authority, were commanded by him not only to deny them the
Churches peace and Communion, but even lodging and entertainment: manifestly
declaring, that they reckoned them among those whom S. John forbids to receive
to house, or to say God speed to them. All these terrors notwithstanding S.
Cyprian holds still his former opinion, and though out of respect to the
Churches peace Vide Con. Carth. apud sur. To. 1.
he judged no man, nor cut off any man from the right of Communion, for
thinking otherwise than he held, yet he conceived Stephen and his adherents,
Bell. l. 2. de Conc. c. 5. Aug. ep. 48. and lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 18.
to hold a pernicious Error. And S. Austin, (though disputing with the
Donatists he uses some Tergiversation in the point,) yet confesses elsewhere,
that it is not found that Cyprian did ever change his opinion. And so far was
he from conceiving any necessity of doing so, in submitting to the judgment of
the Bishop and Church of Rome, that he plainly professes that no other Bishop,
but our Lord Jesus only, had power to Judge (with Authority) of his Judgment,
and as plainly intimates that Stephen, for usurping such a power, and making
himself a Judge over Bishops, was little better than a Tyrant: and as heavily
almost he censures him, and peremptorily opposes him as obstinate in Error, in
that very place where he delivers that famous saying, How can he have God for
his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother? little doubting it seems
but a man might have the Church for his Mother, who stood in opposition to the
Church of Rome, and far from thinking what you fondly obtrude upon him, that to
be United to the Roman Church, and to the Church was all one, and that
separation from S. Peter's Chair was a mark, I mean a certain mark, either of
Schism or Heresy.

26. But you have given a false or at least a strained Translation of S.
Cyprians forecited Words; for Cyprian says not to whom falsehood cannot have
access, as if he had exempted the Roman Church from a possibility of Error, but
to whom perfidiousness cannot have access, meaning those perfidious
Schismatics, whom he there complains of; and of these by a Rhetorical
insinuation, he says that with such good Christians as the Romans were, it was
not possible they should find favorable entertainment. As for his joining the
Principal Church and the Chair of Peter, how that will serve to prove
separation from the Roman Church to be a mark of Heresy, it is hard to
understand. Though we do not altogether deny, but that the Church of Rome might
be called the Chair of S. Peter, in regard he is said to have Preached the
Gospel there; and the principal Church, because the City was the principal and
imperial City, which prerogative of the City, if we believe the Fathers of the
Council of Chalcedon, was the ground and occasion, why the Fathers of former
times (I pray observe) conferred upon this Church this prerogative above other
Churches.

27. Obj. But in another place (Epist. 52.) S. Cyprian makes Communicating with
Cornelius (the Bishop of Rome) and with the Catholic Church to be the same.

Answ. This does not prove that to Communicate with the Church and Pope of
Rome, and to Communicate with the Catholic Church, is always (for that you
assume) one and the same thing. S. Cyprian speaks not of the Church of Rome at
all, but of the Bishop only, who when he does Communicate with the Catholic
Church, as Cornelius at that time did, then whosoever Communicates with him,
cannot but Communicate with the Catholic Church: and then by accident one may
truly say, such a one Communicates with you, that is, with the Catholic
Church, and that to Communicate with him is to Communicate with the Catholic
Church. As if Titius and Sempronius be together, he that is in company with
Titius, cannot but be at that time in company with Sempronius. As if a General
be marching to some place with an Army, he that then is with the General must
at that time be with the Army: And a man may say without absurdity, such a time
I was with the General, that is, with the Army, and that to be with the General
is to be with the Army. Or as if a man's hand be joined to his Body, the finger
which is joined to the hand is joined to the Body, and a man may say truly of
it, this finger is joined to the hand, that is, to the Body, and to be joined
to the hand is to be joined to the Body; because all these things are by
accident true. And yet I hope you would not deny, but the finger might possibly
be joined to the hand, and yet not to the Body, the hand being cut off from the
Body; and a man might another time, be with his General and not with his Army,
he being absent from the Army. And therefore by like Reason your collection is
Sophistical, being in effect but this, to communicate with such a Bishop of
Rome, who did Communicate with the Catholic Church, was to Communicate with
the Catholic Church, therefore absolutely and always it must be true, that to
Communicate with him, is by consequent to Communicate with the Catholic
Church, and to be divided from the Communion, is to be an Heretic.

28. Obj. S. Irenaeus says, (lib. 3. cont. haer: c. 3.) Because it were long
to number the successions of all Churches, we declaring the Tradition of the
most great most Ancient and known Church, founded by the two glorious Apostles
Peter and Paul, which Tradition it has from the Apostles, coming to us by
succession of Bishops, we confound all those who any way either by vain Glory,
Blindness, or ill Opinion do gather otherwise than they ought. For to this
Church for a more powerful Principality, it is necessary that all Churches
resort, that is, all faithful People (undique) of what place soever: In which
(Roman Church) the Tradition from the Apostles has always been conserved from
those who are (undique) every where.

Answ. Though at the first, hearing the Glorious Attributes here given (and
that justly) to the Church of Rome, the confounding Heretics with her
Tradition, and saying it is necessary for all Churches to resort to her, may
sound like Arguments for you: yet he that is attentive I hope will easily
discover, that it might be good and rational in Irenaeus having to do with
Heretics, who, somewhat like those who would be the only Catholics, declining
a trial by Scripture as not containing the Truth of Christ perfectly, and not
fit to decide Controversies without recourse to Tradition: I say he will easily
perceive that it might be rational in Irenaeus to urge them with any Tradition
of more credit than their own, especially a Tradition consonant to Scripture,
and even contained in it; and yet that it may be irrational in you to urge us,
who do not decline Scripture but appeal to it as a perfect rule of Faith, with
a Tradition which we pretend is many ways repugnant to Scripture, and repugnant
to a Tradition far more general than it self, which gives testimony to
Scripture, and lastly repugnant to it self as giving attestation both to
Scripture and to Doctrines plainly contrary to Scripture. Secondly, that the
Authority of the Roman Church was then a far greater Argument of the Truth of
her Tradition when it was United with all other Apostolic Churches, than now
when it is divided from them, according to that of Tertullian, Had the Churches
Erred they would have varied, but that which is the same in all, cannot be
Error but Tradition; and therefore though Irenaeus his Argument may be very
probable, yet yours may be worth nothing. Thirdly, that fourteen hundred years
may have made a great deal of alteration in the Roman Church: as Rivers, though
near the Fountain they may retain their native and unmixt sincerity, yet in
long Progress cannot but take in much mixture that came not from the Fountain.
And therefore the Roman Tradition though then pure, may now be corrupt and
impure: and so this Argument (being one of those things which are the worse for
wearing) might in Irenaeus his time be strong and vigorous, and after declining
and decaying may long since have fallen to nothing. Especially considering that
Irenaeus plays the Historian only and not the Prophet, and says only, that the
Apostolic Tradition had been always there as in other Apostolic Churches
conserved or observed, choose you whether, but that it should be always so he
says not, neither had he any warrant. He knew well enough that there was
foretold a great falling away of the Churches of Christ to Antichrist: that the
Roman Church in particular was forewarned that she also, nay the whole Church
of the Gentiles, might fall if they look not to their standing: and therefore
to secure her that she should stand for ever, he had no reason, nor Authority.
Fourthly, that it appears manifestly out of this Book of Irenaeus quoted by
you, that the Doctrine of the Chiliasts was in his Judgment Apostolic
Tradition, as also it was esteemed (for ought appears to the contrary) by all
the Doctors, and Saints, and Martyrs of or about his time, for all that speak
of it, or whose judgments in the point are any way recorded, are for it: and
Justin Martyr professes that all good and Orthodox Christians of his time
believed it, and those that did not, he reckons amongst Heretics. Now I
demand, was this Tradition one of those that was conserved, and observed in the
Church of Rome, or was it not? If not, had Iraeneus known so much, he must have
retracted this commendation of that Church. If it was, then the Tradition of
the present Church of Rome contradicts the Ancient, and accounts it Heretical,
and then sure it can be no certain note of Heresy to depart from them, who
have departed from themselves, and prove themselves subject unto error by
holding contradictions. Fifthly and lastly, that out of the Story of the Church
it is as manifest as the light at noon, that though Iraeneus did esteem the
Roman Tradition, a great Argument of the Doctrine which he there delivers and
defends against the Heretics of his time, viz. that there was one God, yet he
was very far from thinking that Church was, and ever should be a safe keeper,
and an infallible witness of Tradition in general: Inasmuch as in his own life,
his action proclaimed the contrary. For when Victor Bishop of Rome obtruded the
Roman Tradition touching the time of Easter upon the Asian Bishops under the
pain of Excommunication, and damnation, Iraeneus, and all the other Western
Bishops, though agreeing with him in his observation yet sharply reprehended
him for Excommunicating the Asian Bishops for their disagreeing, plainly
showing, that they esteemed that not a necessary doctrine and a sufficient
ground of excommunication, which the Bishop of Rome and his adherents did so
account of: For otherwise how could they have reprehended him for
excommunicating them, had they conceived the cause of his excommunication just
and sufficient? And besides evidently declaring that they esteemed not
separation from the Roman Church a certain mark of Heresy, seeing they
esteemed not them Heretics though separated and cut off from the Roman Church.

31. Obj. S. Austin says (in Psalm cont. partem Donati) It grieves us to see
you so to lie cut off. Number the Priests even from the Sea of Peter; and
consider in that order of Fathers who succeeded; to whom she is the Rock which
the proud gates of Hell do not overcome: Where he seems to say, that the
Succession in the Sea of Peter, was the Rock which our Savior means when he
said, upon this Rock will I build my Church.

Ans. I answer, First, We have no reason to be confident of the truth hereof,
because S. Austin himself was not, but retracts it as uncertain, and leaves to
the Reader whether he will think that, or another more probable. Retr. l. 1. c.
26. Secondly, what he says of the Succession in the Roman Church in this place,
he says it elsewhere, of all the Successions in all other Apostolic Churches.
Thirdly, that as in this place he urges the Donatists with separation from the
Roman Church, as an argument of their Error: So elsewhere he presses them with
their Separation from other Apostolic Churches, nay more from these than from
that, because in Rome the Donatists had a Bishop, though not a perpetual
Succession of them, but in other Apostolic Churches they wanted both. These
scattered men (says he of the Donatists Epist. 165.) read in the holy Books
the Churches to which the Apostles wrote, and have no Bishop in them: But what
is more perverse and mad, than to the Lectors reading these Epistles to say,
Peace with you, and to separate from the peace of these Churches, to which
these Epistles were written? So Optatus having done you (as it might seem)
great service, in upbraiding the Donatists as Schismatics, because they had
not Communion with the Church of Rome, overthrows and undoes it all again, and
as it were with a sponge wipes out all that he had said for you, by adding
after, that they were Schismatics, because they bad not the fellowship of
Communion with the seven Churches of Asia, to which S. John writes: whereof he
pronounces confidently, (though I know not upon what ground) Extra septem
Ecclesias quicquid for is est, alienum est. Now I pray tell me, do you esteem
the Authority of these Fathers a sufficient assurance, that separation from
these other Apostolic Churches, was a certain mark of Heresy, or not? If so,
then your Church has been for many Ages heretical. If not, how is their
authority, a greater argument for the Roman, than for the other Churches? If
you say, they conceived separation from these Churches a note of Schism, only
when they were united to the Roman: so also they might conceive of the Roman,
only when it was united to them. If you say, they urged this only as a
probable, and not as a certain Argument, so also they might do that. In a word,
whatsoever answer you can devise to show, that these Fathers made not
separation from these other Churches a mark of Heresy, apply that to your own
Argument, and it will be satisfied.

33. You see S. Austins words make very little, or indeed nothing for you. But
now his Action, (which according to Cardinal Perrons rule, is much more to be
regarded than his words, as not being so obnoxious to misinterpretation) You do
ill to translate it, the Principality of the Sea Apostolic, as if there were
but one: whereas S. Austin presently after speaks of Apostolical Churches, in
the plural number, and makes the Bishops of them, joint Commissioners for the
judging of Ecclesiastical causes.
I mean his famous opposition of three Bishops of Rome in Succession, touching
the great question of Appeals, wherein he and the rest of the African Bishops
proceeded so far in the first or second Milevitan Council, as to The words of
the Decree (which also Bellarmine l. 1. de Matrim. c. 17. assures us to have
been formed by S. Austin) are these. Si qui (Africani,) ab Episcopis
provocandum putaverint, non nisi ad Africana provocent Concilia, vel ad
Primates provinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina antem, qui putaverit appellandum,
a nullo intra Africam in Communionem suscipiatur. This Decree is by Gratian
most impudently corrupted. For whereas the Fathers of that Council intended it
particularly against the Church of Rome, he tells us they forbad Appeals to
all, excepting only the Church of Rome.
decree any African Excommunicate, that should appeal to any man out of Africa,
and therein continued resolute unto death: I say this famous Action of his,
makes clearly and evidently and infinitely against you. For had Boniface, and
the rest of the African Bishops, a great part whereof were Saints and Martyrs,
believed as an Article of Faith, that Union and Conformity with the Doctrine of
the Roman Church, in all things which she held necessary, was a certain note of
a good Catholic, and by Gods command necessary to Salvation, how was it
possible they should have opposed it in this? Unless you will say they were all
so foolish as to believe at once direct contradictions, viz. that conformity to
the Roman Church was necessary in all points, and not necessary in this: or
else so horribly impious, as believing this doctrine of the Roman Church true,
and her power to receive Appeals derived from divine Authority, notwithstanding
to oppose and condemn it, and to Anathematize all those Africans, of what
condition soever, that should appeal unto it. I say of what condition soever:
For it is evident, that they concluded in their determination, Bishops as well
as the inferior Clergy and Laity: And Cardinal Perrons pretense of the
contrary, is a shameless falsehood, repugnant to the plain The words are these,
Praefato debito salutationis officio, impendio deprecamur; ut deinceps ad aures
vestras hinc venientes, non facilius admittatis; nec a nobis excommunicates
ultra in Communionem velitis recipere, quia hoc etiam Niceno Concilio definitum
facile advertet venerabilitas tua. Nam si de inferioribus Clericis vel Laicis
videtur id praecavert, quanto magis hoc de Episcopis voluit observari.
words of the Remonstrance of the African Bishops to Celestine Bishop of Rome.

34. Obj. Tertullian says (Praescrip. cap. 36.) If thou be near Italy, thou
bast Rome, whose Authority is near at hand to us: a happy Church, into which
the Apostles have poured all Doctrine, together with their blood.

Ans. Your allegation of Tertullian is a manifest conviction of your want of
sincerity: For you produce with great ostentation what he says of the Church of
Rome, but you and your fellows always conceal and dissemble, that immediately
before these words he attributes as much for point of direction to any other
Apostolic Church, and that as he sends them to Rome who lived near Italy, so
those near Achaia he sends to Corinth, those about Macedonia to Philippi, and
Thessalonica, those of Asia to Ephesus. His words are, Go to now thou that wilt
better employ thy curiosity in the business of thy salvation, run over the
Apostolical Churches, wherein the Chairs of the Apostles are yet sat upon in
their places, wherein their Authentic Epistles are recited, sounding out the
voice, and representing the face of every one! Is Achaia near thee? there thou
have Corinth: If thou art not far from Macedonia, thou have Philippi, thou have
Thessalonica: If thou can go into Asia, there thou have Ephesus: If thou be
adjacent to Italy, thou have Rome, whose Authority is near at hand to us (in
Africa;) A happy Church, into which the Apostles poured forth all their
Doctrine together with their Blood, etc. Now I pray Sirtell me, if you can for
blushing, why this place might not have been urged by a Corinthian, or
Philippian, or Thessalonian, or an Ephesian, to show that in the Judgment of
Tertullian, separation from any of their Churches is a certain mark of Heresy,
as justly and rationally as you allege it to vindicate this privilege to the
Roman Church only? Certainly if you will stand to Tertullians judgment, you
must either grant the authority of the Roman Church (though at that time a good
Topical Argument, and perhaps a better than any the Heretics had, especially
in conjunction with other Apostolic Churches:) yet, I say you must grant it
perforce but a Fallible Guide as well as that of Ephesus, and Thessalonica, and
Philippi, and Corinth: or you must maintain the authority of every one of these
infallible, as well as the Roman. For though he make a Panegyric of the Roman
Church in particular, and of the rest only in general, yet as I have said, for
point of direction he makes them all equal; and therefore makes them (choose
you whether) either all fallible, or all infallible: Now you will and must
acknowledge that he never intended to attribute infallibility to the Churches
of Ephesus, or Corinth, or if he did, that (as experience shows) he Erred in
doing so; and what can hinder, but then we may say also that he never intended
to attribute infallibility to the Roman Church, or if he did that he Erred in
doing so?

38. Ad. 20, 21, 22, 23.] The sum of your discourse in these Sections, if it be
pertinent to the Question, must be this. Want of Succession of Bishops and
Pastors holding always the same Doctrine, and of the forms of ordaining Bishops
and Priests which are in use in the Roman Church, is a certain mark of Heresy:
But Protestants want all these things: Therefore they are Heretics. To which I
answer, That nothing but wnat of truth and holding Error, can make or prove any
man or Church Heretical. For if he be a true Aristotelian, or Platonist, or
Pyrrhonian, or Epicurean, who holds the Doctrine of Aristotle, or Plato, or
Pirrho, or Epicurus, although he cannot assign any that held it before him for
many Ages together, why should I not be made a true and Orthodox Christian, by
believing all the Doctrine of Christ, though I cannot derive my descent from a
perpetual Succession that believed it before me? By this reason you should say
as well, that no man can be a good Bishop or Pastor, or King or Magistrate, or
Father that succeeds a bad one. For if I may conform my will and actions to the
Commandments of God, why may I not embrace his Doctrine with my understanding,
although my predecessor do not so? You have above in this Chapter defined Faith
a free Infallible, obscure, supernatural assent to Divine Truths, because they
are revealed by God and sufficiently propounded: This definition is very
fantastical; but for the present I will let it pass, and desire you to give me
some piece of shadow or reason, why I may not do all this without a perpetual
Succession of Bishops and Pastors that have done so before me? You may judge as
uncharitably, and speak as maliciously of me, as your blind zeal to your
Superstition shall direct you, but certainly I know, (and with all your
Sophistry you cannot make me doubt of what I know,) that I do believe the
Gospel of Christ (as it is delivered in the undoubted Books of Canonical
Scripture, as verily as that it is now day, that I see the light, that I am now
writing: and I believe it upon this Motive, because I conceive it sufficiently,
abundantly, superabundantly proved to be Divine Revelation: And yet in this, I
do not depend upon any Succession of men that have always believed it without
any mixture of Error; nay I am fully persuaded, there has been no such
Succession, and yet do not find my self any way weakened in my Faith by the want
of it; but so fully assured of the truth of it, that not only, though your
Devils at Lowden do tricks against it, but though an Angel from Heaven should
gainsay it or any part of it, I persuade my self that I should not be moved.
This I say, and this I am sure is true: and if you will be so Hypersceptical as
to persuade me, that I am not sure that I believe all this, I desire you to
tell me, how are you sure that you believe the Church of Rome? For if a man may
persuade himself he does believe what he does not believe, then may you think
you believe the Church of Rome, and yet not believe it. But if no man can Err
concerning what he believes, then you must give me leave to assure my self that
I do believe, and consequently that any man may believe the aforesaid truths
upon the aforesaid motives, without any dependence upon any Succession that
has believed it always. And as from your definition of Faith, so from your
definition of Heresy, this fancy may be refuted. For questionless no man can
be an Heretic but he that holds an Heresy, and an Heresy you say is a
Voluntary Error; therefore no man can be necessitated to be an Heretic whether
he will or no, by want of such a thing that is not in his power to have: But
that there should have been a perpetual Succession of Believers in all points
Orthodox, is not a thing which is in your power, therefore our being or not
being Heretics depends not on it. Besides, what is more certain, than that he
may make a straight line, who has a Rule to make it by, though never man in
the World had made any before: and why then may not he that believes the
Scripture to be the Word of God, and the Rule of Faith, regulate his Faith by
it, and consequently believe aright without much regarding what other men
either will do or have done? It is true indeed there is a necessity that if God
will have his Words believed, he by his Providence must take order, that either
by Succession of men, or by some other means natural or supernatural, it be
preserved and delivered, and sufficiently notified to be his Word; but that
this should be done by a Succession of men that holds no Error against it,
certainly there is no more necessity, than that it should be done by a
Succession of men that commit no sin against it. For if men may preserve the
Records of a Law, and yet transgress it, certainly they may also preserve
directions for their Faith, and yet not follow them. I doubt not but Lawyers at
the Bar do find by frequent experience, that many men preserve and produce
evidences, which being examined oftimes make against themselves. This they do
ignorantly, it being in their power to suppress, or perhaps to alter them. And
why then should any man conceive it strange, that an erroneous and corrupted
Church should preserve and deliver the Scriptures uncorrupted, when indeed for
many reasons which I have formally alleged, it was impossible for them to
corrupt them? Seeing therefore this is all the necessity that is pretended of a
perpetual Succession of men Orthodox in all points, certainly there is no
necessity at all of any such, neither can the want of it prove any man or any
Church Heretical.

39. When therefore you have produced some proof of this, (which was your Major
in your former Syllogism,) That want of Succession is a certain mark of
Heresy, you shall then receive a full answer to your Minor. We shall then
consider whether your indelible Character be any reality, or whether it be a
Creature of your own making, a fancy of your own imagination? And if it be a
thing, and not only a Word, whether our Bishops and Priests have it not as well
as yours; and whether some men's persuasion that there is no such thing, can
hinder them from having it, or prove that they have it not if there be any such
thing? (Any more than a man's persuasion that he has not taken Physic or
Poison, will make him not to have taken it if he has, or hinder the operation
of it?) And whether Tertullian in the place quoted by you, speak of a Priest
made a Layman, by a just deposition or degradation, and not by a voluntary
desertion of his Order? And whether in the same place he set not some mark upon
Heretics that will agree to your Church? Whether all the Authority of our
Bishops in England before the Reformation, was conferred on them by the Pope?
And if it were, whether it were the Popes right, or an Usurpation? If it were
his right, whether by Divine Law or Ecclesiastical? And if by Ecclesiastical
only, whether he might possibly so abuse his power, as to deserve to lose it?
Whether de facto he had done so? Whether supposing he had deserved to lose it,
those that deprived him of it had power to take it from him? Or if not, whether
they had power to suspend him from the use of it, until good caution were put
in, and good assurance given, that if he had it again, he would not abuse it as
he had formerly done? Whether in case they had done unlawfully that took his
power from him, it may not (things being now settled, and the present Government
established) be as unlawful to go about to restore it? whether it be not a
Fallacy to conclude, because we believe the Pope has no power in England, now
when the King and State and Church has deprived him upon just grounds of it,
therefore we cannot believe that he had any before his deprivation? Whether
without Schism, a man may not withdraw obedience from an Usurped Authority
commanding unlawful things? Whether the Roman Church might not give Authority
to Bishops and Priests to oppose her Errors, as well as a King gives Authority
to a Judge to judge against him, if his cause be bad; as well as Trajan gave
his Sword to his Prefect, with this commission, that if he Governed well, he
should use it for him, if ill against. Whether the Roman Church gave not
Authority to her Bishops and Priests to Preach against her corruptions in
manners? And if so, why not against her Errors in Doctrine, if she had any?
Whether she gave them not Authority to Preach the whole Gospel of Christ, and
consequently against her Doctrine, if it should contradict any part of the
Gospel of Christ? Whether it be not acknowledged lawful in the Church of Rome,
for any Layman or Woman that has ability to persuade others by Word or by
Writing from Error, and unto truth? And why this Liberty may not be practiced
against their Religion, if it be false, as well as for it if it be true?
Whether any man need any other Commission or Vocation than that of a Christian,
to do a work of Charity? And whether it be not one of the greatest works of
Charity (if it be done after a peaceable manner, and without any unnecessary
disturbance of order,) to persuade men out of a false, unto a true way of
Eternal happiness? Especially the Apostle having assured us, that he,
(whosoever he is) who converteth a sinner from the Error of his way, shall save
a Soul from Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins? Whether the first
Reformed Bishops died all at once, so that there were not enough to ordain
others in the places that were vacant? Whether the Bishops of England may not
Consecrate a Metropolitan of England, as well as the Cardinals do the Pope?
whether the King or Queen of England, or they that have the Government in their
Hands, in the minority of the Prince, may not lawfully commend one to them to
be consecrated, against whom there is no Canonical exception? Whether the
Doctrine, that the King is supreme head of the Church of England, (as the Kings
of Judah, and the first Christian Emperors were of the Jewish and Christian
Church,) be any new found Doctrine? Whether it be not true, that Bishops being
made Bishops, have their Authority immediately from Christ, though this or that
man be not made Bishop without the Kings Authority; as well as you say, the
Pope being Pope, has Authority immediately from Christ, and yet this or that
man cannot be made Pope without the Authority of the Cardinals? Whether you do
well to suppose, that Christian Kings have no more Authority in ordering the
affairs of the Church, than the great Turk, or the Pagan Emperors? Whether the
King may not give Authority to a Bishop to exercise his function in some part
of his Kingdom, and yet not be capable of doing it himself: as well as a Bishop
may give Authority to a Physician, to practice Physic in his Diocese, which
the Bishop cannot do himself? Whether if Nero the Emperor would have commanded
S. Peter or S. Paul to Preach the Gospel of Christ, and to exercise the office
of a Bishop of Rome, whether they would have questioned his Authority to do so?
Whether there were any Law of God or man, that prohibited K. JAMES to give
Commission to Bishops, nay to lay his injunction upon them, to do any thing
that is lawful? Whether a casual irregularity may not be lawfully dispensed
with? Whether the Popes irregularities if he should chance to incur any, be
indispensable? And if not, who is he, or who are they, whom the Pope is so
subject unto, that they may dispense with him? Whether that be certain which
you take for granted; That your Ordination imprints a Character and ours does
not? Whether the power of Consecrating and Ordaining by imposition of hands,
may not reside in the Bishops, and be derived unto them, not from the King but
God; and yet the King have Authority to command them to apply this power to
such a fit person, whom he shall commend unto them: As well as if some
Architects only had the faculty of Architecture, and had it immediately by
infusion from God himself, yet, if they were the Kings Subjects, he wants not
authority to command them to build him a Palace for his use, or a fortress for
his service: Or as the King of France pretends not to have power to make
Priests himself, yet I hope, you will not deny him power to command any of his
Subjects that has this power, to ordain any fit person Priest, whom he shall
desire to be ordained? Whether it do not follow, that whenever the King
commands an House to be Built, a Message to be delivered, or a Murderer to be
Executed, that all these things are presently done without intervention of the
Architect, Messenger, or Executioner: As well as, that they are ipso facto
Ordained and Consecrated, who by the Kings. Authority are commended to the
Bishops to be Ordained and Consecrated: Especially seeing the King will not
deny, but that these Bishops may refuse to do what he requires to be done,
lawfully if the person be unworthy, if worthy, unlawfully indeed, but yet de
facto they may refuse: and in case they should do so, whether justly or
unjustly; neither the King himself, nor any Body else, would esteem the person
Bishop upon the Kings designation? Whether many Popes, though they were not
Consecrated Bishops by any temporal Prince, yet might not, or did not receive
authority from the Emperor to exercise their Episcopal function in this or that
place? And whether the Emperors had not authority, upon their desert, to
deprive them of their jurisdiction, by imprisonment or banishment? Whether
Protestants do indeed pretend that their Reformation is Universal? Whether in
saying, the Donatists Sect was confined to Africa, you do not forget your self,
and contradict what you said above, in. 17. of this Chapter, where you tell us,
they had some of their Sect residing in Rome? Whether it be certain, that none
can admit of Bishops willingly, but those that hold them of Divine institution?
Whether they may not be willing to have them, conceiving that way of Government
the best, though not absolutely necessary? Whether all those Protestants that
conceive the distinction between Priests and Bishops, not to be of Divine
institution, be Schismatical and Heretical for thinking so? Whether your form
of ordaining Bishops and Priests, be essential to the constitution of a true
Church? Whether the forms of the Church of England differ essentially from your
forms? Whether in saying, that the true Church cannot subsist without undoubted
true Bishops and Priests, you have not overthrown the truth of your own Church:
wherein I have proved it plainly impossible, that any man should be so much as
morally certain, either of his own Priesthood or any other man's? Lastly,
whether any one kind of these external Forms and Orders, and Government be so
necessary to the being of a Church, but that they may not be diverse in diverse
places, and that a good and peaceable Christian may and ought to submit himself
to the Government of the place where he lives whatsoever it be? All these
Questions will be necessary to be discussed for the clearing of the truth of
the Minor proposition of your former Syllogism, and your proofs of it: and I
will promise to debate them fairly with you, if first you will bring some
better proof of the Major, That want of Succession is a certain note of
Heresy, which for the present remains both unproved and unprobable.

40. Obj. You say, The Fathers assign Succession as one mark of the true Church.

Answ. I confess they did urge Tradition as an Argument of the Truth of their
Doctrine and of the falsehood of the contrary; and thus far they agree with you.
But now see the difference: They urged it not against all Heretics that ever
should be, but against them who rejected a great part of the Scripture, for no
other reason but because it was repugnant to their Doctrine, and corrupted
other parts with their additions and detractions, and perverted the remainder
with diverse absurd interpretations: So Tertullian not a leaf before the words
by you cited. Nay they urged it against them who when they were confuted out of
Scripture, fell to accuse the Scriptures themselves as if they were not right,
and came not from good authority, as if they were various one from another, and
as if truth could not be found out of them, by those who know not Tradition,
for that it was not delivered in writing, (they did mean wholly,) but by word
of mouth: And that thereupon Paul also said, we speak wisdom amongst the
perfect. So Irenaeus in the very next Chapter before that which you allege.
Against these men being thus necessitated to do so, they did urge Tradition,
but what or whose Tradition was it? Certainly no other but the joint Tradition
of all the Apostolic Churches, with one Mouth and one Voice teaching the same
Doctrine. Or if for brevity sake they produce the Tradition of any one Church,
yet is it apparent, that that one was then in conjunction with all the rest;
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, testify as much in the words cited, and S.
Austin, in the place before alleged by me. This Tradition they did urge
against these men, and in a time, in comparison of ours, almost contiguous to
the Apostles: So near, that one them, Irenaeus, was Scholar to one who was
Scholar to S. John the Apostle. Tertullian and Origin were not an Age removed
from him: and the last of them all, little more than an Age from them. Yet
after all this they urged it not as a demonstration, but only as a very
probable argument, far greater than any their Adversaries could oppose against
it. So Tertullian in the place above quoted,. 5. How is it likely that so many
and so great Churches should Err in one Faith? (it should be, should have Erred
into one Faith.) And this was the condition of this Argument as the Fathers
urged it. Now if you having to deal with us, who question no Book of Scripture,
which was not Anciently questioned by some whom you your selves esteem good
Catholics; nay who refuse not to be tried by your own Canons, your own.
Translations, who in interpreting Scriptures are content to allow of all those
rules which you propose, only except that we will not allow you to be our
Judges; if you will come fifteen hundred years after the Apostles, a fair time
for the purest Church to gather much dross and corruptions, and for the mystery
af iniquity to bring its work to some perfection, which in the Apostles time
began to work, If (I say) you will come thus long after and urge us with the
single Tradition of one of these Churches, being now Catholic to it self
alone, and Heretical to all the rest: nay not only with her Ancient Original
Traditions, but also with her post-nate and introduced Definitions, and these
as we pretend, repugnant to Scripture, and Ancient Tradition, and all this to
decline an indifferent Trial by Scripture, under pretense (wherein also you
agree with the calumny of the Old Heretics) that all necessary truth cannot be
found in them without recourse to Tradition: If, I say, notwithstanding all
these differences, you will still be urging us with this argument, as the very
same and of the same force with that wherewith the forementioned Fathers urged
the Old Heretics, certainly this must needs proceed from a confidence you
have, not only that we have no School Divinity, nor Metaphysics, but no Logic
or common sense, that we are but Pictures of men, and have the definition of
rational creatures given us in vain.

41. But now suppose I should be liberal to you, and grant what you cannot
prove, that the Fathers make Succession a certain and perpetual mark of the
true Church; I beseech you what will come of it? What, that want of Succession
is a certain sign of an Heretical company? Truly if you say so, either you want
Logic, which is a certain sign of an ill disputer; or are not pleased to use
it, which is a worse. For speech is a certain sign of a living man, yet want of
speech is no sure argument that he is dead, for he may be dumb and yet living
still, and we may have other evident tokens that he is so, as Eating, Drinking,
Breathing, Moving: So, though the constant and Universal delivery of any
Doctrine by the Apostolic Churches ever since the Apostles, be a very great
argument of the truth of it, yet there is no certainty, but that truth, even
Divine truth, may through men's wickedness, be contracted from its universality,
and interrupted in its perpetuity, and so lose this argument, and yet not want
others to justify and support it self. For it may be one of those principles
which God has written in all men's Hearts, or a conclusion evidently arising
from them: It may be either contained in Scripture in express terms, or
deducible from it by apparent consequence. If therefore you intend to prove
want of a perpetual Succession of Professors a certain note of Heresy, you
must not content your self to show, that having it is one sign of truth; but
you must show it to be the only sign of it and inseparable from it. But this,
if you be well advised, you will never undertake. First because it is an
impossible attempt: and then because if you do it you will mar all: for by
proving this an inseparable sign of Catholic Doctrine, you will prove your
own, which apparently wants it in many points, not to be Catholic. For whereas
you say this Succession requires two things, agreement with the Apostles
Doctrine, and an uninterrupted conveyance of it down to them that challenge it:
It will be proved against you that you fail in both points; and that some
things wherein you agree with the Apostles have not been held always, as your
condemning the Doctrine of the Chiliasts, and holding the Eucharist not
necessary for Infants; and that in many other things you agree not with them
nor with the Church for many Ages after. For example; In mutilation of the
Communion, in having your Service in such a Language as the Assistants
generally understand not, your offering to Saints, your Picturing of God, your
worshipping of Pictures.

42. Ad. 24.] Obj. The true Church must have Universality of place which
Protestants wanting cannot avoid the just note of Heresy.

Answ. You have not set down clearly and univocally what you mean by it,
whether Universality of fact or of right: and if of fact, whether absolute or
comparative: and if comparative, whether of the Church in comparison of any
other Religion, or only of Heretical Christians: or if in comparison of these,
whether in comparison of all other Sects conjoined, or in comparison only of
any one of them. Nor have you proved it by any good argument in any sense to be
a certain mark of Heresy: For those places of S. Austin do not deserve the
name. And truly in my judgment you have done advisedly in proving it no better.
For as for Universality of right, or a right to Universality, all Religions
claim it, but only the true has it, and which has it cannot be determined,
unless it first be determined which is the true. An absolute Universality, and
diffusion through all the World if you should pretend to, all the World would
laugh at you. If you should contend for latitude with any one Religion,
Mahumetism would carry the Victory from you. If you should oppose your selves
against all other Christians besides you, it is certain you would be cast in
this suit also. If lastly, being hard driven you should please your selves with
being more than any one Sect of Christians, it would presently be replied, that
it is uncertain whether now you are so, but most certain that the time has been
when you have not been so. Then when the Hierom. Cont. Luciferianos.
whole World wondered that it was become Arrian: then when Athanasius opposed
the World, and the World Athanasius: then when In Theodoret. Hist. 16. c. l. 2.
your Liberius having the contemptible paucity of his adherents objected to him
as a note of Error, answered for himself, There was a time when there were but
three opposed the decree of the King, and yet those three were in the right,
and the rest in the wrong: then when the Professors of Error surpassed the
number of the Professors of truth in proportion, as the sands of the Sea do the
Stars of the Heaven. (As In ep. 48. ad Vincentium.
S. Austin acknowledges:) then when Commenitorii. lib. 1. c. 4.
Vincentius confesses, that the Poison of the Arrians had contaminated, not
now some certain portion, but almost the whole World: then when the Author of
Nazianzens Life testifies, That In vita Nazianz.
the Heresy of Arrius, had possessed in a manner the whole extent of the
World; and when Nazianzen found cause to cry out, In Orat. Arian. and pro
seipso.
Where are they who reproach us with our poverty, who define the Church by the
multitude, and despise the little flock? They have the People, but we the
Faith. And lastly when Athanasius was so overborn with Sholes and Floods of
Arrians, that he was enforced to write a Treatise on purpose Tom. 2.
against those, who judge of the truth only by plurality of adherents. So that
if you had proved want of Univesality even thus restrained, to be an infallible
note of Heresy, there would have been no remedy but you must have confessed,
that the time was when you were Heretics. And besides, I see not how you would
have avoided this great inconvenience, of laying grounds and storeing up
arguments for Antichrist, against he comes, by which he may prove his Company
the true Church. For it is evident out of Scripture, and confessed by you, that
though his time be not long, his dominion shall be very large; and that the
true Church shall be then, the woman driven into the wilderness.

45. Ad. 25.26.] You endeavor to prove that the Faith of Protestants is no
Faith, being destitute of its due qualifications.

Obj. First, you say, their belief wants certainty, because they denying the
Universal Infallibility of the Church, can have no certain ground to know what
Objects are revealed or testified by God.

Ans. But if there be no other ground of certainty but your Churches
infallibility, upon what certain ground do you know that your Church is
infallible? Upon what certain ground do you know all those things which must be
known before you can know that your Church is infallible? As that there is a
God: that God has promised his assistance to your Church in all her Decrees:
that the Scripture wherein this promise is extant is the word of God: that
those Texts of Scripture which you allege for your infallibility are
incorrupted: that that which you pretend is the true sense of them? When you
have produced certain grounds for all these things, I doubt not but it will
appear, that we also may have grounds certain enough to believe our whole
Religion, which is nothing else but the Bible, without dependence on the
Churches infallibility. Suppose you should meet with a man that for the
present, believes neither Church, nor Scripture, nor God, but is ready and
willing to believe them all, if you can show some sufficient grounds to build
his faith upon; will you tell such a man there are no certain grounds, by which
he may be converted; or there are? If you say the first, you make all Religion
an uncertain thing: If the second, then either you must ridiculously persuade,
that your Church is infallible, because it is infallible, or else that there
are other certain grounds besides your Churches infallibility.

46. Obj. The Holy Scripture is in it self most true and infallible, but
without the direction and declaration of the Church, we can neither have
certain means to know what Scripture is Canonical, nor what Translations be
faithful, nor what is the true meaning of Scripture.

Ans. But all these things must be known, before we can know the direction of
your Church to be infallible, for no other proof of it can be pretended, but
only some Texts of Canonical Scripture, truly interpreted: Therefore either you
are mistaken, in thinking there is no other means to know these things, but
your Churches infallible direction, or we are excluded from all means of
knowing her direction to be infallible.

47. Obj. But Protestants, though they are persuaded their own opinions are
true, and that they have used such means as are wont to be prescribed for
understanding the Scripture, as Prayer, conferring of Texts, etc. Yet by their
disagreement show, that some of them are deceived. Now they hold all the
Articles of their faith, upon this only ground of Scripture, interpreted by
these rules, and therefore it is clear, that the ground of their faith is
infallible in no point at all.

Ans. The first of these suppositions must needs be true, but the second is
apparently false: I mean, that every Protestant is persuaded that he has used
those means which are prescribed for understanding of Scripture. But that which
you collect from these suppositions is clearly inconsequent: and by as good
Logic you might conclude, that Logic and Geometry stand upon no certain
grounds, that the rules of the one, and the principles of the other do
sometimes fail, because the disagreement of Logicians and Geometricians show,
that some of them are deceived. Might not a Jew conclude as well against all
Christians, that they have no certain ground whereon to rely in their
understanding of Scripture, because their disagreements show that some are
deceived; because some deduce from it the infallibility of a Church, and others
no such matter? So likewise a Turk might use the same argument against both
Jews and Christians, and an Atheist against all Religions, and a Sceptick
against all reason. Might not the one say, Men's disagreement in Religion, shows
that there is no certainty in any; and the other, that experience of their
contradictions teaches, that the rules of reason do sometimes fail? Do not you
see and feel how void of reason and how full of impiety your sophistry is? And
how transported with zeal against Protestants, you urge arguments against them,
which if they could not be answered, would overthrow not only your own, but all
Religion? But God be thanked, the answer is easy and obvious! For let men but
remember not to impute the faults of men but only to men, and then it will
easily appear, that there may be sufficient certainty in reason, in Religion,
in the rules of interpreting Scripture, though men through their faults, take
not care to make use of them, and so run into diverse errors and dissentions.

48. Obj. But Protestants cannot determine what points be fundamental, and
therefore must remain uncertain, whether or no they be not in some fundamental
error.

Ans. By like reason since you acknowledge, that every error in points defined
and declared by your Church destroys the substance of Faith, and yet cannot
determine what points be defined, it follows that you must remain uncertain,
whether or no you be not in some fundamental error, and so want the substance
of Faith, without which there can be no hope of Salvation.

But though we cannot perhaps say in particular, thus much, and no more is
fundamental, yet believing all the Bible, we are certain enough that we believe
all that is fundamental. As he that in a receipt, takes twenty ingredients
whereof ten only are necessary, though he know not which those ten are, yet
taking the whole twenty he is sure enough that he has taken all that are
necessary.

49. Ad. 29. Obj. It is generally delivered by Catholic Divines that he who
erreth against any one revealed truth, t^seth all Divine Faith. Now certainly
some Protestants must do so, because they hold contradictions, which cannot all
be true. Therefore some of them at least, have no divine faith.

Ans. I pass by your weakness in urging Protestants with the authority of your
Divines. Yet if the Authority of your Divines were even Canonical, certainly
nothing could be concluded from it in this matter, there being not one of them,
who delivers for true doctrine this position of yours, thus nakedly set down,
That any error against any one revealed truth destroys all divine faith. For
they all require (not your self excepted) that this truth must not only be
revealed, but revealed publicly, and (all things considered) sufficiently
propounded to the erring party, to be one of those, which God under pain of
damnation commands all men to believe.

But if the Reader will be at the pains he may see this vain fancy confuted,
out of one of the most rational and profound Doctors of your own Church, I mean
Estius, upon the third Book of the Sententes, the 23. Distinct. and the 13.
Section, beginning thus. It is disputed whether in him who believes some of the
Articles of our Faith, and disbelieves others, or perhaps some one, there be
faith properly so called in respect of that which he does believe?

50. But if Protestants have certainty, they want obscurity, and so have not
that faith, which as the Apostle says is of things not appearing. This
argument you prosecute in the next Paragraph; but I can find nothing in it, to
convince or persuade me that Protestants cannot have as much certainty as is
required to faith, of an object not so evident as to beget science. If
obscurity will not consist with certainty in the highest degree, then you are
to blame for requiring to faith contradicting conditions. If certainty and
obscurity will stand together, what reason can be imagined that a Protestant
may not entertain them both as well as a Papist? Your bodies and souls, your
understandings and wills are, I think, of the same condition with ours. And why
then may not we be certain of an obscure thing as well as you?

51. But then besides, I am to tell you, that you are here, every where,
extremely, if not affectedly mistaken in the Doctrine of Protestants; who though
they acknowledge, that the things which they believe are in themselves as
certain as any demonstrable or sensible verities, yet pretend not that their
certainty of adherence is most perfect and absolute, but such as may be
perfected and increased as long as they walk by faith and not by sight. And
consonant hereunto is their doctrine touching the evidence of the objects
whereunto they adhere. For you abuse the world and them, if you pretend that
they hold the first of your two principles, That these particular Books are the
word of God, (for so I think you mean) either to be in it self evidently
certain, or of it self and being divested of the motives of credibility,
evidently credible: For they are not so fond as to be ignorant, nor so vain as
to pretend, that all men do assent to it, which they would if it were evidently
certain, nor so ridiculous as to imagine, that if an Indian that never heard of
Christ or Scripture, should by chance find a Bible in his own Language, and
were able to read it, that upon the reading it he would certainly without a
miracle believe it to be the word of God: which he could not choose if it were
evidently credible. What then do they affirm of it? Certainly no more than
this, that whatsoever man that is not of a perverse mind, shall weigh with
serious and mature deliberation, those great moments of reason which may
incline him to believe the Divine authority of Scripture, and compare them with
the light objections that in prudence can be made against it, he shall not
choose but find sufficient nay abundant inducements to yield unto it firm faith
and sincere obedience. Let that learned man Hugo Grotius speak for all the
rest, in his Book of the Truth of Christian Religion; which Book whosoever
attentively peruses shall find that a man may have great reason to be a
Christian without dependence upon your Church for any part of it: and that your
Religion is no foundation of, but rather a scandal and an objection against
Christianity. He then in the last Chapter of his second Book has these
excellent words, If any be not satisfied with these arguments abovesaid, but
desires more forcible reasons for confirmation of the excellency of Christian
Religion, let such know that as there are variety of things which be true, so
are there diverse ways of proving or manifesting the truth. Thus is there one
way in Mathematics, another in Physics, a third in Ethics, and lastly
another kind when a matter of fact is in question: wherein verily we must rest
content with such Testimonies as are free from all suspicion of untruth;
otherwise down goes all the frame and use of History, and a great part of the
art of Physic, together with all dutifulness that ought to be between parents
and children: for matters of practice can no way else be known but by such
Testimonies. Now it is the pleasure of Almighty God that those things which he
would have us to believe (so that the very belief thereof may be imputed to us
for obedience) should not so evidently appear, as those things which are
apprehended by sense and plain demonstration, but only be so far forth revealed
as may beget faith, and a persuasion thereof, in the hearts and minds of such
as are not obstinate: That so the Gospel may be as a touchstone for trial of
men's judgments, whether they be sound or unsound. For seeing these arguments,
whereof we have spoken, have induced so many honest, godly, and wise men to
approve of this Religion, it is thereby plain enough that the fault of other
men's infidelity is not for want of sufficient testimony, but because they would
not have that to be had and embraced for truth which is contrary to their
wilful desires; it being a hard matter for them to relinquish their honors,
and set at naught other commodities; which thing they know they ought to do, if
they admit of Christ's Doctrine and obey what he has commanded. And this is the
rather to be noted of them, for that many other historical narrations are
approved by them to be true, which notwithstanding are only manifest by
authority, and not by any such strong proofs, and persuasions, or tokens, as do
declare the history of Christ to be true; which are evident, partly by the
confession of those Jews that are yet alive; and partly in those companies and
congregations of Christians which are any where to be found; whereof doubtless
there was some cause. Lastly, seeing the long duration or continuance of
Christian Religion, and the large extent thereof can be ascribed to no human
power, therefore the same must be attributed to miracles: or if any deny that
it came to pass through a miraculous manner; this very getting so great
strength and power without a miracle, may be thought to surpass any miracle.

52. And now you see I hope that Protestants neither do nor need to pretend to
any such evidence in the doctrine they believe, as cannot well consist both with
the essence and the obedience of faith. Let us come now to the last nullity
which you impute to the faith of Protestants, and that it is want of prudence.
Touching which point, as I have already demonstrated, that wisdom is not
essential to faith, but that a man may truly believe truth, though upon
insufficient motives; So I doubt not but I shall make good, that if prudence
were necessary to faith, we have better title to it than you; and that if a
wiser than Solomon were here, he should have better reason to believe the
Religion of Protestants than Papists, the Bible rather than the Council of
Trent. But let us hear what you can say!

53. Ad. 31. You demand then first of all, What wisdom was it to forsake a
Church confessedly very ancient, and besides which there could be demonstrated
no other Visible Church of Christ upon earth? I answer: Against God and truth
there lies no prescription, and therefore certainly it might be great wisdom to
forsake ancient Errors for more ancient Truths. One God is rather to be
followed than innumerable worlds of men: And therefore it might be great wisdom
either for the whole Visible Church, nay for all the men in the world, having
wandered from the way of Truth, to return unto it; or for a part of it, nay for
one man to do so, although all the world besides were madly resolute to do the
contrary. It might be great wisdom to forsake the Errors though of the only
Visible Church, much more the Roman, which in conceiving her self the whole
Visible Church, does somewhat like the Frog in the Fable, which thought the
Ditch he lived in to be all the World.

54. You demand again, What wisdom was it to forsake a Church acknowledged to
want nothing necessary to Salvation, endued with Succession of Bishops, etc.
usque ad Election or Choice? I answer: Yet might it be great wisdom to forsake
a Church not acknowledged to want nothing necessary to Salvation, but accused
and convicted of many damnable errors: certainly damnable to them who were
convicted of them, had they still persisted in them after their conviction;
though perhaps pardonable (which is all that is acknowledged) to such as
ignorantly continued in them. A Church vainly arrogating without possibility of
proof a perpetual Succession of Bishops, holding always the same doctrine; and
with a ridiculous impudence pretending perpetual possession of all the world:
whereas the world knows, that a little before Luthers arising, your Church was
confined to a part of a part of it. Lastly a Church vainly glorying in the
dependence of other Churches upon her, which yet she supports no more than
those crouching Anticks which seem in great buildings to labor under the
weight they bear, do indeed support the Fabric. For a corrupted and false
Church may give authority to preach the Truth, and consequently against her own
falsehoods and corruptions. Besides, a false Church may preserve the Scripture
true, (as now the Old Testament is preserved by the Jews,) either not being
arrived to that height of impiety as to attempt the corruption of it, or not
able to effect it, or not perceiving, or not regarding the opposition of it to
her corruptions. And so we might receive from you lawful Ordination and true
Scriptures, though you were a false Church; and receiving the Scriptures from
you (though not from you alone, I hope you cannot hinder us, neither need we
ask your leave to believe and obey them. And this, though you be a false
Church; and receiving the Scriptures from you (though not from you alone,) I
hope you cannot hinder us, neither need we ask your leave, to believe and obey
them. And this, though you be a false Church, is enough to make us a true one.
As for a Succession of men that held with us in all points of Doctrine, it is a
thing we need not, and you have as little as we. So that if we acknowledge that
your Church before Luther was a true Church, it is not for any ends, for any
dependence that we have upon you; but because we conceive that in a charitable
construction, you may pass for a true Church. Such a Church (and no better) as
you do sometimes acknowledge Protestants to be, that is, a Company of men,
wherein some ignorant Souls may be saved. So that in this ballancing of
Religion against Religion, and Church against Church, it seems you have nothing
of weight and moment to put into your Scale; nothing but Smoke and Wind, vain
shadows and fantastical pretenses. Yet if Protestants on the other side, had
nothing to put in their Seal but those negative commendations which you are
pleased to afford them; nothing but, no Unity, nor means to procure it; no
farther extent when Luther arose than Luthers Body; no Universality of time or
place; no visibility or being, except only in your Church; no Succession of
Persons or Doctrine; no leader but Luther, in a quarrel begun upon no ground
but passion; no Church, no Ordination, no Scriptures but such as they received
from you; if all this were true, and this were all that could be pleaded for
Protestants, possibly with an allowance of three grains of partiality your
Scale might seem to turn. But then if it may appear that part of these
objections are falsely made against them, the rest vainly; that whatsoever of
truth is in these imputations, is impertinent to this Trial, and whatsoever is
pertinent is untrue; and besides, that plenty of good matter may be alleged
for Protestants which is here dissembled: then I hope, our Cause may be good
notwithstanding these pretenses.

55. I say then, that want of Universality of time and place, The invisibility
or not existence of the professors of Protestant Doctrine before Luther,
Luthers being alone when he first opposed your Church, Our having our Church,
Ordinations, Scriptures, personal and yet not Doctrinal Succession from you,
are vain and impertinent allegations, against the truth of our Doctrine and
Church. That the entire truth of Christ without any mixture of Error should be
professed or believed in all places at any time, or in any place at all times,
is not a thing evident in reason, neither have we any Revelation for it. And
therefore in relying so confidently on it, you build your House upon the Sand.
And what obligation we had either to be so peevish, as to take nothing of
yours, or so foolish as to take all, I do not understand. For whereas you say
that this is to be choosers and therefore Heretics, I tell you that though all
Heretics are choosers, yet all choosers are not Heretics, otherwise they
also, which choose your Religion must be Heretics. As for our wanting Unity
and Means of proving it, Luthers opposing your Church upon mere passion, our
following private men rather than the Catholic Church; the first and last are
mere untruths, for we want not Unity, nor means to procure it in things
necessary. Plain places of Scripture, and such as need no interpreter are our
means to obtain it. Neither do we follow any private men, but only the
Scripture, the Word of God as our rule, and reason, which is also the gift of
God given to direct us in all our actions, in the use of this rule. And then
for Luthers opposing your Church upon mere passion, it is a thing I will not
deny because I know not his Heart, and for the same reason you should not have
affirmed it. Sure I am, whether he opposed your Church upon reason or no, he
had reason enough to oppose it. And therefore if he did it upon passion, we
will follow him only in his action and not in his passion, in his opposition,
not in the manner of it; and then I presume you will have no reason to condemn
us, unless you will say that a good action cannot be done with reason, because
some Body before us has done it upon passion. You see then how imprudent you
have been in the choice of your arguments, to prove Protestants unwise in the
choice of their Religion.

56. It remains now, that I should show that many reasons of moment may be
alleged for the justification of Protestants, which are dissembled by you, and
not put into the Balance. Know then, Sir, that when I say, the Religion of
Protestants, is in prudence to be preferred before yours: as on the one side I
do not understand by your Religion, the Doctrine of Bellarmine or Baronius, or
any other private man amongst you, nor the Doctrine of the Sorbon, or of the
Jesuits, or of the Dominicans, or of any other particular Company among you,
but that wherein you all agree, or profess to agree, the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent: so accordingly on the other side, by the Religion of
Protestants, I do not understand the Doctrine of Luther or Calvin, or
Melancthon; nor the Confession of Augusta, or Geneva, nor the Catechism of
Heidelburg, nor the Articles of the Church of England, no nor the Harmony of
Protestant Confessions; but that wherein they all agree, and which they all
subscribe with a greater Harmony, as a perfect rule of their Faith and Actions,
that is, The Bible. The Bible, I say, The Bible only is the Religion of
Protestants! Whatsoever else they believe besides it, and the plain,
irrefragable, indubitable consequences of it, well may they hold it as a matter
of Opinion; but as matter of Faith and Religion, neither can they with
coherence to their own grounds believe it themselves, nor require the belief of
it of others, without most high and most Schismatical presumption. I for my
part after a long (and as I verily believe and hope,) impartial search of the
true way to Eternal Happiness, do profess plainly that I cannot find any rest
for the sole of my Foot, but upon this Rock only. I see plainly and with mine
own eyes, that there are Popes against Popes, Councils against Councils, some
Fathers against others, the same Fathers against themselves, a Consent of
Fathers of one Age against a Consent of Fathers of another Age, the Church of
one Age against the Church of another Age. Traditive interpretations of
Scripture are pretended, but there are few or none to be found: No Tradition
but only of Scripture, can derive it self from the Fountain, but may be plainly
proved, either to have been brought in, in such an Age after Christ; or that in
such an Age it was not in. In a word, there is no sufficient certainty but of
Scripture only, for any considering man to build upon. This therefore, and this
only I have reason to believe: This I will profess, according to this I will
live, and for this, if there be occasion, I will not only willingly, but even
gladly lose my life, though I should be sorry that Christians should take it
from me. Propose me any thing out of this Book, and require whether I believe
it or no, and seem it never so incomprehensible to humane reason, I will
subscribe it with Hand and Heart, as knowing no demonstration can be stronger
than this, God has said so; therefore, it is true. In other things I will take
no man's liberty of judgment from him; neither shall any man take mine from me.
I will think no man the worse man, nor the worse Christian: I will love no man
the less, for differing in opinion from me. And what measure I mete to others I
expect from them again. I am fully assured that God does not, and therefore
that men ought not to require any more of any man than this, To believe the
Scripture to be Gods word, to endeavor to find the true sense of it, and to
live according to it.

57. This is the Religion which I have chosen after a long deliberation, and I
am verily persuaded that I have chosen wisely, much more wisely than if I had
guided my self according to your Churches authority. For the Scripture being
all true, I am secured by believing nothing else, that I shall believe no
falsehood as matter of Faith. And if I mistake the sense of Scripture, and so
fall into Error, yet am I secure from any danger thereby, if but your grounds
be true: because endeavoring to find the true sense of Scripture, I cannot but
hold my Error without pertinacy, and be ready to forsake it when a more true
and a more probable sense shall appear unto me. And then all necessary truth
being as I have proved, plainly set down in Scripture, I am certain by
believing Scripture, to believe all necessary Truth: And he that does so, if
his life be answerable to his Faith, how is it possible he should fail of
Salvation?

58. Besides, whatsoever may be pretended to gain to your Church the credit of
a Guide, all that and much more may be said for the Scripture. Has your Church
been Ancient? The Scripture is more Ancient. Is your Church a means to keep men
at Unity? So is the Scripture to keep those that believe it and will obey it,
in Unity of belief, in matters necessary or very profitable, and in Unity of
Charity in points unnecessary. Is your Church Universal for time or place?
Certainly the Scripture is more Universal. For all the Christians in the World
(those I mean that in truth deserve this name,) do now, and always have
believed the Scripture to be the Word of God: whereas only you say that you
only are the Church of God, and all Christians besides you deny it.

59. Thirdly, following the Scripture, I follow that whereby you prove your
Churches infallibility, (whereof were it not for Scripture what pretense could
you have, or what notion could we have?) and by so doing tacitly confess, that
your selves are surer of the Truth of the Scripture than of your Churches
authority. For we must be surer of the proof than of the thing proved,
otherwise it is no proof.

60. Fourthly, following the Scripture, I follow that which must be true if
your Church be true: for your Church gives attestation to it. Whereas if I
follow your Church, I must follow that which, though Scripture be true, may be
false; nay which if Scripture be true must be false, because the Scripture
testifies against it.

61. Fifthly, to follow the Scripture I have Gods express warrant and command,
and no color of any prohibition: But to believe your Church infallible, I have
no command at all, much less an express command. Nay I have reason to fear that
I am prohibited to do so in these Words: call no man Master on Earth: They fell
by infidelity, Thou stand by Faith, Be not high minded but fear: The Spirit
of truth The World cannot receive.

62. Following your Church I must hold many things not only above reason but
against it, if any thing be against it: whereas following the Scripture I shall
believe many mysteries but no impossibilities; many things above reason, but
nothing against it; many things which had they not been revealed, reason could
never have discovered, but nothing which by true reason may be confuted: many
things which reason cannot comprehend how they can be, but nothing which reason
can comprehend that it cannot be. Nay I shall believe nothing which reason will
not convince that I ought to believe it: For reason will convince any man,
unless he be of a perverse mind, that the Scripture is the Word of God: And
then no reason can be greater than this, God says so, therefore it is true.

63. Following your Church I must hold many things which to any man's judgment
that will give himself the liberty of judgment, will seem much more plainly
contradicted by Scripture, than the infallibility of your Church appears to be
confirmed by it; and consequently must be so foolish as to believe your Church
exempted from Error upon less evidence, rather than subject to the common
condition of mankind upon greater evidence. Now if I take the Scripture only
for my Guide, I shall not need to do any thing so unreasonable.

64. If I will follow your Church I must believe impossibilities, and that with
an absolute certainty, upon motives which are confessed to be but only
Prudential and probable: That is, with a weak Foundation I must firmly support
a heavy, a monstrous heavy building: Now following the Scripture I shall have
no necessity to undergo any such difficulties.

65. Following your Church I must be servant of Christ and a Subject of the
King, but only Ad placitum Papae. I must be prepared in mind to renounce my
allegiance to the King, when the Pope shall declare him an Heretic and command
me not to obey him: And I must be prepared in mind to esteem Virtue Vice, and
Vice Virtue, if the Pope shall so determine. Indeed you say it is impossible he
should do the latter; but that you know is a great question, neither is it fit
my obedience to God and the King should depend upon a questionable Foundation.
And howsoever, you must grant that if by an impossible supposition the Popes
commands should be contrary to the law of Christ, that they of your Religion
must resolve to obey rather the commands of the Pope than the law of Christ.
Whereas if I follow the Scripture, I may, nay I must obey my Sovereign in
lawful things, though an Heretic, though a Tyrant, and though, I do not say
the Pope, but the Apostles themselves, nay an Angel from Heaven should teach
any thing against the Gospel of Christ, I may, nay I must denounce Anathema to
him.

66. Following the Scripture I shall believe a Religion, which being contrary
to Flesh and Blood, without any assistance from worldly power, wit or policy;
nay against all the power and policy of the World prevailed and enlarged it
self in a very short time all the World over. Whereas it is too too apparent,
that your Church has got and still maintains her authority over men's
Consciences, by counterfeiting false miracles, forging false stories, by
obtruding on the World suppositious writings, by corrupting the monuments of
former times, and defacing out of them all which any way makes against you, by
Wars, by persecutions, by Massacres, by Treasons, by Rebellions; in short, by
all manner of Carnal means whether violent or fraudulent.

67. Following the Scripture I shall believe a Religion, the first Preachers of
Professors whereof, it is most certain they could have no worldly ends upon the
World, that they could not project to themselves by it any of the profits or
honors or pleasures of this World, but rather were to expect the contrary,
even all the miseries which the World could lay upon them. On the other side,
the Head of your Church, the pretended Successor of the Apostles, and Guide of
Faith, it is even palpable, that he makes your Religion the instrument of his
ambition, and by it seeks to entitle himself directly or indirectly to the
Monarchy of the World. And besides, it is evident to any man that has but half
an eye, that most of those Doctrines which you add to the Scripture do make one
way or other, for the honor or temporal profit of the Teachers of them.

68. Following the Scripture only, I shall embrace a Religion of admirable
simplicity, consisting in a manner wholly in the worship of God in Spirit and
Truth. Whereas your Church and Doctrine is even loaded with an infinity of
weak, childish, ridiculous, unsavory superstitions and ceremonies, and full of
that righteousness for which Christ shall Judge the World.

69. Following the Scripture, I shall believe that which Universal,
never-failing Tradition assures me, that it was by the admirable supernatural
Work of God confirmed to be the Word of God: whereas never any miracle was
wrought, never so much as a lame Horse cured in confirmation of your Churches
authority and infallibility. And if any strange things have been done, which
may seem to give attestation to some parts of your Doctrine, yet this proves
nothing but the truth of the Scripture, which foretold that (Gods providence
permitting it, and the wickedness of the World deserving it) strange signs and
wonders should be wrought to confirm false Doctrine, that they which love not
the Truth, may be given over to strange delusions. Neither does it seem to me
any strange thing, that God should permit some true wonders to be done to
delude them who have forged so many to deceive the World.

70. If I follow the Scripture, I must not promise my self Salvation without
effectual dereliction and mortification of all Vices, and the effectual
Practice of all Christian Virtues: But your Church opens an easier and a
broader way to Heaven, and though I continue all my life long in a course of
sin, and without the Practice of any Virtue, yet gives me assurance that I may
be let into Heaven, at a Postern-gate, even by any Act of Attrition at the hour
of Death, if it be joined with confession, or by an Act of Contrition without
confession.

71. Admirable are the Precepts of piety and humility, of innocence and
patience, of liberality, frugality, temperance, sobriety, justice, meekness,
fortitude, constancy and gravity, contempt of the World, love of God and the
love of mankind; In a Word, of all Virtues, and against all vice, which the
Scriptures impose upon us, to be obeyed under pain of damnation: The sum
whereof is in manner comprised in our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, recorded
in the 5, 6, and 7. of S. Matthew, which if they were generally obeyed, could
not but make the world generally happy, and the goodness of them alone were
sufficient to make any wise and good man believe that this Religion rather than
any other, came from God the fountain of all goodness. And that they may be
generally obeyed, our Savior has ratified them all in the close of his
Sermon, with these universal Sanctions, Not every one that says Lord Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of my Father which is
in Heaven: and again, whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them
not, shall be likned unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand,
and the rain descended, and the flood came, and the winds blew, and it fell,
and great was the fall thereof. Now your Church, notwithstanding all this,
enervates and in a manner dissolves and abrogates many of these precepts,
teaching men that they are not Laws for all Christians, but Counsels of
perfection and matters of Supererrogation: that a man shall do well if he do
observe them, but he shall not sin if he observe them not; that they are for
them who aim at high places in heaven, who aspire with the two sons of Zebede,
to the right hand or to the left hand of Christ: But if a man will be content
barely to go to heaven, and to be a doorkeeper in the house of God, especially
if he will be content to taste of Purgatory in the way, he may obtain it at any
easier purchase. Therefore the Religion of your Church is not so holy nor so
good as the doctrine of Christ delivered in Scripture, and therefore not so
likely to come from the Fountain of holiness and goodness.

72. Lastly, if I follow your Church for my Guide, I shall do all one, as if I
should follow a Company of blind men in a judgment of colors, or in the choice
of a way. For every unconsidering man is blind in that which he does not
consider. Now what is your Church but a Company of unconsidering men, who
comfort themselves because they are a great company together, but all of them,
either out of idleness refuse the trouble of a severe trial of their Religion,
(as if heaven were not worth it,) or out of superstition fear the event of such
a trial, that they may be scrupled and staggered and disquieted by it; and
therefore, for the most part do it not all. Or if they do it, they do it
negligently and hypocritically, and perfunctorily, rather for the satisfaction
of others than themselves: but certainly without indifference, without liberty
of judgment, without a resolution to doubt of it, if upon examination the
grounds of it prove uncertain, or to leave it, if they prove apparently false.
My own experience assures me, that in this imputation I do you no injury: but
it is very apparent to all men from your ranking, doubting of any part of your
Doctrine, among mortal sins. For from hence it follows, that seeing every man
must resolve that he will never commit mortal sin, that he must never examine
the grounds of it at all, for fear he should be moved to doubt: or if he do, he
must resolve that no motives, be they never so strong shall move him to doubt,
but that with his will and resolution he will uphold himself in a firm belief
of your Religion, though his reason and his understanding fail him. And seeing
this is the condition of all those whom you esteem good Catholics, who can
deny, but you are a Company of men unwilling and afraid to understand, lest you
should do good! That have eyes to see and will not see, that have not the love
of truth (which is only to be known by an indifferent trial,) and therefore
deserve to be given over to strong delusions; men that love darkness more than
light: in a word, that you are the blind leading the blind, and what prudence
there can be, in following such Guides, our Savior has taught us in saying,
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

74. Ad. 32. Your next and last argument against the faith of Protestants is,
because wanting certainty and prudence, it must also want the fourth condition,
Supernaturality. For that being a humane persuasion, it is not in the essence
of it Supernatural: and being imprudent and rash, it cannot proceed from Divine
motion, and so is not supernatural in respect of the cause from which it
proceeds.

Ans. This little discourse stands wholly upon what went before, and therefore
must fall together with it. I have proved the Faith of Protestants as certain,
and as prudent as the faith of Papists; and therefore if these be certain
grounds of supernaturality, our faith may have it as well as yours. I would
here furthermore be informed how you can assure us that your faith is not your
persuasion or opinion (for you make them all one,) that your Churches doctrine
is true? Or if you grant it your persuasion, why is it not the persuasion of
men, and in respect of the subject of it, an humane persuasion? I desire also
to know, what sense there is in pretending that your persuasion is, not in
regard of the object only and cause of it, but in nature or essence of it
supernatural? Lastly, whereas you say, that being imprudent it cannot come from
divine motion: certainly by this reason all they that believe your own
Religion, and cannot give a wise and sufficient reason for it, (as millions
amongst you cannot) must be condemned to have no supernatural faith: or if not,
then without question nothing can hinder, but that the imprudent faith of
Protestants may proceed from divine motion, as well as the imprudent faith of
Papists.

75. And thus having weighed your whole discourse, and found it altogether
lighter than vanity, why should I not invert your conclusion, and say, Seeing
you have not proved that whosoever errs against any one point of Faith loses
all divine Faith: nor that any error whatsoever concerning that which by the
Parties litigant may be esteemed a matter of faith is a grievous sin, it
follows not at all, that when two men hold different doctrines concerning
Religion, that but one can be saved? Not that I deny, but that the sentence of
S. Chrysostom. with which you conclude this Chapter may in a good sense be true:
for oftimes by the faith is meant only that Doctrine which is necessary to
salvation, and to say that salvation may be had without any the least thing
which is necessary to salvation, implies a repugnance and destroys it self.
Besides, not to believe all necessary points, and to believe none at all, is
for the purpose of salvation all one; and therefore he that does so, may justly
be said to destroy the Gospel of Christ, seeing he makes it uneffectual to the
end for which it was intended, the Salvation of men's souls. But why you should
conceive that all differences about Religion are concerning matters of faith,
in this high notion of the word, for that I conceive no reason.

CHAP. VII. The ANSWER to the Seventh CHAPTER.
Showing that Protestants are not bound by the Charity which they owe to
themselves, to reunite themselves to the Roman Church.

6. Ad. 2.] WHereas you say, it is directly against Charity to our selves, to
adventure the omitting of any means necessary to salvation, this is true: But
so is this also, that it is directly against the same Charity, to adventure the
omitting any thing, that may any way help or conduce to my salvation, that may
make the way to it more secure or less dangerous. And therefore if the errors
of the Roman Church do but hinder me in this way, or any way endanger it, I am
in Charity to my self bound to forsake them, though they be not destructive of
it. Again, whereas you conclude, That if by living out of the Roman Church we
put our selves in hazard to want something necessary to Salvation, we commit a
grievous sin against the virtue of Charity as it respects our selves: This
consequence may be good in those which are thus persuaded of the Roman Church,
and yet live out of it. But the supposition is certainly false. We may live and
die out of the Roman Church, without putting our selves in any such hazard: Nay
to live and die in it is as dangerous as to shoot a gulf, which though some
good ignorant souls may do and escape, yet it may well be feared that not one
in a hundred but miscarries.

7. Ad. 5.] In this Section I observe, first, this acknowledgment of yours,
That in things necessary only because commanded, a probableignorance of the
commandment excuses the party from all fault, and does not exclude Salvation.
From which Doctrine it seems to me to follow, that seeing obedience to the Roman
Church cannot be pretended to be necessary, but only because it is commanded,
therefore not only an invincible, but even a probable ignorance of this
pretended command, must excuse us from all faulty breach of it, and cannot
exclude Salvation. Now seeing this command is not pretended to be expressly
delivered, but only to be deduced from the word of God, and that not by the
most clear and evident consequences that may be; and seeing an infinity of
great objections lies against it, which seem strongly to prove that there is no
such command; with what Charity can you suppose that our ignorance of this
command, is not at the least probable, if not all things considered, plainly
invincible? Sure I am, for my part, that I have done my true endeavor to find
it true, and am still willing to do so; but the more I seek, the farther I am
from finding, and therefore if it be true, certainly my not finding it is very
excusable, and you have reason to be very charitable in your censures of me. 2.
Whereas you say, That besides these things necessary because commanded, there
are other things, which are commanded because necessary: of which number you
make Divine infallible faith, Baptism in Act for Children, and in desire for
those who are come to the use of Reason, and the Sacrament of Confession, for
those who have committed mortal sin: In these words you seem to me to deliver a
strange Paradox, viz. That Faith, and Baptism, and Confession are not therefore
necessary for us, because God appointed them, but are therefore appointed by
God because they were necessary for us, antecedently to his appointment; which
if it were true, I wonder what it was beside God that made them necessary, and
made it necessary for God to command them! Besides, in making faith one of
these necessary means, you seem to exclude Infants from Salvation: For Faith
comes by hearing, and they have not heard. In requiring that this Faith should
be divine and infallible, you cast your Credentes into infinite perplexity, who
cannot possibly by any sure mark discern whether their Faith be Divine or
human, or if you have any certain sign, whereby they may discern, whether they
believe your Churches infallibility with Divine or only with humane faith, I
pray produce it, for perhaps it may serve us to show, that our Faith is Divine
as well as yours. Moreover in affirming that Baptism in act is necessary for
Infants, and for men only in desire, You seem to me in the latter to destroy
the foundation of the former. For if a desire of Baptism will serve men in
stead of Baptism, then those words of our Savior, Unless a man be born again
of water, etc. are not to be understood literally and rigidly of external
Baptism; for a desire of Baptism is not Baptism, and so your foundation of the
absolute necessity of Baptism is destroyed. And if you may gloss the Text so
far, as that men may be saved by the desire, without Baptism it self, because
they cannot have it, why should you not gloss it a little farther, that there
may be some hope of the salvation of unbaptized infants: to whom it was more
impossible to have a desire of Baptism, than for the former to have the thing
it self? Lastly, for your Sacrament of Confession, we know none such, nor any
such absolute necessity of it. They that confess their sins and forsake them
shall find mercy, though they confess them to God only and not to men. They
that confess them both to God and men, if they do not effectually and in time
forsake them, shall not find mercy. 3. Whereas you say, that supposing these
means once appointed as absolutely necessary to salvation, there cannot but
arise an obligation of procuring to have them, you must suppose I hope, that we
know them to be so appointed, and that it is in our power to procure them:
otherwise though it may be our ill fortune to fail of the end, for want of the
means, certainly we cannot be obliged to procure them. For the rule of the law
is also the dictate of common reason and equity, That no man can be obliged to
what is impossible. We can be obliged to nothing but by virtue of some command:
now it is impossible that God should command in earnest any thing which he
knows to be impossible. For to command in earnest, is to command with an intent
to be obeyed; which is not possible he should do, when he knows the thing
commanded to be impossible. Lastly, whosoever is obliged to do any thing, and
does it not, commits a fault; but Infants commit no fault in not procuring to
have Baptism, therefore no obligation lies upon them to procure it. 4. Whereas
you say, that if Protestants dissent from you in the point of the necessity of
Baptism for Infants, it cannot be denied but that our disagreement is in a
point fundamental; If you mean a point esteemed so by you, this indeed cannot
be denied: But if you mean a point that indeed is fundamental, this may
certainly be denied, for I deny it, and say, that it does not appear to me any
way necessary to Salvation to hold the truth, or not to hold an error, touching
the condition of these Infants. This is certain, and we must believe that God
will not deal unjustly with them, but how in particular he will deal with them
concerns not us, and therefore we need not much regard it. 5. Whereas you say
the like of your Sacrament of Penance, you only say so, but your proofs are
wanting. Lastly, whereas you say, This rigor ought not to seem strange or
unjust in God, but that we are rather to bless him for ordaining us to
Salvation by any means: I answer, that it is true, we are not to question the
known will of God of injustice; yet whether that which you pretend to be Gods
will, be so indeed, or only your presumption, this I hope may be questioned
lawfully and without presumption; and if we have occasion we may safely put you
in mind of Ezekiel's commination, against all those who say, thus says the
Lord, when they have no certain warrant or authority from him to do so.

8. Ad. 4. In the fourth Paragraph you deliver this false and wicked Doctrine,
that for the procuring our own salvation we are always bound under pain of
mortal sin, to take the safest way, but for avoiding sin we are not bound to do
so, but may follow the opinion of any probable Doctors, though the contrary may
be certainly free from sin, and theirs be doubtful. Which doctrine in the former
part of it is apparently false: For though wisdom and Charity to our selves
would persuade us always to do so, yet many times, that way which to our selves
and our salvation is more full of hazard, is notwithstanding not only lawful,
but more Charitable and more noble. For example, to fly from a persecution and
so to avoid the temptation of it, may be the safer way for a man's own
salvation; yet I presume no man ought to condemn him of impiety, who should
resolve not to use his liberty in this matter; but for Gods greater glory, the
greater honor of truth, and the greater confirmation of his brethren in the
faith, choose to stand out the storm and endure the fiery trial, rather than
avoid it; rather to put his own soul to the hazard of a temptation, in hope of
Gods assistance to go through with it, than to baulk the opportunity of doing
God and his brethren so great a service. This part therefore of this Doctrine is
manifestly untrue. The other not only false but impious; for therein you
plainly give us to understand, that in your judgment, a resolution to avoid
sin, to the uttermost of our power, is no necessary means of Salvation, nay
that a man may resolve not to do so, without any danger of damnation. Therein
you teach us, that we are to do more for the love of our selves, and our own
happiness than for the love of God; and in so doing contradict our Savior, who
expressly commands us, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our
soul, and with all our strength; and has taught us that the love of God
consists in avoiding sin and keeping his commandments. Therein you directly
cross S. Paul's Doctrine, who though he were a very probable Doctor, and had
delivered his judgment for the lawfulness of eating meats offered to Idols; yet
he assures us that he which should make scruple of doing so, and forbear upon
his scruple, should not sin, but only be a weak brother; whereas he, who should
do it with a doubtful conscience, (though the action were by S. Paul warranted
lawful, yet) should sin and be condemned for so doing. You pretend indeed to be
rigid defenders and stout champions for the necessity of good works; but the
truth is, you speak lies in Hypocrisy, and when the matter is well examined,
will appear to make your selves and your own functions necessary, but obedience
to God unnecessary: Which will appear to any man who considers what strict
necessity the Scripture imposes upon all men, of effectual mortification of the
habits of all Vices, and effectual Conversion to newness of Life, and Universal
obedience, and withal remembers that an act of Attrition, which you say with
Priestly absolution is sufficient to Salvation, is not mortification, which
being a work of difficulty and time, cannot be performed in an instant. But for
the present, it appears sufficiently out of this impious assertion, which makes
it absolutely necessary for men, either in Act if it be possible, or if not, in
Desire, to be Baptized and Absolved by you, and that with Intention: and in the
mean time warrants them that for avoiding of sin, they may safely follow the
uncertain guidance of a vain man, who you cannot deny may either be deceived
himself, or out of malice deceive them, and neglect the certain direction of
God himself, and their own Consciences. What wicked use is made of this
Doctrine, your own long experience can better inform you, than it is possible
for me to do: yet my own little conversation with you affords me one memorable
example to this purpose. For upon this ground I knew a young Scholar in Doway,
licensed by a great Casuist to swear a thing as upon his certain knowledge,
whereof he had yet no knowledge but only a great presumption, because
(forsooth) it was the opinion of one Doctor that he might do so. And upon the
same ground, whenever you shall come to have a prevailing party in this
Kingdom, and power sufficient to restore your Religion, you may do it by
deposing or killing the King, by blowing up of Parliaments, and by rooting out
all others of a different Eaith from you. Nay this you may do, though in your
own opinion it be unlawful, because Bellar. Contr. Barcl. c. 7. In 7. c.
refutare conatur Barcl. verba illa Romuli. Veteres illos Imperatores
Constantium Valentem and Caeteros non ideo toleravit Ecclesia quod legitime
successissent, sed quod illos sine populi detrimento coercere non poterat. Et
miratur hcc idem scripfisse Bellarminum. l. 5. de Pontif. c. 7. Sed ut magis
miretur, sciat hoc idem sensisse S. Thomam. 2. 2. q. 12. art. 2. ad 1. Vbi
dicit Ecclesiam tolerasse ut fideles obedirent Juliano Apostatae, quia in sui
novitate nondum habebant vires compescendi Principes terrenos. Et postea,
Sanctus Gregorius dicit, nullum adversus Juliani persecutionem fuisse remedium
praeter lacrymas, quoniam non habebat Ecclesia vires quibus illus tyrannidi
resistere posset.
Bellarmine, a man with you of approved Virtue, Learning and Judgment, has
declared his opinion for the lawfulness of it, in saying, that want of power to
maintain a Rebellion, was the only reason that the Primitive Christians did not
Rebel against the persecuting Emperors. By the same rule, seeing the Priests
and Scribes and Pharisees, men of greatest repute among the Jews for Virtue,
Learning and Wisdom, held it a lawful and a pious work to persecute Christ and
his Apostles, it was lawful for the People to follow their Leaders: for herein,
according to your Doctrine, they proceeded prudently, and according to the
conduct of opinion, maturoly weighed and approved by men as it seemed to them
of Virtue, Learning and Wisdom; nay by such as sat in Moses Chair, and of whom
it was said, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: which
Universal you pretend is to be understood Universally, and without any
restriction or limitation. And as lawful was it for the Pagans to persecute the
Primimitive Christians, because Trajan and Pliny, men of great Virtue and
Wisdom were of this opinion. Lastly, that most impious and detestable Doctrine,
(which by a foul calumny you impute to me, who abhor and detest it,) that men
may be saved in any Religion, follows from this ground unavoidably. For
certainly Religion is one of those things which is necessary only because it is
commanded: for if none were commanded under pain of damnation, how could it be
damnable to be of any? Neither can it be damnable to be of a false Religion,
unless it be a sin to be so. For neither are men saved by good luck, but only
by obedience; neither are they damned for their ill Fortune but for sin and
disobedience. Death is the wages of nothing but sin: and S. James sure intended
to deliver the adequate cause of sin and Death in those words, Lust when it
has conceived brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
Death. Seeing therefore in such things, according to your Doctrine, it is
sufficient for avoiding of sin, that we proceed prudently, and by the conduct
of some probable opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men of Learning,
Virtue and Wisdom: and seeing neither Jews want their Gamaliels, nor Pagans
their Antoninus's nor any Sect of Christians such professors and maintainers of
their several Sects, as are esteemed by the People, which know no better (and
that very reasonably) men of Virtue, Learning, and Wisdom, it follows evidently
that the embracing their Religion proceeds upon such reason as may warrant
their action to be prudent, and this is sufficient for avoiding of sin, and
therefore certainly for avoiding damnation, for that in humane affairs, and
discourse, evidence and certainty cannot be always expected. I have stood the
longer upon the refutation of this Doctrine, not only because it is impious,
and because bad use is made of it, and worse may be, but only because the
contrary position, That men are bound for avoiding sin always to take the
safest way, is a fair and sure Foundation, for a clear confutation of the main
conclusion, which in this Chapter you labor in vain to prove, and a certain
proof that in regard of the precept of Charity toward ones self, and of
obedience to God, Papists (unless ignorance excuse them) are in state of sin as
long as they remain in subjection to the Roman Church.

9. for if the safer way for avoiding sin, be also the safer way for avoiding
damnation, then certainly the way of Protestants must be more secure, and the
Roman way more dangerous; take but into your consideration these ensuing
Controversies: Whether it be lawful to worship Pictures? to Picture the
Trinity? to invocate Saints and Angels? to deny Laymen the Cup in the
Sacrament? to adore the Sacraments? to prohibit certain Orders of Men and Women
to Marry? to Celebrate the public service of God in a language which the
assistants generally understand not? and you will not choose but confess that
in all these you are on the more dangerous side for the committing of sin, and
we on that which is more secure. For in all these things, if we say true, you
do that which is impious: on the other side if you were in the right, yet we
might be secure enough, for we should only not do something which you confess
not necessary to be done. We pretend, and are ready to justify out of
principles agreed upon between us, that in all these things, you violate the
manifest commandments of God; and allege such Texts of Scripture against you,
as, if you would weigh them with any indifference, would put the matter out of
question, but certainly you cannot with any modesty deny, but that at least
they make it questionable. On the other side, you cannot with any face pretend,
and if you should, know not how to go about to prove, that there is any
necessity of doing any of these things; that it is unlawful not to worship
Pictures, not to Picture the Trinity, not to invocate Saints and Angels, not to
give all men the entire Sacrament, not to adore the Eucharist, not to prohibit
Marriage, not to Celebrate Divine Service in an unknown Tongue: I say you
neither do nor can pretend that there is any law of God which enjoins us, no
nor so much as an Evangelical Council that advises us to do any of these
things. Now where no law is there can be no sin, for sin is the transgression
of the Law; It remains therefore that our forbearing to do these things, must
be free from all danger and suspicion of sin; whereas your acting of them, must
be, if not certainly impious, without all contradiction questionable and
dangerous. I conclude therefore that which was to be concluded, that if the
safer way for avoiding sin, be also (as most certainly it is,) the safer way
for avoiding damnation, then certainly the way of Protestants must be more
safe, and the Roman way more dangerous.

12. Ad. 5.] Here you begin to make some show of arguing; and the first
Argument put into form stands thus, Every least Error in Faith destroys the
nature of Faith; It is certain that some Protestants do Err, and therefore they
want the substance of Faith. The Major of which Syllogism I have formerly
confuted by unanswerable Arguments out of one of your own best Authors, who
shows plainly that he has amongst you, as strange as you make it, many other
Abettors. Besides, if it were true, it would conclude that either you or the
Dominicans have no Faith, in as much as you oppose one another as much as
Arminians and Calvinists.

13. The Second Argument stands thus, Since all Protestants pretend the like
certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all: Which
Argument if it were good, then what can hinder but this must also be so, Since
Protestants and Papists pretend the like certainty; it is clear that none of
them have any certainty at all! And this too: Since all Christians pretend the
like certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all! And
thirdly this: Since men of all Religions pretend a like certainty, it is clear
that none of them have any at all! And lastly this: Since oft-times they which
are abused with a specious Paralogism, pretend the like certainty with them
which demonstrate, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all!
Certainly Sir, Zeal and the Devil did strangely blind you, if you did not see
that these horrid impieties were the immediate consequences of your positions,
if you did see it, and yet would set them down, you deserve worse censure. Yet
such as these, are all the Arguments wherewith you conceive your self to have
proved undoubtedly, that Protestants have reason at least to doubt in what case
they stand.

14. Your third and fourth Argument may be thus put into one; Protestants
cannot tell what points in particular be Fundamental; therefore they cannot
tell whether they or their Brethren do not Err Fundamentally, and whether their
difference be not Fundamental. Both which deductions I have formerly showed to
be most inconsequent; for knowing the Scripture to contain all Fundamentals,
(though many more points besides, which makes it difficult to say precisely
what is Fundamental and what not,) knowing this I say and believing it, what
can hinder but that I may be well assured, that I believe all Fundamentals, and
that all who believe the Scripture sincerely as well as I, do not differ from
me in any thing Fundamental?

15. In the close of this Section, you say, that you omit to add that we want
the Sacrament of Repentance instituted for the remission of sins, or at least
we must confess that we hold it not necessary: and yet our own Brethren the
Century writers acknowledge that in the times of Cyprian and Tertullian,
private Confession even of thoughts was used, and that it was then commanded
and thought necessary; and then our Ordination, you say, is very doubtful and
all that depends upon it. Answer, I also omit to answer, 1. That your Brother
Rhenanus, acknowledges the contrary, and assures us that the Confession then
required and in use, was public, and before the Church, and that your
auricular Confession was not then in the World; for which his Mouth is stopped
by your Index Expurgatorius. 2. That your Brother Arcudius acknowledges, that
the Eucharist was in Cyprians time given to Infants, and esteemed necessary, or
at least profitable for them, and the giving it shows no less; and now I would
know whether you will acknowledge your Church bound to give it, and to esteem so
of it? 3. That it might be then commanded, and being commanded be thought
necessary, and yet be but a Church Constitution. Neither will I deny, if the
present Church could, and would so order it, that the abuses of it might be
prevented, and conceiving it profitable, should enjoin the use of it, but that
being commanded it would be necessary. 4. Concerning our Ordinations, besides
that I have proved it impossible that they should be so doubtful as yours*
according to your own principles; I answer, that experience shows them
certainly sufficient to bring men to Faith and Repentance, and consequently to
Salvation; and that if there were any secret defect of any thing necessary,
which we cannot help, God will certainly supply it.

19. It is remarkable against what you say,. 7. That any small Error in Faith
destroys all Faith, that S. Austin, whose authority is here stood upon, thought
otherwise: He conceived the Donatists to hold some Error in Faith and yet not
to have no Faith. His words of them to this purpose are most pregnant and
evident, you are with us (says he to the Donatist. Ep. 48.) in Baptism, in the
Creed, in the other Sacraments: And again. Super gestis cum emerit: Thou have
proved to me that thou have Faith; prove to me likewise that thou have Charity.
Lib. 5. prope initium.
Parallel to which words are these of Optatus, Amongst us and you is one
Ecclesiastical conversation, common lessons, the same Faith, the same
Sacraments. Where by the way we may observe, that in the judgments of these
Fathers, even the Donatists, though Heretics and Schismatics, gave true
Ordination, the true Sacrament of Matrimony, true Sacramental Absolution,
Confirmation, the true Sacrament of the Eucharist, true extreme Unction; or
else (choose you whether) some of these were not then esteemed Sacraments. But
for Ordination, whether he held it a Sacrament or no, certainly he held that it
remained with them entire: for so he says in express terms, in his Book against
Parmenianus his Epistle. Which Doctrine if you can reconcile with the present
Doctrine of the Roman Church, Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

20. Ad. 8.] Obj. You say there is un inevitable necessity for us, either to
grant Salvation to your Church, or to entail certain damnation upon our own,
because ours can have no being till Luther, unless yours be supposed to have
been the true Church. I answer, this cause is no cause: For first, as Luther
had no being before Luther, and yet he was when he was, though he was not
before; so there is no repugnance in the terms, but that there might be a true
Church after Luther, though there were none for some Ages before; as since
Columbus his time, there have been Christians in America, though before there
were none for many Ages. For neither do you show, neither does it appear, that
the generation of Churches is Univocal, that nothing but a Church can possibly
beget a Church: nor that the present being of a true Church, depends
necessarily upon the perpetuity of a Church in all Ages; any more than the
present being of Peripateticks or Stoics depends upon a perpetual pedigree of
them. For though I at no hand deny the Churches perpetuity, yet I see nothing
in your Book to make me understand, that the truth of the present depends upon
it, nor any thing that can hinder, but that a false Church, (Gods providence
overwatching and overruling it,) may preserve the means of confuting their own
Heresies, and reducing men to truth, and so raising a true Church, I mean the
integrity and the Authority of the word of God with men. Thus the Jews preserve
means to make men Christians, and Papists preserve means to make men
Protestants, and Protestants (which you say are a false Church) do, as you
pretend, preserve means to make men Papists; that is, their own Bibles, out of
which you pretend to be able to prove that they are to be Papists. Secondly,
you show not, nor does it appear that the perpetuity of the Church depends on
the truth of yours. For though you talk vainly, as if you were the only men in
the World before Luther, yet the World knows that this is but talk, and that
there were other Christians besides you, which might have perpetuated the
Church though you had not been. Lastly, you show not, neither does it appear,
that your being acknowledged in some sense a true Church, does necessarily
import, that we must grant Salvation to it, unless by it you understand the
ignorant members of it, which is a very unusual Synechdoche.

21. Whereas you say, that Catholics never granted that the Donatists had a
true Church or might be saved. I answ. S. Austin himself granted that those
among them, who sought the Truth, being ready when they found it to correct
their Error were not Heretics, and therefore notwithstanding their Error might
be saved. And this is all the Charity that Protestants allow to Papists.

Therefore the Argument of the Donatists, is as good as that of the Papists
against Protestants. For the Donatists argued thus, speaking to the Catholics,
Your selves confess our Baptism, Sacraments and Faith good and available. We
deny yours to be so, and say there is no Church, no Salvation amongst you;
Therefore it is safest for all to join with us.

22. S. Austins words are (cont. lit. petil. l. 2. c. 108.) Petilianus dixit,
venite ad Ecclesiam populi and aufugite Traditores, Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c.
108.
si perire non vultis: Petilian says, come to the Church ye People, and fly
from the Traditours, if ye will not be damned; for that ye may know that they
being guilty, esteem well of our Faith, behold I Baptize these whom they have
infected, but they receive those whom we have Baptized. Where it is plain, that
Petilian by his words makes the Donatists the Church, and excludes the
Catholics from salvation absolutely. And whereas you say, the Catholics never
yielded that among the Donatists there was a true Church and hope of Salvation,
I say it appears by what I have alleged out of S. Austin, that they yielded
both these were among the Donatists, as much as we yield them to be among the
Papists. As for D. Potters acknowledgment, that they maintained an error in the
matter and nature of it Heretical: This proves them but material Heretics,
whom you do not exclude from possibility of Salvation. So that all things
considered, this argument must be much more forcible from the Donatists against
the Catholics, than from Papists against Protestants, in regard Protestants
grant Papists no more hope of salvation than Papists grant Protestants: whereas
the Donatists excluded absolutely all but their own part from hope of
Salvation, so far as to account them no Christians that were not of it: the
Catholics mean while accounting them Brethren, and freeing those among them,
from the imputation of Heresy, who being in error quaerebant cauta
sollicitudine veritatem corrigi parati cum invenerint; sought for truth
carefully, being ready when they found it to correct their errors.

23. Whereas you say, That the Argument for the certainty of their Baptism
(because it was confessed good by Catholics, whereas the Baptism of Catholics
was not confessed by them to be good,) is not so good as yours, touching the
certainty of your Salvation grounded on the confession of Protestants, because
we confess there is no damnable error in the doctrine or practice of the Roman
Church: I Answer, no: we confess no such matter, and though you say so a
hundred times, no repetition will make it true. We profess plainly, that many
damnable errors plainly repugnant to the precepts of Christ both Ceremonial and
Moral, more plainly than this of Rebaptization, and therefore more damnable,
are believed and professed by you. And therefore seeing this is the only
disparity you can devise, and this is vanished, it remains that as good an
answer as the Catholics made touching the certainty of their Baptism, as good
may we make, and with much more evidence of Reason, touching the security and
certainty of our Salvation.

24. By the way I desire to be informed, seeing you affirm that Rebaptizing
those whom Heretics had baptized was a sacrilege, and a profession of a
damnable Heresy, when it began to be so? If from the beginning it were so,
then was Cyprian a sacrilegious professor of a damnable heresy, and yet a
Saint and a Martyr. If it were not so, then did your Church excommunicate
Firmilian and others, and separate from them without sufficient ground of
Excommunication or Separation, which is Schismatical. You see what difficulties
you run into on both sides; choose whether you will, but certainly both can
hardly be avoided.

27. What S. Austin answers to the Donatists argument, fits us in answer to
yours, as if it had been made for it; for as S. Austin says, that Catholics
approve the Doctrine of Donatists, but abhor their Heresy of Re-baptization: So
we say, that we approve those fundamental and simple necessary Truths which you
retain, by which some good souls among you may be saved, but abhor your many
Superstitions and Heresies. And as he says, that as gold is good, yet ought not
to be sought for among a company of thieves, and Baptism good but not to be
sought for in the Conventicles of Donatists: so say we, that the Truths you
retain are good, and as we hope sufficient to bring good ignorant souls among
you to salvation, yet are not to be sought for in the Conventicle of Papists,
who hold with them a mixture of many vanities, and many impieties.

30. Obj. But Protestants do either exclude Hope by Despair, with the Doctrine
that our Savior died not for all, and that such want grace sufficient to
salvation; or else by vain presumption grounded upon a fantastical persuasion
that they are predestinate, which Faith must exclude all fear and trembling;
and you add, though some Protestants may relent from the rigor of the
aforesaid doctrine, yet none of them can have true hope while they hope to be
saved in the Communion of those, who defend such Doctrins.

Ans. See numb. 4. in the fol. edit.
All this may be as forcibly returned upon Papists, as it is urged against
Protestants; in as much as all Papists either hold the Doctrine of
Predetermination and absolute Election, or Communicate with those that do hold
it. Now from this Doctrine what is more prone and obvious, than for every
natural man (without Gods especial preventing grace) to make this practical
collection; either I am elected, or not elected; if I be, no impiety possible
can ever damn me: If not, no possible industry can ever save me? Now whether
this disjunctive persuasion be not as likely (as any doctrine of Protestants) to
extinguish Christian Hope and filial fear, and to lead some men to despair,
others to presumption, all to a wretchless and impious life, I desire you
ingenuously to inform me; and if you deny it, assure your self, you shall be
contradicted and confuted, by men of your own Religion and your own society;
and taught at length this charitable doctrine, that though men's opinions may be
charged with the absurd consequences which naturally flow from them, yet the
men themselves are not; I mean, if they perceive not the consequence of these
absurdities, nor do not own and acknowledge, but disclaim and detest them.

I add 1. That there is no Calvinist that will deny the truth of this
proposition, Christ died for all, nor to subscribe to that sense of it, which
your Dominicans put upon it; neither can you with coherence to the received
Doctrine of your own Society, deny that they as well as the Calvinists, take
away the distinction of sufficient and effectual grace, and indeed hold none to
be sufficient, but only that which is effectual. 2. Whereas you say, They
cannot make their calling certain by good works, who do certainly believe that
before any good works they are justified, and justified by faith alone, and by
that faith whereby they certainly believe they are justified: I answer, There
is no Protestant but believes that Faith, Repentance, and universal Obedience,
are necessary to the obtaining of Gods favor and eternal happiness. This being
granted, the rest is but a speculative Controversy, a Question about words
which would quickly vanish, but that men affect not to understand one another.
As if a company of Physicians were in consultation, and should all agree, that
three Medicines and no more were necessary for the recovery of the Patients
health, this were sufficient for his direction toward the recovery of his
health; though concerning the proper and specifical effects of these three
Medicines, there should be amongst them as many differences as men: So likewise
being generally at accord that these three things, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
are necessary to salvation, so that whosoever wants any of them cannot obtain
it, and he which has them all cannot fail of it, is it not very evident that
they are sufficiently agreed for men's directions to eternal Salvation? And
seeing Charity is a full comprehension of all good works, they requiring
Charity as a necessary qualification in him that will be saved, what sense is
there in saying, they cannot make their calling certain by good works? They
know what salvation is as well as you, and you have as much reason to desire
it: They believe it as heartily as you, that there is no good work but shall
have its proper reward, and that there is no possibility of obtaining the
eternal reward without good works: and why then may not this Doctrine be a
sufficient incitement and provocation unto good works?

31. You say, that they certainly believe that before any good works they are
justified: But this is a calumny. There is no Protestant but requires to
Justification, Remission of sins, and to Remission of sins they all require
Repentance, and Repentance I presume may not be denied the name of a good work,
being indeed, if it be rightly understood, and according to the sense of the
word in Scripture, an effectual conversion from all sin to all holiness. But
though it be taken for mere sorrow for sins past, and a bare purpose of
amendment, yet even this is a good work, and therefore Protestants requiring
this to Remission of sins, and Remission of sins to justification, cannot with
candor be pretended to believe, that they are justified before any good work.

32. Obj. You say, They believe themselves justified by faith alone, and that
by that faith whereby they believe themselves justified:

Answ. Some peradventure do so, but withal they believe that that faith which
is alone, and unaccompanied with sincere and universal obedience, is to be
esteemed not faith but presumption, and is at no hand sufficient to
justificafication: that though Charity be not imputed unto justification, yet
it is required as a necessary disposition in the person to be justified, and
that though in regard of the imperfection of it, no man can be justified by it,
yet that on the other side, no man can be justified without it. So that upon
the whole matter, a man may truly and safely say, that the Doctrine of these
Protestants taken altogether, is not a Doctrine of Liberty, not a Doctrine that
turns hope into presumption, and carnal security, though it may justly be
feared, that many licentious persons, taking it by halves, have made this
wicked use of it. For my part, I do heartily wish, that by public Authority it
were so ordered, that no man should ever Preach or Print this Doctrine that
Faith alone justifies, unless he joins this together with it, that universal
obedience is necessary to salvation. And besides that those Chapters of S. Paul
which entreat of justification by faith, without the works of the Law, were
never read in the Church, but when the thirteenth Chapter of the first Epistle
to the Corinthians concerning the absolute necessity of Charity should be, to
prevent misprision, read together with them.

33. Obj. Whereas you say, that some Protestants do expressly affirm the former
point to be the soul of the Church, etc. and that therefore they must want the
Theological virtue of Hope, and that none can have true hope, while they hope
to be saved in their Communion.

I Answer, They have great reason to believe the Doctrine of Justification by
faith only, a point of great weight and importance, if it be rightly
understood: that is, they have reason to esteem it a principal and necessary
duty of a Christian, to place his hope of justification and salvation, not in
the perfection of his own righteousness (which if it be imperfect will not
justify,) but only in the mercies of God through Christ's satisfaction: and yet
notwithstanding this, nay the rather for this, may preserve themselves in the
right temper of good Christians, which is a happy mixture and sweet composition
of confidence and fear. If this Doctrine be otherwise expounded than I have here
expounded, I will not undertake the justification of it, only I will say (that
which I may do truly) that I never knew any Protestant such a soli-fidian, but
that he did believe these divine Truths; That he must make his calling certain
by good works: That he must work out his salvation with fear and trembling, and
that while he does not so, he can have no well-grounded hope of Salvation: I
say I never met with any who did not believe these divine Truths, and that with
a more firm, and a more unshaken assent, than he does that himself is
predestinate, and that he is justified by believing himself justified. I never
met with any such, who if he saw there were a necessity to do either, would not
rather forgo his belief of these Doctrins than the former: these which he sees
disputed and contradicted and opposed with a great multitude of very potent
Arguments; then those, which being the express words of Scripture, whosoever
should call into question, could not with any modesty pretend to the title of
Christian. And therefore there is no reason but we may believe, that their full
assurance of the former Doctrins does very well qualify their persuasion of
the latter, and that the former (as also the lives of many of them do
sufficiently testify) are more effectual to temper their hope, and to keep it
at a stay of a filial and modest assurance of Gods favor, built upon the
conscience of his love and fear, than the latter can be to swell and puff them
up into vain confidence and ungrounded presumption. This reason, joined with
our experience of the honest and religious conversation of many men of this
opinion, is a sufficient ground for Charity, to hope well of their hope: and to
assure our selves that it cannot be offensive, but rather most acceptable to
God, if notwithstanding this diversity of opinion, we embrace each either with
the strict embraces of love and Communion. To you and your Church we leave it,
to separate Christians from the Church, and to prescribe them from heaven upon
trivial and trifling causes: As for our selves, we conceive a charitable
judgment of our Brethren and their errors, though untrue, much more pleasing to
God than a true judgment, if it be uncharitable; and therefore shall always
choose (if we do err) to err on the milder and more merciful part, and rather to
retain those in our Communion which deserve to be ejected, than eject those
that deserve to be retained.

34. Lastly, whereas you say, that seeing Protestants differ about the point of
Justification, you must needs infer that they want unity in faith, and
consequently all faith, and then that they cannot agree what points are
fundamental: I Answer, to the first of these inferences, that as well might you
infer it upon Victor Bishop of Rome and Policrates; upon Stephen Bishop of Rome
and S. Cyprian: inasmuch as it is undeniably evident, that what one of those
esteemed necessary to salvation the other esteemed not so. But points of
Doctrine (as all other things) are as they are, and not as they are esteemed:
neither can a necessary point be made unnecessary by being so accounted, nor an
unnecessary point be made necessary by being overvalued. But as the ancient
Philosophers, (whose different opinions about the soul of man you may read in
Aristotle de Anima, and Cicero's Tusculan Questions,) notwithstanding their
diverse opinions touching the nature of the soul, yet all of them had souls, and
souls of the same nature: Or as those Physicians who dispute whether the brain
or heart be the principal part of a man, yet all of them have brains and have
hearts, and herein agree sufficiently: So likewise, though some Protestants
esteem that Doctrine the soul of the Church, which others do not so highly
value, yet this hinders not but that which is indeed the soul of the Church may
be in both sorts of them; and though one account that a necessary truth which
others account neither necessary nor perhaps true, yet this notwithstanding, in
those Truths which are truly and really necessary they may all agree. For no
Argument can be more sophistical than this: They differ in some points which
they esteem necessary; Therefore they differ in some that indeed and in truth
are so.

35. Now as concerning the other inference, That they cannot agree what points
are fundamental: I have said and proved formerly that there is no such
necessity as you imagine or pretend, that men should certainly know what is, and
what is not fundamental. They that believe all things plainly delivered in
Scripture, believe all things fundamental, and are at sufficient Unity in
matters of Faith, though they cannot precisely and exactly distinguish between
what is fundamental and what is profitable: nay though by error they mistake
some vain, or perhaps hurtful opinions for necessary and fundamental Truths.
Cap. 3.. 53. and alibt.
Besides, I have showed above, that as Protestants do not agree (for you
overreach in saying they cannot) touching what points are fundamental; so
neither do you agree what points are defined and so to be accounted, and what
are not: nay, nor concerning the subject in which God has placed this
pretended Authority of defining: some of you settling it in the Pope himself,
though alone without a Council: Others in a Council, though divided from the
Pope: Others only in the conjunction of Council and Pope: Others not in this
neither, but in the acceptance of the present Church Universal: Lastly, others
not attributing it to this neither, but only to the perpetual Succession of the
Church of all Ages: of which divided Company it is very evident and undeniable,
that every former may be and are obliged to hold many things defined and
therefore necessary, which the latter, according to their own grounds, have no
obligation to do, nay cannot do so upon any firm and sure and infallible
foundation.

FINIS.
OUT OF Mr. Chillingworth's Manuscript. A LETTER TO Mr. LEWGAR, CONCERNING THE
Church of Romes Being the Guide of Faith and Judge of Controversies.
Good Mr. LEWGAR,
THough I am resolved not to be much afflicted for the loss of that which is
not in my power to keep, yet I cannot deny, but the loss of a friend goes very
near unto my heart: and by this name of a friend, I did presume till of late,
that I might have called you, because, though perhaps for want of power and
opportunity, I have done you no good office, yet I have been always willing and
ready to do you the best service I could: and therefore I cannot but admire at
that affected strangeness which, in your last Letter to me, you seem to take
upon you, renouncing in a manner all relation to me, and tacitly
excommunicating me from all interest in you: the Superscription of your Letter
is to Mr. William Chillingworth, and your Subscription John Lewgar, as if you
either disdained or made a conscience of stiling me your friend, or your self
mine. If this proceed from passion and weakness, I pray mend it; if from reason
I pray show it: If you think me one of those to whom Saint John forbids you to
say God save you, then you are to think and prove me one of those Deceivers
which deny Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh. If you think me an Heretic
and therefore to be avoided, you must prove me (...), condemned by my own
judgment; which I know I cannot, and therefore I think you cannot: If you say I
do not hear the Church, and therefore am to be esteemed an Heathen or Publican;
you are to prove that by the Church there is meant the Church of Rome: and yet
when you have done so, I hope Christians are not forbidden to show humanity and
civility, even to Pagans: for Gods sake, Mr. Lewgar, free your self from this
blind zeal, at least for a little space; and consider with reason and
moderation what strange crime you can charge me with, that should deferve this
strange usage, especially from you: Is it a crime to endeavor with all my
understanding to find your Religion true, and to make my self a believer of it,
and not be able to do so? Is it a crime to employ all my reason upon the
justification of the Infallibility of the Roman Church, and to find it
impossible to be justified? I will call God to witness, who knows my heart
better than you do, that I have evened the scale of my judgment as much as
possibly I could, and have not willingly allowed any one grain of worldly
motives on either side; but have weighed the Reasons for your Religion and
against with such indifference, as if there were nothing in the world but God
and my self; and is it my fault, that that scale goes down which has the most
weight in it? that that building falls, which has a false foundation? have you
such power over your understanding, that you can believe what you please,
though you see no reason, or that you can suspend your belief when you do see
reason? If you have, I pray for our old friendships sake teach me that trick;
but until I have learnt it, I pray blame me not for going the ordinary way; I
mean for believing or not believing as I see reason: If you can convince me of
wilful opposition against the known truth, of negligence in seeking it, of
unwillingness to find it, of preferring temporal respects before it, or of any
other fault, which is in my power to amend, that is indeed a fault, if I amend
it not, be as angry with me as you please. But to impute to me involuntary
errors; or that I do not see that which I would see, but cannot; or that I will
not profess that which I do not believe; certainly this is far more
unreasonable error, than any which you can justly charge me with; for let me
tell you, the imputing Socinianism to me, whosoever was the author of it, was a
wicked and groundless slander.

Perhaps you will say, for this is the usual song on that side, that pride is a
voluntary fault, and with this I am justly chargeable for forsaking that guide
which God has appointed me to follow: But what if I forsook it, because I
thought I had reason to fear, it was one of those blind guides which whosoever
blindly follows, is threatened by our Savior that both he and his guide shall
fall into the Ditch; then I hope you will grant it was not pride, but
Conscience that moved me to do so; for as it is wise humility to obey those
whom God has set over me, so it is sinful credulity to follow every man or
every Church, that without warrant will take upon them to guide me: show me
then some good and evident title which the Church of Rome has to this office,
produce but one reason for it which upon trial will not finally be resolved and
vanish into uncertainties; and if I yield not unto it, say if you please I am
as proud as Lucifer: in the mean time give me leave to think it strange and not
far from a Prodigee, that this Doctrine of the Roman Churches being the guide of
faith, if it be true doctrine, should either not be known to the four
Evangelists, or if it were known to them, that being wise and good men, they
should either be so envious of the Churches happiness; or so forgetful of the
work they took in hand, which was to write the Gospel of Christ, as that not so
much as one of them should mention so much as once, this so necessary part of
the Gospel, without the belief whereof there is no salvation, and with the
belief whereof, unless men be snatched away by sudden death, there is hardly any
damnation. It is evident they do all of them, with one consent, speak very
plainly of many things of no importance in comparison hereof: and is it
credible or indeed possible that with one consent or rather conspiracy, they
should be so deeply silent concerning this unum necessarium? You may believe it
if you can, for my part I cannot, unless I see demonstration for it: for if you
say they send us to the Church, and consequently to the Church of Rome: this is
to suppose that which can never be proved, that the Church of Rome is the only
Church; and without this supposal, upon Division of the Church, I am as far to
seek for a guide of my Faith as ever. As for example,

In that great division of the Church when the whole world wondered, says Saint
Hierom, that it was become Arrian: when Liberius Bishop of Rome (as S.
Athanasius, and S. Hilary testify) subscribed their Heresy, and joined in
Communion with them: Or in the division between the Greek and the Roman Church,
about the procession of the Holy Ghost, when either side was the Church to it
self, and each part Heretical and Schismatical to the other; what direction
could I then an ignorant man have found from that Text of Scripture, Unless he
hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen or a Publican: or Upon this
Rock will I build my Church and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

Again, give me leave to wonder, that neither S. Paul writing to the Romans
should so much as intimate this their privilege of Infallibility, but rather
on the contrary put them in fear in the eleventh Chapter, that they as well as
the Jews were in danger of falling away.

That Saint Peter, the pretended Bishop of Rome, writing two Catholic
Epistles, mentioning his departure, should not once acquaint the Christians
whom he writes to, what guide they were to follow, after he was taken from them.

That the writers of the New Testament, should so frequently forewarn men of
Heretics, false Christ's, false prophets, and not once arm them against them,
with letting them know this only sure means of avoiding their danger.

That so great a part of the New Testament should be employed about Antichrist,
and so little or indeed none at all, about the Vicar of Christ, and the guide
of the faithful.

That our Savior should leave this only means for the ending of
Controversies, and yet speak so obscurely and ambiguously of it, that now our
Judge is the greatest Controversy, and the greatest hinderance of ending them.

That there should be better evidence in the Scripture to entitle the King to
this Office who disclaims it, than the Pope who pretends it.

That S. Peter should not ever exercise over the Apostles, any one act of
Jurisdiction, nor they ever give him any one Title of Authority over them.

That if the Apostles did know S. Peter was made head over them, when our
Savior said, Thou art Peter, etc. they should still contend who should be the
first; and that our Savior should never tell them S. Peter was the man.

That S. Paul should say, he was in nothing inferior to the very chief
Apostles.

That the Catechumenists in the primitive Church should never be taught this
foundation of their Faith, that the Church of Rome was Guide of their Faith.

That the Fathers, Tertullian, S. Hierom and Optatus, when they flew highest in
commendation of the Roman Church, should attribute no more to her than to all
other Apostolical Churches.

That in the Controversy about Easter, the Bishops and Churches of Asia,
should be so ill Catechized as not to know this Principle of Christian Religion
-- The necessity of Conformity in Doctrine with the Church of Rome. That they
should never be pressed with any such necessity of conformity in all things,
but only with the Tradition of the Western Churches in that point.

That Irenaeus and many other Bishops (notwithstanding ad hanc Ecclesiam
necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam) should not yet think that a necessary
Doctrine, nor a sufficient ground of Excommunication, which the Church of Rome
though to be so.

That S. Cyprian and the Bishops of Africa, should be so ill instructed in
their Faith, as not to know this foundation of it. That they likewise were
never urged with any such necessity of Conformity with the Church of Rome, nor
ever charged with heresy or error for denying it.

That when Liberius joined in Communion with the Arrians and subscribed their
heresy, the Arrians then should not be the Church, and the Guide of Faith.

That never any Heretics for three Ages after Christ, were pressed with this
Argument of the Infallibility of the present Church of Rome, or charged with
denial of it, as a distinct Heresy; so that Aeneas Sylvius should have cause
to say, Ante tempora Concilii Niceni, quisque sibi vivebat, and parvus
respectus habebatur ad Ecclesiam Romanam. That the Ecclesiastical Story of
those times mentions no Acts of Authority of the Church of Rome over other
Churches; as if there should be a Monarchy, and the Kings for some Ages
together should exercise no act of Jurisdiction in it.

That to supply this defect, the Decretal Epistles should be so impudently
forged, which in a manner speak nothing else but Reges and Monarchas; I mean,
the Popes making Laws for exercising authority over all other Churches.

That the African Churches in S. Austins time should be ignorant that the Pope
was Head of the Church and Judge of Appeals jure divino; and that there was a
necessity of Conformity with the Church, in this and all other points of
Doctrine.

Nay that the Popes themselves should be so ignorant of the true ground of this
their Authority, as to pretend to it, not upon Scripture or universal
Tradition, but upon an imaginary pretended nonesuch Canon of the Council of
Nice.

That Vincentius Lirinensis seeking for a guide of his Faith and a preservative
from Heresy, should be ignorant of this so ready one, The Infallibility of the
Church of Rome.

All these things and many more are very strange to me, if the Infallibility of
the Roman Church be indeed and were always by Christians acknowledged the
foundation of our Faith: And therefore I beseech you pardon me, if I choose to
build mine, upon one that is much firmer and safer, and lies open to none of
these objections, which is Scripture and universal Tradition; and if one that
is of this Faith may have leave to do so; I will subscribe with hand and heart,

Your very loving and true Friend W. C.

A TABLE OF Contents. Note that the first Figure refers to the Chapter, the
other to the divisions of each Chapter.
A.
PRotestants agree in more things than they differ in, by believing the
Scripture. chap. 4. div. 49.50. We have as many rational means of Agreement as
the Papists. c. 3.7, 8. Papists pretend to means of agreement, and do not
agree. c. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. Not necessary to find a Church agreeing with
Protestants in all points. Ans. pref. 19. and c. 5.27. Antiquity vainly pleaded
for Romish Doctrins and Practices, since many Errors are more ancient than some
of their Doctrins. c. 5.91. The Apostolic Church an Infallible Guide to which
we may resort, being present to us by her Writings. c. 3.69, 80. That the
Church has power to make new Articles of Faith, asserted by the Romish Doctors.
c. 4.18. This one Article, I believe the Roman Catholic Church to be
Infallible, if their Doctrine were true, would secure against heresy, more than
the whole Creed. c. 4.77, 78, 79, 83. Christ's assistance promised to the
Church, to lead her into more than necessary truths. c. 5.61, 62. Atheism and
irreligion springs easily from some Romish Doctrins and Practices. Pref. 7, 8.
S. Austins saying, Evangelio non crederem, etc. how to be understood. c. 2.54,
97, 98, 99. S. Austins Testimony against the Donatists, not cogent against
Protestants. c. 2.163. S. Austins words, No necessity to divide unity,
explained. c. 5.10. The Authors vindication from suspicion of Heresi^. Pref.
28. The Authors motives to turn a Papist, with answer^ to them. Pref. 42.43.
B.
The Bible which is the Religion of Protestants, to be preferred before the way
of Romish Religion, showed at large. c. 6. from 56. to 72. Inclusive.
C.
The Calvinists rigid Doctrine of Predetermination, unjustly reproached by
Papists, who communicate with those that hold the same. c. 7.30. To give a
Catalogue of our Fundamentals not necessary nor possible Ans. Pref. 27. and c.
3.13, 53. Want of such a Catalogue, leaves us not uncertain in our Faith. c.
3.14. Papists as much bound to give a Catalogue of the Churches proposals,
which are their Fundamentals, and yet do it not. c. 3.53. Our general Catalogue
of Fundamentals as good as theirs. c. 4.12. c. 7.35. Moral certainty a
sufficient Foundation of Faith. c. 2.154. A Protestant may have certainty,
though disagreeing Protestants all pretend to like certainty. c. 7.13. What
Charity Papists allow to us Protestants, and we to them. c. 1.1, 3, 4, 5. A
Charitable judgment should be made of such as err, but lead good lives. c.
7.33. Protestant Charity to Ignorant Papists; no comfort to them that will not
see their errors. c. 5.76. The Church how furnished with means to determine
Controversies. c. 1.7, 11. Commands in Scripture to hear the Church and obey
it, suppose it not infallible. c. 3.41. We may be a true Church, though
deriving Ordination and receiving Scripture from a false one. c. 6.54. Common
truths believed, may preserve them good that otherwise err. c. 7.33. Conscience
in some cases will justify separation, though every pretense of it will not.
c. 5.108. Concord in damned errors, worse than disagreement in controverted
points. c. 5.72. The Consequences of men's Opinions, may be unjustly charged
upon them. c. 1.12. c. 7.30. What Contradictions Papists believe, who hold
Transubstantiation. c. 4.46. All Controversies in Religion not necessary to be
determined. c. 1.7, 156. and c. 3.88. How Controversies about Scripture it self
are to be decided. c. 2.27. Controversies not necessary to be decided by a
Judicial sentence, without any appeal. c. 2.85. That the Creed contains all
necessary points, and how to be understood c. 4.23, 73, 74. Not necessary that
our Creed should be larger than that of the Apostles c. 4.67, 70, 71, 72.
Whether it be contrary to the Creed, to say the Church may fail. c. 5.31.
D.
S Dennis of Alexandria's saying explained; about not dividing the Church. c.
5.12. To deny a Truth witnessed by God, whether always damnable -- Ans. Pref.
9. The Apostles depositing Truth with the Church, no argument that she should
always keep it sincere and entire. c. 2.148. Of Disagreeing Protestants, though
one side must err, yet both may hope for salvation. Ans. Pref. 22. and c. 1.10,
13, 17. Two may disagree in a matter of faith, and yet neither be chargeable
with denying a declared Truth of Gods. Ans. Pref. 10. Differences among
Protestants vainly objected against them. c. 3.2, 3, 5. and c. 5.72. No reason
to reproach them for their differences about necessary Truths and damuable
Errors. c. 3.52. What is requisite to convince a man that a Doctrine comes from
God. Ans. Pref. 8. Believing the Doctrine of Scripture, a man may be saved,
though he did not believe it to be the word of God. c. 2.159. The Donatists
error about the Catholic Church, what it was and was not. c. 3.64. The
Donatists case and ours not alike. c. 5.103. The Roman Church guilty of the
Donatists Error, in persuading men as good not to be Christians, as not Roman
Catholics. c. 3.64. Papists liker to the Donatists than we, by their
uncharitable denying salvation out of their Church. c. 7.21, 22, 27.
E.
English Divines vindicated from inclining to Popery, and for want of skill in
School Divinity. Pref. 19. How Errors may be damnable. Ans. Pref. 22. In what
case Errors damnable, may not damn those that hold them. c. 5.58. and c. 6.14.
In what case Errors not damnable, may be damnable to those that hold them. c.
5.66. No man to be reproached for quitting his Errors. c. 5.103. Though we may
pardon the Roman Church for her Errors, yet we may not sin with it. c. 5.70.
Errors of the Roman Church that endanger salvation to be forsaken, though they
are not destructive of it. c. 7.6. Erring persons that lead good lives, should
be judged of charitably. c. 7.33. A man may learn of the Church to confute its
Errors. c. 3.40. We did well to forsake the Roman Church for her Errors, though
we afterward may err out of it. c. 5.63, 64, 65, 67, 87, 92. We must not
adhere to a Church in professing the least Errors, lest we should not profess
with her necessary Doctrine. c. 3.56. The Examples of those that forsaking
Popish Errors, have denied necessary Truths, no Argument against Protestants.
c. 3.63. External Communion of a Church may be left without leaving a Church.
c. 5.32, 45, 47.
F.
Whether Faith be destroyed, by denying a Truth testified by God. Ans. Pref.
25. c. 6.49. c. 7.19. The Objects of Faith of two sorts, essential and
occasional. c. 4.3. Certainty of Faith less than the highest degree, may please
God and save a man. c. 1.8. and 6.3, 4, 5. Faith less than infallibly certain
may resist temptations and difficulties. c. 6.5. There may be Faith where the
Church and its infallibility begets it not. c. 2.49. Faith does not go before
Scripture, but follows its efficacy. c. 2.48. Protestants have sufficient means
to know the certainty of their Faith c. 2.152. In the Roman Church, the last
resolution of Faith is into Motives of Credibility. c. 2.154. The Fathers
declared their Judgment of Articles, but did not require their declarations to
be received under Anathema. c. 4.18. Protestants did not forsake the Church,
though they forksook its errors. c. 3.11. Sufficient Foundation for faith
without infallible certainty. c. 6.6, 45. What Protestants mean by Fundamental
Doctrins. c. 4.52. In what sense the Church of Rome errs not Fundamentally.
Ans. Pref. 20. To be unerring in Fundamentals, can be said of no Church of one
denomination. c. 3.55. To say that there shall be always a Church not erring in
Fundamentals, is to say that there shall be always a Church. c. 3.55. A Church
is not safe, though retaining Fundamentals, when it builds hay and stubble on
the foundation, and neglects to reform her Errors. c. 5.61. Ignorance of what
points in particular are fundamental, does not make it uncertain whether we do
not err fundamentally, or differ in fundamentals among our selves. c. 7.14.
G.
The four Gospels contain all necessary Doctrins. c. 4.40, 41, 42, 43. An
Infallible Guide not necessary for avoiding Heresy. c. 2.127. The Apostolic
Church an Infallible Guide to which we may resort. c. 3.69. The Church may not
be an Infallible Guide in fundamentals, though it be infallible in
fundamentals. c. 3.39. That the Roman Church should be the only infallible
Guide of Faith, and the Scriptures say nothing concerning it, is incredible. c.
6.20.
H.
The difference betwixt Heresy and Schism. c. 5.51. There are no New Heresies,
no more than new Articles of Faith. c. 4.18, 37, 38. Separation from the Church
of Rome no mark of Heresy by the Fathers, whose Citations are answered. c.
6.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 2^, 30, 31, 33, 34. No mark of Heresy to want
succession of Bishops, holding the same Doctrine. c. 6.18, 41. We are not
Heretics for opposing things propounded by the Church of Rome for divine
Truth. c. 6.11, 12. Whether Protestants Schismatically cut off the Roman Church
from hopes of salvation. c. 5.38.
I.
The Jewish Church had no Infallibility annexed to it, and if it had, there is
no necessity that the Christian Church should have it. c. 2.141. The Imposing a
necessity of professing known errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a
just cause of separating from a Church. c. 5.31, 36, 40, 50, 59, 60, 68, 69.
Indifferency to all Religions falsely charged upon Protestants. Ans. Pref. 3.
and c. 3.12. The belief of the Churches Infallibility makes way for Heresy.
Pref. 10. An Infallible Guide not needful for avoiding Heresies. c. 2.127. The
Churches Infallibility has not the same Evidence, as there is for the
Scriptures. c. 3.30, 31. The Churches Infallibility, can no way be better
assured to us, than the Scriptures incorruption. c. 2.25. and c. 3.27. The
Churches Infallibility is not proved from the promise that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. c. 3.70. Nor from the promise of the Spirits
leading into all Truth, which was made only to the Apostles. c. 3.71, 72. The
Churches infallibility not proved from Ephesians. c. 11, 12, 13. He gave some
Apostles etc. till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc. c. 3.79, 80.
That God has appointed an Infallible Judge of Controversies, because such a one
is desirable and useful, is a weak conclusion. c. 2. from 128. to 136.
inclusive. Infallibility in fundamentals, no warrant to adhere to a Church in
all that she proposes. c. 3.57. Infallible interpretations of Scripture vainly
boasted of by the Roman Church. c. 2.93, 94, 95. Whether the denial of the
Churches Infallibility leaves men to their private spirit, reason and
discourse, and what is the harm of it. Pref. 12.13. and c. 2.110. Traditional
Interpretations of Scripture how ill preserved. c. 2.10. Interprecations of
Scripture which private men make for themselves (not pretending to prescribe
their sense to others) though false or seditious, endanger only themselves. c.
2.122. Allow the Pope or Roman Church to be a decisive Interpreter of Christ's
Laws, and she can evacuate them, and make what Laws she pleases. Pref. 10.11.
and c. 2.1. S. Irenaeus's account of Tradition favors not Popery. c. 2.144,
145, 146. His saying that no Reformation can countervail the danger of a
Schism, explained. c. 5.11. A living Judge to end Controversies about the sense
of Scripture, not necessary. c. 2.12, 13. If Christ had intended such a Judge
in Religion, he would have named him, which he has not done. c. 2.23. c. 3.69.
c. 6.20. Though a living Judge be necessary to determine Civil causes, yet not
necessary for Religious causes. c. 2. from 14. to 22. inclus. If there be a
Judge of Controversies, no necessity it should be the Roman Church. c. 3.69.
Roman Catholics set up as many Judges in Religion as Protestants. c. 2.116,
118, 153. A Judgment of discretion must be allowed to every man for himself,
about Religion. c. 2.11. The Protestant Doctrine of Justification, taken
altogether, not a licentious doctrine. c. 7.30. When they say they are justified
by faith alone, yet they make good works necessary to salvation. c. 7.30.
K.
Our obligation to know any divine truth, arises from Gods manifest revealing
it. c. 3.19.
L.
How we are assured in what Language the Scripture is uncorrupted. c. 2.55, 56,
57. To leave a Church, and to leave the external Communion of a Church, is not
the same thing. c. 5.32, 45, 47. Luthers separation not like that of the
Donatists, and why. c. 5.33.101. Luther and his followers did not divide from
the whole Church, being a part of it, but only reformed themselves, forsaking
the corrupt part. c. 5.56. Luthers opposing himself to all in his reformation,
no objection against him. c. 5.89, 90. We are not bound to justify all that
Luther said and did, no more than Papists are bound to justify what several
Popes have said and done. c. 5.112.
M.
They may be members of the Catholic Church, that are not united in external
Communion. c. 5.9. The Protestant Doctrine of Merit explained. c. 4.35, 36. The
Authors Motives to change his Religions, with Answers to them. Pref. 42.43. The
Faith of Papists resolved at last into the Motives of Credibility. c. 2.154.
The Mischiefs that followed the Reformation, not imputable to it. c. 5.92.
N.
What make points necessary to be believed. c. 4.4, 11. No more is necessary to
be believed by us, than by the Apostles. c. 4.67, 70, 71, 72. Papists make many
things necessary to salvation, which God never made so. c. 7.7. All necessary
points of Faith are contained in the Creed. c. 4.73, 74. Why some points not so
necessary were put into the Creed. c. 4.75, 76. Protestants may agree in
necessary points, though they may overvalue some things they hold. c. 7.34. To
impose a necessity of professing known errors, and practicing known
corruptions, is a just cause of separation. c. 5.31, 36, 40, 50, 59, 60, 68,
69.
O.
A blind obedience is not due to Ecclesiastical decisions, though our practice
must be determined by the sentence of superiors in doubtful cases. c. 5.110. A
probable opinion may be followed (according to the Roman Doctors) though it be
not the safest way for avoiding sin. c. 7, 8. Optatus's saying impertinently
urged against Protestants. c. 5.99, 100. Though we receive Ordination and
Scripture from a false Church, yet we may be a true Church. c. 6.54.
P.
Whether Papists or Protestants most hazard their souls on probabilities. c.
4.57. What we believe concerning the Perpetuity of the Visible Church. Ans.
Pref. 18. Whether 1 Timothy 3.15. The Pillar and ground of Truth, belong to
Timothy or to the Church. c. 3.76. If those words belong to the Church, whether
they may not signify her duty, and yet that she may err in neglecting it. c.
3.77. A possibility of being deceived, argues not an uncertainty in all we
believe. c. 3.26, 50, c. 5.107. c. 6.47. By joining in the Prayers of the Roman
Church, we must join in her unlawful practices. c. 3.11. Preaching of the Word
and administering the Sacrament, how they are inseparable notes of the Church,
and how they make it visible. c. 5.19. Private Spirit, how we are to understand
it. c. 2.110. Private Spirit is not appealed to ( i. e. to dictates pretending
to come from Gods spirit) when Controversies are referred to Scripture. c.
2.110. Whether one is left to his private spirit, reason and discourse, by
denying the Churches infallibility, and the harm of it. Pref. 12, 13. and c.
2.110. A man's private judgment may be opposed to the public, when Reason and
Scripture warrant him. c. 5.109. A probable opinion, according to the Roman
Doctors, may be followed, though it is not the safest way for avoiding sin. c.
7.8. It Is hard for Papists to resolve, what is a sufficient proposal of the
Church. c. 3.54. Protestants are on the surer side for avoiding sin, and
Papists on the more dangerous side to commit sin, showed in instances. c. 7.9.
R.
Every man by Reason must judge both of Scripture and the Church. c. 2.111,
112, 113, 118, 120, 122. Reason and judgment of discretion, is not to be
reproached for the private spirit. c. 2.110. If men must not follow their
Reason, what they are to follow. c. 2.114, 115. Some kind of Reformation may be
so necessary, as to justify separation from a corrupt Church, though every
pretense of reformation will not. c. 5.53. Nothing is more against Religion,
than using violence to introduce it. c. 5.96. The Religion of Protestants
(which is the belief of the Bible) a wiser and safer way than that of the Roman
Church, showed at large. c. 6. from 56. to 72. Inclus. All Protestants require
Repentance to remission of sins, and remission of sins to Justification. c.
7.31. No Revelations known to be so, may be rejected as not Fundamental. c.
4.11. A Divine revelation may be ignorantly disbelieved by a Church, and yet it
may continue a Church. c. 3.20. Things equally revealed, may not be so to
several persons. c. 3.24. Papists cannot have Reverence for the Scripture,
whilst they advance so many things contrary to it. c. 2.1. No argument of their
reverence to it, that they have preserved it entire. c. 2.2. The Roman Church,
when Luther separated, was not the visible Church, though a visible Church, and
part of the Catholic. c. 5.26, 27. The present Roman Church has lost all
Authority to recommend what we are to believe in Religion. c. 2.101. The
properties of a perfect Rule. c. 2.5.6, 7. Whether the Popish Rule of
Fundamentals, or ours is the safest. c. 4.63.
S.
Right administration of Sacraments uncertain in the Roman Church. c. 2. from
63. to 68. inclusive. In what sense Salvation may be had in the Roman Church.
Ans. Pref. 5, 7. Salvation depends upon great uncertainties in the Roman
Church. c. 2. from 63. to 73. inclus. Schisms whence they chiefly arise, and
what continues them. c. 4.17. Schism may be a Division of the Church, as well
as from it. c. 5.22. He may be no Schismatic, that forsakes a Church for
Errors not damnable. Ans. Pref. 2. No Schism to leave a corrupted Church, when
otherwise we must communicate in her corruptions. c. 5.25. Not every separation
from the external Communion of the Church, but a causeless one, is the sin of
Schism. c. 5.30. They may not be Schismatics that continue the separation from
Rome, though Luther that began it, had been a Schismatic. c. 5.4. and c. 6.14.
The Scripture cannot be duly reverenced by Papists. c. 2. n. 1. The Scripture
how proved to be the word of God. c. 4.53. The Divine Authority of the
Scripture may be certain, though it be not self-evidently certain, that it is
Gods word. c. 6.51. Books of Scripture now held for Canonical, which the Roman
Church formerly rejected. c. 2.90, 91. Whether some Books of Scripture defined
for Canonical, were not afterward rejected. c. 3.29. The Scripture in things
necessary is intelligible to learned and unlearned. c. 2.104, 105, 106. Some
Books of Scripture questioned by the Fathers as well as by Protestants. c.
2.34. The Scripture has great Authority from internal Arguments. c. 2.47. The
Truth of Scripture inspiration depends not on the authority of the Roman
Church. Pref. 14. and c. 6.45. If the Scriptures contain all necessary truths,
Popery is confuted. Pref. 30. to 38. inclusive. The true meaning of Scripture
not uncertain in necessary points. c. 2.84. A determinate sense of obscure
places of Scripture, is not needful. c. 2.127, 150. The sense of plain places
of Scripture, may be known by the same means, by which the Papists know the
sense of those places that prove the Church. c. 2.150, 151. God may give means
to the Church to know the true sense of Scripture, yet it is not necessary it
should have that sense. c. 2.93. It is easier to know the Scripture and its
sense, than for the ignorant in the Roman Church which is the Church, and what
are her decrees, and the sense of them. c. 2.107, 108, 109. In what Language
the Scripture is incorrupted, and the assurance of it. c. 2.55, 56, 57. The
Scripture is capable of the properties of a perfect Rule. c. 2.7. In what sense
we say the Scripture is a perfect Rule of Faith. c. 2.8. The Scripture not
properly a judge of Controversies, but a Rule to judge by. c. 2.11, 104, 155.
The Scriptures incorruption more secured by providence, than the Roman Churches
vigilance. c. 2.24. When Scripture is made the Rule of Controversies, those
that concern it self are to be excepted. c. 2.8, 27, 156. The Scripture
contains all necessary material objects of Faith, of which the Scripture it
self is none, but the means of conveying them to us. c. 2.32.159. The Scripture
must determine some Controversies, else those about the Church and its Notes
are undeterminable. c. 2.3. The Scripture unjustly charged with increasing
Controversies and Contentions. c. 2.4. The Scripture is a sufficient means for
discovering Heresies. c. 2.127. When Controversies are referred to Scripture,
it is not referring them to the private spirit, understanding it of a
persuasion pretending to come from the Spirit of God. c. 2.110. Protestants
that believe Scripture, agree in more things than they differ in, and their
differences are not material. c. 4.49, 50. Private men, if they interpret
Scriptures amiss and to ill purposes, endanger only themselves, when they do
not pretend to prescribe to others. c. 2.122. The Protestants Security of the
way to happiness. c. 2.53. Want of Skill in School Divinity foolishly objected
against English Divines. Pref. 19. The Principles of the Church of Englands
separating from Rome, will not serve to justify Schismatics. c. 5.71, 74, 80,
81, 82, 85, 86. Socinianism and other Heresies countenanced by Romish Writers,
who have undermined the Doctrine of the Trinity. Pref. 17.18. The promise of the
Spirits leading into all truth, proves not Infallibility. c. 3.71. The promise
of the Spirits abiding with them for ever, may be personal. c. 3.74. And it
being a conditional promise, cuts off the Roman Churches pretense to
infallibility. c. 3.75. Want of Succession of Bishops, holding always the same
Doctrine, is not a mark of Heresy. c. 6.38, 41. In what sense Succession is by
the Fathers made a mark of the true Church. c. 6.40. Papists cannot prove a
perpetual Succession of Professors of their Doctrine. c. 6.41.
T.
Tradition proves the Books of Scripture to be Canonical, not the Authority of
the present Church. c. 2.25, 53, 90, 91, 92. and c. 3.27. Traditional
Interpretations of Scripture how ill preserved by the Roman Church. c. 2.10.
and c. 3.46. No Traditional Interpretations of Scripture, though if there were
any remaining we are ready to receive them. c. 2.88, 89, and c. 3.46. The
Traditions distinct from Scripture which Iraeneus mentions, do not favor
Popery. c. 2.144, 145, 146. The asserting unwritten Traditions, though not
inconsistent with the truth of Scripture, yet disparages it as a perfect Rule.
c. 2.10. Though our Translations of the Bible are subject to error, yet our
salvation is not thereby made uncertain. c. 2.68, 73. Different Translations of
Scripture may as well be objected to the Ancient Church, as to Protestants. c.
2.58, 59. The Vulgar Translation is not pure and uncorrupted. c. 2.75, 76, 77,
78, 79, 80. To believe Transubstantiation, how many contradictions one must
believe. c. 4.46. The Doctrine of the Trinity undermined by Roman Doctors. Pref.
17, 18. The Church may tolerate many things, which she does not allow. c. 3.47.
Gods Truth not questioned by Protestants, though they deny points professed by
the Church. c. 1.12. Protestants question not Gods Truth, though denying some
truth revealed by him, if they know it not to be so revealed. c. 3.16. The
Truth of the present Church, depends not upon the visibility or perpetuity of
the Church in all Ages. c. 5.21. and c. 7.20. The Apostles depositing Truth
with the Church, is no argument that she should always keep it entire and
sincere. c. 2.148. The promise of being led into all truth, agrees not equally
to the Apostles and to the Church. c. 3.34. A Trial of Religion by Scripture,
may well be refused by Papists. c. 2, 3.
U.
Violence and force to introduce Religion, is against the nature of Religion,
and unjustly charged upon Protestants. c. 5.96. What Visible Church was before
Luther, disagreeing from the Roman. Ans. Pref. 19. and c. 5.27. That there
should be always a visible unerring Church, of one denomination, is not
necessary. c. 5.27. The Visible Church may not cease, though it may cease to be
visible. c. 5.13, 14, 41. The Church may not be Visible in the Popish sense,
and yet may not dissemble but profess her faith. c. 5.18. The great
uncertainties salvation in the Roman Church depends on. c. 2.63. to 73.
inclusive. Their uncertainty of the right administration of Sacraments. c.
2.63. to 68. inclusive. The Churches Unity, by what means best preserved. c.
3.81. c. 4.13, 17, 40. Pretense of Infallibility a ridiculous means to Unity,
when that is the chief question to be determined. c. 3.89. Unity of Communion
how to be obtained. c. 4.39, 40. Unity of external Communion not necessary to
the being a Member of the Catholic Church. c. 5.9. Universality of a Doctrine,
no certain sign that it came from the Apostles. c. 3.44. Want of Universality
of place, proves not Protestants to be Heretics, and may as well be objected
against the Roman Church. c. 6.42, 55. We would receive unwritten Traditions
derived from the Apostles, if we knew what they were. c. 3.46. The Vulgar
Translation not pure and incorrupted. c. 2.75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80.
W.
The whole Doctrine of Christ was taught by the Apostles, and an Anathema
denounced against any that should bring in new doctrins. c. 4.18. The wisdom of
Protestants justified, in forsaking the errors of the Roman Church. c. 6.53,
54. The wisdom of Protestants showed at large against the Papists, in making
the Bible their Religion. c. 6. from 56. to 72. inclusive.
FINIS.
ADDITIONAL DISCOURSES OF Mr. Chillingworth NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Jun. 14. 1686.

GUIL NEEDHAM RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Domesticis.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1687.

CONTENTS.
I. A Conference betwixt Mr. Chillingworth and Mr. Lewgar, whether the Roman
Church be the Catholick-Church, and all out of her Communion Heretics or
Schismatics. p. 1. II. A Discourse against the Infallibility of the Roman
Church, with an Answer to all those Texts of Scripture that are alleged to
prove it. p. 26. III. A Conference concerning the Infallibility of the Roman
Church; proving that the present Church of Rome either errs in her worshipping
the Blessed Virgin; or that the Ancient Church did err in condemning the
Collyridians as Heretics. p. 41. IV. An Argument drawn from Communicating of
Infants, as without which they could not be saved, against the Churches
Infallibility. p. 68. V. An Argument against Infallibility, drawn from the
Doctrine of the Millenaries. p. 80. VI. A Letter relating to the same subject.
p. 89. VII. An Argument against the Roman Churches Infallibility, taken from
the Contradictions in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. p. 91. VIII. An
account of what moved the Author to turn a Papist, with his Confutation of the
Arguments that persuaded him thereto. p. 94. IX. A Discourse concerning
Tradition. p. 103.
The Reader is desired to take notice of a great mistake of the Printer and to
Correct it, That he has made this the running Title over most of the Additional
Pieces, viz. A Conference betwixt Mr. Chillingworth and Mr. Lewgar; which
should only have been set over the first: there are also some literal mistakes,
as page 65. (...) twice for (...), and such like, not to be imputed to the
Author.

A CONFERENCE BETWIXT Mr. CHILLINGWORTH AND Mr. LEWGAR.
Thesis. THE Church of Rome (taken diffusively for all Christians communicating
with the Bishop of Rome) was the Judge of Controversies at that time, when the
Church of England made an alteration in her Tenants.

Argu. She was the Judge of Controversies at that time, which had an Authority
of deciding them. But the Church of Rome at that time had the Authority of
deciding them. Ergo.

Answ. A limited Authority to decide Controversies according to the Rule of
Scripture and Universal Tradition, and to oblige her own Members (so long as
she evidently contradicted not that Rule) to obedience I grant she had: but an
unlimited, an infallible Authority, or such as could not but proceed according
to that Rule, and such as should bind all the Churches in the World to
Obedience (as the Greek Church) I say she had not.

Quest. When your Church has decided a Controversy, I desire to know whether
any particular Church or person has Authority to reexamine her decision,
whether she has observed her Rule or no; and free himself from the obedience
of it, by his or her particular judgment?

Answ. If you understand by your Church, the Church Catholic, probably I
should answer no: but if you understand by your Church, that only which is in
Subordination to the Sea of Rome, or if you understand a Council of this
Church, I answer, yea.

Arg. That was the Catholic Church, which did abide in the Root of Apostolic
Unity: But the Church of Rome at that time was the only Church that did abide
in the Root of Apostolic Unity. Ergo.

Quest. What mean you by Apostolic Unity?

Answ. I mean the Unity of that Fellowship wherein the Apostles Lived and Died.

Quest. Wherein was this Unity?

Answ. Herein it consisted, that they all professed one Faith, obeyed one
Supreme Tribunal, and communicated together in the same Prayers and Sacraments.

Solut. Then the Church of Rome continued not in this Apostolic Unity; for it
continued not in the same Faith, wherein the Apostles Lived and Died: for
though it retained so much (in my judgment) as was essential to the being of a
Church, yet it degenerated from the Church of the Apostles times, in many
things which were very profitable; as in Latin Service, and Communion in one
kind.

Argu. Some Church did continue in the same Faith wherein the Apostles lived
and died: But there was no Church at that time which did continue in the
Apostles Faith besides the Roman Church. Ergo.

Answ. That some Church did continue in the Apostles Faith in all things
necessary, I grant it: that any did continue in the Integrity of it, and in a
perfect conformity with it in all things expedient and profitable, I deny it.

Quest. Is it not necessary to a Churches continuing in the Apostles Faith,
that she continue in a perfect conformity with it in all things expedient and
profitable?

Answ. A perfect conformity in all things is necessary to a perfect continuance
in the Apostles Faith: but to an imperfect continuance, an imperfect conformity
is sufficient; and such I grant the Roman Church had.

Quest. Is not a perfect continuance in the Apostles Faith necessary to a
Churches continuance in Apostolic Unity?

Asw. It is necessary to a perfect continuance in Apostolic Unity.

Argu. There was some one company of Christians at the time of Luthers rising,
which was the Catholic Church; But there was no other company at that time
besides the Roman: Ergo, the Roman at that time was the Catholic Church.

Answ. There was no one company of Christians, which in opposition to and
Exclusion of all other companies of Christians was the Catholic Church.

Argu. If the Catholic Church be some one company of Christians in opposition
to and exclusion of all other companies, then if there was some one company,
she was one in opposition to and exclusion of all other companies: But the
Catholic Church is one company of Christians in opposition to and exclusion
of, etc. Ergo, There was then some one company which was the Catholic Church
in opposition to and exclusion of all other companies.

The Minor proved by the Testimonies of the Fathers, both Greek and Latin,
testifying that they understood the Church to be one in the sense alleged.

1. If this Unity which cannot be separated at all or divided, is also among
Heretics, what contend we farther? Why call we them Heretics, S. Cypr. Epist.
75.

2. But if there be but one Flock, how can he be accounted of the Flock, which
is not within the number of it? Id: Ibid.

3. When Parmenian commends one Church, he condemns all the rest; for besides
one, which is the true Catholic, other Churches are esteemed to be among
Heretics, but are not. S. Optat. lib. 1.

4. The Church therefore is but one, this cannot be among all Heretics and
Schismatics. Ibid.

5. You say you offer for the Church, which is one; this very thing is part of
a lie to call it one, which you have divided into two: Id: Ibid.

6. The Church is one, which cannot be amongst us and amongst you; it remains
then, that it be in one only place. Id: Ibid.

7. Although there be many Heresies of Christians, and that all would be called
Catholics, yet there is always one Church, etc. S. August. de util. credend.
c. 7.

8. The question between us is, where the Church is, whether with us or with
them, for she is but one. Id: de unitat. c. 2.

9. The proofs of the Catholic prevailed, whereby they evicted the Body of
Christ to be with them, and by consequence not to be with the Donatists; for it
is manifest that she is one alone. Id. Collat. Carthag. lib. 3.

10. In illud cantic. 6.7. There are 60 Queens and 80 Concubines and Damsels
without number, but my Dove is one, etc. He said not, my Queens are 60, and my
Concubines, etc. but he said my Dove is but one; because all the Sects of
Philosophers and Heresies of Christians are none of his; his is but one, to
wit, the Catholic Church, etc. S. Epiphan. in fine Panar.

11. A man may not call the Conventicles of Heretics (I mean Marcionites,
Manichees, and the rest) Churches; therefore the Tradition appoints you to say,
I believe one Holy Catholic Church, etc. S. Cyrill. Catech. 18.

And these Testimonies I think are sufficient to show the judgment of the
Ancient Church, that this Title of the Church one, is directly and properly
exclusive to all companies besides one; to wit, that where there are diverse
professions of Faith, or diverse Communions, there is but one of these, which
can be the Catholic Church. Upon this ground I desire some company of
Christians to be named, professing a diverse Faith, and holding a diverse
Communion from the Roman, which was the Catholic Church at the time of Luthers
rising: and if no other in this sense can be named, than was she the Catholic
Church at that time, and therefore her judgment to be rested in, and her
Communion to be embraced upon peril of Schism and Heresy.

Mr. Chillingworths Answer.
Upon the same ground, if you pleased, you might desire a Protestant to name
some Company of Christians, professing a diverse Faith, and holding a diverse
Communion from the Greek Church, which was the Catholic Church at the time of
Luthers rising; and seeing he could name no other in this sense. concludes that
the Greek Church was the Catholic Church at that time. Upon the very same
ground you might have concluded for the Church of the Abyssines, or Armenians,
or any other society of Christians extant before Luthers time. And seeing this
is so, thus I argue against your ground.

1. That ground which concludes indifferently for both parts of a
contradiction, must needs be false and deceitful, and conclude for neither
part: But this ground concludes indifferently both parts of a contradiction;
viz. That the Greek Church is the Catholic Church, and not the Roman, as well
as, That the Roman is the Catholic Church, and not the Greek: Therefore the
ground is false and deceitful, seem it never so plausible.

2. I answer Secondly, that you should have taken notice of my Answer, which I
then gave you; which was, that your major, as you then framed your Argument,
but as now, your minor is not always true, if by one you understand one in
external Communion; seeing nothing hindered in my Judgment, but that one Church
excommunicated by another upon an insufficient cause, might yet remain a true
member of the Catholic Church; and that Church, which upon the overvaluing
this cause does excommunicate the other, though in fault, may yet remain a
member of the Catholic Church: which is evident from the difference about
Easter Day between the Church of Rome and the Churches of Asia; for which vain
matter Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicated the Churches of Asia. And yet I
believe you will not say, that either the Church excommunicating, or the Church
excommunicated, ceased to be a true member of the Church Catholic. The case is
the same between the Greek and the Roman Church; for though the difference
between them be greater, yet it is not so great, as to be a sufficient ground
of excommunication: and therefore the excommunication was causeless, and
consequently Brutum fulmen, and not ratified or confirmed by God in Heaven; and
therefore the Church of Greece at Luthers rising might be, and was a true
member of the Catholic Church.

As concerning the places of Fathers, which you allege; I demand, 1. If I can
produce you an equal, or greater number of Fathers, or more ancient than these,
not contradicted by any that lived with them or before them, for some doctrine
condemned by the Roman Church, whether you will subscribe it? If not, with what
face or conscience can you make use of, and build your whole Faith upon the
Authority of Fathers in some things, and reject the same authority in others?

2. Secondly, because you urge S. Cyprians Authority, I desire you to tell me,
whether this Argument in his time would have concluded a necessity of resting
in the Judgment of the Roman Church, or no? If not, how should it come to
pass, that it should serve now, and not then, fit this time and not that? as if
it were like an Almanac, that would not serve for all Meridians? If it would,
why was it not urged by others upon S. Cyprian, or represented by S. Cyprian to
himself for his direction, when he differed from the Roman Church, and all
other that herein conformed unto her, touching the point of Re-baptizing
Heretics; which the Roman Church held unlawful and damnable, S. Cyprian not
only lawful, but necessary; so well did he rest in the Judgment of that Church:
Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam, says he in the Comedy? And Cardinal Perron
tells you in his Epistle to Casaubon, that nothing is more unreasonable, than
to draw consequences from the words of Fathers, against their lively and actual
practice.

The same may be said in refutation of the places out of S. Austin; who was so
far from concluding, from them or any other, a necessity of resting in the
Judgment of the Roman Church, that he himself, as your Authors testify, lived
and died in opposition of it; even in that main fundamental point, upon which
Mr. Lewgar has built the necessity of his departure from the Church of
England, and embracing the Communion of the Roman Church, that is, The Supreme
Authority of that Church over other Churches, and the power of receiving
Appeals from them. Mr. Lewgar, I know, cannot be ignorant of these things; and
therefore I wonder, with what conscience he can produce their words against us,
whose Actions are for us.

If it be said, that S. Cyprian and S. Austin were Schismatics for doing so;
it seems then Schismatics may not only be members of the Church, against Mr.
Lewgars main conclusion, but Canonized Saints of it; or else S. Austin and S.
Cyprian should be rased out of the Roman Calendar.

If it be said, that the point of Re-baptization was not defined in S. Cyprians
time; I say that in the Judgment of the Bishop and Church of Rome and their
adherents, it was: For they urged it as an Original and Apostolic Tradition,
and consequently at least of as great force as any Church definition. They
excommunicated Firmilianus and condemned S. Cyprian, as a false Christ, and a
false Apostle, for holding the contrary; and urged him Tyrannico terrore to
conform his judgment to theirs, as he himself clearly intimates.

If it be said, they differed only from the particular Church of Rome, and not
from the Roman Church, taking it for the universal society of Christians in
Communion with that Church: I Answer,

1. They know no such sense of the word, I am sure never used it in any such;
which whether it had been possible, if the Church of Rome had been in their
judgment to other Churches in spiritual matters, as the City was to other
Cities and Countries in temporals, I leave it to indifferent men to judge.

2. Secondly, that they differed not only from the particular Roman Church, but
also from all other Churches, that agreed with it in those doctrins.

3. Thirdly, I desire you would answer me directly, whether the Roman Church,
taking it for that particular Church, be of necessity to be held Infallible in
Faith by every Roman Catholic, or not. To this Question I instantly desire a
direct answer without tergiversation, that we may at length get out of the
cloud, and you may say, Coram, quem quaeritis, adsum. If you say, they are not
bound to believe so; then it is no Article of Faith, nor no certain truth upon
which men may safely rest without fluctuation or fear of error: And if so; I
demand

1. Why are all your Clergy bound to swear, and consequently your Laity (if
they have Communion of Faith with them) by your own grounds, bound to believe,
That the Roman Church is the Mistress of all other Churches? where it is evident
from the relation and opposition of the Roman to other Churches, that the Roman
Church is there taken for that particular Church.

2. Secondly, why then do you so often urge that mistaken saying of Iraeneus,
Ad hanc Ecclesiam necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam? falsely translating
it, as Cardinal Perron in French, and my L. F. in English -- All Churches must
agree with this Church; for convenire ad signifies not to agree with, but to
come unto; whereas it is evident for the aforesaid reason, that the Roman is
here taken for that particular Church.

3. Thirdly, if that particular Church be not certainly infallible, but subject
to error in points of faith; I would know, if any division of your Church
should happen, in which the Church of Rome either alone, or with some others
should take one way; the Churches of Spain and France, and many other Churches
another, what direction should an ignorant Catholic have then from the
pretended Guide of Faith? How shall he know which of these Companies is the
Church? seeing all other Churches distinguished from the Roman may err, and
seeing the Roman Church is now supposed subject to error, and consequently not
certain to guard those men, or those Churches that adhere unto it from erring.

4. Fourthly, if that particular Church be not infallible in Faith, let us then
suppose that de facto it does err in faith; shall we not then have an Heretical
head upon a Catholic body? A head of the Church, which were no member of the
Church? which sure were a very strange and heterogeneous Monster! If to avoid
these inconveniences you will say, that Roman Catholics must of necessity hold
that particular Church infallible in faith; I suppose it will evidently follow,
that S. Austin and S. Cyprian (notwithstanding those sentences you pretend out
of them) were no Roman Catholics; seeing they lived and died in the contrary
belief and profession. Let me see these absurdities fairly and clearly avoided,
and I will dispute no more, but follow you whithersoever you shall lead me.

3. Thirdly, I answer, that the places alleged are utterly impertinent to the
conclusion you should have proved; which was, That it was impossible, that two
Societies of Christians divided upon what cause soever in external Communion,
may be in truth and in Gods account, both of them parts of the Catholic
Church: whereas your testimonies, if we grant them all, say no more but this;
That the Societies of Heretics, which are such as overthrow any doctrine
necessary to salvation; and of Schismatics, which are such as separate from
the Churches Communion without any pretense of error in the Church or
unlawfulness in the conditions of her Communion; I say, they prove only this,
that such Societies as these, are no parts of the Church: which I willingly
grant of all such, as are properly and formally Heretics and Schismatics;
from which number I think (with S. Austin) they are to be exempted, Qui
quaerunt cauta sollicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum invenerint. Whereas
I put the case of such two Societies, which not differing indeed in any thing
necessary to salvation, do yet erroneously believe that the errors wherewith
they charge one another, are damnable, and so by this opinion of mutual error,
are kept on both sides from being Heretics.

Because I desire to bring you and others to the truth, or to be brought to it
by you, I thought good for your direction in your intended Reply, to acquaint
you with these things:

1. That I conceive the -- in your discourse is this. That whenever any two
Societies of Christians differ in external Communion, one of them must be of
necessity Heretical or Schismatical. I conceive there is no such necessity; and
that the stories of Victor and the Bishops of Asia, S. Cyprian and Pope Stephen
make it evident; and therefore I desire you to produce some convincing argument
to the contrary; and that you may the better do it, I thought good to inform
you what I mean by an Heretic, and what by a Schismatic.

An Heretic therefore I conceive him, that holds an Error against Faith with
obstinacy. Obstinate I conceive him, who will not change his Opinion, when his
reasons for it are so answered, that he cannot reply; and when the reasons
against it are so convincing, that he cannot answer them. By the Faith I
understand all those Doctrines and no more, which Christ taught his Apostles,
and the Apostles the Church; yet I exclude not from this number the certain and
evident deductions of them.

A Schismatic I account him, (and Facundus Hermianensis has taught me to do
so) who, without any supposing of error in the conditions of a Churches
Communion, divides himself either from the obedience of that Church to which he
owes obedience; or from the Communion of that Church to which he owes Communion.

2. Another thing, which I thought fit to acquaint you with, is this: That you
go upon another very false and deceitful supposition; viz. that if we will not
be Protestants, presently we must be Papists; if we forsake the Church of
England, we must go presently to the Church of Rome: Whereas if your Arguments
did conclude (as they do not) that before Luthers time, there was some Church
of one Denomination, which was the Catholic Church; I should much rather think
it were the Church of Greece, than the Church of Rome; and I believe others
also would think so as well as I, but for that reason which one gives, why more
men hold the Pope above a Council, than a Council above a Pope, that is,
because Councils give no maintenance or preferment, and the Popes do.

Think not yet, I pray, that I say this, as if I conceived this to be your
reason for preferring the Roman Church before the Greek; (for I protest I do
not) but rather, that conceiving verily you were to leave the Church of
England, to avoid trouble you took the next Boat, and went to the Church of
Rome, because that bespake you first.

You impute to me (as I hear) that the way I take is destructive only, and that
I build nothing; which first, is not a fault; for Christian Religion is not now
to be built; but only I desire to have the rubbish and impertinent Lumber taken
off, which you have laid upon it, which hides the glorious simplicity of it
from them which otherwise would embrace it. Remember, I pray, Averroes his
saying; Quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis; and consider the swarms of Atheists in Italy, and then tell me,
whether your unreasonable and contradictious Doctrines, your forged Miracles
and counterfeit Legends have not in all probability produced this effect.
Secondly, if it be a fault, it is certainly your own; for your discourse
intended for the proof of a positive conclusion -- That we must be Papists --
proves in deed and in truth nothing; but even in show and appearance no more
but this Negative, that we must not be Protestants; but what we must be, if we
must not be Protestants, God knows; you in this Discourse (I am sure) do not
show it.

Mr. Lewgars Reply.
. 1. The minor of Mr. Chillingworths Argument against my ground is very weak,
being framed upon a false supposition, that a Protestant could name no other
Church professing a diverse Faith, etc. from the Greek Church, which was the
Catholic Church: for if he could not indeed name any other, the title would
remain to the Greek Church: But he has the Roman to name, and so my ground
cannot conclude, either for the Greek or Abyssine or any other, besides the
Roman, but for that it does, except he can name some other.

. 2. His second answer is weak likewise; for my Minor is always true; at least
they thought it to be so, whose Authorities I produce in confirmation of it, as
will appear to any one that considers them well; how their force lies in Thesi,
not in Hypothesi; not that the Church was not then divided into more Societies
than one, but that she could never be.

. 3. As for his Instance to the contrary, wherein he believes I will not say
the Churches excommunicated by Victor ceased to be a true member of the
Catholic: If I say so, I say no more than the Ancient Fathers said before me.
Iraeneus when he desired Victor (...), not to cut off so many and great
Churches; and Ruffinus, reprehendit eam, quod non been fecisset abscindere ab
unitate corporis, etc.

. 4. But howsoever the case of Excommunication may be, the division of external
Communion which I intended, and the Fathers spoke of in the alleged
Authorities, was that which was made by voluntary separation.

. 5. Whereby the Church (before one Society) is divided into several distinct
Societies, both claiming to be the Church; of which Societies so divided, but
one can be the Catholic; and this is proved by the Authorities alleged; which
Authorities must not be answered by disproving them, as he does (for that is to
change his Adversary, and confute the Fathers sayings, instead of mine) but by
showing their true sense or judgment to be otherwise than I alleged it.

. 6. To his demand upon the places alleged I Answer, that I do not build my
whole faith of this conclusion upon the Authority of those Fathers; for I
produce them, not for the Authority of the thing, but of the Exposition. The
thing it self is an Article of the Creed, Unam Catholicam; grounded in express
Scripture, Columba mea unica: but because there is difference in understanding
this Prophecy, I produce these Authorities, to show the Judgment of the
Ancient Church how they understood it; and the proper answer to this is either
to show, that these words were not there, or at least, not this meaning; and so
to show their meaning out of other places more pregnant.

. 7. And I promise, that whenever an equal consent of Fathers can be showed
for any thing, as I can show for this, I will believe it as firmly as I do this.

. 8. But this is not the Answerers part, to propound doubts and difficulties,
but to satisfy the proof objected.

. 9. And if this course be any more taken, I will save my self all farther
labor in a business so likely to be endless.

. 10. His second Answer to the places is wholly impertinent; for therein would
he disprove them from watching a necessity of resting in the judgment of the
Roman Church; whereas I produced them only to show, that among several
Societies of Christians, only one can be the Catholic; and against this his
second Answer says nothing.

. 11. In his third Answer he makes some show of reply to the Authorities
themselves; but he commits a double Error: One, that he imposes upon me a wrong
conclusion to be proved, as will appear by comparing my conclusion in my Paper,
with the conclusion he would appoint me.

. 12. Another, that he imposes upon the Authorities a wrong Interpretation, no
way grounded in the words themselves, nor in the places whence they were taken,
nor in any other places of the same Fathers, but merely forged out of his own
Brain. For first, the places do not only say, that the Societies of Heretics
and Schismatics are no part of the Church; but that the Church cannot be
divided into more Societies than one; and they account Societies divided, which
are either of a diverse Faith or a diverse Communion. Neither do they define
Heretics or Schismatics in that manner as he does.

. 13. For an Heretic in their Language is he, that opposes partinaciously the
Common Faith of the Church: and a Schismatic, he that separates from the
Catholic Communion; never making any mention at all of the cause.

. 14. And if his definition of a Schismatic may stand, then certainly there
was no Schismatic ever in the World, nor none are at this day: for none did,
none does separate without some pretense of Error, or unlawfulness in the
Conditions of the Churches Communion.

. 15. And so I expect both a fuller and directer answer to my Argument, without
excursions, or diversions into any other matter, till the judgment of Antiquity
be cleared in this point.

Mr. Chillingworths Answer.
Ad. 1. The Minor of my Argument, you say, is very weak, being grounded upon a
false Supposition, That a Protestant could name no other Church professing a
diverse Faith from the Greek, which was the Catholic Church: And your reason
is, because he might name the Roman. But in earnest, Mr. Lewgar, do you think
that a Protestant remaining a Protestant, can esteem the Roman Church to be the
Catholic Church? or do you think to put tricks upon us, with taking your
proposition one while in sensu composito, another while in sensu diviso? For if
your meaning was, that a Protestant not remaining, but ceasing to be a
Protestant, might name the Roman for the Catholic; so I say also to your
discourse, that a Protestant ceasing to be a Protestant, might name a Greek to
be the Catholic Church; and if there were any necessity to find out one Church
of one denomination, as the Greek, the Roman, the Abyssine, which one must be
the Catholic? I see no reason, but he might pitch upon the Greek Church, as
well as the Roman; I am sure your discourse proves nothing to the contrary. In
short, thus I say, if a Grecian should go about to prove to a Protestant, that
his Church is the Catholic, by saying (as you do for the Roman) some one was
so before Luther, and you can name no other, therefore ours is so: Whatsoever
may be answered to him, may be answered to you. For as you say, a Protestant,
ceasing to be a Protestant, may name to him the Roman; so I say, a Protestant,
ceasing to be a Protestant, may name to you the Grecian. If you say, a
Protestant, remaining a Protestant, can name no other but the Roman, for the
Catholic; I may (very ridiculously I confess, but yet as truly) say, he can
name no other but the Grecian. If you say, he cannot name the Greek Church
neither, remaining a Protestant; I say likewise, neither remaining a
Protestant, can he name the Roman for the Catholic. So the Argument is equal
in all respects on both sides; and therefore either concludes for both parts
(which is impossible, for then contradictions should be both true) or else
(which is certain) it concludes for neither. And therefore I say, your ground
you build on, That before Luther some Church of one denomination was the
Catholic (if it were true, as it is most false) would not prove your intent.
It would destroy perhaps our Church, but it would not build yours. It would
prove peradventure, that we must not be Protestants, but it will be far from
proving that we must be Papists. For after we have left being Protestants (I
tell you again that you may not mistake) there is yet no necessity of being
Papists; no more than if I go out of England, there is a necessity of going to
Rome. And thus much to show the poorness of your ground, if it were true. Now
in the second place, I say it is false, neither have you proved any thing to
the contrary.

Ad. 2. You say, the Authorities you have produced, show to any that consider
them well, That the Church could never be divided into more Societies than one;
and you mean (I hope) one in external Communion, or else you dally in
ambiguities; and then I say, I have well considered the alleged authorities,
and they appear to me to say no such thing; but only, that the Societies of
Heretics and Schismatics are no true members of the Church: Whereas I put the
case of two such Societies, which were divided in external Communion by reason
of some overvalued difference between them, and yet were neither of them
Heretical or Schismatical. To this I know you could not answer, but only by
saying, That this supposition was impossible; viz. That of two Societies
divided in external Communion, neither should be Heretical nor Schismatical;
and therefore I desired you to prove by one convincing Argument, that this is
impossible. This you have not done, nor I believe can do; and therefore all
your places fall short of your intended conclusion; and if you would put them
into Syllogistical form, you should presently see you conclude from them
Sophistically in that fallacy, which is called A dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
Simpliciter. Thus, -- No two divided Societies, whereof one is Heretical or
Schismatical, can be both members of the Catholic Church: therefore simply no
two divided Societies can be so: the Antecedent I grant, which is all that your
places say, as you shall see anon; but the consequence is Sophistical, and
therefore that I deny: It is no better nor worse than if you should argue thus;
No true divided Societies, whereof one is Outlawed and in Rebellion, are both
members of the same Commonwealth; therefore simply no two divided Societies.

But against this you pretend, That the alleged places say not only, that the
Societies of Heretics and Schismatics are no parts of the Church; but that
the Church cannot be divided into more Societies than one: And they account
Societies divided, which are either of a diverse Faith, or of a diverse
Communion: This is that which I would have proved, but as yet I cannot see it
done. There be Eleven Quotations in all; seven of them speak expressly and
formally of division made by Heretics and Schismatics, viz. 1.3, 4. 7.9, 10,
11. Three other of them, ( viz. 5, 6.8.) though they use not the word, yet Mr.
Lewgar knows they speak of the Donatists, which were Schismatics; and that by
the relative particles you and them are meant the Donatists. And lastly, the
second, Mr. Lewgar knows, says nothing but this, That an Heretics cannot be
accounted of that one Flock, which is the Church.

But to make the most of them that can be: The first says, the Unity of the
Church cannot be separated at all, nor divided. This I grant, but then I say,
every difference does not in the sight of God divide this Unity: for then
diversity of Opinions should do it; and so the Jesuits and Dominicans should be
no longer members of the same Church. Or if every difference will not do it,
why must it of necessity be always done by difference in Communion, upon an
insufficient ground, yet mistaken for sufficient? (for such only I speak of.)
Sure I am, this place says no such matter. The next place says, the Flock is
but one; and all the rest, that the Church is but one, and that Heretics and
Schismatics are not of it; which certainly was not the thing to be proved, but
that of this one Flock, of this one Church, two Societies divided without just
cause in Communion, might not be true and lively members; both in one Body
Mystical in the sight of God, though divided in Unity in the sight of men: It
is true indeed, whosoever is shut out from the Church on Earth, is likewise cut
off from it before God in Heaven: but you know it must be Clave non errante;
when the cause of abscission is true and sufficient.

Ad. 3. If you say so, you say no more than the Fathers: but what evasions and
tergiversations are these? Why do you put us off with ifs and ands? I beseech
you tell me, or at least him that desires to reap some benefit by our
Conference, directly and Categorically, -- Do you say so, or do you say, it is
not so? Were the Excommunicated Churches of Asia still members of the Catholic
Church (I mean in Gods account) or were they not? but all damned for that
horrible Heresy of celebrating the Feast of Easter upon a diverse day from the
Western Churches? If you mean honestly and fairly, answer directly to this
Question, and then you shall see what will come of it. Assure your self, you
have a Wolf by the Ears: If you say they were, you overthrow your own
conclusions, and say that Churches divided in Communion may both be members of
the Catholic. If they were not; then shall we have Saints and Martyrs in
Heaven, which were no members of the Catholic Roman Church.

As for Irenaeus his (...), and Ruffinus his -- Abscindere ab unitate corporis;
they imply no more but this at the most; That Victor (quantum in se fuit) did
cut them off from the External Communion of the Catholic Church; supposing,
that for their Obstinacy in their Tradition, they had cut themselves off from
the internal Communion of it: but that this sentence of Victors was ratified in
Heaven, and that they were indeed cut off from the mystical Body of Christ, so
far was Irenaeus from thinking, that he, and in a manner all the other Bishops,
reprehended Victor for pronouncing this Sentence on them, upon a cause so
insufficient: which how they could say, or possibly think of a Sentence
ratified by God in Heaven, and not reprehend God himself, I desire you to
inform me: and if they did not intend to reprehend the Sentence of God himself,
together with Victors, then I believe it will follow unavoidably, that they did
not conceive, nor believe Victors Sentence to be ratified by God; and
consequently did not believe, that these excommunicated Churches were not in
Gods account true members of the Body of Christ.

Ad. 4. And here again, we have another subterfuge, by a Verbal distinction
between Excommunication, and voluntary separation: As if the separation, which
the Church of Rome made in Victors time from the Asian Churches, were not a
voluntary separation; or as if the Churches of Asia, did not voluntarily do
that which was the cause of their separation; or as if (though they sepated not
themselves indeed, conceiving the cause to be insufficient) they did not yet
remain voluntarily separated, rather than conform themselves to the Church of
Rome: Or lastly, as if the Grecians of Old, or the Protestants of Late, might
not pretend as justly as the Asian Churches, that their Separation too was not
voluntarily, but of necessity; for that the Church of Rome required of them
under pain of Excommunication such conditions of her Communion, as were neither
necessary nor lawful to be performed.

Ad. 5. And here again the matter is straightened by another limitation. Both
sides (say you) must claim to be the Church: but what then, if one of them only
claim (though vainly) to be the Church, and the other content it self with
being a part of it? These then it seems (for any thing you have said to the
contrary) may be both members of the Catholic Church: And certainly this is
the case now, between the Church of England and the Church of Rome: and for
ought I know, was between the Church of Rome and the Church of Greece: For I
believe, it will hardly be proved, that the Excommunication between them was
mutual; nor that the Church of Greece esteems it self the whole Church, and the
Church of Rome no Church but it self a sound member of the Church, and that a
corrupted one.

Again, whereas you say, the Fathers speak of a voluntary separation; certainly
they speak of any Separation by Heretics; and such were (in Victors judgment)
the Churches of Asia, for holding an opinion contrary to the Faith, as he
esteemed: Or if he did not, why did he cut them from the Communion of the
Church? But the true difference is, The Fathers speak of those, which by your
Church are esteemed Heretics, and are so; whereas the Asian Churches were by
Victor esteemed Heretics, but were not so.

Ad. 6. But their Authorities produced show no more, than what I have showed;
that the Church is ^ut one in exclusion of Heretics and Schismatics; and not
that two particular Churches divided by mistake upon some overvalued
difference, may not be both parts of the Catholic.

Ad. 7. But I desire you to tell me, whether you will do this, if the Doctrines
produced and confirmed by such a consent of Fathers, happen to be in the
judgment of the Church of Rome, either not Catholic, or absolutely Heretical.
If you will undertake this, you shall hear farther from me: But if, when their
places are produced, you will pretend (as some of your side do) that surely
they are corrupted, having neither reason nor show of reason for it; unless
this may pass for one (as perhaps it may, where reasons are scarce) that they
are against your Doctrine; or if you will say, they are to be interpreted
according to the pleasure of your Church, whether their words will bear it or
no; then I shall but lose my Labor; for this is not to try your Church by the
Fathers, but the Fathers by your Church.

The Doctrines which I undertake to justify, by a greater consent of Fathers
than here you produce, for instance shall be these.

1. That Gods Election supposes prescience of man's Faith and perseverance.

2. That God does not predetermine men to all their Actions.

3. That the Pope has no power in temporalties over Kings either directly or
indirectly.

4. That the Bishop of Rome may Err in his public determinations of matters of
Faith.

5. That the B. Virgin was guilty of Original sin.

6. That the B. Virgin was guilty of actual sin.

7. That the Communion was to be administered to the Laity in both kinds.

8. That the reading of the Scripture was to be denied to no man.

9. That the Opinion of the Millenaries is true.

10. That the Eucharist is to be administered to Infants.

11. That the substance of Bread and Wine remains in the Euch^^^st of her
Consecration.

12. That the Souls of the Saints departed enjoy not the Vision of God before
the Last day.

13. That at the day of judgment, all the Saints shall past through a purging
fire.

All these propositions are held by your Church either Heretical, or at least
not Catholical; and yet in this promise of yours you have undertaken to believe
them as firmly, as you now do this, That two divided Societies cannot be both
members of the Catholic Church.

Ad. 8. Is it not then the Answerers part to show, that the proofs pretended
are indeed no proofs? and does not he prove no proofs (at least in your mouth)
who undertakes to show, that an equal or greater number of the very same
witnesses is rejected by your selves in many other things? Either the consent
of the Fathers, in any Age or Ages, is infallible, and then you are to reject
it in nothing; or it is not so, and then you are not to urge it in any thing:
As if the Fathers Testimonies against us were Swords and Spears, and against
you bulrushes.

Ad. 9. In effect as if you should say, If you answer not as I please, I will
dispute no longer. But you remember the proverb, -- will think of it. --
Occasionem quaerit, qui cupit discedere.

Ad. 10. I pray tell me, Is not Therefore a note of an Illation, or a
conclusion? And is not your last therefore this, Therefore her judgment is to
be rested in? which though it be not your first conclusion, yet yours it is,
and you may not declaim it: and it is so near of kin to the former (in your
judgment I am sure) that they must stand or fall together: therefore he that
speaks pertinently for the disproving of the one, cannot speak impertinently
toward the disproving the other: and therefore you cannot so shift it off, but
of necessity you must answer the Argument there urged, or confess it
ingenuously to be unanswerable.

Or if you will not answer any thing, where the contradiction of your first
conclusion is not in terms inferred, then take it thus: If S. Cyprian and S.
Austin did not think it necessary in matters of Faith to rest in the judgment
of the Roman Church and the adherents of it; Then either they thought not the
Catholic Churches judgment necessary to be rested on, or they thought not that
the Catholic Church. But the Antecedent is true, and undeniably proved so by
their Actions, and the consequence Evident: Therefore the consequent must be
true in one or other part: But you will not say the former is true; it remains
therefore, the latter must be, and that is -- That S. Austin and S. Cyprian did
not think the Church of Rome and the adherents of it to be the Catholic Church.

Ad. 11. But I tell you now, and have already told you, that in our discourse
before Mr. Skinner and Dr. Sheldon. I answered your Major, as then you framed
your Argument, as now your Minor thus -- If you understand by one company of
Christians, one in External Communion, I deny your Major. For I say, that two
several Societies of Christians, which do not externally communicate together,
may be both parts of the same Catholic Church: and what difference there is
between this, and the conclusion I told you, you should have proved, I do not
well unstand.

Ad. 12. And is it possible you should say so, when every one of the places
carry this sense in their forehead, and 7 of the 11 in terms express it -- That
they intended only to exclude Heretics and Schismatics from being parts of
the Church: For if they did not, against whom did they intend them? Pagans lay
no claim to the Church, therefore not against them: Catholics they did not
intend to exclude: I know not who remains besides, but Heretics and
Schismatics. Besides the frequent opposition in them between -- One Church on
the one side, and Heretics and Schismatics; who sees not, that in these
places they intended to exclude only these pretenders out of the Churches Unity?

Lastly, whereas you say, that the places say -- That the Church cannot be
divided; and that they account those divided who are of a diverse Faith, or a
diverse Communion: I tell you, that I have read them over and over, and unless
my Eyes deceive, they say not one word of a diverse Communion.

Ad. 13. Whereas a Heretic in your Language, is he that opposes
pertinaciously the common Faith of the Church; -- In mine -- He is such a one,
as holds an Error against Faith with Obstinacy: Verily a monstrous difference
between these definitions. To oppose and hold against (I hope) are all one:
Faith and the common Faith of the Church, sure are not very different:
pertinaciously and with Obstinacy, methinks might pass for Synonimous; and
seeing the parts agree so well, methinks the Total should not be at great
hostility. And for the definition of a Schismatic, if you like not mine (which
yet I give you out of a Father) I pray take your own; and then show me, (if you
mean to do any thing) that wheresoever there are two Societies of Christians,
differing in external Communion, one of them most be of necessity either
Heretical, or Schismatical in your own sense of these words. To the contrary, I
have said already, (and say it now again, that you may not forget it) the Roman
and the Asian Churches in Victors time, the Roman and the African in S.
Stephens time differed in external Communion; and yet neither of them was
Heretical; For they did not oppose pertinaciously the common Faith of the
Church: Neither of them was Schismatical; for they did not separate (never
making mention of the cause at all) but were separated by the Roman Church, and
that upon some cause, though it were not sufficient.

Ad. 14. The Donatist did so (as Facundus Hermianensis testifies:) but you are
abused, I believe, with not distinguishing between these two -- They did
pretend, that the Church required of them some unlawful thing among the
conditions of her Communion: and they did pretend, that it was unlawful for
them to communicate with the Church. This I confess they did pretend; but it
was in regard of some Persons in the Church, with whom they thought it unlawful
to communicate: But the former they did not pretend, (I mean while they
continued mere Schismatics,) viz. That there was any Error in the Church, or
impiety in her public service of God: And this was my meaning in saying, -- A
Schismatic is he, which separates from the Church without pretense of Error,
or unlawfulness in the conditions of her Communion: Yet if I had left out the
term unlawfulness, the definition had been better, and not obnoxious to this
Cavillation; and so I did in the second Paper which I sent you for your
direction; which if you had dealt heartily, you should have taken notice of.

Ad. 15. I have replied (as I think) fully to every part and particle of your
Argument. Neither was the History of S. Cyprians and S. Austins opposition to
the Church of Rome an excursion or diversion; but a clear demonstation of the
contradictory of your conclusion: ( viz. That the Roman Church, etc. and
therefore her judgment not to be rested upon) For an answer hereto I shall be
very importunate with you; and therefore, if you desire to avoid trouble, I
pray come out of my debt as soon as may be.

If it be said, that my Argument is not contradictory to your conclusion;
because it shows only, that the Roman Church with her adherents was not in S.
Cyprians or S. Austins time the Catholic Church, but was at the time before
Luther; I say, to conclude the one is to conclude the other. For certainly, if
it were then at Luthers time so, it was always so; if it was not always, it was
not then: for if it be of the essence, or necessary to the Church (as is
pretended) to be a Society of Christians joined in Communion with the Church
and Bishop of Rome; then did it always agree to the Church; and therefore in S.
Cyprians and S. Austins time, as well as at Luthers rising: if it were not
always, particularly not in S. Cyprians time, of the Essence or necessary to
the Church to be so; then it was impossible the Church should acquire this
Essence, or this property afterward, and therefore impossible it should have
it at the time of Luthers rising. Necessarium est, quod non aliquando inest,
aliquando non inest, alicui inest, alicui non inest; sed quod semper and omni.
Arist. Post. Analyt.

Again, every Sophister knows, that of Particulars nothing can be concluded;
and therefore he that will show, that the Church of Rome and the adherents of
it was the Catholic Church at Luthers rising; He must argue thus; -- It was
always so, therefore then it was so: Now this Antecedent is overthrown by any
Instance to the contrary; and so the first Antecedent being proved false, the
first consequent cannot but be false; for what Reason can be imagined, that the
Church of Rome and the Adherents of it, was not the whole Catholic Church at
S. Cyprians time, and was at Luthers rising? If you grant (as I think you
cannot deny) that a Church divided from the Communion of the Roman, may be
still in truth and in Gods account a part of the Catholic (which is the thing
we speak of:) then I hope Mr. Lewgars Argument from Unity of Communion is
fallen to the ground; and it will be no good Plea to say,

Some one Church, not consisting of diverse Communions, was the Catholic Church
at Luthers rising:

No one Church can be named to be the Catholic Church, but the Roman:

Therefore the Roman Church was the Catholic at Luthers rising.

For Mr. Lewgar has not nor cannot prove the Major of this syllogism certainly
true; but to the contrary I have proved, that it cannot be certainly true, by
showing diverse instances, wherein diverse divided Communions have made up the
Catholic Church: and therefore not the dividing of the Communions, but the
cause and ground of it, is to be regarded, whether it be just and sufficient,
or unjust and insufficient.

Neither is the Bishop or Church of Rome, with the Adherents of it, an
infallible Judge thereof; for it is evident, both he and it have erred herein
diverse times; which I have evinced already by diverse examples, which I will not
repeat; but add to them one confessed by Mr. Lewgar himself in his discourse
upon the Article of the Catholic Church, page 84. S. Athanasius being
excommunicated (though by the How by the whole Church, when himself was part of
it, and communicated still with diverse other parts of it?
whole Church) yet might remain a member of Christ's body, (not visible, for
that is impossible, What not to them who know and believe him to be unjustly
Excommunicated?
that a person cut off from visible Communion, though unjustly, should be a
visible member of the Church, but) by invisible Communion, by reason of the
invalidity of the sentence; which being unjust, is valid enough to visible
excision, but not farther.

II. A Discourse against the Infallibility of the Roman Church, with an Answer
to all those Texts of Scripture that are alleged to prove it.
THE Condition of Communion with the Church of Rome, without the performance
whereof no man can be received into it, is this, That he believe firmly and
without doubting, whatsoever that Church requires him to believe.

It is impossible that any man should certainly believe any thing, unless that
thing be either evident of it self (as that twice two are four; that every
whole is greater than a part of it self) or unless he have some certain reason
(at least some supposed certain reason) and infallible guide for his belief
thereof.

The Doctrins which the Church of Rome requires to be believed are not evident
of themselves; for then every one would grant them at first hearing without any
further proof. He therefore that will believe them, must have some certain and
infallible ground whereupon to build his belief of them.

There is no other ground for a man's belief of them, especially in many points,
but only an assurance of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome.

Now this point of that Churches Infallibility, is not evident of it self; for
then no man could choose but in his heart believe it without farther proof.
Secondly, it were in vain to bring any proof of it, as vain as to light a
Candle to show men the Sun. Thirdly, it were impossible to bring any proof of
it, seeing nothing can be more evident, than that which of it self is evident:
and nothing can be brought in proof of any thing which is not more evident than
that matter to be proved: But now experience teaches that millions there are,
which have heard talk of the Infallibility of the Roman Church, and yet do not
believe that the defenders of it do not think it either vain or impossible to
go about to prove it; and from hence it follows plainly, that this point is not
evident of it self.

Neither is there any other certain ground for any man's belief of it: or if
there be, I desire it may be produced, as who am ready and most willing to
submit my judgment to it, fully persuaded that none can be produced, that will
endure a severe and impartial examination.

If it be said, The Roman Church is to be believed infallible because the
Scripture says it is so.

1. I demand how shall I be assured of the Texts that be alleged, that they
are indeed Scripture, that is, the Word of God? And the answer to this must be
either because the Church tells me so, or some other: if any other be given,
then all is not finally resolved into, and built upon that Churches Authority;
and this answer then I hope a Protestant may have leave to make use of, when he
is put to that perilous Question; How know you the Scripture to be the
Scripture? If the answer be, because the Church tells me so: my reply is ready;
that to believe that Church is infallible, because the Scriptures say so: and
that the Scripture is the word of God, because the same Church says so, is
nothing else but to believe the Church is infallible, because the Church says
so, which is infallible.

2. I could never yet from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the
Apocalypse, find it written so much as once in express terms, or equivalently,
that the Church in subordination to the Sea of Rome shall be always infallible.

3. If it be said, that this is drawn from good consequence from Scripture
truly interpreted; I demand, what certain ground have I to warrant me, that
this consequence is good and this interpretation true: and if answer be made,
that reason will tell me so: I reply, 1. That this is to build all upon my own
reason and private interpretation. 2. I have great reason to fear, that reason
assures no man, that the infallibility of the Church of Rome may be deduced
from Scripture, by good and firm consequence.

4. If it be said, that a Consent of Fathers do so interpret the Scripture. I
answer, 1. That this is most false and cannot without impudence be pretended,
as I am ready to justify to any indifferent Hearer. 2. I demand, who shall be
judge whether the Fathers mean as is pretended. If it be said, reason will tell
me so: I say, 1. this is false. 2. This is again to do that which is objected
to Protestants for such a horrid crime, that is, to build all finally upon
reason.

If it be said, they are so interpreted by the Catholic Church; I demand,
whether by the Catholic Church be meant that only that is in subordination to
the Bishop of Rome, or any other with that, or besides that. If any other, it
is false and impudent to pretend that they so understand the Fathers or
Scriptures: If that only, then this is to say, that that Church is infallible,
because it may be deduced from Scripture that it is so; and to prove that it
may be deduced from Scripture, because the Fathers say so; and to prove the
Fathers do say and mean so, because the Church of Rome says they do so. And
then what a stir and trouble was here to no purpose; why was it not rather said
plainly at the beginning; The Church of Rome is certainly infallible, because
she her self says so; and she must say true because she is infallible: and that
is as much to say as unless you grant me the Question, I neither can nor will
dispute with you.

If it is said, indeed the Fathers do not draw this doctrine from Scripture, but
yet they affirm it with a full consent, as a matter of Tradition. I reply. 1.
That this pretense also is false, and that upon trial it will not appear to
have any color of probability to any who remembers, that it is the present
Roman Church, and not the Catholic Church whose infallibility is here
disputed. 2. I demand, who shall be judge, whether the Fathers do indeed affirm
this or no: If reason, then again we are fallen upon that dangerous Rock, that
all must be resolved into private reason: If the Church I ask again, what
Church is meant? If the Church of the Grecians or Abyssines or Protestants, or
any other but the Roman, it is evident they deny it. If the Church of Rome,
then we are again very near the head of the Circle. For I ask, how shall I be
assured this Church will not err and deceive me in interpreting the Fathers;
and the Answer must be either none, or this, that the Church is infallible.

Obj. If it be said, that the Infallibility of the Roman Church would yield the
Church so many commodities, and that the want of an infallible Church to guide
men in the way to Heaven, would bring so many mischiefs upon the world, that it
cannot be thought but that God out of his love to men, has appointed this
Church as an infallible guide to all other Churches; seeing it is so necessary
there should be some such guide, and so evident there is no other.

Ans. I answer, that this argument would serve the Church of Greece, or
England, or Geneva, to prove it self infallible, and the guide of all other
Churches, would they but take upon them to be so. For every one might say for
it self; It is necessary there should be some Guide; it is evident there is no
other; Ergo I am appointed by God to be that Guide. The same argument any man
might use, to make himself Monarch of any popular State: for first he might
represent unto them the commodities of a Monarchy, and the mischiefs of a
Democracy: then he might say, That God surely out of his Love to them has
appointed some remedy for their inconveniences: And lastly, that he has
ordained no other to redress them but himself, and then conclude, that he alone
must of necessity be the man appointed to rule over them.

I answer Secondly, that here also we must resolve all into Reason and the
private Spirit, or that we are still in the Circle. For I demand, how do you
know that these pretended commodities are to be compassed, and these pretended
mischiefs are to be avoided, only by the Infallibility of the Church of Rome or
some other Church, and not by any other means which God has provided. If you
say, reason tells you so; I say 1. This is to make reason your last and lowest
foundation. 2. I assure you Reason tells me no such matter, and yet I know that
I am as willing to hear it as you are. If you say, the Church tells you so, and
she is infallible; this, I say, is to prove the Church infallible because she
is so.

Thirdly, I demand, How it is possible you should know, that these pretended
commodities might not be gained, and these mischiefs which you fear avoided,
without any assistance of the Church of Rome's infallibility, if all men in the
world did believe the Scripture, and live according to it, and would require no
more of others, but to do so? If you say, that notwithstanding this, there
would be no unity in Doctrine: I answer 1. It is impossible you should know
this; considering that there are many places in Scripture, which do more than
problably import, that the want of piety in living, is the cause of want of
unity in believing. 2. That there would be unity of Opinion in all things
necessary: and that in things not necessary unity of Opinion is not necessary.
But lastly, that notwithstanding differences in these things of lesser
importance, there might and would be unity of Communion, unity of charity and
affection, which is one of the greatest blessings which the world is capable
of; absolute unity of opinion being a matter rather to be desired than hoped
for.

Obj. Against this it has been objected, that the Scripture cannot be the
guide, because many men have used their best endeavors to follow it, and yet
have fallen, some into Arianism, others into Pelagianism, others into other
damnable Heresies, and how can I secure any man, but he may do the like?

Ans. To this I answer, by distinguishing the persons which are pretended to
have made use of this Guide, and yet to have fallen into Heresy, that they
were either such as did love the truth sincerely and above all things, as did
seek it diligently and with all their power, to this intent that they might
conform their belief and life unto it; such as following S. Paul's direction,
did first try all things deliberately, and then chose what in their conscience
they thought was best: or they were such as for want of the love of the truth,
God suffered to fall into strong delusions, to fall to a false Religion,
because they brought not forth the fruits of the true; to make shipwreck of
their faith, because they had cast away a good conscience; to have their Eyes
blinded, and their light taken away, because they made not the right use of it,
but were idle and unprofitable, and set their hearts upon vanity, and had only
a form of Religion, but denied the effect of it in their lives and
conversations; in a word, such as were betrayed to their Error, and kept for
ever in it, either by negligence in seeking the Truth, or unwillingness to find
it, or by some other voluntary sin: And for these I dare not flatter them with
hope of pardon; but let me tell you, it is not the error of the understanding,
but the sin of their will that truly and properly damns them: But for the
former I am confident, that nothing is more contumelious to the goodness of
God, than to think that he will damn any such; for he should damn men that
truly love him, and desire to serve him, for doing that which all things
considered, was impossible for them not to do.

Obj. If it is said, that pride of their own understanding made them not submit
to the Church of Rome, and to her guidance, and that for this, being a
voluntary sin, they may be justly damned.

Ans. I answer, that whether the Church of Rome be the guide of all men is the
Question, and therefore not to be begged but proved: that the man we speak of
is very willing to follow this Guide, could he find any good ground to believe
it is his Guide; and therefore the reason he follows her not, is not pride but
ignorance: that as it is humility to obey those whom God has set over us, so
it is credulity to follow every one that will take upon him to lead us: that if
the blind lead the blind, not only the leader but the follower shall perish:
Lastly, that the present Church of Rome pretends very little and indeed nothing
of moment, to get the office of being Head and Guide of the Church, which
Antichrist when he comes, may not and will not make use of, for the very same
end and purpose; and therefore he had reason, not to be too sudden and
precipitate, in committing himself to the conduct of the Pope, for fear of
mistaking Antichrist for the Vicar of Christ.

Obj. But in all Commonwealths, it is necessary there should be not only a Law
for men to live by, but also a living and speaking Judge to decide their
differences arising about the various Interpretations of the Law, and otherwise
Controversies would be endless: therefore if such a judge be so necessary in
civil affairs, for the procuring and preserving our temporal peace and
happiness; how much more necessary is he, for the deciding of those
Controversies, that concern the saving and damning of our souls for ever.

Ans. Hereunto I answer, 1. That if it were as evident and certain that God
has appointed the Pope or Church of Rome to be the Guide of Faith, and Judge
of Controversies, as that the King has appointed such a one to be Lord Chief
Justice, the having of such a Guide would be very available, for to preserve
the Church in Unity, and to conduct men's souls to Heaven: but a Judge that has
no better title or evidence to his place, than the Pope has to that which he
pretends to, a Judge that is doubtful and justly questionable whether he be the
Judge or no, is in all probability likely to produce clean contrary effects,
and to be himself one of the Apples of strife, one of the greatest subjects of
Controversy, and occasion of dissentions.

And to avoid this great inconvenience, if God had intended the Pope or Church
of Rome for this great Office, certainly he would have said so very plainly and
very frequently; if not frequently, certainly sometimes, once at least he would
have said so in express terms: but he does not say so, no not so much as once,
nor any thing from whence it may be collected, with any sure or firm
consequence: therefore if it be not certain, certainly it is very probable he
never meant so.

Again, in Civil Controversies the case can hardly be so put, that there should
be any necessity that the same man should be Judge and Party: but in matters of
Religion, wherein all have equal interest, every man is a party, and engaged to
judge for temporal respects, this way or that way, and therefore not fit to be
a Judge. But what then if he which was with so much clamor and so little reason
vouched, for the Infallibility of the Roman Church, do tell you plainly, there
is no living Judge on Earth appointed by God, to decide the Controversies
arising amongst Christians; nor no way to determine them but Scripture. His
words are express and formal, and need no other commentary but a true
interpretation.

Optatus Melevit. lib. 5. ad princip. Vos dicitis, Licet; nos, non Licet: inter
Vestrum Licet, and nostrum non Licet, nutant and remigant animae populorum.
Nemo vobis credat, nemo nobis; omnes contentiosi homines sumus. Quaerendi sunt
judices: si Christiani, de utraque part dari non possunt: de foris quaerendus
est Judex. Si Paganus, non potest nosse Christiana Secreta: Si Judaeus,
inimicus est Christiani Baptismatis. Ergo in terris de hac re nullum poterit
reperiri judicium: de coelo quaerendus est Judex. Sed ut quid pulsamus caelum,
cum habeamus hic in Evangelio Testamentum? Quia hoc loco recte possunt terrenae
coelestibus comparari; tale est, quod quivis hominum habens numerosos filios:
His, quamdiu presens est, ipse imperat singulis; non est adhuc necessarium
Testamentum. Sic and Christus, quamdiu praesens in terris fuit (quamvis nec
modo desit) pro tempore quicquid necessarium erat, Apostolis imperavit. Sed
quomodo terrenus pater cum se in confinio senserit mortis, timens ne post
mortem suam rupta pace litigent fratres, adhibitis testibus voluntatem suam de
pectore morituro transfert in tabulas diu duraturas; and si fuerit inter
fratres contentio nata, non itur ad tumulum, sed quaeritur Testamentum, and qui
in tumulo quiescit, tacitis de tabulis loquitur vivus. Is, cujus est
testamentum, in coelo est: Ergo voluntas ejus velut in Testamento sic in
Evangelio inquiratur.

That is, You say such a thing is Lawful; we say it is Unlawful: the minds of
the People are doubtful and wavering between your lawful and our unlawful. Let
no man believe either you or us; we are all contentious men. We must seek
therefore for Judges between us. If Christians are to be our Judges; both sides
will not afford such. We must seek for a Judge abroad. If he be a Pagan, he
cannot know the secrets of Christianity: If he be a Jew, he is an Enemy to
Christian Baptism. Therefore there is no judgment of this matter can be found
on Earth. We must seek for a Judge from Heaven. But to what end do we solicit
Heaven, when we have here in the Gospel a Will and Testament? And because here
we may fitly compare Earthly things with Heavenly; The case is just as if a man
had many Sons: while he is present with them, he commands every one what he
will have done; and there is no need as yet of making his last Will. So also
Christ, as long as he was present on Earth (though neither now is he wanting)
for a time commanded his Apostles, whatsoever was necessary. But just as an
Earthly Father, when he feels his Death approaching, fearing lest after his
Death the Brothers should fall out and quarrel, he calls in Witnesses, and
translates his Will from his dying Heart into Writing-Tables that will continue
long after him: Now if any controversy arises among the Brothers; they do not
go to his Tomb, but consult his last Will; and thus he whilst he rests in his
Grave, does speak to them in those silent Tables as if he were alive. He whose
Testament we have, is in Heaven. Therefore we are to enquire his pleasure in
the Gospel, as in his last Will and Testament.

It is plain from hence, that he knew not of any living, speaking, audible
Judge, furnished with Authority and infallibility to decide this controversy:
had he known any such assisted with the Spirit of God for this purpose, it had
been horrible impiety against God and the Churches peace, to say there was none
such: or the Spirit of God was not able by his assistance to keep this Judge
from being hindered with partiality, from seeing the Truth. Had he thought the
Bishop of Romes speaking ex Cathedra to be this Judge, now had been the time to
have said so: but he says directly the contrary, and therefore it is plain, he
knew of no such Authority he had.

Neither is there the like reason for a Judge finally and with Authority to
determine controversies in Religion and civil differences: For if the
controversy be about Mine and Thine, about Land or Money or any other thing,
it is impossible that both I should hold the possession of it and my adversary
too: and one of us must do injury to the other, which is not fit it should be
Eternal: But in matters of Doctrine the case is clean contrary; I may hold my
opinion and do my Adversary no wrong, and my Adversary may hold his and do me
none.

[Texts of Scripture alleged for Infallibility.]

The Texts alleged for it by Cardinal Perron and Mr. Stratford, are partly
Prophecies of the Old Testament, partly promises of the New.

1. Esa. 1.26. Thou shall be called the City of Justice, the faithful City.

2. Esa. 52.1. Through thee shall no more pass any that is uncircumcised, or
unclean.

3. Esa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my
spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

4. Esa. 62.6. Upon thy Walls Jerusalem I have appointed Watchmen all the day
and all the night for ever, they shall not hold their peace.

5. Jerem. 31.33. This shall be the Covenant which I will make with the House
of Israel, says the Lord, I will give my Law in their Bowels, and in their
Heart I will write it, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

6. Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

7. Ezekiel. 37.26. I will give my Sanctification in the midst of them for ever.

8. Ose. 2.19, 20. I will dispouse thee to me for ever; and I will dispouse
thee to me in Justice and judgment, and in mercy and commiserations; I will
Espouse thee to me in Faith, and thou shall know that I am the Lord.

9. Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in thee.

Now before we proceed further, let us reflect upon these places, and make the
most of them for the behoof of the Roman Church; and I believe it will then
appear to any one not veiled with prejudice, that not one of them reaches home
to the conclusion intended, which is, That the Roman Church is infallible.

The first place perhaps would do something, but that there are Three main
exceptions against it. 1. That here is no evidence, not so much as that of
probability, that this is here spoken of the Church of Rome. 2. That it is
certain that it is not spoken of the Church of Rome; but of the Nation of the
Jews, after their conversion, as is apparent from that which follows. Zion
shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. 3. That
it is no way certain, that whatsoever Society may be called, the City of
righteousness, the faithful City, must be infallible in all her Doctrine: with
a great deal more probability, it might challenge from hence the privilege of
being Impeccable; which yet Roman Catholics I believe do not pretend to.

The Second place is liable to the same exceptions; the Church of Rome is not
spoken of in it: but Zion and Jerusalem; and it will serve as well nay better
to prove Impeccability than Infallibility.

The third place is the Achilles for this opinion, wherein every writer
Triumphs; but I wonder they should do so; considering the Covenant here spoken
of is made, not with the Church of Rome, but with Zion and them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, the words are: And the Redeemer shall come out of Zion,
and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob says the Lord. As for me,
this is my Covenant with them says the Lord; My Spirit that is in thee and my
Words, etc. Now if the Church of Rome be Zion and they that turn from iniquity
in Jacob, they may have Title to this Covenant; if not they must forbear, and
leave it to the Jews after their Conversion; to whom it is appropriated by a
more Infallible Interpreter than the Pope; I mean S. Paul, Romans 11.26. And it
seems the Church of Rome also believes as much: for otherwise why does she in
the Margent of her Bible, send us to that place of S. Paul for an exposition.

Read the 4th place, and you shall find nothing can be made of it but this:
that the Watchmen of Jerusalem shall never cease importuning God, for the
sending of the Messiah: To this purpose speaks the Prophet in ver. 1. For Zions
sake I will not hold my peace, and for Hierusalems sake I well not rest, until
the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness: And the Gentiles shall see
thy righteousness. But the words following these that are objected, make it
most evident, which are, ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence, and
give him no rest, till he establish and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
Earth.

The 5th place had they set down entirely, for very shame they could not have
urged it for the Infallibility of the Roman Church. The words are, Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the House of
Israel, and with the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant which I made
with their Fathers -- But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
House of Israel -- After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
inward parts and write it in their Hearts, and I will be their God and they
shall be my People; and they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor and
every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from
the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord. And now I have
transcribed the place, I think it superfluous to make any other answer.

The same Answer and no other will I make also to the 6th place. The words are.
Therefore say unto the House of Israel; thus says the Lord God, I do not this
for your sakes O House of Israel, but for my holy names sake, ver. 22. I will
take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all Countries, and will
bring you into your own Land, v. 24. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you,
ver. 25. A new heart also will I give you, ver. 26. And I will put my Spirit in
you and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do
them, ver. 27. And ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers: I
will also save you from all your uncleanness, and I will call for the Corn
and will increase it, and lay no Famine upon you. And the desolate Land shall
be tilled, ver. 34. And they shall say, this Land that was desolate, is become
like the Garden of Eden.

The 7th place also carries its answer in its forehead: Thus says the Lord
God, behold I will take the Children of Israel from among the Heathen whether
they be gone; and I will make them one Nation in the Land upon the mountains of
Israel: and one King shall be King to them all, etc. to the end of the Chapter.
In all which place, he that can find a Syllable of the Church of Rome, he must
have better eyes than I have.

The next (8th) place would be very pregnant for the Church of Rome, if of
courtesy we would grant, that whatsoever is promised to Israel, is intended to
them. As you may see in the place at large, from ver. 17. to the end of the
Chapter.

The 9th and last place out of the Canticles, had it been urged by a
Protestant; it would have been thought a sufficient Answer to have said, That
Mystical Texts are not fit to argue upon; but if this will not serve, then we
answer. 1. That there is no mention nor intimation of the Church of Rome. 2.
That it proves either too much or nothing at all: that is, that the Roman
Church is impeccable, as well as infallible; unless we will say that Errors
only are Spots, and impieties are not.

Out of the New Testament they allege these Texts.
Matthew. 16.18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. But this is said of the Catholic, not of the
Roman Church: nor can it ever be proved that the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome is the Catholic Church. Secondly, it says something for the
perpetuity of the Church, but not for the Infallibility of it: unless you will
take for granted what can never be proved, That a Church that teaches any
Erroneous Doctrine, is a Church no longer; which is all one, as if you should
say, a man that has the Stone, or Gout, or any other Disease, is not a man.

They urge, Matthew. 28.19, 20. And I am with you all days, even unto the
consummation of the World.

And here also if we will grant, 1. That by you, is meant you and only you of
the Church of Rome. 2. That our Savior has here obliged himself to assist, not
only Sufficienter, but also irresistibiliter, not only to preserve in the
Church a light of sufficient direction, as he provided a Star for the Wise Men,
and a Pillar of Fire and a cloud for the conduct of the Israelites; but also
compel or at least necessitate them to follow it. 3. That he will be with them,
not only to keep them from all damnable and destructive Errors, but absolutely
form all erroneous Doctrines: If these things I say were granted, some good
might be done. But certainly these are (...), too great favors to be looked for
by strangers: And yet if all this be granted, we should run into this
inconvenience on the other side; that if the promise be absolute, not only the
whole Church of Rome; not only a general Council; not the Pope alone; but every
Bishop, every Priest, every one who is sent by Christ to Baptize and Preach the
Gospel, might claim this assistance by virtue of Christ's words, and
consequently Infallibility.

They urge, Matthew. 18.17. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as
the Heathen and the Publican.

And here again the Church must be the Church of Rome, or we are as far to seek
as ever. But what if by it be meant, which is most evident out of the place,
every particular Church of Christians, whereunto any one Christian injured by
another, may address himself for remedy. Certainly whosoever reads the place
without prejudice, I am confident that he shall not deny, but that the sense of
the Words is. That if any Christian injure another, and being first admonished
of it by him in private; then by him before two or three Witnesses; Lastly, by
the Church he lives in; and yet still proceeds on obstinately in doing injury
to his Brother, he is to be esteemed as a Heathen, or a Publican: and then if
Infallibility may be concluded, what a multitude of Infallible Churches shall
we have?

They urge, Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.

But this also either shoots short, or over; either proves nothing, or too
much: Either it proves not the Infallibility of the whole Church, or it proves
the Infallibility of every part of it: Either not the Infallibility of General
Councils, or the infallibility of particular Councils; for there two or three
at least are assembled in Christ's name. But then besides these two or three for
ought I can see or gather from the Text, they may as well be of any other
Church as the Roman.

They urge, Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises
you despises me.

But this will not do you any service, unless of favor we grant, that you
here, is you of the Church of Rome; and but very little if that be granted: for
then every Bishop, every Priest must be Infallible. For there is not the
meanest of the Messengers of Christ, but this may be verified of him, That he
that hears him, hears Christ, and he that despises him, despises Christ.

They urge out of John 14. ver. 15, 16. I will ask my Father, and he will give
you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
Truth.

But here also, what warrant have we, by you to understand the Church of Rome:
whereas he that compares v. 26. with this, shall easily perceive, that our
Savior speaks only of the Apostles in their own persons; for there he says
going on in the same discourse. The Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said to you: which cannot agree but to the Apostles
themselves in person; and not to their Successors, who had not yet been taught
and therefore not forgotten any thing, and therefore could not have them
brought to their remembrance. But what if it had been promised to them and
their Successors? had they no Successors but them of the Roman Church? this
indeed is pretended and cried up, but for proofs of it, desiderantur.

Again, I would fain know whether there be any certainty, that every Pope is a
good Christian, or whether he may not be in the sense of the Scripture, of the
World? If not, how was it that Bellarmine should have cause to think, that such
a rank of them went successively to the Devil?

III. A Conference, concerning the Infallibility of the Roman Church: Proving
that the present Church of Rome either errs in her worshipping the Blessed
Virgin Mary, or that the Ancient Church did err in condemning the Collyridians
as Heretics.
1. Demand. WHether the Infallibility of the Roman Church, be not the
foundation of their Faith which are members of that Church?

Answ. The Infallibility of the Church is (not the foundation but) a part of
their Faith who are members of the Church. And the Roman Church is held to be
the Church, by all those who are members of it.

Reply. That which is the last Reason, why you believe the Scripture to be the
written Word of God and unwritten Traditions his unwritten word; and this or
that to be the true sense of Scripture, that is to you the foundation of your
Faith, and such unto you is the Infallible Authority of the Roman Church.
Therefore unto you it is not only a part of your faith, but also such a part as
is the foundation of all other parts. Therefore you are deceived if you think,
there is any more opposition between being a part of the faith and the
foundation of other parts of it; than there is between being a part of a house
and the foundation of it. But whether you will have it the foundation of your
faith, or only a part of it, for the present purpose it is all one.

2. Demand. Whether the Infallibility of the Roman Church be not absolutely
overthrown, by proving the present Roman Church is in error, or that the
Ancient was?

Answ. It is, if the Error be in those things wherein she is affirmed to be
infallible; viz. in points of Faith.

Reply. And this here spoken of, whether it be lawful to offer Tapers and
Incense to the honor of the Blessed Virgin, is I hope a Question concerning a
point of Faith.

3. Demand. Whether offering a Cake to the Virgin Mary, be not as lawful, as to
offer Incense and Tapers and diverse other oblations to the same Virgin?

Answ. It is as lawful to offer a Cake to her honor as Wax-Tapers, but neither
the one, nor the other may be offered to her, or her honor, as the term or
object of the Action. For to speak properly, nothing is offered to her or to
her honor, but to God in the honor of the Blessed Virgin. For Incense, it is
a foul slander that it is offered any way to the Blessed Virgin; for that
incensing which is used in the time of Mass, is ever understood by all sorts of
people to be directed to God only.

Reply. If any thing be offered to her, she is the Object of that oblation; as
if I see water, and through water something else, the water is the object of my
sight, though not the last object. If I honor the Kings Deputy, and by him the
King, the Deputy is the object of my action, though not the final object: And
to say these things may be offered to her, but not as to the object of the
action, is to say they may be offered to her, but not to her. For what else is
meant by the object of an action, but that thing on which the action is
employed, and to which it is directed?

If you say, that by the object of the action, you mean the final object only
wherewith the action is terminated; you should then have spoken more properly
and distinctly, and not have denied her simply to be the object of this action,
when you mean only she is not such a kind of object: no more than you may deny
a man to be a living creature, meaning only that he is not a horse.

Secondly, I say, it is not required of Roman Catholics when they offer Tapers
to the Saints, that by an actual intention they direct their action actually to
God; but it is held sufficient, that they know and believe that the Saints are
in Subordination and near Relation to God, and that they give this honor to
the Saints because of this relation: And to God himself rather habitually and
interpretative, than actually, expressly and formally. As many men honor the
Kings Deputy, without having any present thought of the King, and yet their
action may be interpreted an honor to the King, being given to his Deputy,
only because he is his Deputy, and for his relation to the King.

Thirdly, I say, there is no reason or ground in the world, for any man to
think, that the Collyridians did not choose the Virgin Mary for the object of
their worship, rather than any other Woman or any other Creature, merely for
her relation to Christ; and by consequence there is no ground to imagine, but
that at least habitually and interpretative, they directed their action unto
Christ, if not actually and formally. And Ergo, if that be a sufficient defense
for the Papists, that they make not the Blessed Virgin the final object of
their worship, but worship her not for her own sake, but for her relation unto
Christ: Epiphanius surely did ill to charge the Collyridians with Heresy,
having nothing to impute to them, but only that he was informed, that they
offered a Cake to the honor of the Blessed Virgin, which honor yet they
might, and without question did give unto her for her relation unto Christ, and
so made her not the last object and term of their worship: and from hence it is
evident, that he conceived the very action it self, substantially and
intrinsically malicious, i. e. he believed it a sin that they offered to her at
all: and so by their action put her in the place of God, by giving unto her
this worship proper to God; and not that they terminated their action finally
in her, or did in very deed think her to be a God, and not a Creature.

But to speak properly, you say, nothing is offered to her or to her honor,
but to God in honor of the Blessed Virgin.

Belike then if through Henly I go from hence to London, I may not be said
properly to go to Henly, but only to London: or if through Water I see the
Sand, I may not be properly said to see the Water, but only the Sand. Away with
such shifting Sophistry; either leave your practice of offering to Saints if it
be naught, or color it not over with such empty distinctions if it be good:
Christ says to his Apostles in regard of their relation to him, He that
hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me: and yet who
doubts, but they that heard the Apostles did properly hear them, and they that
despised them did properly despise them, though their action staid not in them,
but reached up to Heaven and to Christ himself. You pray to Saints and Angels,
though you do not terminate your prayers in them; and yet I doubt not but your
prayers to Saints, may be as properly called prayers, as those you make to God
himself. For though these be of a more excellent nature than they, yet do they
agree in the general nature, that they are both prayers. As though a Man be a
more excellent living creature than a horse, yet he agrees with him in this,
that both are living creatures. But if nothing be properly offered to her or to
her honor, why do you in your sixth Answer say, you may offer any thing to the
Virgin Mary, by way of presents and gifts by the doctrine of the Roman Church?
Certainly he that offers by way of gift or present, offers as properly as he
that offers by way of sacrifice; as a horse is as properly a living creature as
a Man.

But if it were so as you say (which is most false) that you did not properly
offer to the Blessed Virgin, but to God in honor of her; yet in my judgment,
this would not qualify or mend the matter but make it worse. For first, who
taught you, that in the time of the Gospel (after the accomplishment of the
prediction, sacrifice and offering thou would not but a body have thou
prepared me: after this Interpretation of it in the Epistle to the Hebrews, He
takes away the first that he may establish the second) that it is still lawful
to offer Tapers or Incense to God. Secondly, in my understanding, to offer to
God in honor of the Virgin, is more derogatory from Gods honor, than to offer
to her in the honor of God. For this is in my apprehension to subordinate God
to her, to make her the terminating and final object of the action; to make God
the way and her the end, and by and through God to conveigh the worship unto
her.

But for incense, you say, it is a foul slander, that it is offered any way to
the Blessed Virgin.

To this I answer, that your imputing slander to me, is it self a slander: For
1. In your 5th Answer, you have given a clear intimation that you have never
been out of England: so that you cannot certainly know, what is the practice of
your Church in this point beyond Sea. And he that lives amongst you, and has
but half an Eye open and free from prejudice, cannot but see, that the Roman
Religion is much more exorbitant in the general practice of it, than it is in
the Doctrine published in Books of Controversy; where it is delivered with
much caution and moderation, nay cunning and dissimulation that it may be the
fitter to win and engage Proselytes; who being once ensnared, though they be
afterward startled with strange and unlookt-for practices, yet a hundred to
one, but they will rather stifle their Conscience, and dash all scruples
against the pretended Rock of their Churches Infallibility, and blindly follow
those guides, to whose Conduct they have unadvisedly committed themselves, than
come off again with the shame of being reputed weak and inconstant: so terrible
an Idol is this vain nothing, the opinion and censure of foolish men.

But to return again to you, I say your ignorance of the practice of the Roman
Church beyond the Seas, does plainly convince that you have rashly and
therefore slanderously charged me with the Crime of slander. As for your reason
you add, consider it again, and you will see it is worth nothing. For what if
incensing in time of Mass, be understood by all sorts of People to be directed
to God alone (which yet you cannot possibly know) yet this I hope hinders not,
but that in Processions, you may Incense the Images of the Saints, and
consequently (according to your Doctrine) do this Honor to the Saints
themselves represented by the Images. I my self (unless I am very much
mistaken) was present when this very thing was done to the Picture of Saint
Benet or Saint Gregory in the Cloister of Saint Vedustus in the Monastery in
Doway.

But indeed what a ridiculous inconsequence is it, to think that Wax Tapers may
lawfully be offered to the Saints and incense may not: or if Incense may not,
which you seem to disclaim as impious, that Wax Tapers may.

4. Demand. Whether the Collyridians were not condemned as Heretics by the
Ancient Church. First, for offering a Cake upon a Anniversary Feast to the
Blessed Virgin. Secondly for that they did this not being Priests.

Answ. The Collyridians were condemned as Heretics for two things. First, for
employing Women in the place and Office of Priests to offer a Cake (not in the
nature of a gift or present,) but in the nature of a Vt in nomen Virginis
Collyridem quandam Sacrificarent. Epiph. haer. 78. Offerunt panem in nomen
Mariae, omnes autem pane participant --
Sacrifice, which was never lawful for any but Deo enim ab aeterno nulla tenus
mulier Sacrificavit. Idem haeres. 79.
men, and those Diaconissarum ordo est in Ecclesia, sed non ad Sacrificandum,
nam neque Diaconis concreditum est, ut aliquod mysterium perficiant. Id. Ibid.
consecrated.

Secondly, for offering this vid. sup. littera (a)
Sacrifice (...) in the name of the Blessed Virgin, i. e. unto her, her self
directly and terminatively, as an act of Mortuis eultum divinum praestantes.
Id. Ibid. And again: Revera virgo erat honorata, sed non ad adorationem nobis
data sed ipsa adorans Deum. And again: Non ut adoretur Virgo, nec ut Deum hanc
efficeret, etc. Sit in honor Maria; Pater and Filius and Spiritus S. adoretur,
Mariam nemo adoret. Deo debetur hoc mysterium Id. Ibid.
Divine Worship and adoration, due unto her, as unto a Sovereign Pro Deo hanc
introducere statuerant. Id. Ibid. Revera Sanctum erat Mariae corpus non tamen
Deus. And again. Mulierem eam appellavit Joh. 2. Velut prophetans: and ne
aliqui nimium admirati Sanctum, in hanc haeresin dilabantur. And again. Non
tamen aliter genita est praeter hominis naturam, sed sicut omnes ex semine viri
and utero Mulieris. Id. Ibid.
Power and Deity.

Reply. It seems then these Women might offer this Cake to the honor and name
of the Virgin Mary, if they had done it as a Gift or Present and not as a
Sacrifice. Epiphanius then surely was too hasty to condemn them, being informed
of nothing, but that they offered a Cake unto her. Methinks before he had put
them in his Catalogue, he should have enquired whether they offered this Cake
as a Gift only, or as a Sacrifice. Certainly had the practice of offering to
Saints by way of gifts, been the practice of the Church in his time, he would
not have been so uncharitable, as to condemn that action as impious and
Heretical, which might have received so lawful and pious a construction. But
he, good man, it seems could not conceive a difference between a Sacrifice, and
the offering a Creature by way of Consumption to the Honor of that to which it
is offered. The subtle Wits of our times I hope have found out another
definition for it, and I shall understand by you what it is. But if you can
find no other, then certainly, though setting up a Picture or hanging up a Leg
or Eye or Ear in memory of some miraculous cure, obtained by a Saints
intercession, would be a Gift or Present only; yet offering of Incense, or
burning a Taper in the honor of a Saint, daub the matter how you will, will be
without Question a Sacrifice. If you say, that there may be such an offering
and yet no Sacrifice; I would know then, how you would prove that the
Collyridians offering was indeed a Sacrifice? All that Epiphanius says of them
is but this -- Panem proponunt and in Mariae nomen offerunt. And though this
offering of theirs was indeed a Sacrifice in the notion of the word which I
have given it, yet does he not any where say expressly, That they did Sacrifice,
or offer it as a Sacrifice, but only and barely that they did offer it: not
using (as good fortune would have it) any word which does of necessity and
properly signify to Sacrifice: and therefore you are fain to help the Dice,
and alter every place for your advantage. Epiphanius says not, as you translate
him, ut in nomen Virginis Collyridem quendam Sacrificent; nor Sacrificantes
offerunt, as Petavius: but (...), which may as well signify, to consecrate or
offer, as to Sacrifice, if there be any difference between them. So the next
place, offerunt panem in nomen Mariae, omnes autem pane participant; proves not
I hope offering by way of Sacrifice, unless the Consumption of the oblation
make it a Sacrifice; which if it do, how your Tapers can be kept from being
Sacrifices I cannot imagine; unless again perhaps Consumption by way of Eating
will make it a Sacrifice, and by Burning will not; which cannot be, because the
whole Burnt-offerings were Sacrifices as well as any other.

Your third place is, Deo autem ab aeterno nullatenus mulier Sacrificavit. But
(...) signifies not to Sacrifice, but only to perform the Office of a Priest,
and so Petavius translates the place. Nunquam sacerdotio functa est mulier. And
though Sacrificing be one perhaps, yet will you not say it is the only Office
of a Priest: as your next and last place would have declared, had you set it
down faithfully; but in that also you juggle again, and force it to speak to
your purpose thus. Diaconissarum ordo est in Ecclesia, sed non ad
Sacrificandum: but Petavius has translated it truly thus: Quanquam vero
Diaconissarum in Ecclesia ordo sit, non tamen ad sacerdotii functionem, aut
ullam administrationem institutus est. And now though by an usual Synechdoche
the name of the Genus be given to the Species, and therefore had a man fairly
and heartily translated (...) by Sacrifico, I should not have much condemned
him, yet to do it when the Question is, whether this their offering, confessed
to be an offering, were in propriety of speech a Sacrifice, to do it for Ends,
to shift off a convincing argument, to palliate over a foul matter, by putting
a verbal difference where there is none indeed, and all that you may, Imperitos
rerum in fraudem illicere; that is -- But I forbear you.

But Secondly it is pretended, [ they offered this Sacrifice (...) in the name
of the Blessed Virgin: i. e. unto her, her self, directly and terminately as an
act of Divine Worship and adoration due unto her, as unto a Sovereign Power and
Deity.] And to color and countenance this strange gloss, many places are
quoted out of Epiphanius, which I will examine in order as they lie.

The first place is, mortuis cultum Divinum praestantes, where your meaning is,
I believe, that Epiphanius says the Collyridians did so: but the truth is he
says only, mortuos colentes; as Petavius translates it: and therefore here once
again you help the Dice; yet if he had said so, why should you rather from
cultum divinum collect that, that they thought her God, than from mortuis, that
they thought her Dead, and therefore certainly not a God? Certainly this can be
no warrant to you, that Epiphanius charges them with so thinking: For
Protestants you know impute to Papists that they give to Saints cultum divinum,
and yet they do not impute to them the Heresy of thinking, that the Saints are
Sovereign Powers and Deities: But as S. Paul accuses the Gentiles, for that
knowing God to be God, they did not worship him as God, so on the other side,
Protestants condemn Papists, and Epiphanius for ought we can see hitherto,
might condemn the Collyridians, for that knowing the Blessed Virgin not to be
God, they yet worshipped her as God. That is, gave her that worship which is
Gods own peculiar, which yet they might do, not because they thought her God,
but because this worship, which was indeed proper to God, they might think not
proper, but communicable to such Creatures as were high in his favor.

The next place is -- Revera virgo erat honorata, sed non ad adorationem nobis
data, sed ipsa adorans Deum, etc.

I answer that the etc. perhaps conceals something more pertinent to your
purpose, but in the Words set down there appears to me just nothing; for I can
frame out of them no other Syllogism but this.

Whatsoever Epiphanius in this place says is not to be adored, that the
Collyridians thought to be God.

But Epiphan. here says the Virgin is not to be adored.

Ergo. The Collyridians thought her God.

Of this Syllogism I deny the Major proposition, and I believe shall stay as
long for a proof of it, as I have done for an answer to some other discourses,
which being written in a few days, have waited now with a longing expectation
for a promised answer many months. If you say, you would conclude from these
Words, that they did adore her and therefore thought her God, I have answered
already, that they might do this, not because they thought her God, but because
they thought Creatures high in Gods favor capable of adoration.

The next place -- Non ut adoretur Virgo, nec ut deum hanc efficeret -- tells
us that Christ took Flesh of the Virgin, not that she should be adored, nor to
make her God: And this you think imports, that they conceive her God. Yet if I
should, condemning your Practice of offering Tapers to her, use the same Words
and say, -- Christ took Flesh of the Virgin, not that she should be adored, or
to make her God: You would not yet conceive that I charged you with the Heresy
of believing her God, but only of the impiety of giving to her that worship
which was peculiar to God: and why then might not Epiphanius, having like
occasion, use the same words to the Collyridians upon the same, and no other
ground.

The next place -- Mariam nemo adoret, Deo debetur hcc mysterium, -- is so far
from proving your imagination, that it strongly confirms my assertion, that
Epiphanius did not impute to the Collyridians the opinion, that the Virgin Mary
was God. If I should say to a Papist, the Blessed Virgin is not to be worshipped
with the worship of Hyperdaulia, because such worship is due only to the Mother
of God, would they not say I were mad and argued against my self, for that they
believed she was the Mother of God. By like reason, if Epiphanius knew, that
the Collyridians believed the Virgin Mary to be God, he reasoned as wildly
against himself in saying -- Mariam nemo adoret, Deo debetur hoc mysterium --
For it is very true (might they have said) this service is due to God alone,
but you know our Belief and Profession that she is God, and therefore by your
own rule capable of this worship.

The next place is -- Pro Deo hanc introducere studuerunt. And may not this be
justly said to any man, who to any thing besides God, gives that worship which
is proper and peculiar unto God? What if to man that should teach -- The Pope
had power to dispense with men for the keeping of Gods Laws -- I should say,
pro Deo Papam introducis. Must I of necessity mean that that man did verily
believe the Pope not a man but a Sovereign Power and Deity? S. Paul tells us
that Covetousness is Idolatry; he tells us of some, whose God is their Belly;
is it therefore consequent, that every covetous man does indeed believe his
Gold, and every Glutton his Belly, to be indeed a Sovereign Power and Deity?
Away with such fopperies. Whosoever loves, or fears, or trusts in any thing
more than God, may yet be justly said to make that his God, and whosoever
should worship any Creature with that external worship which God has
appropriated to himself, might justly be said to bring in that Creature for
God. S. Paul tells us of some, who in words professed God, yet fact is
negabant, in their deeds deny him: so these on the contrary, may in their words
deny this Creature to be God, and in their Hearts not think it so, yet seeing
their actions to it are as if it were God, they may be justly charged, that
with their deeds they make this Creature God.

Qui fingit Sacros ex auro and marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos, qui colit ille facit.
What if upon consideration of the strangely enormous worship which Papists
give to the Virgin Mary (swearing by her name, making Vows unto her, offering
Tapers to her Honor, attributing a kind of Communicated omniscience and almost
omnipotence to her, as I can easily make good they do, partly out of the
Offices of their Church, partly out of private men's Works, but set out with
License and approbation) what I say, if upon this consideration I should
affirm, pro Deo ipsam introducere conantur. Would it therefore be consequent,
that I must impute this Blasphemy to them, that they believed and taught her to
be a Sovereign Power and Deity? I trow not. And therefore Epiphanius might say
the same of the Collyridians considering their Action, without any intent of
imputing to them any such opinion. This Petavius sure saw well enough, and
therefore (as I shall hereafter demonstrate to the Eye) to countenance his
Marginal Annotation, Quidam Mariam Deum esse crediderunt, he cunningly abuses
and perverts Epiphanius his Text with false Translation. -- Sic pugnat, Sic est
metuendus Ulysses. -- The next place is, revera sanctum erat Mariae corpus non
tamen Deus. (The Body of Mary was truly holy, but not a God.) As much to the
purpose as -- Tityre tu patulae -- for what if Epiphanius say, she is not God,
and therefore not to be adored, does it therefore follow that the Collyridians
believed she was a God? He that knows Logic or sense, cannot but know, that he
that will confute an Adversaries conclusion, must choose such principles to do
it, to which his Adversary consents, and out of that which he grants prove that
which he denies; or if his first propositions be not agreed to by his
Adversary, he must prove them in the end by such as are agreed to; or else he
does nothing. And therefore seeing Epiphanius thinks it sufficient for the
convincing of the Collyridians, of the unlawfulness of the practice, to say,
she was not God: it is evident, that so far was he from imputing to them the
belief that she was God, that he seems rather to take the contrary for a
principle agreed upon between them, which it was sufficient to say and
superfluous to prove. This answer I thought good to make, while I conceived
that here Epiphanius had denied the Person of the Virgin Mary to be God; but
after upon better consideration I found that Petavius had abused me with adding
to Epiphanius of his own -- Illa fuit -- and that Epiphanius says not here, non
tamen Deus (she was not God) of her Person, but of her Body; and as yet I do
not understand that you impute to the Collyridians the belief, that her Body
was God.

The next place -- Mulierem eam appellavit, etc. -- says no more but this; that
our Savior calls the Blessed Virgin Woman, that no man might think her any
thing more than a Woman, as it were prophetically refuting the Schisms and
Heresies which would be in the World: lest some out of excess of admiration of
her, might fall into the Dotage of this Heresy. Thus far Epiphanius: but then
the Question will be, what was this Heresy. You say the belief that she was
God. I say, not that she was God, but that they might lawfully offer to her.
And as I deny not but it follows, she is a Woman, therefore not a God; so I
think you will grant it follows as justly, she is a Woman, therefore not to be
adored with offerings. And therefore seeing the words lie indifferently between
us, and are not expressly and especially here applied, for the refutation of
that Heresy which you pretend they were guilty of, I see no reason why
Epiphanius might not as well intend them for that purpose which I conceive, as
for that which you conceive.

The last place alleged tells us, that she was begotten and Born as other Men
and Women are. Which if the Collyridians had thought her God, Eternal and
absolutely without beginning, should not have been barely said but proved, as
being in effect the very point in question; and therefore seeing Epiphanius
contents himself with saying so without proof, it is evident he never thought
they would make difficulty to grant it, and consequently that they did not
believe her to be God Eternal.

But then again, if the Rule be good which part of your proofs depend upon,
That whatever Epiphanius denies in this discourse, that the Collyridians held
(for upon that ground from -- Non and Deum hanc efficeret: and non tamen Deus,
you conclude they believed her God) If I say this Rule be good, then you should
be constant to it, and now that he says, -- Non tamen aliter genita est praeter
hominum naturam, (she was not begotten in a different way from other men) you
should infer, that they believed not that she was God, but that she was
otherwise Born and Begotten than the ordinary sort of Men. And so whereas he
says before -- Non tamen corpus de coelo tulit -- (her Body was not from
Heaven) you should infer, that they believed her Body came from Heaven. And
again from those -- Sanctum erat Mariae corpus non tamen Deus -- you should
collect that they thought not only her person, but her Body to be God: or if
these be wild and weak deductions, then you must acknowledge that I have done
yours some favor in vouchsafing them a particular answer.

5. Demand. Whether in the Church of Roman, it be not an approved and
perpetually practiced worship of the Blessed Virgin, that Incense (which was
never anciently offered unto any, either by Jews or Gentiles, but to the true,
or to a supposed true God) and Tapers and diverse other oblations, should be
offered to her honor?

Answ. A practice of the Church of Rome, and approved too by those that
practice it, belongs not to her, except it be a practice of the Church and
approved by her. What her practice is abroad I know not; here at home I see no
such practice; nor do I know any approbation of it, in any of her public
declarations: But this I know, that there is nothing in it unlawful or
savouring of the Collyridian Superstition, to offer Wax, Tapers or any other
thing at the Memories of the Blessed Virgin or any other Canonized Saint,
either as means to procure their intercession, by these outward Signs of the
Honor and Devotion which they bear to them (as of Old we find by 8. Austin Ad
aquas Tibilotanas, Episcopo offerente Projecto, reliquias martyris
gloriosissimi Stephani, ad ejus memoriam veniebat magnae multitudinis concursus
and accursus. Ibi caeca mulier, ut ad episcopum portantem pignora Sacra
duceretur, oravit: Flores ques ferebat dedit; recepit, oculis admovit, protenus
vidit. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. abscedens aliquid de Altari (S.
Stephani) florum quod occurrit, tulit. Idem. Ibid. etc.
they did use to adorn their Tombs with Flowers) or as monuments of their
thankfulness for some benefits received by their Intercession, as Theodoret
Theodoretus de curandis affec: Graec. l. 8.
tells us of Eyes and Ears and Hands, some of Gold and some of Silver (hung up
in the Chapels of the Saints) that had been presented as oblations by those
that had recovered health in those Members, according to their Vows made to
that purpose in time of Sickness.

Reply. I do not deny, but a practice may be tolerated in a Church, and not
approved. As the Public Stews are in Italy, and Usury in England: But it is
one thing to Tolerate with condemnation, another to Tolerate without
condemnation, nay with condemnation of those that should oppose or condemn it.
And such I doubt not upon examination, you may find is this practice, general
in the Church of Rome, offering Tapers to the Saints and for their honor. I
say, not only to God, at the Memories of the Saints, as you would mince the
matter, which yet were a groundless superstition, (God having appointed no such
Sacrifice to be offered to him under the Gospel) but to the Saints themselves
and to their honor, prove this lawful for either of those purposes you
mention, either to procure their intercession or as Monuments of thankfulness
for benefits obtained by it, and then you shall do something. Otherwise you
will but trifle as now you have done: For instead of telling us what may be
done de jure, you tell us what of Old has been done de facto. As if ab antiquo,
and a principio were all one; or as if the Church (as we pretend) being subject
to corruption, part of this corruption might not possibly have come in S.
Austins or Theodorets time; yet this I say not, as if I would decline the Trial
of this cause by S. Austin or Theodoret; but because I am sure you will not be
Tried by the Fathers, no not the consent of Fathers in all things: and
therefore there is no reason nor equity in the World, that you should serve
your selves with their Authority in any thing.

But now what is it, which was done in S. Austins time, that may justify the
Practice of the Roman Church? was there then any approved offering of Wax,
Tapers and Incense, to the Queen of Heaven or any other Saint? nil horum: you
neither do nor can produce any thing out of S. Austin to this purpose. But what
then is it? Why forsooth, they were used to adorn their Tombs: Egregiam vero
laudem and spolia ampla; of Old in S. Austins time they were used to adorn
their Tombs with Flowers, therefore we may offer Tapers to them. Truly an
excellent Enthymeme, but I fear the concealed proposition which should make it
a Syllogism, hides its head for shame and dares not appear: yet we will for
once make bold to draw it forth into light, that you may look upon it and tell
us how you like it. This therefore it is.

Whose soever Tombs we adorn, to them and to their honor we may offer Wax
Tapers.

Consider it I pray you, and if you approve it, then approve also of offering
Tapers not only to Canonize Saints, but to all Christians that may have
Monuments in Churches. For all their Tombs may be adorned, with more precious
and lasting Ornaments than Flowers; yet if you had proved but this only, that
in S. Austins time, they adorned the Saints Tombs with Flowers by these outward
signs to procure their Intercession; this, though not much to the purpose, had
been not absolutely to delude us. But your quoted places prove not so much as
this; and yet I believe you quoted the best you could find. Nay they prove not
they did adorn their Tombs with Flowers at all, much less that they did it for
your pretended purpose; such fools you think to deal with, that will take any
thing for any thing. Your first place, I say, proves it not, unless out of mere
courtesy we understand by ferebat, she brought to adorn S. Stephens Tomb.

The Second proves it not, unless we give you leave after Altari (without
warrant from S. Austin) to put in, S. Stephani, whereas I am yet to seek for
any place in S. Austin, where he calls any Altar, the Altar of such or such a
Saint, which yet I think they forbore not for the unlawfulness, but for fear of
misconstruction.

Then for Theodoret, he tells us indeed of Vows made, of monuments of
thankfulness dedicated, for benefits obtained by the intercession of the
Martyrs. But here also I fear your Conscience tells you, that you abuse us and
hide your self in ambiguities. For to whom does Theodoret say these Vows were
made? to whom were these monuments of thankfulness dedicated? What, to the
Author? or Procures of the received favors? To God, or to the Martyrs? If to
the Martyrs, that had been something toward, though not home to your purpose:
For there is a a wide difference between offering of a Creature by way of
Consumption (as was never lawfully done but to God alone, as a profession that
he is the Lord of the Creature) and erecting a permanent Monument to a Saints
honor; which I doubt not but it may lawfully be done to a living Saint, much
more to the memory of a Martyr. But Theodoret in the place, has not so much as
this: Nay it is evident that these gifts he speaks of, were both Vowed and
paid to God himself. His words are -- Pie precatos ea consequi, etc. -- that
they which pray piously, obtain the things which they desire, they paying of
their Vowed presents in the sign of their recovered health, does abundantly
testify. For their Lord accepts most graciously these presents how mean so
ever.

6. Demand. Whether according to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, this may not
be done lawfully by Women and Children, and men that are not Priests?

Answ. They may offer any thing by way of gifts and presents, by the Doctrine
of the Roman Church; But it is contrary to the Roman Doctrine, for any other
than Priests, to offer any thing by way of Sacrifice, as the Collyridians did.

Reply. Aristotle says most truly, that true Definitions (he means I think of
the terms of the conclusion to be demonstrated) are the best principles of
Science: and therefore want of them, must needs be a cause of Error and
confusion in any discourse. Let me therefore here request you to set down what
is a Sacrifice, and how distinguished from an oblation by way of gift or
present, and you will quickly see, that if the Collyridians offering a Cake to
the Blessed Virgin were indeed a Sacrifice, your offering a Taper to her, must
likewise be so. For a Sacrifice is nothing else (for ought I know) but the
oblation of any Creature by way of Consumption, to the honor of that,
whatsoever it is, to which it is offered. For if you include in the definition,
that this offering must be intended to the highest Lord of all: So is, as you
pretend, your offering of Tapers to the Blessed Virgin, intended to God
finally, though not immediately. If you say it must be directed immediately to
him; and is, not only no lawful Sacrifice, but simply no Sacrifice unless it be
so: I say you may as well require to the essence of a Sacrifice, that it be
offered by a Priest, and from thence conclude, because the Collyridians were,
you say, no Priests, their offering was no Sacrifice. For the object of the
Action is as extrinsecal to the essence of it, as the efficient; And therefore
if the defect of a due and legitimate Offerer, cannot hinder but that an
offering may be a true Sacrifice, neither will the want of a due and lawful
object be any hindrance but still it may be so. Secondly, I say, this is to
confound the essence of things with the lawful use of them; in effect as if you
should say, that a Knife, if misimployed, were a Knife no longer. Thirdly, it
is to make it not unlawful, to offer Incense (which yet you seem somewhat
scrupulous of) or Burnt-offerings to the Virgin Mary, or the Saints, or even to
living Men, provided you know and believe and profess them to be Men and not
Gods. For this once supposed, these offerings will be no longer Sacrifices, and
to offer to Creatures offerings that are not Sacrifices, you say, by the
Doctrine of the Roman Church is lawful: It is lastly, to deny (which is most
ridiculous) that the Pagans did indeed Sacrifice to any of their inferior Gods.

7. Demand. If it be said, that this worship which they give to the Blessed
Virgin is not that of Latria, but that of Dulia or Hyperdulia, for that they do
not esteem her God: or if it be said, that their worship to her is not finally
terminated neither, but given her for her relation to Christ. I demand, whether
as it is, in S. Paul's judgment, a great crime for him that knows God, not to
worship him as God, so it be not as great a crime, for him that knows her not
to be God, yet to worship her (as if she were God) with the worship which is
proper and has been always appropriated to God alone, such is the worship of
oblations?

Answ. The worship of oblations, as worship is taken largly for honor, and
oblations for a gift or present, was never appropriate to God alone; take
worship and oblations in any higher sense, and so it is not allowed in the
Church of Rome.

Reply. The oblation of things by way of Consumption, is the worship I spoke
of; this is a higher matter, than that of gifts and presents, and this is
allowed in the Church of Rome, to be employed on, and directed into, (though
not terminated in) the Virgin Mary and other Saints.

8. Demand. Whether any thing can be said for the justifying the Doctrine and
practice of the Roman Church in this matter, which might not also have been as
justly pretended, for the justification of the Collyridians in their opinion
and practice; seeing it was never imputed to them, that they accounted the
Blessed Virgin God, or that they believed in more Gods than one. And seeing
their choosing her out, rather than any other Woman or any other Creature for
the object of their Devotion, shows plainly, that they gave it her for her
Relation to Christ?

Answ. The Collyridians could not say this, as appears by what has been said
before: As it is a most shameless slander upon Gods Church, and such as
(without repentance) will lie heavy upon his Soul that uttered it, that the
Collyridians might as justly and truly have said all this for themselves as
Papists for themselves.

Reply. To this I reply four things. 1. That to my last and most convincing
reason, you have answered (as much as you could I believe, but yet you have
answered) nothing; and I am well content you should do so; for where nothing is
to be had, the King himself must lose his right. 2. That if I had thought or
spoke better of the Collyridians than they deserved, yet I cannot see how this
had been to slander the Church of Rome. 3. That I did not positively affirm,
that the Collyridians might do so, but desired only it might be inquired into
and examined, whether for the reasons alleged they might not do so. 4. And
lastly, upon a through examination of the matter, I do now affirm, what before I
did not, that the Collyridians for ought appears to the contrary, might justly
and truly have said for the justification of their practice, as much, nay the
very same things that the Papists do for theirs. For they might have said, we
are Christians and believe the Scripture, and believe there is but one God. We
offer not to the Blessed Virgin, as believing she is God, but the Mother of
God: our worship of her is not absolute but relative, not terminated in her,
but given to her for her Sons sake: And if our practice may be allowed, we are
content to call our Oblation, not a Sacrifice, but a present: neither is there
any reason, why it should be called a Sacrifice, more than the Offering and
Burning a Taper to the honor of the same Virgin. All this the Collyridians
might have said for themselves: and therefore I believe, you will have more
cause to repent you for daubing over impiety with untempered Mortar, than I
shall have for slandering the Roman Church with a matter of truth.

9. Demand. Whether therefore, one of the two must not of necessity follow:
that either the Ancient Church Erred in condemning the Opinion and Practice of
the Collyridians as Heretical, or else that the Church of Rome Errs, in
approving the same opinion, and the same practice in effect, which in them was
condemned. That is, whether the Church of Rome must not be Heretical with the
Collyridians, or else the Collyridians Catholics with the Church of Rome?

Answ. It appears by the former answers, that neither did the Ancient Church
Err, in condemning the opinion and practice of the Collyridians, as Heretical,
nor does the Church of Rome approve the same opinion or the same practice.

Reply. The Substance of the former answers is but this. That the Papists offer
to the Virgin Mary and other Saints Wax Tapers by way of gift or present, not
of Sacrifice; and to her not as to a God, but as the Mother of God: but that
the Collyridians offered to her by way of Sacrifice, as to a Sovereign Power
and Deity. To this I have replied and proved, that it no way appears, that the
Collyridians did believe the Blessed Virgin to be a Sovereign Power and Deity,
or that she was not subordinate to God. Then that their offering might be
called a gift, as well as the Papists, and the Papists a Sacrifice as well as
theirs; both of them being a Consumption of a Creature in honor of the Blessed
Virgin, and neither of them more than so: and therefore either the Collyridians
must stand with the Church of Rome, or the Church of Rome fall with the
Collyridians. It had been perhaps sufficient for me, thus to have vindicated my
Assertion from contrary objections, without taking on my self the burden of
proving a Negative: yet to free from all doubt the conformity of the Roman
Church with the Collyridians, in this point, I think it will be necessary to
show, and that by many very probable Arguments, that Epiphanius did not impute
to them the pretended Heresy of believing the Virgin Mary God: for then that
other Evasion, that their oblation is a Sacrifice and the Papists is not,
together with this pretense will of it self fall to the ground.

Now an opinion may be imputed to a man two ways: either because he holds and
maintains it expressly and formally and in terms: or because it may by a
rational deduction be collected from some other opinion which he does hold: In
this latter sense I deny not but Epiphanius might impute this opinion we speak
of to the Collyridians, as a consequence upon their practice, which practice
they esteemed lawful. But that they held it and owned it formally and in terms,
this I say Epiphanius does not impute to them, which I think for these seven
reasons.

My first Reason is, because he could not justly do so, and therefore without
evident proof we may not say he did so: for this were to be uncharitable to
him, in making him uncharitable to others. Now I say he could not justly charge
them with this opinion, because he was not informed of any such opinion that
they held, but only of their practice, and this practice was no sufficient
proof that they held this opinion. That his information reached no further than
their Practice, appears out of his own Words. I have heard (says he. Haeres.
78.) another thing with great astonishment: that some being madly affected to
the Blessed Virgin, endeavor to bring her in in Gods place, being mad and
besides themselves: For they report that certain Women in Arabia have devised
this Vanity, to have meetings, and offer a Cake to the Blessed Virgin: The same
practice he sets down Haeres. 79. But that he was informed of any such opinion
that they held, he has not a Word or Syllable to any such purpose; and yet if
he had been informed of any, here had been the place to set it down: which
certainly writing his Book rather of Heretical opinions than practices, he
would not have omitted to do; if there had been occasion: his silence therefore
is a sufficient Argument, that he was not informed of any such opinion that
they held.

Now that their practice was no assurance that they held this opinion, it is
manifest; because they might ground it not upon this opinion that she was God,
but upon another as false, though not altogether so impious, That the Worship
of Oblations was not proper to God alone. And therefore, though Epiphanius
might think or fear that possibly they might ground their practice upon that
other impious opinion, and therefore out of abundant caution confute that also,
as he does obliquely and in a word, and once only in all his long discourse, by
telling them that our Savior called her Woman; yet he had no ground from their
practice to assure himself, that certainly they did hold so. Nay Justice and
Reason and Charity would, that he should incline himself to believe, that they
grounded their practice upon that other opinion, which had less impiety in it,
that is, that this worship of Oblations, was not proper to God, but
communicable to Creatures high in his favor.

My second is, Because if Epiphanius had known, that these Collyridians held
the Blessed Virgin to be a Supreme Power and Deity; this being a far greater
matter than offering a Cake to her, should in all probability rather have given
them their denomination: at least when he sets down what their Heresy was, he
would have made this part of it, that they did believe so: But to the contrary,
in his Anacaephaleosis, p. 130. he thus describes them. They that offer to the
name of the Blessed Virgin Cakes, who are called Collyridians. And again, p.
150. They that offer to the Blessed Virgin Cakes who are called Collyridians:
So to the 79th. Heresy he gives this Title, Against the Collyridians who offer
to Mary: So Haeres. 78, and 79. He sets down what he heard of them; but no
where that they held this opinion of her: I conclude therefore, that he never
conceived this opinion to be a part of their Heresy, and they were no further
chargeable with it, than as a probable consequent upon their practice.

My third is, Because had the Collyridians held her God, they would have
worshipped her all the year long, and not only once a year at a Solemn time, as
Epiphanius says they did.

My fourth is, Because if Epiphanius had known that they held her God, he would
questionless have urged them with those Attributes that are given to God in
Scripture, as Eternity, Immortallity, Impossibility, Omnipotence, etc. And
showed them, that if they believed the Scripture, they could not think of her
any of those things; if they did not, they had no reason to think of her any
thing more than of an ordinary Woman.

My fifth is, because had their opinion been, that the Blessed Virgin was God;
a great part of Epiphanius's discourse were plainly ridiculous; both where he
says only without proof, she was not a God but a Mortal Creature, which to them
that held the contrary should not have been said, but proved: But especially
where he speaks to this purpose (as he does very frequently) that the honor of
Oblations was not to be given to Angels or Men, much less to Women, but only to
God: for what had that been to the Collyridians, if they thought her (as is
pretended) a Sovereign Power and Deity? to what purpose was it for Epiphanius
to ask, Quis prophetam; What prophet ever permitted, that a Man, much less a
Woman should be adored, though he be yet alive. Nor John nor Tecla, nor any
other Saint. For neither shall the Old Superstition have dominion over us, that
leaving the Living God, we should Adore his Creatures. To what end I say was
all this, if they thought her not a Saint nor Creature, but God himself and the
Lord of all? How did this Argument touch them? Ne Angelos quidem -- He suffers
not the very Angels to be adored, how much less the Daughter of Anna? if they
thought her not the Daughter of Anna, but God Eternal; In vain had it been to
say to them -- Not to a Woman, no nor to a Man, but to God alone, is this
mystery (of Oblation) due. So that the Angels themselves are not fit Subjects
for such an honor. Or again, Let the Creature be turned to the Creator: Let
shame at length compel you to worship God alone: Or lastly, that so often
repeated -- Let Mary be honored, but the Lord only adored. For they might have
answered all this in a word, saying, All this discourse sits besides the
Cushion, and concerns us and our offering nothing at all. For we believe the
Blessed Virgin to whom we offer neither Man nor Woman, nor Angel, nor Creature,
but a Deity.

A Sixth Reason let it be this, If Epiphanius did indeed say of the
Collyridians as is pretended, That they held the Virgin Mary God, and so
difference their practice from the Papists: Then the Author of this Answer and
Petavius in his Translation, needed not to have dictated to him what he should
say, nor make him say so whether he will or no: But it is evident they do so,
as of the Author of this Answer I have already shown: and for Petavius his
part, I will so present it to your view, that if you will not shut your Eyes,
you shall not choose but see it.

First then, Haeres. 78. prope fin. he (Petavius) sets in his Margent, quidam
Deum Mariam esse, crediderunt; and to countenance this with a loquuntur of his
own putting in, makes them speak of her like mad Men, i. e. they said she was
God: whereas in Epiphanius's Greek they say just nothing.

Secondly, To fasten the pretended Opinion on them, he translates (...) Novum
dogma: presuming it seems (...) would easily be mistaken for (...), and
therefore means nothing by it, but a vanity or folly.

Thirdly, He translates (...), Illud; and so makes it look backward to that
pretended Novum dogma of the Collyridians; whereas it signifies there [And] and
looks forward to their practice.

Fourthly, With the help of a Colon, he stops the sense at Commentas fuisse,
whereas in Epiphanius there is but a Comma, and the sense goes on without
suspension.

Fifthly, With an adeo ut, he brings in their action, as an effect of their
former opinion; whereas Epiphanius lays nothing to their charge but their
Action only: So that whereas Epiphanius his words truly translated run thus:
Another thing I have received with great astonishment, that others being mad
concerning the Blessed Virgin, have and do go about to bring her in, in the
place of God, being mad, I say, and besides themselves: For they report that
certain Women in Arabia have brought this vanity of offering a Cake to her
name. Petavius makes them thus -- Not without admiration we have heard another
thing, that some in these things that concern the most holy Virgin have
proceeded to that degree of madness, that they would obtrude her upon us for a
God, and speak of her as madmen: For they report that certain Women in Arabia,
have invented that new Opinion: so that to the Virgins name and honor, they
offer by way of sacrifice a Cake or wreath of Bread.

Again in the same Haeres. (...), he translates advantageously -- per mulieres
sacrificia facere. Whereas (...) is more general than sacrificia facere, and
signifies sacris operari, or sacros ritus peragere.

Again, in the same place, whereas Epiphanius says simply and absolutely -- Let
no man offer to her name, he makes it, Let no man offer sacrifice to her name;
as if you might lawfully offer any thing provided you do not call it a
sacrifice.

So again Haeres. 79. besides his putting cunningly -- ipsa fuit -- which
before we took notice of; he makes no scruple to put in Dogma and Sacrificium,
wheresoever it may be for his purpose. Epiphanius his title to this Heresy is,
Against the Collyridians who offer to Mary -- Petavius puts in -- Sacrifice.

Again in the same page, before D. he puts in his own illo dogmate, and whereas
Epiphanius says -- in all this, he makes it, in all this Opinion.

Page 1061. (...), he translates, this womanish Opinion, whereas (...) though
perhaps it may signify a thought, or act of thinking, yet I believe it never
signifies an Opinion which we hold.

Ibid. at B. (...) -- this -- he renders this Opinion.

Page 1064. at C. Nor that we should offer to her name, simply and absolutely:
he makes it, -- Nor that we should offer sacrifice to her name. So many times
is he fain to corrupt, and translate him partially, lest in condemning the
Collyridians, he might seem to have involved the practice of the Roman Church
in the same Condemnation.

My Seventh and last Reason is this. Had Epiphanius known that the Collyridians
held the virgin Mary to be a Sovereign power and Deity, then he could not have
doubted, whether this their offering was to her or to God for her: whereof yet
he seems doubtful and not fully resolved, as his own words intimate, Haeres.
79. ad fin. Quam multa etc. How many things may be objected against this
Heresy? for idle Women either worshipping the Blessed Virgin, offer unto her a
Cake, or else they take upon them to offer for her this foresaid ridiculous
oblation. Now both are foolish and from the Devil.

These Arguments I suppose do abundantly demonstrate to any man not viel'd with
prejudice, that Epiphanius imputed not to the Collyridians the Heresy of
believing the Virgin Mary God: and if they did not think her God, there is then
no reason imaginable why their oblation of a Cake, should not be thought a
Present, as well as the Papists offering a Taper, or that the Papists offering
a Taper, should not be thought a Sacrifice, as well as their offering a Cake;
and seeing this was the difference pretended between them, this being vanished
there remains none at all; So that my first Conclusion stands yet firm; that
either the Ancient Church erred in condemning the Collyridians, or the present
errs in approving and practicing the same worship.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
The Reader when he meets with the Phrase Catholic Doctrine, in the two
following Discourses, must remember, that it does not signify Articles of
Faith determined in any General Councils, which might be looked upon as the
Faith of the whole Church; but the Current and Common Opinion of the Age, which
obtained in it without any known opposition and contradiction. Neither need
this be wondered at, since they are about matters far removed from the Common
Faith of Christians, and having no necessary influence upon good life and
manners, whatsoever necessity, by mistake of some Scriptures, might be put upon
them.

IV. An Argument drawn from the admitting Infants to the Eucharist, as without
which they could not be saved, against the Churches Infallibility.
THE Condition without the performance whereof no man can be admitted to the
Communion of the Church of Rome, is this; that he believe firmly and without
doubting, whatsoever the Church requires him to believe: More distinctly and
particularly thus:

He must believe all that to be divine Revelation which that Church teaches to
be such; as the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Hypostatical union of two natures
in the person of Christ. The procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and
the Son: the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and such like.

Whatsoever that Church teaches to be necessary, he must believe to be
necessary. As Baptism for Infants; Faith in Christ, for those that are Capable
of Faith; Penance for those that have committed mortal sin after Baptism, etc.

Whatsoever that Church declares expedient and profitable, he must believe to
be expedient and profitable: as Monastical Life: Prayer to Saints: Prayer for
the Dead: going on Pilgrimages: The use of Pardons: Veneration of holy Images
and Relics: Latin Service where the people understand it not: Communicating
the Laity in one kind and such like.

Whatsoever that Church holds lawful, he must believe lawful: As to Marry: to
make distinction of Meats, as if some were clean and others unclean: to fly in
time of Persecution: for them that serve at the Altar, to live by the Altar: to
testify a truth by Oath, when a lawful Magistrate shall require it: to possess
Riches, etc.

Now is it impossible that any man should certainly believe any thing; unless
either it be evident of it self, or he have some certain reason (at least some
supposed certain reason) and infallible ground for his belief. Now the Doctrins
which the Church of Rome teaches, it is evident and undeniable that they are
not evident of themselves, neither evidently true nor evidently credible. He
therefore that will believe them, must of necessity have some certain and
infallible ground whereon to build his belief of them.

There is no other ground for a Man's belief of them, especially in many points,
but only an assurance of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome. No man can be
assured that that Church is infallible and cannot err, whereof he may be
assured that she has erred, unless she had some new promise of divine
assistance, which might for the future secure her from danger of erring; but
the Church of Rome pretends to none such.

Nothing is more certain, than that that Church has erred, which has believed
and taught irreconcilable Contradictions, one whereof must of necessity be an
Error.

That the Receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist is necessary for Infants,
and that the receiving thereof is not necessary for them: That it is the will
of God, that the Church should administer the Sacrament to them; and that it is
not the will of God that the Church should do so; are manifest and
irreconcilable Contradictions: Supposing only, (that which is most evident)
that the Eucharist is the same thing, of the same virtue and efficacy now, as
it was in the primitive Church: That Infants are the same things they were,
have as much need, are capable of as much benefit by the Eucharist, now as
then: As subject to irreverent carriages, then as now. And lastly, that the
present Church is as much bound to provide for the spiritual good of Infants,
as the Ancient Church was: I say these things supposed, the propositions before
set down are plain and irreconcilable Contradictions: whereof the present
Roman Church does hold the Negative, and the Ancient Church of Rome did hold
the Affirmative; and therefore it is evident, that either the present Church
does err, in holding something not necessary, which is so; or that the Ancient
Church did err, in holding something necessary, which was not so.

For the Negative Proposition, viz. That the Eucharist is not necessary for
Infants; that it is the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome it is most
manifest. 1. From the disuse and abolition and prohibition of the contrary
Ancient practice. For if the Church did conceive it necessary for them, either
simply for their salvation, or else for their increase or confirmation in
grace, and advancement to a higher degree of glory (unless she could supply
some other way their damage in this thing, which evidently she cannot) what an
uncharitable sacrilege is it, to debar and defraud them of the necessary means
of their so great spiritual benefit? especially seeing the administration of it
might be so ordered, that irreverent casualties might easily be prevented:
which yet should they fall out against the Churches and Pastors intention,
certainly could not offend God, and in reason should not offend man. Or if the
Church do believe, that upon such a vain fear of irreverence (which we see
moved not the Ancient Church at all) she may lawfully forbid such a general,
perpetual and necessary charity, certainly herein she commits a far greater
error than the former. Secondly, from the Council of Trents Anathema, denounced
on all that hold the contrary, in these words. If any man say that the
receiving of the Eucharist, is necessary for little children, before they come
to years of discretion, let him be Anathema. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. de
communione parvulorum, Can. 4.

Now for the Affirmative part of the Contradiction, to make it evident that
that was the Doctrine of the Ancient Church; I will prove it, First, from the
general practice of the Ancient Church for several Ages. Secondly, by the
direct and formal Testimonies of the Fathers of those times. Thirdly, by the
confession of the most learned Antiquaries of the Roman Church. My First
Argument I form thus. If to communicate Infants was the general practice of the
Ancient Church for many Ages; then certainly the Church then believed, that the
Eucharist was necessary for them, and very available for their Spiritual
benefit: But it is certain, that the Communicating of Infants was the general
practice of the Church for many Ages: Therefore the Church of those times
thought it necessary for them. To deny the consequence of the proposition, is
to charge the Church with extreme folly, wilful superstition, and perpetual
profanation of the Blessed Sacrament. As for the Assumption, it is fully
confirmed by Clemens Romans Constit. Apost. l. 3. c. 20. Dionysius Areopagita de
Eccles. Hierarch. cap. ult. S. Cyprian and a Council of African Bishops with
him, Epist. 59. ad Fidum; and in his Treatise de Lapsis p. 137. Edit. Pamel.
Paulinus Bishop of Nola in Italy, An. 353. in Epist. 12. ad Senem; out of Ordo
Romanus, cited by Alevinus S. Bedes Scholar and Master to Charlemain in his
Book de divinis officiis cap. de Sab. Sancto Pasc. Gennadius Massiliensis de
Eccles. dogmatibus c. 52. Council. Toletanum 2. Can. 11. It continued in the
Western Church, unto the days of Jews the Debonair, witness Cardinal Perron
des passages de S. Austin p. 100. Some footsteps of it remained there in the
time of Hugo de S. Victore, as you may see lib. 1. de Sacram. and Caerem, cap.
20. It was the practice of the Church of the Armenians in Waldensis his time,
as he relates out of Guido the Carmelite, Tom. 2. de Sacr. c. 91. de erroribus
Armenorum. It is still in force in the Church of the Abyssines, witness Franc.
Alvarez. Hist. Aethiop. c. 22. and Thomas a Jesu de procuranda salute omnium
gentium. It has continued without any interruption in the Greek Church, unto
this present Age, as may be evidently gathered out of Lyranus in c. 6. John.
Arcudius lib. 1. c. 14. and lib. 3. c. 40. de concord. Eccles. Orient. and
Occident. in Sacram. administratione; Card. Perron des passages de S. Austin.
p. 100. where he also assures us of the Primitive Church in general, that she
gave Infants the Eucharist as soon as they were baptized: and that the custom
of giving this Sacrament to little Infants the Church then observed: and before
p. 21. That in those Ages it was always given to Infants together with Baptism.
The same is likewise acknowledged by Contzen in John 6. ver. 54. and by Thomas
a Jesu de proc. salute omnium gentium. So that this matter of the practice of
the Ancient Church is sufficiently cleared. Seeing therefore the Ancient Church
did use this Custom, and could have no other ground for it, but their belief
that this Sacrament was necessary for Infants, it follows necessarily, that the
Church then did believe it necessary.

But deductions, though never so evident, are superfluous and may be set aside,
where there is such abundance of direct and formal Authentical Testimonies;
whereof some speak in Thesi, of the necessity of the Eucharist for all men,
others in Hypothesi, of the necessity of it for Infants.

My Second Argument, from the Testimonies of the Fathers of those times I form
thus. That Doctrine, in the affirmative whereof the most eminent Fathers of the
ancient Church agree, and which none of their contemporaries have opposed or
condemned, ought to be taken for the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of those
times.

But the most eminent Fathers of the Ancient Church agree in the Affirmation of
this Doctrine, that the Eucharist is necessary for Infants; and none of their
contemporaries have opposed or condemned it. Ergo, it ought to be taken for the
Catholic Doctrine of the Church of their times. The Major of this Syllogism is
delivered and fully proved by Card. Perron, in his Letter to Casaubon 5. obs.
and is indeed so reasonable a postulate, that none but a contentious spirit can
reject it.

For confirmation of the Minor, I will allege, first, their sentences, which
in Thesi affirm the Eucharist to be generally necessary for all, and therefore
for Infants: and then their Suffrages, who in Hypothesi avouch the necessity of
it for Infants.

The most pregnant Testimonies of the first rank are these: Of Iraeneus lib. 4.
cont. Here Is. c. 34. where he makes our Union to Christ by the Eucharist, the
foundation of the hope of our resurrection, in these words. As the bread of
Earth, after the Invocation of God, is now not common bread, but the Eucharist,
consisting of two things an earthly and an heavenly: so our bodies receiving
the Eucharist, are not now corruptible (for ever) but have hope of
resurrection. The like he has, lib. 5. c. 2. And hence in probability it is,
that the Nicene Council styled this Sacrament, Symbolum resurrectionis, the
pledge of our Resurrection. And Ignatius Ep. ad Ephesians. Pharmacum Immortalitatis,
the Medicine of Immortality.

Cyril. Alex. lib. 4. in Joan. They shall never partake, nor so much as taste,
the life of holiness and happiness, which receive not the Son in the mystical
Benediction. Cyril. lib. 10. in Joan. c. 13. and lib. 11. c. 27. This
corruptible nature of our body, could not otherwise be brought to life and
immortality, unless this body of natural life were conjoined unto it. The very
same things says Gregory Nyssen. Orat. Catech. c. 37. And that they both speak
of our conjunction with Christ by the Eucharist, the Antecedents and
Consequents do fully manifest, and it is a thing confessed by learned
Catholics.

Cyprian de coena Domini, and Tertullian de resur. carnis, speak to the same
purpose: But I have not their Books by me, and therefore cannot set down their
words. S. Chrysostom, Hom. 47. in Joh. on these words, nisi manducaveritis, has
many pregnant and plain speeches to our purpose. As, the words here spoken are
very terrible: verily, says he, if a man eat not my flesh, and drink not my
blood, he has no life in him; for whereas they said before, this could not be
done, he shows it not only not impossible, but also very necessary. And a
little after; he often iterates his speech concerning the holy mysteries,
showing the necessity of the thing, and that by all means it must be done. And
again, what means that which he says, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed; either that this is the true meat that saves the soul; or to
confirm them in the faith of what he had spoken, that they should not think he
spoke Enigmatically, or parabolically, but knew that by all means they must eat
his body.

But most clear and unanswerable is that place lib. 3. de Sacerdotio, where he
says, If a man cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven unless he be born again
of water and the holy spirit; and if he which eats not the flesh of our Lord
and drinks not his blood, is cast out of eternal life: And all these things
cannot be done by any other, but only by those holy hands, the hands, I say of
the Priest, how then without their help can any man, either avoid the fire of
hell, or obtain the Crowns laid up for us.

Theophylact. in 6. Joan. when therefore we hear, that unless we eat the flesh
of the Son of man, we cannot have life, we must have faith without doubting in
the receiving of the divine mysteries, and never inquire how: for the natural
man, that is he which follows humane, that is, natural reasons, receives not
the things which are above nature and spiritual; as also he understands not the
spiritual meat of the flesh of our Lord, which they that receive not, shall not
be partakers of eternal life, as not receiving Jesus, who is the true life. S.
Austin de pec. mer. and Remis. c. 24. Very well do the puny Christians call
Baptism nothing else but salvation; and the Sacrament of Christ's Body nothing
else but Life; from whence should this be, but as I believe from the Ancient
and Apostolical Tradition, by which this Doctrine is implanted into the Churches
of Christ, that but by Baptism and the participation of the Lords Table, not
any man can attain, neither to the Kingdom of God, nor to salvation and eternal
life.

Now we are taught by the learned Cardinal; that when the Fathers speak, not as
Doctors, but as witnesses of the Customs of the Church of their times; and do
not say, I believe this should be so holden, or so understood, or so observed,
but that the Church from one end of the earth to the other believes it so, or
observes it so; then we no longer hold what they say, for a thing said by them,
but as a thing said by the whole Church; and principally when it is in points,
whereof they could not be ignorant, either because of the condition of the
things, as in matters of fact; or because of the sufficiency of the persons:
and in this case, we argue no more upon their words probably, as we do when
they speak in the quality of particular Doctors, but we argue thereupon
demonstratively.

I subsume. But S. Austin the sufficientest person which the Church of his time
had, speaking of a point, wherein he could not be ignorant; says not that I
believe the Eucharist to be necessary to salvation; but the Churches of Christ
believe so, and have received this doctrine from Apostolical Tradition:
Therefore I argue upon his words not probably, but demonstratively, that this
was the Catholic doctrine of the Church of his time. And thus much for the
Thesis, That the Eucharist was held generally necessary for all. Now for the
Hypothesis; That the Eucharist was held necessary for Infants in particular.
Witnesses hereof are S. Cyprian, Pope Innocentius I. and Eusebius Emissenus,
with S. Austin together with the Author of the Book entitled Hypognostica.

Cyprian indeed does not in terms affirm it, but we have a very clear
intimation of it in his Epistle to Fidus. For whereas he and a Council of
Bishops together with him, had ordered, that Infants might be baptized and
sacrificed, that is, communicated before the eighth day, though that were the
day appointed for Circumcision by the old Law. There he sets down this as the
reason of their Decree, that the mercy and grace of God, was to be denied to no
man.

Pope Innocent the first, (in Ep. ad Epis. Conc. Milev. quae est inter August.
93.) concludes against the Pelagians; that Infants could not attain eternal
life without Baptism; because without Baptism they were incapable of the
Eucharist, and without the Eucharist could not have eternal life. His words
are, but that which your Fraternity affirms them to Preach, that Infants
without the grace of Baptism may have the rewards of eternal life, is certainly
most foolish; for unless they eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood; they shall have no life in them.

Now that this sense which I have given his words, is indeed the true sense of
them, and that his judgment upon the point was as I have said; it is
acknowledged by Maldonate in Joan. 6. v. 54. by Binius upon the Councils Tom.
1. p. 624. by Sanctesius, Repet. 6. c. 7. and it is affirmed by S. Austin who
was his Contemporary, held correspondence by Letters with him, and therefore in
all probability could not be ignorant of his meaning. I say he affirms it, as a
matter out of Question, Epist. 106. and Cont. Julian. lib. 1. c. 4. where he
tells that Pelagius in denying this, did dispute contra sedis Apostolicae
authoritatem; against the authority of the Sea Apostolic; and after, but if
they yield to the Sea Apostolic, or rather to the Master himself and Lord of
the Apostles, who says, that they shall not have life in them, unless they eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, which none may do but those
that are baptized; then at length they will confess, that Infants not baptized
cannot have life.

Now I suppose no man will doubt, but the belief of the Apostolic Sea; was
then (as S. Austin assures us l. 1. cont. Jul. c. 4.) the belief of the Church
of Rome, taking it for a particular Church: and then it will presently follow,
that either other Churches do not think themselves bound in conformity of
belief with the Roman Church, notwithstanding Irenaeus his -- necesse est ad
hanc Ecclesiam, omnem convenire Ecclesiam: or that this was then the Doctrine of
the Catholic Church. For Eusebius Emissenus I cannot quote any particular
proof out of him: but his belief in this point is acknowledged by Sanctes.
Repet. 6. c. 7. Likewise for S. Austin, the same Sanctesius and Binius, and
Maldonate, either not mindful or not regardful of the Anathema of the Council
of Trent, acknowledge (in the places above quoted) that he was also of the same
belief: and indeed he professes it so plainly and so frequently, that he must
be a mere stranger to him that knows it not, and very impudent that denies it.
Eucharistiam infantibus putet necessariam Augustinus, say also the Divines of
Lovaine, in their Index to their Edition of S. Austin: and they refer us in
their Index only to Tom. 2. page 185. that is, to the 106. Epist. (the words
whereof I have already quoted to show the meaning of Innocentius) and to Tom.
7. page 282. that is, lib. 1. de pec. Mer. and remis. c. 20. where his words
are; Let then all doubt be taken away: Let us hear our Lord I say, saying not
of the Sacrament of Holy Baptism, but of the Sacrament of his Table (to which
none may lawfully come, but he which has been baptized) unless you eat the
flesh of the Son and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you; what seek
we any further? what can be answered hereunto? What, will any man dare to say,
that this appertains not to little Children, and that without the participation
of his body and blood, they may have Life? etc. with much more to the same
effect. Which places are indeed so plain and pregnant for that purpose, that I
believe they thought it needless to add more: otherwise had they pleased they
might have furnished their Index with many more referrences to this point; as
de Pec. Mer. and Rem. l. 1. c. 24. where of Baptism and the Eucharist he tells
us, that Salus and vita eterna sine his frustra promittitur parvulis. The same
he has Cont. 2. Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium l. 1. c. 22. which yet by Gratian
de Consec. D. 3. c. Nulli. and by Tho. Aquinas p. 3. q. 3. art. 9. ad tertiam
is strangely corrupted and made to say the contrary, and l. 4. c. 4. the same
Cont. Julian. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 3. c. 11. and 12. Cont. Pelag. and Celest. l.
2. c. 8. de Praedest. Sanctorum ad Prosp. and Hilar. l. 1. cap. 14. Neither
does he retract or contradict this opinion any where, nor mitigate any one of
his sentences touching this matter, in his Book of Retractations. Sanctesius
indeed tells us, that he seems to have departed from his Opinion, in his works
against the Donatists. But I would he had showed some probable reason to make
it seem so to others; which seeing he does not, we have reason to take time to
believe him. For as touching the place mentioned by Beda in 1. ad Corinth. 10.
as taken out of a Sermon of S. Austins, ad infantes ad Altar. Besides that it
is very strange S. Austin should make a Sermon to Infants; and that there is no
such Sermon extant in his works; nor any memory of any such in Possidius, S.
Austins Scholars Catalogue of his works, nor in his Book of Retractaitons:
setting aside all this, I say First, That it is no way certain that he speaks
there of Infants, seeing in propriety of speech (as S. Austin himself teaches
us Ep. 23) Infants were not Fideles, of whom S. Austin in that supposed Sermon
speaks. Secondly, Admit he does speak of Infants, where he assures us, that in
Baptism every faithful man is made partaker of Christ's body and blood, and that
he shall not be alienated from the benefit of the Bread and Cup, although he
depart this life, before he eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. All this
concludes no more, but that the actual participation of the Eucharist, is not a
means simply necessary to attain salvation, so that no impossibility shall
excuse the failing of it: Whereas all that I aim at is but this, that in the
judgment of the Ancient Church, it was believed necessary, in case of
possibility; necessary, not in actu, but in voto Ecclesiae: not necessary to
salvation simply, but necessary for the increase of grace and glory: And
therefore, Lastly, though not necessary by necessity of means, for Infants to
receive it; yet necessary by necessity of precepts for the Church to give it.

The last witness I promised, was the Author of the work against the Pelagians
called Hypognostica, who ( l. 5. c. 5.) ask the Pelagians, Seeing he himself
has said, unless you eat the flesh, etc. How dare you promise eternal life to
little Children, not regenerate of water and the Holy Ghost; not having eaten
his flesh, nor drank his blood. And a little after, Behold then, he that is not
Baptized, and he that is destitute of the Bread and Cup of life, is separated
from the Kingdom of Heaven.

To the same purpose he speaks l. 6. c. 6. But it is superfluous to recite his
words, for either this is enough or nothing.

The third kind of proof, whereby I undertook to show the belief of the ancient
Church in this point, was the Confession of the learnedest Writers and best
verst in the Church of Rome. Who, what the Council of Trent forbids under
Anathema, that any man should say of any ancient Father, are not yet afraid,
nor make no scruple, to say it in plain terms of the whole Church for many Ages
together, viz. That she believed the Eucharist necessary for Infants. So does
Maldonate in Joan. 6. Mitto Augustini and Innocentii sententiam (quae etiam
viguit in Ecclesia per sexcentos annos) Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus
necessariam. I say nothing says he, of Austins and Innocentius his opinion,
that the Eucharist was necessary even for Infants, which doctrine flourished in
the Church for 600. years.

The same almost in terms has Binius, in his Notes on the Councils, page 624.
Hinc constat Innocentii sententia (quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in
Ecclesia, quam Augustinus sectatus est) Eucharistiam etiam infantibus
necessariam fuisse.

Lastly, That treasury of Antiquity Cardinal Perron, though he speaks not so
home as the rest do, yet he says enough for my purpose: des passages de S.
August. c. 10. p. 101. The Custom of giving the Eucharist to Infants the Church
then observed as profitable. This I say is enough for my purpose. For what more
contradictious, than the Eucharist being the same without alteration to Infants
being the same without alteration, should then be profitable and now
unprofitable: then all things considered expedient to be used, if not
necessary, and therefore commanded: And now, though there be no variety in the
case, all things considered not necessary, nor expedient, and therefore
forbidden.

The Issue of all this Discourse, for ought I can see, must be this: That
either both parts of a Contradiction must be true, and consequently nothing can
be false, seeing that which contradicts truth is not so: or else, that the
Ancient Church did err in believing something expedient which was not so; (and
if so, why may not the present Church err, in thinking Latin Service, and
Communion in one kind expedient:) or that the present Church does err, in
thinking something not expedient, which is so. And if so, why may she not err,
in thinking Communicating the Laity in both kinds, and Service in vulgar
Languages, not expedient.

V. An Argument drawn from the Doctrine of the Millenaries, against
Infallibility.
THE Doctrine of the Millenaries was, That before the worlds end, Christ should
reign upon earth for a thousand years, and that the Saints should live under
him in all holiness and happiness. That this Doctrine is by the present Roman
Church held false and Heretical, I think no man will deny.

That the same Doctrine, was by the Church of the next Age after the Apostles
held true and Catholic I prove by these two Reasons.

The first Reason, Whatsoever doctrine is believed and taught by the most
eminent Fathers of any Age of the Church, and by none of their contemporaries
opposed or condemned, that is to be esteemed the Catholic Doctrine of the
Church of those times.

But the Doctrine of the Millenaries was believed and taught by the eminent
Fathers of the Age next after the Apostles, and by none of that Age opposed or
condemned.

Therefore it was the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of those times. The
Proposition of this Syllogism is Cardinal Perrons rule, (in his Epistle to
Casaubon, 5. observe.) And is indeed one of the main pillars, upon which the
great Fabric of his Answer to King James does stand, and with which it cannot
but fall; and therefore I will spend no time in the proof of it.

But the Assumption thus I prove.

That Doctrine which was believed and taught by Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, the
disciple of the Apostles disciples (according to Eusebius) who lived in the
times of the Apostles, says he, by Justin Martyr, Doctor of the Church and
Martyr: by Melito Bishop of Sardis, who had the gift of Prophecy, witness
Tert. and whom Bellarmine acknowledges a Saint. By S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions
and Martyr; and was not opposed and condemned by any one Doctor of the Church
of those times: That Doctrine was believed and taught by the most Eminent
Fathers of that Age, next to the Apostles, and opposed by none.

But the former part of the Proposition is true. Ergo, the Latter is also true.

The Major of this Syllogism and the latter part of the Minor, I suppose will
need no proof, with them that consider, that these here mentioned were equal in
number to all the other Ecclesiastical Writers of that Age, of whom there is
any memory remaining; and in weight and worth infinitely beyond them: they were
Athenagoras, Theophilus Antiochenus, Egesippus and Hippolitus: of whose
contradiction to this Doctrine there is not extant, neither in their works, nor
in story, any Print or Footstep: which if they or any of them had opposed, it
had been impossible, considering the Ecclesiastical Story of their time is
Written by the professed Enemies of the Millinaries Doctrine; who could they
have found any thing in the monuments of Antiquity to have put in the Balance
against Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, no doubt would not have buried it in
silence: which yet they do, neither vouching for their opinion any one of more
Antiquity than Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived, says Eusebius, nostra
aetate, [in our Age] but certainly in the latter part of the third Century. For
Tatianus because an Heretic I reckon not in this number. And if any man say
that before his fall he wrote many Books; I say, it is true; but withal would
have it remembered, that he was Justin Martyrs Scholar, and therefore, in all
probability of his Masters Faith, rather than against it, all that is extant of
him one way or other is but this in S. Hierome, de Script. Eccles. Justini
Martyris sectator fuit.

Now for the other part of the Minor, that the forementioned Fathers did
believe and teach this Doctrine. And first for Papias that he taught it, it is
confessed by Eusebius the Enemy of this Doctrine ( Lib. 3. Hist. Eccles. c.
33.) in these words, -- Other things besides the same Author (Papias) declares,
that they came to him as it were by unwritten Tradition, wherein he affirms
that after the Resurrection of all Flesh from the Dead, there shall be a
Kingdom of Christ continued and established for a thousand years upon Earth,
after a humane and corporeal manner. The same is confessed by S. Hierome,
another Enemy to this opinion, ( descript. Eccles. S. 29.) Papias the Auditor
of John Bishop of Hieropolis is said to have taught the Judaical Tradition of a
thousand years, whom Irenaeus and Apollinarius followed. And in his preface
upon the Commentaries of Victorinus upon the Apocalypse, thus he writes, --
before him Papias Bishop of Hieropolis and Nepos Bishop in the parts of Egypt
taught as Victorinus does touching the Kingdom of the thousand years.

The same is testified by Irenaeus ( lib. 5. cont. Her. c. 33.) where having at
large set forth this Doctrine, he confirms it by the Authority of Papias in
these words. Papias also the Auditor of John, the familiar friend of Policarpus
an Ancient man, has testified by writing these things in the fourth of his
Books, for he has writtten five. And concerning Papias thus much.

That Justin Martyr was of the same belief, it is confessed by Sixtus Senensis
(Biblioth. Stae. l. 6. An. 347.) by Feverdentius in his premonition before the
five last Chapters of the 5th. Book of Irenaeus. By Pamelius in Antidoto ad
Tertul. parad. paradox. 14.

That S. Melito Bishop of Sardis held the same Doctrine is confessed by
Pamelius in the same place; and thereupon it is that Gennadius Massiliensis in
his Book de Eccles. dogmatibus, calls the followers of this opinion Melitani;
as the same Pamelius testifies in his Notes upon that fragment of Tertullian de
Spe fidelium.

Irenaeus his Faith in this point is likewise confessed by Eusebius, in the
place before quoted in these words. He (Papias) was the Author of the like
Error to most of the Writers of the Church, who alleged the Antiquity of the
Man for a defense of their side, as to Irenaeus and whosoever else seemed to be
of the same opinion with him.

By S. Hierome in the place above cited de script. Eccles. S. 29. Again in Lib.
Ezekiel. 11. in these words. For neither do we expect from Heaven a Golden
Jerusalem ( according to the Jewish tales which they call Duterossis) which
also many of our own have followed: Especially Tertullian in his Book de spe
fidelium; and Lactantius in his seventh Book of Institutions, and the frequent
expositions of Victorinus Pictavionensis: and of late Severus in his Dialogue
which he calls Gallus: and to name the Greeks and to join together the first
and last, Irenaeus and Apollinarius. Where we see he acknowledges Irenaeus to
be of this opinion; but that he was the first that held it, I believe that that
is more a Christian untruth than Irenaeus his opinion a Judaical Fable. For he
himself acknowledges in the place above cited, that Irenaeus followed Papias;
and it is certain and confessed that Justin Martyr believed it long before him:
and Irenaeus himself derives it from -- Presbyteri qui Johannem discipulum
Domini viderunt; from Priests which saw John the Disciple of the Lord. Lastly,
by Pamelius, Sixtus Senensis, and Faverdentius in the places above quoted.

Seeing therefore it is certain, even to the confession of the Adversaries,
that Papias, Justin Martyr, Meleto and Irenaeus, the most considerable and
eminent men of their Age, did believe and teach this Doctrine; and seeing it
has been proved as evidently as a thing of this nature can be, that none of
their contemporaries opposed or condemned it; It remains according to Cardinal
Perrons first rule; that this is to be esteemed the Doctrine of the Church of
that Age.

My second Reason I form thus. Whatsoever Doctrine is taught by the Fathers of
any Age, not as Doctors but as witnesses of the Tradition of the Church, (that
is, not as their own opinion, but as the Doctrine of the Church of their times)
that is undoubtedly to be so esteemed; especially if none contradicted them in
it. But the Fathers above cited teach this Doctrine, not as their own private
opinion, but as the Christian Tradition, and as the Doctrine of the Church,
neither did any contradict them in it. Ergo, it is undoubtedly to be so
esteemed.

The Major of this Syllogism, is Cardinal Perrons second Rule and way of
finding out the Doctrine of the Ancient Church in any Age: and if it be not a
sure Rule, farewell the use of all Antiquity.

And for the Minor, there will be little doubt of it, to him that considers,
that Papias professes himself to have received this Doctrine by unwritten
Tradition, though not from the Apostles themselves immediately, yet from their
Scholars, as appears by Eusebius in the forecited third Book 33. Chapter.

That Irenaeus grounding it upon evident Scripture, professes that he learnt
it, (whether mediately or immediately I cannot tell) from (a) Presbyteri qui
Johannem Discipulum Domini viderunt. Priests or Elders who saw John the Lords
Disciple, and heard of him what our Lord taught of those times (of the thousand
years) and also, as he says after, from Papias the Auditor of John the
Chamberfellow of Polycarpus, an Ancient man who recorded it in writing.

(a) Faverdentius his Note upon this place is very Notable. Hinc apparet (says
he) from hence it appears that Irenaeus neither first invented this opinion,
nor held it as proper to himself, but got this blot and blemish from certain
Fathers. Papias I suppose and some other inglorious fellows, the familiar
Friends of Irenaeus, are here intended.

I hope then if the Fathers which lived with the Apostles had their blots and
blemishes; it is no such horrid Crime for Calvin and the Century writers to
impute the same to their great Grandchildren. Aetas parentum pejor avis
progeniem fert vitiosiorem. But yet these inglorious Disciples of the Apostles,
though perhaps not so learned as Faverdentius, were yet certainly so honest, as
not to invent lies and deliver them as Apostolic Tradition; or if they were
not, what confidence can we place in any other unwritten Tradition.

Lastly, that Justin Martyr grounds it upon plain Prophecies of the Old
Testament, and express words of the New: he professes, That he, and all other
Christians of a right belief in all things, believe it; joins them who believe
it not, with them who deny the Resurrection; or else says, that none denied
this, but the same who denied the Resurrection; and that indeed they were
called Christians, but in deed and Truth were none.

Whosoever, I say, considers these things will easily grant, that they held it
not as their own opinion, but as the Doctrine of the Church and the Faith of
Christians.

Hereupon I conclude, whatsoever they held, not as their private opinion, but
as the Faith of the Church, that was the Faith of the Church of their time: But
this Doctrine they held, not as their private opinion, but as the Faith of the
Church. Ergo, it was and is to be esteemed the Faith of the Church.

Trypho. Do ye confess that before ye expect the coming of Christ, this place
Jerusalem shall be again restored, and that your People shall be congregated,
and rejoice together with Christ, and the Patriarchs and the Prophets, etc.

Justin Martyr. I have confessed to you before, that both I and many others do
believe, as you well know, that this shall be; but that many again, who are
(not) of the pure and holy opinion of Christians, do not acknowledge this, I
have also signified unto you: For I have declared unto you, that some called
Christians, but being indeed Atheists and impious Heretics, do generally teach
blasphemous and Atheistical and foolish things: but that you might know that I
speak not this to you only, I will make a Book as near as I can of these our
disputations, where I will profess in writing that which I say before you; for
I resolve to follow not men, and the Doctrines of men, but God and the Doctrine
of God. For although you chance to meet with some that are called Christians,
which do not confess this, but dare to Blaspheme the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, which also say there is no Resurrection of the
Dead, but that as soon as they die their Souls are received into Heaven, do not
ye yet think them Christians: as neither if a man consider rightly will he
account the Sadducees and other Sectaries and Heretics, as the Genistae and
the Meristae and Galileans, and Pharisees and Hellenians and Baptists and other
such to be Jews; but only that they are called Jews, and the Children of
Abraham, and such as with their lips confess God (as God himself cries out) but
have their Hearts far from him. But I and all Christians that in all things
believe aright, both know that there shall be a Resurrection of the Flesh, and
a thousand years in Jerusalem restored and adorned and enlarged; according as
the Prophets, Ezekiel and Esaias and others do testify: for thus says Isaiah of
the time of this thousand years. For there shall be a new Heaven and a new
Earth, and they shall not remember the former, etc. And after. -- A certain man
amongst us whose name was John, one of the Twelve Apostles of Christ, in that
Revelation which was exhibited unto him, has foretold -- That they which
believe our Christ shall live in Jerusalem a thousand years, and that after,
the Universal and everlasting Resurrection and Judgment shall be.

I have presumed in the beginning of Justin Martyrs answer to substitute (not)
instead of (also) because I am confident, that either by chance, or the fraud
of some ill-willers to the Millinaries opinion; the place has been corrupted,
and (^) turned into (^) (not) into (also.) For if we retain the usual reading
-- But that many who are also of the pure and holy opinion of Christians do not
acknowledge this, I have also signified unto you; then must we conclude, that
Justin Martyr himself did believe the opinion of them which denied the thousand
years, to be the pure and holy opinion of Christians: and if so, why did he not
himself believe it? nay how could he but believe it to be true, professing it
(as he does if the place be right) to be the pure and holy opinion of
Christians: for how a false Doctrine can be the pure and holy opinion of
Christians, what Christian can conceive? or if it may be so, how can the
contrary avoid the being untrue, unholy and not the opinion of Christians?

Again, if we read the place thus -- That many who are also of the pure and
holy opinion of Christians, do not acknowledge this, I have also signified:
certainly there wll be neither sense nor reason, neither coherence nor
consequence in the words following -- For I have told you of many called
Christians, but being indeed Atheists and Heretics, that they altogether teach
blasphemous and impious and foolish things: for how is this a confirmation or
reason of, or any way pertinent unto what went before? if there he speak of
none but such as were, purae piaeque Christianorum sententiae, of the pure and
holy opinion of Christians. And therefore to disguise this inconsequence, the
Translator has thought fit to make use of a false Translation, and instead of
-- for I have told you, to make it, -- besides I have told you of many, etc.
Again, if Justin Martyr had thought this the pure and holy opinion of
Christians, or them good and holy Christians that held it; why does he rank
them with them that denied the Resurrection? Why does he say afterward --
Although you chance to meet with some that are called Christians which do not
confess this, do not ye think them Christians. Lastly, what sense is there in
saying as he does -- I and all Christians that are of a right belief in all
things, believe the Doctrine of the thousand years, and that the Scriptures
both of the Old and New Testament teach it, and yet say -- That many of the
pure and holy opinion of Christians do not believe it? Upon these reasons I
suppose it is evident, that the place has been corrupted, and it is to be
corrected according as I have corrected it, by substituting ^ in the place of ^
(not) instead of (also.) Neither need any man think strange that this
misfortune of the change of a Syllable should befall this place, who considers
that in this place Justin Martyr tells us that he had said the same things
before, whereas nothing to this purpose appears now in him. And that in
Victorinus comment on the Revelation, wherein, (by S. Hieroms acknowledgment)
this Doctrine was strongly maintained, there now appears nothing at all for it,
but rather against it. And now from the place thus restored, these Observations
offer themselves unto us.

1. That Justin Martyr speaks not as a Doctor, but as a witness of the Doctrine
of the Church of his time. I (says he) and all Christians that are of a right
belief in all things hold this: And therefore from hence according to Cardinal
Perrons Rule, we are to conclude, not probably but demonstratively, that this
was the Doctrine of the Church of that time.

2. That they held it as a necessary matter, so far as to hold them no
Christians that held the Contrary: though you chance to meet with some called
Christians that do not confess this, but dare to Blaspheme the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, etc. Yet do not ye think them Christians: Now if Bellarmines
Rule be true, that Councils then determine any thing as matters of Faith, when
they pronounce them Heretics that hold the Contrary; then sure Justin Martyr
held this Doctrine as a matter of Faith, seeing he pronounces them no
Christians, that contradict it.

3. That the Doctrine is grounded upon the Scripture of the Old and New
Testament and the Revelation of S. John, and that by a Doctor and Martyr, of
the Church, and such a one as was converted to Christianity within 30 years
after the Death of S. John, when in all probability there were many alive, that
had heard him expound his own words and teach this Doctrine: and if
probabilities will not be admitted, this is certain out of the most authentical
records of the Church, that Papias the Disciple of the Apostles Disciples
taught it the Church, professing that he had received it from them that learned
it from the Apostles: and if after all this, the Church of those Times might
Err in a Doctrine so clearly derived and authentically delivered, how without
extreme impudence can any Church in after times, pretend to Infallibility.

The Millinaries Doctrine was overborn, by imputing to them that which they
held not: by abrogating the Authority of S. John's Revelation, as some did: or
by derogating from it, as others; ascribing it not to S. John the Apostle, but
to some other John, they know not who: which -- Dionysius the first known
adversary of this doctrine and his followers; against the Tradition of
Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, and all the Fathers their Antecessors: by calling it a
Judaical opinion and yet allowing it as probable by corrupting the Authors for
it, as Justin, Victorinus, Severus.

VI. A Letter relating to the same Subject.
SIR,
I Pray remember, that if a consent of Fathers either constitute or declare a
Truth to be necessary, or show the opinion of the Church of their Time; then
that opinion of the Jesuits, concerning Predestination upon prescience (which
had no opposer before S. Austin) must be so, and the contrary Heretical of the
Dominicans; and the present Church differs from the Ancient, in not esteeming
of it as they did.

Secondly, I pray remember, that if the Fathers be infallible, (when they speak
as witnesses of Tradition) to show the opinion of the Church of their Time,
then the opinion of the Chiliasts (which now is a Heresy in the Church of
Rome) was once Tradition in the Opinion of the Church.

Thirdly, Since S. Austin had an opinion, that of whatsoever no beginning was
known, that came from the Apostles, many Fathers might say things to be
Tradition upon that ground only; but of this Opinion of the Chiliasts, one of
the ancientest Fathers Irenaeus says not only that it was Tradition, but sets
down Christ's own words when he taught it, and the pedigree of the opinion from
Christ a to John his Disciple; from him to several Priests (whereof Papias was
one who put it in writing) and so downwards; which can be shown from no other
Father, for no other opinion, either controverted, or uncontroverted.

Fourthly, That if Papias either by his own error, or a desire to deceive,
could cozen the Fathers of the purest age in this, why not also in other
things? why not in twenty as well as one, why not twenty others as well as he.

Fifthly, That if the Fathers could be cozened, how could general Councils
escape? who you say make Tradition one of their Rules, which can only be known
from the Fathers?

Sixthly, If they object, how could errors come in, and no beginning of them
known? I pray remember to ask them the same Question concerning the
Millenaries, which lasted uncontradicted, until Dionysius Alexandrinus two
hundred and fifty years after Christ; and if they tell you that Papias was the
first beginner, look in Irenaeus, and he will tell you the contrary. ( Loco
citato l. 5. c. 33.)

Seventhly, Remember, that if I ought not to condemn the Church of Rome out of
Scripture, because my interpretation may deceive me; then they ought not to
build their Infallibility upon it (and less upon her own word) because theirs
may deceive them: unless the same thing may be a wall when you lean upon it,
and a bulrush when we do.

Eighthly, Remember that they cannot say, they trust not their Interpretation
in this, but a consent of Fathers; because the Fathers are not said to be
infallible, but as they tell the Opinion of the Church of their time, which is
infallible: therefore they must first prove out of Scripture that she is
infallible, or else she (who is her self the subject of the Question) cannot be
allowed till then to give a verdict for her self.

Ninthly, Remember the Roman Church claims no Notes of the Church, but what
agree with the Grecian too (as Antiquity, Succession, Miracles, etc.) but only
Communion with the Pope and Splendour; both which made for the Arrians in
Liberius his time; and it were a hard Case, that because the Greeks are poor
upon Earth, they should be shut out of Heaven.

Tenthly, Remember that if we have an Infallible way, we have no use (at least
no necessity) of an Infallible Guide; for if we may be saved by following the
Scripture as near as we can (though we err) it is as good as any Interpreter to
keep unity in charity (which is only needful) though not in opinion: and this
cannot be ridiculous, because they say, if any man misinterpret the Council of
Trent, it shall not damn him; and why (without more ado) may not the same be
said of Scripture?

VII. An Argument against the Infallibility of the present Church of Rome,
taken from the Contradictions in your Doctrine of Transubstantiation.
Chillingworth. THat Church is not infallible, which teaches Contradictions:
But the Church of Rome teaches Contradictions. Therefore the Church of Rome is
not infallible.


Mr. Daniel. I deny the Minor.


Chilling. That Church teaches Contradictions, which teaches such a Doctrine
as contains Contradictions: But the Church of Rome teaches such a Doctrine:
Therefore the Church of Rome teaches Contradictions.


Mr. Daniel. I deny the Minor.


Chilling. The Doctrine of Transubstantion contains Contradictions: But the
Church of Rome teaches the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: Therefore the Church
of Rome teaches such a Doctrine as contains Contradictions.


Mr. Dan. I deny the Major.


Chilling. That the same thing at the same time should have the true figure of
a man's body, and should not have the true figure of a man's body, is a
Contradiction: But in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it is taught, that the
same thing, ( viz. our Savior present in the Sacrament) has the true figure of
a man's body, and has not the true figure of a man's body at the same time;
therefore the Doctrine of Transubstantiation contains Contradictions.


Mr. Dan. The Major, though not having all rules required to a contradiction
(as boys in Logic know) yet let it pass.


Chilling. Boys in Logic know no more conditions required to a Contradiction,
but that the same thing should be affirmed and denied of the same thing at the
same time. For my meaning was, that that should not be accounted the same
thing, which was considered after diverse manners.


Mr. Dan. I deny the Minor of your syllogism.


Chilling. I prove it, according to the several parts of it: And first, for the
first part. He must have the Figure of a man's body in the Eucharist, who is
there without any real alteration or difference from the natural body of a man:
But our Savior, according to the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is in
the Sacrament without any real alteration or difference from the natural body
of a man: Therefore according to this Doctrine he must there have the figure of
a man's body. To the second part, that he must not have the figure of a man's
body in the Sacrament, according to this Doctrine, thus I prove it. He must not
have the figure of a man's body in the Eucharist, which must not have extension
there: But our Saviors body, according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
must not have extension there; Therefore, according to this doctrine, he must
not have the figure of a man's body there. The Major of this Syllogism I proved,
because the figure of a man's body could not be without extension. The Minor I
proved thus; That must not have extension in the Eucharist, whose every part is
together in one and the same point: But according to this Doctrine, every part
of our Saviors body must be here in one and the same point: therefore here it
must not have extension.


Mr. Dan. Answered, by distinguishing the Major of the first Syllogism, and
said; that he must not have the true figure of a man's body, according to the
reason of a figure taken in its essential consideration, which is to have
positionem partium sic and sic extra parts; but not the accidental
consideration, which is in ordine ad locum. And this answer he applied for the
solution of the Minor, saying thus, Our Savior is there without any real
alteration intrinsecal, but not extrinsecal; for he is not changed in order to
himself, but in order to place: Or otherwise, he is not altered in his
continual existence, which is only modus essentiae and inseparable even by
divine power, though altered in modo existendi, which is situation and required
to figure taken in order to place.


Chill. Against this it was replied by Chillingworth: That the distinction of a
man's body as considered in it self, and as considered in reference to place, is
vain, and no solution of the Argument: And thus he proved it; If it be
impossible, that any thing should have several parts one out of another in
order, and reference of each to other, without having these parts in several
places; then the distinction is vain: But it is impossible, that any thing
should have several parts one out of another, without having these parts in
several places; Therefore the distinction is vain.

The Major of this Syllogism he took for granted.

The Minor he proved thus: Whatsoever body is in the proper place of another
body, must of necessity be in that very body, by possessing the demensions of
it: therefore, whatsoever has several parts one out of the other, must of
necessity have them one out of the place of the other; and consequently in
several places.

For illustration of this Argument he said; If my head and belly and thighs and
legs be all in the very same place; of necessity my head must be in my belly,
and my belly in my thighs, and my thighs in my legs, and all of them in my
feet, and my feet in all of them; and therefore if my head be out of my belly,
it must be out of the place where my belly is; and if it be not out of the
place where my belly is, it is not out of my belly but in it.

Again, to show that according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, our
Saviors body in the Eucharist has not the several parts of it out of one
another, he disputed thus: Wheresoever there is a body having several parts one
out of the other, there must be some middle parts severing the extreme parts:
But here, according to this Doctrine, the extreme parts are not severed, but
altogether in the same point; Therefore here our Saviors Body cannot have
parts one out of other.


Mr. Dan. To all this (for want of a better Answer) gave only this. Let all
Scholars peruse these. After, upon better consideration, he wrote by the side
of the last Syllogism this: Quoad entitatem verum est, non quoad locum, that
is, according to entity it is true, but not according to place. And to (Let all
Scholars peruse these) he caused this to be added; And weigh whether there is
any new matter, worth a new Answer.


Chillingworth Replied, That to say the extreme parts of a body are severed by
the middle parts according to their entity, but not according to place, is
ridiculous. His reasons are first, Because severing of things is nothing else,
but putting or keeping them in several places, as every silly woman knows; and
therefore to say, they are severed but not according to place, is as if you
should say, They are heated, but not according to heat; they are cooled, but
not according to cold: Indeed is it to say, they are severed, but not severed.


VIII. An account of what moved the Author to turn a Papist, with his own
Confutation of the Arguments that persuaded him thereto.
I Reconciled my self to the Church of Rome, because I thought my self to have
sufficient reason to believe, that there was and must be always in the World
some Church, that could not err: and consequently seeing all other Churches
disclaimed this privilege of not being subject to error; the Church of Rome
must be that Church which cannot err.

I was put into doubt of this way which I had chosen, by D. Stapleton and
others; who limit the Churches freedom from Error to things necessary only, and
such as without which the Church can be a Church no longer, but grantted it
subject to error in things that were not necessary: Hereupon considering that
most of the differences between Protestants and Roman Catholics; were not
touching things necessary, but only profitable or lawful; I concluded, that I
had not sufficient ground to believe the Roman Church either could not or did
not err in any thing, and therefore no ground to be a Roman Catholic.

Against this again I was persuaded, that it was not sufficient to believe the
Church to be an infallible believer of all doctrins necessary; but it must also
be granted an infallible teacher of what is necessary; that is, that we must
believe not only that the Church teaches all things necessary, but that all is
necessary to be believed, which the Church teaches to be so: in effect, that
the Church is our Guide in the way to Heaven.

Now to believe that the Church was an infallible Guide, and to be believed in
all things which she requires us to believe, I was induced: First, because
there was nothing that could reasonably contest with the Church about this
Office, but the Scripture: and that the Scripture was this Guide, I was willing
to believe, but that I saw not how it could be made good, without depending
upon the Churches authority.

1. That Scripture is the Word of God.

2. That the Scripture is a perfect rule of our duty.

3. That the Scripture is so plain in those things that concern our duty, that
whosoever desires and endeavors to find the will of God, there shall either
find it, or at least not dangerously mistake it.

Secondly, I was drawn to this belief, because I conceived that it was evident,
out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, that there must be unto the worlds end a
Succession of Pastors, by adhering to whom, men might be kept from wavering in
matters of faith, and from being carried up and down with every wind of false
doctrine.

That no Succession of Pastors could guard their adherents from danger of
error, if themselves were subject unto error, either in teaching that to be
necessary which is not so, or denying that to be necessary which is so: and
therefore.

That there was and must be some Succession of Pastors, which was an infallible
guide in the way to Heaven; and which should not possibly teach any thing to be
necessary which was not so; nor any thing not necessary which was so: upon this
ground I concluded, that seeing there must be such a Succession of Pastors, as
was an infallible guide; and there was no other (but that of the Church of
Rome) even by the confession of all other Societies of Pastors in the world;
that therefore that Succession of Pastors is that infallible Guide of Faith
which all men must follow.

Upon these grounds I thought it necessary for my salvation, to believe the
Roman Church, in all that she thought to be, and proposed as necessary.

Against these Arguments it has been demonstrated unto me; and First against
the first. That the reason why we are to believe the Scripture to be the word
of God, neither is nor can be the Authority of the present Church of Rome,
which cannot make good her Authority any other way, but by pretense of
Scripture: and therefore stands not unto Scripture (no not in respect of us) in
the relation of a Foundation to a building, but of a building to a Foundation,
does not support Scripture, but is supported by it. But the general consent of
Christians of all Nations and Ages, a far greater company than that of the
Church of Rome, and delivering universally the Scripture for the word of God,
is the ordinary external reason why we believe it: whereunto the Testimonies of
the Jews, enemies of Christ, add no small moment for the Authority of some part
of it.

That whatsoever stood upon the same ground of Universal Tradition with
Scripture, might justly challenge belief, as well as Scripture: but that no
Doctrine not written in Scripture, could justly pretend to as full Tradition as
the Scripture, and therefore we had no reason to believe it with that degree of
faith, wherewith we believe the Scripture.

That it is unreasonable to think, that he that reads the Scripture, and uses
all means appointed for this purpose, with an earnest desire and with no other
end, but to find the will of God and obey it, if he mistake the meaning of some
doubtful places, and fall unwillingly into some errors, unto which no vice or
passion betrays him, and is willing to hear reason from any man that will
undertake to show him his error: I say, that it is unreasonable to think, that
a God of goodness will impute such an error to such a man.

Against the second it was demonstrated unto me, that the place I built on so
confidently, was no Argument at all for the Infallibility of the Succession of
Pastors in the Roman Church, but a very strong Argument against it.

First, no Argument for it; because it is not certain, nor can ever be proved,
that S. Paul speaks there of any succession; Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. For let that
be granted which is desired, that in the 13. ver. by [until we all meet] is
meant, until all the Children of God meet in the Unity of Faith; that is, unto
the Worlds end: yet it is not said there, that he gave Apostles and Prophets,
etc. which should continue, etc. until we all meet, by connecting the 13. ver.
to the 11. But he gave (then upon his Ascension and miraculously endowed)
Apostles and Prophets, etc. for the work of the ministry, for the Consummation
of the Saints, for the Edification of the Body of Christ, until we all meet,
that is, if you will, unto the Worlds end. Neither is there any incongruity,
but that the Apostles and Prophets, etc. which lived then, may in good sense be
said, now at this time and ever hereafter to do those things which they are
said to do: For who can deny but S. Paul the Apostle and Doctor of the
Gentiles, and S. John the Evangelist and Prophet, do at this very time (by
their writings, though not by their persons) do the work of the ministry,
consummate the Saints, and Edify the Body of Christ.

Secondly, it cannot be shown or proved from hence, that there is or was to be
any such succession: because S. Paul here tells us only, that he gave such in
the time past, not that he promised such in the time to come.

Thirdly, it is evident, that God promised no such succession, because it is
not certain that he has made good any such promise; for who is so impudent as
to pretend, that there are now, and have been in all Ages since Christ, some
Apostles and some Prophets and some Evangelists and some Pastors and Teachers:
Especially such as he here speaks of, that is, endowed with such gifts as
Christ gave upon his Ascension; of which he speaks in the 8 ver. saying; He led
Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto men. And that those gifts were -- Men
endowed with extraordinary Power and Supernatural gifts -- it is apparent,
because these Words, and he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. are added
by way of explication and illustration of that which was said before -- and he
gave gifts unto Men: And if any man except hereunto, that though the Apostles
and Prophets and Evangelists were extraordinary and for the Plantation of the
Gospel, yet Pastors were ordinary and for continuance: I answer, it is true,
some Pastors are ordinary and for continuance, but not such as are here spoken
of: not such as are endowed with the strange and heavenly gifts, which Christ
gave not only to the Apostles and Prophets and Evangelists, but to the inferior
Pastors and Doctors of his Church, at the first Plantation of it: And therefore
S. Paul in the 1st. to the Corinth. 12.28. (to which place we are referred by
the Margent of the Vulgar Translation, for the explication of this,) places
this gift of teaching amongst, and prefers it before many other miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost: Pastors there are still in the Church, but not such as
Titus and Timothy and Apollos and Barnabas: not such as can justly pretend to
immediate inspiration and illumination of the Holy Ghost: And therefore seeing
there neither are nor have been for many Ages in the Church, such Apostles and
Prophets, etc. as here are spoken of, it is certain he promised none; or
otherwise we must blasphemously charge him with breach of his promise.

Secondly, I answer, that if by dedit he gave, be meant promisit, he promised
for ever; then all were promised and all should have continued. If by dedit be
not meant promisit, then he promised none such, nor may we expect any such by
virtue of, or warrant from this Text that is here alleged: And thus much for
the first Assumpt which was, that the place was no Argument for an infallible
succession in the Church of Rome.

Now for the second, That it is a strong Argument against it, thus I make it
good.

The Apostles and Prophets and Evangelists and Pastors, which our Savior gave
upon his Ascension, were given by him that they might Consummate the Saints, do
the work of the Ministry, Edify the Body of Christ, until we all come into the
Unity of Faith, that we be not like Children wavering and carried up and down
with every wind of Doctrine. The Apostles and Prophets, etc. that then were, do
not now in their own persons and by oral instruction do the work of the
Ministry, to the intent we may be kept from wavering and being carried up and
down with every wind of Doctrine: therefore they do this some other way: Now
there is no other way by which they can do it, but by their writings; and
therefore by their writings they do it: therefore by their writings and
believing of them we are to be kept from wavering in matters of Faith:
therefore the Scriptures of the Apostles and Prophets and Evangelists are our
Guides. Therefore not the Church of Rome.

FINIS.
AN ANSWER To Some PASSAGES IN Rushworths Dialogues. BEGINNING At the Third
Dialogue Section 12. p. 181. Ed. Paris, 1654. ABOUT TRADITIONS.

LONDON, Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1687.

AN ANSWER To some passages in Rushworths Dialogues.
BEGINNING AT The Third Dialogue,. 12. p. 181. Ed. Paris, 1654. ABOUT
TRADITIONS.
Uncle. DO you think there is such a City as Rome or Constantinople?


Nephew. That I do, I would I knew what I ask as well.


CHILLINGWORTH.

First I should have answered that in propriety of Speech I could not say that
I knew it, but that I did as undoubtedly believe it, as those things which I
did know. For though (as I conceive) we may be properly said to believe that
which we know, yet we cannot say truly, that we know that which we only believe
upon report and hearsay, be it never so constant, never so general: For seeing
the generality of men is made up of particulars, and every particular man may
deceive and be deceived, it is not impossible, though exceedingly improbable,
that all men should conspire to do so. Yet I deny not that the popular phrase
of Speech will very well bear, that we may say we know that which in truth we
only believe, provided the grounds of our belief be morally certain.

Neither do I take any exception to the Nephews answers, made to his Uncles 2,
3, 4. and 5. Interrogatories. But grant willingly as to the first, that it is
not much material whether I remember or not any particular Author of such a
general and constant report. Then, that the Testimony of one or two Witnesses,
though never so credible, could add nothing to that belief which is already at
the height, nay perhaps that my own seeing these Cities would make no
accession, add no degree to the strength and firmness of my Faith concerning
this matter, only it would change the kind of my assent, and make me know that
which formerly I did but believe.

To the fourth, that seeming Reasons are not much to be regarded against sense
or experience and moral Certainties (but withal I should have told my Uncle,
that I fear his supposition is hardly possible, and that the nature of the
thing will not admit, that there should be any great, nay any probable reasons
invented to persuade me that there never was such a City as London) and
therefore if any man should go about to persuade me that there never was such a
City as London; That there were no such men as called themselves, or were
called by others Protestants, in England, in the days of Q. Elizabeth, perhaps
such a man's Wit might delight me, but his reasons sure would never persuade me.

Hitherto we should have gone hand in hand together, but whereas in the next
place he says -- In like manner then you do not doubt, but a Catholic living
in a Catholic Country, may undoubtedly know what was the public Religion of
his Country in his Fathers days, and that so assuredly that it were a mere
madness for him to doubt thereof. -- I should have craved leave to tell my
Uncle that he presumed too far upon his Nephews yielding disposition. For that
as it is a far more easy thing to know, and more authentically testified, that
there were some men called Protestants by themselves and others, than what
opinions these Protestants held, diverse men holding diverse things, which yet
were all called by this name. So is it far more easy for a Roman Catholic to
know that in his Fathers days there were some men, for their outward Communion
with and subordination to the Bishop of Rome called Roman Catholics, than to
know what was the Religion of those men who went under this name, For they
might be as different one from another in their belief, as some Protestants are
from others.

As for example, had I lived before the Lateran Council which condemned
Berengarius, possibly I might have known that the belief of the Real presence
of Christ in the Sacrament was part of the public Doctrine of my Country: But
whether the Real absence of the Bread and Wine after Consecration, and their
Transubstantiation into Christ's Body, were likewise Catholic Doctrine at that
time, that, I could not have known, seeing that all men were at liberty to hold
it was so, or it was not so.

Moreover I should have told my Uncle, that living now, I know it is Catholic
Doctrine, That the Souls of the Blessed enjoy the Vision of God: But if I had
lived in the Reign of Pope John the XXII, I should not have known that then it
was so, considering that many good Catholics before that time had believed,
and then, even the Pope himself did believe the contrary: and he is warranted
by Bellarmine for doing so, because the Church had not then defined it.

I should have told him further that either Catholics of the present time do
so differ in their belief, that what some hold lawful and pious, others condemn
as unlawful and impious: or else that all now consent, and consequently make it
Catholic Doctrine, That it is not unlawful to make the usual Pictures of the
Trinity, and to set them in Churches to be adored. But had I lived in S.
Austins time, I should then have been taught another Lesson: To wit, that this
Doctrine and practice was impious, and the contrary Doctrine Catholic.

I should have told him that now I was taught that the Doctrine of Indulgences
was an Apostolic Tradition: but had I lived 600 years since, and found that in
all antiquity there was no use of them: I should either have thought the
Primitive Church no faithful Steward in defrauding men's Souls of this Treasure
intended by God to them, and so necessary for them, or rather that the Doctrine
of Indulgences now practiced in the Church of Rome was not then Catholic.

I should have told him that the general practice of Roman Catholics now
taught me that it was a pious thing to offer Incense and Tapers to the Saints
and to their Pictures: But had I lived in the Primitive Church, I should with
the Church have condemned it in the Collyridians as Heretical.

I should have represented to him Erasmus his complaint against the
Protestants, whose departing from the Roman Church occasioned the determining,
and exacting the belief of many points as necessary, wherein before Luther men
enjoyed the Liberties of their Judgments and Tongues and Pens. Antea, says he,
licebat varias agitare quaestiones, de potestate Pontificis, de
Condonationibus, de restituendo, de Purgatorio: nunc tutum non est hiscere, ne
de his quidem, quae pie vereque dicuntur. Et credere cogimur, quod homo gignit
ex se opera meritoria, quod benefact is meretur vitam aeternam, etiam de
condigno, Quod B. Virgo potest imperare Filio cum Patre regnanti ut exaudiat
hujus aut illius preces, aliaque permulta ad quae piae mentes inhorrescunt. And
from hence I should have collected, as I think very probably, that it was not
then such a known and certain thing, what was the Catholic Faith in many
points which now are determined, but that diverse men who held external
Communion with that Church which now holds these as matters of Faith, conceived
themselves no ways bound to do so, but at liberty to hold as they saw reason.

I should have showed him by the confession of another Learned Catholic, That
through the negligence of the Bishops in former Ages, and the indiscreet
Devotion of the People many opinions and practices were brought into the
Church, which at first perhaps were but winked at, after tolerated, then
approved, and at length after they had spread themselves into a seeming
Generality, confirmed for good and Catholic: and that therefore there was no
certainty, that they came from the beginning whose beginning was not known.

I should have remembered him that even by the acknowledgment of the Council of
Trent, many corruptions and superstitions had by insensible degrees insinuated
themselves into the very Mass and Offices of the Church, which they thought fit
to cast out: and therefore seeing that some abuses have come in, God knows how,
and have been cast out again, who can ascertain me that some Errors have not
got in, and while men slept (for it is apparent they did sleep) gathered such
strength, gotten such deep root, and so incorporated themselves, like Ivy in a
Wall, in the State and polity of the Roman Church, that to pull them up had
been to pull them down, by rasing the Foundation on which it stands, to wit,
the Churches Infallibility? Besides as much water passes under the Mill which
the Miller sees not, so who can warrant me that some old corruptions, might not
escape from them, and pass for Original and Apostolic Traditions? I say might
not; though they had been as studious to reduce all to the primitive State, as
they were to preserve them in the present State, as diligent to cast out all
Postnate and introduct opinions, as they were to persuade men that there were
none such, but all as truly Catholic and Apostolic as they were Roman.

I should have declared unto him that many things reckoned up in the Roll of
Traditions are now grown out of fashion and out of use in the Church of Rome:
and therefore that either they believed them not, whatever they pretended, or
were not so obedient to the Apostles command as they themselves interpret it --
Keep the Traditions which ye have received, whether by word or by our Epistle.

And seeing there have been so many vicissitudes and changes in the Roman
Church: Catholic Doctrines growing exolete, and being degraded from their
Catholicism, and perhaps deprest into the number of Heresies: Points of
Indifference, or at least Aliens from the Faith, getting first to be Inmates,
after, procuring to be made Denizons, and in process of time necessary members
of the Body of the Faith: Nay Old Heresies sometimes like old Snakes, casting
their Skin and their Poison together, and becoming wholesome and Catholic
Doctrines. I must have desired pardon of my Uncle, if I were not so undoubtedly
certain what was and what was not Catholic Doctrine in the days of my Fathers.

Nay perhaps I should have gone further and told him, That I was not fully
assured what was the Catholic Doctrine in some points, no not at this present
time. For instance, to lay the Axe unto the Root of the Tree: the infallibility
of the present Church of Rome, in determining controversies of Faith, is
esteemed indeed by diverse that I have met with, not only an Article of Faith,
but a Foundation of all other Articles. But how do I know there are not, nay
why should I think there are not in the World diverse good Catholics of the
same mind touching this matter, which Mirandula, Panormitan, Cusanus,
Florentinus, Clemangis, Waldensis, Occham, and diverse others were of, who were
so far from holding this Doctrine the Foundation of Faith, that they would not
allow it any place in the Fabric.

Now Bellarmine has taught us that no Doctrine is Catholic, nor the contrary
Heretical, that is denied to be so by some good Catholics. From hence I
collect that in the time of the forenamed Authors, this was not Catholic
Doctrine, nor the contrary Heretical; and being then not so, how it could since
become so, I cannot well understand: If it be said that it has since been
defined by a General Council; I say first, This is false, no Council has been
so foolish as to define that a Council is Infallible, for unless it were
presumed to be Infallible before, who or what could assure us of the Truth of
this definition? Secondly if it were true it were ridiculous: for he that would
question the Infallibility of all Councils in all their Decrees, would as well
question the Infallibility of this Council in this Decree. This therefore was
not, is not, nor ever can be an Article of Faith, unless God himself would be
pleased (which is not very likely) to make some new Revelation of it from
Heaven.

The (...), the Fountain of the Error in this matter is this: That the whole
Religion of the Roman Church and every point of it, is conceived or pretended
to have issued Originally out of the Fountain of Apostolic Tradition, either
in themselves or in the principles from which they are evidently deducible.
Whereas it is evident that many of their Doctrines, may be Originally derived
from the Decrees of Councils, many from Papal definitions, many from the
Authority of some great Man; To which purpose it is very remarkable what
Gregory Nazianzen says of Athanasius. (...). Orat XXI. in Laudem Athanasii.
What pleased him was a law to men, what did not please him was as a thing
prohibited by Law, his Decrees were to them like Moses his Tables, and he had a
greater veneration paid him than seems to be due from men to Saints.

And as memorable that in the late great Controversy about Predetermination
and Free Will, disputed before Pope Clement VII. by the Jesuits and Dominicans,
The Popes resolution was, if he had determined the matter, to define for that
opinion which was most agreeable, not to Scripture, nor to Apostolic
Tradition, nor to a consent of Fathers, but to the Doctrine of S. Austin: so
that if the Pope had made an Article of Faith of this Controversy, it is
evident S. Austin had been the Rule of it.

Sometimes upon erroneous grounds Customs have been brought in, God knows how,
and after have spread themselves through the whole Church. Thus Gordonius
Huntleius confesses, that because Baptism and the Eucharist had been anciently
given both together to men of ripe years, when they were converted to
Christianity; Afterward by Error when Infants were Baptized, they gave the
Eucharist also to Infants. This Custom in short time grew Universal, and in S.
Austins time passed currantly for an Apostolic Tradition, and the Eucharist
was thought as necessary for them as Baptism. This Custom the Church of Rome
has again cast out, and in so doing professed either her no regard to the
traditions of the Apostles, or that this was none of that number. But yet she
cannot possibly avoid but that this example is a proof sufficient that many
things may get in by Error into the Church, and by degrees obtain the esteem
and place of Apostolic Traditions which yet are not so.

The Custom of denying the Laity the Sacramental Cup, and the Doctrine that it
is lawful to do so, who can pretend to derive from Apostolic Tradition?
Especially when the Sess. XIII.
Council of Constance the Patron of it, confesses that Christ's institution was
under both kinds, and that the faithful in the Primitive Church received it in
both. -- Licet Christ us, etc. Although Christ after his Supper instituted and
administered this venerable Sacrament under both kinds. -- Although in the
Primitive Church this Sacrament were received by the faithful under both kinds.
-- Non obstante, etc. -- Yet all this notwithstanding this Custom for the
avoiding of Scandals (to which the Primitive Church was as obnoxious as the
present is) was upon just reason brought in, that Laics should receive only
under one kind.

Brought in therefore it was, and so is one of those Doctrines which Lerinensis
calls -- inducta non tradita, inventa non accepta, etc. therefore all the
Doctrine of the Roman Church does not descend from Apostolic Tradition.

But if this Custom came not from the Apostles, from what Original may we think
that it descended? Certaintainly from no other than from the belief of the
substantial presence of whole Christ under either kind. For this opinion being
once settled in the Peoples minds, that they had as much by one kind as by both;
both Priest and People quickly began to think it superfluous, to do the same
thing twice at the same time; and thereupon, being (as I suppose) the Custom
required that the Bread should be received first, having received that, they
were contented that the Priest should save the pains, and the Parish the charge
of unnecessary reiteration. This is my Conjecture which I submit to better
judgments; but whether it be true or false, one thing from hence is certain,
That immemorial Customs may by degrees prevail upon the Church, such as have no
known beginning nor Author, of which yet this may be evidently known, that
their beginning whenever it was, was many years, nay, many Ages after the
Apostles.

* S. Paul commands that nothing be done in the Church but for edification. 1
Cor. 14.26.
He says, and if that be not enough, he proves in the same place, that it is
not for edification that either Public Prayers, Thanksgiving and Hymns to God,
or Doctrine to the People should be in any Language which the Assistants
generally understand not; 27, 28.
and thereupon forbids any such practice though it were in a Language
miraculously infused into the speaker by the Holy Ghost: unless he himself or
some other present could and would interpret. He tells us that to do otherwise
is to speak into the Air: 9.11.
That it is to play the Barbarians to one another: That to such Blessings and
Thanksgivings, Amen. Corinthians, Lyranus upon the place acknowledges that in
the Primitive Church, Blessings and all other Services were done in the Vulgar
Tongue. Cardinal Cajeton likewise upon the place tells us that out of this
Doctrine of S. Paul it is consequent, That it were better for the Edification
of the Church, that the public Prayers which are said in the Peoples hearing,
should be delivered in a Language common both to the Clergy and the People. And
I am confident that the Learned Antiquary in the Roman Church cannot, nay
that Baronius himself, were he alive again, could not produce so much as one
example of any one Church, one City, one Parish in all the Christian World, for
five hundred years after Christ, where the Sermons to the People were in one
Language, and the Service in another. Now it is confessed on all hands to be
against sense and reason, that Sermons should be made to the People in any
Language not understood by them, and therefore it follows of necessity, that
their Service likewise was in those Tongues which the People of the place
understood.

But what talk we of 500. years after Christ? when even the Lateran Council
held in the year 1215. makes this Decree. Quoniam in plerisque -- Because in
many parts within the same City and Diocese, People are mixed of diverse
Languages, having under one Faith diverse rites and fashions, we strictly
command that the Bishops of the said Cities or Dioceses provide fit and able
men, who according to the diversities of their Rites and Languages may
celebrate Divine Services and administer the Sacraments of the Church,
instructing them both in word and example.

Now after all this if any man will still maintain, that the Divine Service in
unknown Tongues is a matter of Apostolic Tradition, I must needs think the
World is grown very impudent.

There are diverse Doctrines in the Roman Church which have not yet arrived to
the honor to be Donatae civitate, to be received into the number of Articles
of Faith; which yet press very hard for it, and through the importunity and
multitude of their Attorneys that plead for them, in process of time may very
probably be admitted. Of this rank are the Blessed Virgins Immaculate
conception, The Popes Infallibility in determining Controversies, His
superiority to Councils, His indirect Power over Princes in Temporalties, etc.
Now as these are not yet matters of Faith and Apostolic Traditions, yet in
after Ages in the days of our great Grandchildren may very probably become so,
so why should we not fear and suspect, that many things now pass currantly as
points of Faith which Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo
recepit, which perhaps in the days of our great Grandfathers had no such
reputation.

Cardinal Perron teaches us two Rules whereby to know the Doctrine of the
Church in any Age. The first is when the most eminent Fathers of any Age agree
in the affirmation of any Doctrine, and none of their Contemporaries oppose or
condemn them, that is to be accounted the Doctrine of the Church. The second:
when one or more of these Eminent Fathers, speak of any Doctrine not as Doctors
but as witnesses, and say, not, I think so, or hold so, but, the Church holds
and believes this to be Truth. This is to be accounted the Doctrine of the
Church. Now if neither of these Rules be good and certain, then are we
destitute of all means to know what was the public Doctrine of the Church in
the days of our Fathers. But on the other side, if either of them be true, we
run into a worse inconvenience; for then surely the Doctrine of the Millinaries
must be acknowledged to have been the Doctrine of the Church in the very next
Age after the Apostles. For both the most eminent Fathers of that time, and
even all whose Monuments are extant, or mention made of them, viz. Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Melito Sardensis, agree in the affirmation of
this point, and none of their contemporary writers oppose or condemn it: And
besides they speak not as Doctors but as Witnesses, not as of their own private
opinion, but as Apostolic Tradition and the Doctrine of the Church.

Horantius and out of him Franciscus a Sancta Clara teach us that under the
Gospel there is no where extant any precept of Invocating Saints, and tell us
that the Apostles reason of their giving no such precept was, lest the
converted Gentiles might think themselves drawn over from one kind of Idolatry
to another. If this reason be good, I hope then the position whereof it is the
reason is true, viz. that the Apostles did neither command nor teach, nor
advise, nor persuade the converted Gentiles to invocate Saints, for the reason
here rendered serves for all alike, and if they did not, and for this reason did
not so: how then in Gods name comes invocation of Saints to be an Apostolic
Tradition?

The Doctrines of Purgatory, Indulgences, and Prayer to deliver Souls out of
Purgatory are so closely conjoined, that they must either stand or fall
together; at least, the first being the Foundation of the other two, if that be
not Apostolic Tradition, the rest cannot be so. And if that be so, what meant
the Author of the Book of Wisdom to tell us that (after Death) the Souls of the
righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. What
means S. John to teach us, That they are Blessed which Die in the Lord, for
that they rest from their Labors. But above all what meant Bishop Fisher in
his Confutation of Luthers assertion so to prevaricate as to me he seems to do
in the 18th. Art. in saying, multos fortasse movet, etc. Peradventure many are
moved not to place too great Faith in Indulgences, because the use of them may
seem not of long standing in the Church, and a very late invention among
Christians. To whom I answer that Therefore it is not true that all the Roman
Doctrines were taught by Christ and his Apostles.
it is not certain by whom they began first to be taught. Yet some use there
was of them, as they say very Ancient among the Romans, which we are given to
understand by the Stations which were so frequented in that City. Moreover they
say Gregory the first granted some in his time. And after Caeterum ut dicere
caepimus, etc. -- But as we were saying, there are many things of which in the
Primitive Church no mention was made, which yet upon doubts arising are become
perspicuous through the diligence of after times. Certainly, (to return to our
business) no Orthodox man now doubts whether there be a Purgatory, of which yet
among the Ancients there was made very rare or no mention. Moreover the Greeks
to this very day believe not Purgatory. Who so will let him read the writings
of the Ancient Greeks, and I think he shall find no speech of Purgatory, or
else very rarely. The Latins also received not this verity all at once but by
little and little. Neither was the Faith whether of Purgatory or Indulgences so
necessary in the Primitive Church as now it is, for then Charity was so fervent
that every one was most ready to Die for Christ. Crimes were very rare, and
those which were, were punished by the Canons with great severity. But now a
great part of the People would rather put off Christianity than suffer the
rigor of the Canons. That not without the great Wisdom of the Holy Spirit, it
has come to pass that after the course of so many years, the Faith of
Purgatory and the use of Indulgences has been by the Orthodox generally
received as long as there was no care of Purgatory, no man looked after
Indulgences, for all the Credit of Indulgences depends on that. Take away
Purgatory and what need is there of Indulgences. We therefore considering that
Purgatory was a long while unknown. That after, partly upon Revelations partly
upon Scripture it was believed by some, and that so at length the Faith of it
was most generally received by the Orthodox Church, shall easily find out some
reason of Indulgences. Seeing therefore it was so late ere Purgatory was known
and received by the Universal Church, who now can wonder touching Indulgences,
that in the Primitive Church there was no use of them? Indulgences therefore
began after men had trembled a while at the Torments of Purgatory. For then it
is credible the Holy Fathers began to think more carefully by what means they
might provide for their Flocks a remedy against those Torments, for them
especially who had not time enough to fulfill the Penance which the Canons
enjoined.

Erasmus tell us of himself, that though he did certainly know and could prove,
that Auricular Confession such as is in use in the Roman Church, were not of
Divine institution: yet he would not say so, because he conceived Confession a
great restraint from sin, and very profitable for the times he lived in, and
therefore thought it expedient, that men should rather by Error hold that
necessary and commanded, which was only profitable and advised, than by
believing, though truly the non-necessity of it to neglect the use of that, as
by experience we see most men do which was so beneficial: If he thought so of
Confession, and yet thought it not fit to speak his mind, why might he not
think the like of other points, and yet out of discretion and Charity hold his
peace? And why might not others of his time do so as well as he: and if so, how
shall I be assured that in the Ages before him there were not other men alike
minded, who though they knew and saw Errors and Corruptions in the Church, yet
conceiving more danger in the remedy, than harm in the disease, were contented
hoc Catone -- to let things alone as they were, lest by attempting to pluck the
Ivy out of the Wall, they might pull down the Wall it self, with which the Ivy
was so incorporated.

Sir Edwin Sandys relates that in his Travels he met with diverse men, who,
though they believed the Pope to be Antichrist, and his Church Antichristian,
yet thought themselves not bound to separate from the Communion of it: nay
thought themselves bound not to do so: because the True Church was to be the
Seat of Antichrist, from the Communion whereof no man might divide himself upon
any pretense whatsoever.

And much to this purpose is that which Charron tells us in his third Verite,
cap. 4.. 13.15. That although all that which the Protestants say falsely of the
Church of Rome, were true, yet for all this they must not depart from it: and
again, Though the Pope were Antichrist, and the Estate of the Church, were such
(that is as corrupt both in discipline and Doctrine) as they (Protestants)
pretend, yet they must not go out of it. Both these assertions he proves at
large in the above cited Paragraphs, with very many and very plausible reasons:
which I believe would prove his intent, had not the corruptions of the Roman.
Church possessed and infected even the public Service of God among them, in
which their Communion was required: and did not the Church of Rome require the
Belief of all her Errors, as the condition of her Communion. But howsoever be
his reasons conclusive or not conclusive certainly this was the professed opinion
of him, and diverse others; as by name Cassander and Baldwin, who though they
thought as ill of the Doctrine of the most prevailing part of the Church of
Rome; as Protestants do, yet thought it their duty not to separate from her
Communion. And if there were any considerable number of considerable men thus
minded (as I know not why any man should think there was not) then it is made
not only a most difficult, but even an impossible thing to know what was the
Catholic Judgment of our Fathers in the points of controversy: seeing they
might be joined in Communion, and yet very far divided in opinion. They might
all live in obedience to the Pope, and yet some think him head of the Church by
Divine right: others (as a great part of the French Church at this day) by
Ecclesiastical constitution: others by neither, but by Practice and Usurpation,
wherein yet because he had Prescription of many Ages for him he might not
justly be disturbed.

All might go to Confession and yet some only think it necessary; others only
profitable. All might go to Mass and the other Services of the Church, and some
only like and approve the Language of it: others only tolerate it and wish it
altered if it might be, without greater inconvenience. All might receive the
Sacrament, and yet some believe it to be the Body and Blood of Christ, others
only a Sacrament of it. Some that the Mass was a true and proper Sacrifice,
others only a Commemorative Sacrifice, or the Commemoration of a Sacrifice.
Some that it was lawful for the Clergy to deny the Laiety the Sacramental Cup:
others that it was lawful for them to receive in one kind only, seeing they
could not in both. Some might adore Christ as present there according to his
Humanity, others as present according to his Divine Nature only. Some might
pray for the Dead as believing them in Purgatory: others upon no certain
ground, but only that they should rather have their Prayers and Charity which
wanted them not, than that they which did want them should not have them. Some
might pray to Saints upon a belief that they heard their Prayers and knew their
Hearts; others might pray to them meaning nothing but to pray by them, that God
for their sakes would grant their Prayers: others thirdly, might not pray to
them at all, as thinking it unnecessary, others as fearing it unlawful, yet
because they were not fully resolved, only forbearing it themselves, and not
condemning it in others.

Uncle. I pray you then remember also what it is that Protestants do commonly
taunt and check Catholics with, is it not that they believe Traditions?

It is a mere Calumny that Protestants condemn all kind of Traditions, who
subscribe very willingly to that of Vincentius Lerinensis. That Christian
Religion is -- res tradita non inventa, a matter of Tradition not of man's
invention, is, what the Church received from the Apostles, (and by consequence
what the Apostles delivered to the Church) and the Apostles from Christ, and
Christ from God. Chemnitius in his Examen of the Council of Trent has
liberally granted seven sorts of Traditions, and Protestants find no fault with
him for it. Prove therefore any Tradition to be Apostolic, which is not
written. Show that there is some known Word of God which we are commanded to
believe, that is not contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, and
we shall quickly show that we believe Gods Word because it is Gods, and not
because it is written. If there were any thing not written which had come down
to us with as full and Universal a Tradition as the unquestioned Books of
Canonical Scripture, That thing should I believe as well as the Scripture: but
I have long fought for some such thing, and yet I am to seek: Nay I am
confident no one point in Controversy between Papists and Protestants can go
in upon half so fair Cards, for to gain the esteem of an Apostolic Tradition,
as those things which are now decried on all hands, I mean the opinion of the
Chiliasts; and the Communicating Infants. The latter by the confession of
Cardinal Perron, Maldonate, and Binius was the Custom of the Church for 600
years at least: It is expressly and in terms vouched by S. Austin for the
Doctrine of the Church and an Apostolic Tradition: it was never instituted by
General Council, but in the use of the Church, as long before the First general
Council as S. Cyprian before the Council. There is no known Author of the
beginning of it: all which are the Catholic marks of an Apostolic Tradition,
and yet this you say is not so, or if it be, why have you abolisht it? The
former Lineally derives its pedigree from our Savior to St. John: from S. John
to Papias: from Papias to Just in Martyr, Irenaeus, Melito Sardensis,
Tertullian and others of the two first Ages: who as they generally agree in the
Affirmation of this Doctrine, and are not contradicted by any of their
Predecessors: so some of them at least, speak to the point not as Doctors but
Witnesses, and deliver it for the Doctrine of the Church and Apostolic
Tradition, and condemn the contrary as Heresy. And therefore if there be any
unwritten Traditions, these certainly must be admitted first: or if these which
have so fair pretense to it must yet be rejected: I hope then we shall have the
like liberty to put back Purgatory, and Indulgences, and Transubstantiation,
and the Latin Service, and the Communion in one kind, etc. none of which is of
Age enough to be Page to either of the forenamed Doctrines, especially the
opinion of the Millenaries.

Uncle. What think you means this word Tradition? No other thing certainly but
that we confute all our Adversaries by the Testimony of the former Church;
saying unto them, this was the belief of our Fathers; Thus were we taught by
them and they by theirs, without stop or stay till you come to Christ.

We confute our Adversaries by saying thus -- Truly a very easy confutation:
But saying and proving are two Men's Offices; and therefore though you be
excellent in the former, I fear when it comes to the Trial, you will be found
defective in the Latter.


Uncle. And this no other but the Roman Church did or could ever pretend to,
which being in truth undeniable, and they cannot choose but grant the thing:
Their last refuge is to laugh, and say that both Fathers and Councils did Err
because they were men, as if Protestants themselves were more. Is it not so as
I tell you?

No indeed, it is not by your leave, good Uncle. For first the Greek Church as
every body knows, pretends to perpetual succession of Doctrine, and undertakes
to derive it from Christ and his Apostles, as confidently as we do ours:
Neither is there any word in all this discourse, but might have been urged as
fairly and as probably for the Greek Church as for the Roman: and therefore
seeing your Arguments fight for both alike, they must either conclude for both,
which is a direct impossibility, for then Contradictions should be both true:
or else which is most certain they conclude for neither and are not
Demonstrations as you pretend, (for never any Demonstration could prove both
parts of a Contradiction) but mere Sophisms and Captions, as the progress of
our answer shall justify.

Secondly, It is so far from Protestants to grant the thing you speak of, To
wit, that the controverted Doctrines of the Roman Church came from Apostolic
Tradition, that they verily believe should the Apostles now live again, they
would hardly be able to find amongst you the Doctrine which they taught by
reason of abundance of trash and rubbish which you have laid upon it.

And lastly, They pretend not that Fathers and Councils may err and they
cannot, nor that they were men and themselves are not; but that you do most
unjustly and vainly to father your inventions of Yesterday upon the Fathers and
Councils.


Nephew. I know that we Catholics do reverence Traditions as much as Scripture
it self: neither do I see why we should be blamed for it; for the words which
Christ and his Apostles spoke, must needs be as infallible as those which were
written.

True. But still the question depends, whether Christ and his Apostles did
indeed speak those words which you pretend they did: we say with Irenaeus:
Praeconiaverunt primum, scripserunt postea. What they preached first, that they
wrote afterward: we say with Tertullian -- (Ecclesias) Apostoli condiderunt,
ipsi eis praedicando, tam viva quod aiunt voce, quam per Epistolas postea. --
The Apostles founded the Churches by their Preaching to them: first by word of
mouth, then after by their writings. If you can prove the contrary do so and we
yield: but hitherto you do nothing.


Nephew. And as for the keeping of it, I see the Scripture it self is beholden
to Tradition (Gods providence presupposed) for the integrity both of the
letter, and the sense. Of the letter it is confessed: of the sense manifest. For
the sense being a distinct thing from the naked letter, and rather fetched out
by force of consequence, than in express and formal terms contained, (which is
most true whether we speak of Protestant sense or the Catholic) it belongs
rather to Tradition than express Text of Scripture.

That which you desire to conclude is, That we must be beholden to Tradition
for the sense of Scripture: and your reason to conclude this is, because the
sense is fetched out by force of consequence: This of some places of Scripture
is not true, especially those which belong to faith and good manners, which
carry their meaning in their foreheads. Of others it is true, but nothing to
the purpose in hand, but rather directly against it. For who will not say, If I
collect the sense of Scripture by Reason, then I have it not from Authority:
that is unless I am mistaken. If I fetch it out by force of Consequence, then I
am not beholden to Tradition for it. But the letter of Scripture has been
preserved by Tradition, and therefore why should we not receive other things
upon Tradition as well as Scripture? I answer. The Jews Tradition preserved the
books of the Old Testament, and why then does our Savior receive these upon
their Tradition, and yet condemn other things which they suggested as matters
of Tradition? If you say it was because these Traditions came not from Moses as
they were pretended; I say also that yours are only pretended and not proved to
come from the Apostles. Prove your Tradition of these Additions as well as you
prove the Tradition of Scripture, and assure your selves, we then according to
the injunction of the Council of Trent shall receive both with equal reverence.


Nephew. As it may appear by the sense of these few words. Hoc est corpus meum,
whether you take the Protestant or the Catholic sense: For the same Text
cannot have two contrary senses of it self, but as they are fetched out by force
of Argument; and therefore what sense has best Tradition to show for it self
that is the Truth.

This is neither Protestant nor Catholic sense, but if we may speak the truth
direct nonsense. For what if the same Text cannot have contrary senses: is
there therefore no means but Tradition to determine which is the true sense?
What connection or what relation is there between this Antecedent and this
Consequent? certainly they are mere strangers to one another, and until they
met by chance in this argument, never saw each other before. He that can find a
third proposition to join them together in a good syllogism, I profess unto
you, -- Erit mihi magnus Appollo. -- But what if of these two contrary senses
the one, that is the Literal, draw after it a long train of absurdities; The
other, that is the Figurative do not so? Have we not reason enough without
advising with Tradition about the matter, to reject the Literal sense and
embrace the Spiritual? S. Austin certainly thought we had. For he gives us this
direction in his Book de Doctrina Christiana; and the first and fittest Text
that he could choose to exemplify his Rule, what think you is it? even the
Cousin-German to that which you have made choice of. Unless you eat the flesh
of the Son of Man, etc. Here says he, the Letter seems to command impiety.
Figura est ergo. Therefore it is a Figure commanding to feed devoutly, upon the
Passion of our Lord, and to lay up in our memory that Christ was crucified for
us.


Uncle. These particulars peradventure would require a further discussion, and
now I will take nothing but what is undeniable. As this is, to wit, That what
points are in Controversy betwixt us and Protestants, we believe to have been
delivered by Christ and his Apostles to our forefathers, and by them delivered
from hand to hand to our Fathers, whom we know to have delivered them for such
to us, and to have received and believed them for such themselves.

Certainly though Ink and Paper cannot blush, yet I dare say you were fain to
rub your forehead over and over before you committed this to Writing. Say what
you list, for my part I am so far from believing you, that I verily believe you
do not believe your selves, when you pretend that you believe those points of
your Doctrine which are in controversy, to have been delivered to your
Forefathers by Christ and his Apostles. Is it possible that any sober man who
has read the New Testament, should believe that Christ and his Apostles taught
Christians, That it was fit and lawful to deny the Laity the Sacramental Cup:
That it was expedient and for the edification of the Church, that the Scripture
should be read, and the public worship of God perpetually celebrated in a
language which they understand not, and to which for want of understanding,
(unless S. Paul deceive us) they cannot say Amen: Or is it reasonable you
should desire us to believe you, when your own Men, your own Champions, your
own Councils confess the contrary?

Does not the Council of Constance acknowledge plainly, That the custom which
they ratified, was contrary to Christ's institution, and the custom of the
Primitive Church? and how then was it taught by Christ and his Apostles?

Do not Cajetan and Lyranus confess ingenuously, that it follows evidently from
S. Paul, that it is more for edification, that the Liturgy of the Church should
be in such a Language as the Assistants understand?

The like Confession we have from others concerning Purgatory and Indulgences.

Others acknowledges the Apostles never taught Invocation of Saints.

Rhenanus says as much touching Auricular Confession.

It is evident from Peter Lombard that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was
not a point of Faith in his time.

From Pius Mirandula that the Infallibility of the Church was no Article, much
less a foundation of Faith in his time.

Bellarmine acknowledges that the Saints enjoying the Vision of God before the
day of judgment was no Article of Faith in the time of Pope John the XXII.

But as the Proverb is, when Thieves fall out, true men recover their goods: so
how small and heartless the reverence of the Church of Rome is to ancient
Tradition, cannot be more plainly discovered, than by the Quarrels which her
Champions have amongst themselves, especially about the Immaculate conception
of the Blessed Virgin.

The Patrons of the Negative opinion, Cajetan, Bannes, Bandellus and Canus,
alledg for it, First an whole army of Scriptures, Councils and Fathers,
agreeing unanimously in this Doctrine, That only Christ was free from sin. Then,
an innumerous multitude of Fathers expressly affirming the very point in
question, not contradicted by any of their Contemporaries, or Predecessors, or
indeed of their Successors for many ages.

All the Holy Fathers agree in this, that the Virgin Mary was conceived in
Original sin. So In part primum q. 1. Art. 8. Dub. 5.
Bannes.

Cajetan brings for it fifteen Fathers in his judgment irrefragable, others
produce two hundred, Bandellus almost three hundred. Thus Disp. 51. in Ep. ad
Romans
Salmeron.

That all the Holy Fathers who have fallen upon the mention of this matter,
with one mouth affirm, that the Blessed Virgin was conceived in Original sin.
So Lib. VII. loc. cap. 1. cap. 3. n. 9.
Canus.

And after, -- That the contrary Doctrine has neither Scripture nor Tradition
for it. For (says he) no Traditions can be derived unto us but by the Bishops
and Holy Fathers, the Successors of the Apostles, and it is certain that those
ancient writers received it not from their predecessors.

Now against this stream of ancient Writers, when the contrary new Doctrine came
in, and how it prevailed, it will be worth the considering.

The First that set it abroach was Richardus de Sancto Victore, as his
countryman Omnium express primus Christiferam virginem originalis noxae
expertem tenuit. -- De gestis Scotorum. III. 12.
Johannes Major testifies of him. -- He was expressly the first that held the
Virgin Mary free from Original sin, -- or he was the first that expressly held
so. So after upon this false ground, which had already taken deep root in the
heart of Christians, That it was impossible to give too much honor to her that
was the Mother of the Savior of the World; like an ill weed it grew and spread
apace. So that in the Council of Sess XXXVI.
Basil, (which Binius tells us was reprobated but in part, to wit, in the point
of the Authority of Councils, and in the deposition of Eugenius the Pope) it
was defined and declared, to be Holy Doctrine, and consonant to the worship of
the Church, to the Catholic Faith, to right Reason and the Holy Scripture, and
to be approved, held and embraced by all Catholics: and that it should be
lawful for no man for the time to come to preach or teach the contrary. The
custom also of keeping the Feast of her Holy Conception, which before was but
particular to the Roman and some other Churches, and it seems somewhat
neglected, was then renewed and made Universal; and commanded to be celebrated
-- sub nomine Conception is -- under the name of the Conception. Binius in a
Marginal note tells us indeed, That they celebrate not this Feast in the Church
of Rome, by virtue of this Renovation, -- cum esset Conciliabalum -- being this
was the act not of a Council, but of a Conventicle, yet he himself in his
Index, styles it the Oecomenical Council of Basil, and tells that it was
reprobated only in two points, of which this is none. Now whom shall we
believe, Binius in his Margin, or Binius in his Index?

Yet in aftertimes Pope Sixtus IV. and Pius V. thought not this Decree so
binding, but that they might and did again put life into the condemned opinion,
giving liberty by their constitutions to all men to hold and maintain either
part, either that the Blessed Virgin was conceived with Original sin or was
not. Which Constitution of Sixtus IV. The Sess. V.
Council of Trent renewed and confirmed.

But the wheel again turning, and the Negative opinion prevailing, The
Affirmative was banished, first by a Decree of Paul V. from all public Sermons,
Lectures, Conclusions, and all public Acts whatsoever: and since by another
Decree of Gregory XV. from all private Writings, and private Conferences.

But yet all this contents not the University of Paris. They, as Salmeron tells
us, admit none to the Degree of Doctor of Divinity, unless they have first
bound themselves by solemn Oath to maintain the Immaculate conception of the
Blessed Virgin.

Now I beseech you Mr. R. -- consider your courses with some indifference.

First, You take Authority upon you, against the universal, constant, unopposed
Tradition of the Church for many ages: to set up as a rival, a new upstart
yesterdays invention: and to give all men liberty to hold which they please. So
Pope Sixtus IV. The Council of Trent, and Pius V. that is, you make it lawful
to hold the ancient Faith, or not to hold it, nay to hold the contrary. This is
high presumption. But you stay not here; For,

Secondly, The ancient Doctrine you cloister and hook up within the narrow,
close and dark rooms of the thoughts and brains of the defenders of it,
forbidding them upon pain of damnation so much as to whisper it in their
private discourses and writings: and in the mean time the New Doctrine you set
at full liberty, and give leave, nay countenance and encouragement to all men
to employ their time and wits and tongues and pens, in the maintenance and
propagation of it. Thus Paul V. and Gregory XV. Yet this is not all; For,

Thirdly, You bind men by Oaths to defend the new opinion, and to oppose the
ancient. So the University of Paris. Yet still you proceed further; For,

Fourthly, By your General Councils confirmed by your Popes, you have declared
and defined, that this new invention is agreeable, and consequently that the
ancient Doctrine is repugnant to the Catholic Faith, to Reason, to the Holy
Scripture. So the Council of Basil.

These things I entreat you weigh well in your Consideration, and put not into
the Scale above a just allowance, not above three grains of partiality, and
then tell me whether you can with reason or with modesty suppose or desire that
we should believe, or think that you believe, that all the points of Doctrine
which you contest against us, were delivered at first by Christ and his
Apostles, and have ever since by the Succession of Bishops and Pastors been
preserved inviolate and propagated unto you.

The Patrons I confess of this new Invention set not much by the Decree of the
Council of Basil for it, but plead very hard for a full and final definition of
it from the Sea Apostolic: and finding the conspiring opposition of the
ancient Fathers to be the main impediment of their purpose, it is strange to
see how confidently they ride over them.

First, Says Disp 51. in Epist. ad Romans
Salmeron in the place forecited, they press us with multitude of Doctors; of
whom we must not say that they err in a matter of such moment.

We answer, says he, out of De moribus Eeclesia. lib 1. cap. 2.
S. Austin and the Doctrine of S. Thomas: That the argument drawn from Authority
is weak. Then to that multitude of Doctros we oppose another multitude.

Thirdly, We object to the contrary the efficacy of reasons, which are more
excellent than any Authority.

Some of them reckon two hundred Fathers, other as Bandellus almost three
hundred, Cajetan fifteen, but those as he says irrefragable. But as a wise
Shepherd said -- pauperis est numerare pecus. Some of those whom they produce
are of an exolete Authority, and scarce worthy of memory.

Lastly, Against this objected multitude we answer with the word of God. Exodus
23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Neither shall thou in judgment
yield to the sentence of many to depart from the truth. For when the Donatists
gloried in the multitude of their Authors, S. Austin answered it was a sign of
a cause destitute of truth, to rely only upon the Authority of many men which
may err.

It falls out sometimes also that from some one Doctor, especially if he be
famous, proceeds a multitude of followers of his Opinion, and some, taken with
an humble and pious fear, choose rather to follow the Opinion of another
against their mind, than to bring out of their own wit any thing new, lest they
should so bring any new thing into the Church. Whose humility as it is to be
praised, so the confidence of others is not to be condemned, who for the love
of truth fear not to bring in better things. Thus S. Hierome in his Sermon of
the Assumption, if it be his, fears to affirm that the Virgin Mary is assumed
into Heaven, and thinks it rather to be piously desired, than rashly defined.
But In the Margint here he says, The Doctrine of S. Austin alone has brought
into the Church the Worship of the blessed Virgins Assumption.
S. Austin more happily dared to affirm it, and settle it with many argument,
by which adventure this the Church has gained, that persuaded by his reasons
she has believed it, and celebrates it in her worship.

But they fetch their arguments from the Antiquity of the Doctors, to which
always greater honor was given than to Novelties. But I answer, old men are
praisers of ancient times, but we affirm, the younger the Doctors are, the more
perspicacious. Moreover we say that although they were ancient yet they were
men, and themselves held under the darkness of Original sin and might err. But
go to, who are these Ancients? are they Apostles? are they Ambrose or Hierom,
or Austin? but none of them discussed this Controversy on purpose.

Chrysostom is opposed in his Commentary on S. Matthew, where he says though
Christ were not a sinner, yet he has humane Nature from a sinner. Understand
(says Salmeron) from her who of her self, and according to the condition of
nature was a sinner. Thomas says that Chrysostom speaks exorbitantly, for he
constitutes the Virgin under actual sin. Or that the Commentaries which go up
and down under his name ane not his. Or that these passages are adjectitious.
Or if they be indeed his, with the good leave and favor of so great a man,
they are to be rejected. Neither ought any man to marvel that he and Bernard,
and Thomas, and Bonaventure, and Alexander of Ales, and Albert, and Durand, and
Egidius; and Lastly, The greater part followed that opinion: both because they
were men, and because in progress of time, new mysteries are revealed which
before were unknown. -- For as holiness of life purges no man from sin, so it
frees no man from danger of error. -- Every age finds out some verities proper
to it self, which the former ages were ignorant of, -- and there in the Margin,
Every age has its peculiar divine revelations.

Thus far Salmeron, by whom we may see, That Protestants are not the only men
who say that the Fathers may err: but that Roman Catholics too, can and dare
valiantly break through, and tread under their feet (though perhaps with cap in
hand, and some show of reverence) and even ride over whole bands of Fathers
when they stand in their way.

Another great Achilles for the same opinion is one Joannes Baptista Poza, a
Jesuit, and Professor of Divinity at Complutum: He in his fourth Book of his
Elacidarium Deiparae, pleads very earnestly to have it defined, and labors
very lustily to remove all exceptions to the contrary, but above all those many
ones, -- That there is no Tradition for it, That the stream of Ancient
Tradition is against, and therefore well and worthily may it be condemned for
an Heresy: but to be Canonized among the Articles of Faith, it can with no
reason expect.

To the Second exception he brings two answers which Salmeron it seems forgot,
in the prosecution whereof he has many excellent passages, which I have
thought good to cull out of him to evidence the wonderful reverence, and
constant regard of the present Church of Rome, to the Tradition of the Ancient.

The first, That it is possible the Writings of the Fathers out of which these
Testimonies against the Immaculate conception are taken, may be corrupted: But
to show it probable they are so in these places, he speaks not one word of
sense, nor so much as any colorable reason, unless this may pass for one (as
perhaps it may where reasons are scarce.) No proposition, which contradicts the
common judgment of the Fathers can be probable,; I should rather subsume, but
this does so. Therefore not probable.
But it is de fide that our opinion is probable, for the Council of Trent has
made it so by giving liberty to all to hold it. Therefore without doubt we must
hold, that it is not (whatsoever it seems) against the common judgment of the
Fathers. This argument says he does most illustriously convince the followers
of the contrary opinion: that they ought not to dare affirm hereafter, that
their opinion flows from the common judgment and writings of the ancient
Doctors.

His second answer is, That whereas Bandillus and Cajetan, etc. produce general
sayings of Irenaeus, Origin, Athanasius, Theophilus Alexandrinus, Greg. Nyssen,
Basil, Greg. Naz. Cyprian, Hierom, Fulgentius, and in a manner of all the
ancient Fathers, exempting Christ alone from, and consequently concluding the
Virgin Mary under Original sin, which Argument must needs conclude if the
Virgin Mary be not Christ. His answer I say is, These Testimonies have little
or no strength: for did they conclude, we must then (let us in Gods name) say
that the Virgin Mary committed also many venial sins: For the Scriptures,
Fathers and Councils set forth in propositions as Universal. That there is no
man but Christ who is not often defiled at least with smaller sins, and who may
not justly say that Petition of our Lords Prayer, Demitte nobis debita nostra.

An answer I confess as fit as a Napkin to stop the mouths of his domestic
adversaries, though no way fit to satisfy their reason. But this man little
thought there were Protestants in the world as well as Dominicans, who will not
much be troubled by thieves falling out, to recover more of their goods than
they expected, and to see a prevaricating Jesuit, instead of stopping one
breach in their ruinous cause, to make two. For whereas this man argues from
the destruction of the Consequent to the destruction of the Antecedent thus: If
these testimonies were good and concluding, then the Virgin Mary should have
been guilty not only of Original but also of actual sin, But the Consequent is
false and blasphemous: Therefore the Antecedent is not true. They on the others
side argue, and sure with much more reason, and much more conformity to the
Ancient Tradition: From the Assertion of the Antecedent to the Assertion of the
Consequent, thus: If these testimonies be good and concluding, then the Blessed
Virgin was guilty both of Original sin and Actual; but the Testimonies are good
and concluding; therefore she was guilty even of actual sins, and therefore
much more of Original.

His Third Answer is, That their Church has, or may define many other things
against which (if their works be not depraved) there lies a greater consent of
Fathers, than against the Immaculate Conception, and therefore why not this?

The Instances he gives are four.

1. That the Blessed Virgin committed no actual sin.

2. That the Angels were not created before the visible world.

3. That Angels are Incorporeal.

4. That the Souls of Saints departed are made happy by the Vision of God
before the day of Judgment.

Against the first Opinion he alleges direct places out of Origin, which he
says admit no exposition; though Pamelius upon Tertullian, and Sixtus Senensis
labor in vain to put a good sense on them. -- Out of Euthymias and
Theophylact: Out of S. Chrysostom diverse pregnant testimonies, and S. Thomas
his confession touching one of them, out of the Author of the Questions of the
New and Old Testament in S. Austin cap. 75. Out of S. Hilary upon Psa. 118.
which words yet says he Tolet has drawn to a good construction: yet so much
difficulty still remains in them. -- Out of Tertullian de carne Christi cap. 7.
which he tells us will not be salved by Pamelius his gloss. -- Out of
Athanafius, out of Irenaeus III. 18. out of S. Austin lib. 2. de Symbolo ad
Catech. cap. 5. Whose words yet, because they admit, says Poza, some
exposition, I thought fit to suppress, though some think they are very hard to
be avoided. Out of Greg. Nyss. -- out of S. Cyprian in his Sermon on the
Passion: Whose words, says he; though they may by some means be eluded, yet
will always be very difficult if we examine the Antecedents and Consequents: out
of Anselm, Rich. de S. Victor, S. Ambrose, S. Andrew of Jerusalem, and S. Bid
and then tells us there are many other Testimonies much resembling these: and
besides many Fathers and Texts of Scripture, which exempt Christ only from
actual sin, and lastly, many suspicious sayings against her Immunity in them,
who use to say that at the Angels Annunciation she was cleansed and purged and
expiated from all faults committed by her freewill, which says he, though
Canisius and others explicate in a pious sense, yet at least they show, that
either those alleged against the Imaculate conception are as favorable to be
expounded: Or we must say, that a verity may be defined by the Sea Apostolic
against the judgment of some Fathers.

From these things, says he, is drawn an unanswerable reason, That for the
defining the purity of the conception, nothing now is wanting. For seeing,
notwithstanding more and more convincing testimonies of Fathers who either did,
or did seem to ascribe actual sin to the Blessed Virgin; notwithstanding the
Universal sayings of Scripture and Councils bringing all, except Christ, under
sin: Lastly, notwithstanding the silence of the Scriptures and Councils
touching her Immunity from actual sin, seeing notwithstanding all this the
Council of Trent has either decreed, Seff. VI. c. 23. de Justifical.
or has confirmed, it being before decreed by the consent of the faithful,
that the Blessed Virgin never was guilty of any voluntary, no not the least
sin: It follows certainly that the Apostolic See, has as good nay better
ground, to enrol amongst her Articles the Virgins Immaculate conception: The
reason is clear, for neither are there so many nor so evident sentences of
Fathers which impute any fault or blemish to the Conception of the Mother of
God, as there are in appearance to charge her with actual offenses. Neither are
there fewer Universal propositions in Scripture, by which it may be proved that
only Jesus was free from actual sin, and therefore that the Virgin Mary fell
into it. Neither can there at this time be desired a greater consent of the
faithful, nor a more ardent desire than there now is, that this verity should
be defined, and that the contrary Opinion should be Anathematized for Erroneous
and Heretical. The words of the Council of Trent on which this reason is
grounded are these.

If any man say, That a man all his life long may avoid all, even venial sins,
unless by special privilege from God, as the Church holds of the Blessed
Virgin, let him be Anathema. But if the consent of the Church has prevailed
against more clear Testimonies of ancient Fathers, even for that which is
favored with no express authority of Scriptures or Councils: And if the
Council of Trent upon this consent of the faithful, has either defined this
Immunity of the Virgin, from all actual sin, or declared it to be defined: Who
then can deny but that the Church has immediate power to define among the
Articles of Faith, the pious Opinion of the Immaculate Conception?

His second Example by which he declares the power of their Church to define
Articles against a multitude of Fathers (and consequently not only without but
against Tradition) is the opinion that Angels were not created before the
Corporeal world was created: which says he is, or may be defined, though there
were more Testimonies of Fathers against it, than against the Immaculate
Conception. So he says in the Argument of his Fifth Chapter, and in the end of
the same Chapter: The Council of Lateran has defined this against the express
judgment of twenty Fathers, of which Nazianzen, Basil, Chrysostom, Cyrill,
Hierom, Ambrose, and Hillary are part.

His third Example to the same purpose, is the opinion that Angels are
Incorporeal: against which says he, in the Argument of his sixth Chapter:
there are more Testimonies of the Fathers, than against the Immaculate
Conception, and yet it is, or at least may be defined by the Church, and in the
end of the Chapter, I have for this Opinion cited twenty three Fathers, which
as most men think is now condemned in the Firm de summa Trinitate.
Lateran Council, or at least as De Angelis. lib. 6.
Suarez proves, is to be rejected as manifestly temerarious.

His fourth and last Example to the same purpose is, The Opinion that the Souls
of Saints departed enjoy the Vision of God before the Resurrection. Against
which he tells us in the first place was the Judgment of Pope John XXI. though
not as a Pope but as a private Doctor. Then he musters up against it a great
multitude of Greek and Latin Fathers, touching which he says -- All these
Testimonies when 1. 2. D. 29. cap. 1.
Vasquez has related, at length he cap. 3.
answers that they might be so explained as to say nothing against the true and
Catholic Doctrine. Yet if they could not be so explained, their Authority ought
not to hinder us from embracing that which the Church (...). The same argument
I make (says Pe^^) The Fathers and ancient Doctors which are objected against
the pious opinion of the Conception of the Virgin, may be commodiously
explicated, or at least so handled that they shall not hurt: Notwithstanding
though they cannot be explicated, some of them, that their Testimonies ought
not to hinder, but that the Sea Apostolic may define the Blessed Virgins
preservation from Original sin. In fine, for the close of this Argument he
adds, Nolo per plura. -- I will not run through more Examples: These that I
have reckoned are sufficient, and admonishes learned men to bring together
other like proofs, whereby they may promote the desired Determination.


FINIS.

