THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Seven Prisoners suffering at TYBURN On
Friday the 4th of May, 1677. VIZ.
Robert Dine, William Dine, and Margaret Dine,
Of Enfield, for barbarously wounding of Jane King, the Sweetheart of the said
Robert. Margaret Spicer, For murdering her Bastardchilde. David Hackley,
Jeremiah Dawson, and Mary Brown,
All notorious Offenders, and formerly Burned in the hand for several Felonies
by them committed.


Together with their penitent Behavior in Newgate, since their Condemnation,
and last Speeches at the place of Execution.

With Allowance.

To. L'Estrang.

London: Printed for D. M. 1677.

The Confession and Execution of the Seven Prisoners suffering at Tyburn.
DId not people not only wilfully neglect all means of Grace, and smother
convictions of Conscience, but also abandon all the dictates of Reason, and
considerations of their own Interest even in this world, and give themselves
wholly up to the conduct of Satan, to be hurried on by his temptations to the
most dangerous and destructive Attempts, one would never imagine, that after so
many Monthly Examples as this City affords, of persons bringing themselves to
shameful and untimely Ends by unjust and wicked Courses, any should be at once
so impiously and foolishly bold as to follow the same Courses till they involve
themselves in the like miserable and deplorable Fate.

At the late Sessions, holden for London and Middlesex the 25th and 26th of
April, no less than Nine persons received Sentence of death; of whom Five were
old notorious Offenders; and though often they had obtained the favor of the
Clergy, and some the mercy of Pardons, yet still they persisted in their
lewdness: However, Two of them that seemed the least incourrigible, were once
more graciously redeemed from that destruction they had precipitated themselves
into: And may their suture lives, thus given them as a Prey, and saved as a
Brand plucked out of the fire, be spent in honest Industry and Employment, that
they may prove worthy of such Reprieve; for assuredly if they do not repent,
and turn from these wicked practices, they will shortly again stand in need of
Mercy, which will then refuse to hear their Complaints, and deliver them up to
Death according to Justice.

One of the other Four was Condemned for murdering her Bastard-Childe, which
she most unnaturally killed and hid in her bed for some days, till the same was
discovered by one that came to visit her. As she denied her murdering of it at
the Bar, so she persisted in that negative to Master Ordinary and other
Ministers since she received Sentence, alleging that it was Stillborn; or at
least, contracted its death as soon as ever it saluted the light, by an
accidental fall: However, the Law, to prevent such pretenses which in all Cases
of that kind might be made, obliging the woman immediately after to Cry out,
and she failing therein, and as it is shrewdly apparent by Circumstances, was
the principal Author of its destruction, she was condemned to die, and this day
executed at Tyburn according to Sentence.

Three others, as the Crime they suffered for was the first they were known to
have committed; so was it so strange and heinous, as scarce ever to have been
done by any body but themselves: so that we may say, They died Presidents of
Punishment, for a Crime unpresidented. These were the two Brothers and Sister
of Enfield, who so barbarously mangled Jane King, to whom Robert, one of the
Brothers, pretended Love; but after a long acquaintance, being Fellow Servants
together, she refused to have him: whereupon his treacherous Love turned to
Hatred and Malice, instigated (as it is supposed) chiefly thereunto by this
unhappy Sister, with whom and his Brother he lays a Plot to disfigure her;
maliciously and enviously designing, that because she would not accept of him,
they would render her so deformed, that she her self should not be acceptable
to any other person. In pursuance whereof, on the 20th of February last about 8
of the clock in the evening, Robert and Jane being only up, and their aged
Master in bed, some (...) ^alls Robert by his name at the backdoor, which
(...) immediately opens; and then comes in the Sister and Brother, the later of
whom seizes upon Jane and holds her, while the former barbarous Fury cuts her
Eye so lamentably that she has utterly lost the use of it; mangles her Nose in
a dismal manner, insomuch that two bones were taken out of it; her Tongue she
slit, and almost cut off both her Lips; and also gave her a wound and two slabs
in the Neck, and several slashes on the Arm, etc. And having dispatched this
unheard of Cruelty, left her for dead, and went home; who being gone, Robert
cries out Murder and Thieves; and Neighbors coming in, pretends to be knocked
down, etc. but it pleased God that Jane, after three or four days, recovered
her senses and then declared who had abused her, and fully proved the same at
the Sessions; whereupon they were all Condemned according to the Statute in
that Case made and provided.

Yet did they all persist in the denial of the Fact, after their Condemnation,
even to the day of their Death: nor would all Persuasions or Admonitions of
several Ministers that came to visit them, get any acknowledgement that they
had any hand in it. Though on the Sunday they carried themselves very
attentively in the Chapel, and a great part of the Sermon was to persuade the
necessity of Confession in order to their Souls health, yet they could not be
prevailed upon; only on the Monday Margaret seemed a little unusually troubled,
and delared, That she had something lay upon her Conscience, and desired she
might speak with a Minister in private; whereupon a Minister was sent for, who
took her aside, and hoping then she would have made an ingenuous Discovery,
pressed her with all imaginable Arguments, but to no purpose: For she told him,
she knew nothing of it; whereupon he as'd her, What it was she said troubled
her, and lay upon her Conscience, for which she desired to speak with a
Minister by her self: To which, all the answer that he could get was, That she
had, when she said so, something in her head, but now she had forgot it.

David Hackley having been before burned in the hand, etc. after his Sentence,
appeared very seriously concerned; and whereas he had formerly occasioned much
trouble to a Gentleman that had been his Master, and hired Sadler and others to
accuse and swear against him for several matters, endeavoring what they could
maliciously to have taken away his life, had not their wickedness been
frustrated by Providence, he now (I say) did freely confess, That all that
Prosecution was malicious and groundless, and that he was chief Designer and
Confederate in carrying on the same: For which he asked God and his Master
forgiveness; declaring, That he was heartily sorry for the same, especially
that he should draw in others, and provoke them to swear notorious untruths,
which he was afraid they had never sincerely repented of before their deaths.

Of the other two Prisoners we have little to say, but only that as they lived
incorrigible, and would take no warning by several Convictions; so it is to be
feared they died so too, at least for any public signs of Repentance, which
might testify the contrary.

By the Christian favor of the Court, they were allowed time to prepare for
Death until the 4th of May; at which time they were carried to Tyburn, and
after the usual Prayers, without any considerable or remarkable Speeches, but
only requesting the Prayers of all good People present, they were Executed
according to Law.

FINIS.

