A DISCOURSE CONCERNING TRADE And that in particular of The East Indies.
Wherein several weighty Propositions are fully discussed, and the State of the
East India Company is faithfully stated.
THe Author craves leave in the first place, to present the Reader with some
g^^neral Opinions concerning ^rade, which experience has recommended to the
approbation of the most Judicious.

1. That trading Merchants, while they are in the busy and eager prosecu^tion
of their particular Trades, although they be very wise and good men, are not
al^ways the best Judges of Trade, as it relates to the profit or power of a
Kingdom. The reason may be, because their Eyes are so continually fixed, and
their Minds intent upon what makes for their peculiar gain or loss, that they
have not leisure to expatiate, or tu^^ their thoughts to what is most
advantageous to the Kingdom in general. The like man be said of all
Shopkeepers, and other Tradesmen, until they leave off their Trades and by
the purchase of Lands, become of the same common Interest with most of their
Countrymen.

2. Upon the same reason, a mixed Assembly of Noble men, Gentlemen and
Merchants, are the best Constitution for the making Rules, Orders and Bylaws,
for the carrying on any Trade for the public utility of the Kingdom.

3. That all Trade, domestic or foreign, that does not in the result,
increase the value o^ Land, ought to be totally rejected.

4. That all Monopolies are destructive to Trade, and obstruct the increase of
the value of our Lands, and that therefore, if there be any thing in any
Charter of Incorporate^ ^^^chants, that hinders any of their Majesty's Subjects
from coming into that Trade, (...) as good terms as others did, or yet may, it
is fit that such bars should be removed.

5. That if all Strangers had free Liberty to enter into any of our
Incorporated foreign ^rades, as is practiced by the Dutch, it would greatly
increase our Trade, and improve (...) value of Land.

6. That those narrow Clauses in the Turkey Companies, and other Charters,
which limit (...) Traders to be Freemen of London, and not to be Shopkeepers,
etc. And the practice of (...) no Man to be free of the Turk^y Company under 25
l. if he he under 25 years of (...); or 50 l. if above, are to the prejudice of
the Nation in general.

7. The Dutch, Nationally speaking, are the wisest People now extant, for the
(...) and carrying on their Trades for the public advantage of their Country.

8. That the dominion of the Sea can never be retained, preserved and
maintained, but (...) the excess and predominency of foreign Trade.

9. That dom^stick and foreign Trade (as also Land) do wax and wain together.

10. That Silver and Gold, coined, or uncoined, tho^ they are used for a
measure of all ^^her things, are no less a Commodity then Wine, Oil, Tobacco,
Cloth or Stuffs, and may (...) many cases be exported as much to National
advantage as any other Commodity.

11. That no Nation can be considerable in Trade that prohibits the Exportation
of ^ullion.

12. That it is more for the public advantage to export Gold or Silver, coined
than (...); for by the former we gain the Manufa^ture.

13. That whatever Nation has the lowest interest, will certainly have their
Lands in ^ighest esteem and price: and no Nation shall ever over-match the
Dutch in Trade, till they mate them in the rate of Interest Money.

14. That the Dutch gain more by exportation of Bullion and foreign
Commodities ^^an by all their own native Productions and Manufactures.

15. That when ever wise and great Nations, having different Interests, and
various forms of Government, do yet conspire in the same means to accomplish
the same ends, of Profit, Power and Honor, they are to be concluded nearer the
right way to those ends, ^hen the wisest and best private men living, who hold
contrary Opinions, swayed by personal Profit o^ Loss, Pique or Prejudice.

16. That there is just as much need of Companies of Merchants in England as in
Holland, and no more. The Dutch have no Companies of Merchants, but those of
the East and West Indies, and those in joint Stocks, protected and defended by
the Laws of the Provinces, which are of the same force as Acts of Parliament
with us.

17. That there is a necessity of a joint Stock in all foreign Trade, where
the Trade must be maintained by Force and Fo^^s on the Land, and where the King
cannot conveniently maintain an Amity and Correspondence by Ambassadors, and
not elsewhere.

To proceed, the Propositions intended to be handled, follow First, That the
East India Trade is the most National of all foreign Trades.
Which is thus proved, (viz.)

1. WHat the Dutch, French, Danes, Portugals, and which not long since the
Swedes, and now the Duke of Brandenburgh, have with so great charge an^ expense
attempted, and hedged about with Laws and Encouragements, must certainly b^
matter of the greatest National Consequence.

2. This Trade imploys more great Warlike English Ships from 50 to 70 Guns,
the^ all the Trades of the World from England besides.

3. This Trade alone furnishes us with Saltpeter, a most necessary Commodity.

4. Above four fifth Parts of the Commodities imported by this Trade, are again
ex^ported, to the vast increase of Navigation; by the returns of which, more
than treble the Bullion is imported that was first exported to India.

5. If the (...) the East Indies were not in English hands, the East India
Commodities would come in from Holland, and that with this di^ference, that we
should pay as much for Pepper now sold for 8 d. the pound, as for Nutmegs,
Cl^ves, M^^e, Cinnamon* which is from 6 s. to 15 s. per pound, which though
cheaper at the places of their growth, the Dutch enhaunse by having the sole
Trade for them; this saves the Kingdom in that respect only 50^000 l. per annum.

6. This Trade does more work upon the Manufactures of our Neighbors, than any
other foreign Trade; and whatever weakens them, enriches and strengthens
England* it is reasonably computed, that Italy, France, Holland, Flanders, etc.
( the Staple Countries for Silks and fine Linnens) by the Importation of
East India Silks and Callicoes, not only into England, but from thence into
those Countries, are abated in those fine Manufacture^ above a Million of
Pounds Sterling per annum.

7. It is thought that above 40000 Families in England are employed in
Silk-broa^^ weaving, though that Trade began here but about the beginning of King
Charles the first In a few Years more this Nation may be treble the number in
such Manufactures, since (...) East India Company bring R^w Silk cheaper then
it can be afforded in Turkey, Fran^^* Spain, or any other place where it is
made, and do serve Holland, Flanders, and some other Markets from England.

8. This Trade pays the King 60000 l. per annum Custom, and carries out yearly
60 o^ 70000 l. in Lead, Ti^n, Cloth* Stuffs, etc. of our own Production and
Manufacture, which would not be sent at all, if England were deprived of this
Trade, because neither Dutch nor French would enure the Indians to our
Manufactures.

The Second Proposition, that the Clamours, Aspersions, and Objections made
against the present East India Company, are sinister, selfish, or groundless.
Object. 1. SOme of the Turkey Merchants say, The bringing in of so much Silk,
and so cheap, is a public ^usance* and destroys their Trade, which depends
wholly upon the Exportation of Woollen Manufacture, whereas the East India
Company send out little Manufacture, and much Bullion, etc.

Answ. 1. It Is strange Doctrine to Men skilled in Trade, that the making a
Material (...), that is to be manufactured at home, or exported again into
foreign Countries, (...) be to the public damage.

2. The Turkey Merchants have Shipped out more Cloth yearly, since the great
increase of (...) East India Trade than before.

3. The Question is not, Which Company sends out most Woollen Manufactures, but
which is (...) most Profitable Trade to the Nation, and that is before shown.

4. If the Exportation of Bullion hinders not the Exportation of our
Manufactures, as in (...) appears: and if for every 10 s. value sent out, 30 s.
be brought in Bullion at the long (...), which is evident in the course of the
East India Trade, then the Exportation of Bullion (...) a great and real
advantage.

5. The Turkey Merchants do send out a great deal of Bullion themselves, which
is no (...), but their complaining of others for the same thing is.

6^ The truth of the case, at the bottom, is but this; the Importation of
better and ^^eaper raw Silk from India* may touch some Turkey Merchants profit
at present, though it ^enefits the Kingdom, and ^in^ers not the Exportation of
Cloth: What then? Must one ^rade be interrupted because it works upon another?
At that rate there would be no^^ing but Confusion in a Nation ad infinitum, Our
Plantation Sugars have brought down ^^e Lisbon Sugars within memory of m^n,
from 8 l. per Centum, to 2 l. 10 s. per Centum, and yet the Exportation of our
Woollen Manufactures to Portugal, is now greater then ^ver it was: just as it is
and will prove in the Turkey Trade.

7. If those Turkey Merchants think the East India Trade so good, why do they
not ^ome into it themselves? The Door is open always to them, and all the
King's Subjects.

Object. 2. They say there are not above 80 legitimate Merchants in the
East India Company.

Answ. 1 By Legitimate Merchants they mean such as have served Apprenticeships;
in the ^umber thereof, they reckon short above half.

2. It matters not two Straws to the Kingdom, whether they be legitimate or
illegitimate; ^hey are in the whole 556, which is mo^e by a great many than the
Turkey Merchants, (...) more by above half than they would be, if the Trade
were not managed in a joint ^^ock.

Object. 3. They say the Company have half the known World in their Charter,
and that is (...) much for any Company, etc.

Answ. 1. They have no more in their Charter than all the East India Companies
in Christendom have in their Charters.

2. The Company is a Company of all, or of so many of the King's Subjects as
desired to ^e concerned in that Trade, or yet do, they buying Stock.

Object. But it is dear buying at 280 l. per Cent.

Answ. 1. It Is less then the intrinsi^k value, if the Stock were now to be
broke up.

2. If it be too dear, any Man may be as justly compell^d to sell his House at
the Buyers ^rice, or else be disseized of ^t, as his Stock in the Company.

Object. 4. They say the Charter has exorbitant and illegal Clauses in it.

Answ. 1. No Charter in Europe has less of that kind.

2. It Is absolutely nece^sary, that whoever governs a Trade so remote, and by
such a Multitude of Hands as are employed, should have some extraordinary Power
committed ^o them.

3. Wh^tever is in the Charter, the Company never did any arbitrary Acts, nor
ever seized Shi^s or Goods by virtue of their Charter, tho they have often had
cause.

Object. 5. They say the Company have imp^^^d and exacted great Fines, Mulcts
and Forfeitures to an immense value.

Answ. What they take in any case, is by submission of the party, by agreement
with the Master and Owners in Charter-party, or by Arbitrations, and always in
pursuance of legal Obligations, sealed and delivered.

It is highly reasonable, the Company being at above 100000 l. yearly charge in
India and England, that whoever participates of the Trade, should
proportionably contribute to the Expenses that neces^arily attend the
preservation of it.

Object. 6. They say, besi^e^ Raw Silks, the Company imports wrought Silk, to
the prejudice of the Silk Manufacture in England.

Answ. 1. This lies as much and more against all other wrought Silks imported
into England from Italy, Holland, etc.

2. The Silks which they commonly bring in, are the main part of them
Taffaties, and other plain or striped Silks, such as are not usually made in
England, but imported from France, Italy, Holland. So this importation work*
upon our Neighbors.

3. A great part of the wrought Silk^ imported by the Company, are again Shipped
out to France, Holland, etc. to the great advantage of the King and Kingdom.

Object. 7. Some Clothiers complain that the East India Company hind^rs the
vent of Cloth.

Answ. 1. This deserves a through inspection: 1. Who they are that complained?
2. When and how they began to complain? 3. Why, they complain? 1st. For the
time, when, it was in the year 1674, or 1675, Then they had the confidence to
tell the Parliament, the Company would spoil the trade of Cloth, and bring the
price of Wool to nothing. But in fact, the Company has now stood five or six
Years since that time, and much augmented their Trade for India, but Wool is
advanced in price above 50 per centum, and there has been such a trade for
Wooll^n Manufactures, as England never saw in any former age. 2. Who they were
that complained? Not the poor Kentish Clothiers, that have lost their trade;
nor the Suffolk Men, that have lost their Manufacture of Bl^w Cloth, but the
Worcester, Gloucester, and Somersetshire men, that do now make and vend above
twenty times the Cloth they did before this Company was erected. 3dly. How they
began to complain? Their first Petition was drawn only against the Turkey
Company, for making but one Cloth Shiping in a year: But a certain Counsel
(since famous for other matters) told them, they should draw their Petition
against the E^st-India Company likewise, which they did; whether the Dutch or
some of England gave the best Fees is uncertain. 4. Why they complained: That
few understood: Their Trade was wonderfully increased, and the East India
Company had sent out in some one Year above ten times as much Cloth as was ever
sent out in the time of open Trade.

Object. 8. They complain that the pr^sent Stock is engrossed into a few Hands,
some single Adventurers having 16 or 17000 l. principal Stock in their own
Names.

Answ. 1. If true, the Complaint of it wou^d ^ound better out of the Mouth of
an old Leveller, than a Merchants. None ever pretended to (...), much less to
level Personal Estates, which if they could be made even at Noon, world be
unequal before Night.

2. The Dutch think whoever (...) m^st in their joint Stocks, does most oblige
the Commonwealth, though he (...), insomuch as one Swasso a Jew had at one time
in their East India Stock above the value of 300000 l. Sterling.

3. The more any Adventurer has in the Stock, the more he is engaged to study
and promote the good of it.

4. Notwithstanding the largeness of any of the Adventurers Stocks, there are
yet 556 Adventurers, which is a greater number than are to be found in any
Trade that has not a joint Stock.

Object. 9. There are many other Ports, and Places within the Limits of the
Companies, barter, where English Commodities would vend, which the Company do
not Trade unto.

Answ. 1. There can never be any Society, that will more industriously
expatiate and (...) Trade in those Parts of the World, then this has done, by
all peacable means. 100000 l. ^ill not excuse them for the losses sustained in
such attempts.

2. In India, a Factory at Surrat will share in all the Trades of the Red Sea,
as well as (...), and other Parts within the Correspondency of that Presidency;
The same may be said of ^antam and many other Places as well as Surrat.

3. In very many Places of India, where the Company do not settle Factories,
they carry (...) a Trade by Natives.

Object. 10. It is said, if the Company were not in a Joint Stock, many more
Ships might be ^mployed in India, from one Port to another, in Trading Voyages.

Answ. 1. The Company want neither Stock, nor Skill, or will, to employ as many
Ships (...) they can gain by, and have almost doubled the quantity of their
Stock and Tunnage wit^^n ten Years.

2. The Company have now twenty five Ships and Vessels trading in the
East Indies from Port to Port, besides the eleven great Ships sent out last
Year, which are abundantly enough to answer all the Companies occasions of that
kind.

Object. 11. That since the East India Company was Incorporated, Co^nage has
abated in England.

Answ. This a mere groundles Chimaera, and will appear so, if the Old
Mint-Master, as well (...) the new Ones, be examined.

The 3d Proposition, That since the discovery of the East Indies, the Dominion
of the Sea Depends much upon the wain or increase of that Trade, and
consequently the Security of the Liberty, Property and Protestant Religion of
this Kingdom.
THe first Part of this Proposition is merely Historical, and the proof of it
will require little pains, to all that look beyond the present Age; while the
Spaniards had Portugal, and with it the Trade of India, they were able to
invade England, with a Navy, by them called Invincible, and so it was, as to
Man's understanding. The Dutch since the Protugals sunk in the Indies, have
grown ^o potent, in and by that Trade, that they have contended with us for the
Dominion of the Seas, and if through the Folly or Madness of a few unthinking
or self interested Men, we should deprive our selves of the East India Trade,
we should certainly save them the experiment of Fighting with us again for it;
they would carry the Dominion of the Sea ^lear, and hold it for ever; or until
their Commonwealth should be destroyed by Land force, or intestine Broils.

If we should throw off the East India Trade, the Dutch would soon treble their
strength and power in ^ndia, and would b^^ome sole Masters of all those rich
and necessary Commodities of the East; and make the European World pay five
times more for them, than now they do, which would so vastly increase their
Riches, as to render them irresistible. If they have Trade and Money they will
never want Men, Seamen are Inhabitants of the Universe, and where ever they are
bred, will resort to the best Pay and most constant E^^ployment.

And further all other Foreign Trade in Europe does greatly depend upon
East India Com^modities, and if we loose the importation of them, we shall soo^
abate in all our other foreign Trade and Navigation; and the Dutch will more
then proportionably increase theirs: And the Augmentation of their R^ches would
further enable them to overballanc^ us, and all others in Trade, as well as in
Naval strength.

As to the second part of the Proposition* can any Man that looks abroad into
the World doubt of the Truth of that Obser^ation (viz.) That Trade never
thrives in any Country that is not Protestant. Since Queen Eliza^^th's time our
Customs are increased from 14000 l. Per annum, to above 70000 l. Per annum. I^
it not evident that the Dutch since their being Protestant, are increased m^r^
in Trade and Wealth in one Hundred Years, then the ancient and fortunate Romans
did in four Hundred Years, after the Foundation of their flourishing
Commonwealth? H^ve not the French since they were part Protestants and part
Papists increased more in Trade and Shiping in one Hundred Years, th^^ they did
in five Hundred Years before? A Naval power never affrights us, Seamen never
did nor never will destroy the Liberty o^ their own Country* They naturally
hate Slavery, because they see so much of the Misery of it in other Countries:
All Tyrannies in the World are supported by Land Armies: No Absolute Princes
have great Navies or great Trades, very few of them can match that little Town
of Hamburgh in Shiping.

Who do we fear may destroy our Liberty, Property and Religion, but the Papists
and the French, and so we should have found it* i^ God Almighty had not
disappointed them. Now, under God's Providence, what can best secure us from
them, but our Naval strength, and what does especially increase, and support
that, but our East India Trade. If this be here proved to the conviction of
unbyassed English Men, the consequence in this Proposition is most natural and
irrefragable.

The Fourth Proposition, That the Trade of the East Indies cannot be carried on
to National A^vantage, by a regulated Company, or in any other way then by a
joint Stock, which are proved by the following Arguments.
Argu. 1. THe Practice and Experience of all other Nations shows this. If it be
objected, This Argument will not ^old universally, for the Portugals have a
Trade for East India, and (...) have no joint Stock. It Is answered, there is a
joint Stock for this Trade in Portugal, but that is the King's Exch^quer, who
reserves to himself all considerable India Commodities, and leaves only to his
Subjects those that are tri^i^l: That trade dwindled to nothing, when it came
to be confronted and outdone by the more National and better constituted joint
Stocks of England and Holland.

Argu. 2. Our East India Company have now their Money at 3 per cent Interest:
others that trade in an open or regulated Trade, (...) value their Money at 6
per cent. Now i^ the Company, with their united Stock and Counsels, and Money
at ^ per cent* have much ado to hold up against the subtle Dutch, what shall
poor private M^^ch^^ts of divided, various and contrary Interests do, with
their little separate Stocks, at 6 per cent per annum?

Arg. 3. In regard that all other Europian Nations do now drive the East India
Trade i^ ^oynt Stocks, it seems madness to enter raw and private Persons,
against such compacted and united Constitutions of experienced Counselors,
suppo^ted with an inexhaustible Treasure.

Arg. 4. Should the Company be destroyed, and the Trade left open, their
Privileges in India would be lost, which have cost vast sums to maintain and
retrive, some whereof are these (viz.) The Liberty of Coinage, and their Money
p^ssi^g current in all the King of Gulconda^ s Country. Freedom of Customs in
almost all places, and in some where the Dutch and other Nations pay Custom. At
Fort St G^orge, and Bombay, the Company ha^^ a right, and does impose a Custom
upon the Natives, and all other Nations. In the Empire of Persia they are
Custom free, and have yearly from the Emp^ror aovbe 3000 l. in lieu of the half
Custom of his own Subje^ts, and all others trading thither.

At Bant^m they are at a set rate of 4000 Dollars per annum, for all Customs,
though trade be never so much increased. They are in most places of India, in
effect their own Lawmakers, and can Arrest and Impris^n any Natives that deal
with them, or owe th^^ Money.

All their black Servants, and others employed by them, or tradi^g with them,
are free and exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Native, and other
Governors.

They are in all places free in their Persons and Goods, from all ^nland
Customs and Duties, which are very great upon the Natives.

Arg. 5. This Nation sustained great Losses, Damages and Depredations in the
three Years of open trade, so that at length the very private Traders
themselves, were the forwardest Petitioners for a return to a joint Stock.

Arg. 6. There are above 100 Kings and absolute Princes in India, and as many
Ports and Places of Trade, which would need forty Ambassadors, and (...) must
have Instructions, and carry large Presents.

Arg. 7. Letters pass freely to and from Turkey in a short time, and in case of
Injuries done, the King's men of War may soon go and revenge them; but India is
at a far greater distance, and no certain return of a Letter to be h^d once in
twelve Months and it is more difficult to maintain a Correspondence in India,
from Port to Port, then between England and Turkey.

Arg. 8. Wherever the English settle a Factory, they must presently build
them large Houses, Ware-hous^s, etc. and take many Servants, etc. If it be
said, This may be done by a regulated Company. It is answered, First, how shall
they raise a Stock to buy those the Company already have, which, with what else
they have there, have cost them above 300000 l. Next, how shall they maintain
and defend them? By Levia^ions upon Goods. What? before there are any Goods to
tax: No, they shall raise a joint Stock, to make the first pur^hase* and after
take only a Tax upon Goods to maintain them. These are absurd, incongru^us and
(...) practicable Notions. For in a time of War and danger, Men will forbear
trading; so that there will ^e no Goods to tax when there is most need of
Money. Whereas the Gove^nours or Committees* (...) alwa^s in their Hands a real
Fond of above a Million of Money, an^ can borrow so much more in India, in a
few days, if they want it, their Credit there* being as current (...) ready
Gol^.

Arg. 9. The East India (...) (a^ have that of Holland) have power by their
Charter to make War upon any Nation in India at d^^^retion: this Power they
must have for carrying on of their Trad^. Now to whom shall this Power be
delegated in a reg^l^ted Company? to all English men, or to a single
Ambassador, or to many Ambassadors and Consuls?

The Fifth Proposition, That the East India Trade more profitable and necessary
to the Kingdom of England than to any other Kingdom or Nation in Europe.
1. THis is so, as we are an Island, and have our Security, as well as the
increase of o^ Riches from our Trade and Strength at Sea.

2. The trade of India is to England not only a great but an unmixt advantage:
Where as to our Neighbors, they cannot have it without some mixture of loss in
other respect^ some of them having the production of Silk among themselves, as
Italy and France. An^ they have the sole Manufacture of plain Silks, such as
Tassati^s* Sarc^ne^s. etc. which ar^ brought from India cheaper than they can
make at home. Holland, Flanders and France in some measure, have the principal
Manufactures, in fine Linnens, Cambrick^s, (...) and Hollands, which only
Callico works upon, to the putting them very much out o^ request, even in their
own Countries: Whereas Callico does not much prejudice ou^ strong course sorts
of Linen made in England. Neither is our Linen Manufacture a mat^ter worth
the taking notice of (whatever some men think) but in Holland, Flanders* France
and some parts of Germany, it is their main concern, being the subsistence of
the Maj^rit^ of their People, as the Woollen Manufacture is in England.

3. The Dutch have a standing contract with the King of Persia for all his
Silk, now in re^gard Bengal Silk can be brought cheaper then that, the Dutch by
bringing Silk from Bengal must prejudice that Contract in the price of Silk:
Whereas We having no such Contract in Persia, do not work upon our selves, as
they of necessity must, and yet they are wiser th^^ to slight the Trade of
Bengal for that cause.

For a Conclusion, to show present and future Ages in what a Condition the
English East India Trade stood, when the Company was assaulted by the private
designs of particular Men, the following Account of the present posture of
their Affairs in 1681, is added (viz.) The last year they sent out (which are
not yet returned) for the Coast of Cormandel, and the Bay of Bengall, four
three Deck Ships, the least whereof was burden 530 Tuns.

For Surrat and the Coast of India, 3 three Deck Ships, the least thereof
Burden 450 Tuns.

For Bantam 2 Ships, each 600 Tuns.

For the South Seas, and China 2 Ships, one 430 Tuns, the other 350.

And in all of them the Stock of 479946 l. 15 s. 6 d.

This Year (1681) they are sending out for the Coast of Cormandel and the Bay
of Bengall, 5 three Deck Ships, the least thereof 460. Tuns.

For Surrat and the Coast of India, 3 Ships, the least thereof 460 Tuns.

For Bantam 3 Ships, two of them 360 Tuns a piece, the third 600 Tuns.

And for the South Seas and China one other great Ship.

And in all of them the Stock of above 600000 l.

Note, That the Company employ none but English built Ships, and besides what
they sent out last Year, and are sending this, they have always a considerable
Stock left in the Country, to make and provide Goods beforehand.

It is believed that the Dutch to have this Company destroyed, would give a
Million of ^ou^ds Sterling, and that i^ they should give two Millions, they
would have too good a Bar^ain of it.

All that is hitherto wrote, is only an Abstract of a most elaborate and
judicious Treatise pub^^shed in the Year 1681, It is brought into this narrow
compass for the better information of English Men, many of whom have not
disposition or leisure to peruse long Tracts, especially where they ^steem
themselves not concerned. The time when that Treatise was printed and published
does demonstrate, that it was not calculated for the present Conjuncture. The
Reader has here under written, an Abreviation of a Supplement to that Treatise
printed and published this present Year 1689, which will inform him of the
present Posture and Circumstances of the East India Companies Affairs.

About the Year 1681, the Company had raised the English Navigation and Power
in India much beyond what it was in any former Age: But soon after that
destructive Trade of the Interlopers beginning, the Dutch took the advantag^ of
that confusion to surprise Bantam: Which troubles falling together upon the
Company, and soon after a general failure of Credit in all public Funds,
caused many Adventurers to sell their Stocks.

Whether under all the aforesaid Pressures the Company behaved themselves like
true English men and Lovers of their Country* will appear by a Narrative of
what they have done since the publishing the Treatise in 1681, and what now is
the present State of the English Interest in India.

The Company have built within th^se seven Years past 16 New great Ships
besides many more sma^^er one^ now in their (...), These 16 Ships, except one
which carries but 30 Guns, may carry (...).

All of them ex^ept one, are three D^ck Ships, and are of Burden, from 900 to
1300 Tuns each.

Within the said seven Years (the Company having lost Banta^) They have built,
fortif^e^, and garrisoned three Forts in several Parts of India for security of
the Pepper Trade, which h^ve and will cost them 400000 l. St^rli^g.

The Company have now at Sea, in India, and coming from thence January the last
1688, 89. the following Ships (viz.) fifteen Ships consigned to Bombay and the
Coast of India, their Cargoes amounting to about 360000 l. Sterling.

Thirteen Ships consigned to Fort St George, etc. on the Coast of Choromandel,
and to the Bay of Bengall, their Cargoes amounting to near 570000 l. Sterling.

And seven Ships (...), their Cargoes amounting to near 100000 l.

Besides about thirty other armed small Ships and Vessels, constantly remaining
in the Country.

The Company have now upon their Hands in England unsold, above the value of
700000 l. in East India Goods, whereas they do not know of 50000 l. value
unsold in any other European Companies hands, except the Dutch Spice.

They have within seven Years so enlarged and (...) the Fort of St George, and
their City of Madrass, that it is now one of the finest and largest Cities in
those parts of the World, containing at least One Hundred Thousand Families of
all Nations, all subject to such Laws for Life and Goods, as the Company by
virtue of their Charter think ^it to impose upon them.

The Customs and New Imp^st paid the King for two Years, from August 1685, to
August 1687, amounted to 255326 l. 1^ s. 1 d. Since the Wars in India it has
been less, but now the Wars are over, the Customs are like to be more yearly
then they were in either of those two Years.

The Company have built new Forts in their Island of Bombay, and ordered a dry
Dock to be built there, and all other Conveniences for repairing and fitting
the bigest English Ships which was the principal want the Nation under went for
some Ages.

And, which is the most considerable National advantage that ever was attempted
there the Company have reduced the principal part of their trade of Surrat to
their own Island o^ Bombay, the Inhabitants whereof from four thousand
Families, when the Company first po^^sessed that Island, are increased to fifty
thousand Families, all subject to the Companie^ Laws; and that Island lying
upon the North Coast of India near Surrat, the Emporium o^ the India Trade to
Arabia, Persia, Busserab* and the Red Sea, is of inestimable value to this
Kingdom. This Island has cost the Company in Fortifying, Garrisoning, etc. at
times above 500000 l. and never produced any return, nor would have been of use
to England, if the Trade had not been brought thither. This transition from
Surrat to Bombay could never have been done without a War, to make this War
upon so great a Prince as the Mogul, was vulgarly thought a vain or rather
distracted attempt in the Company; yet by God's blessing upon their Arms, that
War (the charge whereof cannot be computed at less then 1000000 l.) has ended
to the eternal honor of our Nation and a Peace concluded upon such honorable
Articles, that if a Blanck had been delivered to the Company in England to
write down their own Terms, they would not have desired more than is granted by
the Articles, the Ratifications whereof from the Mogul himself in the Persian
Language, are now brought home.

The Abstracter of the foregoing Treatise, is no East India Merchant, nor any
way concerned with the Company; Neither is he engaged in this work by any of
them, but, being a great lover of his Native Country, he should be much grieved
to see England l^sser in Naval power and Trade, then any of our Neighbors;
whether they be our best FRIENDS, or our most dangerous Enemies: And therefore,
being wonderfully convinced, upon the reading the aforesaid Treatise, He
thought it pity that every good English Man should not be enlightened in this
Foreign Affair, as well as himself, who had formerly entertained as great
prejudices against the East India Company, as most other Men; and possibly
through Ignorance, he may in his discourses, have done them some disservice,
which he is sorry for: and therefore, has contracted the aforesaid Treatise
into this narrow compass, that the knowledge of the matters here discussed may
spread the fu^ther, to the conviction of, such who are not biased by private
interest, but have been imposed upon by loud Clamor and a bold
Misrepresentation of things.

For the New Question; Whether the Company should exercise Martial Law, in the
Government of their Colonies in Indi^? No man in his Wits will make a doubt
thereof (...) has read that faithful, pleasant and profitable History of
Purchase his Pilgrims, the first p^rt, printed in the Year 1625. wherein by the
course of the History he will find that Martial Law is more necessary in India,
than Bread is to the support of Man's Life; and that (...) East India Company
had constantly Commissions from the Crown for that purpose in the blesse^ time
of Quen Elizabeth, and during all the peaceable Reign of King James the first.

June the 25 th 1686.
London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crocked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch; And at the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court, in
Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit,, 1689.


