AN ESSAY UPON THE PROBABLE METHODS Of making a People Gainers IN THE Balance
of Trade.

Treating of these Heads, viz.

Of the People of England.

Of the Land of England, and its Product.

Of our Payments to the Public, and in what manner the Balance of Trade may
be thereby affected.

That a Country cannot increase in Wealth and Power but by private Men doing
their Duty to the Public, and but by a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in
such as are trusted with the Administration of Affairs.

By the Author of The Essay on Ways and Means.

Inter quae L. Piso ambitum fori, corrupta judicia, saevitiam oratorum
accusationes minitantium increpans, abire se, and cedere urbe, victurum in
aliquo abdito and longinquo rure testabatur. Simul Curiam relinquebat.

Tacit. lib. 2. Annal. LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

INDEX.
SECT. I.
The probable Methods of Making a People Gainers in the Balance of Trade.
THE Author's Reasons for Writing upon this Subject, with his Reply to the
Pamphlets against his late Discourses on the Revenues and Trade of England,
Page 1 to p. 4. The difference between Writing and Speaking, p. 5. The Author's
Design in Writing, p. 6. What should be the Study of those who would understand
the Body-Politick of a Nation, p. 8. The Author's Hypothesis upon the Balance
of Trade, p. 9. We have been heretofore large Gainers by Trade, p. 10. The
Scope of this Essay, p. 11. How the ill Effects and Consequences of the late
War, are yet to be remedied and prevented, p. 12. The Natural or Artificial
Product of a Country is the Spring and Original of Trade, Ib. To find out the
Result of the Peoples Labor and Industry we must consider the Number and
Quality of the People, according to their several Ranks or Classes, together
with the Quantity, Quality and Product of the Land, p. 13 and 14.
SECT. II.
Of the People of England.
MR. King's Method in forming his Schemes about the Numbers of the People, Page
15. Of the Original and Increase of the People of England, from time to time,
with a Scheme thereof, p. 16 to 18. The difference at this time between the
Neat Annual Increase of the People, and the general Increase by Procreation, p.
19. The general Increase by Procreation, proportioned between the Country, the
great Towns and London, p. 20. London takes up one half of the Kingdoms Neat
Increase, Ib. The Proportions of Marriages, Births and Burials, between the
Country, the Towns and London, with a Scheme thereof, p. 20 and 21. The
Prolifickness of London, compared with the Country, p. 21. Reasons why the
Marriages in London produce fewer Children then the Country Marriages, Ib. The
Proportions of the People in relation to Males and Females and other
Distinctions, with a Scheme thereof, p. 22. Of the number of Communicants,
Fighting Men, Batchelors and Maidens, Ib. The Ages of the People, according to
their several Distinctions, with a Scheme thereof, p. 23. A general Scheme of
the Income and Expense of the several Families of England, Anno. 1688, Ib. The
Number of the People is not pretended to be laid down, but by way of
Hypothesis, p. 24. The Increase and Decrease of the People should be carefully
observed, Ib. Countries are more or less Populous, as Liberty and Property are
well or ill secured, p. 25. Of the Increase of the People of Rome, Ib.
Considerations upon an Act of general Naturalization, p. 27. Reflections upon
the Number of Foreigners in London, p. 28. The Danger of Foreign Troops, with
an Instance of it in Carthage, p. 29 and 30. Large Armies Dispeople a Country,
p. 31. Of Encouraging Marriages, p. 32. The Duties on Marrages and Births
hinder Propagation, p. 33. The Annual Marriages of the Kingdom are too few in
proportion to the gross Number of the People, p. 34. A large Proportion of
adult Females remain unmarried, p. 35. The near proportion between Males and
Females, is an Argument against Polygamy, ib. The easy Composition for
Bastard-Children, hinders Marriages, ib. England may be rendered one of the
Strongest Nations in Europe, p. 36 What it is that makes a Country powerful,
ib. Comparison between England and Holland, p. 37 We may best check the
immoderate growth of any Neighboring Nation, by making our selves powerful at
Home, p. 38, etc. Reflections on the War between the Carthaginians and Romans,
Ib. Some Observations upon Mr. King's general Scheme of the Ranks, Degrees,
Qualifications and Employments of the People, p. 41 In Taxes the Nobility and
Gentry bear but a small Proportion to the whole Body of the People, Ib. All
Duties upon the Consumption of a large Produce fall most upon the common sort,
p. 42 Excises upon our Home Consumption are not proper in times of Peace, ib.
High Customs and High Excises together, are incompatible, p. 43 The Proportion
between the People and Families which subsist of themselves, and such as have
principally their Subsistence from others, p. 43. 44, 50 Duties upon the Home
Consumption fall heaviest upon the lower rank, consequentially though not
directly, p. 44. 45 and 48 High Excises in times of Peace are destructive to
our Wealth (unless the Dutch Parsimony could be introduced amongst Us) and will
fall most heavily upon our Woollen Manufactures, p. 45. 46 Of the Bulk of our
Woollen Exports, p. 47 The Bodies of Men are the most valuable Treasure of a
Country, p. 50 A Country may be Populous but Poor, if their* Numbers be not
well Employed, p. 51 Who they be that are a Burden to the Public, ib. Of
Cottagers and Paupers, p. 52 Of the Releif of the Poor, and who they are that
swell the Poors Rates, with the Advantages of Employing the Poor, p. 53. and
54. Of the Laws relating to the Poor, p. 55 A Scheme for setting the Poor to
Work, and providing for impotent Poor, by a general Incorporation of
Snbscribers to a stock of 300,000 l. for 21 Years, p. 57 Charities to the Poor
in the Streets and at Doors, computed at 300,000 l. per ann. over and above the
Poors Rates, p. 65 Of Relieving and Releasing Prisoners for Debt, p. 69
SECT. III.
Of the Land of England and its Product.
MR. King's Scheme of the several sorts of Land in England, with the Quantities
and Value. Page 70 His Scheme of the Produce of the Arable Land, p. 71 The neat
Value of the Produce of the Arable Land, p. 72 The Value and Produce of the
rest of the Land, p. 73, 74 His Estimate of the live stock of the Nation, p.
75, 76 Observations upon the preceding Schemes, p. 76. The general Rental of
England is increased since the Year, 1600. from 6 Million to 14 Millions, p. 77
England has now 7 Acres per Head, but is capable of maintaining double its
present Number, p. 78 It may be dangerous for some Countries to be very
Populous but not for England, p. 79 Countries not overstockt may suffer greatly
for want of Corn, p. 80 Want of Corn may very much Exhaust our Treasure, p. 81
What Stock of Corn remains generally in England at the succeeding Harvest, p*
82 In what proportion a defect in the Harvest may raise the Price of Corn, p.
83 The Care of the Hollanders to have Granaries and Storehouses for Corn, and
the Wealth they acquire thereby, p. 84. Considerations about Granaries in
England, p. 85, 86 Countries thrive by Trade as they well or ill manage their
Product and Manufactures, p. 87 England with Industry may be the foremost
People in the whole Commercial World, p. 88. It seems more the Interest of
England to Employ its Land in Breeding and Feeding Cattle, than to produce
Corn, p. 89. Of the Breeding and Transporting of Horses, p. 90 The Value of the
Horses Yearly bred in England, p. 91 Of the Mines and Minerals of England, p.
92 Of the Mines in Cardiganshire, p. 93 Nations who will thrive, must look into
small things as well as great, p. 94 Of the Fishery, p. 95 Of Wool and the
Woollen Manufacture, p. 96 Of the Old and New Draperies, p. 97 Different
Countries are adapted to different Manufactures, p. 99 Ireland is able to
Nourish more than 3 times its present Inhabitants, ib. Of the Woollen
Manufacture there, p. 100 Ireland fit to be Encouraged, ib. England gains by
the Improvement of Ireland, p. 101 Of the Wealth of Rome, and the chief Seat of
Empires, p. 101 and 102 Ireland has not above 500,000 l. in current Cash, p.
102 Of the English Bill for Prohibiting the Exportation of the Woollen
Manufactures of Ireland to Foreign Parts, p. 104 Whether Laws made here, are
binding in Ireland, p. 105 Mr. Molineux's Argument considered, viz. Whether
Ireland be a Colony from England, ib. The Argument stated, p. 106 An Historical
Deduction of the whole matter, p. 107, etc. The Case of Ireland compared with
the Roman Colonies, p. 114 The difference of the Case between Scotland and
Ireland, p. 116 Whether it be necessary to prohibit by Law the Exportation of
Woollen Manufactures from Ireland to Foreign Parts, p. 120 Whether the Woollen
Goods can be made cheaper in Ireland than in England, p. 121 The Author's
Conclusion upon this Argument, p. 126 Of setting up the Linen Manufactures in
Ireland, p. 127 Of taking off the Prohibition which now lies upon Irish Cattle,
p. 129 Of the course Draperies of England, and of encouraging their Exportation
to new Places, p. 131
SECT. IV.
Of our Payments to ohe Public, as they affect the Balance of Trade.
THe danger of Profusion and of the Crown being brought low, p. 135 The Wealth
of a Country is finite as well as of a private Man, p. 136 Of the
Administration of the public Revenues under Henry III. and Henry IV. of
France, ib. Machiavel's Sentiments touching Liberality in a Prince, p. 137
Whence the ill management in Kingdoms proceeds, ib. Of Frugality in absolute
Monarchies, p. 138 Whether large Payments to the State are hurtful, p. 140 Of
the Annual Income of England, France and Holland, ib. The great Increase of our
Wealth, between Anno 1660 and 1688. was from the small Taxes and Duties then
paid, comparitively with other Nations, p. 142 The Payments in 1688. were
little above a 20th part of the then Annual Income of the Nation, p. 143 The
Duties and Payments now on Foot, are one Eighth of the present Annual Income,
ib. It will be several years before our Annual Payments can be considerably
diminished, p. 144. The Excise and Malt Duty are a burden upon our Woollen
Manufactures, p. 145. High Customs are pernicious to our Commerce abroad, ib.
The high Duties on Salt, are, of all others, the most hurtful to Trade, p. 146.
Mr. King's Proportion of our own, and our Foreign Navigation; with a Scheme
thereof, and several Conclusions thereupon, p. 147 to 150. How the Balance of
Trade, from time to time, might be adjusted from the Custom-house Books, p.
151. Mr. King's Position, as to the Nations Gain by Foreign Trade, ib. The
principal Expense in a trading Vessel, is Meat and Drink, p. 152. Of the Salt
used for Barrelling up Beef and Pork, and the high Price of it now, to what it
was before, Anno 1688. with the Consequences thereof, p. 153* Trade is a
necessary Evil, p. 154* Freight is the most certain Profit in Trade, p. 155.
The Tax on Coals affects our Iron Manufactures, ib. An Abstract of Mr. King's
Scheme of the yearly Increase of the actual Stock of England, from 1600 to
School. with some Conclusions thereupon, p. 156. The great Taxes and Variety of
new Duties lately levied, are a heavy Burden upon our Foreign Trade, p. 157. An
Account of what Money has been actually granted since the War, p. 158. An
Account of what Money was intended by the Parliament for the War, p. 162. The
Expense of the Civil-List during the War, p. 163. The Expense of the War and
Civil-List, balanced against the Money granted during the War, p. 164. Of
Interest for public Moneys, ib. The Public cannot be much in Debt, if all
Accounts were narrowly inspected, p. 165. If the Public be much in Debt, how
the same must arise, ib. We still remain engaged for upwards of 20 Millions,
and in what particulars, p. 166. England cannot flourish in Trade and
Manufactures, till we come to pay but 2,300,000 per An. as before the war, p.
167. If this be not compassed, what will be the Consequences thereof, ib. How
it comes that France and Holland have thriven by Trade, notwithstanding their
heavy Taxes, though England cannot, p. 168. New Impositions and remote Fonds,
are dangerous to Liberty, p. 169. Of our present Payments to the Government,
and the dangers that may arise thereby, p. 170. Of better providing against the
diverting and misapplying the public Treasure, p. 172. Danger of stopping the
Exchequer, ib. Corrupt Ministers will sooner divert appropriated Moneys, than
make new Levies, p. 173. Our Mischiefs are only to be cured, by lessening, as
fast as possible, our present public Payments, p. 174. By negligence we may
come to pay constantly between 5* and 6 Millions per An. p. 175 Of improving
the Revenues already granted, particularly the Excise, p. 176. Of good
management in laying out the public Treasure, p. 178. Some Methods proposed
how to get sooner out of Debt, p. 179. Of over-haling the Public Accounts, ib.
Of the Crown Lands and Forfeited Estates in Ireland, ib. Of unwarrantable Gains
by Contracts with the Crown, ib. Of the surprising Premiums for Circulating
Excheq. Bills, p. 180. Of rejecting the Offer made by the Old East India
Company to raise 2 Millions, and allowing a large Premium to the New, p. 181
Frugal management invites the People to stretch their Purses, p. 183 Difference
between Human Bodies and the Body Politic, p. 184 High Interest and large
Premiums divert Money from flowing in the Channel of Trade, p. 186 Laws cannot
lower Interest, where great Sums are continually borrowed by the Government, p.
187 A Prince's Absence from his Dominions is prejudicial to the Balance of
Trade, ib. Recapitulation of the Methods for getting sooner out of Debt, ib.
It Is dangerous for one part of the People to be indebted to the other, p. 189
Fonds divide the Kingdom into two sorts, Creditors and Debtors, ib. High Taxes
introduce Arbitrary Power, p. 192 A Summary of the three foregoing Sections,
ib.
SECT. V.
That a Country cannot increase in Wealth and Power, but by private Men doing
their Duty to the Public, and but by a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom in
such as are trusted with the Administration of Affairs.
OF the Romans running into Slavery, p* 193 Why the Romans never attempted to
restore the Commonwealth, p. 194 How Arbitrary Power may be settled here upon
a lasting Foot, p. 195 Of Corruption in the Representatives of a People, p. 196
By what Methods mixed Governments may come to be the greatest Tyranny in the
World, p. 197 The danger of a legal Tyranny, ib. The Wealth and Power which
must defend the State, depends upon our preserving inviolate, our ancient
Constitution, p. 198 Of studying to deceive and be deceived, ib. Honors and
Preferments will avail little, when Liberty is subverted, p. 199 Ill Conduct in
a State is an incurable Consumption, requiring the Interposition of the
Legislative Authority, p. 200 Contenders for Liberty ought not to be called a
Faction, ib. To whom the Name of a Faction truly belongs, p. 201 A Description
of the two several Parties which are commonly in great Assemblies, and of the
Country and Court Party so called, p. 202. Of such as style themselves Managers
in public Assemblies, p. 204 Good Kings may repose their entire Concerns upon
a House of Commons, p. 205 The Qualifications fit for Managers, p. 206 Giddy
young Men not fit for Managers, ib. Instances of the unsuccessful Conduct of
young Ministers, p. 207 The ill Consequences of a young Ministry, with a
Majority at their Back, p. 208 What our Wealth and Greatness depends upon, ib.
Of preserving our Constitution, p. 209 Freedom and Wealth go hand in hand
together, ib. The Methods which wicked Ministers will take, when they are in
Power, and have Thoughts of enslaving England, p. 210 What Field bad Ministers
love to range in, p. 211 Bad Ministers do not love Peace, the Reasons why, p.
212 Designing Men love a long War, instanced in Ireland, p. 213 The Charge of
the War in Ireland, p, 215 The fatal Effects of not timely minding the Affairs
of Ireland, p. 216 The great opportunity there was of doing good at the
Revolution, and giving us a sound Constitution, ib. Of keeping off Parliaments,
and continuing long ones, p. 218 Of the Act for Triennial Parliaments, p. 220
The Ingredients of a Statesman in the former Reigns, ib. Of the 6 years
Parliament after the Revolution, p. 221 The Peoples Expectations upon the
Revolution, p. 222 But some Persons were then acted by no Principle for the
Public Good, p. 223 Of the Apprehensions of Popery and Universal Monarchy, p.
224 The temper of the People with respect to the Ministers, ib. The Ethics
here advanced are directed to Posterity, p. 225 The subtle Arts of ambitious
and designing Men, ib. By what Steps public Vices and Immoralities first creep
into a Country, p. 226 A Description of the Persons and Councils of such who
may design to change the Constitution, p. 227 Considerations of the Posture of
Affairs at the Restoration of K. Charles II. ib. Of the prudent Administration
of the Lord Chancellor Clarendon, and the Lord Treasurer Southampton, p. 228 Of
the Designs of others to make King Charles II. absolute, and so to alter the
Constitution, p. 230 Of the open Invasions upon our Liberties in King James the
2ds Reign, p. 231 There were always virtuous Persons who opposed the Designs of
ill Ministers. p. 232 Liberty was cunningly attackt, and as nobly Protected in
the 18 years House of Commons, temp. Car. 2. ib. After the year 1679, the two
Parties fell into the Distinction of Whigs and Tories, p. 233 and 234 A
Description of the two sorts of Whigs in the two last Reigns, p. 234 A
Description of the Tories in K. Charles 2. Reign, p. 236 The Measures these
Parties took in the last Reign, p. 238 Upon what Principles the Change was made
at the Revolution, the necessity of keeping up to the same Principles, and the
Danger of receding from them, p. 239 to 241 Free States yield to Slavery when
Men in Vogue are corrupted; instanced in Rome, applied to England, p. 246 When
a Free State degenerates into Tyranny, it makes no farther Increase in Riches
or Power, p. 248 The Objection as to France in this particular answered, ib. If
our Constitution should be given up, Poverty will creep insensibly upon us, p.
249 When Things go amiss, it will awaken the Parliament to animadvert upon the
wild Proceedings of State-Empericks p. 250 The public Virtue which must
preserve a State is a constant and perpetual Will to do our Country good, p.
251. To encounter bad Men, good Patriots of both Sides must join together in
Defense of their Princes Person and the Established Government, p. 253 The
Success of particular Men is oftentimes foreign to their Deserts and Conduct,
but it is not so with Governments, p. 255 Whence the ill Management in former
Reigns proceeded, p. 256 The Legislative Authority can correct the Pride of
insolent and undertaking Ministers, p, 257 Qualifications of a Member of
Parliament, 258. The Employments of England may be made the Engines wherewith to
subvert our Constitution, p. 259 Good Men should strive to be in Power, ib. Men
of Parts and Probity should assist the Public with their Wisdom, when the
Administration is any thing right, but should have no hand in it when it is
entirely bad, p. 260 and 261 The proper time for such Men to undertake the
Management of Affairs, p. 262 The Duty which private Persons owe to the
Public, instanced in six Particulars, p. 264 1. That such as represent the
People be Incorrupt; Unbiased and Disinterested, p. 265. 2. That they
diligently attend the Nations Service, p. 266 3. That they carefully watch any
Innovation or Encroachments upon the Constitution, p. 268 4. That they make
Provision against future Evils, p. 273. 5. That they look narrowly into the
Income and Expense of the Kingdom, and examine which way Immense Debts have
been contracted, and how that Money has been disposed of, which the Nation has
already granted, p. 277 6. That they hold a strong Hand over the Men of
Business, calling those to an Account who either through Folly or upon some
wicked Design pursue distructive Measures, p. 288.
Ministers whose chief Aim is their own Gratness, are neither good for Prince
nor People, as in many Instances, p. 296 1. When they take no Care of their
Master's Revenue, ib. 2. When they have more regard to themselves than to their
Princes Honor, p. 297. 3. When they are ready to sacrifice their Princes
Safety to their own Vanity or Ambition, ib, 4. When they prefer keeping up
their Interest to all other Considerations whatsoever, ib. 5. When they think
to subsist more by the Strength of their own Faction, than by their Princes
Favor, p. 298 6. When to get themselves well thought on, they care not what
Opinion the People have of the Government, ib. 7. When they consult more their
own Ease than the public Good. ib. 8. When their own Safety is their principal
Object, p. 299
What is to be done when such Persons are on the Stage of Business, ib. Our
being still a free People is owing to the Power our Ancestors exerted of
Impeaching the Criminal great Ones, p, 300 The High Crimes of wicked Ministers
must be attackt with Addresses and Impeachments, p. 301 Statesmen should take
great Care how they contract public Hatred, p. 302. Good Kings have the Hearts
and Affections of their Subjects, ib. What will be the Lot of honest and wise
Ministers, p. 303 Richlieu was a good Minister for the French King, but not for
France, p. 304 Wise Statesmen, whose Innocence is their Guard, are not
apprehensive of Impeachments, p. 305. Impeachments are not to be used on every
slight occasion, ib. It is the sublimest Wisdom not to be angry with Persons,
but to mend Things, p. 306 The Public Affairs are to be mended by determining,
What Councils have been against Law, what Advices have Impoverished the Crown
and Kingdom, and what Practices have wasted the Nation's Treasure, p. 307. How
bad Statesmen, when accused, will endeavor to cover their Faults, ib. A
Recapitulation of the whole Matter, p. 308. Where Things are well administered,
that Country will always increase in Wealth and Power, ib. The Venetians have
been preserved for 13 Centuries, by the Goodness of their Constitution, p. 309
The ill Effects of Matters being in a tottering Condition, and the good Effects
of Stability, prudent Conduct and just Administration, ib. Uncorruptness in the
Law and Courts of Judicature, may help to recover the sickly parts of a
Constitution, p. 310 Some Advices of Card. Richlieu to Lewis 13. of France, p.
312.
THIS Book being Printed in haste, these Errors have escaped the Correction of
the Press, which the Reader is desired to mend with his Pen.

ERRATA.
PAge 43 Line 18 dele to, 46. l. 6. dele to, 46. l. 8. r. it is more 53. l. 12.
r. Employment, 58. l. 5. r. are very, 63. l. 7 dele by, 69. l. 13. r. not at
all, 69 l. 18. r. manner, 75. l. 3. r. breed, 77. l. 25. r. Millions, 88. l.
16. r. Commercial, 147. l. 19. r. two and three fourths, 156. l. 30. r. 1688,
173. l. 6. r. a Revenue, 175. l. 16. dele of, 193. l. 14. r. the, 196. l. 3. r.
Corruption, 205. l. 27. r. buisy, 205. l. 27. r. pretend, 210. l. 27. r.
Distribution, 210. l. 28. dele of, 218. l. 27. r. that, 259. l. 27. r. Segne,
262. l. 1. r. Lamia, 268. l* 14. r. any, 268. l. 15. r. the, 280. l. 30. r.
Understanding, 289. l. 1, 2. r* Stoics, 289. l. 9. Cincinnatus, 289. l. 26. r.
Elect, 293. l. 2. r. Dominion, 298. l. 14. r. Government, 298. l. 30. r.
Contentment, 304. l. 4. r. Balance.

In Sheet O, No. Page, for 300 read 200, etc.

Books Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England. In Two Parts,
viz. I. Of the Use of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the
Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be
restored. III. On the Management of the Kings Revenues. IV. Whither to Farm the
Revenues, may not, in this Juncture, be most for the Public Service* V. On the
Public Debts and Engagements. By the Author of The Essay on Ways and Means.
Part I.

As also the Second Part. By the same Author.

Capt. Dampier's Voyages, Vol. II. in Three Parts. First, the Supplement of his
Voyage round the World, being that part that relates to Tonquin, Achin,
Malacca, and other Places in the East Indies. Second, his Voyage to the Bay of
Campeachy in the West Indies. Third, his Observations about the Winds and
Weather in all parts of the Ocean, between the Tropicks; with a General Index
to both Volumes. Octavo. Illustrated with particular Maps.

As also the First Part. And all sorts of Plays.

AN ESSAY UPON THE PROBABLE METHODS Of making a People Gainers IN THE Balance
of Trade.
SECT. I.
THE Writer of these Papers stands in a manner engaged to say something upon
this Subject, having in his Discourses, published last Year, promised to handle
several Points concerning the Balance of Trade; to which Design he was
principally induced by the perusal of some Calculations then communicated to
him by Gregory King Esquire Lancaster Herald.

The Essay upon Ways and Means, and the Discourses lately set forth On the
Revenues, and On the Trade of England, did meet with so good a Reception from
the best sort of Men, that he finds himself encouraged once more to offer to
the Public his Observations of the like Nature; from which, if any thing can
be gathered that may promote, or that will hereafter tend to the Welfare and
Prosperity of his Country, he shall think his Labors well rewarded.

It Is true, his Computations were attacked, sometime after they were published,
by two Pamphlets; but so impotently, that he thinks he cannot do himself
greater Right, than to desire that all People who give themselves the trouble
to read his Writings, would likewise be pleased to peruse Mr. P. R. -- y's
Observations, and Mr. T. E. -- d's Remarks upon the said Books. And he doubts
not, but that any Impartial Reader, by comparing the Schemes together, and by
duly weighing the Arguments of both sides, will think these Answerers have
rather strengthened and confirmed, than shaken his Foundations.

It Is an easy matter to pick out of any Book, here and there, something to
Cavil at; which is the common Method taken by the little Scriblers of the Town
of Answering, as they call it, a Writer; but all Judicious Men know that an
able Author proceeds quite another way; and if his Adversary has advanced a
wrong Proposition, or a false Hypothesis, he sets up something in the room of
what he would pull down, he offers another Proposition or Hypothesis, which
shall visibly be truer, wiser and better founded: All other arguing (especially
where any new Matter has been advanced) being but wretched Sophistry, that
carries with it no Conviction. What has been here said, is all the Reply the
Writer of these Papers designs to make to the two forementioned Pamphlets and
their Authors, who (whatever they may be good for else) have shown by their
Works, that Figures and Calculations, about the King's Revenue, are very little
their Province.

He thought it might be of use (in the heat of a War that had then the
appearance of lasting a great while) to propose Ways and Means by which Taxes
might be laid more equally, and by consequence more lightly upon the People:
And when the Peace was concluded, he believed he might do his Country Service
to treat of the Public Revenues and of the Trade of England, the quiet Times
which the King's Valor and Wisdom had newly procured, seeming most seasonable
to propose some kind of Remedy for those Disorders in the Administration, which
a War of such length had undoubtedly occasioned. In the Tracts therefore which
he published last Year, he handled Credit, The King's Revenues, The Public
Debts and Engagements; and in the second Volume several Points relating to
Trade, thereby to give some View, what Improvements this Nation was capable of,
under a careful and steady Management.

And having deeply imprinted in his Mind, the Notion that all our Thoughts,
Endeavors and Designments should tend to the Good and Welfare of our Country;
and being convinced, that even where Abilities are wanting, the very Intentions
are commendable and virtuous, he is resolved to continue his Studies upon the
same Subject, and to look yet farther into the Condition and Posture of this
Kingdom.

He is now indeed called up to a Station, wherein he has the opportunity of
delivering his Thoughts concerning the Business of England another way than by
his Pen; but it is many Years since he had the Honor to sit in Parliament; and
he doubts very much, whether he shall be able to arrive at any degree of
expressing himself readily and well; without which, the best and most useful
Matter loses all its Energy and Effect, before a great Assembly. Writing and
Speaking are Talents very different; a tolerable Style may be attained to by
great Application and Diligence, but Elocution is a Gift (and if employed to
honest Uses) one of the greatest Bounties Nature can bestow upon a Man: He who
has not the Seeds of it within him, shall never come at it by Art or Labor;
and (which perhaps is not vulgarly observed) Writing much extinguishes the
Faculty of Talking well off hand, in some Persons who would otherwise have a
competent Share thereof; for if the Writer be of any Form, he accustoms himself
to a Correctness and a Choice of Words: And this Nicety and Care beget a
diffidency in him which is altogether inconsistent with the Happiness of
Speaking well in Public. Such therefore, as fear they cannot deliver their
Thoughts well and clearly another way, must commit them to Writing, in order to
make whatever Qualities they have, of Service to their Country.

The Matters we have hitherto handled, have been in a manner entirely new, and
such wherein very little Help could be had from Books; and (it being the
Interest of some Persons of no small Power in the Management of Affairs, that
many Truths, important for England to be known, should rather be concealed, if
possible, in the Center of the Earth, than laid open) the Aids and Lights which
might be gathered from the public Accounts and Offices, have been
industriously withheld from all who are not servile Applauders of their wild
and distructive Conduct; however, he will proceed on with his Work,
notwithstanding the potent Malice of such Men, utterly indifferent how much his
Inquiries offend them, provided they yield any Benefit to the King and Kingdom.

His Aim always has been and ever shall be, to show how the Wealth and Strength
of England is to be secured and improved; to set the Matters thereunto
conducing in a true Light; to instill into the Minds of young Gentlemen a
desire of looking into the Revenues and Trade of the Nation; that having
therein an insight themselves, they may not be, in some future Reign, ensnared
by the wicked Arts of false and rapacious Ministers, who will be ever craving
for large Supplies, but careless how they wast the public Treasure; who will
be always coveting new Fonds, which they will lay by as so much Lumber of the
State, when they have borrowed all they can upon 'em, not minding how any new
Branch is managed; who will be for shearing the Sheep as many times as they
can, every Year, without any care of the Flock, or how the Fleece shall grow
again; and who will be for pulling down the Commonwealth, so they may build up
their own Fortunes.

It shall not be here argued, whither the Skill of Physic be now brought to
Perfection, or whether it is yet capable of further Improvements; but this may
be safely pronounced, That the Knowledge of the Sinews, Muscles, Arteries and
Veins, with the late discovery of the Circulation of the Blood and all the
Parts of Anatomy, conduce very much to render this dark Science more plain and
certain.

In the same manner, such as would understand the Body-Politick, its true
Constitution, its State of Health, its Growth or Decay, its Strength or
Weakness, and how to apply Remedies to the various Distempers to which it is
incident, must study and look narrowly into all the distinct parts of the
Commonwealth, its Trade, the Current Money, (which is its flowing Blood) the
Arts, Labor and Manufactures, and the number of its People; with many other
things which altogether are the Members of which the great Body is composed.

From these Topics, to reason upon Matters of Government, has been the Method
we have hitherto taken, and which we shall pursue in the following Tract; and
the way we go of arguing and concluding upon things by Figures, being in a
manner new, and made use of but by two or three before us, and that too but
very superficially, it is hoped Grains of Allowance will be made, and that we
shall be looked npon as Beginners of an Art not yet Polished, and which Time
may bring to more Perfection.

In all Arts and Sciences, the first Inventions have been rude and unskilful:
Very anciently, the Aegyptains knew something of Geometry, and the Assyrians of
Astronomy; but as well these, as all other parts of Knowledge, were but a
shapeless Body, till brought into some Form by the artfull Hands of Pherecides,
Thales, Anaximander and Pythagoras; and yet Philosophy had neither Strength nor
Beauty, till it was further improved in the three successive Schools of
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle.

What has been here said of sublimer Things, holds as well in Speculations of
an inferior Nature, and in Arts merely Mechanical, whose first Principles and
Rudiments must be imperfect. But if this our manner of Inquiring into Matters
that relate to Polity and Government, be found any ways Instructive and
Beneficial to the Public, we hope hereafter to be followed by abler Hands, who
shall finish what we are but beginning.

We have formerly said, Discourses on the Public Revenues and Trade, part 2 d
p. 331.
That to find out the true Balance of Trade, in order to adapt thereunto our
Laws and Form of Living, would bring as much Wealth to this Country, as is
requisite to render a Nation safe and happy. That an exact Balance between Us
and every distinct Place, perhaps cannot by any humane Skill be attained to;
and that it is not certain whether a Scrutiny so very Nice, would be of any
Use. But that without doubt, a general State of this Matter, formed upon strict
Enquiry, with Deliberation and Skill; and such a one as would carry with it a
Demonstration of being somewhat near the Truth, must be a great Help to the
Rulers and Ministers of a Country, and a good Guide in many important Councils.

That we have been heretofore large Gainers by Trade, is manifest from the
expensive War we were able to carry on for so many Years; and though to find out
in what Particulars we got or lost, may be very difficult; yet to give some
general View of the matter may not be impossible: And we shall endeavor to
show from whence such may take their Rise, who would have some Prospect of a
thing so vast and that seems at such a distance.

And albeit to know the Quantum of our yearly Gains, may not perhaps so much
import the State; yet to be watchful that we do not lose, wast and impair from
time to time, must certainly be the concern of every one who loves his Country;
and as it behooves private Men frequently to Balance their Accounts, and to see
how their Condition stands; so without doubt, it is a Duty incumbent upon those
who are in Power, very often to contemplate the Posture of the Nation, in order
to this, that growing Mischiefs may have a sudden Cure.

As the Wealth of all kinds stored up in this Kingdom was of late our chief
Support, so what we are hereafter to get, must defend us against the Accidents
at home and abroad, to which all Governments are liable; and upon this Account
the Motions of Trade ought to be observed with a strict and careful Eye.

And we owe it to our Country to communicate what we think may conduce to make
it flourish; and the Men in Power should encourage such Attempts, at least they
should not oppress nor contrive their Ruin, who employ their whole time, and
impair their own Health, in studying to promote the Common Good.

But they who Act upon a Principle are not easily disheartened. In this Essay
we shall set forth some probable Methods of making a Nation Gainers in the
Balance of Trade: And we shall close the Discourse with endeavoring to show,
That this Balance is not to be put of our Side, (by which we mean that a
Country cannot increase in Wealth and Power) but by private Men doing their
Duty to the Public, and but by a steady Course of Honesty, Care and Wisdom, in
such as are trusted with the Administration.

The Wounds of the late War have drein'd us of so much Blood, and our Foreign
Commerce has met with such a Ruffle and Interruption in all Parts of the World,
and our Neighbors grow so fast upon us, some in Wealth, and others in Shipping
and the Skill of Trade, that Poverty must grow upon us apace, our Naval
Strength must decrease, and we must utterly lose the Dominion of the Sea,
unless the Legislative Authority exert it self with Vigor, and interpose
betimes to prevent our impending Ruin.

We have said formerly, Discourses on the Public Revenues and on Trade, Part 2
d, p. 15.
That Gold and Silver are indeed the Measure of Trade, but that the Spring and
Original of it, in all Nations, is the Natural or Artificial Product of the
Country; that is to say, what their Land, or what their Labor and Industry
produces.

There is no Man that can reasonably dispute this Position; and if granted, it
follows from thence, That to know rightly how the Balance of Trade stands with
any Nation, a due Inspection must be made into their Natural or Artificial
Product.

But this Natural or Artificial Product being most of it the Result of the
Peoples Labor and Industry, we shall be still in the dark as to all Inquiries
of this kind, without maturely considering the Numbers of the People.

In these sort of Speculations not only the Quantity but Quality of the
Inhabitants must be duly pondered, they must be divided into their several
Ranks and Classes: It must be distinguished who by their Arts, Labor or
Industry are increasing, and who by their Expense, Poverty, or Sloth, are
decreasing the Kingdom's Wealth. Of these Sub-divisions are likewise to be
made, of what Numbers are employed in the Church, in War, in the Fleets
Mercantile and Warlike, in the Law, in Offices, in Merchandise, in Shop-keeping
and Trades, in Handicrafts; and who both of the higher and lower Degree are
Persons living upon their Estates; who are Freeholders, Farmers, Laboring
People, Servants, Cottagers, Alms-People, and Vagrants.

The People being thus distributed into their proper Ranks, we are likewise to
inquire into the Quality of the Land they are to cultivate and improve, in
order to that Natural or Artificial Product which is the Medium whereby a
Superlucration of Wealth is to be gotten. We should examine what Proportion of
it is Arable, Pasture and Meadow, Woods and Coppices, Forests, Parks and
Common, Heaths, Moors, Mountains, and barren Land, Houses and Homesteads, etc.
Rivers, Lakes, Meers, Roads, Ways, and wast Land.

The Land is to yield the Product, which Product is to yield the Wealth, so
that we should inquire how this Product stands in every particular, but more
especially in the principal constituent Parts of England's Strength, namely
Wool, Corn, and our Mines; for it is by the well ordering and wise disposition
of these Branches of our Wealth, that we are to be Gainers in the Balance of
Trade.

We shall therefore handle distinctly these Heads, viz. the People, the Land
and its Product, and shall endeavor to lay down several Matters, from whence
(peradventure with good Grounds of Probability) some Conclusions may be made in
relation to our present Subject; and because Taxes influence very much in the
Balance of Trade, as will be shown hereafter, we shall likewise say something
concerning our Payments to the Public.

SECT. II.
OF THE People of England.
THE Writer of these Papers has seen the beforementioned Mr. King's Natural
and Political Observations and Conclusions upon the State and Condition of
England in Manuscript. The Calculations therein contained are very accurate,
and more perhaps to be relied upon than any thing that has been ever done of
the like kind. This Skilful and Laborious Gentleman has taken the right Course
to form his several Schemes about the Numbers of the People; for besides many
different Ways of working, he has very carefully inspected the Poll-Books, and
the Distinctions made by those Acts, and the Produce in Money of the respective
Polls, going every where by reasonable and discreet Mediums: Besides which
Pains, he has made Observations of the very Facts in particular Towns and
Places, from which he has been able to judge and conclude more safely of
others; so that he seems to have looked further into this Mystery than any
other Person.

With his Permission, we shall offer to the Public such of his Computations as
may be of use, and enlighten in the Matter before us.

He lays down, That if the first Peopling of England was by a Colony or
Colonies, consisting of a Number between a Hundred and a Thousand People,
(which seems probable) such Colony or Colonies might be brought over between
the Year of the World 2400 and 2600, viz. about eight or nine Hundred Years
after the Flood, and fourteen or fifteen Hundred Years before the Birth of
Christ; at which time the World might have about a Million of Families, and
four or five Millions of People.

From which Hypothesis, it will follow by an orderly Series of Increase,

That when the Romans invaded England fifty three Years before Christ's time,
the Kingdom might have about 360,000 People, and at Christ's Birth about four
hundred Thousand.

That at the Norman Conquest, Ann. Christ. 1066. the Kingdom might contain
somewhat above 2,000,000.

That Anno 1260. or about 200 Years after the Norman Conquest, it might contain
about 2,750,000 People, or half the present Number: So that the People of
England may have doubled in about 435 Years last past.

That in probability the next doubling will be in about 600 Years to come, viz.
by the Year 2300, at which time it may have about 11,000,000 of People, and the
Kingdom containing about 39 Millions of Acres, there will be then about three
Acres and a half per Head.

That the Increase of the Kingdom for every hundred Years of the last preceding
Term of doubling, and the subsequent Term of doubling, may have been and in
probability may be, according to the following Scheme.

Anno Christi. Number of People. Increase every hundred Years. 1300 2,860,000
440,000. 1400 3,300,000 540,000. 1500 3,840,000 780,000. 1600 4,620,000
880,000. 1700 5,500,000 920,000. 1800 6,420,000 930,000. 1900 7,350,000
930,000. 2000 8,280,000 925,000. 2100 9,205,000 910,000. 2200 10,115,000
885,000. 2300 11,000,000.

Whereby it may appear, That the Increase of the Kingdom being 880,000 People
in the last hundred Years, and 920000 in the next succeeding hundred Years, the
Annual Increase at this time may be about 9000 Souls per Annum.

But whereas the Yearly Births of the Kingdom are about 1 in 28: 95, or 190,000
Souls. And the Yearly Burials 1 in 32: 35 or 170,000 Souls. Whereby the Yearly
Increase would be 20,000 Souls. It is to be noted, p. An. 1 st. That the
Allowance for Plagues and great Mortalities may come to at a Medium 4000 11,000
per An. 2 dly. Foreign or Civil Wars at a Medium 3500 3 dly. The Sea constantly
employing about 40,000 may precipitate the death of about 2500 4 thly. The
Plantations (over and above the Accession of Foreigners) may carry away 1000
Whereby the neat Annual Increase may be but 9000. Souls.

That of these 20,000 Souls which would be the Annual Increase of the Kingdom
by Procreation, were it not for the formention'd Abatements.

The Country Increases Annually by Procreation 20,000 Souls. The Cities and
Towns, exclusive of London, by Procreation 2000 Souls. But London and the Bills
of Mortality decrease Annually 2000 Souls.

So that London requires a Supply of 2000 Souls per An. to keep it from
decreasing, besides a further Supply of about 3000 per Annum for its Increase
at this time. In all 5000, or above a half of the Kingdoms neat Increase.

Mr. King further observes, That by the Assessments on Marriages Births and
Burials, and the Collectors Returns thereupon, and by the Parish Registers, it
appears, That the Proportions of Marriages, Births and Burials, are according
to the following Scheme.

Vide Scheme A.

Whence it may be observed, That in 10,000 Co-existing Persons, Scheme A.
People. Annual Marriages. 530,000 London and Bills of Mortality 1 in 106. In
all 5000. Producing 4. Children each. 870,000 The Cities and Market Towns 1 in
128. In all 6800. Producing 4.5 Children each. 4,100,000 The Villages and
Hamlets 1 in 141. In all 29200. Producing 4.8 Children each. 5,500,000 1 in
134. 41000. 4.64 Annual Births. Annual Burials. London and Bills of Mortality 1
in 26. In all 20000. 1 in 24.1. In all 22000. The Cities and Market Towns 1 in
28. In all 30600. 1 in 30.4* In all 28600. The Villages and Hamlets 1 in 29.4
In all 139400. 1 in 34.4 In all 119400. 1 in 28.95 190000. 1 in 32.35 170000.

Place this Scheme p. 20.

There are 71 or 72 Marriages in the Country producing 343 Children.

78 Marriages in Towns producing 351 Children.

94 Marriages in London producing 376 Children.

Whereby it follows,

First, That though each Marriage in London produces fewer People than in the
Country, yet London in general having a greater Proportion of Breeders, is more
prolifick than the other great Towns, and the great Towns are more prolifick
than the Country.

Secondly, That if the People of London of all Ages were as long lived, as
those in the Country, London would increase in People much faster pro rato than
the Country.

Thirdly, That the Reasons why each Marriage in London produces fewer Children
than the Country Marriages, seem to be

First, From the more frequent Fornications and Adulteries.

Secondly, From a greater Luxury and Intemperance.

Thirdly, From a greater Intensness on Business.

Fourthly, From the unhealthfulness of the Coal Smoke.

Fifthly, From a greater Inequality of Age between the Husbands and Wives.

Sixthly, From the Husbands and Wives not living so long as in the Country.

He farther observes, Accompting the People to be 5,500,000, That the said five
Millions and a half (including the Transitory People and Vagrants) appear by
the Assessments on Marriages Births and Burials, to bear the following
Proportions in relation to Males and Females, and other Distinctions of the
People, viz.

Vide Scheme B.

So that the Number of Communicants is in all 3,260,000 Souls.

And the Number of Fighting Men between 16 and 60 is 1,308,000.

That the Batchelors are about 28 per Cent. of the whole,

Whereof those under 25 Years are 25 per Cent.

And those above 25 Years are 2 per Cent.

That the Maidens are about 28 per Cent. of the whole, Scheme B.
Males. Females. Males. Females. Both. In London and Bills of Mortality 10 to
13. 230,000 300,000 530,000 In the other Cities and Market Towns 8 to 9.
410,000 460,000 870,000 In the Villages and Hamlets 100 to 99. 2,060,000
2,040,000 4,100,000 27 to 28. 2,700,000 2,800,000 5,500,000 That as to other
Distinctions they appear by the said Assessments to bear these Proportions,
People. Males. Females. Husbands and Wives at above 34 per Cent. 1,900,000
950,000 950,000 Widowers at above 1 per Cent. 90,000 90,000 Widows at about 4
per Cent. 240,000 240,000 Children at above 45 per Cent. 2,500,000 1,300,000
1,200,000 Servants at about 10 per Cent. 560,000 260,000 300,000 Sojourners and
single Persons 4 per Cent. 210,000 100,000 110,000 100 5,500,000 2,700,000
2,800,000 And that the different Proportions in each of the said Articles
between London, the Great Towns, and the Villages, may the better appear, he
has formed the following Scheme.
London and Bills of Mortality. Souls. The other Cities and great Towns. Souls.
The Villages and Hamlets. Souls. Husbands and Wives 37 per Cent. 196,100 36 per
Cent. 313,200 34 per Cent. 1,394,000 Widowers 2 per Cent. 10,600 2 per Cent.
17,400 1 per Cent. 61,500 Widows 7 per Cent. 37,100 6 per Cent. 52,200 4 per
Cent. 184,500 Children 33 per Cent. 174,900 40 per Cent. 348,000 47 per Cent.
1,927,000 Servants 13 per Cent. 68,900 11 per Cent. 95,700 10 per Cent. 410,000
Sojourners 8 per Cent. 42,400 5 per Cent. 43,500 3 per Cent. 123,000 100
530,000 100 870,000 100 4,100,000 He further observes,supposing the People to
be 5,500,000, that the yearly Births of the Kingdom may be 190,000, and that
the several Ages of the People may be as follows,
In all Males. Females. Those under 1 year old 170,000 88,500 81,500 Those
under 5 years old 820,000 413,300 406,700 Those under 10 years old 1,520,000
762,900 757,100 Those under 16 years old 2,240,000 1,122,000 1,118,000 Those
above 16 years old 3,260,000 1,578,000 1,682,000 Those above 21 years old
2,700,000 1,300,000 1,400,000 Those above 25 years old 2,400,000 1,152,000
1,248,000 Those above 60 years old 600,000 270,000 330,000 Those under 16 years
old 2,240,000 Those above 16 years old 3,260,000 Total of the People 5,500,000

Place this Scheme p. 22.

Scheme C.
At a Medium years The Husbands are aged 43 years apiece, which at 17 per Cent.
makes 742 The Wives 40 years apiece, 17 690 The Widowers 56 years apiece, 1 84
The Widows 60 years apiece, 4 270 The Children 12 years apiece, 45 540 The
Servants 27 years apiece, 10 284 The Sojourners 35 years apiece, 4 140 At a
Medium 271 100 2750

Place this Scheme p. 23.

Scheme D.
A Scheme of the Income and Expense of the several Families of England,
Calculated for the Year, 1688.
Number of Families* RANKS, DEGREES, TITLES, and QUALIFICATIONS. Heads per
Family. Number of Persons. Yearly Income per Family. Yearly Income in general.
Yearly Income per Head. Yearly Expense per Head. Yearly Increase per Head.
Yearly Increase in general. l. s. l. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. 160 Temporal
Lords 40 6,400 3,200 512,000 80 0 70 0 10 0 64,000 26 Spiritual Lords 20 520
1,300 33,800 65 0 45 0 20 0 10,400 800 Baronets 16 12,800 880 704,000 55 0 49 0
6 0 76,800 600 Knights 13 7,800 650 390,000 50 0 45 0 5 0 39,000 3,000 Esquires
10 30,000 450 1,200,000 45 0 41 0 4 0 120,000 12,000 Gentlemen 8 96,000 280
2,880,000 35 0 32 0 3 0 288,000 5,000 Persons in greater Offices and Places 8
40,000 240 1,200,000 30 0 26 0 4 0 160,000 5,000 Persons in lesser Offices and
Places 6 30,000 120 600,000 20 0 17 0 3 0 90,000 2,000 Eminent Merchants and
Traders by Sea 8 16,000 400 800,000 50 0 37 0 13 0 208,000 8,000 Lesser
Merchants and Traders by Sea 6 48,000 198 1,600,000 33 0 27 0 6 0 288,000
10,000 Persons in the Law 7 70,000 154 1,540,000 22 0 18 0 4 0 280,000 2,000
Eminent Clergymen 6 12,000 72 144,000 12 0 10 0 2 0 24,000 8,000 Lesser
Clergymen 5 40,000 50 400,000 10 0 9 4 0 16 32,000 40,000 Freeholders of the
better sort 7 280,000 91 3,640,000 13 0 11 15 1 5 350,000 120,000 Freeholders
of the lesser sort 5 660,000 55 6,600,000 10 0 9 10 0 10 330,000 150,000
Farmers 5 750,000 42 10 6,375,000 8 10 8 5 0 5 187,500 15,000 Persons in
Liberal Arts and Sciences 5 75,000 60 900,000 12 0 11 0 1 0 75,000 50,000
Shopkeepers and Tradesmen 4 225,000 45 2,250,000 10 0 9 0 1 0 225,000 60,000
Artizans and Handicrafts 4 240,000 38 2,280,000 9 10 9 0 0 10 120,000 5,000
Naval Officers 4 20,000 80 400,000 20 0 18 0 2 0 40,000 4,000 Military Officers
4 16,000 60 240,000 15 0 14 0 1 0 16,000 500,586 5 2,675,520 68 18 34,488,800
12 18 11 15 4 1 2 8 3,023,700 Decrease Decrease 50,000 Common Seamen 3 150,000
20 1,000,000 7 0 7 10 0 10 75,000 364,000 Laboring People and Out Servants 3
1,275,000 15 5,460,000 4 10 4 12 0 2 127,500 400,000 Cottagers and Paupers 3
1,300,000 6 10 2,000,000 2 0 2 5 0 5 325,000 35,000 Common Soldiers 2 70,000 14
490,000 7 0 7 10 0 10 35,000 849,000 3 2,795,000 10 10 8,950,000 3 5 3 9 0 4
562,500 Vagrants; as Gypsies, Thieves, Beggars, etc. 30,000 60,000 2 0 4 0 2 0
60,000 So the general Account is 500,586 Increasing the Wealth of the Kingdom 5
2,675,520 68 18 34,488,800 12 18 11 15 4 1 2 8 3,023,700 849,000 Decreasing the
Wealth of the Kingdom 3 2,825,000 10 10 9,010,000 3 3 3 7 6 0 4 6 622,500
1,349,586 Neat Totals 4 1 5,500,520 32 5 43,491,800 7 18 7 9 3 0 8 9 2,401,200

Place this Scheme p. 23.

Whereof those under 25 Years are 26 per Cent.

And those above 25 Years are 2 per Cent.

That the Males and Females in the Kingdom in General, are aged one with
another 27 Years and a half.

That in the Kingdom in General, there is near as many People living under 20
Years of Age, as there is above twenty, whereof half of the Males is under 19,
and one half of the Females is under 21 Years.

That the Ages of the People, according to their several Distinctions, are as
follows, viz.

Vide Scheme C.

Having thus stated the Numbers of the People, he gives a Scheme of the Income
and Expense of the several Families of England, Calculated for the Year, 1688.

Vide Scheme D.

Mr. King's Modesty has been so far overruled, as to suffer us to Communicate
these his Excellent Computations, which we can the more safely commend, having
examined them very carefully, tried them by some little Operations of our own
upon the same Subject, and compared them with the Schemes of other Persons, who
take Pleasure in the like Studies.

What he says concerning the Number of the People to be 5,500,000 is no
positive Assertion, nor shall we pretend any where to determine in that Matter;
what he lays down is by way of Hypothesis, That supposing the Inhabitants of
England to have been, Anno 1300, Two Millions 860,000 Heads, by the orderly
Series of Increase allowed of by all Writers, they may probably be about Anno
1700 Five Millions 500,000 Heads; but if they were An. 1300 either less or
more, the Case must proportionably alter; for as to his Allowances for Plagues,
great Mortalities, Civil Wars, the Sea and the Plantations, they seem very
reasonable, and not well to be contraverted.

Upon these Schemes of Mr. King, we shall make several Remarks, though the Text
deserves much a better Comment.

The People being the first Matter of Power and Wealth, by whose Labor and
Industry a Nation must be Gainers in the Balance, their Increase or Decrease
must be carefully observed by any Government that designs to thrive; that is,
their Increase must be promoted by good Conduct and wholesome Laws, and if they
have been Decreased by War, or any other Accident, the Breach is to be made up
as soon as possible, for it is a Maim in the Body Politic affecting all its
Parts.

Almost all Countries in the World have been more or less Populous, as Liberty
and Property have been there well or ill secured. The first Constitution of
Rome was no ill founded Government, a Kingly Power limited by Laws; and the
People increased so fast, that from a small beginning, in the Reign of their
Sixth King, they were able to send out an Army of 80000 Men. And in the time of
the Commonwealth, in that Invasion which the Gauls made upon Italy, not long
before Hannibal came thither, they were grown so numerous, as that their Troops
consisted of 700,000 Foot and 70,000 Horse; it is true, their Allies were
comprehended in this Number, but the ordinary People fit to bear Arms, being
Mustered in Rome and Campania, amounted to 250,000 Foot and 23,000 Horse.

Nothing therefore can more contribute to the rendering England Populous and
Strong, than to have Liberty upon a right Foot, and our legal Constitution
firmly preserved. A Nation may be as well called free under a limited Kingship
as in a Commonwealth, and it is to this good Form of our Government; that we
partly owe that doubling of the People, which has probably happened here in the
435 Years last past. And if the Ambition of some, and the Mercenary Temper of
others, should bring us at any time to alter our Constitution, and to give up
our ancient Rights, we shall find our Numbers diminish visibly and fast. For
Liberty encourages Procreation, and not only keeps our own Inhabitants among
us, but invites Strangers to come and live under the shelter of our Laws.

The Romans indeed made use of an Adventitious Help to enlarge their City,
which was by incorporating Foreign Cities and Nations into their Commonwealth;
but this way is not without its Mischiefs. Machiavel' s Discourses on Livy.
For the Strangers in Rome by degrees had grown so numerous, and to have so
great a Vote in the Councils, that the whole Government began to totter, and
decline from its old, to its new Inhabitants: Which Fabius the Censor
observing, he applied a Remedy in time by reducing all the new Citizens into
four Tribes, that being contracted into so narrow a space, they might not have
so malignant an influence upon the City.

An Act of General Naturalization, would likewise probably Increase our Numbers
very fast, and repair what Loss we may have suffered in our People by the late
War: It Is a Matter that has been very warmly contended for by many good
Patriots; but peradventure it carries also its Danger with it, which perhaps
would have the less Influence by this Expedient, namely, If an Act of
Parliament were made, That no Heads of Families, hereafter to be naturalized
for the first Generation, should have Votes in any of our Elections. But as the
Case stands, it seems against the Nature of right Government, that Strangers
(who may be Spies, and who may have an Interest opposite to that of England,
and who at best ever join in one Link of Obsequiousness to the Ministers)
should be suffered to intermeddle in that important Business of sending Members
to Parliament. From their Sons indeed there is less to fear, who by Birth and
Nature may come to have the same Interest and Inclinations as the Natives.

And though the Expedient of Fabius Maximus, to contract the Strangers into four
Tribes, might be reasonable where the Affairs of a whole Empire were transacted
by Magistrates chosen in one City, yet the same Policy may not hold good in
England; Foreigners cannot influence Elections here by being dispersed about in
the several Counties of the Kingdom, where they can never come to have any
considerable strength. But some time or other, they may endanger the Government
by being suffered to remain, such vast Numbers of 'em, here in London, where
they inhabit all together, at least 30000 Persons in two Quarters of the Town,
without inter-marrying with the English, or learning our Language, by which
Means for several Years to come, they are in a way still to continue
Foreigners, and perhaps may have a Foreign Interest and Foreign Inclinations:
To permit this, cannot be advisable or safe. It may therefore be proper to
limit any new Acts of Naturalization, with such Restrictions as may make the
Accession of Strangers not dangerous to the Public.

An Accession of Strangers well regulated, may add to our Strength and Numbers;
but then it must be composed of Laboring Men, Artificers, Merchants and other
rich Men, and not of Foreign Soldiers, since such fright and drive away from a
Nation more People than their Troops can well consist of: For if it has been
ever seen, that Men abound most where there is most Freedom ( China excepted,
whose Climate excells all others, and where the exercise of the Tyranny is mild
and easy) it must follow, that People will in time desert those Countries
whose best Flower is their Liberties, if those Liberties are thought Precarious
or in Danger. That Foreign Soldiers are dangerous to Liberty, we may produce
Examples from all Countries and all Ages; but we shall instance only one,
because it is eminent above all the rest.

Polybius, Lib. 1.
The Carthaginians, in their Wars, did very much use Mercenary and Foreign
Troops; and when the Peace was made between them and the Romans, after a long
Dispute for the Dominion of Sicily, they brought their Army home to be Paid and
Disbanded, which Gesco their General had the Charge of Embarking, who did order
all his Part with great Dexterity and Wisdom. But the State of Carthage wanting
Money to clear Arrears, and satisfy the Troops, was forced to keep them up
longer than was designed. The Army consisted of Gauls, Ligurians, Baleareans
leareans and Greeks. At first they were insolent in their Quarters in Carthage,
and were prevailed upon to remove to Sicca, where they were to remain and
expect their Pay. There they grew presently corrupted with Ease and Pleasure,
and fell into Mutinies and Disorder, and to making extravagant demands of Pay
and Gratuities; and in a Rage, with their Arms in their Hands, they marched
Twenty Thousand of them toward Carthage, incamping within 15 Miles of the
City; and chose Spendius and Matho, two profligate Wretches for their Leaders,
and imprisoned Gesco who was deputed to 'em from the Commonwealth. Afterward
they caused almost all the Affricans, their Tributaries, to revolt; They grew
in a short time to be 70,000 strong; They fought several Battles with Hanno and
Hamilcar Barcas. During these Transactions, the Mercenaries that were in
Garrison in Sardinia mutinied likewise, murdering their Commander and all the
Carthaginians; while Spendius and Matho, to render their Accomplices more
desperate, put Gesco to a cruel Death, presuming afterward to lay Siege to
Carthage it self. They met with a Shock indeed at Prion, where 40,000 of them
were slaughtered; but soon after this Battle, in another, they took one of the
Carthaginian Generals Prisoner, whom they fixed to a Cross, crucifying thirty
of the principal Senators round about him. Spendius and Matho were at last
taken, the one crucified and the other tormented to death: But the War lasted
three Years and near four Months with excessive Cruelty; in which the State of
Carthage lost several Battles, and was often brought within a Hairs breadth of
utter Ruin.

If so great a Commonwealth as Carthage, though assisted at that time by Hiero
King of Syracuse, and by the Romans, ran the hazard of losing their Empire,
City and Liberties, by the Insurrection of a handful of Mercenaries, whose
first Strength was but 20,000 Men; it should be a warning to all Free Nations,
how they suffer Armies so composed to be among them; and it should frighten a
Wise State from desiring such an Increase of People, as may be had by the
bringing over-Foreign Soldiers.

Indeed, all Armies whatsoever, if they are over large, tend to the dispeopling
of a Country, of which our Neighbor Nation is a sufficient Proof; where in one
of the best Climates in Europe, Men are wanting to Till the Ground. For
Children do not proceed from the intemperate Pleasures taken loosly and at
random, but from a regular way of Living, where the Father of the Family
desires to rear up and provide for the Offspring he shall beget.

Securing the Liberties of a Nation, may be laid down as a Fundamental for
increasing the Numbers of its People; but there are other Polities thereunto
conducing, which no Wise State has ever neglected.

No Race of Men did multiply so fast as the Jews, which may be attributed
chiefly to the Wisdom of Moses their Lawgiver, in contriving to promote the
State of Marriage.

The Romans had the same Care, paying no Respect to a Man Childless by his own
Fault, and giving great Immunities and Privileges, both in the City and
Provinces, to those who had such and such a number of Children. Encouragements
of the like kind are also given in France to such as enrich the Commonwealth
by a large Issue.

But we in England have taken another Course, laying a Fine upon the
Marriage Bed, which seems small to those who only contemplate the Pomp and
Wealth round about 'em, and in their View; but they who look into all the
different Ranks of Men, are well satisfied that this Duty on Marriages and
Births, is a very grevious Burden upon the poorer Sort, whose Numbers compose
the Strength and Wealth of any Nation. This Tax was introduced by the Necessity
of Affairs. It Is difficult to say what may be the Event of a new thing; but if
we are to take Measures from past Wisdom, which exempted Prolifick Families
from Public Duties, we should not lay Impositions upon those who find it hard
enough to maintain themselves. If this Tax be such a Weight upon the Poor, as
to discourage Marriage and hinder Propagation, which seems the Truth, no doubt
it ought to be abolished; and at a convenient time we ought to change it for
some other Duty, if there were only this single Reason, That it is so directly
opposite to the Polity of all Ages and all Countries.

In order to have Hands to carry on Labor and Manufactnres, which must make us
Gainers in the Balance of Trade, we ought not to deterr but rather invite Men
to marry, which is to be done by Privileges and Exemptions, for such a Number
of Children, and by denying certain Offices of Trust and Dignities to all
unmarried Persons; and where it is once made a Fashion among those of the
better. Sort, 'twill quickly obtain with the lower Degree.

See Scheme A.
Mr. King in his Scheme (for which he has as Authentic Grounds, as perhaps the
Matter is capable of) lays down, That the Annual Marriages of England are about
41,000, which is one Marriage out of every 134 Persons: Upon which we observe,
that this is not a due Proportion, considering how few of our Adult Males (in
comparison with other Countries) perish by War or any other Accident; from
whence may be inferred, that our Polity is some way or other Defective, or the
Marriages would bear a nearer proportion with the gross Number of our People;
for which Defect, if a Remedy can be found, there will be so much more Strength
added to the Kingdom.

From the Books of Assessment on Births, Marriages, etc. by the nearest View he
can make, he divides the 5,500,000 People into 2,700,000 Males and 2,800,000
Females; from whence (considering the Females exceed the Males in Number, and
considering that the Men marry later than Women, and that many of the Males are
of Necessity absent in the Wars, at Sea and upon other Business) it follows,
that a large Proportion of the Females remain unmarried, though at an Adult Age,
which is a dead Loss to the Nation, every Birth being as so much certain
Treasure; upon which Account, such Laws must be for the Public Good, as induce
all Men to marry whose Circumstances permit it.

From his Division of the People, it may be likewise observed, That the near
Proportion there is between the Males and Females (which is said to hold also
in other Places) is an Argument (and the strongest that can be produced)
against Poligamy, and the Increase of Mankind, which some think might be from
thence expected; for if Nature had intended to one Man a Plurality of Wives,
She would have ordered a great many more Female Births than Male, her
Designments being always Right and Wise.

The securing the Parish for Bastard-Children, is become so small a Punishment
and so easily Compounded, that it very much hinders Marriage. The Dutch compel
Men of all Ranks, to marry the Woman whom they have got with Child; and perhaps
it would tend to the farther Peopling of England, if the Common People here,
under such a certain Degree, were condemned by some new Law to suffer the same
Penalty.

A Country that makes Provision to increase in Inhabitants, whose Situation is
good, and whose People have a Genius adapted to Trade, will never fail to be
Gainers in the Balance, provided the Labor and Industry of their People be
well managed and carefully directed.

The more any Man contemplates these Matters, the more he will come to be of
Opinion, That England is capable of being rendered one of the strongest
Nations, and the richest Spot of Ground in Europe.

It Is not extent of Territory that makes a Country Powerful, but Numbers of Men
well employed, convenient Ports, a good Navy, and a Soil producing all sort of
Commodities. The Materials for all this we have, and so improveable, that if we
did but second the Gifts of Nature, with our own Industry, we should soon
arrive to a pitch of Greatness, that would put us at least upon an equal Foot
with any of our Neighbors.

If we had the Complement of Men, our Land can maintain and nourish; If we had
as much Trade as our Stock and Knowledge in Sea Affairs is capable of
embracing; If we had such a Naval Strength as a Trade so extended would easily
produce; and, if we had those Stores and that Wealth which is the certain
Result of a large and well governed Traffic, what humane Strength could hurt
or invade us? On the contrary, should we not be in a posture not only to
resist, but to give the Law to others?

Our Neighboring Commonwealth has not in Territory above Eight Millions of
Acres, and perhaps not much above two Millions two Hundred Thousand People; and
yet what a Figure have they made in Europe for these last hundred Years? What
Wars have they maintained? What Forces have they resisted? and to what a hight
of Power are they now come, and all by good Order and wise Government?

They are liable to frequent Invasions; They labor under the Inconvenience and
danger of bad Ports; They consume immense Sums every Year to defend their Land
against the Sea; all which Difficulties they have subdued by an unwearied
Industry.

We are fenced by Nature against Foreign Enemies; Our Ports are safe; We fear
no Irruptions of the Sea; Our Land Territory at home is at least 39 Millions of
Acres; We have in all likelihood not less than Five Millions and a half of
People; what a Nation might we then become, if all these Advantages were
thoroughly improved, and if a right Application were made of all this Strength,
and of these Numbers?

They who apprehend the immoderate growth of any Prince or State, may perhaps
succeed by beginning first, and by attempting to pull down such a dangerous
Neighbor, but very often their good Designs are disappointed. In all
appearance they proceed more safely, who under such a fear make themselves
strong and powerful at home. And this was the Course which Philip, King of
Macedon, the Father of Perseus, took, when he thought to be invaded by the
Romans.

The Greatness of Rome gave Carthage very anxious Thoughts, and it rather seems
that they entered into the second Punick War, more for fear the Romans should
have the Universal Empire, than out of any Ambition to Lord it themselves over
the whole World. Their Design was virtuous, and peradventure wise to endeavor
at some early Interruption to a Rival that grew so fast: However we see they
miscarried, though their Armies were led by Hannibal. But Fortune which had
determined the Dominion of the Earth for Rome, did perhaps lead them into the
fatal Council of passing the Eber, contrary to the Articles of Peace concluded
with Asdrubal, and of Attacking Saguntum, before they had sufficiently
recovered of the Wounds they had suffered in the Wars about Sicily, Sardinia,
and with their own Rebels. If the high Courage of Hannibal had not driven the
Commonwealth into a new War, while it was yet faint and weak, and if they had
been suffered to pursue their Victories in Spain, and to get firm footing in
that Rich Warlike and then Populous Country, very probably in a few Years they
might have been a more equal Match for the Roman People. It Is true, if the
Romans had endeavored at the Conquest of Spain, and if they had disturbed the
Carthaginians in that Country, the War must have been unavoidable, because it
was evident in that Age, and will be apparent in the Times we live in, that
whatever Foreign Power already grown great, can add to its dominion the
Possession of Spain, will stand fair for Universal Empire.

But unless some such Cogent Reason of State, as is here instanced, intervene,
in all appearance the best way for a Nation that apprehends the growing Power
of any Neighbor, is to fortify it self within; we do not mean by Land Armies,
which rather debilitate than strengthen a Country, but by Potent Navies, by
Thrift in the Public Treasure, Care of the Peoples Trade, and all the other
honest and useful Arts of Peace.

By such an Improvement of our Native Strength, agreeable to the Laws and to
the Temper of a Free Nation, England without doubt may be brought to so good a
Posture and Condition of defending it self, as not to apprehend any Neighbor
jealous of its Strength, or envious of its Greatness.

And to this end we open these Schemes, That a Wise Government under which we
live, not having any Designs to become Arbitrary, may see what Materials they
have to work upon, and how far our Native Wealth is able to second their good
Intentions of preserving us a rich and a free People.

Having said something of the Number of our Inhabitants, we shall proceed to
discourse of their different Degrees and Ranks, and to examine who are a Burden
and who a Profit to the Public; for by how much every Part and Member of the
Commonwealth can be made useful to the whole, by so much a Nation will be more
and more a Gainer in this Balance of Trade which we are to treat of.

See Scheme D.
Mr. King, from the Assessments on Births and Marriages, and from the Polls, has
formed the Scheme here incerted, of the Ranks, Degrees, Titles and
Qualifications of the People. He has done it so Judiciously, and upon such
Grounds, that it is well worth the careful Perusal of any Curious Person; from
thence we shall make some Observations in order to put our present Matter in a
clearer Light.

First, This Scheme detects their Error, who in the Calculations they frame,
contemplate nothing but the Wealth and Plenty they see in rich Cities and great
Towns, and from thence make a Judgment of the Kingdoms remaining Part; and from
this View conclude, That Taxes and Payments to the Public do mostly arise from
the Gentry and better sort, by which Measures they neither contrive their
Imposition aright, nor are they able to give a true Estimate what it shall
produce; but when we have divided the Inhabitants of England into their proper
Classes, it will appear that the Nobility and Gentry are but a small Part of
the whole Body of the People.

Believing that Taxes fall chiefly upon the better Sort, they care not what
they lay, as thinking they will not be felt; but when they come to be levied,
they either fall short, and so run the Public into an immense Debt, or they
light so heavily upon the Poorer Sort, as to occasion insufferable Clamours;
and they whose proper Business it was to contrive these Matters better, have
been so unskilful, that the Legislative Power has been more than once compelled
for the Peoples ease to give new Fonds, instead of others that had been ill
projected.

This may be generally said, That all Duties whatsoever upon the Consumption,
of a large Produce, fall with the greatest weight upon the Common Sort: So that
such as think in new Duties that they chiefly tax the Rich, will find
themselves quite mistaken; for either their Fond must yield little, or it must
arise from the whole Body of the People, of which the Richer Sort are but a
small Proportion.

And though War, and National Debts and Engagements, might heretofore very
rationally plead for Excises upon our Home-Consumption; yet now there is a
Peace, it is the concern of every Man that loves his Country, to proceed warily
in laying new ones, and to get off those which are already laid as fast as ever
he can. High Customs and high Excises both together are incompatible, either of
them alone are to be endured, but to have them co-exist is suffered in no well
governed Nation. If Materials of Foreign growth were at an easy rate, a high
Price might be the better born in things of our own Product, but to have both
dear at once (and by reason of the Duties laid upon them) is ruinous to the
inferior Rank of Men; and this ought to weigh more with us, when we consider
that even of the Common People, a Sub-division is to be made, of which one part
subsist from their own Havings, Arts, Labor and Industry; and the other Part
subsist a little from their own Labor, but chiefly from the Help and Charity
of the Rank that is above them. For according to to Mr. King's Scheme,

See Scheme D.
The Nobility and Gentry, with their Families and Retainers, the Persons in
Offices, Merchants, Persons in the Law, the Clergy, Freeholders, Farmers,
Persons in Sciences and Liberal Arts, Shopkeepers and Tradesmen, Handicrafts
Men, Naval Officers, with the Families and Dependants upon all these
altogether, make up the Number of -- 2,675,520 Heads.

Brought over 2,675,520 Heads. The Common Seamen, Common Soldiers, Laboring
People and Out-Servants, Cottagers, Paupers, and their Families, with the
Vagrants, make up the number of -- 2,825,000 Heads. In all, 5,500,520 Heads.
So that here seems a Majority of the People, whose chief dependence and
subsistence is from the other Part, which Majority is much greater, in respect
of the Number of Families, because 500,000 Families contribute to the support
of 850,000 Families. In Contemplation of which, great Care should be taken not
to lay new Duties upon the Home-Comsumption, unless upon the extremest
Necessities of the State; for though such Impositions cannot be said to fall
directly upon the lower Rank, whose Poverty hinders them from consuming such
Materials (though there are few Excises, to which the meanest Person does not pay
something) yet indirectly, and by unavoidable Consequences, they are rather
more affected by high Duties upon our Home-Consumption, than the Wealthier
Degree of People, and so we shall find the Case to be, if we look carefully
into all the distinct Ranks of Men there enumerated.

First, As to the Nobility and Gentry, they must of necessity retrench their
Families and Expenses, if excessive Impositions are laid upon all sorts of
Materials for Consumption; from whence follows, That the Degree below them of
Merchants, Shopkeepers, Tradesmen and Artizans, must want Employment.

Secondly, As to the Manufactures, high Excises in time of Peace, are utterly
destructive to that principal Part of England's Wealth; for if Malt, Coals,
Salt, Leather, and other things bear a great Price, the Wages of Servants,
Workmen and Artificers, will consequently rise, for the Income must bear some
proportion with the Expense; and if such as set the Poor to work, find Wages
for Labor, or Manufacture advance upon them, they must rise in the Price of
their Commodity, or they cannot live; all which would signify little, if
nothing but our own Dealings among one another were thereby affected; but it
has a Consequence far more pernicious in relation to our Foreign Trade, for
it is the Exportation of our own Product that must make England rich; to be
Gainers in the Balance of Trade, we must carry out of our own Product, what
will purchase the Things of Foreign Growth that are needful for our own
Consumption, with some Overplus either in Bullion or Goods to to be sold in
other Countries; which Overplus is the Profit a Nation makes by Trade, and it
its more or less according to the natural Frugality of the People that Export,
or as from the low Price of Labor and Manufacture they can afford the the
Commodity cheap, and at a rate not to be under-sold in Foreign Markets. The
Dutch, whose Labor and Manufactures are dear, by reason of Home-Excises, can
notwithstanding sell cheap abroad, because this disadvantage they labor under
is balanced by the Parsimonious Temper of their People: But in England, where
this Frugality is hardly to be introduced, if the Duties upon our
Home-Consumption are so large as to raise considerably the price of Labor and
Manufacture, all our Commodities for Exportation must by degrees so advance in
the prime Value, that they cannot be sold at a rate which will give 'em Vent in
Foreign Markets; and we must be every where under-sold by our wiser Neighbors.
But the Consequence of such Duties in times of Peace, will fall most heavily
upon our Woollen Manufactures, of which most have more Value from the
Workmanship than the Material; and if the Price of this Workmanship be
inhanc'd, it will in a short Course of time put a Necessity upon those we deal
with of setting up Manufactures of their own, such as they can, or of buying
Goods of the like Kind and Use from Nations that can afford them cheaper. And
in this Point we are to consider, that the Bulk of our Woollen Exports does not
consist in Draperies made of the fine Wool, peculiar to our Soil, but is
composed of course broad Clothes, such as Yorkshire Clothes, Kersies, which
make a great part of our Exports; and may be, and are made of a courser Wool,
which is to be had in other Countries: So that we are not singly to value our
selves upon the Material, but also upon the Manufacture, which we should make
as easy as we can, by not laying over heavy Burdens upon the Manufacturer:
And our Woollen Goods being two thirds of our Foreign Exports, it ought to be
chief Object of the Public Care, if we expect to be Gainers in the Balance of
Trade, which is what we hunt after in these Inquiries.

Thirdly, As to the lower Rank of all, which we compute at 2,825,000 Heads, a
Majority of the whole People, their principal Subsistence is upon the Degrees
above them; and if those are rendered uneasy, these must share in the
Calamity, but even of this inferior Sort, no small Proportion contribute
largely to Excises, as Laborers and Out-Servants, which likewise affect the
Common Seamen, who must thereupon raise their Wages, or they will not have
wherewithal to keep their Families left at Home; and the high Wages of Seamen
is another Burden upon our Foreign Traffic. As to the Cottagers, who are
above a fifth Part of the whole People, some Duties reach even them, as those
upon Malt, Leather and Salt, but not much because of their slender Consumption;
but if the Gentry, upon whose Woods and Gleanings they live, and who employ 'em
in Day Labor; and if the Manufacturers, for whom they Card and Spin, are
over-burthen'd with Duties, they cannot afford to give them so much for their
Labor and Handiwork; nor to yield them those other Reliefs which are their
principal Subsistence, for want of which, these miserable Wretches must perish
with Cold and Hunger.

Thus we see Excises either directly or indirectly, fall upon the whole Body of
the People; but we do not take notice of these Matters, as receeding from our
former Opinion: On the contrary, we still think them the most easy and equal
way of Taxing a Nation; and perhaps it is demonstrable, that if we had fallen
into this Method at the beginning of the War, of raising the Year's Expense
within the Year, by Excises, England had not been now indebted so many
Millions; but what was advisable, under such a Necessity and Danger, is not to
be persued in times of Peace, especially in a Country depending so much upon
Trade and Manufactures.

Our Study now ought to be how those Debts may be speedily cleared off, for
which these new Revenues are the Fonds, that Trade may again move freely as it
did heretofore, without such a heavy Clogg; but this Point we shall more amply
handle, when we come to speak of our Payments to the Public.

Mr. King divides the whole Body of the People, into two Principal Classes, viz.

See Scheme D.
Increasing the Wealth of the Kingdom, -- 2,675,520 Heads. Decreasing the Wealth
of the Kingdom, -- 2,825,000 Heads.
By which he means, That the First Class of the People, from Land, Arts and
Industry, maintain themselves, and add every Year something to the Nation's
General Stock; and besides this, out of their Superfluity, contribute every
Year so much to the maintenance of Others.

That of the Second Class, some partly maintain themselves by Labor (as the
Heads of the Cottage Families) but that the rest, as most of the Wives and
Children of these, sick and impotent People, idle Beggars and Vagrants, are
nourished at the Cost of Others; and are a Yearly Burden to the Public,
consuming Annully so much as would be otherwise added to the Nation's general
Stock.

The Bodies of Men are without doubt the most valuable Treasure of a Country;
and in their Sphere, the ordinary People are as serviceable to the
Commonwealth as the rich, if they are employed in honest Labor and useful
Arts: And such being more in Number, do more contribute to increase the
Nation's Wealth, than the higher Rank.

But a Country may be Populous and yet Poor (as were the ancient Gauls and
Scythians) so that Numbers, unless they are well employed, make the Body
Politic big, but unweildy, strong but unactive, as to any Uses of good
Government.

Their's is a wrong Opinion, who think all Mouths profit a Country that consume
its Product: And it may be more truly affirmed, That he who does not some way
serve the Commonwealth, either by being employed, or by employing Others, is
not only a useless, but a hurtful Member to it.

As it is Charity, and what we indeed owe to Humane Kind, to make Provision for
the Aged, the Lame, the Sick, Blind and Impotent: So it is a Justice we owe to
the Commonwealth, not to suffer such as have Health, and who might maintain
themselves, to be Drones, and live upon the Labor of Others.

The Bulk of such as are a Burden to the Public, consists in the Cottagers
and Paupers, Beggars in great Cities and Towns, and Vagrants.

Upon a Survey of the Hearth Books, made in Michaelmas, 1685. it was found that
of the 1,300,000 Houses in the whole Kingdom, those of one Chimney amounted to
554,631; but some of these having Land about them, in all our Calculations, we
have computed the Cottagers but at 500,000 Families. But of these, a large
Number, may get their own Livelihood, and are no Charge to the Parish, for
which Reason Mr. King very judiciously computes his Cottagers and Paupers,
decreasing the Wealth of the Nation, but at 400,000 Families; in which Account,
he includes the poor Houses in Cities, Towns and Villages, besides which he
reckons 30,000 Vagrants; and all these together, to make up 1,330,000 Heads.

This is a very great Proportion of the People to be a Burden upon the other
Part, and is a Weight upon the Land-Interest; of which the Landed Gentlemen
must certainly be very sensible.

If this vast Body of Men, instead of being Expensive, could be rendered
Beneficial to the Commonwealth, it were a Work no doubt highly to be promoted
by all who love their Country.

It seems evident to such as have considered these Matters, and who have
observed how they are ordered in Nations under a good Polity, that the Number
of such who through Age or Impotence stand in real need of Relief, is but small
and might be maintained for very little; and that the Poor Rates are swelled to
the extravigant degree we now see 'em at, by two sorts of People, One of which,
by Reason of our slack Administration, is suffered to remain in Sloth; and the
Other, through a Defect in our Constitution, continue in wretched Poverty for
want of Emplyment, though willing enough to undertake it.

All this seems capable of a Remedy, the Laws may be armed against voluntary
Idleness, so as to prevent it; and a way may probably be found out to set those
to Work who are desirous to support themselves by their own Labor: And if this
could be brought about, it would not only put a stop to the Course of that Vice
which is the Consequence of an idle Life, but it would greatly tend to enrich
the Commonwealth; for if the Industry of not half the People maintains in some
degree the other part; and besides, in times of Peace did add every Year near
two Millions and a half to the general Stock of England; to what pitch of
Wealth and Greatness might we not be brought, if one Limb were not suffered to
draw away the Nourishment of the other; and if all the Members of the Body
Politic were rendered useful to it.

Nature, in her Contrivances, has made every part of a living Creature either
for Ornament or Use; the same should be in a Politic Institution rightly
Governed.

It may be laid down for an undeniable Truth, That where all work no body will
want; and to promote this, would be a greater Charity and more Meritorious,
than to build Hospitals, which very often are but so many Monuments of
ill-gotten Riches, attended with late Repentance.

To make as many as possible of these 1,330,000 Persons (whereof not above
330,000 are Children too young to work) who now live chiefly upon others, get
themselves a large share of their Maintenance, would be the opening a new Vein
of Treasure of some Millions Sterling per Annum; it would be a present Ease to
every particular Man of Substance, and a lasting Benefit to the whole Body of
the Kingdom: For it would not only nourish but increase the Numbers of the
People, of which many Thousands perish every Year, by those Diseases contracted
under a slothful Poverty.

Our Laws relating to the Poor are very numerous, and this Matter has employed
the Care of every Age for a long time, though but with little success, partly
through the ill Execution, and partly through some defect in the very Laws.

The Corruptions of Mankind are grown so great, that, now adays, Laws are not
much observed, which do not in a manner execute themselves; of this Nature are
those Laws which relate to bringing in the Prince's Revenue, which never fail
to be put in Execution, because the People must pay, and the Prince will be
paid; but where only one part of the Constitution, the People, are immediately
concerned, as in Laws relating to the Poor, the Highways, Assizes, and other
Civil Economy, and good Order in the State, those are but slenderly regarded.

The Public Good being therefore, very often, not a Motive strong enough to
engage the Magistrate to perform his Duty, Lawgivers have many times fortified
their Laws with Penalties, wherein private Persons may have a Profit, thereby
to stir up the People to put the Laws in Execution.

In Countries depraved, nothing proceeds well, wherein particular Men do not
one way or other find their Account, and rather than a Public Good should not
go on at all; without doubt, it is better to give Private Men some Interest to
set it forward.

For which Reason, it may be worth the Consideration of such as study the
Prosperity and Welfare of England, whither this great Engine of maintaining the
Poor, and finding them Work and Employment, may not be put in Motion by giving
some Body of Undertakers a reasonable Gain to put the Machine upon its Wheels.

In Order to which, we shall here incert a Proposal delivered to the House of
Commons last Session of Parliament, for the better maintaining the Impotent,
and employing and setting to Work the other Poor of this Kingdom.

In Matters of this Nature, it is always good to have some Model or Plan laid
down, which thinking Men may contemplate, alter and correct, as they see
occasion; And the Writer of these Papers does rather choose to offer this
Scheme, because he is satisfied it was composed by a Gentleman of great
Abilities, and who has made both the Poor Rates, and their Number, more his
study than any other Person in the Nation. The Proposal is as follows.

A Scheme for setting the Poor to Work.
FIrst, That such Persons as shall subscribe and pay the Sum of 300,000 l. as a
Stock for and toward the better maintaining the Impotent Poor, and for buying
Commodities and Materials to employ and set at Work the other Poor, be
Incorporated and made one Body Politic, etc. By the Name of the Governor and
Company, for maintaining and employing the Poor of this Kingdom.

By all former Propositions, it was intended that the Parishes should advance
several Years Rates to raise a Stock, but by this Proposal the Experiment is to
be made by Private Persons at their Risk; and 300,000 l. may be judged a very
good Stock, which added to the Poor Rates for a certain number of Years, will
be a very good Fond for buying Commodities and Materials for a Million of Money
at any time. This Subscription ought to be free for every Body, and if the Sum
were subscribed in the several Counties of England and Wales, in Proportion to
their Poor Rates, or the Monthly Assessment, it would be most convenient; and
Provision may be made, That no Person shall transfer his Interest but to one of
the same County, which will keep the Interest there during the Term; and as to
its being one Corporation, it is presumed this will be most beneficial to the
Public. For first, All Disputes on Removes, which ane very chargeable and
burdensome, will be at an end, this Proposal intending, that wherever the
Poor are, they shall be maintained or employed. Secondly, It will prevent one
County which shall be diligent, imposing on their Neighbors who may be
negligent, or getting away their Manufactures from them. Thirdly, In Case of
Fire, Plague, or loss of Manufacture, the Stock of one County may not be
sufficient to support the Places where such Calamities may happen; and it is
necessary the whole Body should support every particular Member, so that hereby
there will be a general Care to administer to every Place according to their
Necessities.

Secondly, That the said Corporation be established for the Term of one and
twenty Years.

The Corporation ought to be established for one and twenty Years, or otherwise
it cannot have the benefit the Law gives in Case of Infants, which is their
Service for their Education; besides, it will be some Years before a matter of
this Nature can be brought into Practice.

Thirdly, That the said Sum of 300,000 l. be paid in, and laid out for the
Purposes aforesaid, to remain as a Stock for and during the said Term of one
and twenty Years.

The Subscription ought to be taken at the Passing of the Act, but the
Corporation to be left at liberty, to begin either the Michaelmas or the
Lady Day after, as they shall think fit. And per Cent. to be paid at the
subscribing to Persons appointed for that purpose, and the remainder before
they begin to Act; but so as 300,000 l. shall be always in Stock during the
Term, notwithstanding any Dividends or other Disposition: And an Account
thereof to be exhibited twice in every Year upon Oath, before the Lord
Chancellor for the time being.

Fourthly, That the said Corporation do by themselves, or Agents in every
Parish of England, from and after the Day of during the said Term of one and
twenty Years, provide for the real Impotent Poor good and sufficient
Maintenance and Reception, as good or better than has at any time within the
space of Years before the said Day of been provided or allowed to such Impotent
Poor, and so shall continue to provide for such Impotent Poor, and what other
growing Impotent Poor shall happen in the said Parish during the said Term.

By Impotent Poor is to be understood all Infants and old and decrepid Persons
not able to Work; also Persons who by Sickness or any Accident are for the time
unable to labor for themselves or Families; and all Persons (not being fit for
Labor) who were usually relieved by the Money raised for the use of the Poor;
they shall have Maintenance, etc. as good or better, as within Years they used
to have.

This does not directly determine what that shall be, nor is it possible, by
reason a Shilling in one County is as much as two in another; but it will be
the Interest of the Corporation that such Poor be well provided for, by reason
the contrary will occasion all the Complaints or Clamor that probably can be
made against the Corporation.

Fifthly, That the Corporation do provide (as well for all such Poor which on
the said Day of shall be on the Poor Books, as for what other growing Poor
shall happen in the said Term, who are or shall be able to labor or do any
work) sufficient Labor and Work proper for such Persons to be employed in. And
that Provision shall be made for such laboring Persons according to their
Labor, so as such Provision does not exceed 3/4 parts, as much as any other
Person would have paid for such Labor. And in Case they are not employed and
set to work, then such Persons shall, until Materials or Labor be provided for
them, be maintained as Impotent Poor; but so as such Persons who shall
hereafter enter themselves on the Poor's Books, being able to Labor, shall not
quit the Service of the Corporation, without leave, for the space of six Months.

The Corporation are to provide Materials and Labor for all that can work, and
to make Provision for them not exceeding parts as much as any other Person
would give for such Labor. For Example, if another Person would give one of
these a Shilling, the Corporation ought to give but Nine Pence. And the Reason
is plain, First, Because the Corporation will be obliged to maintain them and
their Families in all Exigences, which others are not obliged to do, and
consequently they ought not to allow so much as others. Secondly, In Case any
Persons able to Labor, shall come to the Corporation, when their Agents are
not prepared with Materials to employ them, by this Proposal, they are to allow
them full Provision as Impotent Poor, until they find them Work, which is
entirely in favor of the Poor. Thirdly, It is neither reasonable nor possible
for the Corporation to provide Materials upon every Occasion, for such Persons
as shall be entered with them, unless they can be secure of such Persons to
work up those Materials; besides, without this Provision, all the laboring
People of England will play fast and loose between their Employers and the
Corporation, for as they are disobliged by one, they will run to the other, and
so neither shall be sure of them.

Sixthly, That no Impotent Poor shall be removed out of the Parish where they
dwell, but upon notice in Writing given to the Churchwardens or Overseers of
the said Parish, to what place of Provision he or she is removed.

It is judged the best Method to provide for the Impotent Poor in Houses
prepared for that purpose, where proper Provision may be made for several, with
all Necessaries of Care and Maintenance. So that in some places one House will
serve the Impotent Poor of several Parishes, in which Case the Parish ought to
know where to resort, to see if good Provision be made for them.

Seventhly, That in case Provision be not made for the Poor of each Parish, in
manner as aforesaid, (upon due notice given to the Agents of the Corporation)
the said Parish may order their Poor to be maintained, and deduct the Sum by by
them expended out of the next Payments to be made to the said Corporation by
the said Parish.

In case any Accident happens in a Parish, either by Sickness, Fall, Casualty
of Fire, or otherways; and that the Agent of the Corporation is not present to
provide for them, or having notice does not immediately do it, the Parish may
do it, and deduct so much out of the next Payment; but there must be Provision
made for the notice, and in what time the Corporation shall provide for them.

Eighthly, That the said Corporation shall have and receive for the said one
and twenty Years, That is to say, from every Parish Yearly, so much as such
Parish paid in any One Year, to be computed by a Medium of Seven Years; namely,
from the 25th of March, 1690. to the 25th of March, 1697. and to be paid half
Yearly; and besides, shall receive the Benefit of the Revenues of all Donations
given to any Parish, or which shall be given during the said Term, and all
Forfeitures which the Law gives to the Use of the Poor; and to all other Sums
which were usually collected by the Parish, for the maintenance of the Poor.

Whatever was raised for or applied to the Use of the Poor, ought to be paid
over to the Corporarion; and where there are any Donations for maintaining the
Poor, it will answer the Design of the Donor, by reason there will be better
Provision for the maintenance of the Poor than ever; and if that maintenance
be so good, as to induce further Charities, no doubt the Corporation ought to
be entitled to them: But there are two Objections to this Article; First, That
to make a Medium by a time of War is unreasonable. Secondly, To continue the
whole Tax for One and Twenty Years, does not seem to give any Benefit to the
Kingdom in that time. To the First, It is true, we have a Peace, but Trade is
lower now than at any time during the War, and the Charge of the Poor greater;
and when Trade will mend, is very uncertain. To the Second, It is very plain,
that although the Charge may be the same to a Parish in the Total, yet it will
be less to particular Persons, because those who before received Alms, will now
be enabled to be Contributors; but besides, the turning so many hundred
thousand Pounds a Year (which in a manner have hitherto been applied only to
support Idleness) into Industry; and the employing so many other idle Vagrants
and sturdy Beggars, with the Product of their Labor, will altogether be a
present Benefit to the Lands of England, as well in the Rents as in the Value:
And further, the accidental Charities in the Streets and at Doors, is, by a
very modest Computation, over and above the Poor Rates, at least 300,000 l. per
Annum, which will be entirely saved by this Proposal, and the Persons set at
work; which is a further Consideration for its being well received, since the
Corporation are not allowed any thing for this Service.

The greater the Encouragement is, the better the Work will be performed; and
it will become the Wisdom of the Parliament in what they do, to make it
effectual; for should such an Undertaking as this prove ineffectual, instead of
remedying it, will increase the Mischief.

Ninthly, That all the Laws made for the Provision of the Poor, and for
punishing idle Vagrant Persons be repealed, and one Law made to continue such
parts as are found useful, and to add such other Restrictions, Penalties and
Provisions as may effectualy attain the End of this great Work.

The Laws hereunto relating are numerous, but the Judgment and Opinions given
upon them are so various and contradictory, and differ so in sundry places, as
to be inconsistent with any one general Scheme of Management.

Tenthly, That proper Persons be appointed in every County to determine all
Matters and Differences which may arise between the Corporation and the
respective Parishes.

To prevent any ill Usage, Neglect or Cruelty, it will be necessary to make
Provision that the Poor may tender their Complaints to Officers of the Parish;
and that those Officers having examined the same, and not finding Redress, may
apply to Persons to be appointed in each County and each City for that purpose,
who may be called Supervisors of the Poor, and may have Allowance made them for
their Trouble; and their Business may be to examine the Truth of such
Complaints; and in case either the Parish or Corporation judge themselves
agriev'd by the Determination of the said Supervisors, Provision may be made
that an Appeal lie to the Quarter Sessions.

Eleventhly, That the Corporation be obliged to provide for all public
Beggars, and to put the Laws in Execution against public Beggars and idle
vagrant Persons.

Such of the public Beggars as can work must be employed, the rest to be
maintained as impotent Poor; but the Laws to be severely put in Execution
against those who shall ask any public Alms.

THis Proposal, which in most parts of it seems to be very maturely weighed,
may be a Foundation for those to build upon, who have a public Spirit large
enough to embrace such a noble Undertaking.

But the common Obstruction to any thing of this Nature, is a malignant Temper
in some who will not let a public Work go on, if private Persons are to be
Gainers by it: When they are to get themselves, they abandon all Sense of
Virtue, but are clothed in her whitest Robe; when they smell Profit coming to
another, masking themselves with a false Zeal to the Commonwealth, where their
own Turn is not to be served. It were better indeed, that Men would serve their
Country for the Praise and Honor that follow good Actions; but this is not to
be expected in a Nation, at least leaning toward Corruption; and in such an
Age it is as much as we can hope for, if the Prospect of some honest Gain
invites People to do the Public faithful Service. For which Reason, in any
Undertaking where it can be made apparent that a great Benefit will accrue to
the Commonwealth in general, we ought not to have an evil Eye upon what fair
Advantages particular Men may thereby expect to Reap, still taking care to keep
their Appetite of getting within moderate Bounds, laying all just and
reasonable Restraints upon it, and making due Provision that they may not wrong
or oppress their Fellow Subjects.

It Is not to be denied, but that if fewer Hands were suffered to remain idle,
and if the Poor had full Employment, it would greatly tend to the Common
Welfare, and contribute much toward adding every Year to the general Stock of
England.

Among the Methods that we have here proposed of Employing the Poor, and making
the whole Body of the People useful to the Public: We think it our Duty to
mind those who consider the Common Welfare of looking with a compassionate Eye
into the Prisons of this Kingdom, where many Thousands consume their Time in
Vice and Idleness wasting the Remainder of their Fortunes, or lavishing the
Substance of their Creditors, eating Bread and doing no Work, which is contrary
to good Order, and pernicious to the Commonwealth.

We cannot therefore but recommend the Thoughts of some good Bill that may
effectually put an end to this Mischief so scandalous in a Trading Country,
which should let no Hands remain useless.

It Is not all difficult to contrive such a Bill as may Relieve and Release the
Debtor, and yet preserve to his Creditors all their fair, just and honest
Rights and Interest.

And having in this Matter endeavored to show that to preserve and increase
the People, and to make their Numbers useful, are Methods conducing to make us
Gainers in the Balance of Trade, we shall proceed to handle the second Head.

SECT. III.
Of the Land of England, and its Product.
IN treating of this Matter, we shall again produce one of Mr. King's Schemes,
which are all of them so accurately done, that we may venture to say they are
not to be contraverted in any Point so material as to destroy the Foundation of
those Reasonings, which the Writer of these Papers, or any other Person shall
form upon them.

He computes that England and Wales contain 39 Millions of Acres, according to
the following Scheme.

Vide Scheme E.

Scheme E.
Acres Value per Acre. Rent. l. s. d. l. Arable Land, 9,000,000 0 5 6 2,480,000
Pasture and Meadow, 12,000,000 0 8 8 5,200,000 Woods and Coppices, 3,000,000 0
5 0 750,000 Forests, Parks and Commons, 3,000,000 0 3 8 570,000 Heaths, Moors,
Mountains, and barren Land, 10,000,000 0 1 0 500,000 Houses and Homesteads,
Gardens and Orchards, Churches and Churchyards, 1,000,000 The Land 450,000 The
Buildings 2,000,000 Rivers, Lakes, Meers and Ponds, 500,000 0 2 0 50,000 Roads,
Ways, and wast Land, 500,000 0 0 0 In all 39,000,000 about 6 2 12,000,000 True
Yearly Value. Value, as rated to the 4s. Tax. Produce of the 4s. Tax. l. l. l.
So the yearly Rents or Value of the Land is 10,000,000 6,500,000 1,300,000 The
Houses and Buildings 2,000,000 1,500,000 300,000 All other Hereditaments
1,000,000 500,000 100,000 Personal Estates, such as have been reached in the 4
s. Aids 1,000,000 550,000 100,000 In all 14,000,000 9,050,000 1,800,000

So that whereas the Tax of 4 s. per Pound, one Aid with another, has produced
but 1,800,000 It should produce, if duly Assess'd 2,800,000
Place this Scheme p. 70.

SCHEME F.
The Produce of the Arable Land, he thus Estimates in a Year of moderate Plenty.
Bushels per Bushel Value. s. d. Wheat 14,000,000 at 3 6 2,450,000 Rye
10,000,000 at 2 6 1,250,000 Barley 27,000,000 at 2 0 2,700,000 Oats 16,000,000
at 1 6 1,200,000 Pease 7,000,000 at 2 6 857,000 Beans 4,000,000 at 2 6 500,000
Vetches 1,000,000 at 2 0 100,000 In all 79,000,000 at 2 3 4/7 5/9 9,075,000

This is only the Neat Produce, exclusive of the Seed, Corn, which in some
sorts of Grain being near 1/5 of the Produce, and in others 1/8 may in general
be reckoned about 11 Millions of Bushels more, which makes the whole Produce to
be 90 Millions of Bushels, which at 2 s. 3 4/7 5/9 d. per Bushel in Common, is
about 10,338,600 l.

Note, That this Value is what the same is worth upon the Spot where the Corn
grew; but this Value is increased by the Carriage to the Place where it is at
last spent, at least part more.

These 79 Millions of Bushels of Grain are the Product of 8 of the 9 Millions
of Acres of Arable Land; the other Million of Acres producing Hemp, Flax, Woad,
Saffron, Rape, Hops, dying Weeds, etc. the Value of the Product thereof may be
about One Million Sterling.

So that the Rent of the Corn-Land being about 2,200,000 l. per Annum, and the
Neat Produce thereof above 9,000,000 l. the Produce is full four Rents.

But deducting 1/13 part of the Neat Produce, or 700,000 l. in lieu of Tyths,
there remains 8,375,000 l. or three Rents, and near 8/10.

Now the Rents or yearly Value of the Pasture and Meadows, Woods, Coppices,
Forests, Parks, Commons, Heaths, Moors, Mountains and Barren Land, being about
7,000,000 l.

The Produce being but 12,000,000 l. does not make fully two Rents, there being
little Charge either in cultivating the Land, or gathering the Product thereof
comparatively to what there is in the Arable Land.

This Produce is principally in and by Cattle, Hay, Timber, and Firewood.
l. The Produce by Cattle, in Butter, Cheese and Milk, may be, about 2,500,000
The Value of the Wool yearly shorn, about 2,000,000 The Value of the Horses
yearly bred, about 250,000 The Value of the Flesh yearly spent, as Food, about
3,350,000 The Value of the Tallow and Hides of the Cattle, about 600,000 The
Value of Hay yearly consumed by Horses, about 1,300,000 The Hay yearly consumed
by other Cattle, about 1,000,000 The Timber yearly felled for Building and such
Uses, about 500,000 The Wood yearly spent in Firing and petty Uses, about
500,000 So the Produce (including 1 Million in Hay spent by Cattle) may be in
all 12,000,000

SCHEME G.
An Estimate of the Live Stock of the Nation.
Yearly Bread or Increase The whole Stock Value of each besides the Skin Value
of the Stock. l. s. d. l. Beeves, Sterks, and Calves 800,000 4,500,000 2 00 00
9,000,000 Sheep and Lambs 3,600,000 12,000,000 0 07 04 4,400,000 Swine and
Piggs 1,300,000 2,000,000 0 16 00 1,600,000 Deer and Fawns 20,000 100,000 2 00
00 200,000 Goats and Kids 10,000 50,000 0 10 00 25,000 Hares and Leverets
12,000 24,000 0 01 06 1,800 Rabits and Conies 2,000,000 1,000,000 0 00 05
20,833 7,742,000 19,674,000 0 00 00 15,247,633

l. So the value of the live Stock for Food may be 15,247,633 The value of the
Horses, etc. being 1,200,000 at 2 l. 10 s. each, breeding Annually 100,000 may
be 3,000,000 The value of the Pelts and Skins over and above the Wool 2,400,000
The value of the Wool Yearly shorn or pelted 12,000,000 of Fleeces, at 3 s. 4
d. per Fleece 2,000,000 The value of the whole Stock of Tame Fowl, as Geese,
Turkeys, Hens, Ducks, Pigeons, Swans and Peacocks 460,000 The whole Stock of
Wild Fowl about 12,000 In all, 23,119,633

From these Schemes we shall make such Observations as we think may relate to
our present Subject.

Of the 39 Millions of Acres in Territory belonging to England he lays down,
that there may be above a fourth part, viz. ten Millions of Acres in Heaths,
Moors, Mountains and Barren Land; three Millions of Acres in Woods and
Coppices, and three Millions in Forests, Parks and Commons. This Division of
the Land seems to be made with great Judgment; First, Because it agrees very
well with the Consumption of several Commodities, of which we can come at a
near knowledge by the Excises now in being. Secondly, It corresponds exactly
with that Increase in the Kingdoms General Rental, which for these last hundred
Years may have been observed from the Produce of diverse Land-Taxes, and from
several other Particulars.

And there are undeniably Reasons to be given, That this General Rental, Anno
1600. did not exceed six Millions per Annum, but through the help of that
Wealth which has flowed in to us by our Foreign Trade, it has advanced in
several Periods of time from 6 to 8, from 8 to 10, and from 10 to 14 Millions
per Annum. When the General Rental was but six Million per Annum, there was a
great deal more barren Land, of that which was cultivated very much was capable
of Melioration; and there were more Forests, Woods, Coppices, Commons, and wast
Ground than there is now, which our Wealth did enable us from time to time to
enclose, cultivate and improve.

And for the future, as we grow in Riches, and as our People increase, those
many Millions of Acres which now are Barren, will by degrees most of them be
improved and cultivated; for there is hardly any sort of Ground, which Numbers
of Men will not render fertile; but then it must be supposed, that we do not go
backward in our Trade, for if that should happen, instead of improving what is
wast, that which is improved and cultivated will rather return to the Wildness
and Desolation of former Times; for as we have said in our former Discourses,
Land and Trade rise and fall together. Trade brings in the Stock, this Stock
well and industriously managed betters Land, and brings more Product of all
kind for Exportation; the Returns of which Growth and Product are to make a
Country Gainers in the Balance.

As to our quantity of Land, in Relation to its Inhabitants, as the Case
stands, we seem now to have about 7 Acres per Head; but there are many Reasons
to think, that England is capable of nourishing double its present Number of
People, which supposing them now to be 5,500,000 would be eleven Millions, and
even then there will be as many Acres per Head as they have in Holland. And
when we have this Complement of Men, either in the natural Course of time, or
sooner by the help of good Conduct, we shall be in a State of Power to deal
with any Strength in Europe. In the natural Course of time this cannot happen
in a great while, but the common Progression of things may be hastened by Art,
so that if we are studious to preserve and increase our People, peradventure in
not many Years, we may have Hands enough, not only to make us safe from the
Insults of others, but to render us formidable to all our Neighbors: And Men
being the truest Strength and Riches of a Country, the Councils of all Wise
States should tend to obtaining and keeping together as many as the Land will
Nourish. There are indeed Countries, to whom their full Complement of
Inhabitants would be dangerous, and subject them to frequent Famines in bad and
unseasonable Years for Corn. As for Example, if France had had as many People
as the Land will feed in times of common Plenty, half of 'em must have perished
during their late Dearths for want of Bread, because they have a vast Inland
Country, and only the Out Parts upon such an Emergency can be relieved by the
Assistance of other Places. And we see that anciently before there was much
Trade, there were frequent Famines in the World, because one Part could not
then help another; for which Reason, the Northern Nations heretofore, when
their People multiplied too fast, did disburthen themselves by sending out
numerous Colonies to seek out new Dwellings, in apprehension that by a scarce
Year they might be distroy'd at home; but England (with any moderate Care) is
not liable to such a Fear, though its present Numbers should even be doubled,
because we have every where the Sea to Friend, and in such an Extremity our
Wants may be supplied from other Nations.

And our Matter leading us into it, it may not be unnecessary here to take
Notice, That Countries not over-stock'd with Men, and though Situate, so as to be
relieved by the Sea, may suffer greatly, and be reduced very low for want of
Corn, unless they make some due Provision against such a Calamity.

The value of the Wheat, Barley and Rye, necessary for the Sustenance of
England, amounts at least to six Millions of Pounds per Annum at the common
Rate; from whence it is apparent, That if a long Dearth should happen here, such
as they lately had in France, though we may be supplied upon more easy Terms
than France was, and though we might still keep our People alive, yet that a
Disaster of this kind would exhaust more of our Money than a War of ten Years
continuance. Suppose (which God forbid) that for two or three Years
successively the Season should prove so bad as to deprive us of half our usual
Crop; to supply such a Want, what immense Sums must be carried out of the
Kingdom? And it may be made evident, that such a Scarcity did very much drein
the French.

To provide against a Calamity of the like Nature, is no doubt of the highest
Consequence. That we have been deficient in this point of Polity is too
Notorious, though Providence has taken more Care of us than a Negligent People
deserve. However, we have had outrageous Famines in England, and in Edward the
3ds Reign, Corn did once rise to 13 times the common value; this indeed can
hardly happen again, because there are more different sorts of Soils improved
and manured now than in that Age; but at several times we have suffered Wants
of this kind very afflicting, and sometime or other our Negligence in a Matter
of such concern to the People's Welfare, may come to be more severely punished.

By the best Accounts we are able to procure from such as have looked into
these things, we find that in England, in a plentiful Year, there is not above
five Months stock of Grain at the time of the succeeding Harvest, and not above
four Months Stock in an indifferent Year, which is but a slender Provision
against any Evil Accident. We enjoy the benefit of such different Soils, viz.
High Lands and Low Lands, where one hits when the other fails, that now adays
we seldom see Corn above treble its common Rate, which however would be fatal,
if it should at any time continue so long as to make large Supplies from abroad
necessary to us. It Is observed, That but 1/10 defect in the Harvest may raise
the Price 3/10, and when we have but half our Crop of Wheat, which now and then
happens, the remainder is spun out by Thrift and good Management, and eked out
by the use of other Grain; but this will not do for above one Year, and would
be a small help in the succession of two or three unseasonable Harvests: For
the scarcity even of one Year is very destructive, in which many of the poorest
Sort perish, either for want of sufficient Food, or by unwholesome Diet.

We take it, That a Defect in the Harvest may raise the Price of Corn in the
following Proportions.

Defect above the Common Rate. 1 Tenth Raises the Price 3 Tenths 2 Tenths 8
Tenths 3 Tenths 1. 6 Tenths 4 Tenths 2. 8 Tenths 5 Tenths 4. 5 Tenths

So that when Corn rises to treble the Common Rate, it may be presumed, that we
want above a third of the Common Produce; and if we should want 5 Tenths, or
half the Common Produce, the Price would rise to near five times the Common
Rate.

We dwell the longer upon this Subject, being convinced in Judgment, that
nothing in the World can more impoverish a Country, nor tend more to set it
back with other People in the Balance of Trade for a long while, than such a
Calamity; it is indeed the Scourge of God, but improvident States are more
liable to it than wiser Nations.

The Hollanders cannot nourish their People from their Territory, and must
always seek for Assistance from abroad; but in Prospect that the Harvest may be
bad now and then, in some and even in all those Places from whence they fetch
their Corn, whereby in scarce times they would be imposed upon. They take care
to have Granaries and Storehouses, where in plentiful Years they lay up vast
Quantities of all sort of Grain against a dearer Season; by which good and
prudent Economy, those Dearths which in their turn have afflicted most other
Countries, fall but lightly upon their Common People.

On the contrary, when such a Calamity happens, they are able from their Stores
to assist other Nations; and though we cannot go so high as Vid. Sir Walter
Raleigh' s Remains, p. 173.
Sir Walter Raleigh, who is over large in his Computations of this Nature, and
reckons the Dutch to get an Immense Sum by this sort of Trade; yet it is
apparent, That they are very great Gainers from time to time, by selling us our
own Corn dear, which they had bought cheap, and that they make us pay very
largely for its Storeroom.

A Nation that will get by Foreign Traffic, must carefully watch all these
things; and the Instance we have here given, is a great pull-back in the
general Balance of Trade, and what the Dutch in this manner Gain, is a dead
Loss to England.

But this Evil is without doubt capable of a Remedy. If they can afford to let
their Money lie dead for a time, pay Freight backward and forward, and
Storeroom, and yet be Gainers by selling us our own Commodity in a dearer
Market, why should not we think it worth our while to build Granaries and
public Storehouses, within our own Dominions?

We take it, That Freight backward and forward in such a bulky Ware as Corn is,
does over Balance the difference in the Interest of Money here and there: So
that we seem to be imposed upon in this important Matter, merely through that
Negligence of which Wealthy Nations are but too Guilty.

It may therefore be worth the Consideration of such as study the good of
England, whither it would not be advisable, and for the public Welfare, to
settle a Fond for the erecting in every County Granaries capable of containing
such a quantity of Corn as may nourish the People for a certain time, upon any
emergent occasion, and as may hinder us at all times from purchasing at a dear
Rate our own Product from our more wary Neighbors.

This first Step would be the most chargeable, but in the Course of a few
Years, the Expense would be over-paid to the Body of the Kingdom; as to filling
these Stores with Corn, sufficient to answer the People's Occasions, we are
inclined to think it would be best managed by private Undertakers, whom the
hopes of Advantage will easily invite into such a Business. But here again will
come the common Objection made to public Things, That some private Men will be
thereby Gainers; and so, in the name of God, let 'em, provided they do the
Public Service.

However, there are many Reasons to think, That such a Business, from the very
Nature of it, would be more uncorruptly managed, than most other public
Matters. First, Some Persons would look after it as a Work of more meritorious
Charity than any that can be thought on. Secondly, In case of Male
Administration, the Clamors of the common People would be irresistible.
Thirdly, A great many different sorts of Men would find themselves concerned in
point of Interest, to see it well and justly administered.

It Is not here pretended, to give any regular Scheme of this whole Matter,
which would take up more time than consists with the brevity designed in these
Discourses; but it is hoped, the Hints now given, will suffice to make some good
Patriots in due season lay to heart a business of such high Importance to their
Land, to its Product, and to the entire Body of the People.

That Corporation for setting the Poor to Work, of which a Scheme has been here
proposed, may very properly provide Granaries round the Kingdom.

It would likewise be very advisable to review the Ancient Laws concerning
Corn, for they no ways square with the present Numbers of our People, nor with
the Growth of London, and indeed ought to be more adapted to many other
Circumstances of the Times we now live in.

All Countries thrive or decline by Trade, as they well or ill manage their
Product and Manufactures; and wise Nations observe carefully every part, where
they think to have any probable Advantage. If they excel in Product and
Manufacture, as in France, the Government bends it self to encourage the People
in the pursuit of what is judged profitable to the Public. If they have little
Product of their own, as in Holland, they fall to be Carriers of the World, and
to buy Goods in one place to vend in another, whereby the Bulk of their Riches
has been gained.

England has an Excellent Product of its own, wherewith to sustain its
Inhabitants: The Woollen Manufacture is a Wealth in a manner peculiar to us. We
have besides the Product of other Countries subject to our Dominion the
West Indies. The East Indies are an inexhaustible Mine of Vanities, to barter
for the Vanities of other Countries, which a rich Nation will always covet. We
have Ports and Situation, and every thing that can contribute to make us the
foremost People of the whole Commercial World, only a little Industry may be
wanting, which to stir up is the Drift of these Inquiries.

We have looked into Mr. King's Computation of the Corn, because it should be
the Fundamental Care of a good Government, to provide that the People never
want it, for two or three Years defect there pulls down whatever the Merchant
has been doing for a long time.

As to his Estimate of our live Stock in Cattle, many Conclusions perhaps
useful may be formed from it, which we omit, as fearing to be too Voluminous:
We shall only observe, That it seems more the National Interest of England, to
employ its Land to the Breeding and Feeding of Cattle, than to the Produce of
Corn; For, as Mr. Fortrey has well noted, England's Interest and Improvement,
p. 15.
The profit of one Acre of Pasture in the Flesh, Hide and Tallow of an Ox, or
in the Flesh, Wool and Tallow of a Sheep, or in the Carcass of a Horse, is of
so much greater value abroad, than the like Yield of the Earth would be in
Corn; that the Exportation of this Nation might be at least double to what it
is, if rightly disposed.

It Is true, in these Matters Men are apt to follow what they think their
particular Profit, but the Influence of good Laws would go a great way toward
inclining them more to pursue what is for the general Advantage; and indeed the
private Concerns of Men should be always made subservient to the Public
Interest.

Nor is force at all needful to bring this about, for Men in most of their
Measures, where the Administration is wise and steady, may be induced to pursue
the common Welfare by directive Laws, by Examples from the Prince and great
Ones, and by some few not very expensive Encouragements. As for Example, it is
in the Power of a King of England, not only to have as many Horses bred, but of
what Shape and Size He pleases; His Encouragement will at any time increase the
Studds, and when He countenances the Shape and Size that He thinks will profit
His Country most that way, the Breeders will forthwith turn all their Care and
Industry.

Our Ancestors have not been unmindful to promote the breed of Horses, as we
may see by 27 H. 8. 6. 32 H. 8. 13. foreseeing what an Advantage might accrue
thereby to England; but those old Laws want revising, and to be more adapted to
present use.

Our Forefathers indeed were against transporting Horses and Mares above such
a value, 11 H. 7. 13. 1 Ed. 6. 5. but when those Prohibitions were enacted, the
business of Trade was not so well understood, as it is at present. However, in
practice we have of late Years consulted our National Interest, which in all
appearance is to let this Commodity be traded for, as well as any other.

It may be convenient to restrain the carrying out of Mares, but as to
Gueldings and Stone-horses we can see no danger in it. On the contrary, if such
Numbers were called for, as would invite us to increase our Breeds, it would no
doubt bring a great Profit to the Kingdom. Stone-Horses yield most abroad, and
cost no more rearing than Gueldings: Against this is objected, That we may
thereby strengthen our Enemies, by mending the Breed of other Countries; but
there is little Strength added to that Enemy, whose Money we take for a
perishable Commodity: Besides, the Nation we have most Reason to distrust,
labor under a Natural Impediment of not excelling in the Breed of Horses,
their Ground is not proper for it. They do not want Stallions, of which they
may have as good, if not better than Ours from other Parts, but they have
neither Mares nor fit Pasture; and if they had Mares, they would be yet to
seek; for it is Notorious that the Shape, Strength and Beauty of Horses proceed
from the Soil; and when that is changed, in the next Race they degenerate.

This Matter has been taken notice of, because it has been frequently desired
that the ancient Prohibitions here mentioned might be reinforced by some new
Law; but whether or no such a Measure would be right for England, is humbly
submitted to better Judgments.

Mr. King computes the Value of the Horses yearly bred to be about 250,000 l.

This Estimate seems not to be out of the way, and from it we shall observe
that by good Laws and a due Care in their Execution, and by Encouragement from
the great Ones above, it might peradventure be brought about to double our
yearly Breed; and if this could be compassed, and if great Numbers of them
should be sold in Foreign Markets (provided it be deemed safe for the State)
'twould be a new Addition to our National Stock, and be just so much put into
the Scale, yet more to incline of our side the general Balance.

Our Mines are another Product of the Earth, and undoubtedly capable of great
Improvements; we ought to respect them as the Parents of all our Trade, and
which made us known to the first Merchants of the World, the Phoenicians. We
have Tin, Lead, Copper, Calamy, Iron, Coal, Culm, Allom, Copperas, with other
sort of Minerals; and what is in this manner dug out of the Earth, cannot be a
less Article than about 7 or 800,000 l. per Annum in the whole Rental of the
Kingdom.

They who work these Mines and deal in these Materials, know best what Laws and
Constitutions they want to make their Business more easy at Home, and to give
their Commodities a freer Vent Abroad; but if they need any Help from the
Legislative Power, most certainly they ought to have it, since their Stock and
Labor turn so much to the Common Good; for whatever their Product yields in
Foreign Markets, is clear National Profit.

There are lately published some extraordinary Accounts of the Mines in
Cardiganshire, where it is said there are Eight large Veins of Silver, Lead and
Copper Oar, lying near together in one Mountain, nigh a Navigable River and a
good Port. Mine Adventure and Expedient, p. 7.
It Is alleged, That these Mines with a large Stock, in a few Years, may be
advanced to a clear Profit of 170,000 l. per Annum. This Computation does not
seem at all extravagant, to those who have looked into the Accounts of what
Mines produce in other Countries, provided the Oar be good, the Vein like to
last (and large ones seldom fail) and provided there be no invincible
Impediment from Nature to their Working; they have stood still several Years
for want of a good Agreement among the Adventurers.

It Is said Sir H. M. has put 'em in a way of being wrought; but if his
Expedient should not succeed, and if new Differences should arise, the
Legislative Authority may very well and justly interpose, even to compel the
Partners to some Agreement, whereby the Work may be carried on; for it is a
Justice due to the Public at no time to suffer a few Stock-Jobbing Citizens to
stand in the way of any National Advantage, the Fraud and Corruption of which
sort of Men have hurt England in more than one Particular.

If these Mines come but any thing near the Value Mr. Vide Essay on the Value
of the Mines, etc.
William Waller has put upon them, and with Reasons very probable, they are a
fit Object of the States Care; and upon Inspection into their true Worth, if
private Purses cannot raise a Stock sufficient to set 'em going, it were better
done upon some public Fond, to be repaid out of the Profits, than to lose what
is represented as so immense a Treasure. But should it prove less it is not to
be neglected, for Nations (like private Men) who will thrive must look into
small Things as well as great; and for this we have the Examples of France and
Holland, whose Ministers examine into the minutest Matters, where the Public
may possibly Reap any Advantage; and it is a very commendable piece of Wisdom,
were it but for this single Reason, That to do so constantly begets a Habit of
Care and Diligence in things of higher Importance.

The Fishery should be here treated of as being the Product of the Peoples
Labor, Vide Discourses on the Public Revenues and Trade, Part II. p. 135.
but this Point we have elsewhere handled. However, it falls naturally into our
present Subject to observe, That to recover the Fishery, and to bring us to the
Height and Perfection our Coast and Situation are capable of, would increase
the Numbers of our People (for Men always multiply where they have Conveniences
of Living); It would find Employment for the Poor; It would raise Rents, and
give a higher Value to all that Land produces; It would set us right in several
Nations where we are believed to deal at Loss, and particularly in those Places
where our Exportations bear no Proportion, at least in Bulk, with our
Importations, which might be supplied by Fish. We cannot therefore but
earnestly recommend the serious Thoughts of this Matter, and by what Methods it
may be retrieved, to all such as love their Country, and who wish to see us
every Year more and more Gainers in the Balance of Trade.

Having touched upon these Heads, we shall proceed to say something of Wool,
which is a main Article in the Produce of Land.

Mr. King computes the Value of the Wool shorn, to be about 2,000,000 l. per
Annum.

And in the Discourses upon the Revenue and Trade, Part II. p. 414.
we compute, by a General Medium, That the Material is improved one with
another, fourfold in the Workmanship; so that the Value of the Woollen
Manufacture made here, may amount to 8,000,000 l. per Annum.

Perhaps neither of us are much out of the way in these two Calculations, but
suppose us a little under or over the Mark, all People will agree with us, That
this Branch of our Product is very large, and of the highest Importance.

The Writer of these Papers has an Account from a Person, upon whose Judgment
and Experience in these Matters there is great Reason to rely, That our Exports
of all kinds, in the Woollen Manufacture, amount to above two Millions per
Annum; which is so large a Part of our General Exportation, that it must maim
the whole Body of our Trade, to receive any Hurt in so principal a Member.

Whatever Goods we make up of Foreign Materials, and sell in the Markets abroad
all above the Cost of the Materials is clear Gain to England; in the same
manner all our clear Returns from the Plantations which we Export are Neat
Profit.

But where the Materials and Manufactures too are both our own, as in this
instance of the Woollen Goods, two Millions carried out when the general
Balance of Trade is considered, must be esteemed as two Millions gained to the
Kingdom; for the Return of this Exportation supplies our Consumption of Foreign
Goods (which would otherwise be bought with Money) with some Overplus, which
Overplus is what must incline the Scale to turn of our side.

Some People have been apt to fear that we sink in the Woollen Manufacture,
because the Accounts of the fine Draparies exported, have been heretofore
larger than of late Years; but such do not contemplate, that though the Old may
have lessened, what is commonly called the New Draparies have increased,
consisting in Bays, Serges and Stuffs: So that upon the whole, infinitely more
of the Material of Wool has of late Years been wrought up for Foreign use than
in former Times; and herein our Merchants have been only forced to follow the
Modes and Humor of those People with whom they deal, and the Course they have
persued has hitherto not been detrimental to the Public.

Nor is there any Cause to apprehend, but that we may increase from time to
time in the general Manufacture of Wool, though the Exportation of particular
Commodities may now and then vary: For upon the whole, our Material is better
and fitter for all uses than that of most Countries.

'Twere better indeed that the Call from abroad were only for the fine
Draparies, because then we should be in a manner without a Rival; no Country
but England and Ireland, having a Soard or Turf, that will rear Sheep,
producing the Wool of which most of our Draparies are made. It Is true, the
Wool of Spain is fine above all others, but it is the wear only of the Richer
Sort; and of Spanish Clothes not above 9000 Pieces are sent abroad Communibus
Annis. And even in the working up of this Wool, perhaps it may be made out,
that our very Climate gives us an Advantage over other Countries.

The Learned Prelate, who has obliged England with that Noble Work, his History
of the Reformation, Discoursing once upon these Matters, with the Writer of
this Essay, did urge a thing of which the Philosophy seemed very sound and
right, and upon which we have since reflected often; He said, That Nature had
adapted different Countries for different Manufactures; that cold and moister
Climates are fitter for the working up of Wool, because there the Sun does not
exhaust its natural Moisture, nor make it brittle, which would render it ill to
work, and bad to wear; That hot Climates are best for the working up of Silk,
because the Matter is there more disposed to imbibe the Dye, and to take a more
durable impression of it, the Sun helping, at the same time, both to preserve
and to give it Luster.

That we have many natural Advantages over all Foreign Nations, who shall
pretend to set up Looms, is beyond all dispute; but it is a very great Question,
whither there are not weighty Reasons to apprehend Neighbors of another sort,
we mean the People of Ireland.

The Country is very large, it abounds in convenient Ports; it is excellently
Situate for Trade, capable of great Improvements of all kinds, and able to
nourish more than treble its present Number of Inhabitants.

Its Soil, Soard and Turf, are in a manner the same with ours, and proper to
rear Sheep: All which Considerations beget a reasonable fear, that in time they
may come to rival us in our Darling and most Important Manufacture.

That they should increase in People, that their Land should be drein'd and
meliorated, that they should have Trade, and grow Wealthy by it, may not
peradventure be dangerous to England: For it is granted, their Riches will
center at last here in their Mother-Kingdom.

And Colonies that enjoy not only Protection, but who are at their Ease, and
Flourish, will in all likelihood be less inclinable to inovate, or to receive a
Foreign Yoke, than if they are harrass'd and compelled to Poverty, through the
hard Usage of the People from whom they are derived. For though there are now and
then Instances of Countries that rebel wantonly, yet most commonly great
Defections proceed from great Oppression.

It seems therefore a Point of the highest Wisdom to give the Planters of
Ireland all Encouragements that can possibly consist with the Welfare of
England: For it is an Out-work to the Seat of Empire here, if it should be
gained by any Neighboring Power, the Sum of Affairs would be put in danger.
It Is to be preserved but by a Numerous Army, or by its own proper Strength. How
far the first way may affect our Liberties is not difficult to determine, it
follows then that the safest Course must be to let them thrive by Husbandry,
and some Trade, whereby the Natives and Inhabitants will not only have the
Means, but an Interest to defend themselves.

If through a mistaken fear and jealousy of their future Strength and
Greatness, we should either permit or contrive to let them be dispeopled, poor,
weak and dispirited, or if we should render them so uneasy as to incline the
People to a desire of Change, it may invite Strangers to look that way; and if
brought to be naked and defenseless, they must be a Prey to the first Invader.

This will be avoided, if they are suffered to prosper, and not only so, but
Strength thus added to one Member will make the Body-Politick much the stronger.

For as all the Blood with a swift Motion passes frequently through the Heart,
so whatever Wealth out Countries acquire, circulates about, coming into the
chief Seat of Empire, from whence it is dispersed into all its Parts; and ever
since Ireland did improve, it can be made appear England has had no small
Proportion of its Gains.

What made Rome so immensly rich? Her Citizens but little minded Arts or
Handicraft, War was their chief Employment. 'Twas counted Ignoble in a Senator
to exercise Merchandise, nor indeed was the Genius of the People adicted to it,
but being the Head of that large Dominion, the Fountain of Law, and the Spring
from whence all Power, Honors, and Magistracies were derived, thither all Men
resorted; some for Pleasure, others upon Business: So that what was got by the
Sicilians, Rhodians, Cretans, and by the Trading Cities, not only of Greece but
Asia, came at last to center there.

But this holds more strongly, where the Seat of Dominion is in a great
Emporium, for such a City will not only be the Head of Power but of Trade,
governing all its Branches, and giving the Rules and Price; so that all Parts
thereon depending, can deal but subordinately to it, till at last it is found
that Provinces work but to enrich the Superior Kingdom.

That what has been here said is true, in our present Case, appears manifestly
from this, That all People agree, there is not in Ireland above 500,000 l. in
current Cash, notwithstanding their large Exportations for many Years, which
could not be, if they had not some constant Drein, whereby they are exhausted.
It Is true, improving Countries lay out a great Stock in Foreign Materials for
Building, etc. so that they seldom abound much at first in the Species of Money,
but allowing for this; yet in the natural Course of Things they ought to have
more Species, if what they got elsewhere had not been spent here, and returned
hither by Bills of Exchange from Holland, France, Spain, the West Indies, and
other Places.

But though we are ready to agree, That hitherto their Gains both at home and
abroad have chiefly centered here; yet in process of time, it is possible that
in the Management of their Product and Foreign Traffic, they may come to
interfere with, and bring Prejudice to their Mother-Nation. And remote Fears
being allowable where the whole Safety of a State is concerned, they should not
wonder to see England so much alarmed at the Progress they make in the Woollen
Manufacture.

As has been said before, It Is so great a Part of our Exportation, that any
considerable Failure and Interruption therein must set the Balance of Trade
against us with a Witness; it falls therefore naturally into our present
Subject to say something of this Matter.

Last Session of Parliament, a Bill passed the House of Commons, and was
committed in the House of Lords, For Prohibiting the Exportation of the Woollen
Manufactures of Ireland to Foreign Parts.

This Point has of late been much debated, and the general Subject of Men's
Discourses; The Writer of these Papers was then inclined to the milder Side,
being indeed in his Judgment against Prohibitions, because most of such as are
come within his Observation, seem to have been pushed on (without Doors) rather
for private Ends, and to serve some particular Turn, than calculated to produce
any public Benefit.

But having now more maturely considered this nice Controversy, he begins to
lean to their Opinion, who think such a Bill necessary; and more especially if
the Promoters of it can make out the Suggestions upon which it was founded.

Where the Commonwealth is truly concerned, and where her Safety is in
Question, they have very narrow Minds, who let their Compassion be too much
extended to private Objects: Our chief Tenderness should be toward her, and
rough Examples in the infancy of a Mischief are rather merciful than cruel,
because fewer People suffer then, than would otherwise do, if the Evil were
permitted to take deeper Root.

If their Manufactures interfere with ours, so as to hurt England, it must be
undoubtedly advisable to intercept their Growth by some effectual Law betimes,
before such an Error in Government grow too big for our Correction; before too
many Families have turned their Stock that way; before they have increased
their Stock of Sheep, or bred up too great a number of Artists (all which
Circumstances would make their Case yet harder); for we should preserve our
selves with as little Hurt to them as possible.

But it seems, some People make a doubt, whither or no we have Power thus to
intermeddle in their Matters; questioning whether Laws made here are binding
upon them, till they have received a Sanction in their own Parliament. And Mr.
Molyneux counts it a very extravagant Notion, that has not the least Color
from Reason or Record, to term them a Colony from England. But we must beg
leave to differ with him in Opinion. For we take them so far to be a Colony in
the Sense (by the Interpretation both of Law and Reason) as renders them still
dependant upon their Mother-Kingdom.

Nor is this at all impugn'd by the Concessions made to the ancient Irish by
Henry the 2d, King John, and Henry the 3d; but to set this in a better Light,
the Posture of Ireland in those Times must be considered.

The first Adventurers that went over thither, namely, Richard the Son of
Strongbow, and Robert Fitz-Stephen, who stipulated under certain Conditions to
assist Dermot Fitz-Murchard, had not a strength sufficient to reduce the
Country, and little was done toward it of any Consequence, till the Expedition
of Henry the 2d, Anno 1172. with a Royal Army, to whom the Clergy, Nobility,
Gentry and People, made an absolute Surrender of the Kingdom; and, by the
description Historians give of it, it seems to have been that sort of Yielding
which the Romans called Deditio, which was se dare in Manus Potestatem and
Arbitrium. And their giving themselves up to Henry the 2d, without a Battle or
Bloodshed, gave him yet a stronger Title, because the Act was less
constrained, and more flowing from the Will. It Is true, so wild and numerous a
People were not to be kept in Order by a handful of new Inhabitants; the King
therefore gave them a Constitution, by which they were to govern themselves, as
a free Country under him their Lord. After this, the Dominion thereof was
settled upon John his Youngest Son, and two and twenty Years after in him
reunited to the Crown of England. From King John, Henry the 3d, and their
Successors, the ancient Irish and the first Adventurers (of whom many as Edmund
Spencer's View of the State of Ireland, p. 222.
Mr. Spencer has observed, have taken the Names, Manners and Humors of the
Natives) derive several Franchises and Immunities, and among the rest to hold a
Parliament. The Story of those Times is it self dark, but the Reason of their
Councils is yet darker. From Matthew Paris, and Giraldus Cambrensis it appears,
That these Concessions were made to the Body of the Old Irish, though but few, in
Practice, submitted to them; for to use Mr. Spencer's own Words, To whom did
King Henry the 2 d impose those Laws? Not to the Irish, for the most of them
fled from his Power into Deserts and Mountains, leaving the wide Country to the
Conqueror, who in their stead eftsoons placed English Men, who possessed all
their Lands, and did quite shut out the Irish, or the most part of them. And to
those new Inhabitants and Colonies he gave his Laws, to wit, the same Laws
under which they were born and bred, the which it was no difficulty to place
among them, being formerly well inured thereunto; unto whom afterward there
repaired diverse of the Poor distressed People of the Irish, for Succor and
Relief of whom, such as they thought fit for Labor, and industriously
disposed, as the most part of their baser sort are, they received unto them as
their Vassals, but scarcely vouchsafed to impart unto them the benefit of those
Laws, under which themselves lived, but every One made his Will and Commandment
a Law unto his own Vassal: Thus was not the Law of England ever properly
applied unto the Irish Nation, as by a purposed Plot of Government, but as they
could insinuate and steal themselves under the same, by their humble Carriage
and Submission.

But after this, during the Wars between the House of York and Lancaster, they
shook off both the Rule and Laws of England, repossessing their ancient Seats,
driving us by degrees to that which was properly called the English Pale.

In truth it does not appear, That they embraced our Form of Government for a
great while: So that the Models of it given heretofore, from hence seem chiefly
to have been intended for the better Rule of our own People, not but they were
likewise meant as a Benefit to the Irish, if they would be contented to become
a more civilized Nation.

If their ancient Parliament Rolls were extant, it would more plainly appear
what use they made of their Constitution, and thereby it would be seen whither
or no both their House of Lords and Commons did not chiefly consist of the
English Planters.

If, as Mr. Molyneux asserts, Ireland, though annexed to the Crown of Fngland, has
always been looked upon to be a Kingdom complete within it self, and to have
all Jurisdiction to an Absolute Kingdom belonging, and Subordinate to no
Legislative Authority on Earth; these Immunities must be derived from the
Concessions granted at Cashal by Henry the 2d. But with whom was this Compact
made? With the Native Irish; and their Claim to it would be very just, if they
had performed the Conditions of the Stipulation, but their Title seems weakened
by 52 Rebellions which they have made against the Government of England. We
would not be thought here to insinuate, that a People may lose their Natural
Rights by an Insurrection against their Prince, but certain Privileges not
Fundamental, they may forfeit by non-usure or mis-usure. Besides, the Case
between a Prince and his Native Subjects, and between a Government and the
People of a Conquered Country, is quite different. In the first Instance the
Relation is the same, as betwixt a Father and a Son, the Child may Err, and the
Parent will forgive; but in the other Case the Tie is not the same, they are
not so near Akin. It Is true, the Prince is Father of the People, in one place
as well as in the other, but in his Politick-Capacity he is at the Head of
another Commonwealth, with whose Blood and Treasure the stranger Country was
perhaps conquered. And if a Foreign People, thus subdued, Rebel, they may
without doubt forfeit certain Privileges, which were not any Natural Rights of
their own, but Forms of living prescribed, and Concessions granted by the
Conquerors. And the Romans in the best and purest Times of the Commonwealth,
did frequently deprive Subject Cities and Countries, rebelling, of their Land,
and of their Immunities: To be a State not Subordinate to any Legislative
Authority on Earth, is a Privilege that may be forfeited by a Subject-Country,
and yet leave to the People their Natural Rights unhurt: That the Irish were
once a Subject-Country, appears from the entire Resignation of themselves to
Henry the 2d, as Head of the Commonwealth of England. To reduce a wild Nation,
it was expedient to put their Liberties upon a good Foot. He restored them
therefore to be a free People, and so they and their Descendants might have
been. They might have continued an Independent Kingdom, and the Old Irish might
have preserved both their Land, and the Immunities thereon depending, if they
had not themselves altered their own Constitution.

But by Rebelling frequently, and by being as often Vanquished, they changed
their own Form of Government. They were heretofore Proprietors of the Land, and
therefore had Right to be the two Estates in Parliament of Lords and Commons,
but this was by degrees lost, and became vested in the new Inhabitants:
Insomuch that, to use Mr. Molyneux's own Words, Now it is manifest, That the
great Body of the present People of Ireland, are the Progeny of the English and
Britains, that from time to time have come over into this Kingdom; and there
remains but a mere handful of the ancient Irish at this Day, I may say not One
in a Thousand.

Are the Concessions granted by King Henry now vested in this Thousandth Part?
And are they the Body-Politick of Ireland, of which not One in a Thousand sits
in Parliament; and of which very few have Voices in choosing those who are to
sit there? If any, these certainly are to be the distinct State, and To have
all Jurisdiction to an Absolute Kingdom belonging, for with their Ancestors
those Stipulations were made, under which Mr. Molyneux pretends to claim.

But the Old Inhabitants having lost the greatest part of their Property, have
lost so much of their share in the Constitution, which is now devolved upon
those Colonies which England has from time to time sent to conquer and possess
the Land, who are now properly the Body-Politick of that Kingdom.

These we allow have forfeited nothing by any Rebellion the Natives have made,
they are Purchasers, and at a dear Rate with the frequent hazard of their Lives
and Fortunes: We must therefore see how far the ancient Rights of the Irish are
devolved upon them, and whither under that Claim the New Inhabitants may justly
term themselves an Independent Nation.

Whoever Conquers, Conquers in the Right of that Country at whose Expense the
War was made; and though the Property of the Land be often granted to the
Adventurers, the Dominion thereof is always reserved to the Nation that sends
her People out. It Is true, where a part of the People divides its self from the
rest to seek new Seats at their own Cost, as they did among the Scythians,
Goths and Vandals, there the Case was otherwise, for they rambled so far as no
more to communicate with their Mother Country.

But it does not appear, That Fitz-Stephen or Richard Strongbow, went out upon
such Terms as those Northern Nations did. On the contrary, their Endeavors had
little Success till seconded by the Power of England, at whose Expense all the
succeeding Conquests of Ireland have been either made or secured; so that if
the ancient Irish had any Rights of Dominion, and if those Rights are
forfeited, the Forfeiture devolves upon England, and not upon the Adventurers,
nor their Successors.

Nor is it indeed consistant with the Principles of Government that a part of
the People should separate from the rest, and be (especially so near at hand)
an Independent Dominion, for that were to have Protection where they owe no
Duty, which is an Absurdity in Politics.

When a part of the People divides from the rest to seek more Territory, if
they are at their own Cost, and strong enough to eradicate or keep under the
Natives, they become a New Empire, and may be justly termed a distinct Nation:
But if not at their own Expense, and if they are weak and always stand in need
of being protected by their Mother Country, they are in all appearance to be
accounted but as a Colony.

Nor are Names to alter the Nature of Things. It Is granted Ireland has been
very anciently called a Kingdom, though our Princes did not take the Style of
Kings thereof till the Reign of Henry the 8th. It Is likewise apparent, That
they have many distinct Jurisdictions; That they are a State within themselves;
That they have an undoubted Right to hold Parliaments; but all this does not
hinder them from being still a Colony, nor can it make them an Independent
People.

Almost every Colony that the Romans planted was a Model of their own
Republic, Sigonii Commentaria.
and framed according to it, by those whom the Senate had deputed for its
Settlement. They had an Annual Duumviratus, in Imitation of the Consular
Authority. They had likewise Censors, Aediles and Quoestors; and which comes
strongest to our present Case, every Colony had its particular Senate: But will
any one pretend to argue from thence, That all these were Distinct and
Independent Commonwealths?

These Branches and Scions from the great Trunk of the Republic, had all of
'em the Face of Formal Governments; they had Magistracies and Councils, Power
of Life and Death, and to raise Money for their Common Safety, and to make Laws
for their better Rule; but this is no Argument that they had all the Parts of
Sovereign Empire.

It Is true the Inhabitants of Ireland, from ancient Concessions, have a
Priviviledge perhaps above the Roman Colonies, namely, to Tax themselves by
their own Suffrages, within their own Limits; but this is no more than what is
claimed by several Provinces of France, which nevertheless account themselves
subordinate to the Sovereign Power of the whole State.

There is a part of Empire not communicable, and which must reside Sovereignly
somewhere; for there would be such a perpetual clashing of Power and
Jurisdictions, as were inconsistant with the very Being of Communities, unless
this last Resort were somewhere lodged. Now this Incommunicable Power we take
to be the Supreme Judgment of what is best and most expedient for the whole;
and in all Reason of Government this ought to be there trusted and lodged, from
whence Protection is expected.

That Ireland should judge of what is best for it self, is just and fair; but
in Determinations that are to reach the whole, as namely, what is most
expedient for England and Ireland both, there, without all doubt, the Supreme
Judgment ought to rest in the King, Lords, and Commons of England, by whose
Arms and Treasure Ireland ever was, and must always be defended.

Nor is this any claiming the same Empire over Scotland, Case of Ireland, p. 84.
as Mr. Molyneux would suggest, for there is no Parity of Reason in the Cases:
Scotland to England (as Aragon to Spain) is a distinct State, governing it self
by different Laws, though under the same Prince, and is truly but a Kingdom
Confederated with the Realm of England, though subject to our King. The Land
thereof was not acquired to the present Inhabitants by the Arms of England;
protect them we do, as the Strongest Allies always are to defend the Weaker,
but this puts 'em not in the Degree of Subordination we are treating of. They
are not our Discendants, and they are but Politically our Brethren; whereas the
English-Irish, who are now chief Lords of that Soil, are naturally our
Offspring.

Their Inferior Rule and Jurisdictions are not disputed, but that Super-eminent
Dominion and supreme and uncontrollable Regiment over themselves, which they
pretend to, is neither safe for England to grant, nor for them to ask.

Such a Power would be dangerous, because by some Accident it may come to be so
exercised, as to be their and our Ruin.

We have had bad Kings, and those Kings have had evil Counselors: Suppose us
then, in some future Age, under such Circumstances, as to have a Prince and his
Council so angry with the People, as to desire their Destruction, which was our
Case once with King John, Mat. Paris.
who would have sold us to the Moors to wreak his own Discontents. And suppose
this Prince willing to set up Ireland in opposition to this Kingdom, may not a
Prince, so disposed, give the Royal Assent to Laws in Ireland, that would
utterly destroy England? And what Remedy would Poining's Act be in such a
Juncture? In a Case like this, what way have the People of England to preserve
themselves, but to represent their Grievance to the Prince? Who, when he sees
the Error of his Council, may be induced to join in some Supreme Exercise of
the Legislature here, coercive, and such as may keep Ireland in the degree of
Subordination, that seems requisite to the well-being of both Nations.

Suppose a Prince bent to hurt England, should give his Assent to a Law there,
That the Irish may transport all their Wool to Foreign Countries; would not
this, as they say, cut the Turf from under our Feet, and at one blow, in a
manner, ruin all our Woollen Manufactures? There are many other Instances, in
which, if they were indulged, the greatest part of our Traffic would be
carried to their Ports.

In Matters of Trade, even the best of Kings may be surprised, of which we have
a late Example; and the ill Consequences the Scotch Act will probably have,
ought to make us very watchful over what our Neighbors do, especially where
they depend upon us.

That the greatest part of the present Inhabitants of Ireland, chiefly those
who claim the Land-Property, are a Colony from England, has been here
peradventure sufficiently made out; and we take it to be their best Hold, to be
always so accounted, because it gives them a lasting Title to be protected and
defended by us. And if they are a Colony, it would be a strange Defect in our
Constitution, if we wanted any of the Powers requisite to pursue the Ends of
Government, of which the Principal is to take care, that no one part of the
People be permitted to hurt the other; but if the Legislature of England
cannot, in Important Matters, restrain that of Ireland, Ireland is at least in
a Capacity to ruin England, which would make our Form of Government at one and
the same time Ridiculous and Dangerous.

But to be thus out of our Jurisdiction, would in the Conclusion be as fatal to
them as to us; for though they should grow Rich at our Expense, and though a large
part of our Trade were diverted thither, they would not yet be able to subsist
alone, and by themselves. And if we by Loss of our Trade become weakened, how
can we give them that Assistance which from time to time they have always
wanted? So that this division of Strength would be destructive to both
Countries. It must therefore be their Interest as well as Ours, That the
Supreme Power, and the chief Wealth, should be ever preserved to Center here in
the Seat of Empire.

Upon the whole Matter, it seems the Right of England, and as well for the
Benefit of Ireland its best and noblest Colony, that the Legislative Authority
here should upon all Emergencies, make such Regulations and Restrictions,
relating to Trade especially, as shall be thought for the Weal-Publick of both
Countries.

And having premised these Things, we shall proceed to handle more closely the
Subject of our Question; namely, Whither it is necessary to Prohibit by Law,
the Exportation of Woollen Manufacture from Ireland to Foreign Parts?

To put an early Stop to their turning their Stock and Industry this way,
appears requisite for many Reasons.

First, Ireland contains near a half as much Territory as England, and the Soil
being of the same Nature, may be brought to produce near a half as much Wool as
England yields; and this Material being the Basis upon which our Trade is
built, they who can come near us in it, will come just so near us in our Trade
abroad.

Secondly, Countries thinly Peopled, can sooner improve in the Breed of Cattle,
than any other way, because it is a Work which a few Hands may manage.

Thirdly, Where there is Plenty of a Material, which, Manufactur'd, yields a
good Price, Hands will soon be invited over to work it up.

Fourthly, But this holds more strongly, where not only the Material, but all
sort of Provisions are cheap; and in Countries which have not been yet
improved, where every new Commer hopes to make a sudden Fortune.

From which Positions it follows, If Ireland be permitted to proceed in the
Exportation of Woollen Goods,

First, That in no long Course of time they may come to carry out to the value
of a Million per Annum.

Secondly, That the cheapness of Provisions will enable them to afford their
Commodities cheaper than England can do in Foreign Markets.

All that have either writ or spoke upon this Subject, agree, That the whole
Controversy turns upon this single Point, whither they can make the same
Woollen Goods cheaper there than here.

To set this in a true Light, we must consider the first Material, and those
who work it up.

As to the first Material, beyond all doubt Wool is a third cheaper there than
in England.

As to the Workmanship, the Clothiers affirm Spinning to be one half of it, and
that of all Hands is agreed to be cheaper there than here. And for the Combing
and Weaving, the Price of course must abate, as Workmen increase; for
Handycraft in Countries, where Living is cheap, can be dear no longer than till
Artists are bred up. And a great many Artists will be instructed before the
Multitude of Inhabitants can render Provisions dear in such a Place as Ireland.
But to judge rightly of these Matters, we must contemplate the Body of the
People in each Country.

Political Anatomy of Ireland, p. 76.
Sir William Petty affirms, That the Inferior Rank of People in Ireland (through
whose Hands Spinning must pass) do not expend one with another above 52
Shillings per Head. The Expense of the same Rank cannot be less here than 5 l.
per Head.

It Is an undeniable Truth, That the Common Provisions for Life are one half
cheaper there than here: It Is likewise as plain, That Meat and Drink are one
half of Mankind's Expense reckoned in a Mass together. And these Advantages of
Living, must enable them to afford the same Commodity cheaper than we can do,
where not only our Numbers make Provisions dear, but where new Excises give all
things of our Home-Consumption yet a higher Price.

Mr. Clement's (for we take him to be the Author of Interest of England, with
Relation to the Trade of Ireland.
that Fine Discourse upon this Subject, inscribed to the Marquess of Normanby)
makes this Judicious Observation, That if any one offers his Goods cheaper than
the usual Price, that will then become the Market Price; and every one else
must sell at the same, or keep his Goods.

The Cheapness of Living, and all other Circumstances considered, it seems very
probable, That if they should come to have the necessary Complement of Workmen,
and to flourish in this Manufacture, they will be able to sell it one third
cheaper than we can do.

If they can make for a Million, and afford it by one third cheaper than we, it
follows, That at least one half of our Exportations in that Commodity must
immediately determine.

And the Consequence of this would be, That Rents must every where fall. The
Purchase of Land must sink. The Poor must want Employment, and grow upon us;
half our Foreign Trade must forthwith cease, and in the other half, we must be
Losers in the Balance, which is chiefly kept of our Side by the Woollen
Manufactures.

Not only a third, but an Abatement of ten per Cent. forced upon us, by the
Rivalship in Trade of another Country, would throw us into more Disorders, than
the most knowing Man in England can readily describe.

And to ask where will be the Stocks of Money to set up so large a Manufacture?
is but an evasive way of Arguing; for where the Prospect of Gain is certain,
Money never fails to come. And if it should ever be determined, That England
cannot restrain that Country in this Exportation, Foreigners will carry Stocks
to an Improving Place, where they may reasonably expect many more Advantages,
than what shall arise from this Manufacture. As for Example, To lay out Money
upon good Securities, at ten per Cent. Interest, to buy Land capable of great
Melioration at ten Years Purchase. And to have almost all the Necessaries of
Life half as cheap again as in other parts; are not all these Circumstances
sufficient to invite thither, not only Foreign Stocks, but very much of our own
Money, and a great Number of our Workmen, where their Industry will turn to a
better Account than it does here?

No Wise State, if it has the Means of preventing the Mischief, will leave its
Ruin in the Power of another Country. And if Wars have been thought not only
Prudent, but just, which have been made to interrupt the too sudden Growth of
any Neighbour-Nation, much more justifiable may a Mother-Kingdom exercise the
Civil Authority in Relation to her own Children; who from her had their Being,
and still have their Protection, especially when her own Safety is so much
concerned.

Nor can this be thought Rigor; It Is but a reasonable Jealousy of State, and
only severe Wisdom, which Governments should show in all their Councils; It Is a
preventing Remedy which operates gently in the beginning of the Disease, before
there are many, and those inveterate Humors to contend with. And if a timely
Stop be put to these Exportations from Ireland, it will hurt but a very few
(which is never to be regarded, where the good of the whole Public is in
Question) and even that Few, without any great difficulty, may have their
Industry turned to safer Objects.

For these and several other Reasons, which will occur to such as think
seriously of this Subject, it seems for the Public Good, That the Legislature
of England should, by some Restrictions, keep Ireland from interfering with us
in this Principal Foundation of our whole Traffic. And to do it by a Positive
Law here, and not to leave it to the Administration there, as some propose,
appears to be the rather requisite; because when this Step is made, and when
they are rendered incapable of Exporting Woollen Goods, there will lie a
Necessity upon the Governing Part and Landed Men, of doing their utmost to
promote other Improvements, of which their Soil is capable.

Nor is it fair to urge, That we may proceed from one Prohibition to another,
till we leave them nothing, and till they are quite undone. They can
fundamentally hurt us no other way, their Rivalship is dangerous in none but
the Woollen Manufacture, where all Lucrum Cessans, is Damnum Emergens to
England, since all our Affairs abroad turn and depend upon it; nor can we
suffer any Competitors in it, if we mean to flourish and be Gainers in the
General Balance of Trade.

To think this Kingdom will either pevishly or covetously hurt that Colony, is
an absurd Imagination. It Is obvious enough, that too much depends upon the
Possession of such an Island, to render its Inhabitants desperate, and desirous
of a Change, if they have a large Trade, and flowing Riches, the Benefit
thereof will redound to us at last; And the wiser a Government is, the more it
will desire to see 'em prosper, except in this single Instance, where their
Wealth would be built upon our Destruction.

But such a Prohibition as we have been treating of, will have very little
Effect, unless they can be likewise hindered from carrying out their Wool; to
prevent which, their Situation considered, will be a very hard Matter; but
there are no difficulties of the like Nature, which are not to be overcome, if
the Administration be strict and steady.

They, who would prohibit the Exportation of Woollen Goods from Ireland, to
Foreign Parts, have hitherto proposed setting up there the Linen Manufacture,
but this Design is likewise not without its Dangers: The setting up the Linen
Manufacture will be less hurtful than to set up the Woollen, but we are to
consider, That Ireland will be always able to supply it self with Draperies at
Home, and that there will be no Market for their Linen, but England, and its
Dependences. Now it is evident, That our Woollen Goods are sold in several
Countries, namely, Holland, Hamburgh, Germany, the Han's Towns, and all the
East Country; many of which Places will not be able to take off our Woollen
Goods, unless we deal for their Linnens: And in Fact, and by Experience, it has
been seen, in the Case of the East India Trade, since there has been Imported
from thence vast Quantities of Linnens, such as Callicoes, Muslins, Romals for
Handkershifts, which answered the end of Lawns, Cambricks, and other Linen
Cloth, we have not Exported that vast quantity of Draperies to those Northern
Parts, of which Sir Walter Raleigh makes mention. As our Call for their Linnens
has diminished, their Call for our Draperies has proportionably decreased; and
not only so, but these People have been compelled by Necessity to fall upon
making Course Woollen Cloth, by which they supply themselves, and other
Places, which heretofore we were wont to furnish. So that it deserves a very
serious Consideration, what future Effect it may have upon our Woollen Goods,
to promote a Considerable Linen Manufacture in Ireland.

Upon the whole Matter, it ought to be carefully examined, Whither or no a
better Expedient may not be thought on, to stop their Progress in the new
Draperies, than to introduce the Linen Manufacture there? and whither it would
not be best for both Kingdoms to take off the Prohibition that now lies upon
Irish Cattle?

This Point has been formerly much debated, and it remains yet very doubtful,
when this Prohibition was set on foot, which was most consulted, Public Good,
or Private Interest; The Numbers of the Breeding were without doubt stronger,
at that time, than those of the Feeding Lands; but it is to be feared, in the
making that Act, that the general Interest of England was not sufficiently
considered.

If the People of Ireland are permitted to bring their Cattle hither, it will
lower the Price of Flesh in England; a Matter very important to a Country that
Subsists so much by Manufactures. It Is true, the Breeding Counties will be
thereby somewhat hurt, but it will encourage Improvements and Melioration of
Barren Land, in order to Feed, which will be advantageous to the whole Public
of the Nation. It will divert those of Ireland, from thinking to extend their
Trade too much abroad; a Point not to be slighted. And it will in a manner
confine the principal Part of their Dealings to this Kingdom; which, for many
Reasons of State, will be best and safest for England.

It Is therefore submitted to better Judgments, whither or no to open the way
hither for their Cattle, will not be most advisable; and the truest Method to
hinder their Progress in Manufactures, without doing any thing that may look
like Injury or Oppression.

It Is no true Objection to say, That the People of Ireland will not fall
readily into this sort of Trade, which has been now so long intermitted; for,
as we are informed, the Payments are very ill made, for that Flesh, Tallow and
Hides, that are Exported to Foreign Parts. That the Merchant makes the Butcher
stay sometimes two or three Years, upon pretense of Bills of Exchange, and
Returns expected from the West Indies, Spain, and other Parts; and if the
Butcher be ill dealt with, it must follow, that the Landlord cannot be paid his
Rent: Whereas when the Trade was open for England, the Gentlemen of Ireland
received ready Money, or if they gave Credit, it was answered by the next
Return; and England was to them as Smithfield is to Lancashire, Lincolnshire,
or any other English Feeding County; besides, it would keep down the Exchange,
which would be another Encouragement to the Irish Nobility and Gentry, who
spend so large a Part of their Estates in London.

So that in all likelihood, the People of that Kingdom, if the said Prohibition
were taken off, would cheerfully submit to a Law here, binding them not to
Export to Foreign Parts their Woollen Goods; nor would they perhaps think of
setting up the Linen Manufacture, which is likewise not without Consequences
very pernicious; and for these Reasons, the Expedient here proposed, is now
offered to Public Consideration.

Before we quit our present Subject of Land and its Product, we shall offer
another Hint. The Course Draperies is that part of our Woollen Manufacture, in
which we are in greatest Danger to be rivaled by other Countries; it stands
therefore in need of most Encouragement. There are many Parts of the World,
whose Poverty disables them from buying our Woollen Goods, because of their
high Price. As Russia, Poland, Tartary, etc. and therefore they are supplied by
the Germans, or some other Neighbors, with a sort of Cloth very contemptible,
in Comparison of what we could make to answer the same Ends and Uses. Suppose
then, instead of paying five per Cent. Custom outward bound, That such Course
Clothes not exceeding such a certain Value, should for a term of Years receive
upon the Exportation ten per Cent. Bounty Money by way of Encouragement from the
State, for so much as the Exporters can make appear was carried out, to
Countries with whom we had no Dealings of that kind before, and that such their
Exportations are in order to enlarge our Trade. A Recompense of this Nature
would in all probability increase the Woollen Manufacture of England, in not
many Years, at least one third.

We have the more largely handled the Irish Prohibitions, because in all
appearance the Balance of Trade will very much depend upon the Measures
England shall take, in relation to that Colony; since we should proceed very
heavily in all our Foreign Traffic, if Ireland is left in a Capacity to
disturb us abroad, in the vent of our Woollen Manufactures.

And having treated of the Numbers of the People, and of Land, and its Product,
we shall proceed to say something of our Payments to the Public, and in what
manner the Balance of Trade may be thereby affected.

SECT. IV.
Of our Payments to the Public, and in what manner the Balance of Trade may
be thereby affected.
WHETHER it be under a Commonwealth, an Absolute Monarchy, or in a Mixed
Government, the Affairs of a Country can never go on prosperously, unless the
Public Revenues are well and wisely ordered. Richlieu says, Cest le Point
d'Archimede qui estant fermement etabli, Testament Politic, part 2.. 7.
done moyen de mouvoir tout le monde.

Commonwealths are seldom to blame in this part of Polity, and when they quit
it, suffering their Treasure to be imbezzel'd by the Men in Power, they seldom
fail of salling soon after into the Hands of a single Person. In Absolute
Monarchies, where it is neglected, the Prince is compelled by his Want to Flea
and Rack his Subjects, and to wink at all sorts of Rapine in those whose
Business it is to contrive Ways of supplying his Necessities, till at last he
becomes Tirannical and Odious to the whole People.

Profusion has the same ill Effects in Constitutions where the Regal Authority
is limited by Laws. Richlieu says, Ibid.
A necessitous Prince can never undertake a glorious Action; and Necessity
ingendering Contempt, he can never be reduced to that Condition without being
exposed to the Attempts of his Enemies, and of those who are envious of his
Greatness. Besides, when the Crown is brought very low, it alters the due
Balance of Power, which should be kept even and well-pois'd to preserve such
Forms of Government; for it either inclines the People who hold the Purse to
entrench upon such Prerogatives as are necessary for the Prince's Safety, and
to keep the Kingdom's Peace, or it gives bad Men an opportunity of suggesting
to him that wicked Council (which was given to King Charles I.) of making
himself easy, by subverting his People's Rights.

This able Statesman lays down, Testament Politic, Par. 1. c. 4.. 1.
That good Order in the Revenue depends more on those who have the
Administration than on Laws and Regulations, which remain useless unless such
as are employed to see them observed be willing to perform their Duty.

The Legislative Part of the Constitution gives the Money, but it principally
belongs to the Ministerial Part to take Care that what is granted be not
wasted, diverted, or misapplied; and if such as are trusted fail to do this, it
is incumbent on the Legislature to interpose, and call 'em to a strict Account.

The Wealth of a Country is Finite, as well as the Substance of any private
Man; and when a Ministry set themselves industriously about it, they can as
well ruin a whole People, as the Duke of Buckingham could see an end of his
great Estate.

Harry III. of France, for want of Order and by being ill-served, in a few
Years consumed an immense Sum, and anticipated all the Crown-Revenue. His
Successor Harry IV. with a very little Care of his own, but by the infinite
Application, Prudence and Honesty of the Duke of Sully his Treasurer, paid most
of those Debts off, and left behind him, at his Death, Five Millions Sterling
in his Coffers. And at this Day, for want of Conduct in the Ministry, Spain is
not the richer for the Silver Mines of Potosi. So that the Wealth or Poverty of
the Public does, in a manner, wholly depend upon the good or bad
Administration of its Affairs.

Machiavel does not seem to think Liberality a necessary Virtue in a Prince,
Prince, c. 16.
because, to support it, there must go so much Oppression of the People. And
that a frugal Prince shall be accounted Noble to all from whom he takes nothing
away, which are an infinite number: And that he shall be esteemed Near and
Parsimonious only by those Few to whom he gives but little. And he says, That a
Prince ought not so much to concern himself (so he exacts not upon his
Subjects, so he be able to defend himself, so he becomes not despicable and
commits no Rapine upon his People) though he be accounted Covetous, for that it
is one of those Vices which fortifies his Dominion. And he observes, That Pope
Julius II. was liberal till he came to the Papacy, but frugal afterward, which
enabled him to do such great Things against the Power of France.

That the Business of most Kingdoms has been ill managed, proceeds from this:
It imports the lower Rank of Men only and the People (whose Cries seldom reach
the Prince till it is too late, and till all is past Remedy) that Matters
should be frugally ordered, because Taxes must arise from their Sweat and
Labor. But the great Ones, who heretofore have had the Prince's Ear and
Favor, or who hoped to have him in their Possession, were swayed by another
sort of Interest; they liked Profusion, as having had a Prospect to be Gainers
by it: They can easily set their Account even with the State, a small Charge
upon their Land is more than balanced by a great Place, or a large Pension. At
the same time the People who are to pay all, and expect to receive nothing, are
glad to see a frugal Court; which though it be not so good for its Followers,
never fails to enrich a Nation.

It Is true, Galba is an Instance that the Virtues of a close-handed Prince may
be unsuccessful in Countries governed by the Sword, and where the Soldier is
riotous, and in long Possession of a slack Discipline. And perhaps in all
Absolute Monarchies, he who Governs should rather lean toward Munificence than
Thrift. But Frugality in the State can never be dangerous in a Trading Nation,
ruled by Laws of its own making; and it is not only necessary in it self, but
profitable in the Example, teaching private Men that good Husbandry in their
Domestic Affairs, which never fails to enrich the whole Body-Politick.

Much nobler is it to enjoy the Praises of an Universal People, living in
Plenty and at their Ease, not burdened by Taxes and Duties; than to have the
good Words of a few Flatterers, or those Harpies which commonly haunt a Court
to gripe all they can; who, when they are gorged themselves, pollute all the
Remainder with their foul and obscene Claws, so that no Body else desires to
touch it. Besides, we have hardly an Instance of any Prince, that in time of
Need, was truly assisted and defended by his Minions, and the Creatures of his
Bounty and Favor; but a King beloved for wise, just and careful Government,
has been very seldom deserted by his People.

But suppose a Prince should desire to exercise in a very ample manner the
inbred Magnificence of his Mind; if he will discharge the Trust committed to
him by the King of Kings; if he will not make what he counts Virtue distructive
to his People, he must find Matter to supply his liberal Inclinations; which he
only can do, who sees that his Ministers look well after his Income and
Expenses.

Some Persons have a strange Notion, That large Payments to the State are not
hurtful to the Public; That Taxes make Money circulate; That it imports not
what A pays, when B is to receive it: But we hope to show, that they who argue
in this manner, are very much mistaken.

We have formerly touched upon this Matter in the Discourses on the Revenues,
Part I. p. 196, 197, 198.
and Trade of England, to which we refer the Reader; but the Necessity of our
present Argument compels us here to handle this Point something more at large.

All Nations have a certain Annual Income upon which the People live and
subsist, out of which Taxes of all kinds arise; which Income we take to be
since the War, In England, -- 43,000,000 l. per An. In France, -- 81,000,000 l.
per An. In Holland, -- 18,250,000 l. per An.


And we must beg leave to repeat, in this place, something which we have laid
down in those Tracts; P. 195.
That to nourish the Mass of Mankind, as to their Annual Expense in the Way and
Form of Living practiced in each of the three Countries, such an Innual Income
is necessary as is set down in the foregoing Scheme. By Annual Income we mean
the whole that arises in any Country, from Land and its Product, from Foreign
Trade and Domestic Business, as Arts, Manufactures, etc. And by Annual
Expense, we understand what is of Necessity consumed to Cloth and Feed the
People, or what is requisite for their Defense in time of War, or for their
Ornament in time of Peace. And where the Annual Income exceeds the Expense,
there is a Superlucration arising, which may be called Wealth or National
Stock. The Revenue of the Government is a part of this Annual Income, as
likewise a part of its Expense; and where it bears too large a proportion with
the whole, as in France, the common People must be miserable, and burdened
with heavy Taxes. That part of the Prince's Revenue that nourishes his own
Person is very little; but in great Monarchies, where numerous Armies, large
Fleets, and pompous Courts are maintained, there the Expense swells high,
insomuch that to the Maintenance of the Governing part, viz. the Prince, his
Officers of State, Military Power, etc. which are not in time of Peace above
one 26th of the whole, there is required near the Ninth Penny of the Annual
Income. And in such Countries the Governing part are Rich or at their Ease, but
the other 25 parts, who are the Body of the People, must be oppressed with
Taxes, as may be observed in the French Dominions. And this holds more
strongly, where the Public Debts make the Payment of a sixth part of the
Annual Income necessary, which, for some time, is like to be the Case of France.

To explain these Assertions shall be the Subject of this Section, whereby it
will appear how much the Balance of Trade may be affected by our Payments to
the Public.

We shall endeavor to show, in the last Section, That the Wealth of a Country
does in a great measure proceed from a right Administration of its Affairs:
However, it may happen sometimes to increase in Riches where Things are in the
main ill administered, as England did to the Year 1688, in the two Reigns that
preceeded this; but whoever looks carefully into the true Reason why we grew so
fast in Wealth during those Eight and twenty Years, will find it was because we
paid all that time but small Taxes and Duties to the Government, comparatively
with other Nations.

For in 1688. our gross Payments to the Public, in which Charge of Management
was included, did not exceed -- 2,300,000 per Annum. Which was but little above
one 20th Part of the then -- 44,000,000 An. Inc.

But our Case is very much altered, now, and since that Year, a great many new
Revenues have been erected. We still pay the old Excise, the Customs and
Post-Mony; besides which, there is laid Additional Duties upon Beer, Ale, and
other Liquids; Additional Customs, the continued Acts and Joint Stocks, Duty on
Marriages, etc. double Duty on Stamped Paper, Duty on Hackney Coaches, on Malt.
The double Tonnage, the former and last Duties upon Salt. The Duty on Windows,
upon Leather, Paper and Coals.

The Old and New Impositions of all kinds reckoned together, and including the
new Poll, and the 3 Shillings Aid, it will be found that there was collected
from the People about 5,500,000 Last Year. Which is above one eighth part of
our present -- 43,000,000 An. Inc.

During all the War, there has been levied here great Sums every Year, and many
of the forementioned Fonds are to continue so long, that it will be several
Years before our Annual Payments can be considerably diminished. And there is
such a difference between a Twentieth and an Eighth, or indeed a Tenth, or a
Twelfth Part (which yet we shall not come at in some time) as must inevitably
affect the Nation's Trade, and the whole Body of its People.

When there was raised no more than about a Twentieth Part, there were great
Sums of Money to circulate in Foreign Traffic, and to employ in enlarging our
Home-Manufactures, which two Fountains of our Wealth must be dry, when the
Springs that heretofore fed 'em are diverted, and let into another Channel.

There is scarce any of these new Revenues, which do not give Trade some
desperate Wound. The Additional Duties on Beer and Ale, and the Tax upon Malt,
are apparently a Burden upon the Woollen Manufactures, affecting the Carder,
Spinner, Weaver and the Dyer, who all of them must be raised in their Wages,
when the Necessaries of Life are raised to them. The Consequence of which will
be, That our Woollen Goods must come at a heavy and disadvantagious Price into
the Foreign Markets.

There is no Man will pretend, that High Customs are not pernicious to our
Commerce abroad. A Nation is not Gainers in the general Balance of Trade, by
the Dealing of a Few, who are able to employ in it great Stocks; such may make
to themselves an Immense Gain, but they go but a little toward enriching the
whole Public, which seldom thrives, but when, in a manner, the Universal
People bend their Thoughts to this sort of Business; when every one is ready
with his small Stock, and little Sum, to venture and rove about the World: Of
these some prosper, and others are undone; however, in the way of Merchandise,
Men who do not thrive themselves, may yet contribute very much to make their
Country Rich, which gets by the Dealings of all, and does not suffer by the
unfortunate Conduct of here and there a Merchant. But when the Customs are
High, all these under Dealers, who all along in England have made up the chief
Bulk of our Trading Men, must hold their Hands, though in Skill, Industry, and
inventive Parts and Wit, they may exceed Merchants of more Wealth, and of a
higher Rank. Nor is it indeed practicable for Men of but a moderate Fortune to
Deal at all, when more than treble that Sum is necessary to have ready now to
pay the King, which formerly would set up a Substantial Trader, and maintain
him in sufficient Business.

But of all the new Impositions, none are so dangerous to the very Being of
Trade, nor so hurtful to all its Parts and Members, as the high Duties lately
laid upon Salt. First, They affect the Common People in the whole Course of
their Living, whose chief Nourishment is Bacon, and other Salted Flesh, so that
this Excise has an universal Influence upon all our Manufactures whatsoever. But

Scheme H. A SCHEME of the Naval Trade of England, and the National Profit
arising thereby, Calculated for the Year, 1688.
Exported, Value here Value abroad Value upon the Balance Gain by Freight,
etc. l. l. l. l. By our Selves, 3,310,000 4,120,000 Value abroad 4,120,000 To
our Selves, 810,000 By Foreigners, 1,000,000 1,250,000 Value here 1,000,000 To
Foreigners, 250,000 4,310,000 5,370,000 5,120,000 1,060,000 Imported, By our
Selves, 5,570,000 2,870,000 Value abroad 2,870,000 To our Selves, 2,700,000 By
Foreigners, 1,550,000 1,150,000 Value here 1,550,000 To Foreigners, 400,000
Gross Imports, 7,120,000 4,020,000 Gross Imports 4,420,000 Gross Imports,
3,100,000 Gross Exports, 4,310,000 5,370,000 Gross Exports 5,120,000 Gross
Exports, 1,060,000 In all 11,430,000 9,390,000 9,540,000 4,160,000 Val. abroad
Val. abroad So he Exports by our own Shipping being 4,120,000 In all --
6,990,000 Imports by our own Shipping 2,870,000 National Gain by our Shipping
in the Balance of Trade 1,250,000 Value here Value here And the Imports by
Foreign Shipping being 1,550,000 In all -- 2,550,000 Exports by Foreign
Shipping 1,000,000 National Loss by Foreign Shipping in the Balance of Trade
550,000 9,540,000

Place this Scheme p. 147.

the general Prejudice it may bring to Navigation, is yet of much a higher
Consequence.

Mr. King, in his Computations of the Naval Trade of England, Anno 1688. and
the National Profit then arifing there-by, reckoning what Proportion was
Navigated by our selves at that time, and what by Foreigners, is of Opinion,
That with Relation to the value of our whole Trade here at home, our own
Navigation was somewhat more than three fourths, and the Foreign Navigation
near one fourth; But reckoning the value of the Foreign Navigation at the
Market here, and of our own at the Markets abroad, then the Foreign Navigation
seems to have been at that time in Proportion to our own, as one to two three
fourths, and with respect to the Tunnage of Ships, our own Navigation seems to
have been at that time two thirds, and the Foreign Navigation one third,
according to the following Scheme.

Vide Scheme H.

From whence he Concludes, l. That our Gain upon the Balance by our own
Shiping being 1,250,000 And our Loss upon the Balance by Foreign Shipping
being 0,550,000 The Increase of Money, or Adequate Treasure, by the Balance of
Trade in General, might be Anno 1688. 700,000

And that the Advantage to Foreigners Trading to England in their own Ships,
might be at that time in General thus.

l. By Freight, or Advance of the Price of our Commodities Exported by them,
above the value here 250,000 By Freight, or Advance of the Price of their own
Commodities Imported here above their value abroad 400,000 In all, 650,000

l. Brought over 650,000 Besides, the Increase of Goods Imported to their own
Countries over and above their own Exports, according to the value of them in
their own Countries 100,000 In all, 750,000

Upon the whole He Concludes, l. First, That the General Increase of our Money
or Adequate Treasure, and of Wares and Commodities over and above the value of
our Gross Exports, was Anno 1688. 2,810,000 And the Gain made by Foreign
Nations with England, in their own Shipping, was 750,000 So that the Naval
Trade of England was at that time, generally profitable to our Selves and
Foreigners in all 3,560,000 Secondly, That the National Profit to England by
Foreign Trade was then at least 1,700,000 Whereof in Money or Adequate Treasure
700,000 1,700,000 And in Wares or Commodities Treasured up, or applied to the
Increase of the National Stock, besides what we consumed our selves 1,000,000

Whoever considers these Computations, will find 'em very Judiciously made, and
that Mr. King has done as much as could be performed merely by the Strength of
Numbers.

To come to an exact Knowledge in this Matter, and such as would be almost
beyond Contradiction, the Books of the Customs should be looked into; and from
thence might be drawn an Account of all the Exportations from London, and the
Out Ports to every distinct Country; and also of all the Importations to
London, and the Out Ports from every distinct Country, and what might at that
time be the value of those Goods, being computed by able Merchants: And this to
be done for some competent Number of Years by reasonable Mediums, it may be
very nearly guessed from such a View, how the Balance of Trade stood from time
to time.

But where a thing so much within their Reach (and which the French Ministers
are said to do in their Exports and Imports) has not been done by the Men of
Business here; there is no way of knowing how the Balance stands, but by
considering the Numbers of the People, and their probable Consumption of our
Home Product, and of Foreign Materials, from whence a Judgment may be formed,
not indeed perfectly demonstrable, but very near the Truth.

Mr. King observes, That by how much the Nation does not consume of its
Imports, but either lays up, or increases the Stock of Gold or Silver, or other
Adequate Treasure, or of durable Commodities in Specie; by so much, at least,
does the Nation gain by Foreign Trade, besides all other Advantages of
Navigation.

It Is difficult to know how our Navigation has proceeded for these ten Years
last past, but it is to be feared, That the Gain which Foreigners have made, by
fetching and carrying in their own Bottoms, has been much greater of late, then
it was heretofore; which must be a very considerable Prejudice to England, and
highly tend to set the Balance of Trade against us.

Reckoning long and short Voyages together, the principal Expense of fitting
out a Trading Vessel, is Drink and Meat. The Excises and Duty upon Malt,
without doubt, make Drink sufficiently dear to the Freighter. And the Duty upon
Salt makes Victualling a very heavy Burden upon him, all which must end in
lessening our Navigation from time to time; for undoubtedly Foreigners
observing how dear Freight is with us, will Trade in their own Ships as much as
possible.

In Barrelling up Beef and Pork, we heretofore made use of St. Martin's, etc.
or Oleron and English Salt mixed together; and with these Materials the Flesh
was best prepared, both for wholsomness, and long keeping; our own Salt without
Foreign Mixture being fiery, corrosive, and very Scorbutic. As we are
informed, the St. Martins, and worser sort of French Salt, from 1676, to 1688,
was delivered in London, at about 2 l. 5 s. per Tun, and forty Bushels to the
Tun. And that from Oleron, at from 2 l. 10 s. to 2 l. 15. per Tun. But now the
very Duty for forty Bushels of Oleron Salt amounts to 13 l. 6. s. 8. d. besides
the 25 per Cent. ad valorem, of which formerly the prime Cost came to but 2 l.
15 s. at highest: The Duty likewise upon forty Bushels of Lisbon Salt comes to
13 l. 6 s. 8 d. of which the prime Cost was formerly, at highest, but 3 l. 10
s. And as to our Newcastle, and Limington Salt, which is now generally made use
of in Salting Beef and Pork for Trading Vessels; the very Duty for forty
Bushels amounts to 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. of which, before the War, the prime Cost
came but to 3 l. at the dearest Market: Insomuch that we are credibly informed,
a Merchant can store himself in Ireland, for a long Voyage, with Salt, Beef and
Pork, ready packed up, almost as cheap as he can buy the Salt in England.

So that for long Voyages, the Merchant will either Victual in Ireland, or Salt
his Beef and Pork on some Foreign Coast, as he Sails along, where Provisions
shall be cheap, which must bring a great Damage to the Landed Interest here; or
if he does not do so, Victualling will be so expensive to him, as to make
Freight much dearer than it ought to be in a Country that expects to thrive by
Trade.

The Consequence of all which will be, That the Body of our Merchants must lie
under a general Discouragement; They will neglect looking after National Gain,
which English Merchants have perhaps heretofore as much considered in their
Dealings, as any Trading Men in the whole Commercial World; They will have an
Eye to nothing but their own temporary Profit, and fuffer Strangers to go away
with those Gains which England was wont to make by Freight; from whence it will
follow, That we must decay in our Stock of Shipping, and decrease every Year in
the breed of Seamen; and when this happens, we must no more pretend to such a
Naval Strength as has hitherto made us terrible to all our Neighbors.

Trade, without doubt, is in its nature a pernicious thing; it brings in that
Wealth which introduces Luxury; it gives a rise to Fraud and Avarice, and
extinguishes Virtue and Simplicity of Manners; it depraves a People, and makes
way for that Corruption which never fails to end in Slavery, Foreign or
Domestic. Licurgus, in the most perfect Model of Government that was ever
framed, did banish it from his Commonwealth. But, the Posture and Condition of
other Countries considered, it is become with us a necessary Evil. We shall be
continually exposed to Insults and Invasions without such a Naval Force, as is
not to be had naturally but where there is an extended Traffic. However, if
Trade cannot be made subservient to the Nation's Safety, it ought to be no more
encouraged here than it was in Sparta: And it can never tend to make us safe,
unless it be so managed as to make us increase in Shipping and in the Breed of
Seamen.

Freight is not only the most Politic, but the most National and most certain
Profit a Country can possibly make by Trade; Therefore all Duties must be
pernicious that burden it, and make it dear. And we have dwelt the longer upon
this Article of the Salt Duty, because it seems to have more dangerous
Consequences, in relation to our Commerce abroad, than all the other
Impositions put together.

The late Tax upon Coals is a heavy Burden on all Handicrafts working on Iron,
a Manufacture in which we are now come to a great Perfection. And the Skill and
Neatness of our Workmen is such in Locks, Keys, Hindges, and other Curiosities
of this kind; that our Exportations of these Commodities may in time grow very
considerable, if this new Duty does not interrupt their Industry.

We have shown in several Instances, how the Excises lately set a foot, may
affect us in the general Balance of Trade. And we have done it with a design
of making it appear how much it is for the Common Good, to endeavor to get out
of those Debts, for which these Revenues are the Security and Fund.

Mr. King, in a Scheme of his, of the Yearly Increase and Decrease of the
Actual Stock of England, from the Year 1600. to School. and what it may probably
amount to by the Year 1710. if the present Peace continue, (and none of those
Accidents of Plague, War, Fires and Civil Discords intervene, which more or
less do certainly diminish or hinder the Increase of the Nations Wealth,
whenever they happen) computes, That Anno 1600. the said Actual Stock was but
about 25 Millions, making a Yearly Increase of about 4 or 500,000 l. That Anno
1630. it was about 37 Millions, making a Yearly Increase of about one Million.
That in 1664. (the Year before the last great Plague) it was about 64 Millions,
making a Yearly Increase of about 1,200,000 l. And that Anno 1668. it was about
86 Millions, making a Yearly Increase of 2,400,000 l.

And Concludes,

First, That the last Plague, the Fire of London, and the Dutch War, did
actually diminish the said Stock, at least 9 or 10 Millions, and hindered the
Increase of 18 or 20 Millions more.

Secondly, That the last War with France, with the other Circumstances of the
Revolution, and the Recoyning the Money, has actually diminished the said Stock
about 12 Millions, and hindered the Increase of about 28 Millions besides.

Thirdly, That the Nation will not arrive to the same Degree of Actual Stock,
which it had Anno 1688. till about the Year 1705. nor make an Increase of
2,400,000 l. per Annum, as it did in 1688. till about the Year 1706. nor then
neither, unless the Taxes be considerably diminished; that thereby our
Navigation and Commerce may be fully restored, to what it was before the late
War.

We do not pretend to give any Account of the present Posture of our Foreign
Trade, nor how it stood during all the last War, for it would be launching into
a very wide Sea; but without doubt, the Immense Sums that have been raised
every Year, and the variety of new Duties that have been lately levied, are a
heavy Burden upon it.

And in order to give some little Light into this Matter, and to show how the
Balance has been, and may be thereby affected, we shall briefly State what
Money has been Anually granted since the War.

l. s. d. For Anno 1689. Granted for the War, and to pay 60,000 l. to King
Charles's Servants, and to pay 600,000 l. to the Dutch, in all that Year
1,844,786 16 04 For Anno 1690. Granted for the War 2,535,452 01 02 For Anno
1691. Granted for the War, and for building Ships 4,794,861 07 00 3/4 For Anno
1692. Granted (besides what was paid out of the Revenue of the Crown toward
the War) 3,337,268 08 09 ^/4 Carry over 12,512,368 13 04 l. s. d. Brought over
12,512,368 13 04 For Anno 1693. Granted for the War 3,471,482 16 01 For Anno
1694. Granted for the War 5,030,581 09 09 For Anno 1695. Granted for the War
4,883,120 00 06 For Anno 1696. Granted for the War, and to make good some
Deficiences, and to make good the Clipped Money, and for the Civil List, and
French Protestants 7,961,469 00 00 For Anno 1697. There was Granted for the
War, and to make good the Deficiences of former Funds, and for the Civil List,
and French Protestants 11,887,160 00 9 Carry over 45,746,182 00 5 l. s. d.
Brought over 45,746,182 00 05 For Anno School. There were Funds given, amounting
to about 4,500,000 00 00 Ordinary Revenue of the Crown, reckoned at a Million
per Annum, by a Medium during these ten Years, might produce in the whole about
10,000,000 00 00 In all, 60,246,182 00 5

l. s. d. Brought over -- 60,246,182 00 5 But in these Articles several Sums
are twice reckoned; as for Example, where one Fund was taken away, and another
given in its place; and where Funds have been granted to supply the
Deficiencies of other Funds, for which Articles there may be deducted about
7,000,000 l. 12,000,000 00 00 And the ordinary Crown-Revenue might be charged,
during that time, toward the War, with about 5,000,000 l. So that there has
been actually granted but about 48,246,182 00 5

It Is not pretended, That the foregoing Accounts are exact to a Tittle; but
according to the best Information we are able to procure, they are as near the
Truth as is requisite in our present Argument.

Having shown what has been granted in Fonds, we shall now show what was
intended by the Parliament; and, for five Years, very little more demanded for
the Fleet and Army.

l. s. d. For Anno 1689, -- 3,295,628 04 05 For Anno 1690, -- 4,010,760 06 07
For Anno 1691, -- 4,172,393 09 07 For Anno 1692, -- 3,629,439 12 03 For Anno
1693, -- 4,117,080 09 06 For Anno 1694, 5,030,581 09 09 For Anno 1695, --
4,883,120 00 06 For Anno 1696, 5,024,854 04 11 For Anno 1697, -- 4,880,078 19
11 For Anno School, 1,300,000 00 00 40,343,936 17 05

Note, That from Anno 1693 inclusive, to Anno 1697 inclusive, the difference
between what was demanded by the Ministers, and granted by the Parliament for
the Fleet and Army during those Five Years, amounted in the whole time but to
1,465,623 l. 19 s. 9 d.

Suppose the Expense of the Civil List from 1689 inclusive, to School inclusive,
to have been one Year with another 600,000 l. per Annum.

l. s. d. The Expense of the Civil List then in ten Years may have been
6,000,000 00 00 Toward which the ordinary Revenue of the Crown, besides what
it was charged with to the War, may have yielded about 5,000,000 00 00 But in
1696 and in 1697, there was granted by the Parliament for the Civil List per
Annum, 500,000 l. in the whole 1,000,000 00 00 So that in this Computation the
Expense of the Civil List is to be reckoned at but 5,000,000 00 00

And the Accounts of England may run thus, l. s. d. Actually granted 48,246,182
00 05 Expense of the War, l. s. d. 45,343,936 17 05 40,343,936 17 05 Expense of
the Civil List 5,000,000 00 00 Remains -- 2,902,245 02 11

So that except in the Article of Interest Money, and except in the Article of
1,465,623 l. 19 s. 09 d. in which the Demands of the Ministers for the State of
the War, exceeded what was granted by the Parliament, the Expenses of the
Government seem to have been fully supplied, and that there remains an
Overbalance of 2,902,245 l. to be accounted for.

Now as to Interest-Mony for the 5,000,000 l. with which the Crown-Revenue may
have been charged toward the War, those Fonds, most of 'em, have and will
answer the Principal and all the Interest allowed by Parliament: And other
Interest, which several Fonds fell short of satisfying, has been in a great
measure made good by the Supply of 7,000,000 l. granted to answer Deficiencies.

And as to the State of the War having exceeded what was granted, in ballancing
the general Account, this Article ought to be considered, if during the whole
War the Muster-Rolls have been full; and if all along we have had our
Complement of Ships and Seamen, according to that State of the War which was
every Year laid before the Parliament.

But upon the whole Matter, considering what has been granted, and what may
probably have been expended, there seems good Reason to think that the Public
of England, if all Accounts were narrowly inspected, cannot be much in Arrear
either to the Fleet, Army, or to the Civil List.

So that if there shall remain any great Arrear, in all likelihood it must
chiefly arise from exorbitant Premiums, unwarrantable Interest, and other ways
of laying out Money, hurtful to the King, and distructive to the People.

The rough Draught of our general Accounts here given, which is as perfect as a
By-stander only could procure, may perhaps afford some little Help to such as
will think of these Affairs; and this rude Model may contribute toward the
forming of a better Scheme.

The Forty eight Millions granted, as we have said, by Parliament for the
several Years from 1689 to School inclusive, have not been actually levied. To
state exactly how much of it has been already raised, and what proportion of it
remains secured by remote Fonds, is not to be done without greater Helps than
the Writer of these Papers can come at: But so far we know, and may affirm
safely, that a great part of the Product of Land, our Trade, and Manufactures,
remain still mortgaged for upwards of twenty Millions.

Two of the Nine Pences on Beer and Ale are to be esteemed as a Perpetuity, the
third Nine Pence is engaged for a long Term of Time; the first Duty upon Salt
can be looked upon no better than as a perpetual Fond; the new Customs,
continued Acts and Joint-Stocks, the Duty on Marriages, Births, etc. the first
Duty on Stamped paper, the Duty on Windows, half the Duty on Glass-Ware, the
new Duties on Whale-Fins and Scotch Linen, are continued to the First of
August, 1706. The last Duties upon Salt, and Stamped Paper, are Perpetuities;
there is a further Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage granted from the last of
January, 1699. for His Majesty's Lifetime; and the Impositions upon Malt,
Leather and Paper, are not expired.

To imagine we can buy off and redeem, in any moderate time, all these
Perpetuities or long Fonds, is a vain Hope; but this may be laid down for a
certain Truth, That England will never flourish in Trade and Manufactures till
the greatest Part of 'em are cleared, and till our Affairs are brought to such
a Posture, that we may not pay to the Government either for the Support of the
Crown, or on Account of Fonds, where the Principal is sunk, above 2,300,000 l.
per Annum, or about a twentieth part of the Nation's general Income, which was
our Condition before the War.

And unless this can be compassed it will be found, That in no long Course of
Time we shall languish and decay every Year, by Steps easy enough to be
perceived by such as consider of these Matters. Our Gold and Silver will be
carried off by degrees, Rents will fall, the Purchase of Land will decrease,
Wool will sink in its Price, our Stock of Shipping will be diminished,
Farm-houses will go to ruin, Industry will decay, and we shall have upon us all
the visible Marks of a declining People.

It may indeed be objected, That France for about forty, and Holland for above
a hundred Years have thriven by Trade, notwithstanding that all the while they
have lain under the Burden of heavy Taxes. To which may be answered, That
where (as in France) the Administration in other Things is exact and right, the
Subjects, though poor, may enlarge their Traffic, for general good Order makes
amends for a great deal of Oppression; but they would yet have had more Trade
if their Prince had left 'em richer: Besides, Arbitrary Power has compelled 'em
to that Domestic Thrift, which of it self goes very far to make a People
succeed in Foreign Commerce, though their Payments to the Public are excessive.
And as to the Dutch they have been so long inured to this Parsimony, that the
more they are to pay the State, the more they save at home; and they always
take care not to clog their Importations; and from this Polity it comes that
high Taxes are not hurtful to their Trade.

But in Countries where the Administration of Affairs is loose, partly through
the mildness of the Laws, and partly through the bad Execution of 'em, where
the People have been in a long Possession of Ease and Plenty, and where they
think it an Essential part of Freedom to be as Expensive and Luxurious as they
please, and where no Man retrenches upon any public Account whatsoever: Among
such a People, high Taxes, Duties, and Impositions, must inevitably occasion a
decay of Trade; and though their Dealings seem large and not to be interrupted,
they shall carry on such a sort of Traffic as will bring along with it at last
their certain Ruin.

A variety of new Impositions and remote Fonds do not only hurt us in the
Balance of Trade, as we have shown, but they are dangerous to Liberty, without
which, Trade can never truly flourish, and without which it is indeed of no
Importance; for to what end should Men acquire Wealth, which they cannot call
their own? And accordingly under Despotick Governments (except in some places
where the Administration of the Tyranny is very wisely carried on) but few
trouble themselves with the Thoughts of Foreign Traffic.

Whoever considers the vast number of new Duties now a-foot, will find that
it is not impossible to make 'em the Engines wherewith bad Men, some time or
other, may endeavor to undermine our Civil Rights. It Is true, in this Reign we
have no reason to entertain such a Fear, but a Country that will preserve its
Constitution must provide against remote Dangers.

At present we pay to the Government, besides the Three Shillings Aid and
Poll-Mony, so many Duties, Old and New, as amount to about Three Millions and a
half per Annum. Some of 'em, it is true, expire shortly. But suppose Necessity
or bad Management (and there is nothing which ill Husbandry cannot devour)
should compel us to continue what is now expiring for a longer time; and admit
that for present Subsistence, and to pay old Debts, these Fonds of Three
Millions and a half per Annum should be settled as a Security to Lenders, for
some certain time to come.

Suppose then a Government in the Possession of such a large Revenue at first
legally granted, put into a Method of Collection, and to the Payment of which
the People shall be accustomed.

And suppose, in some future Reign, the Ministers should be either weary or
afraid of Parliaments, and desirous to Govern by the Sword, and without Law.
That this may happen is not impossible, because we have heretofore seen
Statesmen so disposed.

It Is to be hoped this is a Danger very remote indeed; but when a Ministry
shall be so madly inclined, the Symptoms of their approaching Frenzy will be
evident enough; for at such a Season we shall see 'em choose rather to be
supplied by distant Fonds, than with what will produce ready Money: And they
will take care that Revenues granted may not be well managed nor improved to
the Height, with this Design, That the People may be kept in the dark, both as
to what they give, and as to what each Branch is like to yield.

Suppose then an Ambitious and Desperate Set of Men, with all these Thoughts
about 'em, and resolved to make their Master Absolute, may they not, with the
Help of such an ample Revenue, quite overthrow our Constitution? Arbitrary
Ministers have heretofore stopped the Exchequer; and if we should ever see Men
of the same Stamp upon the Stage of Business, it is not impossible but that they
may run into the same wicked Measures, especially if they should be backed with
the Support of a Standing Army.

The Liberties of a People are but in a very precarious Condition, when they
can be subverted by one pernicious Counsel: It should therefore be the Care of
such as love their Country, to render this fatal Advice as dangerous and
impracticable as Laws can make it.

At a time when there is such an Immense Revenue collected every Year, it seems
a Fault in our Constitution that sufficient Provision is not made against
diverting and misapplying the Public Treasure, and against breaking into
Appropriated Fonds. And to speak in plain Words, There is reason to fear that
the Laws have not made it Criminal enough to stop Payments in the Exchequer.

When a Town that apprehends a Siege finds it self weak by Nature in one place,
the first Care of the Defenders is to fortify that Post as well as ever they
can. In the same manner a Constitution that is attackable one way, should
strengthen that Part with severe Laws. The Exchequer therefore should be fenced
about with all possible Skill, that it may never be invaded by bold and
designing Ministers.

A Stop there would at once pull down all our Civil Rights. Nay, to stop the
Principal only, though the Payments of the Interest should be continued, would be
fatal to our Constitution, for there would yet remain an Income large enough to
make Parliaments useless. And if wicked Men should thus set up for themselves,
they would still have Revenue sufficient to bear their Expenses, and to keep up
an Army to awe such as their Conduct shall displease.

Some indeed will argue, That a corrupted Ministry will as soon make new Levies
of Money, as venture thus to divert what has been already granted and
appropriated: But this Objection has no weight in it. The People more willingly
submit to a Tax once lawful, than to pay a new Duty against Law. The Tonnage
and Poundage illegally levied in the former part of King Charles I.'s Reign,
did not occasion half the Clamor as the new Imposition of Ship-Mony. In the
beginning of King James II. d's Reign, the Tonnage and Poundage, and Temporary
Excise, determined by King Charles his Death, was paid without opposition; but
if King James had attempted to raise a new Tax by the Regal Authority, his
Subjects without doubt would not have paid it. Besides, when a Tax is lawful in
its Original, it is to be feared that the People will not much concern
themselves who is to receive it, the Court, or such as have trusted the
Exchequer; but they would be alarmed to some purpose if they should be called
upon to make new Payments not warranted by Law. So that in all probability more
Danger may arise to our Liberties from breaking into old Fonds appropriated,
and stopping the Exchequer, than from making new and forcible Levies upon the
Subject.

And though there is no Cause in this Reign to fear such Attempts, yet it must
certainly be Wisdom to provide against future Evils, especially when it is
possible that one desperate and wicked Council may destroy that Constitution
for which we have been so long contending.

The true way to hinder such a Disease from ever coming upon the Body-Politick
will be to remove the Cause, by lessening as soon as possible these Payments to
the Public of three Millions and a half per Annum, besides Polls and
Land-Taxes; which large Issues may endanger Liberty, and without doubt hurt us
in the Balance of Trade.

The Debts for which these Fonds are a Security, by Negligence will every Year
increase, insomuch that in a very short time, and with a very little more
Carelessness, the Raising more and more will grow unavoidable for our common
Defense, till at last we shall come to pay constantly between five and six
Millions per Annum. And when this Kingdom shall be arrived at that Period of
ill Conduct, we may venture to Pronounce, That the Common People of England
will in all Circumstances be then as poor and miserable, as the Common People
of France were before the War. And we desire all good Patriots to carry this
Reflection in their minds.

On the contrary by good Management this Debt may be lessened, so that the
Fonds which are its Security (instead of of being continued) may be dropped every
Year, till at last we may come to pay to the Government for its Support and
Defense, such a Sum as will not be dangerous to our Freedoms, nor prejudicial
to our Foreign Traffic.

He who proposes Thrift may please the Common People, but he shall be sure to
disgust some others; However the Writer of these Papers thinks it his Duty to
Recommend Frugality in the State; and he believes it is the Wisest and Honestest
way of Enriching the Public, to make it Rich out of its own Revenues.

As to what Improvements may be made in the Revenues already granted, we refer
the Reader to what we have formerly said upon this Subject in our Discourses on
the Revenues and Trade of England; Part I. page 119.
We have laid down that several Branches there specified may, by good
Management, and without Oppression, be Annually Increased 736,075 l.

Nor upon Enquiry since, do we find any Reason to receed from this Opinion; on
the contrary we have good Cause to think, that they are rather Capable of
greater Improvements than we had then taken notice of.

The Malt is indeed an Article in that Account; but it is an expiring Duty which
the People of England hope never to see continued, therefore an Abatement is to
be made upon that Head: But the remaining Branches, if well looked after, would
ease us of very many Burdens.

In that Discourse, we have shown several Reasons not yet Answered, Why the
Excise on Beer and Ale single and double is Improvable in the whole 318,000 l.
per Annum, but instead of rising, the Excise is again fallen since the Account
was Stated.

l. Single and Double Excise Year Ending 24 June, 1697. Produced about 900,000.
The said Duties, Year Ending 24 June School. Produced about 860,000. The Duties
fallen, about 40,000.

So that the Excise now almost Doubled produces but about the same Sum which it
yielded formerly with the single Duty only upon it; for which we shall presume
to say, the Managers neither have given, nor can give, any well grounded and
solid Reason.

When we consider how much the Excise was Advanced in six Years by good
Management, we cannot but be of Opinion, that a very great Sum might be Raised
every Year toward Clearing the gross Debt, by Skill and careful Conduct, in
such as Govern the respective Branches.

But tho it imports the State to a high Degree to have the utmost of its Legal
Dues, and just Revenues, fairly brought in, yet a great deal more depends upon
having this Revenue Frugally and Wisely laid out; For, as in private Instances,
He who lives with Economy, shall be Richer, tho his Gains are but small, than
a Prodigal, let his Gettings be never so large; So Governments which manage
their Affairs thriftily, shall have more Wealth than States which have the way
to obtain never so large Contributions from their People.

What is to be got by good Management in bringing in the Revenues, is nothing
in comparison of what may be saved in laying out the Public Treasure, one way
the Proffit is limited and narrow, and the other boundless, one way we can
reckon but by Hundreds, the other way by Millions.

A Venetian Ambassador once told Cardinal Richlieu, Testament Politic Part 2.
C. 9. Sect. 7.
That there needed no more to make France happy, than wisely to lay out what
was vainly dissipated. Qu'elle Scut aussi bien despenser ce qu'elle dissipoit
sans Raison que la Republique scavoit bien n'employer pas un seul Quadrain sans
besoin, et sans beaucoup de Menage.

A State must be plunged into endless Debts and Difficulties, unless it has a
strict Eye over all its Expenses, especially such as relate to a War, which is
always a greedy Monster, but Devours much more when it is left to feed at random.

To come at such a future Thrift as may bring us out of that Debt which lies so
heavy in the other Scale when we consider of the Balance of Trade; One way
perhaps will be severely to Enquire how the Forty eight Millions already given
have been Expended: Besides it will not peradventure be difficult to show that
of the many Millions still owing, a large Sum might be saved, if the Public
Accounts from their very beginning were overhaled.

A Government that will get out of Debt, must look nicely into every
particular; It ought in Prudence to examine into all Grants made by the Crown,
when the People lay under the Burden of Heavy Taxes.

It Is said that the Forfeitures in Ireland, and the Lands possessed by the
Crown in 1688, would satisfy a large part of what the Public is now Indebted.

It Is alleged that Gains unwarrantable in Law, and not to be justified by any
Necessity whatsoever, have been made in several Contracts with the Crown, if
all this were looked into, very probably something might be saved toward
discharging the Nations Debts.

There is one piece of Management which the Writer of these Papers is very much
surprised at, and it relates to the Exchequer Bills.

l. l. The first Subscription at 10 per Cent, was for 400,000. Premium 40,000.
The second Subscription at 10 per Cent, was for 700,000. Premium 70,000. The
third Subscription at 10 per Cent, was for 500,000. Premium 50,000. The 4th.
Subscription at 8 per Cent, was for 400,000. Premium 32,000. The fifth
Subscription at 4 per Cent, was for 1,000,000. Premium 40,000. Total
Subscriptions 3,000,000. tot. Prems. 232,000.

Besides, these Premiums there is a Current Interest upon the Bills of above 7
per Cent, And it is likewise observable, that the whole struck into Exchequer
Bills is but 2,700,000 l. to circulate which there has been a Subscription of 3
Millions, so that the Engine which carries, is heavier than the weight it
bears, which seems but clumsy Workmanship; besides it is remarkable that there
is yet sunk of these Bills but 1,250,000 l. And of the Exchequer Bills a vast
Sum are become Specie Notes at the Current Interest, tho Money now lies, or
ought to lie, for their discharge.

There is likewise another piece of Economy after which, sometime or other, it
may be worth while to make Enquiry. The Old East India Company offered to raise
the two Millions then wanted, and to deposit 200,000 l. to make good their
Proposal, nor did they propose or expect any Premium or Deduction whatsoever;
Yet their Offer was discouraged and rejected by some of our Men of Business;
and the same Persons have thought it reasonable to allow to the New Company a
Premium of 62,500 l. which was defalk'd out of the first Payment of 200,000 l.
part of which Premium is contrary to the Express direction of the Act of
Parliament.

'Twill cost England a large Tax to raise the Sums lavished in these two
Instances, but we shall say no more upon these Particulars, leaving the Reader
to make his own Comment upon such unaccountable Proceedings.

When the Affairs of a Private Man are in disorder, he sinks faster toward the
later end than in the beginning; The same thing holds in a Government whose
Revenues are entangled, the further it goes the more the Debt swells, unless
such as are concerned in the Administration resolve before it be too late, to
enter upon Wise and Thrifty Measutes.

Where the King's Person is beloved, where his Virtues are revered, and where
the Government is of the Peoples own Forming, and Election, the Subjects will
seldom fail to exert themselves strongly, and are very willing to stretch their
Purses, in order to put the Public Revenues into such a posture that the
Administration may be easy, and that the Kingdom may be protected; but they
must be invited to this by seeing that what they give is Frugally managed, and
not Profusely wasted, and by observing that their Money goes to Support the
State, and not to Enrich Private Persons.

Men when they are worn out with Diseases, Aged, Crazy, and when besides they
have the Mala Stamina Vitae, may be patched up for a while, but they cannot
hold out long; for Life, though it is shortened by Irregularities, is not to be
extended by any Care beyond such a Period. But it is not so with the
Body-Politick, by Wisdom and Conduct that is to be made long-lived, if not
Immortal; Its Distempers are to be cured, nay its very Youth is to be renewed,
and a Mixed Government grows Young and Healthy again, whenever it returns to
the Principles upon which it was first founded.

The Disorders we labor under are capable of a Remedy, and our Difficulties
are not such but that they may be mastered: Those Payments to the Public, by
good Management may be lessened, which inevitably must set the Balance of
Trade against us.

While these Immense Debts remain, the Necessities of the Government will
continue, Interest must be high, and large Premiums will be given. And what
Encouragement is there for Men to think of Foreign Traffic (whose Returns for
those Commodities that enrich England must bring no great Profit to the private
Adventurers) when they can sit at home, and without any Care or Hazard get
from the State by dealing with the Exchequer, Fifteen and sometimes Twenty,
Thirty, Forty and Fifty per Cent.? Is there any Commerce abroad so constantly
advantageous? Will Men who can safely, and without Trouble, reap such Gains,
breed their Children to be Merchants? Will they venture great Stocks to make
Discoveries, and employ their Industry to enlarge and extend our Dealings in
distant Parts? Will they think of building that multitude of Trading Vessels
which alone can rear us up a sufficient Breed of able Seamen? And if that Tide
of Wealth which was wont to flow in Trade, be diverted to another Channel; and
if we mind no other Traffic but that which just supplies our Luxuries, must we
not in a few Years be Losers in the general Balance?

Where Interest is high, the Merchants care not to deal in any but rich
Commodities, whose Freight is easy, and whose Vent is certain in corrupted
Countries; And of these Costly Wares very many carry out Money, and but few
bring any back to the Kingdom. It Is the Bulky Goods, whose Returns are not of
so great Profit, that breed most Seamen, and that are most Nationally gainful;
but such Goods cannot be very much dealt in where Interest is high, nor can any
Laws in the World lower it where great Sums are continually borrowed by the
Government. And by these Instances it must sufficiently appear, how much our
Payments to the Public may affect the Balance of Trade.

And, treating upon this Subject, we cannot but take Notice, where the Prince
is frequently absent from his own Dominions, sojourning for a long space of
time in a Foreign Country, in which He, His Court, and His whole Retinue are
obliged to make great Expenses, That this is highly prejudicial to the Balance
of Trade, and, without doubt, must incline the Scale to that Nation's Side
where the Money is spent.

Upon the whole Matter, If the Revenues already granted are well looked after,
and improved; if the Accounts of the Fleet and Army are carefully inspected; if
the Grants are strictly examined; if the State enters entirely upon Frugal
Measures; and if we resolve to exert our Selves, so as not to let this
dangerous Burden lie long upon us, this Great Debt may be cleared in some
moderate time, and those large Payments to the Public will cease, which are
like so many bloody Issues that emaciate the Body-Politick, and render it
Hectical and Consumptive; and, if this Debt were paid, we should get rid of
that variety of new Excises, and high Customs, which hurt Foreign Traffic, and
interrupt us in our Domestic Business, and which are more especially a heavy
Weight upon the Woollen Manufacture.

Even in a Commonwealth it is dangerous for one part of the People to be very
much indebted to the other; and in Rome it was the occasion of great Seditions.
When the State has borrowed large Sums, and issued out Securities by Tallies
upon different Fonds, it is commonly said the Public is so and so indebted; but
in truth the Case is otherwise, and more properly speaking, these sort of Fonds
divide a Country into two Ranks of Men, of which one are Creditors and the
other Debtors; and this Distinction does without doubt belong to all Nations
where the People pay Taxes to one another, as it now happens to be our Case in
England. The Creditors are the Bank, such as deal with the Public for Stores,
Lenders of all kinds, besides a great many Foreigners, whose Money is lent to
the State in English Names. The Debtors are the Landed Men, the 5th or 6th part
of whose Rents are pawned for the Public Service from Year to Year, by Aids
and Land-Fonds. All Merchants likewise who pay Customs, and all Shopkeepers and
Retailers are, according to our Distinction, to be accounted Debtors. Thus
almost all England may not be improperly divided into Debtors and Creditors,
nor in a long and expensive War was this wholly to be avoided, but without
doubt it cannot be wise nor safe to let this Distinction long continue; for
though such as Receive may like their Condition and think themselves at Ease, yet
such as are to Pay cannot be so well contented. It Is true, some modern
Politicians have run upon another Notion; and several Persons have thought that
the more Fonds are erected, the more People are engaged to preserve the present
Government. This Policy indeed of theirs would hold good if they could make
out, That the Lenders are stronger; and more in number than such as are
concerned in Payments to the Public: But it rather seems to hold in Sense and
Reason, That the Throne of that Prince, in a Free Nation, must be the most
firmly established, whose Affairs permit him to ask the fewest Taxes from his
People.

France was once upon a right foot in relation to its Liberties; and they who
peruse their History with Care will find, That Arbitrary Power did not so much
bring in high Taxes, as high Taxes introduced Arbitrary Power; for when that
Golden Idol of an Immense Revenue was once set up, all the Nation bowed to it.

In the Second and Third Sections we have shown, That the probable Methods to
make a Country Gainers in the Balance of Trade, are to take Care of Increasing
and Employing the People, and to Improve Land and its Product. In this Fourth
Section we have set forth how this Balance may be affected by our Payments to
the Public. And in the last Discourse we shall endeavor to show, That the
Wealth and Prosperity of a State depend chiefly upon a wise, steady and honest
Administration.

SECT. V.
That a Country cannot Increase in Wealth and Power but by Private Men doing
their Duty to the Public, and but by a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in
such as are trusted with the Administration of Affairs.
AT Romae ruere in Servitium Consules, Patres, Eques, quanto quis illustrior,
tanto magis falsi ac festinantes. But at Rome they all ran headlong into
Slavery, the Consuls, the Senate, the Gentry and the nobler the person was, tho
more false, and the greater haste he made. This was the Condition of Rome when
Tiberius assumed the Empire, but God forbid it should be ever the Case of
England, for our Constitution will be entirely lost when such a Corruption
happens; we may indeed preserve the Name of Liberty, and some of its outward
Forms, but no more than what will help to keep our Chains the faster on:
Tyrannies have been often subverted, where the Princes govern merely by their
own Will, without giving to their Subjects the least appearance of being free;
but those absolute Monarchies are hardly to be shaken, and that Servitude is
lasting, where the People are left to make their own Fetters.

It is a matter of great wonder, that from the Time of Augustus downwards, the
Romans, who were seldom without Brave and Virtuous Men, should never make One
Attempt to restore the Commonwealth, and to shake off that Power which some of
the Emperors exercised with such exorbitance; but in all likelihood it
proceeded from this, that the Soldiers and Common People, without whom no
great Revolution can be made, believed themselves still free, because, in show,
the Commonwealth had the same Form as in elder times: there was a Senate,
Consuls, Tribunes, and an appearance of all the Ancient Magistracies, tho
nothing remained of the ancient Liberty: But this the Common People did not
feel, for the Cruelty and Fraud of Tiberius, the Madness of Caligula, the
Stupidity of Claudius, the Riots and Lust of Nero, the Gluttony and Sordid Mind
of Vitellius, the Vanities of Otho, and the Enormous Vices of Domitian did
little hurt to the Inferior Rank of Men, who all the while had Panem and
Circences, which was all they desired; but the Mischiefs these Monstrous
Princes brought upon the World, fell chiefly upon Nobler Heads; who yet could
not rescue their Country, so much were the Common People lulled asleep, with
the Opinion they entertained, that the Laws still governed, because they saw
every year Consuls and a Senate; but this Senate being corrupted, made the
Tyranny boundless and safe: For the People could never be induced to oppose
that Power which still bore some Resemblance to their Ancient Form of
Government.

In the same manner, if in future Ages our Parliaments should be debauched in
Principles, and become willing to be the Instruments of a Prince's Will, and to
act as he directs them, Arbitrary Power would be here settled upon a lasting
Foot; for the Common People would never join with any who would attempt to
redeem their Country, because they will be deceived by Names and Forms, and
think the Laws governed, and that they are free, if the outward show of the
Constitution is still preserved.

When Cotruption has seized upon the Representatives of a People, it is like a
Cronical Disease hardly to be rooted out. When Servile Compliance and Flattery
come to predominate, things proceed from bad to worse, till at last the
Government is quite dissolved. Absolute Monarchies are in danger of great
Convulsions, when one Man, their Prince, happens to be weak, or wicked; but
Commonwealths, or mixed Constitutions are safe till the Chief Part of the
Leading Men are debauched in Principles. However, Monarchy has this Advantage,
that the one Man, their Prince, is mortal, and if bad, he may be succeeded by a
better; but a people thoroughly corrupted never returns to right Reason; And we
see that the depravity of Manners, which began in Rome presently after the
second Punic War, among the Nobility and Gentry, became every year worse and
worse, till at last Caesar destroyed the Commonwealth. And after his time,
under the succeeding Emperors, every Senate grew more abject and complying than
the other, till in Process of Time the old Roman Spirit was utterly
extinguished, and then that Empire by degrees became a Prey to Barbarous
Nations.

If all parts of the State do not with their utmost power promote the Public
Good, if the Prince has other Aims than the safety and welfare of his Country,
if such as represent the People do not preserve their Courage and Integrity, If
the Nations Treasure is wasted, If Ministers are allowed to undermine the
Constitution with Impunity, If Judges are suffered to pervert Justice and wrest
the Law, then is a mixed Government the greatest Tyranny in the world; it is
Tyranny established by a Law, it is authorized by Consent, and such a People are
bound with Fetters of their own making. A Tyranny that governs by the Sword,
has few Friends but Men of the Sword, But a Legal Tyranny (where the People are
only called to confirm Iniquity with their own Voices) has of its Side the
Rich, the Fearful, the Lazy, those that know the Law, and get by it, Ambitious
Churchmen, and all those whose Livelihood depends upon the quiet Posture of
Affairs; And the Persons here discrib'd compose the Influencing Part of most
Nations; So that such a Tyranny is hardly to be shaken off. Men may be said to
be enslaved by Law, or their own Consent, under Corrupt or degenerate
Republics, such as was the Roman Commonwealth from the time of Cinna, till the
Attempts of Caesar, and under degenerate mixed Governments, such as Rome was
while the Emperors made a show of Ruling by Law, but with an awed and corrupted
Senate: To which Form of Government, England was almost reduced, till the King
came over to put our Liberties upon a better Foot.

But what has been, may be, and tho we are safe during his Reign, yet in after
Ages, bad and designing Ministers may think their Conduct is no way to be
maintained but by the Sword, and that they cannot securely prey upon the
Commonwealth, till they have made their Master absolute, upon which Score, in
these Inquiries concerning the Methods whereby England may be a Gainer in the
General Balance of Trade, we think it needful to lay down, That all that
Wealth and Power which must defend this State upon any Emergencies or Invasions
from abroad, depends upon our preserving inviolate the ancient Constitution of
this Kingdom.

Men do as industriously contrive Fallacies to deceive themselves (when they
have a Mind to be deceived) as they study Frauds whereby to deceive Others; And
if it leads to their Ends, and gratifies their present Ambition, they care not
what they do, thinking it time enough to serve the Public, when they have
served themselves; and in this view very many betray their Trusts, Comply, Give
up the Peoples Rights, and let Fundamentals be invaded, flattering themselves,
that when they are grown as great as they desire to be, 'twill be then time
enough to make a stand, and redeem the Commonweulth. The same Notion led Pompey
to join with those who intended to Subvert the Roman Liberties; But he found
them too strong, and himself too weak, when he desired to save his Country.

In the same manner, if there be any in this Nation who desire to build their
Fortunes upon the Public Ruin, they ought to consider that their great
Estates, high Honors and Preferments, will avail 'em little when the
Subversion of Liberty has weakened and impoverished us so, as to make way for
the bringing in of Foreign Power.

It imports all Degrees of Men in their several Posts, to endeavor at the
Preserving that Form of Government, under which we have prosper'd for near
seven hundred Years. It happens seldom that any Country is totally subdued by
Foreign Force, and Civil War is indeed a raging Fever; but it goes away of
itself, when the Humors that fed it are spent, and is often no more than the
Sign of a Health too florid, and the Effects only of too much Blood in the Body
Politic: But ill Conduct in a State long continued, wastes it by slow and
certain degrees, and at last brings an incurable Consumption upon all its Parts
and Members.

If the Affairs of this Kingdom should ever happen to be ill conducted, which
we hope is a Remote Fear, the Legislative Power must then interpose with its
Authority, and the united Wisdom of the Nation must rescue Us out of weak and
polluted hands, for such a Ministry is a surer Engine to destroy a State, than
any its Enemies can bring against it.

It Is true, such as would correct Errors, and watch that no Invasion may be
made on Liberty, have been heretofore called a Faction by the Persons in Power;
but it is not properly their Name, and ought to be given to another sort of Men.

It Is wrong to call them the Faction, who by all dutiful and modest Ways
promote the Cause of Liberty, as the true means to endear a Prince to his
Subjects, and to lay upon them a stronger tie and obligation to preserve his
Government. For a People will certainly best love and defend that Prince, by
whom the greatest Immunities and most good Laws have been granted.

They cannot properly be termed the Faction, who desire a War should be managed
upon such a Foot of Expense as the Nation is able to bear; Who would have the
Public Treasure not wasted, the Prince not deceived in his Grants and
Bargains, who would have the Ministry watchful and Industrious, and who, when
they complain, are angry with Things and not with Persons.

The Name of Faction does more truly belong to them, who, tho the Body Politic
has all the Signs of Death upon it, yet say all is well, that the Riches of the
Nation are not to be exhausted, that there is no misgovernment in all its
Business, that it feels no decay, and that its Economy is perfect, and who,
all the while, are as arrogant and assuming as if they had saved that very
People, whom their Folly and mad Conduct has in a manner ruined.

They may be rather termed the Faction, who were good Patriots out of the
Court, but are better Courtiers in it, and who pretended to fear excess of
Power while it was not communicated to them, but never think the Monarchy can
be high enough advanced, when they are in the Administration.

In Nations (where for a long time Matters have not been placed upon a Foot of
Honesty) their great Assemblies consist commonly of two Parties, in both of
which Sides there are many who have the same right Intentions to the Public,
and many, who in all their Councils consult only their private Interest.

Of one side, some out of Principle love their Country, and are jealous of its
Liberties; and yet at the same time are careful of their Princes Honor and
Interest. In all their Proceeding they have nothing in view but the Public
Good, They study not so much how to blame the Past, as which way the Future is
to be mended; They do not accuse the Statesman, and yet let the Fault continue,
as well knowing, that Impeachments of Men, and not of Crimes produce new, but
seldom better Ministers.

They desire the Necessities of the State should be well supplied, the Person
of the Prince reverenced, and his Government maintained. When his Ministers
have made false steps, or when their Councils have had unsuccessful Events,
they desire not to inflame the Assembly where they sit, but are willing rather
to assist with their superior knowledge, and to bring the minds of Men to the
Temper and Calmness that is proper in weighty Deliberations.

Persons of this Character are in most Assemblies of a People, but they are
often joind and followed by such as have quite another View and Aim, and who in
all their Actings, consult not the Common Welfare, but either wreak their own
Discontents, or pursue some Ambitious Hope, and upon such, or the like
Accounts, mix themselves with the wiser and better sort; However the Good and
the Bad, being thus mingled and blended, compose altogether what in vicious
times is called the Country Party.

On the other side, there are some very nice in what may entrench upon the
Regal Authority, yet never forgetful of the Peoples Rights; It Is true, their
Post often compells them to excuse all Faults, tho guilty of none themselves,
They are forced too frequently to move for Money, but wish there was less
occasion for it: They hate not such as differ from 'em in Opinion, and secretly
approve of the Right Course, which sometimes they must not follow; but with
such as have been here described, there will too often join an Ignorant,
Mercenary, and Servile Crew, who like all things, and examine nothing, Unanimous
in Evil, Diligent in Mischief, Variable in Principles; Constant to Flattery,
Talkers for Liberty, but Slaves to Power. Such as these will too frequently in
vicious times mingle with the sound Part of a Court, stiling themselves the
Court Party, and the Princes only Friends.

In former Reigns, by the Artifice of designing Statesmen, the Representatives
of the People were divided into those two Parties; Besides, in most Assemblies
which meet by the Authority of a single Person, there are still some who are
thought to have the Secret, and they style themselves the Managers: The Eyes of
every one are bent upon them, their words are observed, and in most things they
give the first Turn; At Court indeed they pretend to sway and and govern every
Motion: but in Matters esteemed indifferent, they carry with 'em many of the
best sort, and are certainly followed by all such as are willing to be guided.
These are believed to have weighed before hand, and to know what is wisest,
most safe, most expedient, or at least most grateful; And when they appear, it
is imagined there has been put into their Heads the whole extracted
Quintescence of all the Ministerial Wisdom. In the House they undertake for the
Court, and at Court for the House, receiving singly, the Thanks of what
proceeds from the joint Affection of all the rest, and are thought alone to
give what the whole Nation pays.

To tell what time designing Men began to erect for themselves this new Office,
and when and how this Imposition took its Rise, would be too long a Digression
from the present Matter; but we may truly affirm, Things have never gone well
with our Princes, nor their People, since it was first invented.

Good Kings at all times, without any Danger, may repose their entire concerns
upon a House of Commons, the National Interest will go on there without
driving, and when Difficulties arise, the Ministers only make them; For when
the King and People have but one Interest, it goes on of its own Accord, and
such as ptetend to be busy for the Prince in that Place, are working for
themselves, and not for him.

But if in after Ages our Disorders and Corruptions should make this Office
Necessary; If there must be Managers, If some must lead and others follow, it is
reasonable the Guides should be well instructed.

Nothing therefore can more import the Prince, than that they who will assume
such a Province, should be Men of Grave Discretion, and solid Judgment, Wise,
and not Subtle, Cool, Temperate, Steady, Discerning, and Patient of
Contradiction: and indeed they cannot be proper for that Post, unless they have
in their Heads an Universal Scheme of their own and the Business of other
Countries.

When Giddy Young Men without Experience are relied upon and trusted in this
Station, they embroyl the Princes Affairs; By their Ignorance they give his
Enemies advantage, and by their Insolence disoblige his Friends.

A Man can be no more born a Statesman than a Physician, or a Lawyer; and let
the Mind be never so happily disposed, time must ripen what is begot by Nature.

Mr Hobbes says, Hobbb's Leviath^n p. 10.
He that has most Experience in any kind of Business, has most signs to guess
at the future time; and consequently is the most Prudent: And so much more
Prudent than he that is new in that kind of Business, as not to be equaled by
any Advantage of Natural or Extemporary Wit.

The Sanguine Hopes conceived by Young Men are by no means proper in Weighty
and great Deliberations, and they seldom make good Statesmen: Elder Years,
where they produce not Wisdom, bring at least Caution, which is something like
it.

They who have seen much are used to frequent Disappointments, and therefore
not inclined to venture; especially they rarely hazard the sum of affairs
upon any single Council.

Young Men are good to execute the Results of elder Wisdom, but the same Fire
which makes them best for Action, renders them unfit for Council: Yet there is
now and then a fortunate Genius, in whom the Prudence of Age, and the Warmth of
Youth meet together, but of such the Examples are not common.

Pierce Gaveston, Hugh Spencer, and the Duke of Buckingham, are sufficient
Instances that the Conduct of Young Ministers is seldom Successful to
themselves, nor to their Masters: They do the less Mischief if they meddle only
in the Pleasures of their Prince; but when warm Heads, full of Conceit, with
slight Wit, and no true Wisdom, pretend to guide a whole State, and to have
Majority at their Beck and Rule, in a short time they occasion more Disorders
than can be remedied in many Years.

When Persons so described come to have a Corrupt Majority of their side, They
diminish the Nations Stock and its Coin, They lose its Trade, They Anticipate
all the Princes Revenues, They charge the Subject for many Years to come with a
great Number of New Duties and Impositions, They bring the State into an
Immense Debt, and plunge it into such Difficulties, that hardly any new
Revenues can be well erected: But it is hoped England will never fall into such
destructive Hands.

Our Wealth and Greatness depend absolutely upon keeping the Legislative Power
to future Ages untainted, Vigilant for the Public Safety, Jealous of the
Peoples Rights, Watchful over the Ministers, and to have the Members not awed
by Armies, nor to be seduced by Preferments, Bribes or Pensions; That we are
safe at present is granted, and that we are not now under any Dangers of the
like kind, and that this important Post is well secured, is allowed: But
writing for Posterity, to which these Papers may peradventure be transmitted,
we think it needful to give these Cautions.

While we preserve our Constitution as we received it from our Ancestors, Bad
Men may have a short Power to do Mischief; however their Rage and Folly will be
at last corrected; but if we suffer our Civil Rights to be invaded, and if our
ancient Form of Government should be lost, then ill Ministers will proceed
without Comptrol, they will in a short time dissipate the Nations Treasure, the
People will have no Stock for Trade, they will lose their Industry, they will
grow inclinable to change, Resty and Indifferent in the cause of Liberty, and
perhaps willing to submit to any foreign Force, like Spain which has been both
despotically and weakly governed.

Freedom and Wealth proceed hand in hand together, and if one is lost the other
will not long continue: but this Notion is not much regarded by those who can
only be great, and have no ways of making their own Fortunes, but by the
destruction of their Country.

For such as propose to thrive by Disorder and Misgovernment, have a strong
Interest to beggar the People, The Confusion which Public wants and Private
Necessities introduce, suits best with their Designs: A wealthy Nation may be
jealous of its Rights, and watch any Invasions upon its Freedom, and a Rich
Gentry may be unmanageable; And such bad Men may think, that the best Course to
keep us humble is to make us poor.

If any should be so wicked to have Thoughts of enslaving England, they will
endeavor to Mate and Quell the Stomachs of the Common People, by reducing them
to the Misery and want which decay of Trade, if it ever happens, must bring
upon this Nation; And they will try to distress the Gentry in their Estates to
that Degree, as to make 'em rely upon the Court for a Livelihood and
Subsistence: for which Reasons they will wink at the loss of our Foreign
Traffic, and perhaps contrive its Destruction, knowing that upon the
Prosperity of Trade, Rents and Land have for many years depended. Nor can ill
Ministers desire a better Circumstance, than to have Men of the best Fortunes
reduced by their Necessities to come and Cringe and Sue to them for a small
Employment. Does not this bring all into their Power? Must not such as shall
have the Destribution of of these Favors be courted and followed by the major
Part of the Gentry? Would not so great a Capacity of helping others add to
their strength, make 'em rich and safe, and indeed set them in a manner above
Impeachments?

If bad Men should ever get into Power they will not only contribute to ruin
our Foreign Trade, but they will try to impoverish the Kingdom by exorbitant
Taxes, thereby to bring the Gentry and People yet more under their Subjection;
They will likewise plunge their Master into Debts and Necessities, to render
their Tricks and Arts of more use, and to put a higher value upon the Band they
shall have in pay; for in former times we have seen that when a Court wanted,
they who procured Money to be given, were thought to give it; by which means
they obtained Favor cheaply at the Expense of Others: And this single Merit
atton'd for all their Faults, It excused false Steps and Negligence, It
sheltered their Bribery, and covered their Disability for the Public Service.

Besides, they will entangle their Masters Affairs, because a Prince that does
not need Money, may come not to need them, whose Talents, in all likelihood,
will consist in procuring Taxes, not in well laying out the Sums granted;
Therefore a wanting State, a troubled Government, and an indebted Exchequer
will be their Region; Large Premiums, Exorbitant Interest, Diverting
Appropriated Fonds, Choice of Fonds on which to place their own Money,
Preferring one Debt and Postponing another, will be always good Matter for ill
Statesmen to work upon, but afford much a better Harvest when the Government
stands in want of Money; Immense Sums given every Year will be a brave and
ample Field for their Avarice to range in, which would be cramped and confined,
if bound within the narrow Limits of what a Nation may be able to pay.

Of all things, they love a long and an expensive War, and fear Peace; for
Peace produces Order, and gives the Prince leisure to enquire into the Abuses
of the State; It lets him into a right knowledge of Persons in the Kingdom, and
the Dregs which float upwards when the Liquor is stirred, must sink to the
bottom in quiet times; Peace restores Liberty of Speech, whereas in War all is
silenced with the single word Necessity; In Peace there is no need to court
Factions, Turbulent Spirits are not so useful, Thrift may be introduced, and
such sudden Fortunes cannot be raised out of the Public. Grievances may be
calmly debated, The Management of the Revenues inspected, The Conduct of the
Ministers may be examined; And good Laws may be proposed without the Perpetual
Objection of, Are ye for bringing in the French and Popery? But War will better
answer their Designs, who mean to thrive by the loose Admistration with which
War is generally accompanied, and who propose to prosper by the Calamities and
Misery of their Country.

The Business of Ireland at the beginning of the Revolution, is a pregnant
Instance how much designing Men love a long War. That Kingdom might have been
presently reduced, the Nation was dispirited, He who held the Government was
ready to give up the Marks and Ensigns of his Authority, with the Strengths
depending on it; They were struck with a Panic Fear, and had readily submitted
if in any reasonable time a small Force had been sent thither; But one People
does rarely yield so much to the Fame of another, as to surrender without being
asked or summoned. It was desired that a few Tropps might be carried over to
confirm and countenance our Friends, and to give our Enemies a fair Color for
pursuing that Course to which they were enough persuaded by their true
Interest, tho they could not modestly acquiesce, unless something had been done
that might save Appearances; for a great Army could not with any Decency
disband, without so much as hearing of an opposite Strength, to which (in the
general Fright that possessed their Party) they might have yielded with some
Saving to their Honor. But Ireland was for a long time slighted, and the
Natives were suffered to gather into a formidable Power. That Diversion gave
our Neighbor Kingdom opportunity to take Breath, and time to recover from the
Fright and Amazement which so potent a League had brought upon them. The Troops
who perished so miserably at Dundalk and elsewhere, would have been a great
Addition to the Confederate Force. The Vigor that actuates the Minds of men in
their first Proceedings should have been carried against France, and not have
been let to consume itself, and slacken within our own Dominions. If by good
Conduct the Affairs of Ireland had been betimes appeased, the Power of these
three Nations had been united, and we might have entered the Lists with our
Strength entire, and a Treasure unwasted, which probably would have wrought
such Effects, and begot such a Terror as might have produced long ago as sound
and honorable a Peace as we enjoy at present, after the Expense of so much
Blood and Money.

This War stood England in 4,128,672 l. 5 s. 3 d., and both Nations in
4,515,693 l. 0 s. 8 d., but if we come to reckon the Burnings, Waste and
Depredation, and the irreparable Loss of Men, English and Irish, by Sickness
and in Battle, and the Irish damage redounding to us at last, it may be safely
affirmed that we are the worse for that War by at least 7 Millions.

However that fatal Neglect did divert from the War against France above four
Millions, and did engage in Civil Broils those Arms which were so needful in
the beginning to make a strong Impression upon our Enemies abroad.

But a certain Party of Men were too busy themselves at home for to mind the
Nations Foreign Concerns. They were dividing the spoil here, They were hunting
after Places, and sharing among one another the Dignities and Offices of the
State, which took up all their time, and employed all their Care. Besides, such
an early Coalition and Union of the whole strength of the three Kingdoms, might
have terrified France too soon, and taken away their Hopes of a succeeding War,
which is the Crop and Harvest of designing Ministers, the Field in which they
fatten, and a Spend-thrift, to whom they are Stewards without Account.

If not minding the Affairs of Ireland did hinder the Peace so long, then we
owe to that fatal Council the Beginning of the Debt, which now presses so hard
upon us; for without the Color of such a War, those immense Sums could not
have been consumed, which for these last five Years have been levied in this
Kingdom

When King James went away, we were reduced to what Mr Hobbes calls the State
of Nature, the Original Contract being dissolved, and the Ligaments broken,
which held us before together: The Nation was then a Blank, apt to receive any
Impression; The old Building was pulled down, and the Faults in it before might
have been corrected, if the Architects had been skilful, and such Lovers of
their Country as they pretended to be. Never men had such an Opportunity of
doing Good, as they who had the chiefest hand in making the Revolution. They
had a Prince willing to consent to whatever might set us upon a right Foot, if
they had met his design of Landing here with equal Virtues. The Gentry and
People were at that time newly awakened from the Lethargy in which they had
been for many Years; They saw how narrowly Religion and their Liberties had
escaped; Their Fears had made 'em Wise and Sober; Their Eyes were universally
opened; And they were wrought up to a Temper (which seldom happens in a whole
Nation) of being capable to receive good and honest Councils. It was in their
Power for ever to have banished Flattery and Corruption from the Court, and
from another Place where those Vices are yet more hurtful; and when they had
changed Persons, if they had taken Care at the same Instant to mend Things,
they had wrought a general Reformation in our Manners. It was in their Hands to
have given us a Sound Constitution, They had before 'em the Errors of
preceding Reigns, by which they might have corrected their Model, They should
have entered upon a strict Economy, neither plundering for themselves, nor
suffering Others to grow Rich at the Public Cost. They should have been as
careful in the State, as their Master was active in the Field, they should have
begged less, and done more. They should have avoided Bribery, than which
nothing could be more unseemly in Reformers of a State; and which was certain
to keep out the best, and let the worst Men into all their Business. They ought
to have known that a new Settlement was to be maintained by severer Rules and
Methods than perhaps are necessary in a Court where the Prince is born in
Purple. And lastly, They should have made this Reflection, That more than
ordinary Virtue of all kinds was needful to answer the Peoples Expectations,
and that more than common Wisdom was requisite to maintain and justify so
great a Change.

The worst and most unhappy Kings that ever were would have ruled better, had
it not been for the wrong Suggestion and wicked Incitements of the Flatterers
about 'em; But those Pests and Poisons of a Court are yet more to blame, when
things suceeed not well with Wise and Virtuous Princes.

That Declaration which the King sent to England before he came over, was the
Pole Star by which our State Pilots were to steer their Course. 'Twas well
known that to keep the same Parliament sitting so many Years was what had
chiefly debauched the Gentry of this Kingdom, it was therefore expected that in
the Act for declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, some Provision
should have been made against thta Evil for the future. Several Ministers, who
betrayed their King and Country, have gone on to the last with Impunity, by
keeping Parliaments quite off; but more have found a Shelter for their Crimes
in Houses, which they have long held together, and of which they have had the
handling for many a Sessions; Could Men pretend to be Patriots, and not take
Care of securing that Post? Could our Freedoms be any way certainly lost, but
by laying aside the use of Parliaments, as was designed in the Reign of King
Charles the First, or by keeping them so long sitting, till a Majority of
Members should be under Engagements with the Court, as had almost happened in
the Reign of King Charles the Second? Were we not both times upon the very
brink of ruin, and in hazard of being no more a free People? Did it not
therefore import that Party which had heretofore made such high Professions for
Liberty, to provide that England might be no more threatened with the same
danger? Should not this have been a main Article in our Contract with their
Majesty's upon their Accession to the Throne, who readily consented to all
things that might make us safe and happy, The King having promised in his
Declaration, To do all things which the two Houses of Parliament should find
necessary for the Peace, Honor and Safety of the Nation, so that there may be
no more danger of the Nations falling at any time hereafter under Arbitrary
Government.

'Twas certainly a great Omission not to bring on in the very beginning of the
Revolution, the Act for Triennial Parliaments, which our own Corruptions
produced at last; If the State had entered early into that wholesome Council, it
had made the Kings entire Reign more easy to himself, and less costly to his
People. It had given a Rise to that Virtue and Public Honesty he came over to
plant, and had answered all the ends of his Declaration. They who were not well
principled, must have pretended so to be, for the Paths and Road to Preferment
had been thereby quite altered: The Ingredients which before composed a
Statesman, were Skill to govern the House, Ability now and then to make an
Important Turn, knowledge of the Members, that is, who were to be taken off,
and what was their Price, Diligence in keeping that Band together who were
right or wrong to be unanimous. They who were thus qualified themselves, or who
would blindly follow the Professors of these pernicious Arts, engrossed the
whole Business and Employments of the Nation; But by neglecting to put Matters
under a good Settlement in the beginning, one and the same House of Commons
came to continue sitting with short Intervals for Six Years, and this wrong
measure being taken, renewed all the former Errors of our Constitution, and for
a time restored to Men the same dishonest Interest they had before, and, if any
were so wicked, gave them fresh opportunity and room to endeavor once more the
Subversion and Ruin of this Kingdom, not by the very ways practiced in former
times, but by the same corrupt Inclinations and Councils dressed in other
Shapes; And tho, without doubt, none of 'em are chosen into this Parliament,
yet it is to be feared, that in those Sessions of Six Years continuance, there
was reared up a new brood of Men of Business, as high Flatterers, more false,
designing, and rapacious than their Predecessors, but without the same Skill
and Dexterity to support their Malice.

However, it is hoped the Act for Triennial Parliaments may have given a Check
to this Ulcer, which was growing in the Body Politic, and that it may hinder
the Gangreen from proceeding further; yet tho the old Venom may be restrained
a while by Remedies, it is to be feared it lurks still within us, ready to break
out upon the first Occasion.

If that Party which once seemed so Jealous of our Rights had not abandoned all
their old Principles, they might have formed us a lasting Establishment, such
as could not have been shaken by Domestic Rage or Foreign Power: whereas now
we depend alone upon the Reputation, Merit and Virtues of the King, that bind
and hold us together; But when he must yield to Nature (which Misfortune we
hope is very distant from us) in all Humane Probability, nothing can be
expected but Confusion and Civil War.

When the Breaches made upon our Constitution in the late Reigns, had induced
many of the best Sort to judge a Revolution needful, the People had reason to
expect that in a new Modeled Government, all things should have been set upon
the Foot of Honesty and Virtue, and to see all that Maladministration
reformed, which some persons had been reasonably complaining of for 30 Years.
We thought to see a virtuous Court, a watchful State, an Industrious and frugal
Ministry. If all these our Expectations had been answered, what Disasters from
without or within could have hurt England? Must not the Change have been
tacitly consented to, (if not applauded) even by those that suffered in it? Had
we not at home a discontented Party, which was to be silenced by showing 'em an
honester, more steady, more difinterested, and a wiser Conduct than what they
had known before, and still lingered after? Had we not abroad a Potent Enemy
against whom our Strength was to be husbanded discreetly, that it might last
the longer? And lastly, was not the best and most irreproachable Management in
the world necessary and hardly sufficient, to enable us to carry on that War,
with which so great an Alteration was certain to be followed?

But instead of building upon these Foundations, and taking such measures as
had rendered our Proceedings safe in their Consequences, and not obnoxious to
any Censure, some Persons have given manifest Proof that they were acted by no
sort of Principle, and that in their Doings they were rather swayed by Private
Interest, Revenge, Ambition, and their other Appetites; than guided by any
sense of the Publiick Good; for we no sooner had upon the Throne a Prince
feared and reverenced broad, and Idolized here, but some persons immediately
forgot the Cause for which they called him over.

If we had shown any Desire to assist and imitate his Perfections, what a fair
Fame of our selves had we transmitted to After Ages.

If some Men had considered wisely they would have found, that all things were
not secure, because Religion was out of danger, whose Concerns are soon
forgotten when we begin to be pressed with other Fears; Besides, if Matters are
not so ordered, that Spain may not fall under the Power of France, Popery, and
universal Monarchy are still to be apprehended.

Prosperity, a flowing Trade, and great Riches, may admit of Prodigality,
Negligence in the State, and false steps in the Ministry, but a People
exhausted by long Taxes desire to see in those above 'em Thrift for the Public,
Vigilance, and as much good Conduct as can be expected in humane Business.
Power is seldom Invidious to the Common People when placed in virtuous Hands,
nor are Calamities intolerable, which could not have been avoided by any Care
or Caution. When the Ministers do well, those under 'em suffer quietly; but on
the Contrary, If they observe themselves ruled in the Subordinate parts of
Government, by such as make a prey of the Commonwealth, and to that end only
take upon 'em its Administration, if they plainly perceive their miseries and
Misfortunes to proceed chiefly from the Corrupt or weak Councils of such
Statesmen, they become disheartened and lose that Mettle and Spirit, without
which the high designs of their powerful Neighbors are not to be resisted.

But tho some Errors might be committed in the beginning of the Revolution,
it is hoped all things are now well, that Peace has put an End to those
Disorders in Government which War does commonly beget, and that our present
Management is not liable to any Censure. And what is said here, and what may be
observed hereafter of the like kind in the Series of this Discourse, is not at
all the present case of England; it is hoped we are not a Corrupt People, but in
Process of time we may grow so, and lose that Virtue which is presumed to shine
in this Age. This Section is therefore directed to Posterity, which alone is
concerned in the Ethics here advanced.

In future Ages perhaps Ambitious and Designing Men may desire to embroyl their
Masters affairs only, to make him more Dependant upon their Arts; hereafter Men
of Arbitrary Principles may designedly neglect the Concerns and Care of Foreign
Traffic, with a Purpose to Impoverish, and so to enslave the People; In the
next Age likewise designing Ministers may take Advantage of the Martial Temper
of a Prince, and instead of reigning in his High Courage with grave Councils,
they may disguise from him the true State of his Affairs, and push him on to a
new War, without making right Provisions, or without such previous Leagues as
may make it tolerable in the Progress, or happy in the Conclusion; and perhaps
they may desire the Semblance of a War, only to have a Pretense for a Standing
Army.

For the Benefit therefore of future times, it may be proper to show by what
steps those Vices and Immoralities that affect the Public first creep into a
Country, and what Progress they come afterward to make, and to show what sort
of Men and what kind of Councils entangle a Princes Affairs.

But tho this Paper be directed to Posterity, and tho it is nothing but a
Caution to future times, yet probably it may offend some Persons who are tender
in these Matters.

However we shall venture to affirm that if this Nation should ever be under
any great Disorder, the truest Course to mend it, will be to plant in the Minds
of the better sort Morality, and the Shame of doing ill to their Country, And
we shall presume to assert that observing the Rules and Dictates of Virtue,
does not only lead to Heaven and a blessed State hereafter, but is the best way
of securing to a People in general, Prosperity, Peace, Safety, Power, and
Happiness in this present World.

To trace those Men who may design to change this Constitution in all their
dark and crooked Ways, and to follow 'em in all their Mazes will be difficult;
however we shall do our best to describe the Persons, and to show their
Councils, that they may be narrowly watched by all such as love their Country.

But to do this we must take a short view of things past, and a little consider
the Posture of Affairs at the Restoration of King Charles the 2d, and how they
stood during his Reign and the Reign of his Successor.

When that Prince was recalled from Exile, by the Voice of the whole People
(who had been tired with the many Changes in Government, that happened from
Cromwell's Death to the year 1660) 'twas almost impossible, but that we should
run from one to the other Extreme; And 'twas reasonable to fear that Men should
readily embrace Servitude, who knew not how to make a right use of Liberty.
Upon which Account many have wondered why our Ancient Form of Government was
not at that time altered, and how it came to pass we did not then embrace
Absolute Monarchy.

But we are to consider that King Charles was a young Prince, more inclined to
taste the Pleasures of Power, than willing to feel its Weight; He had undergone
many Troubles, which he intended to recompense with great Ease and Luxury; so
that the rugged work of Subverting the Laws suited neither with his Age nor
Temper. Had he lived longer, as Time and Opposition began to sour his Blood,
what he might have attempted is very doubtful.

Besides the unactive Genius of the King, there happened then another
Circumstance very fortunate for England, which was, that the Services and Merit
of the Chancellor Clarendon, and the Treasurer Southampton, did strongly induce
him to put the Administration of his Affairs into their Hands. They were both
Persons of Age and Experience, They had known the former Reign, They had seen
the Grounds and Rise of the Civil War, They understood the Nature of our
Constitution, They saw what had deposed one King, and found that unlimited
Power was hard to compass, and difficult to keep; And having their Masters Ear,
and at first a large share in his Affection, They kept Him within Bounds. The
Skill in the Laws of One, the Eloquence of the Other, the General Abilities of
both, made 'em esteemed by the People, and awful to their very Prince, and this
gave a weight to all their Councils. They had Authority enough in their Persons
to be listened to, when they spoke bold and necessary Truths: having Superior
Knowledge and Desert too, to be heard, they did not stand in need of saying
always what was pleasing, which is the miserable and servile Condition of
Upstart, Weak and Obscure Statesmen; But less were they obliged to Flatter
every Flatterer. Having a Foundation of Merit, they scorned the mean Aid of
Parties, or to be the wretched Journeymen of any dark Cabal: Knowing what was
their Masters and the Nations Interest, and intending to promote both; They
gave wholesome Advice, without Fear of offending either Prince or People. That
Kingly Government was then kept within the Limits of the Law, That our
Constitution was not given up between the Fears of One, and the Hopes of the
Other Party, and that our Civil Rights were still preserved, was chiefly owing
to the Wisdom, Courage, and Integrity of those two able Statesmen.

But even then, and all along afterward, there were still some among us
impatient to make their Master Absolute; They consisted principally of such as
had large Ambition, and Slender Merit, who are the best Instruments for any
Tyranny. These were ever embroiling the King with his Parliament, either to
protect them, or to justify some of their illegal Actions. Sometimes they got
him to appear a violent Churchman, and at other seasons to favor the
Dissenters, but at no time to take Care of Religion itself. They persuaded Him
to extend the Regal Power in every thing; They got him to seize all the
Charters, in order to influence Elections. By their Councils He raised an Army,
under Color of declaring War with France; By their Instruments They made him
absolute in Scotland, at the same time doing what they could to weaken the
Protestant Interest in Ireland. But their chief Aim was to procure Him so large
a standing Revenue, as might make Parliaments useless for the future. It Is
true, they proposed this Revenue for his Life only; but if that first step had
been made, it had not been difficult afterward to entail it on the Crown:
Besides, what has been granted to one Prince, has been always continued to his
Successor without any Struggle.

That these Things were done with a Design to change the Constitution, is
visible enough: And it is as evident that these Councils were either promoted by
Persons, who wanted the Sublime Part of Wisdom, necessary for the Conduct of
Great Affairs, and therefore were to form a Government that might subsist by
Tricks and Arts, or they were forged by a set of Men, whose Avarice and
Ambition no Regular Establishment could satisfy, whose Crimes a Free State
would look into, and whose Arbitrary Proceedings a Parliament would not suffer:
They were therefore to build their Fortunes, Gratify their High Desires, and
find Impunity, by setting up the Regal Power above the Laws.

In the next Reign, yet more open Invasions were made upon our Liberties, not
by the same Men, but by Men acting upon the same Principles; But they proceeded
more cunningly before than afterward: For in the former Reign 'twas thought
best to begin with altering the Constitution, and that when this was done,
Religion might be changed of course: But the hot Zeal of the Catholics would
not permit 'em to go by Slow and Regular Measures; They therefore made a
strange and unpolitick Attempt, never like to suceeed, which was first to
Convert, and then to Inslave the Nation.

While these Matters were transacting, there appeared all along Persons, both
in and out of the Court, who did most Virtuously oppose those Designs, that,
first secretly, and then openly, were forming against their Country.

As some were contriving to Subvert our Civil Rights, others did as carefully
watch their Preservation, which Invading and Defending, divided England into
what was then called the Court and Country Party.

Never was Liberty more cunningly attacked, nor more Nobly Protected, than in
that House of Commons which sat Eighteen Years. It contained bold bad Men, with
Hearts and Heads fit to contrive the Subversion of a State. But there were in
it also Persons of another Character, very Great indeed, with quite Superior
Judgments, and with Minds so rightly adapted for Government, that the Weight of
a whole Empire might be safely reposed upon their Shoulders, in whom
Conversation with the dead Wisdom of past Ages, was joined with Experience, and
a perfect Knowledge of this present World. These brave Spirits from the
Beginning resisted that Inundation of Flattery and servile Compliance, with
which great Revolutions in Corrupt times are certain to be attended. They
Vigorously opposed that Unanimous Band, which diligently promoted Arbitrary
Power. Sometimes they saved us when we were within three or four Votes of utter
Ruin; They hindered that Increase of the Kings Revenue, which alone would have
put an end to Parliaments. These were the Prime Leaders of such whom the People
for some Years were pleased to Term the Country Party, and by Good Patriots, so
called, our Constitution was for a while preserved.

But after the Year 1679. on both sides the Minds of Men grew so inflamed, and
such Animosities did arise between 'em, that they could no longer call one
another by the Civil Appellation of Court and Country Party, so that the
different sides began to be distinguished by other sort of Names.

It Is indeed below the Gravity of a Sober Writer to use the Common Cant words
of the Town, but it is sometimes unavoidable, especially when that which was
only Mirth and Cant at first, became at last a serious Matter.

The Accidental words of Guelf and Ghibelin, in Process of time grew to be the
Names of Powerful Parties, into which several Countries were divided, and in
which Emperors, Kings, Popes and Princes engaged, and these Names of
distinction continued for some Ages, producing Wars and Actions of great
Importance.

In the same manner the Words of Whig and Tory, intended at first as reciprocal
Reproaches, in a short time grew to be the Names by which two great Parties
were contented to be called, and into which in a manner the whole Nation was
divided.

They were termed Whigs, and indeed they called themselves so, who under
another Name, had heretofore opposed the Corrupt and illegal Proceedings of the
Court, who foresaw the Dangers that would arise from a Catholic King, who were
for correcting the Exorbitances of Westminster Hall, and for putting a stop to
extravagant Fines, and who made a resolute stand, and would give no more Money,
till the Habeas Corpus Act was passed, and till the new raised Army was
disbanded; and who did their utmost against the Surrender and Regulating of
Charters.

In the next Reign the same Men, or Men acting upon the same Principle,
declared themselves against taking off the Test and Penal Laws. They showed an
open Dislike in Parliament of Catholics being put into Offices of Trust. They
abhorred the Cruel Executions in the West. They opposed the Violent Prosecution
of the Seven Bishops. And lastly, They were ready and active with their
Councils and Assistance to bring over the Redeemer of England.

A Man is but young at Nineteen, but a Party may be thought old that is of so
long a standing. The Persons just now described were the Old Whigs, whose
Principles will be reverenced in future Ages by all such as love their Country.
It Is true, some Persons did join with these, and call themselves Whigs, who had
all along other Views than the Nations Service, whom Disappointments had
sowr'd, who opposed to be taken off, and who did not like a Court, because a
Court did not like them. But they who swim against the Tide, must make use of
all Helps, and in Corrupt Times, even the best Patriots have refused no sort of
Men that could any ways assist the Public: the Good and Bad of these altogether
were called the Whig Party.

To what had been formerly styled, the Court Side, the People afterward gave
the Name of Tories. And we shall give an Account of what sort of Persons this
Party was composed. The Bulk of 'em consisted of such as were descended from
the Cavaliers, whose Families had suffered very much by the Civil War, and who
by Education were seasoned with an early Love to Kingly Government. They were
Jealous that all Motions tending to preserve Liberty, savored of the
Commonwealth, with whose Weight their Fathers had been so lately Crushed. A
most unwise Generation of Men, to have any Fears that a Commonwealth could be
restored in a Country so corrupted! Many of them were much of that Principle of
which Tacitus describes Marcellus Eprius to have been, who said in the Senate,
Se meminisse Temporum qui bus natus sit, quam Civitatis formam Patres Avique
instituerint: ulteriora mirari, presentia sequi, bonos Imperatores voto
expetere, qualescunque tolerare. Many of 'em were debauched by Pomp and
Splendor, and in the Heat of their Youth, they liked the Pleasures of a Court,
but the Riots of it compelled many of 'em, at last, to depend upon its Favors.
Others embraced the Regal Power more warmly, because they saw many of the
Opposite Side bitter against the Church, not so desirous to Correct any of its
Errors, as willing to lay the Ax to its very Root. Others linked themselves
with this Band out of a Cautious Temper, and through a Fear that contending
with the Court might produce another War. Some gave into this side out of
Gratitude to King Charles, and Many through mere Affection to his Person; for
without doubt He was a most engaging Prince. Others went into it from a real
Conviction of their Minds that the King was not safe without more Power, to
which Opinion they were chiefly led, by observing the Rash Councils, unquiet
Spirits, and insolent Behavior of some of their Opponents. But with those who
might Act of this Side upon a Principle, there joined a great many who had no
good Intentions to the Public, who were for enlarging the Prince's Power, in
order to augment their own, who were for Robbing the People, that they might
share in the Plunder, who would have set the King above all the Laws, that they
might be never accountable to a Parliament for their Proceedings; and, who
pretending a great Zeal for the Church, were all the while making way for
Popery; thus upon Different Motives, considerable Numbers were listed of this
Side, and the Good and the Bad mingled together, composed what was called the
Tory Party.

But Humane Affairs are subject to such odd Turns, that in the next Reign many
of both these Parties traversed their Ground, and mutually passed into that
Camp which some of their Enemies had deserted. Not a few of the Whigs entered
into the worst of King James's Measures and Councils; And the Eyes of those who
had been reckoned Tories, were in a manner universally opened, and they began
to see the Errors they had been committing so many Years, insomuch that they
were as eager as any Others to promote the Revolution: So that the Soundest
Part of these Clashing Factions shook Hands together, and joined in that Rescue
of our Liberties which could never have been brought about, but by the
Concurrent Endeavor of both Parties.

Both sides had their Faults, and of both sides bad Men were listed, and of
each side there were many who all along acted upon the Principles of Honesty
and Virtue, and who aimed at the Common Good, tho as to the Way to it, in their
turns, each side might be now and then mistaken; It must indeed be granted,
that the Whigs saw the Diseases that were growing upon the Body Politic,
before the Tories, But when the Distemper began to rage, the Tories were not
behind hand in seeking out the Proper Remedy.

But tho such as the Common People then called Tories, joined in the
Revolution, and had without doubt the greatest Hand in it, having on their Side
Men of Fortunes, Power, and Figure, and the main Body of the Church, which will
always be found the strongest Interest in England, yet it must be confessed
that the Change was made upon the old Whig Principles, of making Parliaments
awful to the Ministers, and of keeping the Regal Authority within the Limits of
the Law; for what this Nation then did, was directly Opposite to the Church or
Tory Maxims; but when Princes quit the old Rules of right Government, their
Subjects will be apt to forget the old Rules prescribed for their Obedience,

It Is hoped these Names of Distinction are now quite abolished and forgotten;
But the Faction of Guelfs and Ghibelins, after having slept for some time,
revived again, and continued upward of two hundred years, even when the
Derivation of the Words was no more remembered; And the Parties lasted so long,
because the same. Principles upon which they had first differed, remained still
deeply imprinted in their Minds, and afforded continual Matter for new
Dissension.

In the same Manner perhaps some time hence the Names of Whig and Tory may be
again renewed here, to disturb this Nations Peace; And if this should happen,
we must implore the Whigs not to forget their old Principles and ancient Maxims.

The Tories, by taking Arms to defend their Civil Rights, and by joining to
Depose that Prince by whom those Rights were violated, have in the most Public
Manner in the World renounced their Doctrine of Jus Divinum, Passive Obedience,
and Non-Resistance.

But if the Whigs should hereafter take their Stations, if they should go upon
that Ground which the Tories have quitted, if they should enter upon just such
Measures, if they should pursue the same Councils, if they should suffer
themselves to be imbid'd with Tory Notions, our Constitution must be entirely
lost.

For they may undermine it without Suspicion: who will be Jealous of those who
have been Preaching up Liberty and accusing Arbitrary Ministers for thirty
Years? who will suspect such professed Patriots? They may change the Form of our
Government, and have the People of their side, who can have no Jealousy of
them, for the Whigs are the Favorites of the People, as having so often
preserved England. No Person could be Popular enough in Rome to think of
Subverting its Constitution, in the Purity of the Commonwealth, but Manlius who
had saved the Capitol.

It will hardly be surmis'd, that they can mean to inslave us, who (by their
Speeches, Actions and Writings) for many Years seemed rather inclined to a
Republic, than to Despotick Government. But if they should come to change their
Minds, if They should throw off their former Principles, we shall be undone by
the very Men whom we thought our surest Friends.

If old Whigs should hunt after Places as much as ever the Tories did, and if
like them, upon Preferment, they should become quite new Men, in Voting,
Thinking, and Speaking, in a Moment making a sudden Turn from the whole Course
of their former Lives; If old Whigs, as the Tories did, should ever take Bribes
and Pensions to betray their Trust; If they should do any thing to break into
the Habeas Corpus Act, which is the Chief Guardian of our Liberberties; If they
should oppose any good Act for the frequent sitting of Parliaments, which want
in the Constitution produced all our former Miseries, If they should openly
oppose any reasonable Provision for Tyrals in Treason, the want of which has
lost many a Noble Life, and for which heretofore they had so loudly called; If,
as the Tories did, they should send their Emissaries about to influence or
corrupt Elections; If old Whigs to whom Meum and Tuum was once so sacred,
should come to ruin a Society of Trading Men, and at one blow destroy many
hundred Families, but God forbid Englishmen should ever have such a Thought;
If old Whigs shall persuade any Future Prince to Closet Members, as was done in
the preceding Reigns; If by their Power they should get Men turned out of
Employment, for pursuing the Dictates of their Conscience, and Understanding;
If like the Ministers heretofore complained of, They should have a Band of
Pensioners ready to give up any Right, to grant any Sum, and to excuse, nay,
even to vote their Play Master Thanks for any Male Administration.

If the Old Whigs should restore to Men the same dishonest Interest they had
heretofore, If they should consume us in their Ministerial, and sell us in
their Legislative Capacity; If they should desire to have things governed
rather by Tricks and little Arts, than according to the Direction of the Laws,
or the Bent of the People; If they, who upon the Virtuous Principle of keeping
England a free Country, in former times, opposed all Excises, should be brought
to create so many new Offices and Officers, as may influence Elections round
the Kingdom; If they, who heretofore thought the best way to preserve their
Civil Rights, was to keep the Purse, and to have always something to give,
should be for settling such an immense Revenue on the Crown, as may make
Parliaments unnecessary; If they who were so careful in King Charles's Reign,
not to burden the Nation with Taxes, should give away the Peoples Wealth, as
if England were a Mine of Treasure never to be exhausted; If they who have ever
asserted, that all Rents and Payments to the Crown were the Kingdoms Revenues,
and not Alienable, but by Authority of Parliament, should in a short space of
Time come to Alienate all the Crown Land, and to leave the King hardly a Turf
of Ground either in England or Ireland; If they who formerly thought it
sufficient Matter of Impeachment for a Lord Treasurer, or any Other entrusted
by the King, to pass large Grants from the Crown to Themselves, should give to
their Creatures, and share among one another, in a few years, of Crown Lands,
near to the Value of two Millions.

If the very Men who have Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, pa. 197. p. 192.
Asserted and Claimed it to be their true, ancient and indubitable Right, and
that it ought to be esteemed, allowed, adjudg'd and deemed That the Raising or
keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in time of Peace, unless it be with
the Consent of Parliament, is against Law; If they who once believed this Eagle
in the Air frighted all Motions toward Liberty; If they who heretofore thought
Armies in time of Peace, and our Freedoms inconsistent; If the same Men should
throw off a Whig Principle so fundamental; If they should become the open
Advocates for standing Forces, and even submit to Troops composed of F^reigners.

If in this manner the Old Whigs, whose Foresight and Courage has hitherto
preserved England, should quite change their Minds, and go thus retrograde from
all their former Speeches, Actions, and Councils; If they should thus come to
cloth themselves with the Foul, Ridiculous and Detested Garments of the
Tories, and give into the worst of their Measures; And if all that has been
here discoursed should happen, then would the Constitution of this Country be
utterly subverted.

For Men finding themselves thus forsaken by the Ancient Friends to Liberty,
would believe they were bought and sold; They would imagine that there was no
such thing as Virtue and Honesty remaining in the Kingdom; They would think all
Pretensions to the Public Good, to be nothing but Designs of Ambitious Persons,
to lift themselves up to high Honors, upon the Shoulders of the People; And
when Nations have before their Eyes an Armed Power to Fear, and none in whom
they can put any Trust, they seldom fail of submitting to the Yoke.

Free States yield to Slavery when the Men best esteemed, and most in Vogue,
are generally thought to be corrupted. This was the Condition of Rome under
Augustus, Lib. 1. Ann.
as Tacitus finely describes it, Vbi Militem donis, Populum Annona, Cunctos
dulcedine otii pellexit; insurgere paullatim, Munia Senatus Magistratuum, legum
in se trahere, nullo adversante: cum ferocissimi per acies aut proscriptione
cecidissent. Ceteri Nobilium, quanto quis servitio promptior; opibus ac
Honoribus extollerentur: ac novis ex rebus aucti, tuta and praesentia, quam
vetera ac periculosa mallent, neque Provinciae illum Statum rerum abnuebant,
suspecto Senatus populique imperio, ob certamina potentium, and avaritiam
magistratuum: invalido legum auxilio quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia
turbabantur. When the best and noblest Spirits were all extinct, and when 'twas
seen that the Remainder were contented with Wealth, Titles and Preferments, the
Price of their Submission, the Romansthought it their safest Course to commit
all to the Care and Wisdom of a Single Person.

In the same manner, If in times to come it should happen that our Nobility and
Gentry should be more sollicitous to get a small Employment, than to keep a
great Estate; If the Persons of Note and Figure should be swayed by their
private Interest, without any Regard to the Public Good; If it should be
visible to the Counties and Buroughs, that Men covet to be chosen, not for
their Country's Service, but in order to serve themselves; If it should grow
apparent, that neither Side is at bottom better principled than the Other, that
Court and Country Party, Whigs and Churchmen, are nothing but the Factions of
Those who Have, and Those who desire Preferment; If in this manner the whole
Mass of Blood in the Body Politic should be corrupted, the Nation will throw
off that Reverence to Parliaments, which has hitherto preserved our Liberties,
and like the Neighboring Countries either terrified or allured, they will by
degrees submit to unlimited Monarchy; And so we shall lose one of the best
Constitutions that was ever set afoot for the well Governing a People.

Handling as we do the Methods whereby a Nation may Increase in Wealth and
Power, we thought it necessary to describe those Parties and Factions which
probably hereafter may come to influence in its Councils; And this has been
done in order to incite Good Men to watch over their Growth and Progress, and
such Good Men chiefly as design to engage on neither Side, but to bend all
their Care that no Side may be able to hurt the Commonwealth.

And if it should be asked, * Machiavel's Discourses on Livy, lib. 2. c. 2.
Why the Care of Liberty and preserving our Civil Rights should be so much
recommended in a Paper relating to Trade? We answer, that herein we follow
Machiavel, who says, That when a Free State degenerates into a Tyranny, the
least Mischief that it can expect, is to make no farther Advancement in its
Empire; and no farther Increase either in Riches or Power, but for the most
part it goes backward and declines.

This deep Statesman has a saying in another Place well worthy of eternal
Remembrance, Lib. 1. c. 10.
That the Prince who aims at Glory and Reputation in the World, should desire a
Government, where the Manners of his Subjects are corrupted and depraved, not
to Subvert and destroy it like Caesar, but to rectify and restore it like
Romulus, than which the Heavens cannot confer, nor Man propose to himself
greater Honor.

It may be objected, that in France, where all Thoughts of Liberty are
extinguished, Trade and Riches have of late Years very much increased. But this
admits of an easy Answer. An absolute Prince, with great Abilities and Virtues,
by Care and Wisdom may make his Country flourish for a time. However, if his
Successors are weak or wicked, all shall be soon unravelled and go backward,
and Poverty shall soon invade the same People which before began to thrive; for
to make a Nation very Rich and Powerful, there must be a long Succession of
good Princes (which seldom happens) or a long Succession of good Laws and good
Government, which may be always had in Countries that preserve their Freedom:
And without doubt it is on this Account that Machiavel has asserted, That no
Cities have augmented their Revenues or enlarged their Territories, Lib. 2. c.
2.
but whilst they were free and at Liberty.

And if in future times the Nobility and Gentry of England (which God forbid)
should traffic the Peoples Rights for Titles, Tacit. lib. 2. Ann.
Bribes or Places, vilia Servitii pretia, and if they should be induced
fearfully, or which is worse, corruptly to give up this Constitution, Poverty
will creep insensibly upon us. We shall, as Machiavel says, go backwards and
decline, Land will yield a great deal less than now, Rents will be ill paid,
And we shall not have a Foreign Traffic, large and extended enough to produce
such a Naval strength as may make us Safe at home and Terrible abroad.

It Is therefore upon the Authority of this great Man that we have laid down,
That a Country cannot Increase in Wealth and Power but by Private Men doing
their Duty to the Public, and but by a Steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in
such as are trusted with the Administration.

However, if Things should hereafter proceed amiss, It Is hoped the strong
Constitution of this Government will in time throw off those Diseases which may
affect it for a Season, and that the united Wisdom of the Nation can recover us
from that Decay of Health to which we may be reduced by a few Empiricks of
State; Their Giddy Management for a while may be supported, and born out, by
the great Riches which peradventure may have been collected here by the
Industry and Prudence of former Ages; but if what has been gathering seven
Centuries, they should squander away in a few Years, the Cries of that People
whom they so impoverish, will at last awaken the Parliament to enquire into,
and animadvert upon their Wild Proceedings.

If the Wealth and Power of a Country depend upon the Good Government and
Stability of its Affairs, it must certainly import all the different Ranks of
Men to contribute their utmost that Things may be well administered: And in
mixed Constitutions almost every Man is able in some Degree to help toward
this; for if the People are honest and careful in the Choice of their
Representatives, and if those Representatives perform their Duty, Arbitrary
Power can never be settled here, and no Male Administration that may hereafter
happen can long continue.

That we are in no Danger at present, and that Matters proceed well, now is
allowed, but for the security of future times it may not be amiss frequently to
repeat this Caution, that our Whole depends upon keeping one Post well defended.

The Public Virtue which must preserve a State is A Constant and perpetual
Will to do our Country Good; And where this Principle governs, tho in the Minds
of but a Few, yet if they persevere with undaunted Courage, the small Number
may prevail at last to defeat the Malice of the Corrupt Part, especially when
the Endeavors of the Few are assisted by a Prince disposed by Interest and
Inclination to promote the Common Welfare.

If Good Men were but as Active and Vigilant as their Opposites, 'twould not be
so easy a Matter to change the Constitution of a Country: When those who are
concerned in Honor and Interest to have things well administered, do
resolutely and firmly join together to oppose such as find their Profit by a
Corrupt and loose Administration, a Stand may at least be made, and some Stop
put to the further Progress of the Evil.

But tho Pompey, Caesar and Crassus composed a fatal Triumvirate, and united in
a strict League to Subvert the Liberties of Rome, we do not read that there was
the same Union and good Understanding between Lucullus, Cato, Cicero, and the
rest, who endeavored to save the Commonwealth, for the Luxury and Lazyness of
some, the froward Temper, or Secret Ambition of Others, made 'em either neglect
or obstruct the Business of the Public, which might be the Reason that Caesar
at last prevailed.

In the same manner, if hereafter a Cabal of Men, in order to their own
Greatness, should design To change this Constitution, To introduce a Government
by the Sword, and To give away all the Nations Wealth; And if to these Ends
they should form Assemblies, and there propose what they intend to consent to
in another Place, They will succeed, and their Attempts can never be withstood,
unless such as mean England well, join in as firm ad League for its
Preservation, as They shall enter into for its Destruction.

If therefore, in future times, it shall be visible that some Men, to build
their own Fortunes, are Pushing at their Countries Ruin, good Patriots must
then exert all their Virtue, they must reassume the Courage of their
Ancestors, they must lay aside their Pleasures, but, chiefly, they must
Sacrifice to the Public all their ancient Animosities; They must mutually
forgive one another, It must be no more remembered of what Party the Man was,
it being sufficient to enquire, whither or no he always acted upon the
Principles of Honesty and Honor. At such a time the best Men of both Sides, if
the Name of Parties shall still remain, must shake hands together, with a
Resolution to withstand the unanimous, subtle, and diligent Enemies of the King
and Kingdom.

In such a Juncture both sides must contend, not which shall flatter highest,
but which shall best contribute to the defense of their Princes Person, and to
the maintenance of the established Government.

If bad Men shall have Meetings to consult how they may destroy our Civil
Rights, Good Patriots ought to meet calmly to Communicate Councils which way
those Rights are to be preserved; Discourses on Livy, C. 52.
for Machiavel says, There is not a better or more secure Way to Suppress the
Insolence, or Cross-bite the Designs of an Ambitious Citizen, than to take the
same way to prevent, which he takes to advance them.

In such a Juncture not only the best of all Parties must be taken in, but we
must be angry with no sort of Men that are willing to unite against the Enemies
of England, for in a Nation which for a long time was, as all allow, upon a
dishonest Interest, 'twill be difficult to find Persons whose Characters shall
be entirely without a Blemish; Nor indeed was there ever any Man perfect; At
such a Season therefore, Men must place their Hopes in such as have most
Abilities, and fewest Faults, especially when they live in the Dreggs of
Romulus, and not in the Republic of Plato's Institution.

If the Nobility and Gentry retain their wonted Courage, and preserve their
former Wisdom, They will always rescue us out of weak and polluted Hands, And
will never endure that so Noble a Prince as we have now upon the Throne,
esteemed by the whole World, and Head of the Protestant Interest, should at any
time be distressed at home, or interrupted abroad, in the Measures His high
Valor purposes for the Good of Europe, by the ill Conduct of any Minister.

Particular Men do often miscarry in the World, notwithstanding that in their
whole Transactions they give continued Proofs of a most perfect Conduct, They
shall not be the Richer for their Thrift, nor better esteemed for their
Integrity: Their Industry shall avail 'em nothing: Their Courage shall never
bring 'em Victory, and their wisest Councils shall have no Success. Others in
the mean time every Way deficient, of no Desert, and merely by the help of
Fortune, shall succeed in all they undertake. But tho she may be said to govern
thus in single Events, and here and there to influence in the Actions of
Private Persons, Great Monarchies and Commonwealths do not depend upon Her.
Politic Institutions, prudently ordered in the beginning, and keeping on in a
Steady Course of Wisdom and Virtue, are out of her Power and Rule, and can
never fail to prosper; And when Disasters happen to a State, it is seldom the
work of Chance, but rather the effect of some Misgovernment.

For in former Reigns we have seen, that when the Kings Revenue was not well
Managed it proceeded from this, that the Employments relating to it were not
the Rewards of Skill, but the Recompense of another Merit, and that want of
knowledge in the Managers was winked at while they were giving Money in another
Place. Heretofore If Men betrayed their Trust and sold the People, it was
because they were largely invited to it. In former times, when the Nations
Trade impaired and went backward, the secret Cause was that the Ministers were
servilely to Promote the Interest of some other Country. And in the preceding
Reigns, if the Kings Treasure was wildly dissipated, and if exorbitant Grants
were made, it came from this, that the Ministers could refuse no Body, having a
great deal to ask for Themselves, and that they were not to put Rubs in the Way
of others, that they might more smoothly carry on their own Pretensions. These
Instances are only given, not but that by many others we could support this
Position, That when the Public Treasure is wasted, when a Nation runs into
immense Debts, when the Land of the Crown is granted all away, when its
Revenues are ill managed, and when the People are Corrupted, we are not
altogether to blame Fortune, the Times or Accidents of the War, but rather to
attribute a great Share of these Evils to some Error in the Subordinate Parts
of the Administration.

Tiberius in a Letter to the Senate has this Expression Necio an Suasurus
fuerim omittere potius praevalida and adulta vitia, Tacit l. 3. Ann.
quam hoc adsequi, ut palam fieret quibus flagitiis impares essemus. The Scope
of his Epistle is to show how difficult it was for him to correct Vices, with
which the Principal Men of Rome were tainted, and that by the Attempt he might
draw Envy upon Himself. But tho a Cautious Prince might have reason to
entertain such a Fear, the whole Legislative Power of a Country need never lie
under Apprehensions of the like nature. This Strength can deal with the
Ambition, Avarice, Corruption and Rapine of the Great ones: The Legislative
Authority can correct Men of Arbitrary Principles, and pull down the topping
Pride of Insolent and undertaking Ministers, who are by no means equal to their
Business, and whose Heads are Giddy, and turn round in the Eminence, on which
Fortune, Flattery, and their other Vices, not their Merit, has placed them.

And if our Affairs here should ever happen to light into such Hands, we must
put our chief Hopes in the King at the Head of a Parliament.

While that Place contains Men of Courage and Public Spirit, Matters cannot
long proceed amiss. Whoever therefore undertakes that Trust, should continually
have before their* Eyes how much the Common Welfare depends upon their Virtues.
But above all things, they should have disinterested and self-denying Minds.

It can hardly be conceived, but by those who have seen it, what Reverence is
paid, even by his Enemies, to a Man of steady Principles, the Tenor of whose
Words and Actions are always the same; who is neither to be bought nor
frighted: He is admired and followed, all he says has its due weight, his
honest Hoary Head is dear to all Mankind. Whereas the Whiffling Prolers after
Places, and little busy Intreaguers, are contemptible to the very Men, of whom
they are the wretched Instruments. And let the Ambitious think what they
please, that Man has most real Power in this Country, who is believed to be of
the most unshaken Integrity toward the Public, and He who has such a Character
enjoys more true Greatness than all the vain Pomp and Honors a Court can give.

The Employments of England are yet but few, and their Profits but
Inconsiderable to what they are in several Nations, however small as they seem
to be, it is to be feared that some time or other they will be made the Engines
wherewith bad Men will endeavor to subvert this Constitution.

It Is true, at present we are out of such a Danger, but if in future times we
should change to see all Employments reserved for Men in one certain Station,
if the Road to Preferment should lie but through one Place and Passage; when
this happens we shall have Cause to be alarmed, and to look about us.

They who feel within themselves Abilities to serve the Public, are by no means
blameable in desiring to be upon the Stage of Business. On the contrary, that
sour Philosophy which makes some Persons at all Seasons retire and abandon the
State, is by no means to be commended. They do indeed but Nomine Magnifico,
Tacit L. 4. Hist.
Segue otium velare: If the Posture of Affairs will possibly admit it, Good Men
should rather strive to be in Power, that the Commonwealth may not be engrossed
by Corrupt and Unskilful Hands. A Wise Man can easily discern whither the
Ministers are such, that he may with Honor and Safety mix in Councils with
them. If the Administration be sound and right, or if it has but a Face looking
that way, it is a proper Season for Men of Probity, Skill, and Virtue, to
produce their Talents, and to push themselves forward, in order more fully to
mend Things. And at such a time They should be ready to assist the State with
their true Sense and right Understanding; nor should they lazily suffer the
Perfections of their Minds to be useless and unactive. And if among those there
be any very Eminent, Strong in Friends, versed in Affairs of State, of a deep
Reach and Foresight, Who have Eloquence to sway Assemblies, and Courage to
resist and overcome Popular Fury, Such ought not to despair of the Public, but
assist with their Wisdom to redeem a People from their weak Hands, who shall
get into Power by mere Chance, when the Nation perhaps has been in a high
Ferment, as in Boiling Liquors the Scum will get uppermost. And there is such
Reverence paid to those who have a very great Genius, that when they offer
themselves to serve the Commonwealth, the weight of the People will bear down
all the Upstart Pretenders, and force 'em to give way, and make Room for Merit
so Superior.

But if it should ever happen that the Administration should be entirely bad
and wrong, then ought Good Men to have no Share nor hand in it, They should
withdraw from any Participation in the Negligence or Guilt; They should quit
what They cannot honorably hold; They should concern themselves no more in
Business, leaving such Ministers to govern by themselves, who will not govern
well, and be contented to serve their Country by defending Liberty in one Post
against any Incroachment; They should not make so ill a Use of that Affection
the People may bear 'em, and of the Interest they may have in the Nation, as to
be a shelter for the Crimes or Folly of Others; Nor should they as it were lend
their Countenance, and be the Skreen behind which bad Men may safely attempt to
undermine the Constitution.

If the Times are good, Silent Merit will be sought after; but if they are bad
ill Men will be lifted up to the Offices and Dignities of the State by the
Applause of their Adherents, and the Faction of their Friends; but at such a
Season it is no shame not to be employed, Tatitus speaking of Aelius Lanira,
Tacit lib. 6. Ann.
says, Et non permissa Provincia Dignationem addiderat.

Great Men are often liable to one unfortunate Vanity: They believe their
Parts, Dexterity and Wisdom, to be such, that they can mend Things, give 'em a
new Complexion, Correct all Errors, and at least that they shall preserve
themselves sound, tho every one else be tainted; And upon these Presumptions,
some of the Men in best Esteem have heretofore engaged with a foul and depraved
Ministry; But we could never see that they were able to make any Converts: On
the contrary, instead of changing the Court the Court did alter them.

Courts are but slowly mended, and that not by the Authority or Example of any
Single Person, except it be of the Prince Himself, strongly bent to set Matters
upon a right Foot. And yet we have more Instances of Courts which have spoilt
their Prince, than of Princes that have reformed their Courts.

And if it be asked, when is the most proper time for Persons of Probity and
Virtue to undertake the Management of Affairs, It may be answered, It is then
seasonable when Things call loudly to be mended, when unskilful Pilots have run
the Ship aground, so that she sticks fast, ready to split at the next coming of
the Waves, when Ignorant Men are quite bewildered in their Errors, when the
whole People See and Feel the Effect of ill Government, when the Prince grows
ashamed of those whom His Subjects hate and fear, when the Commonwealth cannot
emerge out of its Debts and Difficulties, withour Help from Abler Hands, then
is the true time for the best Men to offer themselves to the service of their
Country. At such a Season Honesty will not stand alone, weak, defenseless, and
out of Countenance at the sight of Prosperous Vice. Nor can Courts be ever Safe
for Honest Men, till the Circumstance and Necessity of the times bring thither
a Party strong enough to maintain itself against those who are grown great by
wicked Arts.

If English Men will be continent in this single Point, all must of Course go
well; If they who have Noble Commands in the Country will scorn meanly to
depend in Town; If they who have brave Seats of their own will despise the
crowded Antichambers of the Great Ones here; If they who have plentiful
Estates, will slight a troublesome and precarious Employment, They are more
happy than a Court can make them: If our Nobility and Gentry would consider how
miserable the Noblemen of France are with all their Mighty Places, they would
at no time hereafter desire to wear the Livery of Bondage. And if they are
truly seasoned with these Notions, That their Liberties are above all Price,
and (as Sir Benjamin Rudiard was wont to say) That there is nothing worth being
a Knave, the Head must be very Skilful, and the Heart very Bold, that will
undertake to invade our Fundamental Rights.

It Is true, what has been here advanced and what shall be said anon, may seem
needless at present, when all things are presumed to go well, but these Notions
may be of Use to After Ages.

The Duty which Private Persons owe to the Public, lies in a very narrow
Compass, and when that is thoroughly performed, a Country seldom fails to see
a steady Course of Wisdom and Honesty in such as are trusted with the
Administration. This Duty may chiefly consist in the following particulars.

1st, That such as represent the People, be Incorrupt, Unbiased, and
Disinterested.

2ly, That they diligently attend the Nation's Service.

3ly, That they carefully watch any Innovation or Encroachments upon the
Constitution.

4ly, That they make Provision against future Evils,

5ly, That they* look narrowly into the Income and Expense of the Kingdom, and
examine which way immense Debts have been contracted, and how that Money has
been disposed of which the Nation has already granted.

6ly, That They hold a strong Hand over the Men of Business, calling those to
an Account, who, either through Folly, or upon some wicked Design, pursue
destructive Measures.

1st, That such as represent the People be incorrupt, unbiased, and
Disinterested. This Point we have handled sufficiently in the Series of this
Discourse. And to what has been already said upon that subject, we shall now
only add, That Rome was once free, That France heretofore had the three
Estates, which were the Guardians of its Liberty; That Spain had formerly many
Rights and Privileges, of which nothing now but the Shadow remains: That
Denmark and Sweden had once Constitutious something like that of England; and
that all these Countries have been enslaved by their own Corruptions.

2ly, That They diligently attend the Nations Service. For otherwise They do
not discharge the Trust to which They are chosen. It has been formerly a Matter
of great Wonder, that Gentlemen should even waste their Fortunes to be elected,
and yet afterward never mind that Station which they seemed before so
vehemently to covet. Cato had many Virtues too big for Practice, but he may be
easily imitated in one good Quality he had, of never failing to be present in
the Senate. Such should give way to Others, and make Room for Men of more
Leisure, who cannot afford to employ all their Time in the Service of their
Country. But above all others, they are to blame who can be drawn from their
Duty by Luxury, Lazyness, and Pleasures. Liberty can be hardly wounded in a
full House, the Attempts made upon it in former Reigns were made when such as
had no Dependence upon the Court were absent about their Country Business. The
ill Ministers of those days took that Opportunity To promote Taxes, which would
never pass in a full Assembly, To pass dangerous Laws, To set afoot new
invented Corporations, which may be fatal in their Consequences, and To form
Projects either destructive to the Nation in General, or Ruinous to particular
Men. All the ill things ever done have been compassed when the Negligence of
some had made one side Strong and the other Weak.

And if in After Ages any of the Men of Business should be so wicked as to
proceed by the same Councils, and to go by the like Measures, they will promote
their dark Designs in some such Juncture, when the best Patriots shall be gone
away quite tired out by Sessions artificially prolonged.

But it is the Duty of all who love England to defeat by unwearied patience
such a Conspiracy against the People; And to obviate such a Mischief, if the
ordinary Rules cannot do it, extraordinary Laws may be thought on to oblige the
Members to that Attendance which they owe their Country.

He who does not attend, injures the Borough for which he serves; for it may so
happen, that in his Absence a thing may pass to their Ruin who have sent him,
and which his presence might have prevented; His Electors therefore seem to
have such a Right to his Service as in reason no Others ought to dispense with,
without their Consent.

Deserting in this Manner the Public is a growing Evil, upon which account it
ought to have a timely Remedy. Perhaps it might not be amiss if a Bill were
brought in to make it highly Penal for any Member to be absent from the House
above fourteen days, without express leave first had under the Seal of the
Borough for which he serves.

A great many Mischiefs both Public and Private would be prevented, if such as
represent their Country would be strict in this Duty of attending.

3dly, That they carefully watch an Innovation or Encroachments upon they
Constitution. There is nothing lulls a People more asleep than the Reign of a
good Prince, reverenced for his Wisdom, feared for his high Courage, beloved
for his Lenity, and admired for a Number of other Virtues; whereas under a bad
Reign the Subjects are Jealous and vigilant, tho often to little Purpose.
However, it is agreed on by all Writers, that the Mild Rule of Augustus,
contributed more to confirm the Slavery of Rome, than all the Severity and
Cuning of Tiberius.

The best Times likewise produce the worst Presidents; for in good times the
People let many Things slip, being then at their Ease, not suspicious, and
consequently not watchful over the Government; but where this Supine Temper
prevails, mixed Governments decline immediately into Absolute Power. The
frequent Contests that were of old between the Senate and People of Rome
without doubt preserved their Freedom; for where all are of one Mind, ill Use
may be made of that Unanimity, by some Eloquent, Subtle, and Ambitious Man, who
may turn and rule it as he pleases. Therefore to preserve Constitutions that
have a mixture in 'em of Popular Government, it is necessary there should be
always some small Division, just enough to keep the Minds of Men awake, that
they may observe what Advantages one part of the State gets over the other.

Bad Kings provoke enough to look into their Actions, but when the People have a
good Prince, they give a favorable Interpretation to all he does.

And the best Man that ever Reigned may be ill served. Declaration and
Remonstrance of Lords and Commons, May 19. 1642.
It is a Maxim of our Law, That the King can do no wrong, but if any ill be
committed in Matters of State, the Council; if in Matters of Justice, the
Judges must answer for it. But though the Laws exempt our Kings from Blame,
They are not freed from the bad Effects of ill Conduct in their Ministers.

He therefore who represents his Country, cannot do the Nation nor his Prince
better Service, than to see that those who sit at Helm, do not run the Ship
upon dangerous Rocks. Absolute Dominion is a Bait with which the greatest Minds
may be tempted; for they whose Goodness is unlimited, may desire that their
Power should be so too. But no one Man ought to think of being Omnipotent,
unless he could be Omniscient and Omnipresent. Besides, though Princes may
desire great Power, that they may be able to do great Good, such as serve 'em
rarely proceed upon this Principle. They often desire their Masters should be
Arbitrary, in order to their own Impunity, and to build a large fortune for
themselves, for which reason they should be watched in all their Windings, and
followed in all their dark and subtle Mazes.

It seldom happens that the Liberties of a Country are Invaded all at once, The
Steps of Power are leisurely and slow, Ministers who have it in their Thoughts
to change the Nature of a Government, go to work by Degrees. At first they make
use of the most Popular Hands they can possibly procure, ordering it so, that
the People may not perceive who it is that puts their Fetters on, but these
Popular Men they shove out at the first convenient Season, that all may be of a
Piece. Their next Business is to corrupt such Persons as have the clearest
Fame, whom they discard when sufficiently tainted, and this they do that the
People may think all Mankind alike, which naturally drives 'em to follow those
only who are in Power, and who can do 'em good. Afterward they get from the
Nation all the Money they can, the Collecting of which erects new Employments,
and creates them a number of Dependants, who, in one certain place, are their
chief Strength and best Support: By the distribution of these Sums, They
likewise make more Friends. But being never out of fear of accounting for all
at last, their Principal Aim is to procure their Master such a standing
Revenue, as may make him subsist without the People's Help. If they find this
impossible, or difficult, then by Accusations, by Exorbitant Proceedings
without any President, and by harrassing Private Persons, either in their Fame
or Fortune, they endeavor to make all the different Ranks of the People out of
love with their ancient Constitution.

But when they have done all this, Tacit L. 2. Hist.
They will not yet think themselves quite out of danger. Senatus and Populus
nunquam obscura Nomina, etsi Aliquando obumbrentur. They will still lie under
Apprehensions of being reached at last by the Guardians of Liberty. Therefore
to damp all Thoughts of Freedom, To influence the better Sort, and To awe the
Vulgar, their last work is to procure a Standing Army.

By Manifest Original Contract, an Armed Force cannot be raised nor kept within
this Kingdom, without Consent of Parliament, so that if hereafter we should be
ever enslaved that way it is our own proper Fault.

Where Armies are Powerful, there grows a Necessity upon Princes, rather to
please them than the People. And yet no Mercenaries are sufficient to help a
Prince against a Powerful Foreign Force, if the Subjects are disobliged at
home. Machiavel says, That a Prince who founds the Duration of his Government
upon Mercenary Troops shall never be firm nor secure. Prince Chapter 12.
But he counts Foreign Forces yet more dangerous, Chapter 13.
because they are always unanimous, and at the Command of other People.

If hereafter any Ministers should be so wicked, to attempt the Subversion of
our Fundamental Rights, we have here shown some of the Steps, which they will
probably make, to compass their Designs. It therefore imports all good Men, to
watch their first Invasions and Encroachments, and betimes to intercept 'em in
their Course.

Fourthly, That they make Provision against future Evils. The Virtues requisite
for such as will handle matters of Government, have their Foundation in Wisdom
and Courage. He, whose Endowments of the Mind, are not sufficient to foresee a
long while before what may be the Event of a Council, cannot consult safely for
his Prince; and he who at every turn is afraid of Popular Anger, shall never
give any sound Advice.

Virtue and Wisdom, in some Sense, are Terms Synonimous, and different Words,
signifying the same thing; for no Man can be Virtuous with any Effect conducive
to the Public Good, without a rich Talent of the Mind, and strong Wisdom; nor
can a Man be truly Wise, without such Public Virtue, as warmly embraces the
Liberty, Honor and Interest of his Country. And when a Genius of this kind
appears in any Nation, he has a Natural Right to the Offices and Dignities of
the State: But if ever Courts shall happen to be depraved, they will like quite
another sort of Men: Wanting true Wisdom, they must set up something in the
Room of it; that is to say, Momentary Shifts, and short Remedies; raw and
unskillful Medlers in Business, are their Darlings, that will venture at all,
and yet know nothing; upon which Principle they make open War with Desert of
any kind, and reckon it a great Conquest, when they can get rid of a wary and
knowing Statesman.

They count it supreme Wisdom to answer any single Necessity, never regarding
whether the manner of doing it be Safe, Just, or Honorable. They not only
trust Providence, (as all Men should do) but are content to rest wholly upon
it; believing Foresight, and Thoughts of the Future, to bring more Anxiety than
Profit. They are Wise, as some Men subsist from Hand to Mouth; they think it
sufficient to live to Day, and to make Provision for the present Moment. All
this perhaps may be good Philosophy in Private Cases; but for the whole Body of
a State to go by such Rules, must needs be very dangerous.

Machiavel says Prince, c. 3.
, The Romans could never relish the Saying, that is so frequent in the Mouths
of our Politicians; To enjoy the present benefits of Time. They either provided
against, or Fronted a Danger; and seldom let themselves be overtaken by it: He
says likewise, That things which are discovered at a distance, (which is done
only by Prudent Men) produce little Mischief, but what is easily averted: But
when, through Ignorance or Inadvertency, they come to that Height, that every
one discerns them, there is no Room for any Remedy, and the Disease is
incurable.

Cardinal Richlieu says, Testament Politic du Cardinal Richlieu. P. 2. Cap. 4.
It is the Duty of Ministers of State, to Represent to their Masters, That it
is more necessary to consider the Future, than the Present; and that Distempers
are like the Enemies of a State, against whom Prudence obliges to march, rather
than tarry till they are come, to drive 'em out again; that those who do not
follow this Method, will fall into great Confusions, which it will be very
difficult to remedy afterward. But he lays down, That it is a common thing
among weak Men, to drive off time, and to choose the preserving their Ease for a
Month, rather than to deprive themselves of it for a while, to avoid the
Trouble of many Years; which they do not consider, because they see only what
is present, and do not anticipate Time by a wise Providence. He farther adds,
That Ministers, who never consider to morrow, live happily for themselves; but
others live unhappily under them.

We have here cited the Authorities of two very able Men, both in the Theory
and Practice of State Affairs; to show how dangerous their Measures are, who
consult nothing but their present Ease, who love Palliating Remedies, and who
are for removing from 'em the Evil Day at as great a distance as they can.

If we should ever fall into such Hands, they will not care with what Debts and
Payments they load Future Times, so they may come at a little ready Money. They
will give large Premiums and Interest, never considering who must pay the
Reckoning at last. They will set afoot high Duties, never weighing how the
Peoples Trade and Manufactures are thereby affected. They will not mind how
profusely they waste the Nation's Treasure; Negligence and Prodigality, being
pleasant and easy for the present time, though afterward the Parents of
Infinite. Care and Trouble.

Constancy in denying unreasonable Suits, Thrift for the Public, promoting
Foreign Traffic, Improving the Revenues granted, keeping the Ships of War in
good Repair, laying up Stores, making Schemes for better Governmenment,
retrenching all needless Expenses, providing against Wars to come, making good
Leagues Abroad, allaying Heats and Animosities at Home, and putting Impediments
in the way of any Power that grows too fast, are so many Seeds which Great and
Able Statesmen, are always Sowing, without a Prospect to Reap in many Years,
but the Harvest comes at last; and under the Conduct of such Ministers Nations
Thrive and Flourish: Whereas, such as proceed upon that narrow Notion of
Enjoying the present benefits of Time; though they may thereby do their own Work,
and make their own Fortunes, yet without doubt, they will Ruin whatever
Government they undertake to Guide.

If in after Ages, they who are trusted with the Administration here, should be
thus careless and unforeseeing, it will be the Duty of such as represent the
People, by frequent and serious Inquiries into the State of the Nation, and by
plain Speeches, to rowse up the Men of Business from a Lethargy, that may prove
so Fatal; for undoubtedly, any part of the Legislative Authority may call upon
the Executive Power, to make Provision against Future Evils.

Fifthly, That they look narrowly into the Income and Expense of the Kingdom,
and examine which way Immense Debts have been contracted, and how that Money
has been disposed of, which the Nation has already granted.

The last Duke of Buckingham had many Designs to put the Affairs of his Estate
in Order; and to this End he consulted several sorts of Men: His wise and true
Friends laid before him, That no ways would be so effectual, as to look into
his Accounts, to employ honest Stewards, and to live within Compass. But there
was another Set of People, in whom he more delighted, who made him believe
they would put his Business into such a Posture, that no Negligence, nor no
Profusion should do him any hurt. In short, they told him directly, That they
would procure for him the Philosophers Stone. He hearkened to 'em, minded none
of his Affairs, he let his Servants do what they pleased, and would put no
Limits to his Expenses. But the Consequence and Conclusion of all was, That His
Graces evil Counselors became Rich, and he grew Poor.

In the same manner, if in some future Reign we should fall into the Hands of
bad Ministers, they will tell the Prince, that they can get for Him the
Magisterium (and indeed it would prove a kind of Philosophers Stone, if they
can so concert matters, as to obtain all the supplies they shall insist on)
they will persuade Him they can maintain His Crown and Dignity out of a Mine of
new Projects, never to be exhausted, and upon this View they will advise Him,
first, to give them very large Sums to buy Limbecks, Crucibles, and Charcoal;
for Utensils must be had, and Workmen must be paid; they will promote the
making Exorbitant Grants, and giving away the Crown Lands upon this Notion,
That it is sowing a little to reap much. They will conceal pernicious Pensions
under the dark Veil of Secret Service. An Article that hides all. But the
Estimates of the Charge of the War will be the best shelter they can possibly
have for their Profusions of any kind, where they may incert Items never to be
disproved, and never to be understood. Finding how much it turns to their own
Account to have an Ample Revenue to range in, they will persuade their Prince
to ask all Things, and to spare nothing: And if such Bad Men as have been here
described should ever come to be trusted, they will make the Body Politic
faint and look pale with continual Opening of its Veins; they will leave the
Crown bare, the Exchequer empty, and all the Revenues Anticipated; they will
distress the Gentry, and beggar the Common People; and having thus enriched
themselves, and improverish'd all other Degrees of Men, they will reduce the
Nation to be naked and defenseless, hardly able to support it self at home,
much less in a Condition to undergo another Foreign War.

If at any time hereafter, such Men as have been here painted out, should be
suffered to entangle our Matters, to dissipate our Treasure, and to waste the
Commonwealth, where will be the Money, the Fleet, and Arms, that may be
necessary, in case the French should ever break the Peace, and attempt to
possess themselves of Spain, and the West Indies?

If by the Giddy, or rather frantic Conduct of Beardless Politicians, lifted
perhaps up from the meanest Obscurity, and set in a manner to hold the Reins,
our Affairs should hereafter be brought so low, (which God forbid) as that we
must sit still, while those Dominions fall into a Power already but too
Dreadful, how can Universal Monarchy be avoided? And if Spain should happen to
be thus lost, we are not only hurt in a point of Empire, the most Important of
all, but the whole Trade of England will be cut up by the very Roots.

It may be laid down for a certain Truth, that no Man of a great Fortune, was
ever undone in a few Years, but he was Cheated of much more, than he was able
to Spend: And this is yet more true, if the Man had Parts, and a good
Uunderstanding. Private Men are Ruined, when those about 'em are Unfaithful,
and are to Profit by their Destruction; and if they have no trusty Servant,
that will put them in Mind of their Condition.

The same holds in the Affairs of a whole Nation. When a Public, that was once
clear and easy, is overwhelmed with Debts; when this happens among a People
that have been always willing to give, and in a Ministry that has never been
backward to ask, when all Occasions have been supplied to their full demand,
when the Prince is wise, and without any Expensive Pleasures; when such a
Country does labor under Difficulties almost insuperable, and when in some
future Reign all this shall be our Case, Mankind will entertain an Opipinion
that the Administration is not right; the World will be inclin^d to think, that
such as shall then govern in the Revenue want either Fidelity or Skill; it will
be thought that they have not at any time laid before their Master a true State
of his Affairs; it will be believed that they have never contrived his Expenses
with Care and Wisdom, and that they have not endeavored by grave and wholesome
Councils to moderate his Bounties.

The Liberality of a Prince, the most extended we can imagine, will yet oblige
but a very few; and to give it a constant Supply, vast Numbers must be
harrass'd. Besides, among the Vulgar, Frugality in a Court does in some Measure
commute for high Taxes. Liberality is Noble in rich and quiet Times, but it
will hardly be thought just, when what is given is to be in a manner the last
drop of Blood in the Subjects Veins. Not to value their Treasure has been
always the Fault of Great and Heroic minds, of which many had been ruined
every Moment, but that they had grave and honest Ministers ready to keep 'em
within Bounds by wholesome Advices, rugged Truths, and severe Virtue. And so the
Duke of Sully proceeded with his Master Harry the 4 th. When a Prince is in his
Nature too Bountiful, it is a Duty incumbent upon such as serve Him, with all
Humility to beg, That in his high Wisdom he would consider how hardly that is
gathered, which they shall see so lightly given: They ought rather to quit
their Posts, than to sign or fix the Seal to immoderate Gifts. But those Hands
must be very clean themselves, which are held up to Kings with humble Prayers,
that they would have Compassion on their People.

It Is true, War is a devouring Monster, and to feed it will very much disorder
the Revenues of a Country: And yet we see France has been able for Nine Years
to engage all the Strongest Part of Europe, to have all the while Land Armies,
consisting of above three hundred Thousand Men, and to maintain a Fleet as
numerous, and more expensive than that of England: And after all this, they
have been in a Condition to make larger Expenses of all kinds (as is said) than
in any two Years during the War; and we see 'em now in a Posture to meditate
higher Designs than ever. That they did bear up so long against the Confederate
Strength, that they have been able Annually to expend such an Immense Treasure
for upward now of ten Years, and that they are not at present quite exhausted
and impoverished, must without doubt proceed from the good Conduct of those to
whom the Management of their Affairs has been entrusted. No Man is endured
under that Monarchy to perform the Functions and Offices of the State in an
ignorant and careless manner. The Minsters there are more frugal for their
Master than in their own Concerns; they do not make too much have to be Rich;
they are contented that a Great Fortune should be the Recompense of many
Services, and of long Merit. They have not let the Crown Lands of France be as
it were a Derelict, Et primi Occupantis: We do not observe it has been so
ordered in that Kingdom, that both the Body of the People and the Public too
are Poor at one and the same Instant; their Ministers have not suffered the
Commonwealth to be consumed by Usurious Contracts with the Common Lenders; and
by their Care and Wisdom they have obtained such Credit, even under a Despotick
Power, that they have not been forced all along to pay above 7 per Cent.
Interest for Money lent the King; whereas 40 per Cent. has been paid for mighty
Sums in one Free Government: so that upon the whole Matter, it is evident
enough, that this Devouring Monster War is to be fed where the Men of Business
are Honest, Foreseeing and Frugal for the State.

Mixed Governments, among many other Excellencies, have this Advantage, that a
good Administration may be obtained by any one part of the Constitution, that
will set it self strongly to so good a Work; Kings can at all times set things
right, if the Business of their Wars do not compel 'em to be often Absent.
Either of the Houses, when they have set themselves to inquire into, and
correct Disorders, have been terrible to the most Bold, Subtle, and most
Powerful Statesmen, that ever went about to undo a People, or to mislead a
Prince.

If in any future Reign, the Treasure of this Kingdom should be mis-manag'd,
and profusely wasted; and if Debts, hardly to be waded through, should be
contracted; the Representatives of the People may, by looking strictly into all
these Matters, perhaps immediately lessen the public Engagements, at least
they may put some Stop to the farther Progress of the Mischief.

In such a Juncture, good Men will think it their Duty, to see whether this
Debt is not to be lessened, by reviewing former Accounts; they will examine,
whether the Sums already granted were not sufficient to pay off all the Forces
we have had at Land and Sea: They will inquire from whence such a high Article
of Arrears proceeds: They will see how so many Fonds come to be Deficient, and
whether such Deficiencies have not been occasioned by some ill Conduct in
those, who have managed the respective Branches: They will inform themselves,
which way the many Millions are gone, which the People have paid: They will
desire to know, what Necessities could compel the Men of Business to give such
large Premiums, and high Interest; and whether the Promoters of a Council so
pernicious, did not lend their own Money; and whether they have not been
Parties deeply concerned themselves in all usurious Contracts: They will
inquire upon what Consideration, and for what Services, immoderate Grants of
Lands and Money have been made, and they will do it the more strictly; if, when
such Grants were passed, it should happen that the Nation was indebted, and
paid heavy Taxes.

The Representatives of the People can look into all these things; and, no
Doubt, it is a Duty which they owe their Country, that has trusted 'em with so
unlimited a disposal of their Fortunes.

To prevent Mismanagement in the Revenue of this Kingdom, it seems necessary
that a Law should be made, to put the Lords of the Treasury under such an Oath,
as the Lord High Treasurer of England takes; for it appears an Absurdity in our
Government, that the meanest Officer concerned in the King's Revenue, should be
sworn to a true, and faithful Discharge of his Trust; and that the Treasury,
who are trusted with the whole, whose Authority is so boundless, and who have
it so much in their Power, to hurt the Nation, should be under no Oath at all.
Some Objections there are against this; but he who considers 'em well, will
find 'em of no weight, and that those Necessities which have broken into, and
overruled the Ancient Course of the Exchequer, might have been avoided by Care
and Conduct.

If in future Times England should have any Grounds to doubt, that the Treasure
of the Public has been Imbezzel'd; if prodigious Fortunes, raised in ten Years
by obscure Men, who have had no Dealings but with the Court, should Minister
Occasion of Suspicion; if Resumptions should be thought fit, we mean in Cases
where Persons of no Merit have been enriched with the Kingdom's Spoils; if it
should be thought reasonable to see whether any thing is to be saved in an
immense Debt, out of the unwarrantable Gains which the Lenders have made; if it
should be judged expedient to inquire into any Maladministration in those
through whose Hands the Revenue passes; if it should be deemed necessary Thrift
to look into all Pensions; if it should be thought reasonable fairly and
impartially to state the Account of so many Millions given and expended, so
great and difficult a Work as a Strict Inquiry into all these Matters will
prove, cannot be entered upon, and brought to a good Conclusion, but by the
united Wisdom of the Nation.

No other Power can face that Strong League, which will be made between Fellow
Criminals, to save one another. Ordinary Remedies prevail but little against
stubborn and inveterate Diseases: If therefore our Affairs should be ever in
disorder, the Legislative Authority can bring the most effectual Helps to set
us right.

And in such a Case, peradventure, it may be thought advisable to promote a
Bill, That such sort of Abuses as have been here described, and all other
Maladministration of the like kind, may be inquired into by Committees of
both Houses, to sit in the Interval of Parliament, with all requisite Powers,
without Salaries, and to be chosen by Ballot. And supposing past Errors to be
too big for Correction, yet so Awful an Authority, and the fear that it will
from time to time be renewed, may, for the future, be some Check to the growing
Corruptions of the Age.

All the Premises considered, we submit it to better Judgments, whether it is
not the Duty of such as represent their Country, To look narrowly into the
Income and Expense of the Kingdom, and to examine which way immense Debts have
been contracted, and how that Money has been disposed of, which the Nation has
already granted.

Sixthly, That They should hold a Strong Hand over the Men of Business, calling
those to an Account, who either through Folly, or upon some wicked Design,
pursue destructive Measures. Helvidius Priscus, after the Example of his
Father-in-law Petus Thrasea in the Philosophy he made use of to fit himself for
the Service of his Commonwealth, followed the Opinion of the Stoic, who placed
all Good and Evil in Honesty or Dishonesty, accounting the Gifts of Fortune,
such as high Birth, Power and Wealth, to be but things indifferent toward the
constituting of Happiness, which they define to be internal only in the Mind.

But though Aristides, Socrates, Phocion, Publicola, Cinciunatus, Attilius
Regulus, and many others, have been great Men under a constant and willing
Poverty; yet, without doubt, Nobility and Riches help good Spirits on of their
way, and set 'em forward: He that is high Born, his Perfections may be sooner
taken notice of, as standing upon an Eminence; and he that has Wealth need not
be troubled with Private and Domestic Cares, and may devote all his Time and
Thoughts to the Service of his Country.

Machiavel says, Discourses on Livy, lib. 1. C. 26.
that a Prince, who intends to invade the Constitution of a Free People, takes
this Course: To subvert all, to turn every thing Topsie Turvie, and make all
things new. To alter the Magistracy, create new Titles, Eelct new Persons,
confer new Authorities, advance the Poor, and impoverish the Rich. That what is
said of David, may be said of him: He filled the Hungry with good Things, and
the Rich he has sent empty away. Besides, it is his Interest to build new
Cities, to shift the Inhabitants from one place to another; in a Word, so to
Toss and Transpose every thing, that there be no Honor, Wealth, nor Preferment
in the whole Province, but what is ownable to him.

Some of these Courses were taken by Harry the 3 d. in France; but his chief
aim was to introduce new Persons into such Offices and Dignities of the State,
as were filled before with the Nobility and Princes of the Blood. He raised out
of the Dust obscure Persons, who might owe to him only their Wealth and Honor,
and who might look upon him as their second Creator: These paid him a blind
Obedience; they never considered what was for the Public Good, what was
Reasonable, Safe, Expedient, Just, or Honest, but in all things did as they
were commanded; with such a Set of Men this dark Prince gave the first Mortal
Wound to the Liberties of France; He placed them so high as to overlook the old
Gentry, who being weakened and depressed, had neither the Interest nor the
Courage to preserve their Ancient Form of Government.

He has been followed in these Steps by all the French Kings his Successors; so
that under that Monarchy, in every Reign since, we have hardly seen any but the
Creatures merely of the Prince's Favor, and quite new Men upon the Stage of
Business, and such have in a manner engrossed all the Employments of Profit,
Trust and Honor.

We grant that in a well constituted Government, which is upon a right Foot
indeed, neither Wealth nor Titles, and nothing but Virtue and Abilities, should
prefer a Man to the Honors and Employments of his Country. But when the Times
are too corrupt to admit of such Measures, the Question will be, Who with most
safety are to be relied on, they whose Fortunes are made, or they who are to
make their Fortunes? They who have a Satiety of Titles, or they whose Ambition
may prompt 'em to attempt any thing to advance Themselves?

In all likelihood Countries (whose depraved Manners will not allow 'em to lift
up Virtue in Distress, and which in truth cannot find such Men to serve 'em, as
were Aristides, Socrates, and those other Heroes, whom we newly mentioned;)
should desire to see themselves ruled in the subordinate Parts of Government,
by the best Hands that can be possibly got: If it is to be come at, they should
endeavor to have Places of great Honor and high Trust, filled with Persons,
whose Birth, Estates, and other Circumstances, seem, in Humane Probality, to
set 'em at least above the common Temptations of the World.

He who has a good Stake, will be afraid to engage in desperate Councils; he
who has a large Estate will not consent to have the Laws subverted, which are
his firmest Security; for where the Sword governs, Lands at best are held but
under a precarious Title. They who are well Born will desire to preserve that
Constitution, of which they and their Ancestors have always been a Part:
Instead of Governing and making a Figure in their Country, in all appearance
they will be loath to become the contemptible Clients and Dependants of some
Favorite or Minister, whom Chance or Partiality shall set above bis Betters.

But they who come into a Government, with a design to build a Family, and make
a Fortune; who are to get all, and can lose nothing, who are chiefly
recommended by their Boldness to Undertake, and readiness to Comply, whom no
Councils fright, and whom no Measures shock; such Men are indeed the proper
Instruments for introducing Arbitrary Power, but can hardly be thought fit
Ministers in any Nation, that is desirous to preserve its Freedom.

Whoever looks over our Histories, will find, that all the Attempts which were
heretofore made upon the Liberties of England, have been formed by such
Persons, as have been here described.

Most of our former Princes having had Designs of Absolute Domimion, and
finding that the Men of Fortune and Figure would rather obstruct, than promote
their Intentions, thought it more conducing to their Ends to be served by
another sort of People, and did therefore bring into the Management of their
Affairs all along a Set of Ministers, Weak, Ambitious, Light, Designing, Rash,
Unskilful in the Arts of wise Administration, and versed in nothing but Craft
and Tricks; but at the Head of these they had always some one that was to be
the Forlorn Hope, and who would venture to go greater Lengths than any of his
Companions: And for this Post they generally chose a Pushing Man of a Bold
Spirit, a ready Wit, a Fluent Tongue, obscure and low in the World, and such a
One whom Fortune could hardly leave in a worse Condition than she found him.
Nor was it difficult to find Persons of this Character, who would hazard their
Heads, to compass Power, Wealth, and Greatness. And though they could not arrive
at Unlimitted Monarchy, the Philosophers Stone, our former Statesmen have so
much hunted after, yet in the Search of it they found several other good
Things; we mean, good for themselves, that is to say, Titles and Great Estates.
It Is true, many of 'em have been interrupted in their Course, and the weight of
the People has born 'em down at last. But a Man of a wretched Beginning, never
heard of before, when he sees himself lifted up high, seldom thinks of the
Laws, Impeachments, and the Ax. He hopes to elude Justice; that the Power which
set him on, will bring him off; and that he may be defended by his Numbers, and
a Corrupted Majority devoted to him; or as his Predecessors have done, that he
may at last retire full of Wealth and Crimes, and that his Guilt will be
covered in the fresher Offenses of those who are to Succeed him: Or Men of this
Stamp, when they have got all they can, may think to be forgiven by changing
Sides; and that it will be time enough to become good Patriots, when they are
no longer suffered to hurt the Commonwealth; for the Arms of the Public have
been but too open to embrace such a sort of Penitents.

Upon these, or the like Hopes, the Cethegi and Catalines of former Times have
presumed to attack the Liberties of England. It must therefore be a Duty
incumbent upon such as represent their Country, To hold a Strong hand over the
Men of Business.

'Twould be endless to enumerate all the Dangers that may befall a Free
Government, if it should have at the Head of its Affairs a Minister of a bold
and Enterprizing Spirit, who, from a low Degree, aspires to the highest
Greatness, and whose Ambition is not restrained by any Private or Public
Considerations.

If in some future Reigns it should be our Case to have such a Man in a
Station, and with the Power of doing much Hurt, all such as desire to preserve
their Civil Rights, should with undaunted Courage set themselves to stop him in
his Career, and to intercept him in his Growth.

Machiavel says, Prince, c. 22.
There is one Rule infallible to Princes in the Election of such as are to
serve 'em. When you observe your Officer more careful of himself than of you,
and all his Actions and Designs pointing at his own Interest and Advantage,
that Man will never be a good Minister.

We shall beg the Reader's Pardon for one short Digression in this Place, Ibid.
c. 22.
and it is to take notice of another fine Remark of the same Author, who says,
The Actions of a new Prince are liable to a stricter Observation, than if he
were Hereditary; and when they are known to be Virtuous, gain more upon People,
and oblige them farther than Antiquity of Blood, because Men are more affected
with present than passed things. But to return to our Matter.

The Spaniards were in a flourishing Condition in Richlieu's time: Testament
Politic du Cardinal Richlieu, p. 2. c. 3.
And in the beginning of his Ministry the Affairs of France were in great
Disorder: He wholly attributes the Prosperity of Spain to this Principle
(running through all their Councils at that time, and prevailing with all their
Ministers) of preferring the Public Good to Private Interest; and the contrary
obtaining in France, he says, was the Cause of all their Disorders. So that we
may justly think the present Greatness of the French has taken its Rise from
this Noble Principle, having gotten, there, deeper Footing now than it had
heretofore.

Ministers, whose Chief Aim, in all they do, is their own Greatness, can
neither be good for Prince nor People. And when they consult their Private
Interest more than the Public Good, it is, in many Instances, apparent to all
the World; as for Example.

First, When they take no Care of their Master's Revenue. For in all Countries,
and in all Ages, bad Statesmen have thriven best under Princes plunged in Debts
and Difficulties.

Secondly, When they have made a false Step, and do not own it, and recede, but
rather call in the Prince's Authority, and all his more immediate Dependants,
to help 'em out, and to countenance their Errors, it is a Sign they have more
regard to themselves, than to his Honor.

Thirdly, When they enter upon new and desperate Councils, which if they
succeed well, will redound to their proper Glory; and if they should have a bad
Event, may hazard his Ruin; it is a plain Mark that they are ready to sacrifice
his Safety to their own Vanity or Ambition.

Fourthly, When they conceal from him Truths which he ought to know; when they
do not acquaint him with the State of his Affairs, nor with the true Condition
of the Nation; when they do not endeavor to moderate his Expenses; and when
they do not quit, when sound Councils cannot prevail, it is an evident Proof,
That they prefer keeping up their Interest, as they call it, and holding their
Post and Employments, to all other Considerations whatsoever.

Fifthly, When they are ready to do any thing, let it be never so hurtful to
their Master, provided it square with the Interest and Measures of the Party,
of which they are at the Head, and by whom they are buoyed up; It Is a Mark that
they aim at, being independent even of the Prince himself, and that they think
to subsist more by the Strength of their own Faction, than by his Favor.

Sixthly, When Man to Man, and singly, they are willing to own any Errors, but
say at the same time, that they were against this, and that, accusing their
Brethren of the State for every Miscarriage, it is a Sign that provided they
themselves are well thought on, they do not care what Opinion the People
entertain of the whole Government.

Seventhly, When they are for proposing dishonorable and unjust Shifts to raise
Money, rather than to take the Pains of forming before hand better Schemes for
Ways and Means, it is a Sign that they prefer the Momentary Arts of recommending
themselves to all Thoughts whatsoever, and that they consult more their own
ease than the Public Good. It Is likewise an Evidence that they are not of
Richlieu's mind, who says, Testament Politic, p. 2. c. 4.
That public Administration takes up the Thoughts of Judicious Ministers,
insomuch that the perpetual Meditations they are obliged to make, to foresee
and prevent the Evils that may happen, deprives them of all manner of Rest and
Contentement, excepting that which they receive in seeing many Sleep quietly,
relying on their Watchings, and live happy by their Misery.

Eigthly, When contrary to the Constitution of the Land, they promote Councils
which tend to the keeping up an Armed Force, it is a sign, that not daring to
trust the Laws, they would have their Proceedings maintained another way; that
they desire such an Impunity as the Sword has seldom failed to give bad
Ministers in other Countries. It Is a Mark that their own Safety is their
principal Object, and that they had rather the Nation should be burdened with
Taxes, and have the Form of Government altered, and that the Prince should lose
his Subjects Hearts, than venture themselves before a Free and angry People.

We have given some of the Marks, which selfish and designing Statesmen may be
known by hereafter. And if in future times it should be our Case, to see
Persons of this Character upon the Stage of Business, we must rowse up the
Vigor of our Ancient Constitution, we must awaken all the Laws, and direct 'em
boldly to the Heads of such a dangerous sort of Men.

Machiavel says, Discourses on Livy. lib. 2. C. 1.
That they who governed the State of Florence, from Anno 1434, to 1494, were
wont to say, That it was necessary every five Years to review the State, for
otherwise it would be very hard to maintain it: They called reviewing the
State, reducing the People to the same Terror and Awe as they had upon 'em of
old, when every Man was punished according to his Crime, let his Quality be
what it would.

He lays down likewise, That Kingdoms as well as Commonwealths, have often
occasion to be reduced to their first Principles:Which, he says, was done in
France by the Parliaments, who revived the Ancient Government as often as they
opposed the King in his Arrests, and as often as they called great Delinquents
to account, whose Crimes, if they are suffered to grow, cannot be reformed but
with Disorder, if not the Dissolution of the whole Government.

For want of pursuing some such like Courses, the French have lost their old
Constitution, and are now under the absolute Sway of a single Person; and that
we in England continue still to be a free People, is without doubt chiefly
owing to that Power, which our Ancestors have from time to time exerted, of
impeaching such of the great Ones, as they saw entering upon Measures, which
plainly tended to introduce unlimited Dominion.

We have been hitherto preserved by pulling down such Men, as were setting
themselves and their Master above the Laws; and we shall transmit to Posterity
our Civil Rights untouched and untainted, if we do not lose our wonted Courage.

If therefore, in any future Reign, it should be seen, that the Ministers waste
the Kingdom's Treasure, that they misgovern or misapply it, that they break
into appropriated Fonds; that they give Advices which invade Property, and
which, in their Consequences, tend to disaffect the People. And lastly, that to
secure themselves they promote one Council, which must end in the subversion of
all the Laws; if these things should come to appear, they who represent their
Country will not be afraid to attack these bold and high Crimes with
Complaints, Addresses and Impeachments; for if this be omitted, the Impunity
such Men have found will engage so many new Offenders, that at last, by their
Number, they grow safe, and above Correction; and when this happens (as it has
appeared in the instance of France) the Liberties of a Country are entirely
lost.

When Matters are become unquiet, by ill Conduct, discerning Princes, like Wise
Men who have a Lawsuit, desire to piece things up as soon as possible, and to
remove the Bone of Dissension; as seeing full well, That Troubles make the
common People Inquisitive, that Inquiry gives 'em Knowledge; and that when they
have Knowledge, they are very hard to Govern.

But ill Ministers often think that the best Course to save themselves, is yet
farther to embroil their Masters business, not considering, that the more
things grow disturbed, the greater Necessity there will be of sacrificing them
to appease the People's Anger.

Statesmen should take great Care how they contract Public Hatred: For both
Good and Bad Kings desert 'em at last, and with just Reason; for he who has not
Judgment, Conduct and Wisdom enough to avoid being odious, deserves not to be
protected by his Prince, to his own Hurt and Danger.

Is there any Instance of a Wise, Just, and Good King (Reigning so long as to
have his Virtues known) who had not the Hearts and Affection of his Subjects?
When Plots are formed against such Princes, are they not presently defeated?
And does not all Mankind detest the Conspirators? And let some Flatterers say
what they will, the Vulgar are not impatient of any Rule* that is tolerably
fair and easy; at bottom they love the Splendour of a Court, and are fond of
Regal Power; so that Kings, who will but stoop the least to be Popular, are
doated upon, and Idolis'd in every Country.

The same thing holds in relation to Ministers, if they are honest, if they
have a Superior Genius, if they do not make too much have to be rich, if they
are notoriously seen to prefer the Common Welfare before their own Private
Interest, if they are Affable and Industrious in doing good Offices, if by
their Actions it is known that they do not desire to hold their Stations upon
any ignoble Terms, if they are not Haughty, Arrogant, and Insolent, they may
Rule the State without Clamors, they may grow Gray in their Dignities and
Offices, the best Part of Mankind will be constantly of their Side. And if they
are at any time attacked by Private Malice upon some Disobligations or
Disappointment, their Enemies will not be able to do 'em any hurt: Clouded they
may be for a while, but they will soon shine out with fresher Luster. If by
Inadvertency, and through the Frailty of humane Nature, they have made false
Steps, and committed small Faults, the General Voice will be ready to excuse
'em, and their Perfections shall be put in the Balances, and outweigh their
Errors.

But here it may be objected, that Richlieu, who was undoubtedly one of the
Greatest Men that ever undertook the Guidance of a State, and who had very near
all the good Qualities necessary for one to whom the Reins of Empire are
committed, did, notwithstanding, lie under continual Accusations, Popular
Anger, and Conspiracies against his Person. To which we answer, That this
Cardinal was a good Minister for the French King, but not for France. He had
all along Designs to make his Master Absolute. It Is true, he endeavored, by his
Sagacity, Care, and Deep Foresight, to make the French as great and happy as a
Country can possibly be under an unlimitted Dominion: However, his Foundation
was not found at bottom, nor honest to Humane kind: He was therefore, from time
to time, harras'd, interrupted and perplexed by the few good Patriots that
remained, who had still an Eye toward their ancient Constitution: Some indeed
joined with these to oppose him, who did not act upon so right a Principle.

But when the Ministers in the Measures they take to promote their Master's
Greatness, consider their Countries Freedom, when at one and the same time they
are Trusty and Impartial Servants to Prince and Country both, when they duly
Contemplate how unwise and wrong it is ever to let them have a divided
Interest; Such States Men as do all this, stand like Rocks against whom the
Waves, stirred and moved forward by vulgar Breath, beat in Vain. They are safe,
Revered by the best sort, and the Darlings of the People; Such need not fear
the scanning of their Actions, Popular Anger, nor the secret Machinations of
discontented Persons; Their Innocence is their sure Guard, Armed with which,
they are not apprehensive of Impeachments.

From what has been here said peradventure it will appear, that mixed
Governments are not to be long preserved under their old Form, unless such as
represent their Country Do hold a strong hand over the Men of Business, calling
those to an Account, who either through Folly or upon some wicked Design,
pursue Distructive Measures.

But this high Cordial is not to be used upon every flight Occasion; 'twas
never intended by our Ancestors to encounter stempers better Cured another way,
and to be then only Administered when the Body Politic was sick at Heart.
Nothing can be Admired and Awful that at every turn is exposed to common View;
Impeachments are the Laws Supreme Sword which should be Drawn only to cut off
great Offenses; It should hang high, with the Scabard on, over the Heads and in
the View of such as meddle in Matters of State, and when it is unsheathed, it
should be in a Way and Manner so very Terrible, as to make all Offenders
Tremble.

If in Times to come, our Affairs should happen to be under an ill
Administration, the Calamities that must thereby fall upon all Degrees of Men
(those excepted who shall have enriched themselves by the Public Spoils) will
stir up the Legislative Authority to Interpose in looking after our future
Safety.

And at such a season perhaps it will be thought the Sublimest Wisdom of all,
not to be angry with Persons but to mend Things, and that it will not Import
much tho the Criminal escape unpunished, so the Fault can be Corrected. The
remorse and shame of having, may be, in a few Years ruined a Rich and
Flourishing People (for so the Case may happen) will be Punishment enough to
those who have left in 'em any seeds of Honor.

Such therefore as mean their Country well in an unhappy Juncture of this
Nature when they go to give Affairs a better Complexion, should in all
likelihood begin their Work by Determining and Pronouncing What Councils have
been directly against the Law, what Advices have Tended to Impoverish the Crown
and Kingdom, and what Practices have wasted the Nations Tr^asure. And when in
this Solemn Manner they have Condemned the Offenses, if they think fit, the
Offenders may be reached with Ease.

If we should ever have a Set of Statesmen whose Offenses will compel the
Nation to Accuse them, they will endeavor to cover their own Faults by
recriminating upon the Proceedings of former times. If they are Charged with
wasting the Public Treasure, with giving away the Crown Lands, with aiming at
Arbitrary Power, and to Govern by the Sword, they will be so Audacious to think
they stand justified by answering, The same things were heretofore done. But
they ought to make this Reflection, that King Charles was in danger to loose
his Crown, and that King James actually lost it; because his Ministers persu'd
Measures distructive to the Kingdom.

And now in a few Words to Re-capitulate the whole Matter of this long Section;
If such as represent the People are Incorrupt, Unbiased and Disinterested. If
they diligently attend the Nation's Service. if they carefully watch
Encroachments upon the Constitution. If they make Provision against future
Evils. If they look Narrowly into the Debts and Expenses of the Nation. If they
hold a strong Hand over the Men of Business. And if in this Manner Private
Persons perform their Duty to the Public, we shall not fail in all succeeding
Times, to see a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom in such as are trusted with
the Administration of Affairs. For it may be laid down for a certain Maxim,
That Statesmen will hardly be Negligent, Corrupt or Arbitrary, when they are
overlooked with careful Eyes by so Considerable a Part of the Constitution.

And where Things are well Administered That Country will always increase in
Wealth and Power. Have we not before our Eyes the Example of Spain, laboring
under Public and Private Wants, occasioned by nothing but a long Series of
Misgovernment? What has preserved the Venetians for thirteen Centuries against
such Potent Leagues as have been frequently formed against 'em, but that the
goodness of their Constitution has enabled them to do great things with a very
little? Would People under a Tyranny, or indeed under a better Form of
Government ill managed, have defended themselves with such Courage as Venice
and Holland have done? Did ever Countries fight so Bravely for their
Oppressors, as Nations that have contended in the Defense of their own
Liberties? Where Matters are in a tottering Condition, do not the People grow
sullen and loath to venture their Stocks out of their sight? Is it not seen
that at such a time Men hoard their Money up which should Circulate in Trade?
When the Subjects are under Apprehensions that ill Conduct at home will at last
produce Wars, Dangers and Invasions from abroad, have they not in all Ages at
such a Season intermitted their Foreign Traffic, Manufactures and other
Business? What begets general Industry, but hopes to have Property preserved?
Is it not evident that tho here and there a Private Man accumulates great
Riches under an Absolute Monarchy, yet that the whole Body of the People is
always poor and miserable in Countries so Governed? What encourages Men, with
infinite Care, Labor, and Hazard, to gather private Wealth, which enriches
the Public at last, but the hopes that stability of Affairs, prudent Conduct,
and just Administration, may produce Peace, Security, and lasting Empire? Where
Men have a Prospect of all this, Strangers resort thither with their Wealth and
Stocks, whereas Merchants and other Cautious Persons abandon Countries, whose
Follies and Corruptions subject 'em to continual Changes and frequent
Revolutions, so that peradventure upon solid Reasons and very just Grounds, we
may lay down, That nothing more Contributes to make a Nation Gainers in the
general Balance of Trade, than good Laws well observed, and a constant Course
of Honest and steady Government.

As Trade and Riches have their Principal Foundation in the Liberty and Laws of
a Country, so when those great Springs go right, they set in Motion the Engine
of a Commonwealth, tho some other Wheels may happen to be out of Order.

To have the Course of Law and Courts of Judicature proceed uncorruptly, is
such a Remainder of Strength and Health, as may in time help to recover the
other sickly Parts of a Constitution.

So that a Nation is not depraved beyond all hope of Cure, which has in the
Chief Seats of Judgment, Men of deep Learning, Probity, Moderation and
Integrity.

We shall Conclude this last Section with some Advices which Richlieu directs
to Lewis the 13 th. Testament Politic Part. 2. Chap. 10.
Unless Princes use their utmost Endeavors to regulate the diverse Orders of
their State; If they are Negligent in the Choice of a good Council; If they
despise their wholesome Advice, unless they take a particular Care to become
such that their Example may prove a speaking Voice; If they are Negligent in
Establishing the Reign of God, that of Reason, and that of Justice together. If
they fail to protect Innocence, to recompense Signal Services to the Public,
and to punish Disobedience, and the Crimes which trouble the Order, the
Discipline, and Safety of States; unless they apply themselves to foresee and
prevent the Evils that may happen, and to divert by careful Negotiations the
Storms which Clouds drive before them from a greater Distance than is thought;
If Favor hinders them from making a good choice of those they Honor with
great Employments, and with the Principal Offices of the Kingdom; If on all
Occasions they do not prefer Public Interest to Private Advantages, tho
otherwise never so good Livers, they will be found more guilty than those who
actually transgress the Commands and Laws of God, it being certain that to omit
what we are obliged to do, and to commit what we ought not to do, is the same
thing.

FINIS.

