A NEW DISCOVERY OF THE Sham-Presbyterian Plot. OR, The substance of the
Information of James Carol, given in upon Oath before the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor of LONDON, July 1681. Together with an Account of the Apprehension
of one Lamport an Irish Papist, that endeavored to suborn the said Carol. The
said Lamport being seized in his Bed the 10th. of this Instant August.

The Information of James Carol a Protestant Englishman late of Dublin, and
first Discoverer of the horrid Popish Plot in Ireland, in the Year 1672. sworn,
and examined before the Right Honorable Sr. Patient Ward Knight Lord Mayor of
London.
THis Informant says, That he has been enforced to expend, and been at above
1000. l. Damages by the unjust Prosecutions of Papists of great Power in
Ireland, by reason of his Discovery of an Horrid Popish Plot carrying on in
that Kingdom in 1672. which has been to the utter Ruin of Himself and his
Family; His Wife dying big with Child in 1680. of Blows received from the
Papists; and this Informant narrowly escaping with his Life: That in 1673. he
was dealt with to retract his Evidence, and tempted thereunto with the promised
reward of 500 l. But the Informant Refused to be prevailed with, considering
the everlasting Damage he must incur by such unjust Actions: That about the
beginning of June last, the Informant happened to meet with one Peter Lamport,
an Irish Papist, and pretended Merchant, whose Lodging was in Rosemary-Lane,
who inviting this Informant to drink a Dish of Coffee with him at Mr. Bridges
Coffee-house in Pope's Head Ally, over against the Royal Exchange, carried him
into an obscure and remote part of the Room alone, and then and there told this
Deponent, That there had a long time been a great talk of a Popish Plot; But
shortly it would be proved by many witnesses, That it was only a Presbyterian
Plot; and That those that had endeavored to make out a Popish Plot, would be
seized and hanged, if they would not turn it on the Presbyterians; And that the
Earl of Shaftsbury, and several other Protestant Lords and others, would be
seized and sent to the Tower; abusing them, and many others, with many
opprobrious and scandalous Names: And added, That Fitz Harris is a great Rogue,
and would be hanged, although he now declares the Presbyterians employed him,
and will do any thing in hopes that his Majesty will pardon him; But there is
the word of a King for it, He shall dye, for there is no trusting him. You see,
(said the said Lamport, further directing his discourse to this Informant) how
you and others have been slighted a long time; Therefore take my Advice, be you
concerned in making it out to be a Presbyterian Plot. The Informant demanded,
in what Particulars he might do it, and prayed him to explain his mind.

Lamport replied -- I am sure you understand me well enough; it is to be a
Presbyterian Plot, and you will be easily believed and credited, having of late
been conversant with them, and now is the time to make your own Terms; and were
I in your case, I would make good Terms for my self. It will be the making of
you: Therefore do not lose the Opportunity. To all which, the Informant made
him only general civil Answers, and so for that time they parted.

This Informant further says, That a Week or thereabouts afterward, the said
Lamport met him in Tower-street, and then demanded of him, what he thought of
the Discourse they had the other day. This Informant replied, I believe Sir,
you are concerned, and know much of these Affairs, as to the making it out to
be a Presbyterian Plot. Then the said Lamport swore, That he did know as much
as any man, and more than this Informant would believe; And that this Informant
might take what he said for Truth: For (said he) did I not tell you, That some
of the Lords would be seized on suddenly, and sent to the Tower? and don't you
find my words to be true?

The Informant answered, That he found some of his words to be true, for he had
heard that the Lord Howard was Committed, and that he remembered their last
Discourse very well. Yes, says Lamport, and you will hear of many more Warrants
for the securing of several persons, for having an hand in this
Presbyterian-Plot, and they sent to the Tower e're it be long. Therefore are
you yet concerned or employed in the Business? To which this Informant, willing
to sift his Intentions, replied, -- I have, Sir, been toward Whitehal, since
you gave me that advice. That Is well, said Lamport, take my counsel, and you will
do well; be concerned, and neglect not your time, for you will never have such
another opportunity. And so again we parted.

Suddenly after the said Lamport, as I was credibly informed, went for France;
and on the 26th of July I discovered this whole Transaction upon Oath, to the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor. And understanding since, That the said Lamport
was returned into England, on the 10th of this instant August he was seized in
his Bed in Rosemary-Lane aforesaid; and being carried before Justice Rycroft, I
there again testified the Truth of the Premises against him.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head Ally, in Paternoster Row.
1681.


