The Distressed Estate of the City of DVBLIN IN IRELAND at this present.

Which is besieged by many thousands of the Rebels, who commit most Barbarous
and bloody outrages and Murders against the Protestants inhabiting about the
City.

With the Copy of a wicked and bloody Letter which was sent from one of the
chief of the Rebels in Ireland, to an English Merchant of London, and a Papist.

Full of bitterness and cruelty.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

A True Relation of the Estate of Ireland.
Diverse strange Reports and Rumors have been spread and diffused about this
Kingdom, few of which Reports have been true, but false suggestions fomented
by idle fellows, who for some small fragments of Silver think it no crime to
abuse the Ears of the world with strange and unheard of untruth, therefore J
have thought good to give to the world a true and real Satisfaction of the
estate of the Kingdom of Ireland, which J confess is very deplorable, and
deserves our pity, for great is their calamities, their enemies increasing
daily, as touching the City of Dublin, whereas it was reported that it was
taken, it was untrue, for since the first Conspiracy against the Lord chief
Justices, and the surprisall of the Castle they never attempted any thing
against the City, it being but a vain attempt by reason that the Castle can
command the City in despite of their resistance, and for all the old Irish
that went into Dublin, as soon as the Plot was discovered, they left the City
and joined with Mackqueres, for Tyrone arrived not till above 3. weeks after
the Conspiracy was discovered, and they had gathered to a head, and plundered
many places; and done diverse outrages and murders being animated on by
Macqueres who is of a bloody disposition, but after Tyrones arrival being made
General he restrained them from such bloody enterprises, making Policy his
chief engine to usher mischief, and where Policy prevails not, force makes a
passage, for great men he will entreat with courtesy, but if that be not of
force to draw them to his party, then does he seize of their estates, and
learn them to seek a grave of rest rather then a life so despiacble, many
places have they surprised, many murders have they committed, great are the
outrages that are daily done by them, many slight skirmishes there has been
between the Irish parties and the Protestants, Captain Digby on the 4. day of
December happened to meet with Captain Oneale, marching toward a little
Village in the County of Monno, betwixt whom was a bloody salutation; but
Oneales forces being greater then Digbies; the Protestants retreated with the
loss of some men, many other times there has been skirmishes too tedious at
this time to be related, great are the fears of the Protestants which causes
many to leave the Kingdom, and many have been shipwrackt by reason of the late
tempestuous storms, diverse women and children drowned at Sea in the same ship
that the Gentleman came in that made this Relation, who was miraculously
preserved, by Gods omnipotence and all commanding power, thus leaving all true
Protestants to pray for their deliverance, and with their Prayer good Lord
deliver them and preserve us, and though our troubles be great yet the Lord
will deliver us out of all, Save us good Lord we beseech thee.

The true Copy of a wicked and bloody Letter which was sent from Ireland to an
English Merchant of London, December. 19. 1641
Worthy Sir,
I Can do no less but let you understand the affairs that we have now
undertaken, by reason that we were suppressed in the exercise of our Religion,
which we always have professed, and there is no alteration of it to be had by
force, but by the will of God, if it does please the Almighty God to alter our
hearts, then no doubt but we shall be changed.

As yet we do stand to maintain the Roman Catholic Church to be our true
Church, whom we do now sight under; Therefore we do not any thing but what
our consciences is bound to do.

I pray you, do but consider how stiffely the Protestants did stand to
maintain their Religion in Q. Mary's days, when she prosecuted them to their
lives, and did put so many to death both by fire and other torments, yet they
would not alter their Religion that formerly they professed, because it was
grounded in them by faith in Christ, as they did believe, therefore no force
could prevail with them, but they had rather suffer all the afflictions that
possibly could be invented against them, then to alter their Religion the which
they had been formerly grounded in.

Worthy Sr. Consider our Estates, for the same is our Case at this time, you
cannot but know, how that we are deprived of all our Liberty, and some of our
Religion which are in England is so Persecuted, even to the Banishment of their
Estates, and others of their lives, the which does move us to consider of their
Sufferings, and to make us to prevent the same occasion to our selves in time,
and whilst that we have opportunity for fear their distressed cases should be
ours, the which does move and stir us up to maintain and defend that which we
have begun, and to go on freely to Redeem our selves from that Bondage

For J dare be bold to say, if we could but enjoy the same Liberty of
conscience as formerly we have done that neither I nor any other would have
taken up Arms against the King, for it has been our desire to have lived in
peace, and to have hazarded our Lives and Estates to have done him service, if
his Majesty had Commanded us thereunto, But seeing it otherwise we must
maintain that which is already on foot for better had we dye in the field,
then to endure the miseries that would have happened to us, for professing that
Religion, which our Predecessors from antiquity has lived, and dyed in the
defense thereof.

But as we are now in the field for the freedom of our conscience, so will we
undantedly proceed on for the perfecting of that good work we have begun,
neither are we possessed with the terror or fear of our enemies the
Heretics, who threaten our destruction, for out of a little strength at
first, have we increased to many Thousands, and do daily still increase, both
of our own Country men, and diverse others of our Brethren in England, France,
Spain, and the Low Countries, which continually come to assist us, there is a
great sight of English, and I do believe most of them are Protestants, which
does side with us, and that does encourage us the more, for we do march on
boldly without fear as a man may say, for there is but a few which does oppose
us, and we are to march into Dublin, as we suppose on the 21. of this Instant
Month, for the major part o^ the best of them which lives in the City will
assist us therein, and they have sent to us, to bid us not be dismayed, but to
come on freely and with coragious Spirits, for the Town shall be delivered up
to us, as soon as we come to it, and the City Gates should be Opened at our
approach unto the Walls, for there is but few to oppose and with stand us,
only some certain number of English would put us hard to it at the first
entrance, but they made no doubt but they should subdue them, and then the
Town should be theirs,

Vale, Your friend P. T.
From our Camp near Dublin December. 17. 1641.
FINIS.

