An ACCOUNT of Robert Crosfeilds Proceedings IN THE HOUSE of LORDS, The last
Session, and this Session of Parliament: Wherein will apear the* Present
Miserable State and Condition OF THE NATION, By the Open Violating and Invading
of the Law and Liberty of the Subject: Humbly Presented to the Consideration of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
IT is by all Men an allowed Principle, That it is the Bounden Duty of every
Subject by the Laws of God, Nature, and the Nation, to contribute all that in
him lies toward the Glory of God, and the Service and Preservation of his
Native Country, and the greater his Quality or Station is, whether Spiritual or
Temporal, so much the more is this Duty Incumbent on him.

If this wholesome Principle had been truly and sincerely practiced this Reign,
then might we have expected that God would have blessed our Endeavors, and not
have suffered us to have endured so long and tedious a War, and so great
Expense of Blood and Treasure; and at last to be reduced to such a Pitch of
Misery, as this Nation never groaned under; and (which is more deplorable) not
caused by our Enemies abroad, but our pretended Friends and Patriots at home;
and which is worst of all, the Nation's groaping, as it were, in the Dark, not
seeing the true Rise and Cause of our present Misery and approaching Ruin.

All which will appear by the Violent Oppression, Injustice, and judicial
Blindness of the present Age.

For Brevity's sake I shall pass over a great Act of Publis(...) (...) me in my
entitled stice perv etc. page
Injustice done to the Public by the Commissioners of Accounts, in the
beginning of the Session of Parliament, holden in the Year 1694/^. and begin
the Relation of my Proceedings at the Exhibiting my Petition to the House of
Peers, the same Session of Parliament, as follows, viz.

March 9. 169^. I Presented to the House of Peers the following Petition.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled* Robert Crosfeild.
THat your Petitioner having lately dedicated and presented to your Lordships a
Book entitled, Great Brittain's Tears; setting forth the great Abuses
committed in the Government by Persons in Places of Trust, and also the
Embezlement of the Public Treasure, t^ the great Hazard of the common Safety
of the Nation: And your Petitioner having in the Paper annexed, drawn up some
part of the said Miscarriages and Grievances that the Nation now labors under,
relating to the Royal Navy, and being ready by good substantial Evi^^^^e to
prove the same before this most Honorable House:

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays that your Lordships will please to
hear and examine the said Grievances, that the Offenders may have such
punishment, and the great Numbe^ (...) oppressed, such Relief, as to your
Lordships Wisdom shall seem meet. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
That the present Commissioners for Sick and Wounded Seamen, and Exchanging
Prisoners at War, depending on the Admiralty) not regarding Instructions, or
the Good of the Government, have committed gross Enormities; as Holding or
Conniving at an unlawful Correspondence with the French, and Wronging both King
and Subject in their Accounts, with other great miscarriages: All which has
been about a Year since laid in Writing before the Secretary of State by one
Mr. Baston, and by the King's Command examined before the Lords of the
Admiralty, etc. And it will appear, that the said Commission has been very
injurious to the poor Sailors in particular, and very detrimental to the
Government in general.

2. That the Lords of the Admiralty, and Commissioners of the Navy, have acted
contrary to the Public Good, by countenancing, supporting, and preferring
Criminals; and on the contrary, persecuting the Discoverers, and turning just
Men out of their Offices.

3. That their Lordships have had great Discoveries laid before them of
Embezlements, and other great Frauds committed in the King's Yards, attended
with Forgery and Perjury.

4. That it is manifest some of the Commissioners of the Navy have in that
Office advanced themselves from Salaries of 30 l. per Annum, to vast Estates,
having passed great Frauds, and totally discouraged the Discovery of Embezled
Stores, to the great waste of the Public Treasure.

5. That it has been a long Practice in the Navy to make out false Tickets and
Powers, suspending and del^^ing the poor Sailers in their just Payments, to the
general Discourage^^nt of th^^, and Starving their Families.


But e're I could get the aforesaid Petition Read in the House of Peers, I met
with s^veral difficulties, many Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, declining
to carry in the same; and being almost out of hopes, at length I met with a
Noble Lord, that with much freedom carried it into the House, and caused it to
be Read on the 9th of March last; Whereupon their Lordships were pleased to
Order the Commissioners of ^ccount to lay before the House an Account of the
Proceedings against the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded; and in the mean
time their Lordships did Hear and Examine part of the Matter at the Bar of the
House, which put me in great hopes that ^ll the Evil Practices would have been
laid open that Parliament.

But the Commissioners of Accounts fearing that the Notorious Matters of
Perjury, etc. king in their Office, would have come to light. They to prevent
the same, pretended (...) House, in Answer to their Lordships Order, That the
Matter was still depending before them, and not finished, etc. And so prevailed
with their Lordships to Recommit the matter to them, which was accordingly done
the 20th of March last, and the next day, the 2d. and 3d. of the
abovementioned Articles were also referred to their Examination, with Order to
Transmit the same, when perfected, to the House; which (by reason of much
Important Business) they have not had leisure to do to this day! but how evilly
they have examined the aforesaid matter, sufficiently appears by what has been
Published in (...)
Print, and will also be further demonstrated by what ensues; and so all these
Enormous Crimes were hid, covered and hushed up the last Session of Parliament,
by these Gentlemen's great Ingenuity.

But in order to the Detecting these falatious Practices, I did, against the
Meeting of this present Session of Parliament, Print and Publish a Book
Entitnled, Justice Perverted, etc. Which I Dedicated to both Houses of
Parliament, setting sorth some of the horrible Corruptions in the Government.
Also Mr. Baston Printed and Published his Case, Dedicated to the House of
Peers, containing, not only the Evil Practices of the present Commissioners for
Sick and Wounded, but also the more evil Examination thereof, by the
Commissioners of Accounts. And that all these soul Matters might come to a fair
Examination, I drew up a Petition to the House of Peers, but before I Insert
it, I shall Relate the great (and I believe unparalleled) difficulties I met
with, in bringing the said Petition into the House.

Having drawn up my said Petition, I repaired to that Noble Lord, who carried
it into the House the last Parliament, and prayed his Lordship to cause it to
be Read, but found his Lordship very cool in the matter, though not refusing to
do it; in this manner I waited upon, and attended his Lordship near a Month,
but finding nothing move, and much time lost, I drew another Copy of my
Petition, and presented it to diverse other Noble Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, but none thought fit to Adventure to carry in the said Petition, tho
the matter was actually Depending in the House from the last Parliament; upon
which I was necessitated to take other Measures, and thereupon I wrote a Letter
to my Lord Keeper, and sent it into the House to his Lordship, by the
Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod: A Copy of which Letter is as Follows.

My Lord, Jan. 27. 1695/6.
Although it is the unquestionable Right of every free Born Subject of England,
to have the Liberty of Petitioning, and though it has in all Ages been also
accounted the Indispensible Duty of every Peer, not to refuse a Petition that
shall be offered him; yet have not I been able, in a Months Attendance and
Solicitation of several Noble Lords, to get a Petition carried into the House
of Peers. My said Petition is against Notorious Crimes, that have been
Committed in the Admiralty, Navy, and Sick and Wounded Offices, whereby the
King and Kingdom have been grossly abused, and the public Treasure wasted, to a
very high degree, which has already greatly Endangered the Common Safety, and
certainly will (if not timely redressed) bring the Nation into Confusion; all
which I am fully able to prove.

Therefore, as an Englishman, I think myself obliged to lay open the same by
the Duty I owe to God, my King and my Country.

And so I most humbly pray your Lordship to cause this Letter to be Read to the
House, and move that I may be Called to the Bar to Present my Petition, being
sorry I am forced to trouble your Lordship with this New way of Petitioning the
House of Peers: I am attending at the Door of the House, and Remain, with all
profound respect.

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, Robert Crosfeild.


At the Receiving of which Letter, my Lord Keeper (as I was informed) Acted
with a great deal of Honor; For immediately he Reported the true Nature and
Substance of it to the House, Telling their Lordships withal, That 'twas the
severest Charge that ever he Read; at the making of which Report, the same Lord
(who I had long applied to before) came out of the House in great haste, and
sent one of the Door-keepers to me in the Painted Chamber, desiring me to send
him my Petition, he having lost that which I had given him before, which I
accordingly did, and then his Lordship returning into the House, spoke (as I
was informed) to this effect: That he acknowledged he had been very much Teez'd
about bringing in this Petition; but that when he brought it in the last
Parliament, it not meeting with that Encouragement, he hoped and expected it
would have had, was the Reason why he was so backward in doing it this Session,
at which several of the Lords stood up and said, That if it had been offered to
them, they would have brought it in; and the whole House said, They were very
willing to hear it, but that the Business for the day was Ordered for the
East India Company; so my Petition not being read that day, I concluded his
Lordship would have caused it to be Read the next Morning; but finding nothing
moved, and fearing things were all asleep, I wrote out another Copy, and the
next morning, viz. 29th. of Jannuary, I offered it to a Noble Lord, who told me
he heard I had been refused almost by every Body, and that he would carry it in
for me, which his Lordship accordingly did, and immediately it was Read, a Copy
of which is as follows.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled* Robert Crosfeild,
THat your Petitioner, the last Session of Parliament, presented his humble
Petition to your Lordships setting forth several great Corruptions in the
Government, a (...)ion and Arti(...) of (...) belong (...) ^his ^aper.
Copy (...) is her*unto annexed, and the said Corruptions and Miscarriages
having not been re^ess'd; nor the Actors therein punished, nor the Great
Numbers of Oppressed had any Relief; (but their Miseries Increased) nor the
said Petition thoroughly Examined. And your Petitioner being ready to prove the
Allegations, and Articles therein by Good and Substantial Evidence.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays your Lordships to order a speedy
Hearing of the said Corruptions and Grievances, before this most Honorable
House in such manner, as to your Lordships Wisdom shall seem meet. And your
Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.

Robert Crosfeild.


Upon reading which Petition the House was pleased to make the following order.

Die Mercurii, Jan. 29. 1695.
UPon reading the Petition of Robert Crosfeild, praying to be heard as to the
Corruptions and Grievances, laid before this House the last Session of
Parliament in his Petition. It is ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
in Parliament assembled, that the Commissioners appointed by a late Act of
Parliament to Examine, take and State the public accounts of the Kingdom, do
lay before this House with all Convenient speed; An account in Writing what
they have done upon the orders of this House, sent to them the last Session of
Parliament, in Reference to the matters mentioned in Mr. Crosfeilds Petition.

Math. Johnson Cler. Parliamentor.


As soon as this order was made, I was told by a Member of the house that when
the Commissioners of accounts returned their Answer, and that the whole matter
lay fairly before the house, that then their Lordships would appoint a
Committee to Examine it; accordingly I waited several days, and finding no
Report from the Commissioners of accounts, and having good grounds to believe
they would never return any, by reason it would discover their own Partial and
Illegal practices, I therefore acquainted a Noble Lord therewith, and prayed
his Lordship to move the house to appoint a Committee to Examine these
Corruptions, before whom I would prove diverse Notorious matters, that were
never before the Commissioners of Accounts, and delivered his Lordship a
Petition to that purpose, which will be hereafter incerted. But his Lordship
did not think fit to move the house thereupon, telling me, I had better wait
some time longer, which I accordingly did. -- But finding that diverse Crafty
and Scandalous Reports were spread abroad, Namely, That my design in bringing
these Complaints was not so much for the public good, as it was to cause heats
and feuds in Parliament to hinder the Kings Affairs, for that if these matters
were laid before the King, his Majesty would effectually redress the same; But
to acquit my self of such a Callumny I drew up a Petition to his Majesty, which
I presented at Kensington, on Sunday the 9th of Feb. Inst. A Copy of which
Petition is as follows.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of Robert Crosfeild.
Shows, THat your Petitioner has a few days since presented his humble
Petition to the house of peers (where it is now depending) setting forth the
great Corruptions and Evil Practices of the Admiralty, Navy, and Sick, and
Wounded Offices, a Vid. The Pe(...)tion and A(...)ticles in th(...) beginning of
this paper.
Copy of which is hereunto annexed.

That the said Corruptions having been practiced and strongly supported, the
greatest part of your Majesty's Reign, Your Petitioner humbly Conceives, that
it is from thence has proceeded all the Ruins and Distresses that have fallen
upon the public, which if not redressed are likely to Increase to such a
degree, as to prove of fatal Consequence.

That as these proceedings, do greatly tend to Allienate the hearts of your
Majesty's good Subjects, who have ventured their Lives and Fortunes for your
Majesty's service, so on the Contrary, the Redress of these Grievances and
bringing the Offenders to Justice, will greatly draw the affection of your
faithful people, to your Majesty's Government: and your Petitioner, in all
humility Conceives that the general love of those Millions of your Majesty's
good Subjects that have and do so freely Contribute their Estates for your
Majesty's Service, is much more to be valued than the Love of those few that
serve your Majesty chiefly for the Lucre of great Estates, some of whom it is to
be feared, will be too ready when oppertunity serves, to draw their Swords in
behalf of your Majesty's Enemies, the truth of which appears by their wilful
fatal Management, in almost every Branch of your Majesty's Service this War.

That your Petitioner being desirous (if possible) to prevent these matters
being Examined in open Parliament, least feuds and heats should a rise, which
may be of ill Consequence to your Majestys Affairs, and being humbly of opinion
that your Majesty may redress these Grievances by a Committee of such Noble
Persons, who well understand the nature of the Crimes, and are of known
Integrity, and Zealous for your Majestys true Interest and happy Government,
the Names of whom your Petitioner has humbly presumed to insert.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays your Sacred Majesty, to appoint
the said Committee so Duke of Shrewsbury. Lord privy Seal. Marquess of
Normanby. Earl of Rochester. Earl of Bridgwater. Earl of Stamford. Earl of
Malborough. Earl of Monmouth. Earl of Torrington. Lord Cornwallis. Marquess of
Carmarthen. Lord Cornbury. Sir Richard Onslow. Sir Samuel Bernadiston.

named (with such other persons as your Majesty in Wisdom shall think fit to
add thereto) to Hear and Examine the Articles and Allegations in the annexed
petition, and with all Convenient speed to make a Report to your Majesty,
without the accustomed formality and Delays, That the Offenders may be
punnish'd, the Grievances Redressed, and the minds of Your Majesty's good
Subjects quietted, and their Hearts Reunited to your Majesty in all Love and
Duty. And your Petitioner shall ever pray.

Robert Crosfeild.


The same Evening I received the Kings answer to this Petition, by the
Secretary of State to this Effect, That my Petition was Read, but that the
matter being depending before the house of Peers, his Majesly did not think fit
to meddle with it. And thus I found the aforesaid Reports of the Kings hearing
these matters to be utterly false, whereupon, I applied again to the house of
Peers, and finding no Report nor any answer returned from the Commissioners of
Accounts, nor any probability of the same: I drew another Copy of the
aforementioned Petition, relating to the Commissioners of Accounts, which by
reason of the great difficulty I had found to get it Carried into the house; I
enclosed it in a better and sent it to Sir George Treby, Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Plea's, who was then speaker of the house (my Lord keeper being
Indisposed) by the Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod, a Copy of which Letter and
Petition is as follows, viz.

February 13th 1695/6.
My Lord,
THE great difficulty I have found, to get a Petition Carried into the house of
peers, oblig^^ me to give your Lordship this trouble.

I have a Petition of Complaint against diverse Notorious Corruptions, in the
Government now depending in the House, upon which their Lordships have Ishu'd
an order to the Commissioners of Accounts, But the said Commissioners delaying,
or rather never Intending to obey the said order, and fearing the house of
Peers, as well as the Nation in General may be a gain Imposed upon, and
disappointed this Session of Parliament as they were the last, I therefore
humbly pray your Lordship to read the Enclosed Petition to the house, it being
of great Concern to the public good: And Mr. Baston who is named therein with
my self, are attending at the Door to answer the same.

I am, My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient Servant Robert Crosfeild.
Directed on the back side to the Right Honorable Sir George Treby, Lord Chief
Justice of the common Plea's.




To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of Robert Crosfeild.
Shows, THat when your Petitioner presented his humble Petition, to your
Lordships the last Session and this Session of Parliament, It was not only
designed to lay open the Corruptions and Evil practices of the Admiralty, Navy,
and Sick, and Wounded Offices, but also Intended as an Appeal from the Justice
of the Commissioners, for Stating the public Accounts, who in the latter end
of the year 1693. Had the Complaint laid before them, against the present
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, which contrary to the public good, they
have delayed to this day in the manner following, viz.

That the said Complaint was about five months in their Office sworn to, before
it came under Examination, till on the first of August 1694 The said
Commissioners of Accounts sent for Mr. Baston, and, after rejecting the first
three Articles in his Complaint, they, in an Illegal and Arbitrary manner,
Examined the rest, and Countenanced and Conceall'd manifest Perjury therein, as
well as other notorious Crimes, all which lay Dormant till the beginning of
March 1694.

That your Petitioner the last Session of Parliament, presenting his humble
Petition to this most Honorable House; your Lordships were pleased to order
the said Commissioners of Accounts, to lay before the House an account of the
proceedings, against the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, to which in Eleven
days, viz. from the 9th to the 20th of March, they returned only a Verbal
answer, and pretended the matter was still depending before them and not
finished, etc. by which they prevailed to have it Recommitted, which was
accordingly done, as well as the 2d and 3d Articles in my Petition, which they
Examined as Illegally as before (all which appears by what Mr. Baston and your
Petitioner have set forth in Print). And so the matter has been delayed by the
said Commissioners of Accounts to this day, by which means the Nation has been
sadly disappointed of a most necessary discovery, which otherwise might have
been laid open to your Lordships the last Session of Parliament, and in all
probability, Infinite Evils prevented that has since fallen upon the Public.

That the Commissioners of Accounts having acted in the aforementioned manner,
their Report, whenever they make it, will appear to their shame, and so your
Petitioner humbly Conceives it naturally follows, they will never obey the
present order of this most Honorable House (which has already been fifteen
days unanswered) so as to make a Report of these matters willingly, but
Endeavor by all means possible to Evade and delay it this Session of
Parliament also, under diverse specious pretenses of other more Important
business. For preventing of which, and for that your Petitioner humbly
Conceives, the distresses and danger that the public lies under, is very great
by reason of the violent perverting and obstructing of Justice, and for that
the adversaries have no way to withstand a Legal hearing of these Notorious
matters, but by the aforesaid method of delays.

Your Petitioner does therefore most humbly pray, your Lordships to appoint a
Committee to hear and Examine the Articles, and Allegations in his late
Petition, who in the mean time that the Commissioners of Accounts may delay
their Report, shall have diverse Ennormous Crimes proved before their
Lordships, that were never before the said Commissioners of Accounts.

And your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc. Robert Crosfeild.


This Petition Enclosed in the aforesaid Letter, was delivered by the Usher of
the Black-Rod to Sir George Treby, and I expecting his Lordship would have
moved the house therein (as my Lord Keeper had done before) I attended that
day, but heard nothing of it, Then I came to the House the next morning, and
understood from one of the Clerks of the Parliament whose name I think is
Walker) That Sir George Treby had given my Letter and Petition to him, and told
him he had nothing to do to move the House in it, and that every body knew Mr.
Crosfeilds business, and offered to give my Petition back.

Thus all these foul Crimes, that have been laying open these two Sessions of
Parliament, are knocked down dead by this last Act of denial of Justice in the
highest Court of Indicature, which has obliged me to Print these Proceedings;
and because the matters are so notorious, as hardly to be Parell'd in any Age
or Nation, I shall therefore crave leave to make some short Observations upon
the whole.

And 1st, observing our unaccountable Losses and Miscarriages with the great
Streights, into which the public is brought to find out Money for Carrying on
the War, It is matter of amazement to Consider, That there should be such
Coldness, or rather unwillingness to Examine into that Mass of Wickedness, that
has been laid open, which having overspread the Nation like a Leprosy, has been
the true Cause of all our passed and present miseries, and must Inevitably
bring us to Ruin, if the Laws are not speedily put in Execution to prevent it.
I say, it is matter of Amazement, that we should be backward to Enquire into the
Cause of our Misery.

2dly, Our practices are not only contrary to the Rules of common Prudence and
Reason, but also to the practice of all other Nations, It being publicly
known, That the French and Venetians have lately constituted Commissioners, to
Enquire into public frauds, as naturally concluding (tho none are Complained
of) that there will be Cheats and Embezelments of the public Money in time of
War, when there is most need of frugality. But we are so far from doing like
them, that we are unwilling to Enquire into those Notorious Miscarriages that
are already laid open, tho some of them have been actually proved over and
over, and the Criminals Protected and Continued in their Employments to this
day.

3dly, That as my Lord Keeper Acted with much Honor, and did his Duty for the
publickgood, in Reporting my Letter before mentioned to the House of Peers, so
on the contrary Sir George Treby, in refusing to Read or Report my Letter, or
Petition to the House, has only denied Justice, and put a stop to this
necessary Discovery, and Contributed to protect those Criminals that ought to
be brought to Justice: But has also given a president to Encourage Evil
Practices, and Destroy the Liberty of the subject by taking away the Petition
Right. For if Officers and Ministers of Trust Act Corruptly, and Oppress the
People, and there be no way to appeal from their Justice but to Parliament,
then such Appeal or Complaint must be by Petition; But if the known Liberty and
Right of Petitioning be destroyed, our Laws are Ineffectual and all great Men
become Lawless, none being able to bring them to answer their Crimes: And if
our Laws are not put in Execution, they are in effect Discontinu'd and
Abolished. And if Laws be the Foundation support and upholder of Government,
Then whatever Government wants will or strength to assert its own Laws, and
bring offenders to Justice, must needs be in a very weak and Tottering
Condition and near a period, and this ought to be matter of great sorrow, to
all thinking Men that wish the prosperity of their Country, for however,
slightly it may be thought of it is certainly a most fore and dangerous Disease,
and Requires a speedy and strong purge, or 'twill be past Cure.

And therefore in short, if there be any Law in England, to punish those
hanious Crimes that I have offered to prove, I do and shall insist on, and
Demand it as my Birth Right, to be Speedily and Legally heard upon my Petition,
and Articles now lying in the House of Peers: Not doubting but by their
Lordships Wisdom, Prudence, and Moderation, matters may soon be Regulated to
the Happiness of the King and Kingdom.

Robert Crosfeild.
February 18th 1695/6*

