A DISCOURSE, SHOWING That it is Lawful, and our Duty To swear OBEDIENCE to
KING William, Notwithstanding the Oath of ALLEGIANCE taken to the LATE KING.

By a Divine in the North.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hall, Bookseller in Newcastle upon Tyne. 1689.

TO THE Renownedly Learned and Reverend GILBERT BVRNET, D D. Lord BISHOP of
SARVM.
Reverend Sir,
MY Zeal for this present Government, (the happiest Change that ever Nation was
blessed with,) and my Trouble to see some remaining Scruples, which (in despite
of all God's manifestations to us) seem yet to disturb our Israel, have so far
transported me beyond the bounds of Modesty, and made me forget my own
Weakness, as to thrust upon you this unworthy Pamphlet.

My Forwardness for the Cause had wellnigh put me upon the printing of it
without farther consultation; but upon second thoughts I judged it safer in a
matter, of this weight, to consult some of greater Learning: And whilst my
thoughts were roving to find out some proper persons, (of which, upon several
accounts, there are but few in this quarter of our World,) attracted with the
fame of Your Worth, and Learning, and the sense of Your great Actings in our
happy Change it self, they seemed to bend to You-wards. And though a person of
less Business, and less Note, might very well have served to examine so
pitiful a Piece, yet promising my self better usage from You, whose Candor
must be answerable to Your Greatness, than perhaps I might meet with from some
of lesser note, I resolved, however bold it might appear in me, to take this
way. Accept therefore, Reverend Sir, this poor Piece, which however rude it be,
if it be but sound I care not: And though it was very fond of the journey, to
come and present it self to You, yet it will, upon the approach of so grave a
Censure, (methinks) begin to tremble. And if I be prevented by any other who
(questionless) may do it better, I am very well pleased with the Service which
may be done ^o my Sovereigns by it, and think my self sufficiently rewarded for
my poor Endeavors, that I had the Honor of expressing to You my readiness in
them. God preserve You, Reverend Sir, and enrich his Church more and more with
such noble Patriots.

A DISCOURSE, SHOWING That it is Lawful, and our Duty To swear OBEDIENCE to
KING William, Notwithstanding the Oath of ALLEGIANCE taken to the late King.
AMong the many Scruples of Conscience, which have risen from this turn of
Times, the greatest, in my opinion, and (I hope) the last is this: Whether or
no it be lawful for those, who have sworn Allegiance to the late King, to take
this new Oath of Allegiance to King William.

This is the great Scruple which, I find, cannot easily be shaken off by men
even of greatest Learning, and greatest Integrity; and if men could but once
clear themselves of this, I hope, there will remain no farther cause of Scruple.

And although I do not pretend to prescribe Rules to others, who are wiser and
better than my self, yet what I here write for my own satisfaction, may perhaps
be somewhat satisfactory too to such whose want of leisure, or other lets, may
hinder them from making enquiry into the thing themselves.

First then, There are two preliminary Questions necessary to be considered, in
order to the resolving this present Scruple.

The first is, Whether or no I can be any longer obliged to a man by Oath, or
otherwise, when he himself is divested of that Power, in consideration of which
I was by Oath, or otherwise, obliged to him? And it is certain I cannot. The
thing is so common, and clear, that it needs not much proving, there being
daily instances of the thing: For though a man is obliged to a Lord of a
Manor, a Magistrate, or Master, so long as they are such, yet when they once
cease to be such, and are superseded by Oaths, my Obligation, how strong
soever, does then cease, and I may anew be obliged to the Succeeder.

The next Question is, Who is to be owned as supreme? He who was once our
lawful King, or he who by Force, or otherwise, has dethroned this King, and
is himself seated upon the Throne?

And in my opionion, the last is supreme; for the bearing of the Sword is so
inseparable from the supreme Power, that the very Life of Supremacy consists in
it; and it is as improper to call him King who wants Power, as to call him a
man, who wants Reason.

A King is set over a People by God, as his Vicegerent, and endued with Power
sufficient to endourage and defend the righteous, and punish the wicked; but
when God takes from him all Power, so that he can neither do the one, nor the
other, How can he be called God's Vicegerent, and Supreme? Is not he rather to
be called so, and to be looked upon to be such, upon whom God has transferred
this Power?

And as he who is lawfully ejected can no longer lay any Claim to that Estate
out of which he is ejected, but he is to be owned as Lord, who is lawfully
possessed of it; so when God, who has the sole Disposal of Crowns, and may give
them to whom he pleases, does dispossess a King of a Crown, and puts another in
his place, we are then to acquiesce. It Is true, whilst the thing is in dispute,
it is the part of every honest man, to stand up for his King as much as he can,
but when once the business is ended, and actual possession given, (which could
never be without God's Fiat, who himself is the Judge of Kings, and puts down
one, and sets up another,) there is then no farther Appeal to be made, or
Writ of Error brought, unless we think we are higher than God, and have a
better Right to dispose of Crowns then he; we are therefore to own him as
supreme, whom God has set up, and not obstinately to stand but for him who is
actually dispossessed.

Again: Since the Tribute, and Revenues of a Crown are the Stipend of God, (if
I may call it so,) appropriated by God to the supreme Powers, as his Ministers,
it being necessary for the support of their Grandeur, and Carrying on of their
Business, and therefore, St. Paul says, They are God's Ministers attending
continually upon this very thing: When then this Tribute is quite taken from
one, and given to another, so that it is impossible for him from whom it is
taken to appear any longer as the Minister of God, and carry on his Business,
God then seems to me to have actually discharged such an one from his Service,
and to have pitched upon the other to be his Minister, to whom the Tribute is
paid: And therefore it seems clear to me, that he is to be owned as Supreme,
and God's Minister, who actually possesses the Throne, and the Appurtenances
thereof; and not he who was once King but is now dispossessed:

As for that nice Distinction of a King de jure, and a King de facto, I look
upon it to be a mere Chimaera, and no way practicable. A man cannot serve two
Masters, as our Savior says: We must suppose this King de jure to be a King,
and if he be a King, he must be acknowledged for such, and have all the Honor
and Service paid him which is due to a King.

Again: The King de facto must be acknowledged too to be a King, and being so,
must be honored and served as a King; now what can a man do in this case? If
he serve the one he must neglect the other, if he cleave to the one, he must
forsake the other; he cannot serve them both, they bothlaying Claim to the same
Services. Since then it is impossible to serve them both, there can be no such
thing in Nature as two Kings, a King de jure, and a King de facto; for we know
that Nature designs an End to all her Actions, but there can be no such Action
where the End is impossible: The Query is then, Since there must be but one
King, which of the two is he? The King de jure, or the King de facto? It is
certain the last is he.

My Argument is this: Affairs cannot be managed by Fancy, and Suppositions;
there must be acting in the case: Now a King de jure is only an empty Title,
and cannot act, the whole Power of Acting being in the King de facto; and
therefore unless you think you can live upon mere Notions, you must of
necessity have recourse to the King de facto, and own him as Supreme, since he
is only in a capacity to act.

And whereas it is said, That the Crown cannot be forfeited, and that therefore
a King whilst he lives can never cease to be King; Once King, and allways King.
To this I answer: Grant that it cannot legally be forfeited, and that though
the Law obliges the King, yet it cannot punish him; and that the Law has so
fenced about the Persons of Kings, that it is impossible in the sense of the
Law, for a King upon any Trespass whatever to forfeit his Crown; and that there
is no Subject can offer any Violence, or attempt any thing against the
Prerogative or Person of the King, but at the same time he becomes a Trespasser
of the Law, and by the Law is punishable; grant all this I say, that the Laws
of the Land do, as much as they can, secure the Right of Dominion in the Person
of a King, and his Successors, so that as far as they can make him, he is King
de jure; yet jure they can never make him so absolute, but that God has still
a Right above him, and Power to depose him; and whenever he does it, the Right,
and Power, which were by Law derived, or secured to that King, must then cease,
and be null: And therefore (in my opinion) let such a King, and his Abetters
pretend to what they will, and lay Claim to the Crown as much as they please,
by virtue of this and the other Constitution of Government, yet such Claim is
quite out of doors, when there is another King de facto; and the King de facto
is King de jure, and claims under a far greater Right; for it is Jure divino
that Kings reign, but it is only Jure humano that they are hereditary, or
elective, that there is this or the other sort of Government. It is certain
therefore, that though it be granted, that the Crown cannot legally be
forfeited, yet it may be otherwise lost, and seized on; God may make a
Forfeiture of it, and dispose of it to whom he pleases; otherwise there can be
no Conqueror in the World can have any Right to the Crown, which he conquers.

But you will say, A Conqueror is one thing, and an Usurper is another; you
will own a Conqueror to be supreme, even when the conquered King is living;
but you will not own an Usurper to be so: And thus (I know) many will talk, but
(if I may be so bold as to say so) it is just at random, never knowing, nor
weighing what Reason there may be for the one more than the other: But I am
resolved, with the little Wit I have, to pause upon things better, before I
swallow them down so inconsiderately. Let us then compare the Conqueror and
Usurper together, and see wherein the Excellency of the one lies above the
other.

And first then, Grant that some Conquerours have at first been on the
defensive side, and have had just Cause of War, yet they were not so just to
give over, when they have got sufficient Reparations; but being heartened with
Success, would admit of no Terms, but went still on, till they had ruined their
neighboring Prince: This (I am sure) was neither just, nor lawful; and yet,
being Conquerours, their Supremacy is owned: But where there is one who at
first has had just Cause of War, there are many of them for this one who had
not, but invaded their Neighbors purely out of Ambition, and a desire to
enlarge their Dominions: This surely was unjust, and yet their Supremacy is
owned. I ask then, What is the cause why we may lawfully own their Supremacy?
Is it the unlawfullness of their War? No sure; that cannot be it. What can it
be then? Truly nothing else, but because they proved victorious, and possessed
themselves of the Throne. Now then, if a Conqueror is to be owned as Supreme
because he is possessed of the Throne, though his War was illegal; I ask, Why an
Usurper is not to be owned as Supreme, when possessed of the Throne, though he
too came illegally to it?

It Is true, you may say, you look not upon an illegal War to be so heinous as
Rebellion; I grant it; but yet I look upon them both to be unlawful Means of
coming to a Crown.

The truth of it is, though the Lord cannot be the Author of the Evil of Sin,
yet he is the Author of the Evil of Punishment. Can there be evil in the City,
(says Amos,) and the Lord has not done it? And God, in whose Power alone it
is to punish Kings, may punish them as well by the Hand of a Rebel, as an
Invader. We have so many instances of this, and those so clearly owned by God
too, that it is not to be questioned; and he has too as clearly owned these
very men to be set up by him, and to be his Kings, who (though they had no good
design of their own in it) were yet designed by him, for the Punishment of
those other Kings whom they dispossessed. And when they are thus set up, surely
they are Supreme, and are to be owned as such, unless we will prove (...), and
fight against God. And therefore, if we first have recourse to examples taken
out of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, we shall find, that though Rebels
(for such they were, when they did it without a special Commission from God)
did rise up, and kill their Kings, and possess their Thrones, that the People
were yet subject unto them; and they are listed among the other King's, and
their Reigns set down as Kings in the sacred Cronicle, but (it is true) with the
infamous addition too of the Treason which they wrought. And when it pleased
God that they should be served in the same kind, yet (of so sanctifying a
nature is the Enjoyment of the Crown) even the persons of those Usurpers were
by it accounted so sacred, that even they who rebelled against them, following
their example, are by the Holy Ghost branded for Traitors, and punished
accordingly. I shall for brevity sake referr you to the Scripture it self,
where you shall find Examples of this in many, if not in most of the Kings of
Israel.

But to deal fairly, as one who is not wedded to his opinion, but desires to
inform and be informed, there is one instance amongst the Kings of Israel which
seems to make against me; and it is that of Zimri, who killed Elah, and was
himself within seven days killed by Omri, whom all the People of Israel
assisted. But we must consider, that he was not seated upon the Throne of the
Kingdom, but reigned only in one City, namely, Tirzah, all the rest of the
Kingdom disowning him.

But there is another Example amongst the Kings of Judah, which seems to make
much more against me, and to be the very Case in hand. Athaliah, the
Queen Mother, her Son Ahaziah, King of Judah, being dead, arose, and destroyed
all the Seed Royal, and possessed her self of the Throne, and reigned seven
Years, (a considerable time to have ended all Disputes, if the Case had not
been extraordinary;) Jehoshebah, his Aunt, having saved Joash; the only Son of
Ahaziah that was left unkill'd, hid him all that time; and then Jehojadah the
Priest acquainting the chief Officers with it, brought him forth, where, with
an unanimous consent, he was forthwith proclaimed; with the shouts of which
proclamation, Atbaliah being alarmed, and incensed, runs into the Temple, and
seeing the young King upon the Throne, does there in her own right, her self
being Herald, forthwith proclaim them Traitors, crying, Treason, Treason; but
they were so far, from taking notice of any thing of a Claim which she made to
the Crown, or of her Accusation of Treason which she laid against them, that,
as Jehojadah had before ordered it, she was forthwith taken out, and executed.
And certainly either this instance or none will be able to make out, That
Usurpers, when seated upon the Throne, are yet to be deposed, and the King de
jure only to be owned. And I have the rather quoted this instance, because I
expect it may be instanced against me; and therefore resolved thoroughly to
discuss it, as well for my own, as for the Satisfaction of others. But though
it seems to make so much against me, and though I have set it out as much as I
could, to the advantage of the contrary Opinion, yet I shall now show wherein
it falls short, or rather indeed makes for my side.

And first, If we consider who the person was, who was the main instrument of
this Change, we shall find it to be Jehojadah the Priest, and we must needs
think, that he being satisfied that the Child was preserved alive, would in
this grand Concern consult the Oracle of God, to which he might have recourse,
and the consulting of which was his Office. Again, We have the grounds upon
which he and the People proceeded to this Change clearly set down, 2. Chro. 23.
3. it was an Oracle delivered by God to David, that there should allways be a
Male of his Seed, to sit upon his Throne; they therefore taking this Promise of
God to David as an infallable Truth, and finding acccordingly, that beyond all
expectations there was a Male Child preserved of that Line, they therefore
waving all other obligations, did stick to this Divine Oracle: So that the Case
is vastly different from any thing that could have happened since, they then
having God's special directions in the thing; and this Child (as were all the
Kings of Judah) being a King de jure indeed, but of such a jure, that never
King in the World, since our Shiloh came, can lay claim to the like; for if it
had been only such a Jus, as our Kings have to the Crown, they might as well at
first have stood up against the Usurpress in behalf of Jehosheba, to whom
(according to the tenure of bare Succession) the Right of the Crown did
devolve, after the slaughter of her Nephews. But this they did not. And here
lest I overslipt it, I must (however out of order) take notice of a very
remarkable Point, which is this: That the People offered not to stir (which I
shall presently prove) in defense of the Succession against Athaliah, who was
possessed of the Throne; nay, though Jehosheba, who by Succession was the right
Heiress to the Crown, was alive: And this may serve to satisfy those men, who
are so stiff, that they will not own the King de facto, whilst the King de jure
(as they term him) is alive.

And now I am to make out, that this instance makes more for my opinion, than
the contrary.

It is recorded, that Athaliah reigned all those seven years, till it came to
light that the Child was preserved; and if she reigned, it must be granted,
that she had the same Power as well over Priest, as People, which the Kings of
Judah had; and we never read that Jehojadah, or any other, were before
disobedient to Her, till it was known that there was a Male-Heir, who by the
particular direction of God was to reign. And it must be presumed, that they
would still have owned her as Supreme, if this had not come to light, though
she came to the Crown by most Illegal and Bloody means; for it cannot be
supposed that Jehojadah knew any thing of the first hiding of the Child; and
therefore might from the very first be disobedient to her; for it would have
been unsafe to have concealed it so long: And it cannot be said that he
expected a more fit time to publish it, when the Child should be of discretion
to govern; for even when he was crowned, he was but seven years old, which (I
am sure) are not years of discretion: It follows therefore, that Jehojadah knew
nothing of it; and therefore must be presumed till then, to have lived in
subjection to Athaliah, as supreme. And now I leave it to the World to judge,
whether this instance (however it might seem at first to make against me) does
not make more for me, than for those who are of a contrary Opinion.

The next thing then that we must have recourse to, is the Practice of the
Primitive Christians; and I dare challenge any man to tell me, which of them in
all those many Revolutions of Affairs, when the succeeding Emperors were
allways by indirect means supplanting their Predecessors; Which of them (I say)
did ever deny Subjection to the Emperor in being, however unlawfully he came
to the Throne? Nay, I shall give you an instance to the quite contrary.
Philippus Bardas was Emperor, and (if we believe Eusebius) was Baptized, and a
Christian, and therefore must certainly be mightily endeared to the Christians,
who never before had any Emperor of their Persuasion, but Emperors who most
of them did persecute them in most cruel manner. Now certainly, the loss of
this Emperor would trouble and offend them, and render them (if ever)
disaffected to the Government of the succeeding Emperor Decius, who deposed
him, and murdered him; yet for all this, so far were they from disowning the
present Emperor, who yet came so unworthily to the Throne, that they thought
it their duty to pray for him, and not only for him, but afterward for Gallus,
who succeeded him, and was in every respect as bad as he. He chased away (says
Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, in his Letter to Hermammon) the Holy men which
prayed for Peace, and his prosperous state, and so together with them he
banished the Prayers continually poured unto God for him. Eus. l. 7. c. 1.

And surely we cannot think that those undaunted Champions of Christianity
could, to save themselves, be in the least guilty of any Flattery, or idle
Complement; no sure; but this they did, being thereunto obliged by the Holy
Scriptures, wherein we are commanded to pray for Kings, that we may lead a
quiet, and godly life under them; and surely we have still greater reason to
pray thus for the worst of Kings, because they are in greatest danger of being
disturbed, and disturbing other.

And if indeed the Practice of those primitive Christians had been such as to
disown their Authority, and seek to disturb them, and yet at the same time to
pray for their peaceable Reign, their Prayers, and Practice being so
diametrically opposite, they would certainly have been looked upon, (and that
justly too) as the worst of men, and no way to be trusted.

And though the blasphemous Complement of Boniface to Phocus was more than
Flattery, and an espousing of his barbarous way of accession to the Crown; yet
if he had only been subject to him, and prayed for him, when seated upon the
Imperial Throne, he had done no more than all good Christians then did, and
might lawfully do.

Honest St. Martin did much better, who drinking to his Deacon, and not to the
Emperor, let him see (though indeed too haughtily, tartly, and publicly, not
like a Courtier, nay, nor a prudent Bishop, whose likelier way to work upon the
Emperor had been to have reproved him deliberately, calmly, and privately,
this other being the ready way to have disobliged, and quite lost him) let him
see (I say) that his unjust way of coming to the Crown was displeasing to God,
and did deserve his Fatherly Correption, and Penance. Now this was all that he
did, and this is that which every Ghostly Father of a King ought, and may do,
to admonish him of his sins, and yet at the same time own his Supremacy.

And I look upon him, who, in those great Debates here in England betwixt the
Houses of Lancaster and York about the Crown, did live peaceably under that
King that was possessed of the Throne, to have been far the better Subject, and
better Christian, than he whose turbulent Spirit was still for Change, and was
the occasion of so much War, and Bloodshed.

And thus I have made it out, that not only a Conqueror, but an Usurper is to
be owned as Supreme, and to be set up by God, when possessed of the Throne.

But then the Query is, how far he must be possessed of the Throne, that we may
acknowledge him set up by God, and desist from any farther opposition.

It Is true, we have no such Revelations now as were in the times of the old
Testament, and therefore may still be at a stand, when such Kings are fully set
up by God; yet, if I may spend my weak judgment upon it, I look upon a King to
be thus set up, when the former King, and his Heirs, being either banished,
killed, or imprisoned, the other is seated upon the Throne; and so far, either
for fear or favor, owned by the Nation, that there is wholly a Cessation of
Arms, or a very inconsiderable Opposition made.

And if God has the same Power still (which to question were Blasphemy) to
pull down and set up Kings when he pleases; and yet since we cannot expect any
Revelation from him, when he does it; either this Rule which I have here
mentioned is the only way to know it, or else I would gladly know what other
Rule we have to know it by.

But here it will be objected, That if Possession gives Right, the Law must be
quite laid aside; and he that has the strongest Arm will have the greatest
Right; and so this Doctrine will be an Inlet to all Oppression and Violence.

To this I answer, That grant a King cannot be punished, and dispossessed by due
course of Law, and that therefore God (if I may say so) is forced for the
punishing and dispossessing of Kings to use extraordinary means, which may
tantamount to a Law; yet sure the Law is sufficient to take cognizance of
Subjects, to punish them, and redress their Grievances one to another; and
therefore they need not, and ought not to take these extraordinary means, which
God sees often fit only and necessary for the punishing and dispossessing of
Kings.

But of so intricate a nature is the Matter in hand, that I have scarce
unravelled one doubt, when presently there arises another.

At this rate (say you) even a good King (instance King Charles the Martyr) may
be destroyed by an Usurper, and yet the Usurper is not to be questioned, but
owned as Supreme: Certainly God never intended to destroy a good King so; and
therefore if an Usurper destroy such a King, he cannot be of God's setting up,
and therefore is not to be owned as Supreme.

To this I answer, That I cannot without sorrow reflect upon the horrid Murder
of that gracious Monarch, a Prince of unspotted Integrity, who was certainly
the best of Kings, who for his Piety of Life might rid with the strictest
Votaries, and for the manner of his Death, with the most famed Martyrs; and so
far was he from bringing a Curse either upon the Nation, or himself, by any Sin
of his own, that if ever the Goodness of a King could atone for the Sins of
his People, his certainly could have done it. But it is not allways the sin of
a King, which is the cause of such Overturnings, but very often indeed the sins
of the People; though (God knows) we are too apt to lay the blame off our
selves, and slander the Lord's anointed. And this happens according to Samuel's
Menace to the People; that if they should do wickedly, they should be
destroyed both they, and their King. God is many times pleased for the
Punishment of a sinful People to remove good Kings from them, and to set
Tyrants in their Place; and then even those Tyrants are of God's setting up,
and are therefore to be owned as Supreme, and obeyed, as long as God pleases to
continue them over us.

But here I am afresh assaulted with another Objection, so hard it is to
struggle through this difficult Case: What! (say you) God is pleased to work by
Means, (Miracles are now ceased;) and therefore, if we ourselves put not to our
Hands, to pull down such Usurpers, but fondly own them still to be Supreme, and
therefore not to be resisted, we may long look before we be delivered, and
perhaps may offend God by slipping those Opportunities, which may seem for that
purpose to be put into our Hands.

But to this I answer, That God, who has the Power of Life and Death, is not
so unprepared of Instruments of Death, as for want of others, to make allways
use of one. He has a store house (as I may say) of Accidents, and Diseases,
out of which he may choose any one sufficient to put a Period to the days of the
greatest Monarch; he can kill a King as soon by a Fever, as suffer a Rebel to
kill him: And therefore though David knew that Saul was to be unking'd; nay,
and that he too was to succeed, yet so far was he from being of Abishai's
Opinion, that then was the opportunity to kill him, and that then God had
delivered him into his hands, when they found him asleep, with the Spear at his
Head, so far (I say) was he from being of his Opinion, and taking this
opportunity, that he would neither do it himself, nor suffer him to do it;
but piously, and prudently, told Abishai; that God had means of his own to do
it by, and needed not to be beholden to them to do it by such illegal Means;
and therefore they were to expect his leisure. As the Lord lives (says he)
the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend
into the Battle, and perish. The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my
hand against the Lord's Anointed; and therefore let no Rebel think, that
because God has a mind to put down a King, that yet he shall be the less
guilty, who stretches forth his Hand to do it.

And now I have with what scrutiny I can discust these two Preliminary Queries:
In the answering the first of which there was little difficulty, it being a
generally received Maxim, and Warrantable by the daily Practice of all sorts of
People: The main Difficulty lies in the Second, which I think I have removed,
to my own, if not to the satisfaction of others; and have made it out, both by
Reasons, and Examples, (and at the sametime removed all the Objections, that
might make against it,) that he is not King and Supreme, who was once King, but
is deposed; but he is Supreme, who is actually in Power, and possessed of the
Throne.

And now let us take an estimate of our present Affairs, by what has been here
said.

It is certain, never Prince had juster Grounds of War, than this Prince had.

First, In respect of the true Religion which was groaning under the growing
Tyranny of the Church of Rome: We had a King so bigoted to Popery, that for
it is Propagation, he questioned not to break all that was most binding all
Promises of his own, and the Laws of the Land, which he swore to maintain; so
that he may very well be ranked amongst those Kings, whose saying is, Let us
break their bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from us. But let me not
Reflect too much upon a Person, who is yet upon several accounts to be
respected by us, let us rather admire the Goodness of God, who has sent this
Prince, as another Constantine, to deliver us from these impending ruins; for
we may well say, If the Lord had not sent us this Deliverer, they had swallowed
us up alive, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Secondly, He had just Cause of War to defend his own Right, which the adverse
Party labored to debar him of: There was little good intended him, when
Strangers, Papists, and Jesuits, his professed Enemies were set to manage
Affairs, and were acquainted with all the Intrigues of Court; and yet neither
he, nor any for him were in the least concerned, or taken any notice of. And
when their young Prince was to be born, they did so industriously conceal all
things from him, that they might as well have sent him word, that they intended
to cheat him. He had just Cause therefore to vindicate himself, and his Right,
from the abuses of such insolent Court-Parasites, and Impostors. And though it
is true, he could claim no right by way of Succession, as long as his Father
lived, yet, as a Foreign Prince, he might seek satisfaction for the Affront,
which was put upon him, by such underhand, and illegal Dealings.

Thirdly, As the Cause of his War was just, so the Success was thereunto
answerable: Never Prince was in an Undertaking more apparently favored by
Heaven. But it were needless for me to enlarge upon all the happy Occurences of
this Expedition, since the Learned Dr. Burnet, who was an Eyewitness of them
all, has already done it in his Sermon, which is almost in every man's hand,
and therefore I refer you to it.

This I will only say, That never King came to a Crown with less Bloodshed,
with greater Applause, and Satisfaction of the People: And therefore since (as
I have made it appear) even those who come illegally to a Crown, are yet, when
fully possessed of it, to be owned as Supreme; certainly King William, whose
Cause of War was so just, and so miraculously victorious, and whose
Proclamation over the whole Kingdom was so joyous to all, that in all Places
where it was read, it may very well be said, The shout of a King was among
them; certainly (I say) he is Supreme, he is of God's setting up.

And then it must needs follow, that if he be Supreme, the late King is not;
for there cannot be two Supremes: And then it will follow again, that the Oath
of Allegiance, and Supremacy, which we took to the other King, is now quite out
of doors, all Supremacy, which was the ground of these Oaths, being now quite
lost in the late King.

And then lastly, it will follow, That since King William is Supreme, we are in
duty bound to pay him all that Honor, and Service, which is due to a Supreme;
and then since swearing of Allegiance has allways been owned as due to the
Supreme Power from the Subject, it is our Duty, when put upon it, to swear
Allegiance to him too: And therefore (if I may be so bold to say so) I look
upon it as an Error in any (to say no worse of it) who refuse to do it: As
for my own part, as I have allways been Obedient to my Supreme, so I shall
allways be Obedient to to King William, and Queen Mary, whose Supremacy over us
I pray God long to continue.

FINIS.

