A VINDICATION OF THE Parliament of ENGLAND, In answer to a BOOK, WRITTEN By
WILLIAM MOLYNEUX of Dublin, Esquire; ENTITLED, The Case of Irelands being bound by
Acts of Parliament in England, stated.

By JOHN CARRY Merchant in Bristol.

Nolumus Leges Anglicanas mutari.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be sold by Sam. Crouch in
Cornhill, and Eliz. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. School.

To the Right Honorable, John, Lord Summers, Baron of EVESHAM, And Lord High
Chancellor of ENGLAND.
I Humbly make bold to Present Your Lordship with this little Tract, being an
Answer to a Book, Entitled, The Case of Ireland 's being bound by Acts of
Parliament in England stated, Written by William Molyneus, of Dublin, Esquire.
The Reason which induced me to intermeddle in a thing so much out of my
Profession, as Matters of Law are, was, that I had formerly, amongst other
things, discoursed on the State of Ireland, in my Essay on Trade, and offered
it as my Opinion, That except that Kingdom was bound up more strictly by Laws
made in England, it would soon destroy our Woollen Manufactory here: Wherefore
I proposed to reduce it (with respect to its Trade) to the state of our other
Plantations and Settlements Abroad, which I supposed the only Means we had left
to help our selves, and to render Ireland more useful to this Kingdom. This I
humbly presented to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, and also to the
Honorable the Commons of England then sitting in Parliament; which I presumed
to do, because I thought I had Faithfully and Impartially discoursed on the
Subjects I undertook, at least I knew I had endeavored to do so; and supposing
that Book might give some beginning to the Bill for Encouraging the Woollen
Manufactures in England, and restraining the Exportation of the Woollen
Manufactures from Ireland, I found my self obliged to consider the Arguments
which might be brought against Ireland 's being bound by Statute Laws made in
England. What Success that Bill will have, I know not, but I very much fear, if
something of that nature be not done, we shall soon loose that part of our
Woollen Manufacture now left; which will tend to the Ruining our Poor, the
Lessening the Value of the Lands of England, and depriving us of a great Number
of People, who will be necessitated to leave this Kingdom, and go over to
Ireland, to follow their Employments there; and all this without rendering the
Gentlemen of Ireland any sort of Advantage, that may not be made up to them
another way.

This, I humbly, conceive may be done, and Ireland encouraged on another
Manufacture, no way Detrimental to the Interest of England, and carried on by
such Methods, as may become profitable to both Kingdoms: Till this be done, I
very much fear, both will be uneasy; I humbly beg your Lordship's Pardon for
my Presumption; and that you will be pleased to accept what I here offer, as
from a Person who truly Honors your Lordship; and so much the more, because
you have always Asserted the Rights and Powers of Parliaments. I am with all
Dutiful respect,

Right Honorable, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN
CARRY.

A VINDICATION of the Parliament of England 's Power to Bind Ireland by their
Statute-Laws, in Answer to a Book, written by William Molyneux, of Dublin, Esquire.
SIR,
YOUR Book Entitled, The Case of Ireland 's being Bound by Acts of Parliament
in England, Stated, I have seen, and read over with some thought; and because I
cannot agree with you in your Opinion, I design this as an Answer, to show you
the reason why I differ from you.

But before I proceed farther, I shall premise and grant with you, That Ireland
has long had a Parliament; and I am apt to think that your mistake arises from
this, that you Build too much on the Name, not considering the Power that
Parliament Legally has: For this is no more then our Foreign Plantations, and
great Corporations in England have; in the former, the Governors represent the
King, the great Men or Council the Lords, and the Commons are represented by
such as they elect, and send from their several Districts: In the latter, these
three Estates are likewise Represented by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council of the several Cities or Corporations; these make Laws for their better
Order and Government, yet all subservient to the great Council or Parliament of
this Nation; from whose Jurisdiction those Privileges do not in the least set
them free, but they pay a due Obedience to their Laws, especially those made
with an Intention to bind them.

The Dispute now between you and me is, Whither Ireland can be Bound by our
English Acts of Parliament? This you deny, and I affirm; I will therefore
proceed to enquire into your Arguments.

And because I intend as much Brevity as possible I can, I will pass by all
that in your Book, which I apprehend does not concern the Matter in Dispute.
Your Style is good, and your Language like a Gentleman; but with this fault,
that under that, you sometimes endeavor to cloud your Design, and represent it
to the Reader quite different from your own Intention.

Page 4 You tell us, That the Subject of your present Disquisition shall be,
how far the Parliament of England may think it reasonable to intermeddle with
the Affairs of Ireland, and bind you up by Laws made in their House. This you
might have informed your self from our Statute-Books, which begin with the Laws
of Henry III. about Five hundred years since; and you will find, that in that
King's Reign, and ever since, in the Reigns of his Successors, the Parliament
of England have thought it reasonable to Bind up Ireland by Laws made here, so
often as they saw there was occasion; and no doubt they did the same, or at
least had Power so to do, in the Reigns of Henry II. Richard I. and King John,
who all preceded King Henry III. and Reigned after Ireland came under the
English Government. Now, were that all the Question in Dispute, I could soon
answer you, that what the Parliaments of England did Five hundred years past,
and have done ever since, the present Parliaments think reasonable to suppose
themselves empowered to do, because they make Precedents of former times their
Rule and Government; so that it is not the Will, but the Power of the Parliament
of England in this Matter, that you Dispute; and this appears more plainly in
your next Paragraph, where you call it a pretended Right, founded only on the
imaginary Title of Conquest, or Purchase, or on Precedents, and Matters of
Record.

I do not think it very material for me to consider, on which of these
imaginary Titles, as you call them, they pretend to this Power, the Question
will not turn on that; it is enough, if I assert and prove, that the Parliaments
of England did exercise this Power, ever since Ireland has been under the
English Government; and I think it will lie on you to prove, that either they
did not, and then to show when they first Usurped it, or that it was an
Usurpation from the Beginning; therefore your first, second, and third general
Heads, seeming to be of no great Moment in this Dispute, I shall say the less
to them; your fourth, fifth, and sixth, seem more to relate to the matter
before us.

Under the first of these, speaking of Henry II. you say, Page 11, and 12. That
all the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots of Ireland, came to the King of
England, and received him for King and Lord of Ireland, swearing Fealty to him
and his Heirs for ever; the Kings also, and Princes of Ireland, did in like
manner receive Henry King of England for Lord of Ireland, and became his Men,
and did him Homage, and swore Fealty to him and his Heirs against all Men, and
he received Letters from them, with their Seals Pendent, in manner of Charters,
confirming the Kingdom of Ireland to him and his Heirs; and testifying, That
they in Ireland had ordained him and his Heirs to be their King and Lord of
Ireland for ever. This was Anno 1173. Now, either this Resignation they made to
him was Absolute or Limited, if the latter, I conceive it must be expressed in
those Charters you mention, and it had very much concerned your Argument to
have got them perused, (if any there are) and to have showed, how far the
Parliaments of England have broke through those Original Compacts.

And herein, I think I have granted as much as you desire in your second Head;
it seems to me all one as to the present Case, whether Henry II. be considered,
Page 13. as Conquestor Hiberniae, or as Dominus Hi^erniae, I shall draw no
Arguments from either, a Submission you have acknowledged. You say, Page 15.
That all came in peaceably, and had large Concessions made them, of the like
Laws and Liberties with the People of England; here again it would have been
necessary for you to have produced some of those Concessions, that you might
have made it appear to the Parliament of England, what they were; not that I do
make any Demur to the freedom of the People of Ireland, I take them to be so,
both in their Lives, Liberties, and Properties, as much, and as far, as any
People in England; and I take them to be the more so, because they are subject
to an English Parliament, and so have all the Privileges of an English People,
which the Subjects of Scotland have not; I take every Subject of the Kingdom of
England to be Born Free, and to carry this Charter of his Freedom about him,
let him remove where he will, within the Dominions of England; and that he
cannot be divested thereof, but by the Laws of this Land, made by his
Representatives in Parliament, in the Election whereof, he either has, or may
have a Voice, if he qualifies himself as those Laws do direct. This I
willingly grant, because I would not be thought to argue against the Liberty
and Property of English Men, wherever they are settled: But still, I think it
had been necessary for you to have produced a Transcript of those Concessions;
for either they were made, or they were not; if they were, you live in a
Kingdom, whose Interest it was to preserve them, and they must give great light
into the present Controversy; if none appears, how do you know what those
Concessions were? I insist the more on this, because you say, they had
Concessions, of the like Laws, and Liberties, with the People of England; now
whether by this you mean, the same Laws and Liberties, or such as were very
like them, I am in the dark; if the latter, they must be either more, or less;
they cannot be more, for I take the People of England to be as free as any
People in the Universe; if they were less, then I grant you more then you
desire; for I take the People of Ireland, to stand on the same footing with the
People of England, and yet I am afraid you are not content; therefore I should
gladly see a Transcript of those Concessions, because I am apt to think we
differ in this; I say they were to be subject to all the Laws of England in
general, you exempt them from the Statute-Laws; but I expect to find you fuller
on this, in your Fourth Particular.

As to your third Particular, What Title Conquest gives by the Laws of Nature
and Reason, Page 18. I shall say little to it, supposing it has no relation to
this Controversy; for I do grant, that the People of Ireland are a free People,
and that they are, as you say, Page 20. The Progeny of the English and
Britains, that from time to time went over into that Kingdom. I add, who before
they went hence were subject to the Statute Laws of England; and then the
Question will be, what were those Concessions that discharged them, from
rendering Obedience to the Legislative Power of this Kingdom.

This brings me to your Fourth Particular, page 28. What Concessions and Grants
have been from time to time made to the People of Ireland? But the latter part
of that Particular, page 5. By what Degrees the English Form of Government, and
the English Statute Laws came to be received in Ireland; which you say, was
wholly owing to the Consent of the People and Parliament of Ireland, I deny,
and you are to prove; and I conceive, this cannot better be done, than by
producing some Concessions or Grants, whereby they are discharged by the
Legislative Power of England, from the Obedience they owed, and always paid, to
the Statute Laws of this Kingdom, before they removed into Ireland.

And now we are arrived at the true State of the Controversy; you suppose, that
the People of Ireland cannot pay Obedience to the Statute Laws of this Kingdom,
except they subject themselves to a State of Bondage; and I believe they ought
to do it, especially, when those Laws are designed to bind them, and that this
consists with the State of Liberty and Freedom; I will therefore examine what
you say on this Fourth Particular.

The First Precedent you produce, is only an Account, that Matthew. Paris,
Historiographer to King Henry III. gives, (who, by the way, please to note,
wrote above Sixty Years after King Henry II. took Possession of Ireland) That
Henry the Second, a little before he left Ireland, in a Public Assembly and
Council of the Irish at Lismore, did cause the Irish to receive, and swear to
be governed by the Laws of England, page 28. I desire to know, whether the
Statute Laws were then part of the Laws of England? If they were, (which I
suppose you will not deny, for you confess Parliaments to be before that time,
page 39.) then please to inform me, Whether the People of Ireland consented to
the making those Laws? If not, by your own Argument, here is the Slavery, which
you so much fear and exclaim against through your whole Book, introduced on
them in the original Contract, for he says, that the King caused them to
receive, and swear to be governed by the Laws of England.

But in your next Precedent, you seem to qualify the Severity of that King's
Orders, by what Sir Edward Cook says, viz. That he settled the Laws of England
in Ireland, by the voluntary Acceptance and Allowance of the Nobility and
Clergy, page 29. And he did likewise allow them the Freedom of holding
Parliaments in Ireland, as a separate and distinct Kingdom from England. Please
to note, that Sir Edward Cook wrote about Five Hundred Years after King Henry
II. went into Ireland, and about Four Hundred and Fifty after Matt. Paris
wrote, and you would now bring his Opinion against the constant Practice of the
Parliaments of England, for Five Hundred Years; Besides you say, p. 80, and
116. That Sir Edward Cook was of Opinion, that Ireland was to be governed by
the Statute Laws made in England, where it was specially named therein; and in
the last of these Pages you exclaim against him for this his Opinion. I shall
not examine your Quotations, whether they agree with the Originals or no, my
Profession being not the Law, I am not furnished with those Books, nor do I
think it much to the purpose what Sir Edward Cook says in this matter; yet I
must take notice, that you pen the Words, Holding of Parliaments in Ireland, in
a different Character from the following Sentence, As a separate and distinct
Kingdom from England, which gives me reason to suppose the last was ^ vour to
find out the Original, did the Decision of this Controversy depend upon Sir
Edward Cook's Opinion.

Sir Edward Cook, in this Case, should have given a Transcript of that Grant,
and you should have transcribed it, as you do afterward, the Modus how to hold
their Parliaments, page 29. and yet then, there would have arose this Question,
Whether the Kings of England can legally exempt their English and British
Subjects (for so you call the People of Ireland, page 20.) from their Obedience
to the Legislative Power of this Kingdom, by any Charters or Grants whatsoever;
I am sure I never heard of any such Precedent, but on the contrary, it is
charged as a Crime on the late King James, in an Act made Primo G. and M. Cap.
2. That he assumed and exercised a Power of dispencing with, and suspending of
Laws, and the Execution of Laws, without Consent of Parliament.

But here I see you will raise this Objection against my manner of expressing
my self, and say, That when Grants are made by a King to any Country that does
submit it self to his Authority, all Persons who shall afterward settle
themselves therein, though before subject to other Laws are now ^o^ try;
therefore the People of England, when they settled Ireland, were to be governed
by the Laws granted to Ireland; to this I answer, That the Constitution of the
Government to which this Submission is made, ought specially to be considered;
and then there will arise this 2d Question, Whether a Submission made to the K.
of England, does not include a Submission to the Legislative Authority of
England? I am apt to think it does, and I believe it will appear by what
follows in this Discourse, that the Parliaments of England have ever been of
the same Opinion; But be this how it will, Ireland you allow submitted it self
on the Terms of being governed by the Laws of England, so this Objection seems
rather to be formal, than material, as to the Subject we are upon.

This Modus, you say, page 30. For the most part agrees with the Modus tenendi
Parl' in England, which is a loose Argument; for you know, that one Word in a
Grant, may alter the whole Sense, and we both agree, that the Parliament of
Ireland may make Laws, but the Question is, whether Ireland is not bound by the
Statute Laws of England, as all our Plantations are?

Yet after all, you confess, page 30. That this very Modus, though strenuously
asserted by Sir Edward Cook, is disputed by Mr. Seldom and Mr. Pryn, two
learned Antiquaries, will you then bring it as an Argument against the constant
Practice of the Parliament of England, for Five Hundred Years past? But grant
it had not been disputed at all, I do not see what it will make for your
purpose.

One Reason, you say, why Mr. Pryn doubts this Modus to be sent over by King
Henry the Second, is, because there were no Sheriffs established in Ireland in
Henry the Second's Time, page 31. Yet the Word Vicecomes is in it; all you
answer is, page 32. That perhaps the King intended to constitute Sheriffs; and
yet, the first you find established there, were in the Days of King John; which
was about Fifty Years after; and you say, page 30. That where this Form was
altered from the Modus tenendi Parl' in England, it is only to fit it the better
for the Kingdom of Ireland; if so, it is strange the Word Vice-comes had not
been left out, seeing there was then no such Officer in Ireland.

But page 36. you are pleased to allow, that there is reason to doubt the
certainty of this Record, unless we will depend on the Credit of the Bishop of
Mead; therefore you return to your former Argument, viz. that there were
Parliaments early in the Kingdom of Ireland; which may be probable; but whether
the Parliament of England then lost their Power there, is the thing I dispute,
and you do not prove. You say, page 36, 37. That Henry the Second held a
General Council of the Clergy at Cashall, wherein he rectifyed many Abuses in
the Church, and established sundry Ecclesiastical Laws, agreeable to those in
the Church of England; this in England we call a Convocation, not a Parliament.

You say, page 37. Pari desiderio Regis Imperio se subjiciunt, omnibus igitur
hoc modo consummatis, in Consilio habito apud Lismore Leges Anglicae ab omnibus
sunt gratantur receptae, and juratoria cautione praestita confirmatae, says
Matthew. Paris; from hence you infer, page 38. That they should enjoy the like
Liberties and Immunities, and be governed by the same mild Laws, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, as the People of England; and I see no Reason to the contrary;
all we differ in is, whether they were thereby discharged from being subject to
the Statute Laws made in England; this seems contrary to the Judgment of the
Parliament in Henry the Third's Days, to whom Matthew. Paris was Historiographer;
else, certainly they would not have made Laws to bind Ireland, as I shall by
and by show they did.

You proceed page 38. thus, From all which it is manifest, that there were no
Laws imposed upon the People of Ireland, by any Authority of the Parliament of
England; nor any Laws introduced into that Kingdom by King Henry the Second,
but by the Consent and Allowance of the People of Ireland; and the Reason you
give for it is this; For both the Civil and Ecclesiastical State were settled
there, Regiae sublimatis authoritate; Solely by the King's Authority, and their
own good Wills, as the Irish Statute 11 Eliz. Cap. 1. expresses it. What the
Irish Statutes express, I think has no great Weight in this Debate; the
Question is, by what Power the People of Ireland (for so I will now call them)
threw off that Subjection, they once owed to the Legislative Power of England?
If they think their bare Denial is enough, to warrant them free from such a
Subjection, the People of England may expect the like on the same Argument; if
because they are not present at our Elections, I will answer that in the
following Discourse.

We proceed now to page 39. To see ^^ what farther Degrees the Government of
Ireland grew up conformable to that of England, which are your own Words; you
say, that about the twenty third year of Henry II. (which was within five years
after his return from Ireland) he created his younger Son John King of Ireland,
at a Parliament held at Oxford; and from this you would infer, Page 40. That by
this Donation of the Kingdom of Ireland to King John, Ireland was most
eminently set apart again, as a separate and distinct Kingdom by it self from
the Kingdom of England; but you do not set forth that Grant, and our
Statute-Books are not so old; this had been necessary for many reasons; you
say, Page 40. That by this Donation King John made diverse Grants and Chartes to
his Subjects of Ireland; does this alone show a Regal Authority? and might it
not have been done by a Lord-Deputy, still subject to the Crown of England?
Pray let me ask you, was he at his return to England (which you say was a
little after his first going over) received here by his Father as a
Brother-King? and did he take Precedence of his elder Brother Richard? It Is
much this young King had not punished his Subjects of Ireland, for being angry
at his deriding their long Beards, at which, you say, they took such Offense,
that they departed in much Discontent; I say it is much he had not punished
their Undutifulness, but rather chose to come away in a Pet, and thereby to
abdicate his new Kingdom; for you do not show, that he left the Administration
of the Government with any one else: All that can be said in his Defense is,
that he was young, about Twelve Years old, page 39 and perhaps the obstinate
Humor, which the Barons of England afterward found in him, might grow up with
him, and become an Infirmity of Age; and during King John's being in England,
did the Kingdom of Ireland govern its self? For if his Father, King Henry the
Second, sent over any other to succeed him, all your Argument is lost.

But after all, I find his granting Charters is not of such moment, as to prove
him a King; for this he did to the City of Bristol, whilst he was Earl of
Moreton, (which I believe was long after the time you mention) and I find by
the exemplification of that Charter, that his Son, King Henry the Third, in his
Inspeximus, confirms it, as granted by his Father, King John, when he was Earl
of Moreton, without mentioning that he was then also King of Ireland; and
Princes do not use to abate any thing of their Titles, especially when they are
of so great Importance as this. No body does believe, that King John, whilst
Earl of Moreton, had such a Royal Authority in Bristol, as to discharge it from
an obediential Subjection to the Legislative Power of England.

The Statute Primo G. and M. Cap. 9. ss. 2. says, Ireland is annexed and
united to the Imperial Crown of England, as well by the Laws of this Kingdom,
as those of Ireland; and I am sure, there is a great deal of difference between
being part of the Imperial Crown of England, as Wales is, and a separate
Kingdom, as Scotland is; I find likewise that Henry the Third never wrote
himself more than Lord of Ireland, and it is strange, if Ireland was established
a separate Kingdom in John Earl of Moreton, and his Heirs, that the Title had
not been continued in his Son; and how comes it to pass, that we have ever
since been at the Charge of supporting that Kingdom with our Treasure, without
keeping a separate Account of our Expenses laid out on it, which doubtless we
should have done, had we thought it a separate Kingdom?

But to proceed; on searching Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle, I cannot find that
he takes any Notice of King Henry IId's sending over his Son John about the
Twenty Third Year of his Reign, as you say Page 39. which it is much he should
omit, seeing it was on so memorable an Occasion as his being made King of a
separate Kingdom by his Father, in a Parliament at Oxford; but he says, that
in the Thirty First Year of his Reign, he sent his Son John over to Ireland, to
be Governor there; and afterward, in the Reign of Richard I. (Son to Henry
II. and Brother to this John) he, speaking of the great Kindnesses showed by
the said King Richard I. to his Brother John, has these Words, To whom he made
appear, how much the Bounty of a Brother was better than the Hardnesses of a
Father; and afterward, he names the several Earldoms which he conferred on
him, viz. Cornwall, Dorset, Somerset, Nottingham, Darby, and Lancaster; then
treating of Affairs in England, during the King's Absence on his Voyage to the
Holy Land, says, he left William Longshamp, Bishop of Ely, in chief Place of
Authority, at which his Brother was disgusted, whom he calls there, Duke John;
and in another Place he says, that the King after his Return from the Holy
Land, took from him all the great Possessions he had given him, and afterward
the said John submitted himself to the King his Brother.

Now, does this agree with the Honor and Dignity of a King, who had a separate
Kingdom? or were the Grants of those several Earldoms from his Brother, which
you see were liable to be taken away again at the King's Pleasure, to be
accounted a greater Largess, than the Bounty of his Father, if he had made him
King of a separate Kingdom, and settled it in Parliament, as you affirm?
Besides, if any such thing was done by Henry II. in the Twenty Third Year of
his Reign, it appears, if Baker be in the right, that that Grant was recalled,
for he says plainly, that he sent him over in his One and Thirtieth Year, to
be Governor of Ireland. How indeed says, to be Lord of Ireland; but neither of
them mention any thing of what was done in the Parliament at Oxford. Well,
suppose it to be, Dominus Hiberniae, on which Word you seem to build so much,
page 40, 41. Is this Title any thing greater than Lord Lieutenant, or Lord
Justice, which has, for ought I can perceive, been used ever since? Does a
Title granted in a Patent from the King, discharge any Persons, or the Places
they govern, from Obedience to the Legislative Authority of England? If it
does, I should think That granted by Henry IV. to Sir John Talbot would go a
great way in it, which you give us, page 33. in these Words, Dilecti and
fidelis nostri Johannis Talbot, de Hallom shire Chevaler, locum nostrum
tenentis terrae nostrae Hiberniae, which you interpret, page 32. Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and it is not to be doubted, but Henry IV. thought he
had not divested himself of his Regal Authority in Ireland thereby; for though
we do not find any Statutes made in his Reign to bind that Kingdom, yet we do
in the Reign of his Son Henry V. and those Kings who succeeded him; if then,
John, Earl of Moreton, was never created King of Ireland, nor That made a
separate Kingdom in the Parliament at Oxon (as you allege, but do not prove)
then all your Arguments drawn thence, page 41, 42, 43, 44. beginning with this
Paragraph, Let us then suppose that, etc. fall to the Ground.

As for its being annexed to the Imperial Crown of England by several Acts of
Parliament both here and there, which you mention page 43. I do agree to the
Reason you give for it, page 44. as one, viz. That it should not be alienated
or separated from the Kings of England; But I hope you will not draw any
Inference from this, that Ireland therefore is not subject to our Legislative
Power; it seems to me a greater Argument that it is, and those Acts made in
Ireland, look like an Acknowledgement of it, seeing the Members there, knew the
Opinion of the Parliament of England, by their continued Practice of making
Laws to bind it.

I am the longer on this Subject of Henry the Seconds making his Son John King
of Ireland, and That a separate Kingdom, because I find you insist upon it, as
a thing unquestionable, through your whole Book, and I am willing to clear it
here, to prevent often Repetitions.

I will proceed with you to King John's going over into Ireland, after he
became King of England, page 44. for which you quote Mat. Paris, who says, Cum
venisset ad Dublinensem civitatem occurrerunt ei ibidem plusquam 20 Regul'^
illius Regionis, qui omnes timore maximo praeteriti, Homagium ei and
fidelitatem fecerunt. Fecit quoque Rex ibidem, construere Leges and
Consuetudines Anglicanas, ponens Vice cometes, aliosque ministros, qui populum
Regni illius juxta Leges Anglicanas judicarent. This you know was long after
that Amicable Concession, or Original Compact, you mention, page 37. to be made
between Henry II. and the People of Ireland, and long after the same King John
was made King of Ireland by his Father; and yet your Author says, fecit quoque
Rex ibidem, etc. which I English thus, He appointed Officers to govern them by
the English Laws, wherein he caused them to be instructed; So that here is a
second original Compact, if you will call it so, viz. That they must be
governed by the English Laws and Customs; and now I think we are agreed the
Matter, viz. That they were to be governed by the English Laws.

Let us see then where we differ; for I am very willing to part Friends with a
Gentleman of your Parts, your Fault is, that you would willingly make more from
things then was ever intended by them.

Page 45. You proceed to speak of a Magna Charta, granted by Henry III. to
Ireland, dated at Bristol the 12th of November, in the first year of his Reign,
which, you say, is agreeable to the Magna Charta granted to England; I have not
seen it, nor have you set it forth, so I can say nothing to its Contents; I
will only ask you whither it does discharge Ireland from being subject to the
Legislative Power of England, which is the matter in hand; and if it does,
whether it was confirmed by Parliament; I will not differ with you whose Seals
were put to it, whether the King's own, or the venerable Persons you there
mention; if it does not discharge from Obedience to Laws made by the Parliament
of England, and was not confirmed by them, I examine no farther.

And I do not remember I ever heard of a Parliament held at Bristol, nor does
this seem to be one, because you say, it was by advice of his Council of
England, whose Names are particularly recited, which I therefore take to be the
Privy Council, in opposition to the great Council or Parliament of England; and
the rather, because I find this was the usual Form of granting Charters in
those days: I shall only Note, that this (you say) was eight years older then
that which he granted to England.

Page 46. You set forth another Charter, sent them by the said King in February
following, the Substance whereof you give us Page 47. Volumus quod in Signum
fidelitatis vestrae tam praeclarae tam insignis libertatibus Regno nostro
Angliae a Patre nostro and nobis concessis de gratia nostra and dono in Regno
nostro Hiberniae Gaudiatis vos and vestri Haeredes in Perpetuum. This was made
by advice of his Common Council, and Sealed with their Seals, as it follows in
the same Page; Quas distinct in Scriptum reductas de communi Concilio omnium
sidelium nostrorum vobis mittimus, signatas sigillis Domini nostri, G.
Apostolicae sedis Legati, and fidelis nostri Com. W. Maresc. Rectoris nostri
and Regni nostri, quia sigillum nondum habuimus, easdem processu temporis de
majori Concilio proprio sigillo signaturi.

Test apud Glouc. 6 Febru.
So that here you see, there is a difference between the Communi Concilio, and
the Majori Concilio; but neither do you set forth, nor can I guess what those
Liberties were, being before our Magna Charta of England, as you confess, p.
45. and does appear by our Statute-Books; the latter being made the Ninth Year
of his Reign, and this, you say, in the First. But I cannot allow of your
Paraphrase on it, p. 48. Here we have a free Grant, of all the Liberties of
England, to the People of Ireland; I differ with you in this, because the Grant
you mention does not say, they shall enjoy all the Liberties of English Men,
but all those Liberties which had been granted by his Father and himself to his
Kingdom of England; what those were you do not set forth, and it can have no
Reference to our Magna Charta; besides, it seems strange he should, ex mero
motu, then grant those Privileges to Ireland, which, if I mistake not, cost
England afterward a great deal of trouble, to bring him to acknowledge to be
their right.

But be this as it will, I do not see how it signifies much to the question in
hand, except it be allowed, that the King by Charter can discharge the Subjects
of England from Obedience to the Legislative Power.

Nor can I see what use you make of the Record produced from Mr. Petit, p. 49
and 50. except it be to show, that the Citizens and Burghers of England, were a
part of the Parliament of England, time out of mind; if this be the design, I
have no reason to differ from you; nor shall I dissent from you in this, that
the Parliament of Ireland, has in times past (but how long I know not) and
still does, raise Money on the Subject there, p. 51. But yet this does not
prove, that Ireland is free from the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of England;
nor can any measures be taken from this Quotation, either to prove that there
was a Parliament in Ireland at that time, or the Powers it had, being, as you
confess, only a Letter from the Queen in her Necessities, and you do not tell
us what was done thereon.

Your next Record is in the 12th of Henry III. p. 52, 53. directed to Richard
de Bourgh, then Justice of Ireland, to assemble the Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
Et coram eis public legi faciatis Chartam Domini J. Regis Patris nostri cui
sigillum suum appensum est quam fieri fecit and Jurari a Magnatibus Hibern. de
legibus and consuetudinis Angliae observandis in Hibernia and precipiatis eis
exparte nostra quod leges illas and consuetudines in Charta praedicta contentas
de caetero firmiter teneant and observent and hoc idem per singulos comitatus
Hiberniae clamari faciatis and teneri prohibentes firmiter exparte nostra and
super foris facturam nostram nequis contra hoc mandatum nostrum venire
praesumat, etc. p. 53. Here is no mention made of their making Laws themselves,
but that they shall be governed by the Laws made in England; nor do I find by
any Record you produce, that that Assembly, or any other, had power to refuse
the Laws transmitted to them from time to time out of England: So that all
these Records, and the Proceedings thereon, confirm my Opinion, that you are in
the wrong; and I am apt to question, whether Originally the Parliaments of
Ireland had Power to make Laws, but only to Receive and Obey those sent from
England; it does not appear they had, by any thing you have yet produced, and
then the People of Ireland will be little beholding to you for the pains you
have taken; Though I perceive you draw a strange Inference, p. 55. That from
the days of the three Kings (viz. Henry II. King John, and Henry III.) England
and Ireland have been both governed by the like Forms of Government, under one
and the same supreme head, the King of England; yet so, as that both Kingdoms
remained separate and distinct in their several Jurisdictions.

You say, p. 56. That you will mention no more precedents, nor enter no farther
into that matter; and herein, I think you do well, except they will make more
for you, then those you have quoted already; though if one would take for Law
the Descants you make on them, they would seem to infer more then they do;
(which, as I have before hinted, seems to be your fault throughout your whole
Book) But Charters and Grants do best explain themselves.

You say, page 56. If we now inquire what were those Laws of England that
became thus established in Ireland? Surely we must first reckon the great Law
of Parliaments; which you explain after thus, The free Debate and Consent of
the People, by themselves, or their chosen Representatives; I should be glad to
see this totidem Verbis in the Charters, which would seem plainer to me, than
to be governed by your Glosses; however, it not being my Design to inquire, by
what Steps the Parliament of Ireland grew up to what it now is, but to defend
the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of England over Ireland, I shall enquire no
farther into that matter; and this, after all you have said, seems plain from
the Actions of those very Times; for the same King Henry III. who best knew
what Privileges he had granted, in the Fourteenth Year of his Reign, made a
Law to bind Ireland, called, Statutum Hiberniae, which past at Westminster the
9th of February, 1229. which is about the same time he empowered Richard de
Burgh to summon together the People of Ireland, page 52. which you would have
to be a Parliament, but I much doubt it; Note, that this was Twelve Years after
the Two great Charters from Bristol and Gloucester, page 45, and 47.

And now methinks you seem to differ from what you had said before, page 29.
That Henry II. did not only settle the Laws of England in Ireland, etc. but did
likewise allow them the Freedom of holding Parliaments in Ireland, as a
separate and distinct Kingdom from England, for which you quoted Sir Edward
Cook; and page 56. you said, Mr. Pryn acknowledges One, (viz. a Parliament in
Ireland) in Henry II d's Time; and now, page 58. you say, Till a regular
Legislature was established among them, and this is after the Three First
Kings, viz. Henry II. Richard I. and King John; so that here you grant, there
was no Parliament settled in Ireland till Henry IIId's Days, and yet you allow,
page 58. that till that time Ireland was governed by the Statute Laws of
England; your Words are, (speaking of the Statute Laws of England) we must
repute them to have submitted to these likewise; if so, then all the Grants of
Henry II. Richard I. and King John, did not discharge the People of Ireland
from being governed by the Statute Laws of England; Pray then, when and how
came they to be discharged? I think now the Onus probandi lies plainly on your
Side; the Charters of Henry III. before recited, do not discharge them; nor
does that of King John, but rather bind them faster; the Words are, page 53.
Coram eis public legi faciatis Chartam, etc. and precipiatis eis exparte
nostra quod Leges illas and consuetudines in Charta praedicta contentas de
caetero firmiter teneant and observent; So that by your own Arguments it does
appear, that the People of Ireland are bound to obey the Statutes made in the
Parliament of England, except you can produce something later to discharge
them; and then what becomes of your Modus tenendi Parliament' so much talked of
before in Henry IId's Days? and herein we are again agreed.

You proceed page 58. and say, That the Statutes of England, from the Norman
Conquest to Henry III d's Time, were very few, and slender, only Charters, or
several Grants of Liberties from the King; which nevertheless had the Force of
Acts of Parliament, etc. The shortness of an Act of Parliament does not, I
hope, make it less a Law, I wish they could have kept to those short Forms
still; but that which makes an Act of Parliament is, the Consent of the People
given at the making of it; if this were wanting, the Grants and Charters you
mention could be no Laws; which Right the People of England pretend to, by an
original Contract, beyond any Books, etc. and as old as the Common Law of
England; whereas you seem to infer, that our Statute Laws were only Charters,
or Grants from the King, till Henry IIId's Days; which I think is an Opinion
very disadvantagious to the Liberties of the People of England, for which I
judge they will give you no thanks, except you likewise allow, those Charters
and Grants were made with their Consent, and so were only Declaratory, and then
no matter what Form they were made in, or by what name you call them, if that
essential part of a Law, viz. the Peoples Consent was not wanting: I cannot
believe there was ever any time, when the Liberties of the People of England
depended on the Bounty of the King.

And so I proceed to p. 63. where you say, you will enquire, how the
Statute-Laws and Acts of Parliament made in England since the 9th of Henry III.
came to be of force in Ireland; and this, you conclude, p. 64. proceeded from
their being allowed of, and confirmed in the several Parliaments there, and
that without this Allowance, they had not been Obligatory in Ireland; for this
you produce the Irish Statutes of 10 Henry VII. 10 Henry IV. and 29 Henry VI.
the first you say allows of several Acts made in England, to be Laws binding in
Ireland; the two last prohibit any Statute made in England, from being in force
in the Kingdom of Ireland, unless they were allowed and published by the
Parliament of Ireland; but yet these Statutes you say, p. 64 and 65, are not to
be found in the Rolls, nor any Parliament Roll of that time, but we must depend
on the Evidence of Sir Richard Bolton, formerly Lord Chief Baron of the
Exhequer in Ireland, who, you say, had seen the same exemplified under the
Great Seal: If I grant this, I think I do you a great Favor; otherwise I may
be apt to call in Question, whether you had any Parliaments in Ireland in those
days; you grant before, that you had none till Henry III. and I do not find, by
what you have written, when that Constitution first began; and now you say, you
have no Parliament Rolls of Henry IVth. VIth. and VIIth. But you say, Sir
Richard Bolton had seen an Exemplification, which remains in the Treasury of
Waterford; sure it is a slender Argument; but because the stress of the Matter
does not lie on this, I will for once grant it you on the bare Testimony of Sir
Richard Bolton; and would you infer from this, that the Statute Laws of England
are of no Force in Ireland, till they are allowed by the Parliament there? Pray
Sir, how came your Parliament to assume such a Power, as to dispute the
Authority of the Parliament of England over them? What, if all our Corporations
in England, and Plantations in America should do the same, who have all Grants
and Charters from the King, would this be sufficient to free them from the
Government of the Parliament? if not, how comes Ireland to be set free by an
Act of its own? No, Sir; English Statutes receive no Force or Sanction from
Acts of Parliament made in Ireland.

You raise a fair Objection against your self, page 65, 66. viz. That the very
mentioning these Acts of Parliament in Ireland to prohibit English Acts of
Parliament from binding that Kingdom, does show, that even in those days, the
Parliaments in England did claim this Superiority; but you do not so fully
answer it, page 66. by saying, There is nothing so common as to have one Man
claim another Man's Right; and if bare Pretense will give a Title, no Man is
secure; for it appears, this is no Pretense or bare Claim, but a Power the
Parliament of England once had, and you do not tell us when they lost it.

You say, P. 67. This Superiority of the Parliament of England has been
doubted a great while ago, and a great while strenuously opposed, and
absolutely denied by the Parliament of Ireland: Pray, where was this
strenuously opposed, and in what manner? Did the Parliament of Ireland ever
enter any public Protest against this Superiority, or did the Kingdom of
Ireland ever deny Obedience to the Acts of Parliament made here, with intention
to bind them? No certainly, I never heard that any of them were rejected, but
they have still been received, and then what need had the Parliament of England
to enquire farther into this matter? But you say, P. 68. That we have not one
single Instance of an English Act of Parliament expressly claiming this Right of
binding us. What do you infer from thence? I know not one single Instance of an
Act of Parliament, that the King of England shall have a Negative Voice, no, it
is his Prerogative, and therefore needed not an Act of Parliament; nor is there
any more need of it for the other.

P. 68, 69, 70. You go on to show, how the Parliament of Ireland accepted, and
allowed several Acts made in England; (I take them to be Statutes not designed
to bind Ireland, but it matters not much, and therefore I will not be at the
pains to peruse them) and from hence you draw this Conclusion, p. 70. Thus you
see, by what steps and degrees all the Statutes which were made in England,
from the time of Magna Charta to the Tenth of Henry the VIIth, which did
concern the Common Public Weal, were received, consirmed, allowed, and
authorized to be of force in Ireland; all which was done by assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in the Parliament of Ireland Assembled,
and no otherwise: A very pretty way of Arguing, viz. That because the
Parliament of Ireland did allow of all the Statutes made in England to be good
in Ireland, therefore they had not been so without such Allowance; who do you
think is convinced by this Argument besides your self? Certainly an indifferent
Man would rather have drawn this Conclusion from it, viz. That the Parliament
of Ireland looked upon themselves obliged to allow of, and pay Obedience to the
Laws made by the Parliament of England.

From p. 70, to 77. you proceed to show, how and at what time, several English
Statutes were allowed of in the Parliament of Ireland: To this I can say no
more than I have done before, only I shall observe what you say, p. 70, 71.
That by the Opinion of your best Lawyers, there are diverse, both before, and
since the 10th of Henry the VIIth, which were, and are of force in Ireland,
though not allowed of by that Parliament; and the reason you give for it is, p.
71. That they are Declaratory of the ancient Common Law of England, and not
Introductive of any new Law. Do you think, Sir, this to be the only reason why
those Laws are of Force in Ireland? Suppose Laws had been made to the same
purpose in the Parliament of Scotland, would they therefore have been pleadable
in Ireland? If not, let me ask you, Why should the Laws made by the Parliament
of England, have more force in Ireland, than those made in Scotland? There can
be no other reason given for it, but this, That Ireland is subject to the
Jurisdiction of the Parliament of England, but is not subject to the
Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Scotland. Had you told us what Acts of
Parliament these were, we might have judged whether they were Declaratory, or
no; but since you have omitted that, I think the Answer I have given sufficient.

P. 77. You proceed, to consider the Objections and Difficulties that are moved
against this your Proposition, that the English Laws become passable in Ireland
only by the Consent of the People and Parliament thereof; these, you say, arise
from Precedents and Passages in your own Law Books, that seem to prove the
contrary; which shows, that as Cocksure as you are in this Particular, it has
been disputed, and doubted by your own Lawyers, and in your own Parliaments
too, if I take the matter right.

The first you mention is in p. 78. you say, That in the Irish Act concerning
Rape, passed Anno 8 Edvardi 4. it is expressed, that a doubt was conceived,
whether the English Statute of the Sixth of Richard the Second, Chap. 6. ought
to be of Force in Ireland, without the Confirmation thereof in the Parliament
of Ireland; all the use I shall make of this is, that your Parliaments then
doubted this thing.

Your second Objection is, p. 80. That though perhaps such Acts of Parliament
in England, which do not name Ireland, shall not be construed to bind Ireland;
yet all such English Statutes as mention Ireland, either by the general Words
of his Majesty's Dominions; or by particularly naming of Ireland, are and shall
be of force in this Kingdom. These are your Words, and This, you say, was a
Doctrine first broached directly, by William Hussy, Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench in England, in the First Year of Henry VIIth, and of late revived
by the Lord Chief Justice Cook. Pray, Sir, do you speak in earnest? Was this
Doctrine never broached before the Reign of Henry the VIIth? What think you of
the several Acts of Parliament made in the several Kings Reigns since Henry the
Third, down to Henry the Seventh, in some whereof they mention Ireland, in
others they do not, do you not believe those several Parliaments thought there
was some difference in those Acts? But when the Lord Chief Justice Hussy, and
Sir Edward Cook, after him, both Persons of great Station in the Law, broached
this Opinion, what was done in the Parliament of Ireland thereon? Did they ever
by any public Act declare these Oracles of the Law to be in the wrong? I do
not find by any thing you say that they did, and do believe, you would not have
let such an Argument have lain asleep, if you could have brought it; therefore
I conclude they did not; but on the contrary it does appear, that all Laws of
that Nature have ever since been observed, and obeyed in Ireland, and many of
them of much later Dates; and now I wonder you should come to dispute it by
your private Opinion, One hundred and fifty Years after the Death of Hussy,
when in all this time the Body of Ireland has not undertaken it.

But I will examine your Arguments against this; The first is, That the King
and his Privy Council in England, have often transmitted into Ireland, to be
passed into Laws there. English Statutes, wherein the general Words, [Of all
His Majesty's Dominions, or Subjects,] were comprehended; from whence you
conclude, that they were of a contrary Opinion, p. 81, 82. Suppose this to be
so, the most you can conclude from it is, that it obliquely shows the King and
Privy-Councils Opinion; and does not the Parliaments passing such Acts, as well
show the Opinion of the Legislative Power of England? But what if the King and
Privy Council of England do (as you say) actum agere, shall this make the
Parliaments Intentions, in making those Laws void? No certainly, no more than
the Parliament of Ireland's confirming them, shall prove they were not binding
before; for whither the Parliament of Ireland accept or refuse those Laws, that
are made by the Parliament of England, with intention to bind Ireland, they are
never the more or less binding there.

P. 84. You proceed and tell us, You see no more reason for binding Ireland, by
the English Laws under the general Words, [Of all His Majesty's Dominions, or
Subjects] than there is for binding Scotland by the same. Truly, Sir, I believe
you; else I should wonder to have seen you taking so much Pains: But because I
am of a different Opinion, let me consider this Matter with you;

Ireland is by several Laws made both in this Kingdom, and in that, annexed and
joined to the Imperial Crown of England; but Scotland, though it has been often
sought for, never yet obtained that favor.

Ireland you confess submitted it self to King Henry the Second, and thereby
became at first annexed to the Crown of England; one of the Terms of which
Submission was, That it should be governed by the English Laws; whereas
Scotland was united to it in the Person of King James, and since that by its
voluntary Recognition of King William and Queen Mary, still keeping its own
Laws, and leaving a possibility of its becoming a separate Kingdom again, which
Ireland never can be.

The People of Ireland, I mean the English and Britains, which you say p. 20.
are a Thousand for One of the ancient Irish, were once subject to the
Legislative Power of England; which the People of Scotland never were, but
always a separate Kingdom.

The People in Ireland have all the Privileges of English Men, and thereby
under the easiest Government in Europe; which the People in Scotland have not
whilst they remain in that Kingdom.

The People in Ireland are governed by the Common Laws of England, one part
whereof is, That thore Laws may be enlarged, abridged, or altered by the
Parliament of England; but the People in Scotland are, and ever were, governed
by their own Laws.

Ireland is mentioned in several of our Statutes, as part of the Kingdom of
England, and joined with Wales as a dependant thereon, which Scotland never was
thought to be; viz. 27 Edward III. Sess. 2. in the Preamble of that Statute are
these Words, Sect. 2. For the Damage which has notoriously come as well to us
and the Great Men, as to the People of our Realm of England, and of our Lands
of Wales and Ireland. Cap. 1. it goes on, First that the Staple of Wools, etc.
within our said Realm and Lands: Cap. 2. Item to replenish the said Realm and
Lands with Money and Plate, etc. Cap. 3. Item we Will and Grant that all
Merchants, etc. through our Realm and Lands. Cap. 4. Item for as much as no
Staple can be profitable for us and for our Realm and Lands. Cap. 7. Item We
Will and Grant that no License or Privilege to make Passage by Englishmen,
Irish-men, or Welch-men, of Wools, etc. out of the same Realm and Lands, etc.
Cap. 10. Sect. 2. We Will and Establish, that one Weight, one Measure, and one
Yard, be through all the Land, etc. Here Ireland is comprehended under these
words, throughout all the Land, which I suppose will, without Objection, be
admitted to be the Kingdom of England; if Ireland is not comprehended under
those general Words, then Wales is not, and then one Weight and Measure was
appointed for England, and another permitted to be in Wales; but if Wales is
comprehended under them, then Ireland is also: And this you may know, by
considering what Weights and Measures are settled in Ireland, and when. Cap.
11. Item, We have Ordained and Established, That all Merchants, etc. that do
bring Wines, etc. to the Staples, Cities, etc. within our said Realm and Lands.
Cap. 12. Item, no Merchant, etc. shall carry out of our Realm of England,
Wools, Leather, etc. Here Ireland is again comprehended under the general
Words, our Realm of England, or else Wales is not, and the purport of the Act
shows that; for can it be thought, that the People of Wales and Ireland, had
Liberty to export Wools, Leather, etc. into Foreign Parts, when this was denied
to the People of England? Cap. 13. Item, We Will and Grant, That if any
Merchant, Privy, or Stranger, be Robbed of his Goods upon the Sea, and the
Goods so Robbed come into any Parts within our Realm or Lands. Cap. 14. Item,
We have Ordained, That all Merchants, Privy, or Strangers, may safely carry and
bring within our said Realm and Lands, Plate of Silver, etc. and in the next
Sect. Provided always, that no Money have common course within our said Realm
and Lands, but the Money of Gold and Silver of our Coin. So in Cap. 17. the
Words Realm and Lands are thrice expressed, as comprehending England, Wales and
Ireland: By all which it appears to me, That in those Days there was no
thoughts of Ireland's being a separate Kingdom, or making Laws for themselves
(any other than Bylaws.) But they were supposed to be part of the Kingdom of
England, and under the Jurisdiction of the Legislative Power thereof; and yet
this was long after the pretended Grant of Henry II. to his Son John to be King
of Ireland, as a separate Kingdom; which does confirm me in what I have said
before, that what is now called the Parliament of Ireland, was formerly no more
than a Summoning the Great Men of the Kingdom together, and commanding them to
obey the Laws made in England, as you have it in the Writ sent over by King
Henry the Third to Richard du Burgh, mentioned before, which is transcribed by
you, P. 53. Coram eis public legi faciatis, etc.

The Parliament of England, in those days, was very careful of their Power, and
did not easily part with their Jurisdiction; they presently put in their Claim,
so soon as the Kings of England got any footing, either by Conquest or
Submission. In the Statutes made at Westminster, 27 September, the 11th of
Edward III. Anno 1337. I find Laws made to bind Scotland, cap. 1, 2, and 4. are
repealed, so I cannot see their Contents: But cap. 3. runs thus; Item, It is
accorded and established, That no Merchant, etc. shall bring, etc. into the
said Lands of England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, within the King's Power.
And cap. 5. runs thus, Item, it is accorded, That all the Clothworkers of
strange Lands, etc. which will come into England, Ireland, Wales, or Scotland.
I do not find any Acts of this nature, made either before that time or after,
which put me upon perusing the Histories and Chronicles of England about that
time: How says, That Anno Regni 5 Ed. 3. 1331. Edward Baliol (who was Son to
John Baliol sometime King of Scotland) was by the Assistance of the said King
Edward crowned King of Scots; but afterward he resigned it to the said King
Edward of England, and remained under his Protection many years after. Baker
says, That, to hold a good Correspondence with the King of England hereafter,
he does him homage for his Realm of Scotland. And no doubt, had Scotland still
continued so, the gilded flourishes of a separate Kingdom, would not have
tempted the Parliament of England, to have parted with their Authority, of
making Laws to govern it; and can it be thought, they should so easily let
Ireland slip? it does not appear so by any Act of their own; and for the Acts
of others, they can be no Precedents against them.

But to proceed: There are yet other Reasons why Ireland, should be more bound
by the Statute-Laws of England, then Scotland: Ireland has been always
accounted so much a part of the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, that on the
late Revolution, when the Crown of England was settled on the then Prince and
Princess of Orange, Stat. primo Guil. and Mar. cap. 2. They are declared King
and Queen of Ireland, as well as England; and by that Recognition they had been
so, though the Parliament of Ireland had opposed it; whereas the Case was not
the same with Scotland: The Rights and Privileges of the People of Ireland
were also settled by the same Statute, equal to those of the People of England;
But the Rights and Privileges of the People of Scotland were not. Nor was this
Recognition made in their Names, they took their own time to do it, and to
settle the Rights and Privileges of their own Kingdom as they pleased, being a
separate Kingdom, without dependence on the Kingdom of England. I wonder you
hang so much in this Paragraph, on Ireland's being a separate Kingdom in the
Person of King John; no Man of Sense, who had examined that matter, would make
any dependence thereon, and such I take you to be, therefore it looks as if you
had a mind to betray and give up the Cause, did I not think you a Gentleman of
greater sincerity; you had certainly found a better Argument in your original
Contract, could you have made it out.

Page 85. You proceed to take into consideration, such English Statutes as
particularly name Ireland; and these you divide, into Ancient Precedents and
Modern Instances; and conclude, That if the former do not make against you, the
latter are only Usurpations made upon you.

I think this fully answered before: But I will take your own way, and follow
the Thread of your own Arguments, though I think you spin it too long.

The Ancient Precedents of English Statutes designing to bind Ireland, you say,
are, first Statutum Hiberniae, 14 Hen. 3. Secondly, Ordinatio pro Statu
Hiberniae, 17 Edw. 1. Thirdly, An Act concerning Staples, 2 Hen. 6. page 85,
and 86.

And are these all? What think you of the Statute of Merchants, made at
Westminster 13 Edw. 1. Anno 1258? wherein are these words, Sect. 35. This
Ordinance and Act, the King wills to be observed from henceforth through his
Realm of England and Ireland. What think you of the Statutes made at
Westminster 11 Edw. 3. Anno 1337. which I recited before, where cap. 3. all
Foreign Clothes are prohibited to be brought into Ireland: and cap. 5.
Clothworkers are invited to settle in Ireland, and are encouraged thereto by
Franchises promised them? What think you of the Statute of the Staple,
mentioned before, made 27 Edw. 3. Anno 1353? In the Preamble of which Statute
Ireland is mentioned, and cap. 1. bears this Title, Where the Staple for
England, Wales and Ireland shall be kept, whether Merchandises of the Staple
shall be carried, and what Customs shall be paid for them. Which Chapter shows,
That the Parliament of England had Power of raising Money, by laying Customs on
Commodities in Ireland.

At this Sessions were made Twenty eight Acts, or Chapters, call them which you
will, and all point at Ireland.

But I cannot pass by this last Statute of 27 Edw. 3. without making
observation on its Preamble, which I here give you verbatim; Edward by the
Grace of God, etc. To our Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Ministers, and other our
faithful People, to whom these present Letters shall come, greeting. Whereas
good deliberation had with the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and great Men of
the Counties, that is to say, of every County one for all the County, and of
the Commons of our Cities, and Boroughs of our Realm of England, summoned to
our great Council holden at Westminster the Monday next after the Feast of St.
Matthew the Apostle, the 27th Year of our Reign of England, and of France the
14th; For the damage that has notoriously come, as well to us and to our great
Men, as to our People of our Realm of England, and of our Lands of Wales and
Ireland, because that the Staple of Woolls, Leather, and Wool-fells of our said
Realm and Land, have been holden out of our said Realm and Lands, and also for
the great Profits which should come to the said Realm and Lands, if the Staple
were holden within the same, and not elsewhere: to the Honor of God, and in
Relief of our Realm and Lands aforesaid, and to eschew the Perils that might
happen of the contrary in time to come, by the Counsel and common Consent of
the said Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, Knights and Commons aforesaid, we
have ordained and established the things under written. -- Here the King is
called King of England and France, without mentioning Ireland; but we find the
Laws made in that Sessions, to be binding to his Lands of Wales and Ireland, as
I have before observed. The King also takes notice of the Summons sent to the
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and great Men of the Counties, and Commons of
Cities and Boroughs of his Realm of England, summoned to his great Council
holden at Westminster, etc. without mentioning any thing of Ireland, though it
was bound by the Laws made in that Sessions. By all which it does appear to me,
That Ireland was looked on in those days, as an Appendix to the Kingdom of
England, all one as Wales; and yet the Laws of that Sessions were received in
Ireland: Why did not the Parliament of Ireland (if there was then any) make an
early Protestation against this irregular Proceeding, and condemn it as an
Encroachment on their Privileges? which had been much better, then for you to
undertake this Task three hundred and fifty years after.

But to proceed: What think you of the Statute made at Westminster 34 Edw. 3.
Anno 1360? the Preamble is, These be the things which our Lord the King, the
Prelates, Lords, and Commons have ordained in this present Parliament holden at
Westminster the Sunday next before the Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul, to
be holden and openly published through the Realm: and yet the Title of cap. 17.
is, Merchandise may be carried into, and brought out of Ireland. By which it
appears, That the Parliament of England made Laws to regulate the Trade of
Ireland in those early days, and that the Bill relating to the Woollen
Manufactures, now depending before the present Parliament, is not a Modern
Instance of that Power: Cap. 18. of that Sessions has this Title, They which
have Lands in Ireland, may carry their Goods thither, and bring them again.
From both which I make this observation, That the Preamble says, These are to
be holden and published openly thorough the Realm; and the 17th and 18th
Chapters show, that Ireland is part of that Realm.

In the 4th of Henry 5. cap. 6. an Act was made, but is now Ob, so I find
nothing but its Title in the Statute Book, which is this, If any Archbishop,
Bishop, etc. of Ireland, Rebel to the King, shall make collation of a Benifice
to any Irishman, or bring any Irishman to the Parliament to discover the
^ounsel of Englishmen to Rebels, his Temporalities shall be seized until he
has made Fine to the King. By which it does appear, That the Parliament of
England, took notice there was a Parliament in Ireland, and made Laws to bind
that Parliament.

All these Statutes bound Ireland, and doubtless many more there are, had I
time to look after them, but I mention these, because they come within the
compass of your old Precedents, being before the Second of Henry 6.

But before I speak to your old Precedents, give me leave to mention one
Statute more, viz. 1 Hen. 6. cap. 3. which, though I do not produce as a
Precedent binding Ireland, yet it will serve to show, what opinion the
Parliament of England had of Ireland in those days: the words are these,
Forasmuch as diverse Manslaughters, Murders, etc. and diverse other Offenses now
late have been done in diverse Counties of the Realm of England, by People born
in the County of Ireland, repairing to the Town of Oxford, etc. I will make no
Paraphrase on them, they are easy to be understood by any English Reader; and
this is a Modern Statute, in respect to the time of Henry II. when you say
Ireland was made a separate Kingdom, and settled by him on his Son John, in a
Parliament at Oxon, whereas this Parliament calls it a County.

Well then, let us see what you say against these Ancient Precedents you have
produced, before we come to the Modern Instances, as you call them.

These Statutes, you say, page 86. especially the two first, (meaning Statutum
Hiberniae, and Ordinatio pro Statu Hiberniae) being made for Ireland, as their
titles import, have given occasion to think, that the Parliament of England
have right to make Laws for Ireland, without the consent of their chosen
Representatives. Surely every Body, I think, is of that Judgment, that has
looked into the matter; no, you dissent from it, and for this gives several
Reasons.

The first is page 86, 87, 88. which I am obliged here to transcribe, The
Statutum Hiberniae 14 Hen. 3. as it is to be found in the Collection of English
Statutes, is plainly thus: The Judges in Ireland conceiving a doubt concerning
Inheritances devolved to Sisters or Coheirs, viz. whether the younger Sisters
ought to hold of the eldest Sister, and do homage unto her for their Portions,
or of the chief Lord, and do homage unto him; therefore Girald Fitz-Maurice,
the then Lord Justice of Ireland, dispatched four Knights to the King in
England, to bring a Certificate from thence of the practice used there, and
what was the Common Law of England in that Case; whereupon Henry III. in this
his Certificate or Rescript, which is called Statutum Hiberniae, merely informs
the Justice what the Law and Custom was in England, viz. That the Sisters ought
to hold of the chief Lord, and not of the eldest Sister. And the close of it
commands, That the foresaid Customs that be used within our Realm of England in
this case, be proclaimed throughout our Dominion of Ireland, and be there
observed. Test meipso apud Westminst. 9 Febr. An. Reg. 14. From whence you
infer, That this Statute was no more then a Certificate of what the Common Law
of England was in that case, which Ireland by the original Compact was to be
governed by.

And do you really speak your Thoughts herein? Was it ever customary for the
Judges to send to the King to expound Law to them; and for the King by
Certificates, to direct them what they should give for Law? I thought their
Business had been to declare the Law impartially between the King and his
Subjects; and that, if they doubted in any Points of the Common Law, their
Custom had been to advise one with another, or with some other Learned Council
in the Law. Is it to be thought the King knew Law better than his Judges? I
would not have you insist on this, for the Honor of the Long Robe in Ireland.

But, Sir, there is more in this, then perhaps at first you think; for either
this is a Statute Law, and our Books call it so, therefore in your favor I
will believe it so, or else the King had in those days an Absolute Power and
Authority to impose on Ireland what Laws he thought fit: For, in the close of
that Statute, it is said, Therefore we command you, That you cause the foresaid
Customs that be used within our Realm of England in this case, to be proclaimed
throughout our Dominion of Ireland, and to be straightly kept and observed. If
all our Acts of Parliament, which declare the Common Law of England, shall be
called Certificates, pray what will become of Magna Charta, Charta Foresta, and
most of our old Laws, which were generally Declarations of what was the Common
Law of this Kingdom, and what were the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects,
before the making of them.

I come now to your second old Precedent, the Statute called Ordinatio pro
Statu Hiberniae, made at Nottingham 17 Edw. 1. Anno 1288. This, you say page
88. was certainly never received or of force in Ireland: And you further say,
That this is manifest from the very first Article of that Ordinance which
prohibits the Justice of Ireland, or others the King's Officers, there to
purchase Lands in that Kingdom, or within their respective Bailiwicks, without
the King's License, on pain of Forfeitures. But, that this has ever been
otherwise, and that the Lords Justices and other Officers here, have purchased
Lands in Ireland, at their own Will and Pleasure, needs no proof to those who
have the least knowledge of this Country.

Is this a fair Argument against the Validity of a Statute, That it has not
had due obedience rendered to it? If this be Law, I am afraid many of our late
good Statutes have run the same fate; but I never knew till now, That the
Peoples Obedience was an Essential part in a Statute; I thought, the Consent of
King, Lords, and Commons, given to it in Parliament, had been enough. But we
will not let this Matter fall without further examining into your Argument:
That Statute consists of eight Chapters, let us see which of those Chapters
have not been received and obeyed; you only mention the first, viz. That the
Lords Justices of Ireland, and other Officers, have purchased Lands in Ireland
at their own Will and Pleasure, as you recite it page 88. But the words in the
Statute are these, That the Justices of Ireland, nor any other Officers of ours
of the same Realm, so long as they are in our Service there, shall purchase any
Land or Tenement within the List or Bound of their Bailiwicks without our
special License. Which makes a great Alteration in the Matter; for they might
purchase Lands or Tenements, both before, and after they were in their Offices.

But we will take the Words as you give them; how does it appear that this Law
was not observed? You say, p. 89. It does not appear by any Inquisition,
Office, or Record, that any one ever forfeited on that account. It may be so,
perhaps it was never broke, and then there was no need of an Inquisition; or
the King might grant License, as that Law does direct, to his Justices and
other Officers, to purchase Lands during their being in their Offices; or they
might purchase them without the List or Bounds of their Bailiwicks; and then
the Terms of the Law were complied with: But I am apt to think you will carry
this farther, and say, That in later Years the Justices of Ireland, and other
the King's Officers, have not taken notice of this Law; perhaps so, and what
would you draw from this? How many old Laws have we in England, that are
obsolete and disregarded by Time; which though they fitted the Circumstances of
the Times they were made in, yet are not proper for our Days? Witness the
Statutes against going Armed; the Statutes about Bows and Arrows; and many
others, which were, and still remain Statutes, till repealed, though perhaps
'twill be thought hard to put them in Execution, without giving public Notice
thereof sometime before to the Subject. But after all, how do you know, but
that these Officers, you last mentioned, may have Licenses from the King, to
purchase Lands, though I think it not at all to the matter, whether they have,
or no.

But to proceed; That Statute, as I said before, consists of Eight Chapters,
you have taken notice only of the First; therefore we will come to the next
Chapter of that Statute; The Title is, In what Case only Purveyance may be made
in Ireland. Is that observed in Ireland, or do the Justices or other the King's
Officers, by color of their Offices, take Victuals, or any other things, of
any Person against his Will, contrary to that Chapter? The Third Chapter is
about Transporting Merchandises out of Ireland. Do the Justices, or any of the
King's Ministers, by color of their Offices, Arrest the Ships, or other Goods
of the People of Ireland? The Fourth settles The Fees of a Bill of Grace: The
Fifth settles The Marshal's Fee in Ireland. Perhaps you will say these Officers
take more than their Fees, therefore the Statute is no Act of Parliament. Very
probable they do, that is a general Distemper, where Offices have Fees annexed
to them, and yet it may be an Act of Parliament still. The Sixth Chapter, its
Title is, In what Cases the Justices of Ireland may grant Pardon of Felony, and
where not. The Title of the Seventh Chapter is, By what Seal Writs in Ireland
shall be Sealed. The Eighth and last is, Adjournment of Assizes in Ireland. Are
these Parts of the Statute observed in Ireland, or no? I ask you this, because
if any one part is received, the whole is received: Obedience given to any part
of this Law, acknowledges the Jurisdiction of the Lawmakers; and you insist
only on the First Chapter, as if the rest were no part of the Law.

That this Ordinatio pro Statu Hiberniae, is really in it self no Act of
Parliament, but merely an Ordinance of the King and his Privy Council in
England. I have already given you my Definition, what an Act of Parliament is,
and if this be no more than an Order of the King and his Privy Council, I must
be of your Mind: Let us therefore enquire farther into this matter; you say it
appears to be no otherwise, as well from the Preamble of the said Ordinance, as
from the Observation likewise. I assure you, if this Proof has not more weight
in it than the other, I shall think it an Act of Parliament still: Let us
therefore see what the Preamble is, which I find to be this, Edward by the
Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain, to all those
who shall see or hear these Letters, does send Salutation: Know you, That for
the Amendment of the Government of our Realm of Ireland, and for the Peace and
Tranquillity of our People of the same Land, at Nottingham, the Octaves of St.
Martin, in the Seventeenth Year of our Reign, by the assent of our Council
there being, the points hereafter mentioned be made and agreed upon, to the
intent that they may be firmly observed in the same Realm. Where please to
note, that the Words are not, by assent of our Privy Council, but of our
Council; by which name the Parliament of England is often called.

It would be endless to give and account of the different Styles, under which
Acts of Parliament past in those Days; sometimes in the Name of the King only;
sometimes of the King and Great Men; sometimes of the King and his Council;
sometimes of the King and his Common Council; and sometimes of neither; as he,
who will be at the trouble to inspect our Statute Books may see; I will give
some Instances instead of many; The great Charters are only in the King's Name,
Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. and so, Edward, by the Grace
of God, King of England, etc. The Statute, in the Twentieth of Henry III. made
at Merton, has this Preamble, It was provided in the Court of our Sovereign
Lord the King, holden at Merton on Wednesday the morrow after the Feast of St.
Vincent, the Twentieth Year of the Reign of King Henry, the Son of King John,
before William Archbishop of Canterbury, and other his Bishops and Suffragans,
and before the greater part of the Earls and Barons of England, there being
assembled for the Coronation of the said King, and Helianor the Queen, about
which they were all called; where it was treated for the Commonwealth of the
Realm upon the Articles underwritten. Thus it was provided and granted, as
well of the aforesaid Archbishop, Bishops, Earls and Barons, as of the King
himself and others. By which it appears that in those Days, when the Great Men
(who were the Barons or Freeholders of England) were called together, they made
Laws, and did not so much regard the Style, as that they were made by a general
Consent.

The Statute 51 Henry 3. Sect. 1. begins thus, The King to whom all these
Presents shall come, greeting; We have seen certain Ordinances, etc. Stat. 5.
of the same Year begins thus, The King commands, that all manner of Bailiffs,
Sheriffs, etc. Stat. 6. of the same Year begins thus, If a Baker or a Brewer be
Convict, because he has not, etc. The Preamble of the Statutes 52 Henry 3.
made at Marlbridge, 18. November, 1267. runs thus, In the Year of Grace, One
thousand two hundred sixty seven, the Fifty-second Year of the Reign of King
Henry, Son of King John, in the Utas of St. Martin, the said King providing for
the better Estate of this Realm of England, and for the more speedy
Ministration of Justice, as belongs to the Office of a King, the more
discreet Men of the Realm being called together, as well of the Higher as of
the Lower Estate. It was provided, agreed, and ordained, That whereas the Realm
of England of late had been disquieted with manifold Troubles and Dissentions;
for Reformation whereof Statutes and Laws be right necessary, whereby the Peace
and Tranquillity of the People must be observed; wherein the King intending to
devise convenient Remedy, has made these Acts, Ordinances, and Statutes
underwritten, which he wills for ever to be observed firmly and inviolably of
all his Subjects, as well High as Low.

The Preamble to the Statutes made the Third of Edward I. runs thus, These be
the Acts of King Edward, Son to King Henry, made at Westminster at his
Parliament General after his Coronation, on the Monday of Easter Utas, the
Third Year of his Reign, by his Council, and by the Assent of Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm,
being thither Summoned, because our Lord the King had great Zeal and Desire to
redress the State of the Realm in such things as required Amendment, for the
Common Profit of Holy Church and of the Realm; and because the State of Holy
Church has been evilly kept, etc. the King has Ordained and Established these
Acts underwritten, which he intends to be necessary and profitable to the
whole Realm.

The Preamble to the Statute made the Fourth of Edward the First, called the
Statute of Bigamy, runs thus; In the Presence of certain Reverend Fathers,
Bishops of England, and others of the King's Council, the Constitutions
underwritten were recited, and after heard and published before the King and
his Council: Forasmuch as all the King's Council, as well Justices as others,
did agree that they should be put in Writing for a perpetual Memory, and that
they should be steadfastly observed.

The Preamble to the Statutes made at Gloucester, 6 Edw. 1. runs thus; For the
great Mischiefs, Damages and Disherisons, that the People of the Realm of
England have heretofore suffered through default of the Law, that failed in
diverse Cases within the same Realm; Our Sovereign Lord the King, for the
amendment of the Land, etc. has provided and established these Acts
underwritten, willing and commanding, that from henceforth they be firmly
observed within this Realm.

The Preamble of the Statute of Westminster made the 13th. of Edward I. runs
thus; Whereas of late our Lord the King in the Quinzim of St. John Baptist, the
Sixth Year of his Reign, calling together the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and his
Council, at Gloucester, and considering that diverse of this Realm, etc.
ordained certain Statutes right necessary and profitable for his Realm, whereby
the People of England and Ireland, being Subjects unto his Power, have obtained
more speedy Justice, etc. Our Lord the King in his Parliament, after the Feast
of Easter, holden the 13th. Year of his Reign, at Westminster, caused many
Oppressions of the People, and Defaults of the Laws, for the accomplishment of
the said Statutes of Gloucester to be rehearsed, and thereupon did provide
certain Acts, as shall appear here following. Here I cannot but observe, That
the King and Parliament of England thought Ireland a part of this Realm, and
subject to their Legislative Power; and that it was concerned in the Statutes
of Gloucester beforementioned, though not named therein: Now whose Judgment
shall we take, the King and Parliament who lived in those Days, or yours, Four
hundred Years afterward?

I shall only mention one more, which is in the 21 Edward 1. we find there a
Statute made, De iis qui ponendi sunt in Assisis, and at the end thereof I find
this, Sect. 6. Rex, etc. quia ad communem utilitat^ (...) ^opuli nostri and
Regni, de communi Concilio ejusdem Regni Statuerimus, etc.

Now all these are accounted Statutes, or Acts of Parliament, and so called in
the Books; which shows, that it is not the Name but the Modus of passing them,
which is the essential part of a Statute Law: Besides, if you please to peruse
your own Quotations, p. 48, and 49. you there acknowledge the Parliament to be
called Generale Concilium, Commune Concilium, Great Council or Parliament.

I now come to your last Argument against this Statute, p. 89. That King Edward
I. held no Parliament in the 17th Year of his Reign. This seems very doubtful
even to your self; for it follows, If this were a Parliament, this Ordinatio
pro Statu Hiberniae is the only Act thereof that is extant; and may not that
be? Henry III. granted the Magna Charta in the Ninth Year of his Reign, you
allow this to be a Statute, or Act of Parliament, and yet we do not find any
other Law past that Year; and but one single Act in his Fourteenth Year; One in
the Ninth of Edward I. and many other Instances may be made of this nature.

But after all, I do not see how the stress of the Matter lies on this
Foundation; suppose this to be no Act of Parliament, as you say, what then?
shall we want Ancient Precedents which name Ireland? What think you of the
Statute of Merchants, which I have mentioned before, 13 Edw. 1. this was made
before that of the Seventeenth Year, which you so much contend about, and
Ireland is expressly named in that Statute. The Sum is this, you say it is not a
Statute, I say it is, and the Books call it so: I have also given my Reasons
why I think it so, not that I think it material to our Debate, but because, if
Statutes should be rejected for the Reasons you reject this, I fear a great
part of our old Acts of Parliament, and even Magna Charta it self must be
expunged out of the Statute Book.

I come now to your third Ancient Precedent, the Staple Act, made in the Second
of Henry VI. Cap. 4. This is expired, so I find only the Title in the Statute
Book, which is this: All Merchandises of the Staple passing out of England,
Wales, and Ireland, shall be carried to Calice, as long as the Staple is at
Calice. The Reason you give, why this Law does not bind Ireland, is grounded on
the Opinion of the Judges of England, whereof you give this account, p. 90.
That by the Year Book of the Second of Richard III. it does appear, that the
Merchants of Waterford having Shipped off some Wool, and consigned it to Sluice
in Flanders, the Ship by stress of Weather put into Calice, and Sir Thomas
Thwaits, Treasurer there, seized the said Wool as forfeited, whereupon a Suit
was commenced between the said Merchants and him, which was brought before all
the Judges of England into the Exchequer-Chamber; where the Questions were two,
one of which was, Whither this Staple Act binds Ireland? (I have Abbreviated
what you Write, but I think I have done it fairly;) to which the Judges gave
this Answer, p. 91. Quod terra Hibernia inter se habent Parliament', and omni
modo Cur prout in Angl. and per Idem Parliament' faciunt Leges, and mutant
Leges, and non obligantur per Statuta in Anglia, quia non hic habent Milites
Parliamenti, etc. But in p. 92. you confess from the Year Books of 1 Henry 7.
That when the aforesaid Case came a second time under the Consideration of the
Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber, we find it Reported thus; Hussy the Chief
Justice said, That the Statutes made in England shall Bind those of Ireland,
which was not much gainsaid by the other Judges, notwithstanding that some of
them were of a contrary Opinion the last Term in his Absence. What a strange
Argument is this! The Judges, say you, gave their Opinion; who were those
Judges? You name only Hussy, and he was against it: But you say all the Judges
of England in the former Term; it could not be all, because Hussy was not
there, and afterward he gave his Opinion quite contrary. And as you confess,
p. 92. all the Judges submitted to it; so that here is the Judges Opinion at
one time, against their Opinion at another; and will you bring this to
overthrow the Authority of the Legislative Power of England.

But suppose Hussy and the rest of the Judges had agreed with the first
Opinion, what would you draw from this? Have the Judges Power to question the
Parliament in the Exercise of their Legislative Authority? I know they are
often advised with in the making of an Act, but when it is once past, I presume
their business is to give their Judgments according to it, or to Explain it
where the Sense is doubtful; but not to go against the express Words of an Act,
much less to question the Parliaments Power to make it.

Your second Argument against this Statute's binding Ireland, is a Note in a
Book made by Brook in Abridging this Case, That Ireland is a Kingdom of it
self, and has Parliaments of its own, p. 92. Certainly you have very light
Thoughts of Parliaments, if you think that Notes in Books should abridge their
Power.

The third is a Comment of your own on the whole, p. 93. wherein you draw a
Comparison of Ireland with Scotland, and conclude, That by the same
Argumentation Scotland it self may be bound by English Laws. I confess I would
gladly pay a great Respect to your Person, but I would not willingly be drawn
aside by your Opinion, which I should be, if I were thereby persuaded that the
Parliament of England have no more Power to make Laws to bind Ireland, than
they have to bind Scotland; since it does appear, that they have done it from
the first time of our Statutes being extant, and long before it can be
rationally concluded there was a Parliament there: And yet I do not think they
can make Laws to bind Scotland, because they themselves never pretended to any
such Power, save in the Case aforementioned, that ever I heard of. England and
Ireland are not two distinct Kingdoms, as England and Scotland are: Ireland is
a Kingdom dependant on, and annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, and the
Parliament of Ireland is likewise subordinate to the Parliament of England,
therefore the Laws made by the latter will bind the former: This I hope I have
proved, notwithstanding what you say, That the contrary will be denied by no
Man.

As to what you say in relation to France, page 94. Whether on this way of
reasoning, the People of England had not been subject to the King of France,
had our Kings continued the Possession of that Country, and there kept the Seat
of the Monarchy. I answer, No; for those two Kingdoms had not been united as
England and Ireland are, but as England and Scotland: However, you will find,
That it was provided against by a Statute made 14 Edw. 3. Anno 1340. All I find
of it in Keeble is this, (not being printed at large) By a Statute it was
ordained, That the Realm of England, and the People thereof, shall not be
subject to the King or Kingdom of France.

But you say, page 94. That the Statute Laws of England have not received your
Assent; and you argue thence, That the People of England will consider whether
they also are not the King's Subjects, and may therefore by this way of
reasoning, be bound by Laws which the King may assign them without their
assent, etc. I shall have occasion to speak to this hereafter, so I shall for
the present wave it here.

And now I find you have done with your three Ancient Precedents, the last of
which was in the Second of Henry VI. and I have cited to you several other
Statutes, made before that time, which do undoubtedly bind Ireland, being
intended by the Parliament so to do, which I suppose you never saw, or would
not cite, because you had nothing to say against them.

I shall next follow you to your Modern Instances, which you likewise call
Modern Precedents, page 98, and 99. And here you assert, That before the Year
1641. there was no Statute made in England, introductory of a new Law that
interfered with the Right which the People of Ireland have to make Laws for
themselves, except only those which you have beforementioned.

Is this really so? What think you of those I have before cited? I am very
unwilling to swell this Answer, but I find my self obliged to follow, wherever
you will lead, even to 41.

Well then, besides them, What think you of these several Statutes
under-mentioned? viz.

32 Hen. 8. cap. 24. Whereby the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem in Ireland
were dissolved.

1 Edw. 6. cap. 1. Whereby the Sacrament is directed to be administered in both
Kinds unto the People in Ireland.

1 Edw. 6. cap. 2. Entitled an Act for Election of Bishops, wherein Ireland is
named.

1 Eliz. cap. 1. Whereby the Queen has power given her to assign over to any
Person power to exercise Ecclesiastical Authority in Ireland.

8 Eliz. cap. 3. Against exporting of Sheep from Ireland.

I think all these Laws bound Ireland. But what you mean by Introductory of a
new Law, or Interfering with the Right which the People of Ireland have to make
Laws for themselves, I shall not labor to understand; these seem to be nice
Quibbles: All I proposed was, That the Parliament of England have, and always
had, power to bind Ireland by their Statutes, which you have denied, and I hope
I have proved.

And now I am come with you to 41, where you end your Assertion, and
acknowledge, That in that Year, and since, some Laws have been made in England
to be of force in Ireland; I take your own words, p. 99.

These Acts, you say, are of 17 Car. 1. you do not name the Chapters, but they
are 33, 34, 35, 37. which, being expired, are not to be found in the
Statute-Book any more, save the Titles; therefore I must apply my self to what
you say of them, p. 100. The Titles, say you, of these Acts we have in Pulton
's Collection of Statutes; but with this remark, That they are made of no force
by the Acts of Settlemement and Explanation passed in King Charles the Second's
time in the Kingdom of Ireland. And having gained this Advantage against the
Parliament of England, you make use of it to the utmost; and presently
conclude, That they plainly show, that the Parliament of Ireland may Repeal an
Act passed in England in relation to the Affairs of Ireland. Sure I cannot
think so; for if the Parliament of Ireland can Repeal any one Act made by the
Parliament of England, they may Repeal all they make, which cannot be, except
they have a Jurisdiction above them. For the Power which any one Body or
Society of Men has, to Repeal Laws made by another Body or Society, must
proceed from a Superiority that Body or Society has over the other whose Laws
it does Repeal: So that then (if what you say be true) it follows, That the
Parliament of Ireland is Superior to the Parliament of England; and then we
have brought our Hogs to a fair Market; instead of the Parliament of England's
making Laws to bind Ireland, the Parliament of Ireland may make Laws to bind
England, and likewise Repeal those Laws they have already made.

You Gentlemen of Ireland are angry, That we will not give you leave to carry
away our Trade, and therefore you now undertake to prove, That your Parliament
can Repeal the Laws our Parliament makes. It Is very pretty truly; but I hope
you will not put this your Power in Execution, and Repeal our Act of
Navigation, or our Plantation Acts, and particularly that Act wherein is the
Clause against landing Tobacco in Ireland: This I am fond of for a certain
reason, therefore I beg your favor for it. We will part with our Woollen Bill,
provided you will spare us the Acts already made: It will be a great loss to
the Kingdom of England, if you should Repeal the Acts against planting Tobacco
in Ireland, 'twould very much prejudice our Settlements in Virginia; a Trade,
which besides the great Revenues it brings to the Crown, (whereof you pay a
part) does likewise encourage our Navigation, expends our Manufactures, and
employs our Poor; so that all Persons, from the King to the Beggar, reap
advantage by it; I hope, I say, you will spare us these Acts; though, I cannot
believe you would, did it lie in your power to take them from us; therefore I
will pull up my Spirits, and enquire whether you have this Power you pretend
to. The quotation you make is from Pulton; I have perused him, but he goes no
farther then 4 Car. 1. and I can meet with no Body who has seen any later
Edition; therefore I suppose you must mean Keeble; if so, you have left out a
great part of the Remark: For there I find it to be thus; An Act for reducing
the Rebels in Ireland to their Obedience to his Majesty, and the Crown of
England, EXP. See an Act for the Settlement of Ireland, passed in that Kingdom
Anno 14 Car. 2. 1662. by which this, and the following Acts concerning Ireland,
are, besides their Expiration, of no force.

Methinks I find my Spirits revived, it is not so bad as you represented it;
Keeble says the Act is expired, and then that is the reason why it is of no
force: Every Body that understands Parliaments, knows that none of their Acts
can remain in force longer then they intended them. But now I think of it, I
was to blame to be so much disturbed; For what if Pulton had said so? Has
Pulton liberty to bound the Power of the Parliaments of England by Notes he
shall print in his Statute Book? 'Twas my extraordinary love for Parliaments,
not the weight of your Argument, that cast me down at first.

Perhaps, Sir, you may think this way of arguing savours of Levity; I confess
it does; but you may please likewise to consider, That some People are not to
be beat out of their groundless Fancies, but by ridiculing them: Would any
prudent Man have thus wrested the Sense of this Note, and then brought it as an
Argument against the Authority of the Parliament of England? Surely by leaving
out [EXP] you expected to have caught Butterflies: I suspect your candidness in
those other Quotations wherewith your Book abounds, (though many of them to
little purpose) by your insincerity in this.

And having thus got over this Goliath Argument of yours against the Power of
our English Parliaments, I am the less careful to give Answer to the Objection
you raise your self page 101. viz. It will be said, That by those Acts it is
manifest that England did presume they had such a right to pass Acts binding to
Ireland, or else they had never done it. I confess I am of that opinion, only I
will not call it a Presumption; I think it the just right of the Parliament of
England to exercise a Legislative Power over the Kingdom of Ireland. And what
Answer do you give to this Objection of your own framing? why truly, The
deplorable Condition of Ireland at that time, made it impossible for them to
have a Parliament of their own: and it being absolutely necessary that
something should be done toward the suppressing the Violences then raging among
them, the only means could then be practiced, was for the Parliament of England
to interpose, and do something for their Relief and Safety.

Was this the true Reason? Pray what could you expect from the Parliament of
England, if Ireland was a separate Kingdom, and they had not Power to make Laws
to bind it? The Laws they made could then be of no more Service to them, then
if they had been framed in the Parliament of Scotland, besides the danger of
such a Precedent. But now I think of it, you were not afraid of that danger,
the Parliament of England had made Laws for you five hundred years before; and
therefore what they did at that time, was not (as you say) to Interpose, but to
put in execution a Legislative Authority they had over you.

As to what past in Cromwell's days, p. 101, 102. I shall say little to it; it is
not of much moment one way or the other.

And now I am come with you to King Charles the Second's days, and in it you
say there were several Statutes made to bind Ireland, page 102.

The first you mention is, An Act against importing Cattle from Ireland, or
other Parts beyond the Seas, 18 Car. 2. cap. 2. made perpetual by two Acts in
the same Reign. These, you say, do not bind Ireland: and I say so too;
therefore I wonder you mention them.

The next you quote are, The Acts against planting Tobacco in England and
Ireland, 12 Car. 2. cap. 34. 15 Car. 2. cap. 7. 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 26.
these you say do positively bind Ireland, page 103. But you suggest, That as
there was no need of making them, because no Tobacco was ever planted in
Ireland, (which perhaps there might have been, if those Laws had not been made)
so you imply, they are of no force in Ireland now made; for you see no more
reason for sending of Force to trample down an Acre of Tobacco in Ireland by
those Statutes, then there would be for cutting down the Woods of Shelela, were
there an Act made in England against your planting or having Timber. Truly,
Sir, I am of the same opinion; for if the Parliament of England had made a Law
against planting and having Timber in Ireland, I do not see how you could have
avoided putting it in execution, any more then you could this: And here we are
once more agreed.

The next you mention is the Navigation Act, page 103. (by which, I suppose,
you mean the beforementioned Act 22 and 23 Car. 2.) also the two Acts against
exporting of Wool, 12 Car. 2. cap. 32. and 14 Car. 2. cap. 18. page 104. These
you confess do bind Ireland, and have received due obedience, but what right
the Parliament of England had to make these Statutes you very much question:
you take them to be Innovations on you, as not being warranted by former
Precedents; for that you say before these Acts, (the eldest of which is not
over Thirty seven years) there is not one positive full Precedent to be met
with in all the Statute Books, of an English Act binding the Kingdom of
Ireland, page 104. Thence you argue, p. 105. Shall Proceedings only of Thirty
seven years standing, be urged against a Nation, to deprive them of their
Rights and Liberties which they enjoyed for Five hundred years before, and
which were invaded without and against their Consent, and from that day to this
have been constantly complained of? Let any English Heart that stands so justly
in vindication of his own Rights and Liberties, answer this Question, and I
have done.

Well Sir, I think now we are like to bring the Matter to a short Issue,
provided you will stand to what you say: for I confess I must agree with you in
this so reasonable a Challenge, viz. That if no positive full Precedent can be
produced of above Thirty seven years standing, whereby the Parliament of
England have made Laws to bind Ireland, I think what they have lately done in
that Matter to be an Invasion on your Rights and Liberties.

And here, I believe I state the question much in your favor; for in your
Appeal to any English Heart that stands for his own Rights and Liberties, you
say, that these Invasions have been constantly complained of from that day to
this; which, should I put you on the proof of, I am afraid you would be at a
great loss to do it. Pray, who made the Complaints? and to whom? for it must be
done by your Parliament of Ireland, to the Parliament of England, else it
cannot be supposed to be a Regular Complaint.

But we will take it as I state it, and thereby put the Onus probandi on my
self, That the Parliament of England did make positive full Laws to bind
Ireland before the days of Charles the Second, my work then is to produce them;
and because I will be fair with you in this Combat, I shall wave the three
Statutes you have before excepted against, (whether justly or not, I leave to
the Reader on what I have said before) viz. Statutum Hiberniae, Ordinatio pro
Statu Hiberniae, and the Staple Act 2 Hen. 6. These three, to please you, shall
be dismissed the Ring.

Come then, let us begin; What think you of the Statute of Merchants 13 Edw. 1.
Anno 1258, which is Four hundred and forty years since, wherein (as I have said
before) Ireland is mentioned, and bound? I hope you will allow this to be
positive and full; and then I have only these two things to prove, first, That
there is such a Statute; and for this I refer you to Keeble. Secondly, That it
is acknowledged here to be a Law; and this the constant practice of the Kingdom
of England puts out of doubt, it being accounted one of our best Securities in
matters of Dealing; and a Statute being made 21 Jac. 1. which, among other
things makes it Felony without Benefit of the Clergy, to acknowledge a Statute
in the name of another Person not privy or consenting to it, also to procure it
to be done: I have known two Persons convicted thereon in this City, for
acknowledging the above Statute of Merchants, and receive Sentence accordingly.

Now, Sir, I hope you will yield you are in the wrong.

But because by the Testimony of two or three Witnesses every thing ought to be
tried, I will give you another, viz. that of 11 Edw. 3. Anno 1337. mentioned
before, which is 360 years since, wherein Ireland is also mentioned, and
positively bound.

I will add a third, which I have likewise mentioned before, viz. the Statute
Staple 27 Edw. 3. Anno 1353. which is Three hundred and forty years since: in
the first Chapter whereof, the Staple Towns are settled for Ireland, and in
almost every Chapter, Ireland is mentioned under some name or other, and
positively bound.

I could produce many more, but having had occasion to mention them before, I
will not swell my Answer by repetition.

I hope now, Sir, I have fully proved all I undertook, and you proposed; and
that you will acknowledge your self to be in an error, and give up the Cause,
for I am weary of following as you lead, because I am forced thus to repeat the
same things again. But I must go on to the end of your Book; perhaps you have
something more material to offer then I have yet seen.

But before I proceed, I will mention one Statute made in the Reign of King
Charles the Second, which you omit, and I will put you in mind of, 'twas in his
Twelfth year, cap. 7. The Title (which is all I find of it in the Statute Book)
is, An Act for restoring unto James Marquess of Ormond all his Honors,
Manors, Lands, and Tenements in Ireland, whereof he was in possession on the
23 d day of October 1641. or at any time since; which being as it were a
private Act, is not printed at large. Now I am apt to think that the Marquess
of Ormond thought the Parliament of England had a Legislative Power over
Ireland, else he was very much to blame to be at the Charge and Trouble of
getting this Act past: And do you think that a Person of his Honor and
Interest in Ireland, had any design to betray and give up the Liberties thereof?

I come now with you to the Reign of his present Majesty; which you call a
happy Government; and I think that we in England have just cause to call it so
too, and to bless God for it, as I doubt not but we do: But I am sure it is more
especially happy to the Protestant Interest in Ireland, else I fear their Lands
had had other Owners before this time, though, perhaps under a former Reign,
the Powers of an Irish Parliament might have been asserted, in order to clip
the Wings of the Parliament of England, till both had been levelled to the
despotick power of the Prince.

But however, as happy as this Government is, I find you have something to say
against it: The Parliament in this happy Reign have made Laws to bind Ireland,
which is a thing you complain of, and more especially, because it was done at a
time, when the Subjects of England, have more strenuously then ever asserted
their own Rights, and the Liberty of Parliaments, page 105.

Why then, Sir, you have no reason to complain, for this was one way by which
they asserted their own Rights, and the Liberty of Parliaments, though this was
not the only way: They asserted it likewise in an Act made Anno 1 Gul. and Mar.
cap. 2. entitled, An Act declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects,
and setting the Succession of the Crown. And in an Act made Anno 6 Gul. and
Mar. cap. 2. entitled, An Act for the frequent meeting and calling of
Parliaments. But as great Asserters as they were of the Liberty of Parliaments,
I do not see one word mentioned in that Act, relating to the Parliament of
Ireland; from whence I infer, That they thought there was but one Parliament
for all those Kingdoms, Lands, and Countries which were annexed to the Imperial
Crown of England, else certainly that Parliament, which thought they had Power
to make Laws to bind Ireland, and who you confess made them out of good will
and kindness to you, under those Miseries that Ireland then suffered, page 106.
would have taken some care for that Kingdom, in a Matter of such Weight, even
for many of those Reasons whereon that Statute is grounded, had they not
thought Ireland subject to their own Legislative Power.

But let us come to the Statutes which you mention to be made in this Reign,
wherein Ireland is named.

The first is page 107. An Act made 1 Gul. and Mar. cap. 29. entitled, An Act
for Relief of the Protestant Irish Clergy. This, you say, was obtained by the
distressed Protestant Clergy of Ireland, who were driven into England, and by
accepting Ecclesiastical Promotions here, had forfeited those they had before
in Ireland, by a Statute in that Kingdom 17 and 18 Car. 2. To free themselves
from the Penalty of this Act, they thought it necessary to procure the
forementioned Statute, which the Parliament of England, I perceive, kindly
granted them; and they thought it sufficient to continue them their Rights to
their Promotions in Ireland, notwithstanding that Irish Act. So that here you
see in Fact the Opinion of the Clergy of Ireland, touching the Powers in
dispute between us, notwithstanding any Gloss you may think fit to put on it.

But now the Act is before me, let us see what were the Thoughts of the
Parliament of England when they made that Law, whether they thought it would be
so precarious, as to be in the discretion of the Parliament of Ireland to allow
it; because you seem to infer that it was so, page 107. when you say, The
Protestant Irish Clergy thought they could not be too secure in avoiding the
Penalty of the Irish Act, and therefore applied themselves to the Parliament of
England, and obtained this Act. No sure, the Parliament thought it binding,
else it had argued Levity in them, to make a Law which they thought they wanted
Power to see put in Execution. But let the Law it self speak the Sense of the
Legislators: I must be forced to transcribe the words of the Statute, which are
these, That no Ecclesiastical Person, of what dignity or degree soever,
promoted or beneficed in the Kingdom of Ireland, and who has been enforced to
forsake the said Kingdom, or has so done for fear of the Irish Rebels, and
being of the Protestant Religion, who are or shall be presented, promoted,
collated, instituted, or inducted to any Church or Benefice with Cure, or
without Cure, or to any Ecclesiastical Promotion whatsoever in the Kingdom of
England, shall thereby, or by acceptance thereof, lose any Ecclesiastical
Benefice or Promotion in the said Kingdom of Ireland; but that he, and every of
them, be continued and enabled still to hold and enjoy his Benefice and
Promotion in the said Kingdom of Ireland, of what dignity or degree soever the
same was. You see here, the Parliament takes no notice of any Law made in
Ireland, and consequently of no Parliament there, at least, which should stand
in the way of their Authority. It Is true, there follows these words, Any Law,
Statute, or Canon notwithstanding, I hope you do not take this to be meant of
Laws, Statutes, and Canons made in Ireland; it is not probable it should; but if
you will have it so, then you see that the Parliament of England thought this
Law strong enough to command Obedience in Ireland, although contradictory to
the Laws made by the Parliament there.

The next Statute you mention is, page 108. cap. 34. of the same Sessions,
entitled, An Act for prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with France. By this
you say Ireland is bound. However, you have found a Salvo for this also; 'Twas,
say you, during the heat of the War in that Kingdom, when 'twas impossible to
have a Regular Parliament therein, all being in the hands of the Irish Papists.
What then? should the Parliament of England therefore assume a Power which did
not belong to them? why did they not make Laws to bind Flanders, where the War
was hotter then in Ireland, and the Subjects of the King of Spain under the
Irregular Oppression of the French King? But had not the Parliament of England
exercised this Power before? you your self say they had in Charles the Second's
days, p. 102. So then, this was not the Reason, though you are pleased to
shadow it over with this Vail, it was, because they thought Ireland to be under
their Jurisdiction, and that this Act would be necessary for the Public Weal
of the Kingdom of England, and the Lands belonging to it.

But mistrusting the weight of this Reason, you proceed, and say page 108.
Neither do we complain of it, as hindering us from corresponding with the King's
Enemies, for it is the duty of all good Subjects to abstain from that. What
then? are Statute Laws such Cobweb things, as to be binding only when no
Complaints are made against them? This is a worse Reason then the other; I
admit the Protestant Gentlemen of Ireland to be good Subjects; but what if some
ill Men amongst you should have complained of this Law, and broke through it
for their private advantage, had it not force enough to have caused it is
Penalties to be put in Execution against them? Surely the Parliament thought it
had, else they did ill to name Ireland in the Body of that Statute; and their
Reason for it doubtless was, That they thought Ireland subject to their
Authority, as a Kingdom depending on England, which they did not take Scotland
to be, else in all probability they would have extended that Act thither also.
'Twas not out of love to the French King that they left Scotland out.

Please to note, That this Law likewise binds Jersey, Garnsey, Alderney, Sark,
and Isle of Man; the last was once a Kingdom of it self, separate from England,
and in the hands of the Scots, and of the Norwegians.

The next you mention is, page 109. An Act made 1 Gul. and Mar. Sess. 2. cap.
9. entitled, An Act for the better Security and Relief of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects of Ireland. And what say you to this? Why, page 108. you
tell us, That the banished Laity of Ireland, observing the Clergy thus careful
to secure their Properties, and provide for the worst as well as they could in
that Juncture, when no other Means could be taken by a Regular Parliament in
Ireland; they thought it likewise advisable for them to do something in
Relation to their Concerns. And accordingly they obtained this Act. Very
careful indeed they were, to apply themselves for Paper Laws to the Parliament
of England, if they thought they had no Power to make them. A Man would have
supposed, that the Parliament of Ireland, in their first Sessions after the
Reduction of that Kingdom, would have deprived the Clergymen concerned in
procuring the other Act of all their Ecclesiastical Preferments in Ireland, for
the wrong step they made, because 'twas they began the Dance for the Laity, who
only followed their Example.

And here you have the Opinion of the Laity of Ireland, as you had before that
of the Clergy; and by your Writing I suppose you were one of them.

But you still harp on the same String, 'twas because you could have no Regular
Parliament in Ireland; though I perceive you had a farther drift in obtaining
this Act, then the Clergy had in procuring the other; for you proceed, p. 109.
We concluded with our selves, that when we had obtained these Acts from the
Parliament in England, we had gone a great way in securing the like Acts to be
passed in a Regular Parliament in Ireland, whenever it should please God to
Re-establish us in our own Country. Was this really your Reason? Why then did
not you set it forth in your Petition to the Parliament of England, and
endeavor with them to have got it mentioned in their Act, which might also
have been a salvo to the Privilege of the Parliament of Ireland hereafter? But
I cannot think it was so, because you very well knew by a long Experience, that
Acts of Parliament made in England, wanted not the Authority of the Parliament
of Ireland to confirm them, and consequently you needed it not in this: Nor was
there any reason to fear this Act's being pleaded against you as a Precedent of
your Submission, and absolute acquiescence in the Jurisdiction of the
Parliaments of England over the Kingdom of Ireland, which you complain of p.
110. for I should take the Authority of the Parliament of England to be very
young, if it depended thereon.

But now you have done with this Act, give me leave to take it up: You say,
That therein King James his Irish Parliament at Dublin, and all Acts and
Attainders done by them, are declared void, p. 109. I find then, that King
James had a Parliament in Ireland, which Parliament must be lawfully Assembled,
if Ireland is a separate Kingdom, and not subject to the Statute-Laws of
England: For, though he had abdicated the Kingdom of England, and that it was
so declared by the Parliament here, who had settled the Crown on King William
and Queen Mary; yet supposing Ireland to be a separate Kingdom, that
Declaration would no more have reached it, than it did Scotland, till the same
was done by the Parliament there: Hence then it follows, either that you did
tacitly confess Ireland to be no separate Kingdom, or that the Parliament of
England had Power to declare void an Irish Parliament, and all Acts and
Attainders done by them; for you say, That you obtained this Act for your
better Security and Relief. Please to consider whether I am not in the right as
to this Matter.

The next Act you mention is, p. 111. viz. An Act for Abrogating the Oath of
Supremacy in Ireland, and appointing other Oaths, 3. and 4. Gul. and Mar. This
you say binds Ireland, and to this and the forementioned Acts, you say, you
conformed your selves, because they were in your Favor, and you hope that a
voluntary Submission to the Commands of another who has no Jurisdiction over
you (as you suppose the Parliament of England has not) because they are
pleasing to you, shall give him no Authority to command you ever after as he
pleases, p. 112. If this were the Case, I confess you have reason on your side,
but seeing it is not, but that the Parliament of England has made Laws to bind
Ireland ever since it was united to the Imperial Crown thereof, I hope the
Obedience you paid to these Statutes, shall not be called a Voluntary
Submission, which you have Power to throw off when you please, except you are
of Opinion with what follows, viz. That Subjects ought not to obey longer than
they see it convenient for them, unless they be forced to it, which Force they
are to free themselves from as soon as they can: I am apt to think the
Parliament of England will not like this Principle, and I do not see how the
Parliament of Ireland can neither; for if this be allowed, pari ratione, you
may throw off their Jurisdiction also when you please.

But I will return to this last Act, which you say, p. 111. was made 3 and 4
Gul. and Mar. It has slipped my Collection, so I can observe nothing from it,
save what you say your self, viz. That the Parliament convened at Dublin, Anno
1692. under Lord Sidney, and that likewise Anno 1695, under Lord Caple, paid an
entire Obedience to it. From whence I conclude, that those two Parliaments
thought it their Duty so to do, else it would seem very imprudent in them,
because they could not but conclude, that it would be interpreted an
Acknowledgment of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of England over them; not
that I urge it against them for a Precedent in favor of the Parliament of
England, 'twill imply a weakness in their Authority if they wanted it, which
they do not by your own Confession; for you say, p. 64. That several English
Acts of Parliament were allowed in the Parliament of Ireland held 10 Hen. 7.
though I think that allowance utterly unnecessary, and rather an Incroachment on
the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of England.

But why did the Parliament of England, Anno 3 and 4 Gul. and. Mar. make this
Law, at a time when the Parliament of Ireland was so near sitting, which you
say was Anno 1692? Truly, though I cannot give their Reasons for it, and it
will not be good Manners for me to ask them, yet I will adventure my Thought,
which is, That they knew they had Power to make it, and that the Parliament of
Ireland, whenever they met, was bound to pay Obedience to it.

And now it comes into my mind, let me ask you Gentlemen of Ireland this
Question; Did you think King William and Queen Mary King and Queen of Ireland,
before the Calling of that Parliament, or did you not? if you did not, how came
that Parliament to meet by Virtue of their Writs? For if Ireland be an
Independent Kingdom, the Declaration of the Parliament of England (as I said
before) was nothing to you; but if you did, it must be by Virtue of the Act of
Recognition made in the Parliament of England; if so, then that Act also
reached Ireland, though you do not mention it; and then it follows, that here
is a New Original Compact, whereby Ireland is become a Dependant on the Kingdom
of England, and your Parliament on the Parliament thereof.

I do not see how you will get over this Argument, though there is no need to
make use of it in favor of the Parliament of England; yet I may with much more
Reason draw this Conclusion from hence, then you can from the supposed Donation
of King Henry II. to his Son John, that Ireland was then made a separate
Kingdom.

But I go forwards; p. 113. you come to your Arguments drawn from the Liberty
of the People, and tell us, That the Right of being subject only to such Laws
to which Men give their own Consent, is so inherent to all Mankind, and founded
on such immutable Laws of Nature and Reason, that it is not to be alienated, or
given up, by any Body of Men whatsoever. I confess my self entirely of this
Opinion, and I cannot think the People of Ireland ought to be deprived of that,
which I would not lose my self, much less can I Argue for it: So that you see,
I am no Friend to Slavery, or any thing that looks like it; when I cannot
defend my Argument without subjecting Ireland to this State, I will give up the
Gantlet.

But let us rightly distinguish in this Matter; and since we agree in the main,
let us consider what you mean by giving Consent to a Law: This, I presume, must
be done, either by a Man's self, or by his chosen Representative; if so, then
we will consider how far this will affect the People of Ireland, with respect
to the Matter we are now upon: For I believe you will grant, that if a Man
denies or neglects to qualify himself for such an Election, or if qualified
refuses to be present thereat, or removes himself at such a distance that he
cannot if he would, this Man is not denied his Consent, nor is his Liberty
broken in upon, though he be afterward bound up by Laws made by a Parliament,
in the Election of whose Members he actually gave no Vote; the Laws governing
Elections being made by a common Consent, though they may seem to affect some
Persons severely, yet being thought convenient for the whole Community, ought
to be submitted to: And as for the other two things, being Acts of a Man's own,
his Choice is supposed to go along with them; If this be not allowed, there
never was any Election free. For suppose I will not make my self a Freeholder
for a County, Citizen or Burgess for a Corporation, must the Laws already made
be Cancelled to gratify my Humor? Or suppose that I go on a Voyage to Sea, or
settle my self in the Plantations Abroad, shall not I be bound by the
Statute-Laws of England, because I was not actually present at the Election of
the Members that made them? If this be admitted, few Men will care to be there.
It Is a pleasant way of Arguing, till it comes to be closely applied: Now there
is no English Subject in Ireland, but may put himself, if he please, under one
of these Qualifications, that is, he is capacitated to do it as he is an
Englishman, and this is what his Ancestors did before him, to whose Privileges
he succeeds, and must not expect, that new Itinerant Courts of Parliament shall
be erected to follow him, wherever he thinks fit to remove: If this be
allowed to the Gentlemen of Ireland, why should it be denied to those who
settled in our Plantations in America, they all removed out of England on the
same Principles of advancing their own private Fortunes; and what a Jumble of
Laws should we then have? Not but that I think it highly reasonable, they
should all have power to make private Laws, for the better governing their
several Colonies; and this they do, by Representatives chosen by themselves,
which in the Lesser Plantations they call Assemblies, but in Ireland a
Parliament; which Assemblies, and the Laws they make, ought still to be in
Submission to the Superior Power of the Parliament of England.

But if I do not mistake, you have somewhere owned that Ireland did once send
Representatives to the Parliament of England: I must turn back, and I find it
in p. 95. where you say, There have been other Statutes or Ordinances made in
England for Ireland, which may reasonably be of Force here, because they were
made and assented to by our own Representatives. And you go on to show from the
White Book in the Exchequer in Dublin, the form of a Writ sent by King Edward
I. to his Chancellor of Ireland, wherein he mentions, Quaedam Statuta per nos
de assensu Prelatorum Comitum Baronum and Communitatis Regni nostri Hiberniae,
nuper apud Lincoln and quaedam alia Statuta post modum apud Eborum facta. These
you suppose to be Statutes made, either at the Request of the States of
Ireland, or by the Assent of your own Representatives, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons of Ireland; and from this you Argue, p. 96. That the King
and Parliament of England would not Enact Laws to bind Ireland, without the
Concurrence of the Representatives of this Kingdom.

Well, Sir, put what Sense you please on it, this shows plainly that you then
came to England for your Laws, and that the Parliament of England had a
Legislative Jurisdiction over you in those early days; so that all makes the
worse for your Argument: How then came you to be free from it? For either you
cast off the Parliament of England, or the Parliament of England cast off you;
it is not the latter, for the Parliament is still careful for your Welfare, and
makes good Laws for your better Government; and I see no Power you had to cast
them off, except you will at the same time say, you are not Englishmen, which
I hope you will not; but I find you are like froward Children, who will not eat
their Bread and Butter unless it be Sugared; nothing will please you, unless
the Parliament of England will resign their Legislative Authority, which they
shall never have my Consent to, except I see better Reasons for it than any you
have yet produced.

But you proceed, p. 96. Formerly when Ireland was but thinly Peopled, and the
English Laws not fully current in all parts of the Kingdom, it is probable, that
then they could not frequently Assemble with convenience or safety to make
Laws, in their own Parliaments at Home; and therefore, during the Heats of
Rebellions, or Confusion of the Times, they were forced to Enact Laws in
England. Truly it is a very probable Story you tell us; I take Bevis of
Southampton, or Guy of Warwick, to be altogether as probable. Come let us
examine it; In the former part of your Book you lay it down as undeniable, That
Henry II. in the Parliament at Oxford, made a Donation of Ireland to his Son
John, as a separate Kingdom; and as such Parliaments were there settled (I must
confess I think it is all of a piece) now, you tell us, that because the People
of Ireland could not Assemble with Convenience and Safety, to make Laws, during
the Heats of Rebellions and Confusions of Times there, they came to England to
make them here; just like the Birds, that remove at their Pleasure from colder
Climates, to make their Nests in Warmer. But you prove nothing of this, nor is
it at all likely: Pray when were these Heats of Rebellions? not in the Days of
Henry II. for you say, p. 8. that Anno 1172, Ireland was quietly surrendered to
him by Richard Strongbow at Dublin; afterward, p. 30. you say, he settled a
modus tenendi Parliam. p. 39. you say, that five Years after his return from
thence, he created his Younger Son, John, King of Ireland, who went thither,
and that the Irish Nobility and Gentry immediately repaired to him: It Is true,
you say there was some Difference between them about their long rude Beards,
but I hope you will not call that a Rebellion: p. 40. you imply to us, that
King John made another Voyage thither, which How and Baker say was the 31 Hen.
2. being eight Years after: You proceed also and tell us, That King John
governed them Two and twenty Years during the Lives of his Father Henry II. and
his Brother Richard I. in which time he made them diverse Grants and Charters;
so that hitherto all was well in Ireland: p. 44. you say, That on the Death of
King Richard I. King John, in the Twelfth Year of his Reign, went again into
Ireland, Anno 1210, and then it was that Mat. Paris says the 20 Reguli came to
him to Dublin, and did him Homage: p. 45. you say, That Henry III. came to the
Crown Anno 1216, and the same Year sent over the Charter from Bristol the 12th
of November: And in p. 46. you say, He sent them another in the February
following from Gloucester: p. 52. you say, That Henry III. in the Twelfth Year
of his Reign, sent over a Writ to Hugo de Burgh to Summon the States of
Ireland. In all this time we hear nothing of Wars, Tumults, Heats, or
Rebellions, but quite contrary: For p. 49, and 50. you set forth a Writ (which
you have from Mr. Petit) or rather a Letter written by King Henry III's Queen,
Anno 38. of his Reign, wherein she desires his Subjects of Ireland to assist
the King with Men and Money, to defend his Land of Vascony, which was then
Invaded by the King of Castile. Thus far I quote you from your own Book, and
now you tell us, p. 96. That the People of Ireland could not Assemble with
convenience, to make Laws at Home, by reason of Heats of Rebellions, or
Confusion of Times; and that this caused them to come to England to do it, as
appears by the Writ you mention, p. 95. which was in the Ninth Year of Edward
I. who succeeded his Father Henry III. Really Sir, you have given me so much
trouble to run over your Book again, to show how inconsistent you are in your
Discourse about this Matter, that I could almost be angry with you: But I am
willing to take this pains, not to convince you that you are in an Error, I
imagine that will be labor lost; a Gentleman of your Parts must needs know it
already; but to make it plain, lest any Body else should be drawn aside by what
you write.

Well then, on the Credit of this Writ I will grant you, that Ireland came to
England for Laws in the Ninth of Edward I. And then I hope you will not oppose
this Ancient Precedent, because it is of your own producing.

But to get clear of this you tell us, p. 96. That these Laws were made by your
own Representatives: And to prove that this was so in the Reign of Edward III.
(for you say its plain 'twas so in Edward I.'s time) you tell us, There were
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses elected in the Shires, Cities, and Buroughs of
Ireland, to serve in Parliament in England, and so served accordingly. And to
prove this you tell us, p. 97. That amongst the Records of the Tower of London,
Rot. Claus. 50 Edw. 3. Parl. 2. Membr. 23. We find a Writ from the King at
Westminster, directed to James Butler, Lord Justice of Ireland, and to R.
Archbishop of Dublin, his Chancellor, requiring them to issue Writs under the
Great Seal of Ireland, to the several Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, for
satisfying the Expenses of the Men of that Land, who last came over to serve in
Parliament in England. And in another Roll the 50 Edw. 3. Memb. 19. on
complaint to the King by John Draper, who was chosen Burgess of Cork by Writ,
and served in the Parliament of England, and yet was denied his Expenses by
some of the Citizens, care was taken to reimburse him. Pray what use will you
make of these Records? to prove that the Kingdom of Ireland is not subject to
the Legislative Power of the Parliament of England? I think you have brought
the Matter home, and have mistaken the side; for instead of proving that it is
not, you have proved positively that it is; and particularly that from the
Ninth of Edward the First, to the Fiftieth of Edward the Third, the
Representatives of Ireland came over to sit in the Parliament of England, and
how long before, or how long after they did so, I cannot tell. The Writ you
mention of Edward I. has reference to Statutes made before that time at
Lincoln and York, which I judge must be in the Days of Henry II. Richard I. or
King John, because I do not find that any Parliament was held in either of
these Places, from the beginning of our Statute-Books; and then where is your
separate Kingdom of Ireland under King John? And why have you so often
asserted, That there was never any Law made in England to bind Ireland, till
the Modern Instances you mention? Pray what means all the Clamor you have made
against our late Kings, and the Parliaments of England, for infringing your
Liberties, and breaking through the very design of settling Communities, and
putting you in a worse Condition than you were in the state of Nature? You are
very much beholding to the ingenious Mr. Lock, for the fineness of your
Argument, about the State of Conquest, etc. in the former part of your Book,
which I do not at all blame you for, because I think no Man can handle a
Subject smoothly, whereon he has treated, that does not follow his Copy; but I
blame you for not applying those excellent Arguments more fitly.

But to return to the Matter; P. 58. You confessed, there was no Parliament in
Ireland before King Henry III.'s time, and you have not any where shown, that
it was settled there during his Reign; and now you acknowledge that Ireland
sent Representatives to sit in the Parliament of England in the Reigns of
Edward I. Edw. II. and Edward III. his Successors, where Laws were made to bind
it. Pray then, why do you exclaim against their putting this Power in Execution
still? To this you say, p. 97. It must be allowed that the People of Ireland
ought to have their Representatives in the Parliament of England. And this you
believe they would be willing enough to embrace, but this is a Happiness you
cannot hope for. I have before told you that you are represented there already;
but you are willing some Representatives should come over from Ireland to sit
there, you say they did so once, and you are willing they should do it again;
pray why did you not continue that great Happiness you now so much prize? To
this you Answer, p. 98. This sending of Representatives out of Ireland to the
Parliament in England, on some occasions, was found in process of time to be
very troublesome and inconvenient. I cannot but observe what a Hodge-podge you
would make by the wrong Inferences you endeavor to draw from every thing, only
because you would cloud the Truth; you allow you once sent Representatives to
the Parliament here, but you would now have this to be only upon some
occasions: I hope it was not on occasion of Wars and Tumults during the
prosperous Reigns of Edw. I. and Edw. III. if it was, you do not tell us what
Wars and Tumults they were: It Is much that Edward III. who extended his Arms to
France and Scotland, could not keep in quiet his County of Ireland, as it is
called in the Statute 1 Hen. 6. quoted before; and now you tell us the Reason
why it was then called so, viz. because they formerly sent Representatives to
serve in Parliament here. If this was not the Reason why they sent them only on
some occasions (and you give no other) then, I am apt to think, either that
they sent none at all, or that they sent them to every Parliament; for I cannot
believe, that Laws were made in England and in Ireland at the same time, by two
Parliaments that stood on equal footing one with the other: This is not
probable; for what if their Laws should clash, the Parliament of England would
not submit to have their Laws repealed by the Parliament of Ireland; that were
unjust, because the same Power that made them was not at the repealing of them:
Ireland had Representatives in the Parliament of England, but England had not
in the Parliament of Ireland: Nor is it probable, That the Parliament of
Ireland would have stoopt to the Parliament of England, if they had any
colorable Argument of their side; for you see how loath they are to do it now,
though they have none at all; at least, you, who have undertaken this Contest
in their favor, have produced none; but you have fairly quitted the Field, and
confessed, That Ireland did formerly, for 100 years together, send their
Representatives to the Parliament of England.

Well then, to return to this Happiness, why did not Ireland continue it? You
tell us, page 98. They found it very troublesome and inconvenient. What makes
you then to desire it again? I do not see how it will be less troublesome now;
and I assure you, it will be attended with as many inconveniences, if not to
you in Ireland, yet to us in England; and I hope you will consider your
Neighbors inconveniences, as well as your own.

But as inconvenient and troublesome as it is, you are willing to have this
Happiness restored. Here the nature of the Argument is altered; for now it is
not, Whether the Parliament of England have Power to make Laws to bind Ireland,
and whether what they have done in that Matter for 500 years past, has been
done de jure; but whether Ireland shall be restored to its former Privileges
of sending Representatives to sit in the Parliament of England? I confess, I
have no Authority to treat with you about this Affair; it is reserved for a
higher Power to determine.

But suppose you are denied to have this Happiness restored, the question then
will be, Whether you have any wrong done you? If I was to be Judge, I should
give it against you: For, seeing you have given up your Rights so many hundred
years since, and submitted your selves to your English Representatives, without
sending any from Ireland, I do not see how you can insist on it now: And in
this I believe you have Neighbors Fair; for I doubt not, there are many
Corporations, both in England and Wales, who either did send more Members to
Parliament in former days, or might have done it, had not the Charge or Trouble
put them on seeking to be excused. Particularly, I observe a Clause to this
purpose in the Charter granted to the City of Bristol by King Edward III. when
he made it a County, whereof I have before me an English Copy, which runs thus;
And moreover, we have granted for us and our Heirs to the said Burgesses and
their Heirs and Successors for ever, that the said Town of Bristol, by any
means shall not be charged to send to the Parliament of Us or our Heirs, but
only two Men, as heretofore has been accustomed; the which two Men, as well
Knights of the County of Bristol, as Burgesses of the Town and Borough of
Bristol, for the same Town and Borough shall be bound to make answer. Which
shows, that this was then granted as a favor to that City, at their request,
to avoid the trouble and charge of sending two Knights, as well as two
Burgesses, to represent them in Parliament, which if they would now retrieve,
they cannot. And this was about the same time that you say, Ireland being
discouraged by the Troubles and Inconveniences that attended it, forbore to
send Representatives to sit in Parliament in England.

But whatever was the Reason that made them do this, I cannot agree with what
you say page 98. This we may presume was the reason, that afterward, when
times were more settled, we fell again into our old Track, and regular course
of Parliaments in our own Country: Pray what Regular Course of Parliaments do
you mean? you have not yet proved that you ever had any, but rather confessed
the contrary; you say you sent Representatives to sit in the Parliament of
England, But what then? Does it therefore follow that you might leave that off,
and set up Parliaments of your own at your pleasure? No sure; you might quit
your Privileges of being part of the Parliament of England, but it does not
therefore follow, that you had Power to establish a Parliament in Ireland,
independent on the Parliament of England; no more then if the People of
Cornwall, being unwilling to put themselves to the trouble of attending the
Parliament at Westminster, should therefore without farther warrant, erect one
of their own nearer home, and then expect it should be clothed with full Power,
and be Superior to that of Westminster, with relation to what concerns the
County of Cornwall: For to talk of your Old Track and Regular course of
Parliaments, after what you have said on this Matter, is a Jest, and deserves
no answer.

We are now come to your fifth Particular, page 115. The Opinions of the
Learned in the Laws relating to this Matter. The first you mention is the Lord
Chief Justice Cook's in his Seventh Report in Calvin's Case, page 116. and he
is against you: But you blame him for his unfaithful broken Citations, (which I
agree with you to be an ill way of deceiving a Reader into a good opinion of an
Argument, but must tell you, that you have been too frequently guilty of the
same Fault in this Book) yet I cannot see how the Lord Chief Justice Cook has
been unfaithful in this his Citation, for I take the whole sense of the
Transcript you mention, to be included therein: You say, That after he had
declared Ireland to be a Dominion separate and divided from England, for which
he quotes out of the Year-Books the Case of the Merchants of Waterford, and the
proceedings thereon, which you have mentioned page 91. He concludes, Nostra
Statuta non ligant eos, etc. yet with this Parenthesis (which is to be
understood unless they be especially named) What you say against this his
Opinion, p. 117. That it is downright Magisterial, and point blank against the
irrefragable Reason of the Book he quotes, I think will appear to be very
severe, if the Point he was then upon be considered; which was this, as I find
it in his Abridgment, page 271. R. C. by his Guardian brings an Assize, the
Defendants say the Plaintiff ought not to be answered, quia est Aliagena, natus
5 November. An. Dom. Regis Angliae, etc. tertio, apud E. infra Regnum Scotiae, ac
insra ligeanciam Domini Regis Regni sui S. ac extra ligeanciam Regni sui Angl.
Here, the Debate being about a Post natus in Scotland, Sir Edward Cook brought
the Quotation you mention, for the sake of the last words thereof, sed personae
eorum sunt subjecti Regis sicut Inhabitants in Calesia, Gasconia and Guyan:
who had been ever accounted Denizens; and makes the Note you mention, viz.
(which is to be understood unless they be especially named) on the other part
of that quotation, Nostra Statuta non ligant, etc. because he would not be
thought of Opinion with the former Judges, Et non obligantur per Statuta in
Anglia, which you mention page 91. And this having no relation to the Case he
was then upon, he thought it needless to give the Reasons for this his dissent
in Opinion from them, which makes you call him Magisterial, etc.

But afterward, page 117. you say, that in another place of the same Report he
gives this color of Reason for his former Assertion, That though Ireland be a
distinct Dominion from England, yet the Title thereof being by Conquest, the
same by Judgment of Law might by express words be bound by the Parliaments of
England. From this you would raise an Argument, p. 118. between the Opinion
given by the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber, page 91. and the now Opinion of
the L. Chief Justice Cook: But I shall leave you to reconcile those venerable
Judges, and proceed to my own Argument, because I think I have already spoken
to every thing you therein mention; only I cannot but stand amazed at your --
what shall I call it! in this Assertion, page 118. I challenge any Man to show
me, that any one before him, or any one since, but from him, has vended this
Doctrine: when your self had told us before, page 92. That the Lord Chief
Justice Hussy, and the other Judges were of the same Opinion, when the Case of
the Merchants of Waterford (which is the same you now quote) was argued the
second time in the Exchequer Chamber: And in page 80. you tell us, This was a
Doctrine first broached directly by Will. Hussy Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench in England, in the first year of Henry VII. and of late revived by
the Lord Chief Justice Cook. I wonder how you can make such bold Challenges,
which need no farther trouble then perusing your own Book, to answer. I hope I
have now vindicated my Lord Chief Justice Cook, whose Name, you say, page 116.
is of great veneration with the Gentlemen of the Long Robe; if so, I may
likewise hope, they will give me thanks for doing it, so many years after his
death.

The next Case you mention is that of Pilkinton, 20 Hen. 6. page 122. This you
say is for you: It is too long to transcribe, but the Substance of it is this;
There were Letters Patents granted by the King to A. for an Office in Ireland,
formerly granted to P. by the same King's Letters Patents; whereupon P. brings
a Scire Facias against A. to show cause why his Letters Patents should not be
repealed: A. pleads, That Ireland had time out of mind been a Land separate and
distinct from England, was governed by its own Customs, had a Parliament, and
made Statutes, and by one of those Statutes P. had forfeited his Office:
Hereupon P. demur'd in Law, and it was debated by five of the Judges of
England, who differed in their Opinions about it. Well, what will you infer
from this? does any one doubt whether Ireland has a Parliament, and Customs
among themselves that govern them? Did the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of
England come any way to be called in question here? if not, it is nothing to our
Matter. Yes, you say, page 124. Two of the Judges said, That if a Tenth or a
Fifteenth be granted the King by the Parliament of England, that shall not bind
Ireland, etc. Perhaps it may not; it is according as the Act is worded; we see
our ordinary Acts for raising Taxes are not extended to Ireland: But does this
show that the Parliament of England has not Power to make Laws which shall
bind Ireland? Besides, suppose two Judges of five had positively said they
could not, was their Opinion to be taken against that of the Parliament of
England, shown by their constant practice for Five hundred years? I profess I
cannot see how this Case, reaches the Matter we are upon.

As to the Merchants of Waterford's Case, page 125. it has been spoken to
before, so I shall pass it by now.

The next is the Prior of Lanthonies in Wales, 5 Hen. 6. This you say is for
you, page 125. I think it is not; but it lies on me to give my Reasons,
therefore I will abreviate it; The Prior of Lanthony brought an Action in the
Common Pleas of Ireland against the Prior of Mollingar; Judgment went against
the Prior of M. who brought a Writ of Error in the King's Bench of Ireland,
where the Judgment was affirmed: He then appeals to the Parliament of Ireland,
who reversed both Judgments. The Prior of L. removes all into the King's Bench
in England, but the King's Bench refused to intermeddle, having no Power over
what had passed in the Parliament of Ireland, he then appealed to the
Parliament of England, where, you say, it does not appear by the Parliament
Roll that any thing was done on this Appeal, save receiving the Petition. Well,
what would you draw from this? I think it proves nothing to our Matter; if it
does, the Conclusion must be against you: For it appears by this quotation,
That the Prior of L. two hundred and seventy years since, thought that an
Appeal lay from the Parliament of Ireland to the Parliament of England: and it
does likewise appear, That the Parliament of England received his Petition: But
as to your Inference against the Power of the Parliament of England, because
nothing was done therein, it may as well be concluded, That they cannot judge
Appeals brought before them by a Writ of Error out of the King's Bench of
England, because many times no Proceedings follow thereon, which every Body
knows may be let fall after the Petition is received, at the Pleasure of the
Parties concerned.

As to what you say of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State of Ireland, p. 127,
128, 129. I think I have given a full Answer to it already, so shall not
repeat: I will only add, That it is a wrong method, to draw Arguments against
the Power of the Parliament of England, from Acts made by the Parliament of
Ireland: No doubt the Titles of those Kings and Queens you mention, had been
good to Ireland, though not recognized in the Parliament there. And as for the
Church of Ireland, its subjection to the Parliament of England, does not at all
show that Holy Church is not free; for the Freedom there mentioned, does not
imply an exemption from the Parliaments Power, no more then the Grants and
Charters made to the Church of England, discharge her from the like Subjection;
and yet she is declared free by Magna Charta: and I hope you do not believe,
that the Kings of England gave greater Immunities to the Church of Ireland,
then they did to the Church of England.

The next Case you mention is, page 129. 14 Edw. 2. The Parliament at
Westminster you say moved the King, That the Irish Natives of Ireland might
enjoy the Laws of England concerning Life and Member, in as large and ample
manner as the English of Ireland enjoyed the same. Whence you conclude, p. 130.
That the Parliament of England did not take upon them to have any Jurisdiction
in Ireland, for then they would have made a Law for Ireland to this effect. A
strange Inference! Is it not known that they did make Laws to bind Ireland long
before Edward the Second's time? You your self confess, p. 96. That Ireland
sent Representatives to sit in Parliament here in the Reign of Edward the
First. Besides the Quibble you make on the word [moved] which is only a
mannerly Expression used by your Author between the King and his Parliament;
suppose he had said they represented it to the King, had this altered the
matter? But you say, They made no Law to this effect themselves; pray what need
was there of a new Law, when you have so often told us before, That by the
original Compact settled in Ireland, on their first Submission to the Kings of
England, they were to be governed by the Laws of England, whereof this was
part? In your former Case of Coparcencers, p. 87. you say, The Justice of
Ireland dispatched four Knights to the King in England to bring a Certificate
what was the Common Law of England in that Case; here the Parliament of England
signify to the King what was the Rights of the Irish Natives of Ireland; all
the difference is, the former might not be stated before, and therefore
required an Act; but this you say was, and therefore required none.

But still methinks there is something more under this Head; The Parliament,
say you, moved the King, that the Irish Natives of Ireland might enjoy, etc.
which shows, they had a Jurisdiction there, else they would never have
concerned themselves, where they thought they had nothing to do: It likewise
shows that the original Compact abovementioned, was made with their advice and
consent, otherwise, why should they concern themselves to see it put in
Execution?

I come now to your next Case, page 130. viz. A Writ of Error's lying from the
King's Bench of England, on a Judgment given in the King's Bench in Ireland;
from whence, you say, it is insisted on, that there is a subordination of the
Parliament of Ireland, to the Parliament of England, page 131. This you
acknowledge to have been the Constant practice: But you say, first, This is
grounded on an Act of Parliament made in Ireland, which, it seems, is also
unluckily lost, How then do you know there was such an Act? and if you do not
know it, how come you to offer your bare Surmises as Arguments against the
Power of the Parliament of England? But secondly, you say, on those Removals by
Writs of Error, the Judges in England always judge according to the Laws and
Customs of Ireland. You mention several Cases, wherein the Errors assigned were
words used in Ireland, but not in England; What is all this to the purpose? if
things are called by one name in Yorkshire, and another in Cornwall, shall they
not pass in Yorkshire by the names used there, and in Cornwall by the names
whereby they are commonly called there? The Conclusion you draw from hence,
page 133. seems to me very strange, viz. Hence it is manifest that the
Jurisdictions of the King's Bench in England, over a Judgment in the King's
Bench of Ireland, does not proceed from any subordination of one Kingdom to the
other. Pray, from whence is this made manifest to any Body else besides your
self? Does it appear, that because Writs of Error have been brought from the
King's Bench in England, on Judgments given in the King's Bench in Ireland,
that therefore Writs of Error do not lie from the one Bench to the other? and
if they do, does not this show a Subordination of the one Court to the other?
and consequently of the one Kingdom to the other? But you say, This
Subordination of the Court of King's Bench in Ireland, does not proceed from a
Subordination of the Kingdom, but from some other reason, which you will
endeavor to make out. I am sure your third Reason, page 133, 134. viz. the
Case of Coparceners cannot be it; I have spoken to it before, all I shall now
add is, That you must not bring Arguments against the Power of the Parliament
of England, drawn from reasonable Imaginations, as you call them: I cannot
imagine what Reasons you can offer from the Stories you tell there, either
against the Authority of the King's Bench, or more especially against that of
the Parliament of England.

All that follows, p. 134, 135. is only perhaps, and it may be, which I am not
bound to answer, but with the same style, perhaps, and it may not be: What you
allege of certainty is, That Writs of Error have lain from the King's Bench of
England to the King's Bench of Ireland time out of mind; which seems to me
proof enough for it: and if you have no better Argument against the
Jurisdiction of that Court then this, I am afraid you will lose your Labor
with any English Reader.

But you proceed to your fourth Reason, page 136. and tell us, That when a Writ
of Error is returned into the King's Bench of England, suit is made to the King
only; the Matter lies altogether before him; and the Party complaining applys
to no part of the Political Government of England for redress, but to the King
of Ireland only, who is King in England. Also p. 137. you say, For the People
of Ireland are the Subjects of the King to whom they Appeal. And after that,
you proceed thus, I question not but in former times, when these Courts were
first erected, etc. that if the King had traveled into Ireland, and the Court
had followed him thither, erroneous Judgments might have been removed from
England, before him into his Court in Ireland. What strange Suppositions are
here! have you ever seen any Precedent of this Nature? If yea, why did you not
produce it? if no, why did you suppose it? But admit you had produced such a
Precedent, what would it have signified, more than to have proved, that the
Judges of England going over with the King into Ireland, do become there the
Supreme Court of Judicature? How will your Judges in Ireland take this at your
Hands? Whether it be so or no, I will not undertake to confute you: But as to
your former Arguments, That Writs of Error lie before the King, not the Court;
and Application is made to the King of Ireland, who is in England; they are
pretty ludicrous Distinctions, and if allowed, I cannot see why the Judges of
England may not extend their Jurisdictions to Scotland on the same Arguments: I
have so much Honor for them, that as I was willing to grant it them in
Ireland, as full as you pleased, so I shall be loath to argue against extending
their Power to Scotland also, if they can find any Precedents to warrant it: If
this be Law, I think they have been asleep in the Four last Reigns; it is true,
they were Reigns of Trouble, but now we have Peace, they will have time to look
into that Matter, on this Hint you have given them; I perceive you are fully
persuaded of it, if they are as easily persuaded too, the Business is done: But
I believe the Judges of the King's Bench in England, will not call Causes
before them out of Scotland, because the King of England is King of Scotland,
on your Opinion that they may do it, be you as fully persuaded of this Matter
as you will.

But whither are we going from our Argument? I undertook to prove, That the
Parliament of England can rightfully make Laws to bind Ireland, and you have
put me upon proving, That the King's Bench in England has a Jurisdiction over
the King's Bench in Ireland: I confess you have made this Task easy to me;
for, besides the weakness of your Arguments to the contrary, you grant it, p.
139. but you do it with great Caution, and desire that no Advantage may be
taken thereby, to prove the Parliament of Ireland Subordinate to the Parliament
of England; this I think you needed not have feared, for I know no Body would
ever have raised it as an Argument against you, or will use it now you have
brought it. The Parliament of England's Power over Ireland was long before the
Dates of the Writs of Error you mention, which were all in the Days of King
Charles I. It Is true, you imply there were some much earlier; but all we have
said of this Matter seems to me but Labor lost, and nothing to the Argument we
are upon; nor can I conclude with you, p. 140. from the Prior of Lanthony's
Case, that the Judgment of the Parliament of Ireland, was never questioned in
the Parliament of England; that very Case seems to me to show the contrary,
which I leave to the Reader to judge.

As for the English Act of Parliament, p. 140, 141. made the 25th of Henry
VIII. I cannot see what use you make of that neither, against the Jurisdiction
of the Parliament that made it. You say, It was received in Ireland, and
confirmed in Parliament there, by the Act of Faculties made the 28th Year of
the same King's Reign: It may be so, and what then? All I can say to it is,
that we have trifled a long time on things spoken to before, therefore let us
proceed to something new, if you have it to offer. I very well know, Sir, that
it becomes me to treat you with Respect, both as you are a Gentleman and a
Stranger to me; but I cannot but admire at the Pains you take, of quoting so
many Cases, and then applying them so ill; I confess I can hardly pardon you
this Fault: Your Book seems to be written by different Hands; I am afraid this
latter part is added without your consent, by such as designed Mischief to you,
or the Matter you are handling.

P. 142. You come to your Sixth Article proposed, viz. The Reasons and
Arguments that may be farther offered on one Side and the other in this Debate.

The First is Conquest; the Second Purchase, by sundry Expenses to reduce
Rebellions, and carry on Wars in Ireland, both formerly and of late; the Third
is Strength and Power, which you say England makes use of to make Laws for
securing its Trade from Ireland, and maintaining those Laws when made; these
you descant on, p. 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147. but I am tired, and shall not
give my self the Trouble to consider, what Reasons may arise from these, or any
of them, for the Parliament of England's putting this their Power in Execution:
I never proposed either of them as a reason from whence it sprung, which is the
Argument we are upon.

The last thing you mention, is, Ireland's being looked on as a Colony from
England, p. 148, 149. and therefore subject to its Laws: This you think a very
extravagant Opinion; I am sure none of the Arguments you there bring against it
make it appear to be so; however, I shall not wander again upon this Subject,
having, as I hope, sufficiently proved, That the Parliament of England has
made Laws to bind Ireland, ever since it has been in our Possession. You say
your self, p. 39. That the Parliament at Oxford in King Henry II's days, made
the King's Son John King thereof; which shows they had then a power over it and
it does not appear by their Actions since, that they ever gave it up; and can
the Authority of the Parliament of England over Ireland be better set forth,
than by saying they settled the Sovereignty over it in whom they pleased: It Is
true you do not prove it, nor is it at all probable, yet the Argument is good
against your self, to show they had then a power to do it.

As for the remaining part of your Book, from p. 149. to the end, where you
endeavor to set forth Reasons drawn from the Justness of your Cause, why the
Parliament of England should not put this Power in Execution, (which they have
had and exercised from the beginning over Ireland) it does not become me to
give Answer to it: The great Wisdom of the Nation knows when it is convenient
for them to do it, and when not, they have not made me Arbitrator in that
Affair, but are themselves the proper Judges. However, I hope I may adventure
to say, I have proved in the foregoing Discourse, That it is not against the
Rights of Mankind, nor against the Common Law of England, nor against the
Statute Law of England, nor against the several Concessions made to Ireland,
nor is it inconsistent with the Regalities of a Kingdom (depending on England
as Ireland does,) nor against the King's Prerogative, nor the Practice of
former Ages, nor the Resolution of the Judges, and that it does not destroy
Property, nor create Confusion; These are the Heads you again repeat, but have
been answered already.

Therefore on what has been said, I cannot conclude with you, That the
exercise of this Legislative Power over Ireland, which you call Assumed in your
last Pages, 171, 172, 173, 174. will be any ways inconvenient for the Kingdom
of England; but seeing you are pleased to submit this to the Wise Assembly of
English Senators, I humbly leave it to them also, whether, on the Reasons you
have offered, they will desist for the future. But I cannot admit of your
Comparison with the breaking of the Edict of Nants by the French King; it does
not appear to me, you were ever exempted from their Jurisdiction; nor can I
believe the Gentlemen of Ireland will be drawn aside by your Clamours, to call
this an Invasion on their Rights and Liberties, or be persuaded thereby to
shake off their Allegiance to the King of England, which you groundlesly
suggest. No doubt the Parliament of Ireland is a Prudent Assembly, and know
well enough how to make Laws for the Interest of that Kingdom, which therefore
you think cannot be in the least prejudicial to this. Yet you see Poyning's
Act, 10 Hen. 7. which you mention, p. 173. is still kept on foot, as a light to
their feet; perhaps if this good Guide was laid aside, they might be apt to
stray, which I do not find the Crown of England willing to give up; much less
do I believe that the Parliament of England will surrender their Ancient
undoubted Power to make Laws to bind that Kingdom. However, let not my Opinion
discourage your humble Application to them, which will be a better way than
disputing their Power.

And thus I have made an Essav at answering your Book, which boldly strikes at
the Power of our English Parliaments, a Constitution I much honor, and though
they do not stand in need of such weak Pens as mine, yet I have made use of my
Sling and Stone, till a better Champion undertakes their Cause; I have only
engaged you with your own Weapons, and thrown back those Darts on your self,
which you cast at them: I confess my own weakness to handle a Controversy of
this nature; which I had never undertaken, had I not thought the weakness of
your Arguments had given me an Encouragement. It is reported of the Son of
Craesus, though Dumb before, yet when he saw his Father like to be slain, his
dutiful Affection being stronger then the Cords that bound his Tongue, cried
out, Noli occidere Patrem. You complain often in this Discourse, of the
breaking in on the Liberties of Ireland, for which I see no reason, and I hope
it will not appear so to indifferent Men, when the thing is rightly considered.
I have given you my Thoughts on this Subject, but whether they will make a
better Impression on you, then your Arguments have made on me, I cannot
foresee; therefore shall leave what has been said on both sides, to be scanned
by the Judicious Reader.

Bristol, June 16. School. John Carry.


