The Lancashire LEVITE Rebuked: OR, A FARTHER VINDICATION OF THE DISSENTERS
FROM POPERY, SUPERSTITION, IGNORANCE and KNAVERY; Unjustly Charged on Them, BY
Mr. Zachary Tailor, In his Two Books about the SUREY DEMONIACK.

In a Second LETTER to Himself.

LONDON: Printed by R. J. and Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. School.

PREFACE.
Mr. TAILOR,
I Received your LETTER, May 2. To Your Apostate Friend, N. N.

Sir, I was much startled at the first sight of the Direction, and wondered who
it should be, that was become an Apostate. And I thought of all those Persons I
had heard of, who were reputed the Authors of the Letter, called, The
Lancashire Levite Rebuked: thought I, is there any of them turned Turk, or
Papist? I never heard any such thing. But may be Mr. T. thinks the Author is
quite gone from the Communion of the C. of E. because he could not Pray with
them formerly, That God would Strengthen K. J. in the true Worshipping, etc.
But this, I can assure you, is not so. For I can now keep on my Knees at that
Petition for K. W. (though some others will not) and heartily say, We beseech
thee to hear us, good Lord.

But I was presently satisfied, this was not the Reason; but, because I had
denied my Christian Name.

My first Wonder then ceased, but a second arose in its stead; that you should
say, That I had denied my Christian Name, or at least were ashamed of it.

Pray' Mr. T. When was the Time, where was the Place, who was the Person, to
whom I denied my Christian Name?

I remember not that I ever did deny it, etc. I have not been Rebaptized, nor
taken a new Name, nor am I ashamed of that which was given me in Baptism.

But I confess, I concealed my Name in my Letter to you. And if it will please
or pleasure you, I Will give you some Reasons, why (though the Fortune of Caesar or
Pompey be not concerned therein) I concealed it.

1. To avoid the Blows of the contending Parties. For it is often the Fate of
them that interpose as Friend to both, not only to fail of their desired
Success, to make them Friends; but to disoblige both, and to make themselves
more Enemies of those, who out of Kindness they endeavored to reconcile. And
this I find too true from both Parties. But, Am I become your Enemy, because I
tell you the truth? Gal. IV. 16.

2. I was not willing to disoblige you; for I feared, in some heat, upon the
reading of your Book I might be so far transported, to give Words that I might
find cause to repent of; for I am a Man subject to like Passions as you are.
Yet (whatever Misapprehensions you may have of me) I have a greater Respect for
your Self, and another angry Man that spits Fire against Dissenters, than I
doubt I can make you believe. And it was your tart Censures and Reflections
upon Dissenters, that extorted from me some Expressions, that you may think are
not friendly.

And for these Reasons, and another you have in my P. S. I gave you to
understand, That if any unbecoming Words had overslipt me, I begged your Pardon.
Page 28.

In this I hope I shall treat you with all the Civility that is meet for your
Character, (though there are many Provocations;) and some Epithets in my former,
etc. I wish were expunged. And I was really concerned, soon after it was out of
my Hands, because having occasion to go to Manchester, I there in Discourse
heard a very Learned and Judicious Man, no Dissenter, commend a Sermon you had
Preached there. So I was troubled, lest any thing in my latter should be an
Occasion of lessening your Reputation, and so be a Prejudice to your Ministry.

But after I understood, That others less Judicious were offended at your
Sermon, because, they said, it was like a Presbyterian Sermon. These were the
High Tories and Jacobites, who called you Tailor Upon Titus. Such Blades there
are, that nothing pleases them that is serious.

Again, I have been told, that your Father was sometimes Hasty, (as we say) but
his Passion was soon over: insomuch, that a Manservant that lived with him
would say, I am glad when my Master gives me a Lauke, (a Lancash. Word, which
you understand) for I am sure presently after have a Piece of Silver from him.
And I supposed you might be of the like Constitution, the Sign of a good
Nature, as we say. Therefore I concealed my Name, that I might not provoke to
that you might afterward see cause to be troubled at, and could not be
remedied; for, -- Litera scripta manet.

3. I did also conceal my Name, to avoid the Ill Will of such as might mistake
any thing in it, toward my Person. And to prevent the Censures of all, and to
save my self the trouble of Answering impertinent Questions; and avoid the
fruitless Discourse of one or other about the Letter.

4. Possibly there might be some Apprehensions of Club-Law from some Malignant
Spirits, by Innuendo's; remembering poor De Laune, Mr. Baxter, etc. and what you
had said about Crab-tree. And if this do not satisfy why I conceal my Name, I
want not (...) Examples of Good Men; amongst whom I know you will, with me, own
the Author of The Whole Duty of Man, to be one.

Mr. T. you hint at another Reason, why I am an Apostate, Because I changed the
Presbyter into Levite.

For this I must tell you, I did not know of that Title, 'till I heard of it by
a Friend, who had it from Ephraim Johnston, for whom your Letter is Printed,
nor saw it, 'till the Letter came down Printed.

Mr. T. the next thing you blame me for, is, That I make Personal Reflections
upon the Morals of Men that are dead; for, De Mortuis nil nisi Bonum. To this I
say:

1. Your Maxim is not universally to be observed. For then we must have no
Histories of Bad Men's Lives, and Vices, to deterr the Living from such
Enormities, as the Dead have been guilty of.

2. I must give you to understand, That it is ill Chidden, for your Reflections
upon the Dead. Hildersham and Jesse, Be, and 17, for ought I know, Worthy Men
gave me the Occasion to reflect on W. C. in Vindication, not only of
Dissenters, but the C. of E. Lev. p. 18, 19. and you have done it i^ with a
Witness in this Letter to Mr. Pendlebury, in Words at length, and not in
Figures. Whereas I did but put two Letters, which could not affect him much
farther, than where he was known, or the Places where he acted his Villainies.

3. I did it in Faithfulness: To intimate to the Reverend B. of C. for future
Caution; for I heard a Dissenter say, he had sent the B. Word by a Rev. Divine,
That it was not for his Honor, to permit such a one as W. C. in a Place, which
he supposed, was in his Own Gift. I am persuaded that Ingenious Man forgot to
tell him.

But I know not how to excuse some, that are more peculiarly called in the
Canon Law The B. Eyes, who knew of his Tricks immediately before he went to
Motteram, and (I doubt) were not faithful to that Good Man. And therefore I am
still of the same Mind, in pitying the worthy B. B. that cannot see at distance
without others Eyes, etc. Lev. p. 18.

And thus I have acquitted my self from Blame, for reflecting on the Morals of
W. C. though dead. Besides, his were Villainies notorious; not like your
Insinuations, which follow to be considered.

You say, Should I engage you my Friend, upon the same Ground that you do W. C.
I could name as many of your Ministers, and put C's and N's to them too, who
are yet alive, that labor under the same Guilt, etc. And so you threaten the
Living and the Dead; but for the Dead, you will be modest. De Mortuis. --

But for the Living, you are very free of your Blows, and are prepared for more.

But had you not need to consider well beforehand, whether it be lawful or
convenient for your self to cast Firebrands, lest some should fall upon your
own House or Head, and you not be able to quench it. Yet if you have a Mind of
Billingsgate-Stuff, let me as a Friend advise you, not to be too rash, but look
to it; that it be for the Honor of God, and the Service of the Church, and
your own Reputation; and that it be true, and well attested; remembering, your
own, and every other Man's Name and Reputation is in another Man's Hand and
Power. And that there have been, and are evil Surmisings, and groundless
Suspicions, which are mischievous, and of ill consequence; and that many a Good
Man has suffered unjustly, and been heavily burdened under it, though innocent;
as the Learned Hooke^* that wrote the Ecclesiastical Policy, etc. and that if
it be not true* you can make no Restitution. And supposing it should be true,
it may be it was secret, and not scandalous; and it may be (if Persons be old)
it is long since repented of, and never reiterated.

These evil Surmises and invidious Reflections, are an Indication of a corrupt
and rotten Heart, and of a weak Cause; and the Persons whose Cause, and in
whose Excuse you Threaten, cannot be Justified by a Recrimination: and this
might beget a Recrimination with Letters in some angry Persons, that might
think themselves touched. And indeed it is to be lamented, that there may be
found too many Instances.

There are some yet living, no mean Clergymen, guilty in that kind. And if I
loved a Stink, it is easy to tell you of one that was worse than Gr. and L. that
never Married the Party. And in another Case, to Parallel your Story of Mr.
Pendlebury; (as true, as that he Married his Wife without Parents consent,)
whose Name lives, and will, when others shall be written in the Earth. I can
tell you of one, who gave himself the Title of A. M. to his Patron, when on
Enquiry he proved Undergraduate. But I hope he has long since repented of all;
and I hear he Preaches well and lives well, and therefore I^ll not give so much
as one Letter of his Name.

But there is another Old Stallion, that could not be content with his own
Wife, that neither lived cast, nor cause; but his Miscarriage was Brought
unto, and Sworn before a Justice of Peace. But alas! what is all this to the
Matter in Hand? I Will leave him also without a Letter, to stand or fall to his
own Master; the Lord give him Repentance.

Yet I am grieved to think, what Work such Stuff as this makes among the
Profane; what Sport they make over their Glass and Cups* and hence take
occasion to lessen their own Crimes, and grow Impudent; and make a Mock of
their own and others Sins; which is, or should be, the Grief all Good Men.

For My Own Part, I fear GOD, but fear not any of your Reflections.

CHAP. I.
Dissenters Not Guilty of Popery.
IN the Letter, which somebody (I know not who) Entitled, The Lancashire
Levite Rebuked, I undertook to Vindicate Dissenters from the Charge of Popery,
or Errors looking that Way.

Mr. T. you seem to deny your Charge in Page 45. of your Letter to Apost. Fr.
for you say, My Friend either could not find one place in all my Book, to fix
the Charge on; or else he found it so fully proved, that he saw it necessary to
connive at it. And you farther say, You own Dissenting Ministers were Tools of
Popery. And this was all I charged them with, upon this Head of Popery. Page 5.

Mr. T. you are in so much haste, that you have overlooked or forgotten your
Charge; therefore I shall take leave, (lest I should be thought to bear false
Witness against you) to show you, This was not all you charged them withal. But
I Will tell you,

1. What you charge them with more of Popery.

2. How they are acquitted in my Letter. For which you say, I have the
Impertinence to ask, What Errors in Doctrine, looking that Way? in your Page 5.

1. Your Charge of Popery, is in the first Lines of your Preface, next after
your Names; and it is in these Words, The Foundation, whereof I am an unworthy
Member, being intended for the Preservation of His Majesty's Subjects from
falling into Errors, especially such as tend to Popery. And a late Scandalous
Pamphlet, entitled, The Surey Demoniack, looking that Way, etc. Here is your
Charge.

2. I now show you, how I endeavored to discharge them.

1. By taking notice, you did not prosecute your own Charge put in against
them; for you Indict them of Errors tending to Popery; and when you should
Prove, you Drop your Charge, and bring no Evidence. So they are in course
acquitted. But the Defendants not satisfied, expect the Accuser should
acknowledge his Fault, for Scandalizing of them. And to clear themselves, they
put in their Plea, and prove themselves Not Guilty; by Answering the particular
Instances, that can be thought could affect the Case. And therefore,

2. I anticipated what I thought could be said against the Dissenters, and only
two things could with any Reason be objected. 1. Either that they held some
Errors in Doctrine. 2. Or, that they practiced some things tending that Way;
viz. Toward Popery.

Now if you prove neither, the Bill ought to be quasht; and so you come under
the Crimination your self, which you would have fixed on me; of Bearing False
Witness.

Now for Errors in Doctrine, the Matter was soon over, being none was objected
in particular. And I suppose you did not expect that I should find any tending
to Popery, when your self could find none; though you had charged their Book with
such Errors.

3. I enquired what they had done, that tended altogether toward Popery; here
you lay in a particular Charge.

1. That they were constant Tools of Papists and Popery.

2. They Prayed on Supposition; and such Praying justifying the Papists Prayers
to Saints.

Objection. You object, they are constant Tools of Popery. And for my
Information, you bring a Book called Philanax Anglicus; to prove, They Cut off
the Royal Martyr's Head. Page 5.

Solution. I answer, excepting against the Witness a Papist. We have Mischief
too much from such villainous Witnesses, who account nothing unlawful to say or
do against Heretics, to promote the Catholic Cause.

This Book was written, with a Design to cast the Odium of K. Chapter I. on the
Prorestants; except some few, whom he calls (if I remember right) Protestants
of Integrity: I suppose he may mean such as B. Goodman, Parker of Oxf. or
Barrow; to whom add, if you will, your Dr. Heylin.

This Book was Answered so well by Dr. Owen, that he was highly Caressed by
some Great Ministers of State in King Charles the Second's Time; that for
certain were no Dissenters.

But if you except against him, as a Party, I shall refer you to a Canon of
Canterbury in the same Reign, and Chaplain to K. Chapter II. Dr. Peter du Moulin,
who Answered that Book, and calls it, Purum putum Mendacium, Right Metal of
Untruth; and calls the Author, Philopapa; and Dedicates it to the then B. of
London, Sheldon.

Now would you not be angry, if I should call you Tool of Popery; because from
them you derive your Authority to call Dissenters so.

Again, you refer me to a Book, I suppose, called Foxes and Firebrands; an
Author, may be, of the same Kidney.

Now to be even with you, I have already given you two for two; and to gratify
you, I Will add a third, viz. King Charles the Second's Declaration or
Proclamation, appointed to be Read in Churches Annually, before Jan. XXX.

Obj. But you send me also to fresher Instances; to prove, that Dissenters are
Tools of Popery; viz. Addresses and Speeches to the late K. J.

Solut. I will refer you to Cart-loads of Addresses, and Abhorrences, and
Sermons, Cursings, Exclusioners, and their Posterities; which may be as much
worth, as Dissenters Addresses and Speeches.

Besides, you may add if you will, R. Rev. and Rev. Caresses and Speeches at
Chester, and the Clergy meeting him also. And whose Tools were they? I am
ashamed to name these things, but you extort them. Dat veniam Corvis.

Now how should Dissenters please some Fools? One while they are the Papists
Tools, for their Disloyalty; and in the next Breath, they are Tools for their
Loyalty.

Now since the happy Establishment of King William on the Throne, I suppose you
and Dissenters are agreed in your Loyalty. But some Jacobite would, if he
durst, ask you, How you could dispense with your Doctrine of Non-Resistance and
Passive-Obedience, and your Subscription, That it is not Lawful, etc. But
Dissenters do heartily Bless God for such a Revolution.

And for Mr. Jolly's Speech, and Dissenters Addresses at that Time you mention;
there was none presented, nor did Mr. J. make a Speech.

2. Farther, I had said, Lev. page 9. What are they to be Blamed for? Are they
to be Blamed for their Fasting and Praying? Did they use Popish Exorcisms, or
Popish Ceremonies?

Now to prove they had done nothing to be Blamed for, in their Fasting and
Praying; because whether it was a Cheat, or whether it was a Natural Distemper,
yet they supposing and believing here was a Devil, and the Man really being
under a great Affliction, they Fasted and Prayed; (according to the Advice of
St. James, Chap. V. If any be afflicted, let him Pray.) And what is here to be
Blamed, or what was here done tending to Popery? Now what say you now?

1. You blame their Prayers, because they were upon a Supposition; and would
justify Papists Prayers to Saints.

2. You charge me with misrepresenting your Words, and with Fabulous Stories.

Obj. You say, If the Supposition be false, the Worship is Superstition. And by
asserting this, I am a Friend to Quakers and Papists, if a Supposition be the
Ground of Devotion. For Papists pay Adoration to the Sacrament of the Altar, on
the belief that Christ is personally there; and they Pray to Saints and Angels
on supposition they can hear. Let. to Apost. p. 6. With several impertinent
Reflections, nothing to the Argument.

Sol. To this I say: 1. Mr. J. and the rest did not make a Supposition of it;
for they did verily believe that D. was a Demoniack; and thought there were the
same Symptoms with some Demoniack in the Gospel, which (I remember not that)
you have offered any thing against.

2. But because I said, they Prayed on that Supposition, that Dugd. was a
Demoniack, they were not to be blamed therefore. I answer, That all Worship
upon a Supposition, is not Superstition. For their Prayers were not
Supersticion: Because,

1. Their Prayers for Dugd. were to a lawful Object, God, in the Name of
Christ; and not like the Papists Adoration of the Sacrament.

Now here some Fanatic would fall upon you, and say, Whether is more
excusable, he that adores the Sacrament of the Altar, that believes Christ is
there Personally, etc. or he that adores the Altar, or before it, when Christ
is not there, either Personally or Representatively. Unless they suppose him
there, when there is no reason to believe it, this indeed is Superstition with
a Witness.

2. Dissenters Prayers were not only to a Lawful Object, but for a Lawful
Thing; that God would release an afflicted Man, and one they thought a
Demoniack, from the power of Satan. And that their Prayers were not
Superstition upon this Supposition, may appear by alike Instances; as, suppose
you be absent from your Wife and Children, I hope you Pray for them when at a
distance, supposing and believing them to be alive; but it is possible at the
same time some of them may be dead, and you know it not. Will this Supposition,
which is not then true, make your Prayers Superstition?

K. Chapter II. was Prayed for publicly after he was Dead, for it could not be
known at this distance. Were your Public Prayers then for him, Superstition?

Obj. 2. You charge me with misrepresenting your Words and Fabulous Stories,
Page 5. because I had said, That you deny, that a Natural or Preternatural
Distemper can be attended with a Devil; and that it was no good Argument to
prove that Dick's was no Possession, because a Distemper. Lev. Page 7, 8.

Sol. 1. I did not say these particular Words were yours. But I Will tell you why
I judged the Argument to be yours: 1. From P. 22. of Sur. Imp. to P. 28. you go
about to prove Dugd. 's Fits to be a Cheat, or that there was nothing in his
Fits, but what was Natural. Does it not hence follow, that here was no Devil?
Which to prove, you fetch in the Authority of Dr. Willis, Ratcliff, and
Buckley. Ratcliff says, Page 30. These strange Gestures and Actions were not
Diabolical, but Preternatural. Whence you draw this Conclusion; You see by the
help of my good Friends, I may hope to parallel the Surey Gambals, and satisfy
all unbiased Persons; from the Symptoms that attend Convulsive Distempers; of
what? That for any Feats shown by Dick, there was no necessity for, and
therefore no reason to admit the presence of Rich. Ludicrous Demon, to Play
the Merry-Andrew. Sur. Imp. Page 31.

Now this was either to prove from these Medium's, that it was a Cheat, or
Natural Distemper, and therefore no Demon; or it was not.

1. If it was not, to what end was it produced? and what signifies your
Authorities? For I have told you, it might be a Cheat and Combination, and yet
a Demon; as in the Case of Ananias and Sapphira; and be sure there was a
Distemper, as in those Demoniacks in Mat. 17. and Mark 9. And if this was all
you intended to prove, why do you lay such heavy Charges against the
Dissenters, for believing here was a Demon; which you say, but do not yet
prove, is an Imposture, and not to be believed to be a Demon; but a wild Story.

2. If it was to prove that there was no Demon, which your Words above seem to
imply, then my Charge is not unjust.

And if your Whalley-Sermon advance the quite contrary Opinion, as you say,
Let. p. 5. which contrary Opinion is, if I mistake not, That because a
Distemper, therefore attended with a Devil; and that you affirm, that Natural
and Preternatural Distempers may be attended with a Devil. And if this be so,
you quite give up the Cause. And why here might not be a Demon, (for you have
no other Argument I can find) I yet understand not from you.

Thus you kindly gratify the Dissenters; and with the leave of your Concession,
they may (if they please) still believe a Surey-Demoniack; only you severely
treat them about Matters of Fact, and the manner of their Management of the
Affair. And indeed, if you had in the Spirit of Meekness, blamed them for it,
and admonished them as mistaken Brethren; (though you be not their Diocesan;) and
not Hectored, and treated them with so much Scorn and Disdain, to render them
and their Party contemptible, I would not have blamed you. But, I admonish, I
admonish, I admonish; and then immediately, Take them Derick; I like not.
Meekness and Forbearance, is better than a Word and a Blow. The Apostle's Canon
is better. Gal. 6. 1.

CHAP. II.
Nor of Superstition.
HAVING vindicated Dissenters from your Charge of Errors tending to Popery, I
proceed farther to vindicate them from your Charge of Superstition; which was
undertaken, Lev. Page 10, 11.

Now you say I impute to you, The charging Dissenters with Superstition, but
produce not so much as one Place in all your Book, to Prove this Charge. Let.
page 6. To this, Mr. Tailor, hear my Defense.

1. I did, in the Lev. p. 10. give you part of the Words where you charge them
with Superstition, in different Characters; and, but that I grudge the toil of
transcribing your Sayings, I might have added more.

But now I will let the World have it. In your Preface, p. 1. This Trade which
you have learned from the Papists, was designed to ensnare honest and
well-meaning, but easy People; ( here you judge Hearts) for since neither you
nor they can justify by Arguments, ( here is their Ignorance) your
Superstitions, ( here is the present Charge) and Divisions from the Established
Church; ( here is the next Charge) you were forced to fly to little Shifts and
Tricks, that by working on weak Peoples Fancies, you might win those to your
Party by Craft and Wiles, ( here is another Charge) which you could not by
Reason and Religion.

Now let any impartial Man judge, whether I, or you, my unfriendly Friend, are
to be blamed. Is there no Word in all your Book, nor one Place to prove the
Charge?

I think you are too young to need Spectacles, else I could very well afford to
buy a pair, to read your own Book; provided I might be saved the trouble of
Transcribing. But at last, you honestly confess the Charge, Let. p. 6. but
with some unmannerly Rhetoric, which is no Logic.

But you have a High Charge against me, Page 6. which I must not overrun; and
it is no less than BLASPHEMY.

I perceive I must be at the drudgery of transcribing again, or else you will
say, I produce not one place in your Book, to Prove this; and then they that
read your Book, and not mine, will say I belie you. Now your Charge is this.

I must rank him either amongst the Class of Ignoramus's, or I must make him to
Blaspheme CHRIST. Let. p. 6.

Really Mr. T. I will give you leave to call me an Ignoramus a thousand times,
rather than to Blaspheme Christ; though I should hear of it out of Pulpits and
Coffee-Houses, etc. as once befell a Jury, because out of Compliment to their
Superiors, they would not find innocent Persons guilty, were called
Ignoramus's. And to make me Blaspeme, you never shall; I hope I should rather
suffer my Tongue to be pulled out of my Mouth. But I suppose you mean, you will
prove me a Balsphemer.

And if that be it, put in your Charge, and I will answer.

And let us put it to an impartial Jury. O Yes! hear the Indictment.

If the Greek Word (...) signify wholly, as he says, a Fearing of Demons, or
Worshipping of Devils; CHRIST himself being called (...) Acts 17. 18. Let him
tell me, if according to his Exposition of it, the Fearing of Christ may not be
expounded by Jews and Pagans, for worshipping of Devils. Let. p. 6. And what
then? Am I a Blasphemer? GOD Forbid!

Now Gentlemen, hear my Defense.

1. Take notice, he falsely accuses me. I did not say the Greek Word signifies
wholly a Worshipping or Fearing of Demons. The Heathens did take it in a good
sense, with respect to their own Demons, which they worshipped; yet in this
very Place, Acts 17. 18. they took it in a bad sense, as a strange Demon; as
when we say a False God; and Paul so took it, Verse 22.

2. I will yet tell you for once, seeing you ask it, Whether Fearing of Christ,
may not be expounded by Jews and Pagans, Worshipping of Devils? I say, it may
by them be so expounded, wickedly. Nay I Will tell you more; that they call
Christ here, in Acts 17. 18. a Demon; and so did the Jews, Joh. 8. 48. But
pray' Friend what is that to me, that Jews and Pagans blasphemously call Christ
a Demon; or the Worshipping of Christ, the Worshipping of Devils? Did I ever
call Christ a Demon?

3. Do you think that Jews and Pagans did rightly call Christ a Demon? Or is
this one of his Names? (I hope, not to Bow the Knee to, when it is pronounced;)
for then indeed your Accusation of Blasphemy might have had some Color; and so
to worship a Demon, might be to worship Christ. And then to have called the
worshipping of Christ in a good sense, as a true Object of Worship, A
Worshipping of Devils, would have been Blasphemy.

4. But again, if you think that Christ was properly and truly called a Demon,
then Paul was as great a Blasphemer after his Conversion, as before: For he
called the Pagans Worship, a Sacrificing to Demons, not to God; and he would
not have the Corinthians have Fellowship with Demons. 1 Cor. 10. 10, 21.

What Paul! Would you not have Men to worship Demons? Why Christ is a Demon,
and I hope we may worship Christ.

5. Now according to your Logic, you might very justly charge Dissenters with
the greatest Villainies and Blaspemies.

What Wretches! offer to cast a Demon out of Dicky? Why Christ is a Demon,
(by a very good Token, Jews and Pagans call him so, and used the word properly;
for Mr. T. has told you, Christ himself is so called, Acts 17. 18.) And cast
out Christ?

So Paul comes under Correction, by such a Reason. What, have no Fellowship
with Demons? Why Christ is a Demon, and must we not have Fellowship with
him? (Is this the Reason, why some in the Pulpits cry out against Dissenters,
for talking of Communion with Christ.)

Nay Christ himself will come under Correction of Jews and Pagans, and Mr. T.
for he cast out a Demon: Did he cast out Himself? Such Divinity is like Christ
Eating Himself.

And now Gentlemen, without Favor or Affection, Give in your Verdict, Whether
am I, or my Accuser, more Guilty of Blasphemy?

I remember a Story (for a diversion) of a young Scholar in the University,
when examined, what he remembered of a Sermon Preached by the Head of the
College; the said Head of the College asked him, what was first, second, or
third Grace that he had mentioned to one, being asked, What was my second
Grace? the Boy answered, Ignorance: No, said he, That Is thy Grace, it is none of
mine. So I fear the Blasphemy will be Yours, not Mine.

Mr. T. I would not willingly lay any thing to your charge unjustly; and
therefore I read, and read again, and thought to see if I could put any other
more favorable Construction upon your Words; and I am apt to think, (in
Charity to you) there is some Mistake, either in Writer or Printer.

But the Charge being of so high a nature, I cannot tell how it can be proved
in what you have said, but by this meaning, which is partly expressed, and
partly necessarily implied in your Words, without forcing of them into Nonsense.

And if I mistake, I will once more beg your Pardon, (provided you quit me of
so heinous a Crime) although you very unkindly denied me once before, when I
desired it. For I perceive your Pardons are as hard to be obtained for Love, as
Popish Indulgences, or an Absolution for some Folks without Money; unless it be
to Scotch Converts.

One thing more, under this Head.

I did tell you, that some Persons would retort upon you the Charge of
Superstition; for doing things in the Worship of God, which are neither
commanded by GOD or Men; and are not necessary Circumstances of Decency or
Order.

And it was Queried; Where are you commanded, to Bow to the East? or before the
Altar to make Curt'sies? Where commanded to stand up at Te DEUM, Benedictus,
Magnificat; or at Reading of Psalms? and bouncing and racketing, Priest one
Verse, and People another? is this for Edification? Lev. p. 11.

I have sought for an Answer, but yet find none; for which in Civility I thank
you, for easing me of so much Pains, of transcribing your Answer, and Replying;
which I could easily have done, by the very Authority of a B. s Articles of
Enquiry, into these Crimes beforementioned, and some other
Probation-Ceremonies of the same nature.

Farther, does not he transgress a Rule or Canon, that goes beyond what is
commanded, as he that comes short? Else, what a Gap would this open to an
Inundation of Heathenish and Popish Rites, in the Worship of GOD, and all the
Offices therein?

For why not Salt, Spittle, and Cream, and Chrisom in Baptism? Why not Crossing
upon Crossing in all Parts of Divine Worship? and many other ridiculous
Fopperies used in the Church of Rome. And for ought I know, if the Parson,
Vicar, or Curate have a mind to use them, he may do it as lawfully, as Bow at
the Altar, Stand-up at Te Deum, etc. and Racket the Psalms* which are no way
for Edification, nor are commanded by the Chapter of Engl.

And now I think I have cleared my Self from being a False Accuser and
Blasphemer, and Dissenters from Superstition.

And leave you to vindicate your Self, or those that use Uncommanded Rites and
Ceremonies, from the Crime of Superstition. Romans II. 1.

And if Silence to what was offered in the Lev. be Consent, I know on what Hand
Superstition lies, by your Consent.

CHAP. III.
Nor of Schismatical Divisions.
NOW I proceed to your Charge of Divisions* and am glad, you have once
Acknowledged, That I Charge you not Unjustly.

I endeavored to Clear them from Sinful, Schismatical Divisions: And what say
you to it?

You say, I pretend not to Vindicate them, as in other Cases, from the Guilt of
it; but endeavor to Justify them in it. Let. p. 7.

To this I say:

1. It Is true thus far, That I vindicate them not from some Divisions; but
justify them: i. e. Going to another Place, from your Church of Wigan to
Billinge-Chapel or St. Elms. for I think I need not, I understand no Crime in
either; and I gave you my Reason.

2. I justify them from Divisions in Doctrine, from the Established Church; for
they Subscribe all the Articles concerning Doctrine, and do not Preach against
them when they have done. And so they divide not from you in Doctrine.

Obj. But Corah, Dathan and Abiram, etc. did Subscribe all the Artiticles of
the Jewish Faith. P. 8. And what then?

Sol. 1. I have very often heard of these three Men, (as pertinently may be, as
that of Rebellion being Witchcraft, which was Readiness Sin;) and I think them as
bad Men as you can. But if really they Subscribed the Articles of the Jewish
Faith, then in That they were neither Heretics nor Schismatics.

2. Dissenters say, They separate not from their Lawful Church Governors; and
'till they be proved such Separatists, they are not to be charged with sinful
Divisions.

Obj. But you call their Conventicles Schismatical, P. 20. Sur. Imp. and their
Divisions, Unchristian. P. 69. Ibid.

Sol. You may call their Conventicles what you please; but it is one thing to
say, and another to prove: For I remember not any thing Steely enough to force
such a Conclusion, and Flinty Words will not do it.

Obj. Again, you are about it, and about it; and say, Hark my Friend, are not
your Divisions Unchristian? Do not your Conventicles make a Division? and so
are Schismatical; for these are both one.

Sol. Here Is Learning, to puzzle Dissenters; but I dare venture it with some of
the Lower Classes in Mr. Frank. Academy to Answer; will he not presently say,
Syllogizari non est ex Particulari.

Then I Will venture to tell you, that All Divisions are not Unchristian, nor
Schismatical; for if so, then they that in this Diocese divide from
Chester-Cathedral, and go to worship God in other Churches and Chapels, are
Unchristian and Schismatical. But I suppose you have some other Meaning.

Obj. But, Its Dissenters Divisions are Schismatical and Unchristian.

Sol. 1. In Answer to this I had given, Lev. p. 12. A Learned Man, no
Dissenter, had called Schism an Ecclesiastical Scarecrow, and you call him a
Socinian. But what is that to Dissenters? He was certainly a Chapter of E. Man. And
let him be Socinian, Arminian, Calvinist, Papist, Millenary, in Doctrine; if he
has but a large Swallow, and can but Subscribe the Articles in Dr. Bramhall's,
and some others new-invented Sense; and say he does it Ex Animo, he is no
Schismatic. And yet Heretic and Schismatic seem with St. Paul to be the
same, 1 Cor. 11. And if Dissenters durst but say what they believe not, they
would be no Schismatics.

2. I told you, Lev. p. 12. That I had often heard and read, Protestants excuse
themselves from the Guilt of SCHISM, which the Church of Rome charges them
with, as you do Dissenters. Because that Church required as. Terms of
Communion, things doubtful, unlawful, and sinful; and make the Papists the
Schismatics, who are the culpable Cause of Divisions; and produce Romans 16. 17.

And I am apt to think, that if those that have the Rule in the Church would
impose no other Terms of Communion, but what Christ the chief Ruler has
enjoined, all serious Christians would live in Unity, though not in every thing
in Uniformity. And what Authority any have, to impose more than Christ has, I
am yet to seek.

And this would be a Means to take away all Causes of Divisions, amongst the
Pious, and Humble, and Charitable CHRISTIANS.

But for the Profane, Irreligious, and Immoral, they will readily comply with
that Party which either indulgeth them in their Lusts; or are most easy in
overlooking, or censuring their Crimes.

And if any others be unruly, in breaking that Unity and Concord which Christ
has bounded, let the Pastors of the Churches, according to Christ's
appointment, make use of the Spiritual Sword committed to them; and then,
Valeat, quantum valere potest.

And for those Enormities peculiarly under the Jurisdiction of the Civil
Magistrate, let them use their Sword, for the Punishment of Evildoers.

3. Dissenters think the Protestants Arguments against the Church of Rome, will
justify their present partial Withdrawing from the Chapter of E. And of this their
General Argument you take no notice, though you had said, They cannot by
Arguments justify their Divisions. Pref. p. 1. Surey Imp.

The Chapter of E. have it in their Power at any time, to remove the Schism so much
complained of. Take but away all that Christ has not commanded, as Terms of
Communion, and the Schism ceases. And it is hard, that Men should make those
things Sin, which God has not.

CHAP. IV.
Nor of Ignorance.
THE next Charge. They cannot by Arguments justify their Divisions from the
Establish^d Church. In Answer to this, two things were said in the Lev.

1. Many Dissenters do not totally divide from the Established Church; they
frequent their Public Assemblies, hear the Word, join in their Prayers, and
some in the Lord^s Supper, and in all things that Christ has enjoined as Terms
of Communion; and leave them only in those things they think to be unlawful,
that are of mere Humane Institution.

2. It was also said, That Dissenters are not so ignorant, but they have
something to say for themselves. And four Arguments were produced. And what do
you say?

1. You acknowledge, You charge them home with Ignorance. Page 12. and, That
you are still of the same Mind. And give your Reasons, why you charged them
with Ignorance; because they could not understand Arabic Characters, and some
Ciphers, and suffered a Female-Friend to be called Ishcol; and at last you
crow, What says my Friend? Profound Silence! And you say true in that; for I
never undertook to meddle with Matters of Fact. And it was only undertaken to
vindicate them from Ignorance in matter of Argument, to prove that they can
justify themselves from the Charge of Divisions, etc.

But for Matters of Fact, I am still of the same Mind, and I will not meddle,
though you call me Ignoramus for it; but shall leave it to Mr. C. and you, if you
think it worth the while to wrangle it out; for such Pedantry is no way
edifying to me.

2. But what say you to their Arguments I am content here to attend a Trial of
Skill.

Obj. 1. Their first Argument was: They cannot think it lawful for any body to
command things in the Worship of God, of the same nature, use, significancy and
end, with God's own Appointments; when there is no difference, but God Commands
the one, and Men the other; and make them necessary Terms of Communion. And
they instance in the Cross about Baptism, a Humane Sacrament. Lev. p. 12.

Sol. To this you say: 1. If I knew not the Doctrine of the Church of Eng. I am
still an Ignoramus; If I do know, it is a damnable Scandal. I shall be now gored
sure, with the one Horn; yet I Will go on, here is yet no Blood. Of this afterward.

2. They calling the Cross a Humane Sacrament, you are in a Huff, and cry out,
A Humane Sacrament! Prithee Friend talk Sense.

Repl. I reply, pray you Friend be not too hasty; I perceive you know not who
you speak to. But I Will not take ill your Familiarity, provided you will have
Patience to hear my Defense. For I cannot easily be persuaded I talk Nonsense;
if I find I have done so, I Will ask Dissenters Pardon, for representing their
Arguments in Nonsense; and it shall be hard but you and I will part Friends
about this Matter.

Mr. T. Why may not I, betwixt you and me, call the Cross a Humane Sacrament?

1. You are Book-learned, and therefore know the general Notion of a Sacrament;
you know in the Greek it signifies a Mystery* and amongst the Latins it was a
Military Term, something like our Press-Money. Now suppose I should say, there
are Sacraments Humane, Divine, and Diabolical, I hope you would not again
accuse me of Blasphemy.

Now the Heathens Mysteries and Sacraments were Diabolical, because instituted
by the Devil, who enjoined them by his Oracles.

The Romans Sacraments of old were Humane, whereby they engaged their Soldiers;
though may be sometimes, by some of their Religious Ceremonies, as an Oath for
Confirmation. However, they were but of Men's Institution.

But there are other Sacraments amongst Christians, of which Two are of Divine
Institution. But pray' what are the other Five, which the Papists add? Why will
you not admit them to be Sacraments? Is not one Reason, because they are but of
Humane Institution? And what Contradiction in Terms, if they be called Humane
Sacraments? At best, the Cross is Divine in its End, Use and Significancy, but
Humane in its Institution.

But if that Term will not yet please, I told you we would yet part Friends, or
it shall be your Fault; for I love not to contend de Lana Caprina. Therefore,
if you will, call it a Humane Appointment; and then, Is it lawful for any body
to command things in the Worship of God, of the same nature? etc.

Obj. 1. And now Dissenters say, the Cross is such a Humane Appointment; and
how do you answer this?

Sol. I might have found the Cross in Baptism to be no Humane Sacrament, if I
would have consulted Can. 30. p. 14. say you.

Repl. Sir, I am not so prejudiced against the C. of E. but I will very
willingly hear what she can say for her self; yea I would justify her as far as
I am able. And if you knew me, I think you would not be so harsh in your
Censures of me. Therefore that I might not be partial or unjust, I did consult
her Rubric, and Offices, and Canons, particularly Can. 30. and this you will
find anon.

Obj. 2. Their second Argument was, They think it not lawful ( some of them) to
kneel in receiving the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper.

Sol. To this you say, My Friend is bewildred, etc. and you ask me a very
important Question, Do the Papists receive Wine in that Sacrament?

Now for this time, rather than fall out with you, I Will answer you, The Papists
do receive Wine in that Sacrament, unless the Priests be no Papists? Just such
a Learned Question once was asked, in as good earnest as yours. Pray' Sir, will
you tell me one thing; What Is that? Is the Pope a Papist? Am I now bewildred?

Having told you of Dissenters Offense at Kneeling, I thought good to conceal
their Argument; not that they are contemptible, but that I durst not Vouch for
them; and so eased you of the trouble of Answering them: Yet desired modestly
your help to answer one thing I had heard some of them object, which I could
not answer my self.

Obj. The thing was this. Some of them think it hard, that for doing, or
offering to do as the Apostles did at the Sacrament of the Lord^s Supper, they
should be peremptorily denied that Ordinance: When by the same Reason, if the
Apostles were on Earth, and offered to do as they did, even in the Presence,
and with the Approbation of their Master, they must be denied it.

Now really Mr. T. you are very unkind here; for you give me no help to answer
them; but twit me with my Ignorance, when I had confessed it in this Case; and
had told you, I was not able to answer them. Was this ingenuous? When in
earnest, I would have thanked you, according to promise. But what say you to
this Scruple of Dissenters?

Sol. You cry, A sad Story! if it be true; and is this all? No, here is more.
Whenever you can prove that the Apostles used the Posture that the
Presbyterians now do, I will engage our Church shall indulge you and your
Brethren in the capricious Liberty of their pretended Consciences. Really, a
great and kind Undertaking. For my self, you know, I need not the Indulgence;
but I should be glad of it, for honest Dissenters sake. Yet I much question the
Performance. For, if you should give it to any that Kneel not, the Penalty is
Suspension, by Can. 27. And I doubt you would scarce run such a Hazard, for the
capricious Scruplers.

Repl. Yet I fancy the Presbyterians will say, They do use the same Posture,
for they Sit: Which was their Table Gesture.

You will say, I know the Apostles Posture was Discumbency; or a kind of
Leaning and Lolling in one another's Bosom. But again they will say, Whatever
the Manner was, whether cross-leg'd, or with their Feet under them, or Leaning
sideway on their Elbow, still it was Sitting however.

Yet still my Scruple remains. For if Christ's Apostles were now on Earth, and
would receive it in the same Gesture they did receive it from their Master, and
not Kneel, they must be denied it, by the C. of E. on pain of Suspension. For
let Men be never so pious, holy, and good, they must Kneel, or else be left in
the same Predicament with the most profane Drunkards, Swearers, etc. Yea much
worse, (which I almost tremble to write*) for these, if they will but Kneel,
cannot be denied; nor are they, that ever I heard of.

Obj. 3. Dissenters Third Argument. The imposing and tying of Men to a
particular Form of Worship, ( without Authority from God) from which none shall
vary, is an Invasion of GOD's Prerogative; and an Impeaching of his Wisdom; as
if Men knew better than himself, what Form or manner of Service were fittest
for him. And what say you to this?

Sol. 1. You tell me of a Parliament, etc.

Repl. But I think Dissenters here meddle not with Parliaments, but with the
Chapter of Engl. in their Canons and Book of Common Prayers, and other Rites and
Ceremonies, etc.

Sol. 2. You say, I am a pleasant Spark indeed; and then ask me another grave
Question. Tell me, is Reading GOD's Word, Repeating his own Commandments,
Professing our Christian Faith, Addressing our selves to him in his beloved
Son's own Name, making Laws for him to obey?

Repl. I answer, this is not making Laws for him no obey. But why did you ask
this Question? I could also ask you Questions; but why should we trouble our
selves and others, with asking and answering impertinent Questions? This looks
like a Blind, to escape the Force of Dissenters Arguments unobserved. For they
will say,

1. That it is Terms of Communion which God has not commanded in his Word, and
it is the Chapter of Engl.'s Form of Worship, which they mean, which is imposed;
which God must have, or none; and which all must use, or be punished. This is
making Laws, for God to obey.

2. For Reading of God's Word, and Praying in his own Son's Name, they do
constantly so Worship God, because God himself has enjoined it. But what is
this to their Argument? I think I may promise, in behalf of Dissenters, If the
C. of E. will impose no more on them, than these necessary things, they will
cheerfully obey, and thankfully comply.

3. But if God must not have his Worship in Baptism, unless the Minister do
also Sign with the Sign of the Cross; and God shall not have his Worship in the
Lord's Supper, unless Men will receive the Bread and Wine Kneeling; or if God
shall not have his Worship in Prayer, unless the Minister say over so many
Pater-nosters, and observe so many Ups and Downs, so many Cringes and different
Postures, in one and the same Service; Standing up at the same Scripture read
at one time, not at another; Saying Aloud at one time, not at another: Then
Dissenters think this an Imposing upon God, making Laws for him to obey; and
that with a Penalty; for he must have this, or none.

And 'till you have fairly answered this, I shall not think Dissenters so
Ignorant as you represent them, As not to be able by Arguments to to Justify,
what you call, their Superstitions, and Divisions from the Established Church.
Sur. Imp. Pref. p. 1.

I must again be tormented with answering a wise Question, or else I shall
disoblige you, and forfeit the kind Appellation you give me, of Good Man.
Friend, what is this Cramp Question?

Qu. Pray' tell me, ( this is mannerly) what you call them, that make God to be
content with whatever comes next their Tongues-end? Let. p. 15.

Answ. 1. I answer, If Men Swear and Lie, or Engage themselves in the Name of
God to do any unlawful thing, or rashly take an Oath, without any regard to the
Matter, whether right or wrong; or whether they know what it is, or not: Yet
rather than lose their Preferment, will say what comes next Tongues-end. I Will
give you leave to name them; and it shall be a very hard one, if I consent not.

But not to escape in the dark, I will be open with you.

Answ. 2. If in their Prayers, any make God content with whatever comes next to
their Tongues-end, and not from their Heart; I think, with your leave, they
cannot make God content with them; for he requires Truth in the inward Parts.
And if you will, call them Takers of God's Name in vain.

Qu. Yet another Question. How I Will call them, that will not be at the pains to
compose a Sober Form of Worship for God, but too often foam out their own
Shame, and yet are not ashamed to entitle it to, but will needs have God admit
it, for the Groans of his Spirit. P. 15.

Answ. 1. If you mean by Sober, a Grave and Serious Form of Prayer, if any
Person do Compose a Form in apt and pertinent, intelligible Words, fit to
express the Lawful Desires of the Heart, and to raise their Affections of Hope
and Confidence in God, I would highly commend them. But if they should be so in
love with their own Prayer, as to tie all others to their very Words, and none
other; especially if they mix with their Form uncommanded Rites and Ceremonies,
under a pretense of Decency; I would say they are proud and conceited, and
assume an Authority that does not belong to them.

Answ. 2. I did never hear any such Prayers, as you speak of; nor any affirm,
that what comes next Tongues-end, or that foam out their Shame, and call them,
the Groans of the Spirit. But I doubt too many say and read their Prayers, only
at their Tongues-end; that have no more to think of, but how to Turn-over their
Book-leaves, and Read right.

Answ. 3. If any Minister in Public conceive a Prayer, and speak it in apt
Words, (especially in Scripture-Words) with Humility and Reverence; and the
Matter be Lawful, and in the Name of Christ offered up to the Throne of Grace,
I would very heartily say Amen to it; and believe God will graciously accept it
from an honest Heart.

And it is strange, that Ministers should be discouraged from Improving their
Gifts, either in Composing or Conceiving such Prayers, as (I think) have been
found by Experience, so much tending to Edification and Consolation; and (I
suppose) so esteemed formerly, by the most serious Men of the C. of E. who,
'till of late, constantly used them in the Pulpit.

And some B's put it into their Articles of Enquiry, at their Visitations: Do
you know of any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, that never Pray before their Sermons?
The restraining of which, or discouraging at least, is thought by some one
Occasion of so many raw Divines, weak and ignorant, while they need no other
Qualification to perform their Office, than to be able to Read well; that being
the chief Work. And for Preaching, the Reading of Homilies and other Men's
Sermons, recommended by a R. R. B. to Young Ones, with a Grace, or with the
Spirit of Confidence, (as a Dignitary used to Pray, in a composed Form) is
sufficient. Though this is by others thought a Discouragement to Industry, and an
Occasion of Sloth, Idleness, and worse.

Obj. 4. The Fourth Argument of Dissenters was this, Lev. p. 13. Some of them
think it no less than Sacrilege, to transfer the Ends of God's Sacraments to
their own Appointments: For they think we are Baptized, in token, hereafter we
shall not be ashamed, etc. And that Baptism is the Honorable Badge, whereby
the Infant is Dedicated to the Service of Him that Died on the Cross; and
should not be attributed to the Sign of the Cross. What say you to this
Argument of Dissenters?

Answ. 1. You say, That Baptism is perfect without the Cross, Can. 30. and you
say true. But they will Reply,

Repl. 1. They therefore think it unlawful for Men to add something of their
own, to that which is well and perfect already, according to Divine
Appointment. Pray Friend, for once, let me ask a Question.

Quest. What is Crossing good for?

Sol. Why you will say, It Is an Honorable Badge, whereby the Infant is Dedicated
to the Service of Him that Died on the Cross.

Repl. 2. This is another thing, Dissenters are offended at: That the same
Honor should be put upon an aerial transient Sign of the Cross, of Men's
Institution, that belongs to Baptism, a Sacrament of God's Institution. And
they think it inexcusable Presumption and Arrogance, to set a Man's Badge,
Cheek by Chawl, with Christ's Badge.

Answ. 3. You say, The Canon refers not to the Sign of the Cross, more than
Baptism.

Repl. 3. But the Canon speaks only of the Sign of the Cross, when it says,
It Is a Lawful outward Ceremony, and Honorable Badge, etc.

Dissenters have objected, These Ends of Baptism should not be attributed to
the Sign of the Cross. The Child is Dedicated already by Baptism, and therefore
needs not, should not be Dedicated by the Cross.

Answ. 4. To this you say; I should have given this malicious Reflection a hard
Name, but that I pity my Friend's Ignorance.

Repl. 4. Truly Mr. T. it is not well done to pity, and give no help to Answer
Dissenters. I doubt something pinches, that provokes you. But may be I may have
some Relief; for,

Answ. 5. You say, Dedicate, among other things, is to Deliver up, with some
Solemnity, what belongs to another. And so the Child, by the Sign of the Cross
is solemnly Dedicated to Christ, to whom he does belong by Baptism.

Rep. 5. This is fine indeed: The Child is Dedicated by the Cross, who was
before Dedicated by Baptism: So you take upon you to mend what was perfect
before. And this is another Instance of your impeaching the Wisdom of GOD.

Lastly, Dissenters said, That Infants are Baptized, in Token hereafter, they
shall not be Ashamed, etc. and so should not be Crossed for the same thing. But
you have Cross enough, and say nothing to this.

Now suppose a Person comes, with Authority, under the K.'s Broad Seal, to
Execute an Office; and some Man should come and say, You shall not act, unless
you have my Seal also. Would not this be accounted a Crime of an high nature?

And if you will not take it ill, I Will tell you of a fifth Argument. They
cannot Read that which tells you, the Angel Raphael was the Son of Ananias the
Great. An Angel, begotten by Man! and call it a Lesson; and justify, That it is
either the pure Word of God, or, that which is agreeable to the same. But every
body is in haste to overrun this.

CHAP. V.
Nor of Knavery; nor the Author Guilty of what Mr. T. accuses him of.
ANOTHER Thing charged by you on Dissenters, was, Knavery. To this you confess
the Charge; but say, So conscious is he, that he cannot acquit them of it, that
in his Book he drops it. P. 15.

Now I Will tell you, why I dropped it.

1. I found a General Charge of Knavery; Sur. Imp. Pref. p. 1. This their
Knavery, as well as yours, was discovered. But I found no particular Instances:
And would you have me to forge for you Instances, to prove your General Charge.

2. I looked upon your word Knavery, as only Billinsgate-Rhetorick; or a
Malignant Reflection upon the Party; where I thought you very unjust, and
therefore dropped it.

And you needed not to have given your self so much trouble, in searching your
Book for all the Crimes, mentioned to be charged upon them; all are in the very
first Page of the Preface of your Sur. Impostor. And the next Charge of
Injustice also, in Reflecting upon the whole Party of Dissenters, for the
Miscarriages of a few.

In Page 15. of your Let. you say, There is one thing remains, and that most
plausible in all my Friend's Book, that I have charged on the whole Party, the
Miscarriages of a few. And farther you say, Though my Friend lay this to my
Charge, yet he produces not one Instance.

Now Mr. T. in Answer to this, I will show you the Reason, why I accused you of
laying the Miscarriages of a few on the whole Party; and let the Reader judge,
whether I have wronged you.

1. The Reason of the Charge, was from your Words in the Preface, Page 1. I
must, say you, acquaint (viz. the Reader) that it is an old Juggle that your
Predecessors the Puritans practiced; but their Knavery, as well as yours, was
discovered. Here Is Puritans and Dissenters, indefinitely. And Pref. page 3. The
Party, I imagine, ceased from such Religious Interludes. By which we have
reason to suspect, the Party to Play-over an Old Game. And P. 6. which you
mention: If we be found tripping herein, we expose not only our selves, but our
whole Party; especially if the Leaders of them, as in the present Case, be
conspiring with us, to promote the Intrigue.

Now Mr. T. if you did not reflect upon the Party, what means th^se
Expressions? I would not willingly put worst Constructions upon Words. But let
any impartial Man that reads this, and observes the whole Scope of your Book
besides, judge whether you be unjustly charged with reflecting on the whole
Party, for the sake of a few.

2. The Reason why I brought no Instance, you had before. But are you not to
blame, to call a Man a Thief, tho you bring no Instances; and the more faulty,
if you can find none? And yet you still go about to vindicate your Charge, and
fall foul on the Dissenters, because they are not of your Mind, to think the
Demoniack was a Cheat; (and your self charge not this upon Dissenters truly,
unless you contradict your self) and that they did not by some Overt Act,
Censure it. As if every idle Book and Story, published by Men of C. of E. and
not Censured by an Overt Act, did involve them in the same Guilt with the
Editors.

And you go on, here were 17 Ministers, one way or another, concerned in the
Narrative. And what of all this? Here were two Compilers of the Narrative; but
you charge them not with being the Authors of the Imposture, nor Contrivers of
it.

Six you call Assisters. How are they assisting? Not to carry on an Intrigue or
a Cheat, you are not so hardy as to affirm it. But they Fasted and Prayed, or
Preach^d, and what hurt in this?

Seven you call Attestors. But what do they attest? Not the Truth of the
Imposture, but they believe the Truth of the Affidavits; and that D.'s strange
Fits were by a Diabolical Power. And where is their Fault? Believing Men, upon
their Oaths and Declarations, who were Eye-Winesses, and whom they had no
reason to suspect of Falsehood; attesting nothing but what many others saw, and
which your self deny not to be true.

Again, there might be 50 Hearers, and for ought I know, 500 Hearers and Seers
at one time or other: Must these be all Dissenters, and Accessaries? Some it
may be, will say, It Is so much liker to be no Cheat, when all was done
above-board; and many, not only Seers and Hearers, but of the Witnesses, C. of
E. Men.

And when all is done, how can you tell here was no Devil in the Case? (some
Arguments looking that way, to prove no Devil, you disclaim) And whether you
have any more. I find not.

And in fine, you Self quit all Dissenters from the Imposture, only so far as
they were credulous, and were imposed upon; and as guilty of Pride, and Vain
glory, and Insincerity.

And if they were credulous, it is not the only Property of Dissenters; for B.
Hall, you hear, was so; and tho you pretend his Youth, when the thing was done;
yet when he wrote his Book, he was old enough to judge; and it is probable had
seen or heard of Harsnet's Book.

But for their Pride, Vainglory, and Insincer^ty, Lies and Forgeries, which
are all I remember you charge them with, (excepting what has been spoken to
already) if they, or any of them can be proved Guilty, (which will be hard for
some of those Crimes to be, unless you could see into Hearts) then I shall
heartily say Amen to your Prayer, That GOD would open their Eyes, that they may
repent, (the almost only serious Words I have met with in both your Books;) And
I would pray farther, That God would Pardon them, though I doubt you will not.

And now, whether Dugdale's Tricks were from a Cheat, or a Distemper, or from
Possession, Obsession, or all these, I am not concerned. But something here was
strange, and unusual, and unaccountable, by what I can judge from what all
Parties say. But in one thing I take my self concerned, which is, whether the
Word Obsession be a Chapter of E. Word; for I had said, that it is to be found in
Can. 72.

Mr. T. to this you say, p. 9. The Dissenters finding the Pretense there
Censured, out of that Spirit of Contradiction to the Chapter of E. which they
mostly act by, (this is very charitable) may be supposed not only to make use
of the Word, but the Imposture also, which is there condemned. Here I confess I
am bewildred, and by a crowd of Words brought into such a Cloud, that I know
not where to find you, or what you intend. Let the Canon 72 be consulted, and I
find not, either, 1. That they made a Canon to condemn Obsession, Word or
Thing, no more than Possession; nor do they say it is a Popish Word. 2. Nor do
they condemn Fasting and Prayer, upon such Occasion; but with the B.'s License,
they may Fast and Pray; as some did in Norwich, (if I remember the Place) with
a Boy that was supposed to be Obsessed or Possessed; (Here was Prayer, upon a
Supposition: For how could they be sure?) with the License of the then B. of
Chester. And now take heed of Belying your Mother. And I wish (not for any
Virtue in a B.'s License) for Caution, Dissenters had acquainted the B. or some
others of the Chapter of Engl. and advised with more Learned Physicians, about this
Case.

Page 10. You charge me unjustly, Mr. T. in saying, I would make the World
believe, that you were intimate to W. C.'s Intrigue. And though you never saw the
Man, you might hear of his Hypocritical Carriage at Kirkham, where I suppose
you have some Relations. And the things were not done in Secret, but generally
known, and spoken of. And I had heard you were informed of his Tricks, about
that Business; and withal, that you said you would inform the B. which was
honest. And it never entered into my Thought, that you were accessory to the
Intrigue. I see your Eyes are not yet Cured, Prejudice is powerful.

Again, I had said, P. 18. Lev. The B. of C. would never have connived at W. C.
if he had known such things of him, etc. much less collated him. Here you catch
me; for it seems he was not Collated. Now I Will easily confess my Ignorance and
Mistake: For he being in the Place near two Years, I thought it rational to
believe he was Collated, however the other word Connived you acknowledge. And
if W. C. gave any good Satisfaction, or did any Penance proportionable to his
Offenses committed, so little a while before he went thither, I am glad of it.
And being gone, you shall hear no more of him from me, farther than in my own
necessary Vindication. But there are some Passages in your Let. p. 12. you
charge on me, as an Untruth; viz. That I would insinnate a License to another
Cure, viz. N. Chapel; Mr. Tailor, this is your Untruth. I said he was
Introduced, you say this is notoriously false. Pray' Sir, what is false? Did he
not Preach at N. Chapel? and some tell me, sometimes at Manchester Church. But
say you, Ibid. All that was done, was at the Importunity of the Presbyterian
Party. You here take a Travelers Liberty. For the Presbyterians at Newton kept
up their distinct Meetings all the time, and so did the Presbyterians in Mott
Parish, and do still to this day. And is this like the Presb. Party importuning
for him or Gray?

And then follows a doleful Story of a Vicar, etc. and I can tell you of
another Story, Of one that in a Vicar's Church sat Weeping, while the
Communion-Office was in hand; to see the Symbols of Christ's Body broken, and
his Blood shed; though he must not eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup,
because he durst not Kneel. And what good Man had not cause to be grieved, when
he durst not administer to such a Pious Man, as I believe he esteemed this to
be, for fear of Suspension?

Now I return to your P. 18. and I am accused of bringing in an Argument, which
you say is Mine, not Yours. To this, I would not willingly misrepresent what
you have written, nor would I mistake your meaning; but I ll tell you what led
me so to understand you, and if I be mistaken, I Will not persist in it. You, P.
32. of Sur. Imp. undertook to show two things.

1. That Dugd. was not possessed by the Devil.

2. That if he was, he found no Benefit at all by those erroneously Religious
Offices that they performed for him.

1. To the first I expected your Proof, and you go over his Tricks, etc. and at
last conclude, P. 56. I can find nothing in our Surey-Spark, from whence we may
conclude him a Demoniack. But then to gratify Ministers, I will suppose he was
so; and show,

2. That he found no Benefit by their Prayers, etc. a very bold Attempt. Now
how do you show this? First, you bring in Dicky as a true Prophet, who had
said, They were not able to perform what they had promised. Then you bring in
Dugd. the Father, saying, That after the Ministers had left him, he had several
Fits. Then Walmsley says, Notwithstanding M. J. C. and others Preached and
Prayed by Ri. his Fits continued as violent as before, to the last Fit. Upon
which you make this Inference, P. 57. Does this look like casting out the
Devil? Now if this be not your Argument to prove your Assertion, I find none,
viz. To prove, That Dick found no Benefit by their Prayers. Which was to be
Proved. So you undertake to show, what you either cannot, or will not.

Again, I had said, What were those Offices which you call erroneously
Religious, were they Fasting and Prayers? If you exclude Fasting from being
Religious Worship, (Erroneously there is among the Errata) Dissenters will not
quarrel with you.

To this you have a witty Reflection, P. 19. which I Will leave to those that are
disposed to make merry with your Rhetoric: But must tell you, Dissenters are
not against Fasting, to keep under the Body; nor as a Help in Religious
Worship. And methinks this might have passed, when many C. of E. will not allow
Preaching to be Religious Worship.

Your next Witticism is; If it was conceived in a Barn, viz. Prayers, it was
the fittest Place for them to be begotten in.

Good Sir, is the Worship of God any worse, because in a Barn? Did not David
worship God acceptably on a Barn-Floor? 2 Samuel 24. 18, 19. Was not a Stable the
first place where Christ, after his Incarnation, was worshipped.

Again, I am here blamed, for not having Wit to stop at a Proverb, but marr^d
it with an Explanation. And indeed here you are in the right; for if the
Explanation had been mine, it had been marred.

But I believe E. Johnston your Publisher, can assure you, (and I wonder he did
not) that presently after he had received the Lev. he had a Note of Errata's,
one of which was this; P. 26. l. 19. After Sands, add an absurd Inference, vid.
Ray's Prove. p. 195. Ibid. dele the four next Lines, which were not in the M. S.
And who put them there, I cannot tell.

Yet P. 21. I have a Flirt for something in my Let. P. 27. That I am blind as
Tobit. I perceive something pleases not; but you have the Prudence to pass it
over, and are in haste, as well as another of your Friends. And for Dr. Chew's
Certificate I need not tarry, for Dick never had Fit after the first Dose.

But you say, P. 22. I have a fling at the Largeness of Dioceses, in Lev. P.
18. To this you say, But he would do well to consider, whether he does not by
this spit in the Face of Christ, (God forbid) and his Apostles; whose
Ecumenical Provinces were something larger than the largest of our Dioceses.

Mr. T. are you here in earnest? Or you thought to try whether you could put a
Trick upon your ignorant Friend; if this latter, you should not have jested at
the Name of Christ, when you bow at the Name Jesus.

But if you are in earnest, to justify your large Dioceses, by the Examples of
Christ and his Apostles, then you have spun a fine Thread for your self and
many of your worthy Brethren. For if B's must have as large Dioceses as Christ
and his Apostles, as a H. 8. would make merry with a great Revenue of B's
Lands, and have something to say; One B. in England is enough, and more than
needs, when Thirteen will serve all the World. And then you and many of your
worthy Brethren are like never to wear Lawn Sleeves.

Yet I am not so wedded to my own Opinion, but if you can find One to succeed
Christ in his Ecumenical Province, of the same Natures, Gifts, Wisdom,
Abilities and Authority, for the Performance of the Function, I will not spit
in his Face, but submit.

And if you can find 12 Men with the same Commission, endowed with the same
extraordinary Gifts, and so filled with the Spirit of GOD, as the Apostles,
I Will submit, and we'll be Friends still.

In the same, P. 22. you are in a Huff; and I observe, where I need most of
your Help, you are most out of Humor.

I told you, Lev. p. 18. I had a Scruple about a Prayer in the Litany, used
generally in K. J.'s time, who was a Papist, viz. That it may please thee to
keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee, in righteousness and
holiness of life thy Servant, our most gracious K. and Governor. And the
Reason of my Scruple was, because Popish Worship is Idolatrous; and it seemed
hard for Protestants, to Pray that he might be kept and strengthened in
Idolatry.

To this you say, Is Popery such a mass of Idolatry, that there is no piece of
true Worship in it? Do they not worship God, etc. And was not this that True
Worship we prayed God to keep him in?

Here you are in haste again, but I must tarry by it; for my Scruple is
increased, by multiplied Thoughts of some Things following.

1. By the by, I observe how tenderly you deal by the Papists; their Worship is
true, when Dissenters is erroneously Religious Worship. But let that pass.

2. I have been told, (but not learned it from Mr. Frankl.) that the Popish
Worship is Idolatrous.

3. I have been told also by more than Dissenters, that Idolatrous Worship
mixed with something of True Worship, does defile the whole. And their Liturgy
is Idolatrous, as denominated from the worst Part, (and perhaps the greatest)
as a Drop of Poison in a Cup of Wine.

4. Does not the Church of Rome Worship by their Breviary and Mass Book, as the
C. of E. by their Common Prayer, which they call Divine Service? And is not
their Missal and Breviary Idolatrous Worship? Though in some part of it they pray
to God in the Name of Christ; though it may be, oftener to Saints and Angels, or
to God through their Intercession. And is this a sufficient Reason to justify
Protestants Praying to keep them. and strengthen them in the true worshipping?
etc. Yes, when it is safe for you to drink a Glass of Wine with Poison in it,
because it is but a Drop; but there is a great deal of Good Wine.

5. Do you think this of yours, was the Sense of the first Composers of this
Petition; that it might be Prayed for a Popish K. or Q?

6. But here is implied a positive Assertion, that K. J. worships God truly,
and not a bare Supposition. But if it were but upon Supposition, that you Pray
thus for him, then it is Superstition at the best, according to your own
Doctrine.

7. A Papist will say, If our Worshipping God be such, that you can lawfully
pray God to keep and strengthen us in it; why did you separate from our
Worship? You Will say, We separate not, so far as it is true. And so will
Dissenters say, We separate not from Chapter of Engl. so far as their Worship is
good; only from uncommanded Rites and Ceremonies.

8. Did you not mean, when you Prayed for C. II. (best of K's said many) a
Protestant K. that he might be kept and strengthened in the true Protestant
Worship, or the Common Prayer Worship, and not turn from it. And must not the
words still have the same sense?

Ob. But farther you say, Was not thus Praying for him, the best means to
reclaim him from his false Worship? A means, the best means, thus to Pray.

Sol. 1. This might be pretended a means to keep him from turning Turk or
Infidel, if the Prayer had been, to keep and strengthen him in the Christian
Worship and Religion.

2. Was not this liker to harden him in his false Worship? when you at the same
time acknowledge his Worshipping, without Ifs or Ands, to be true, and pray
that he may be strengthened in it.

3. Would not this be an odd way to convert a Papist, by praying thus with
him, and for him? Lord keep him in the true worshipping of thee; might he not
say, I thank you Sir for your good Prayers, for I perceive I am already in the
true Worshipping of God, and so have no need to change my Church.

4. But was this the best Means? verily I think you are not so ignorant, but
you can readily think of many better Means. And in my Mind, the one honest
Priest of the C. of E. found out a much better Means, when he changed those
words into such as these; That God would direct; and bring him into, and keep
and strengthen him, in the true worshipping of him. In a word, Would it not be
a strange hearing, for Men in the Liturgy to Pray for the Pope, that God would
keep and strengthen him in the true worshipping of him; and to say this is the
best means to reclaim him. The Israelites might thus have prayed for Jeroboam,
for Ahaz, etc. yea, may you not thus pray for the Turk, that God would keep and
strengthen him, etc. If you say he does not worship God truly; yes, may it be
answered, he owns the true God, and worships him. And this is the best Means to
reclaim him from that part of his Worship that is false.

The Sum of all is, If Men have but the Conscience to Subscribe to they know
not what, that they never read; or may have the liberty to put their own
fancied Meanings upon things commanded, and subscribed to; they may subscribe
to the Alchoran, and make a shift to put a plausible Sense upon it; (as S.
Clara, who makes the Articles of the C. of E. agree with the Articles of the
Council of Trent;) and it seems may also lawfully pray for the Turk and Pope;
and say to God, That it may please thee to keep and strengthen them in the true
worshipping of thee, etc. And according to Mr. T. as the best means to reclaim
them from their false Worship.

Your last thing observable, is P. 23. where you justify your self for all your
ill Words and hard Speeches; from the Examples and Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles.

Really Mr. T. this is a Boldness that some tender-hooft Men (as they call them
in derision) would startle and boggle at.

What, compare your self with Christ and his Apostles? I Will say this, when you
know Men's Hearts as Christ did, when you have the Spirit of Discerning, as the
Apostle had; you shall have my consent, to call Men Hypocrites and Insincere,
etc. Provided always you be not too hasty, as some of the Disciples were, Luke
9. 54, 55. and be sure it be in a Good Cause, Gal. 4. 18. and that you have a
Call to it; lest some of your Brethren should blame you for arrogating to your
self, from Tit. 1. 10, 13. that which they account the proper Work of your
Diocesan. And if you have a Mind to assume the Authority of Christ, to call Men
Satan, (for it seems you will allow Peter to have a Devil, though Dugd. none) It
may possibly be as good a warrant for others to call you a Devil; that is, a
False-Accuser, or Slanderer. 2. Tim. 3. 3.

CHAP. VI.
ANSWER, to P. S.
I Am now arrived at your P. S. and you produce Two Letters, to Justify the R.
R. the L. B. of C. etc. and Mr. Gr.

Mr. T. whatever you insinuate, I have a tenderness for the Reputation of that
worthy Person; and therefore when I understood that a Lover of him had sent him
Word, That it was not for his Honor to suffer W. C. etc. I hoped it might be a
sufficient Caution. And therefore in the Lev. I did lay the Blame where I think
it still lies: viz. On those that should have been more Faithful to him; and I
am the more confirmed in my Opinion, by these very Letters you produce, in
Justice to the B. and to Mr. Gray.

For in the first Let. who this R. T. is, or who His Worship is, I am not
concerned: But I suppose he is not the Presbyterian Party you spoke of at P.
11. At whose Request, the B. admitted G. to the Order of Deacon.

But whoever he is, I doubt he is Partial; he told the Bishop of Gr's Crime,
but did he tell him of any Satisfaction he had made, for so Public a Scandal?
Yes, he turned Conformist, and all on a Push skipped over to the C. of E.
doubtless by immediate Inspiration, by the Hopes of better Preferment than
among Dissenters. Is this Satisfaction?

This R. T. reflects on Dissenters, and therefore cannot be thought their
Representative to the B.

But he formerly Observed, (I perceive he is a Man of Observation, and may be an
Observable Man too) when some weak or debauched Minister served in the Place,
there was but little Reflection: A Debauched, and no Reflection; it may be, not
by his Society; but there might by Dissenters, sorrowing and mourning, for what
they could not Reform: Nor when a weak Minister; truly a weak Minister might be
Pious and Godly, and might do his best, and then Charity forbad Reflection.

But now Mr. Gray, a very able Minister, (sure this is some fit Judge) he was
not reflected at Thirske; no, they knew nothing of him, but as he appeared to
be a zealous: Dissenter, 'Till he had a Design for Mot. and Conformity, And
what then? They reflect on him, that is, they called to Mind his former
Offense, for which he had never testified any Repentance.

Let Us see then what the next Letter will do, for this is Small Game? the
Letter is Mr. Gray' s own.

1. But is this fair, to admit a Man to be Witness in his own Cause? Although,
Upon the severest Examination, as to his Morals, P. 11. of the Letter, Would he
Accuse Himself? This marrs the Proof.

2. This very Letter of his, is a Ground of Suspicion.

1. He acknowledges not the Justice of his Censure.

2. He calls the telling of his Faults, Calumnies belched out against him.

3. He says (for ought I know) a manifest Untruth; that the B. of Chapter is
struck at for his sake.

4. He falsely suggests the Cause of divulging his Crime: For was it not
divulged where he was not known before; and how could it be divulged where he
secretly sculk'd?

5. He falsely and spitefully reflects upon Dissenters; and says, he might have
lived quietly, if he had not Conformed.

1. But did he Live quietly when he was a Dissenter, without Censure for his
Sin?

2. Had they not cause to reflect on him, who in so long time never signified
his Repentance to them that Censured him.

6. He charges Dissenters roundly with a Position I never heard, nor read; and
have reason to suspect his Veracity. However, does Recriminating Justify him?

7. He says, he fears it is Malice, more than Matter. What Impudence is this?
Is it Malice, who gave thee Authority to Judge Men's Hearts? More than Matter?
Was there not a Cause, was not the Crime open, notorious, scandalous; and yet
no Matter?

Now Mr. T. are these things Signs of Repentance, and of an humble and broken
Spirit?

And yet after all, if the Man be sincerely a true Penitent, and Live well, and
Preach well, I shall say, The Lord give a Blessing, and Success to his Labors;
for the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of Saints. So far am I from
envying any Pious, Holy Minister, whether of the Chapter of Engl. or Dissenters;
and very heartily will obey your Canon. Gal. 6. 1.

But Mr. T. you have a strange Comment upon that Text. I will not, say you,
reflect upon my Friend, this is honest; though if he be a Man named to me, (I am
confident, no Man living but my self can be sure, who he is you call your
Friend, but your Friend himself; no not the Transcriber of the Levite.) It Is
supposed he is as much as the Scots. Man interested in the Lenity of this
Canon. It Is supposed! Here was doubtless some Reluctance. But out it comes.

Mr. ^ I was astonished when I read this; a Story came into my Mind, of a
French B. taken by the English in Armor. The Pope sends to the K. of England,
to release his Son. Whereupon the K. sends his Armor to the Pope, and ordered
this Question to be asked, Is this thy Son's Coat? To which the Pope answered,
He Is not my Son, but the Son of Mars; and leaves him to the K. to do with him
what he pleased. I Will refer it to your Diocesan, to apply it. And for my self,
I have need enough of Indulgence of Paul's Canon, yet not in Gray's Case. I
Appeal to the Righteous Judge of all the World.

But for you my Friend, if I were your Diocesan, I would Reprove you sharply;
but I Will do it in the Spirit of Meekness.

For ought you know, you have one way or other wounded more innocent Persons,
than Samson did with the Jaw Bone. For there are many Conjectures of the Author
of that which is called Lanc Lev. Some say it is Sir such a One, and Name,
others a Learned and moderate C. of E. Man, others M. D. and others a Bookish
Country Gentleman; others Father it on no fewer than Five or Six Dissenting
Ministers, and name all according to each Man's Fancy So many as these are, you
have exposed them and their Reputation. Besides, occasioned the Sin and
Censures of so many, as believe any of these to be the Author; who live, some
of them 20 Miles distant from one another Now how many may from hence, be
filled with Unchristian and Uncharitable Surmises of innocent Persons;
especially, such as are willing to believe any thing that is Ill, of the
Dissenter.

Good Sir, retire, and think what you have done. (For I profess, I never heard
the least Charge of this nature, against any that are reputed Authors, and as I
know my self, Innocent; to I believe are all the rest.) And read the Author of
(...) of the Government, if the T^ngue, and The B. of C. of Revenge; and the
Lord give you a more meek, humble, and charitable Heart.

MAY 20. School.
FINIS.

