THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS of that Great Captain of his Age the
Viscount de TVRENNE.

Written in French by Monsieur du Buisson, Eldest Captain and Major of the
Regiment de Verdelin.

And Translated into English By Ferrand Spence.

Licensed Feb. 17. 1685/6.

Roger L'Estrange.



London, Printed by J. B. for Dorman Newman and R. Bentley, at the Kings-Arms
in the Poultrey, and at the Post House in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1686.

To His Grace Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monck of
Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
and One of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
IT is not long since, that History seemed a Province so peculiar to the Greeks
and Romans, that the Actions of any other Part of this Globe, were looked upon
as unworthy the Recording: as if Homer and Plutarch's Heroes were only fit to
be produced, and that it were not only Barbarous, but Impious to offer at
measuring them with the Moderns. But we are, at length, made sensible, that all
Regions and Ages afford Valor, Ability, and Politeness. We are grown weary of
talking ever of Alexander and Caesar, and, daily, discover New Conquerour^ as
much to be Valued, and, possibly, to all intents their Equals.

In this File we may place the late Monsieur de Turenne, whose Life I do not a
little glory in the Occasion of laying at Your Graces feet. A more than
ordinary Analogy of Circumstances Authorizes this Dedication. The Viscount's
Partisans boast him to have Barrier'd France more than once, from Inundations
of its formidable, as well as Numerous Enemies. Your Grace's Illustrious Father
may well be styled the Restorer of England, in bringing back the Defender of
its Faith, and re-establishing him upon the Throne of his Ancestors; and this
is what does, unquestionably, give him the Pre-eminence over that so very
Eminent French Captain. But as the Glory of this Personages Life, rather
requires my Shadowing the Piece, I may well be taxed with a Design of lessening
his Merit, by producing him into a greater Light: For though the Viscount had the
Superiority of Conduct over most of the other Generals of his time, yet must we
needs o(...) that all his consummated Prudence and Experience in the business
of Bonn received a foil from Montecuculi's finess; whereas the Lord General of
England through all Disadvantages and Difficulties, gloriously and untarnish'd,
carried the Honor of that Character to the last.

Wherefore, Sir, a Passion for the Credit of my Subject, withholds my hand from
pushing on the Parallel. Nevertheless, I have urged sufficient to Entitle this
Piece fit to challenge your Princely Patronage. Besides as your own Constant
Magnificence and Magnanimity, on all Occasions in the Service of the Crown,
Vigilance, Bravery and Successful Conduct speak you in every thing the Heir of
your Fathers Virtues, so do they render so great an affinity between Yours and
the Viscounts Life, that though the Laters long Experience may Weigh down, a
little, on the one hand; your unspotted Loyalty does again, more than Balance
it on the other, and stamps Merit on this Oblation and renders it a Duty.

And here My Lord, I might value my self upon resisting the Temptation of
improving the Pompous matter I have before me into a Panegyrique. A thing,
indeed, unnecessary, since the World is satisfied your Grace has with Devotion
made Your Fathers Great Actions the Model of Your Own, which is sufficient to
Chronicle you to all Eternity in the first Rank of the Illustrious Men and
Princes of this Age and Nation, and to make me proud of the passion I had to
Subscribe my self,

May it please your Grace, Your most Obedient and most Humble Servant, F.
SPENCE.

The LIFE of the Viscount of Turenne, Marechal General of the Kings Camps and
Arms, Colonel General of the Light Horse of France, and Governor of High and
Low Limosin.
IF Men Writ only for their Contemporaries, very Cautious should I be of
undertaking here the Relation of the Viscount de Turenne's Life, seeing all I
can say of him will in no wise come near the Idea left Us of him, in his Great
Actions: In effect when I shall have urged many instances of his Goodness,
Wisdom, Justice, Prudence, Courage, and all the Other Virtues he in a Sovereign
Degree possessed, have I not reason to fear that this will rather Weaken than
augment the Opinion we have of Him? For though a Book may seem sufficient to
acquaint us with the Vices and Virtues of a Man, yet We have seen such Great
things of this Prince both for Manners, and for Actions, as require a man's
having been an Eyewitness of 'em, to have an Idea of him proportionable to the
Truth. But as we willingly admit the Pleasure of hearing such Persons as have
been Dear to Us made the Subject of the Discourse, I hope this Work far from
Displeasing, will be acceptable to all such as shall peruse it; Very willing
will they be to be re-minded of a Prince, for whom they had, as I may say, a
kind of Adoration; and whose Death they could not refrain Solemnizing with
their tears, though attended with such Glorious Circumstances. As for those that
come after us, I also hope this Piece will afford them a Delightful
Entertainment; For if they are pleased in Reading the History of Alexander the
Great, and Other the famous Captains of Antiquity, whose Virtues were tarnish'd
with many Vices; with much more Reason must they needs take some satisfaction
in Reading the Life of a Prince, who having been no less Wise or Expert than
those Great men in the Trade of War, was Exempt from all their Imperfections.
But besides, I hope, something more will be found than Pleasure in the Life of
so virtuous a Personage; and that it will raise both Admiration and Emulation:
And if it be true, that manners are commonly fashioned after the example of the
Company People usually frequent, may we not believe that Reading another sort
of conversation, is capable of producing the same effect. I will add to all
these Considerations that have enduc'd me to enter upon this work; the Desire I
had to hand down truth to Posterity, a Virtue not much known to the greater
part of our modern Historians, who suffer themselves to be led on by their
Interest or their Passions.

All mankind are Unanimous in This, that Greatness of Birth is a Present of
Fortune; nay I have not yet met with any Person, but reckons it to give a Great
Luster to virtue. We value indeed Virtuous Persons in whatever Rank it has
pleased God to place them, but it is Clear we rate those much higher that are
equally Virtuous, and born with the Advantage of Extraction: It Is a luster that
dazzels all men, and for which, let People talk what they will, Every man has
Naturally a respect. Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne, whose Life I now undertake to
Write, was born at Sedan the 11th of September, 1611. of Parents whose Birth
was not only Eminent, but even recommendable among Sovereigns. He was the Son
of Henry de la Tour D'Auvergne and of Elizabeth of Nassaw: These two Houses are
so blazed throughout Europe, nay, and in the Other Parts of the World, that it
would be needless in me to Enlarge much upon their Grandeur. That of Nassaw has
given an Emperor to Germany, and continued his Posterity in Several Branches
equally Illustrious, and particularly in that of the Princes of Orange. That of
La Tour D'Auvergne has possessed the County of Boulogne and several other Lands
in Sovereignty; and for a top of Greatness matched one of it is Daughters to a
Majesty of France. Not but there are those who are of Opinion that this Ancient
House of Boulogne, and that of Bouillon, are very Different; Nay, and I have
heard it affirmed by the present Duke of Elboeuf, though he had married a
Daughter of this Family, and that his Interest led him to take that Part: But
it is not for me to decide these sorts of things, and though I were better
informed than I am, I should circumscribe my relation to what is commonly said
upon this Point. I shall leave then to others to judge of the Case as they
think fit, and content my self to say, that it is however a most Illustrious
House; Consider we it either as issued from the Counts of Boulogne, or from a
House of Limosin, from whence some derive it is Original: Such as are of this
sentiment, affirm it is Name to be La Tour, of which there are many Gentlemen
settled in the Kingdom, and that they have thereto added the name D'Auvergne.
Mrs de Gouvernet, de Montauban and de la Chartre are of that House, and some of
'em have told me the House of Bouillon and theirs to be one and the same thing.
But one would willingly have more than bare words for it, for no doubt but they
would be very glad to be looked on as Relations of Monsieur de Bouillon, who
hold'st not only an Eminent rank in France, but are likewise very considerable
in Germany, on the score of the Allyances they have there with several Princes.
As for the rest, the Principality of Sedan had not been long in this House,
when the Viscount de Turenne came into the World: His Father was obliged for it
to Henry the 4th. Who had matched him to the Heiress. But we may assure it to
be in acknowledgement for the Services he had received from him. For during the
Civil Wars of France, he brought him sundry Succors from Germany, and spared
neither his Estate nor Person to help him to Subdue his Enemies. For this
Reason did Henry the fourth prefer him before many Others, when the Marrying
that Princess was the point in Agitation, and it is believed he did it too that
he might not remit her Territories into the hands of a Person less affectionate
to him than this Lord: For as they border with France on the side of Germany,
it was that Great Kings Interest to be careful on whom he bestowed the
Heiress. But be it as it will, the new Duke of Bouillon on his very Wedding
night endeavored to acquit himself of that Obligation; for leaving his Brides
Bed, he put on his Armor, and went and Surpised the City of Stenay, which
acquired him Great Reputation. Nevertheless though Henry the 4th, Esteemed him
daily more and more, yet he did not long entertain him with the same favor,
which I shall attribute to what I am going to relate. This Great King was
obliged to turn Catholic, so to appease the troubles of his Kingdom; and the
Duke of Bouillon, a Protestant, not being of a humor to follow his Masters
Example, he became suspected to the King for the kindness born him by those of
his Religion. The Jealousy conceived by the King on this Occasion was so Great,
that the Duke of Bouillon found himself obliged to withdraw into Germany, from
whence he Writ to the King, and procured other Letters from Diverse Princes his
Relations. The King sent to him to return and trust in his Royal Word; but he
was loath to obey; as knowing he had Enemies at Court, who endeavored to
render him answearable for Sundry Complaints made by People of the Religion in
great power at that time. Moreover accused he was of having endeavored to draw
into the Kingdom the Army of Mansfeld, a famous General, who without being in
any Bodies Pay had found the Secret to keep on foot an Army of thirty thousand
men, and make himself feared by all Europe. At length time having appeased all
things, the Duke of Bouillon went to kiss the Kings hand, and then retired to
Sedan, where his main Care was to educate his Children sutably to their
Condition.

God having given him, as I have already said, the Viscount de Turenne, whose
Life I here delineate; he was brought up in the Protestant Religion, to which
his Mother showed her self as zealous as his Father. As soon as he was come to
an age ripe for Instruction, he had Masters given him accordingly, some
appointed to teach him the Exercizes befitting a Person of his Quality; and
it is inconceivable how easily he learnt every thing; which sufficiently
Testified the Vivacity of his Wit. Nevertheless, as some things he applied
himself more willingly to than others, his Inclination lay for those that
concerned Arms; For as for Sciences he set himself slightly to them, or, as I
may say, for fashions sake, which sometimes put Monsieur de Bouillon out of
humor, because he would have rendered him accomplished in all things. When he
had attained fifteen years of Age, Monsieur de Bouillon resolved to send him
into Holland, at that time the School of War for all Persons of Quality, and
where was already his Eldest Brother. For the States after having brought Spain
to demand a Truce, saw themselves upon the point of renewing Hostilities for
ascertaining their freedom. He gave him Letters for Prince Maurice his Brother
in Law, the Greatest Captain of his Age, and the Person to whom the Hollanders
are most endebted for their Establishment. For though they began to cast off the
Spaniards yoke under William Prince of Orange, and that they acquired their
freedom under the Government of Frederick Henry, We may say that without
Maurice they would have found it difficult to compass their Designs. This
Prince being the Person, who began not only to restore Discipline in Armies,
but likewise put in Practice a world of things till then unknown by Judges. He
had the Love of his Soldiers beyond Imagination, was feared by his Enemies,
and esteemed by all his Neighbors; Worthy in short of Commanding the Greatest
States, but happy in having been only the Head of a rising Commonwealth, since
so many Great events can only be imputed to his virtue.

The Viscount de Turenne had had Order at his Departure from Sedan to apply
himself to all that Prince should do as to a Perfect Model. But no need was
there of this Command to inspire him with what it became him to do; He only
looked upon him with Admiration; and in the Desire he had to render himself one
day a great Captain, he observed to his least actions; and though so young, was
not wanting to note his Conduct and Prudence. Prince Maurice beginning to
perceive in him an admirable Genius for War, was very willing to Cultivate it,
and would not suffer him to serve in the Cavalry, as did Monsieur de Bouillon
his Eldest Brother: Monsieur de Turenne found no difficulty to obey him, for he
had already a kindness for the foot, and never while he lived belied that
Inclination. He was wont to say, that the foot made War and the Horse looked
on, which he meant as to Sieges, where the Horse for the most part have nothing
to do. Prince Maurice would have him, for all his being his Nephew, begin the
Trade like Others, that is to say, carry a Musket; for that he might have an
Army ever well disciplined, he suffered not a man of what ever Quality to
become an Officer, without having first learnt how to Obey; for which reason he
commonly said, that the trade of War had some affinity with the Conquest of a
Beautiful Woman, that the one was only learnt foot by foot, and the other not
obtained without much trouble.

The Viscount de Turenne having already the Wit to judge in due manner of all
things, went not only willingly about what his Uncle desired of him, but as
much out of inclination to please him, he resolved to do the Duty of a Common
Soldier. He performed the Guards of fatigue as well as the Guards of Honor,
and those who till then had Exempted themselves from those offices, out of
Shame to see their lazyness tacitly reproved by a young Prince and the nephew
of their General, entered insensibly into a practice of their Duty: yet they
would not imitate him so far as in the pains he took when the Army was on the
March, when he never quitted his Ranks. But his Uncle fearing he might heat
himself, Checked him for rashly Exposing his health, so that he determined to
do like others. Prince Maurice's Order Extremely pleased all the Younger
Brothers, who saw themselves under the Necessity of doing like the Viscount, or
of being Exposed to the Censure of the Officers, and perchance to the Contempt
of the Soldiers; and I believe it partly in this Consideration, that Prince
Maurice had this Complaisance, for in the Exactness he had for matters relating
to the Military Service, he must have had powerful Reason to oblige him to
Slacken. However the Viscount de Turenne that he might give Example to Others,
chose the Rear of his Batallion, and though the Officers desired him to place
himself with them, he ever declined so doing with Excuses, saying, there ought
to be some Difference between the Officers and Soulders. This Occasioned Prince
Maurice to make an Ordinance, by which the Officers were no longer to put
themselves at the head of their Batallions; and all knowing the Viscount de
Turenne to be the Occasion of this Decree, concluded, that since he was capable
in so Green an Age, to observe the Discipline with such Exactness, much another
thing would it be when with years he had attained more Knowledge.

He did not long enjoy the happiness of serving under Prince Maurice. This
Prince out of a Passion for Glory, having undertaken to relieve Breda, which
the Spaniards had beseig'd, died of Grief for not having bin able to Effect his
Design. The States, after having rendered all imaginable Honors to his Memory,
Elected in his Room, for the Command of their Armies, Prince Henry Frederick
his Brother, who had the same Goodness and tenderness for the Viscount de
Turenne, as had had the General Deceas^d. Yet his Birth and Merit requiring his
being distinguished from others, Prince Frederick Henry gave him a Company of
Foot. If he had been a good Soldier, he was still a better Captain. He did not
do like many Persons of Quality now adays, who rely upon their Lieutenants for
the Care and Management of their Companies. He did not think himself sufficient
for its thorough Improvement and well-being; as Young as he was he showed
himself severe toward his Soldiers, when severity was requisite: but saving
in matters regarding the Service, he Sympathiz'd their Miseries and sufferings;
and it was not only with the Mouth, the general Mode of these times, but his
Purse was ever open to the Unhappy; and he did not consider whether they were
of his own company or of another's, when they needed his Assistance. This put
him often under the want of Money; but he told those who remonstrated it to
him, that he should at least consine his Liberalities to his own Company; that
Money was much better employed this way than in Play, in Luxury, or Debauchery,
for which reason he did not Game, or at least, he played so small a matter, as
was not capable of rendering him uneasy. Nor was he also at great expense in
Clothes, and if sometimes he lay under an Obligation to put on the Garb of a
Person of his Quality, he did it without affectation, and without deriving a
vanity from those sort of things, as are indeed only superfluous. He said, a
man should never be Pompous and Magnificent, with other intent, than the Profit
and Livelihood of Poor People; that finery was more troublesome than grateful,
and neatness sufficient; that a man of Quality was sufficiently distinguished
of himself, without still aiming to be conspicuous by Gew-gaws and Trifles;
that we should leave to Women the seeking after Trappings and Ornaments: but
that a man born for Great Matters should slight those that savored of
Effeminacy.

This amazed the world to see so much Prudence and Wisdom in a Person of his
Age, and none that knew him, but past in his favor an advantageous judgment of
the future. For besides this, he was of a strong and robust Constitution, though
none of the Biggest, nor Best made; but seen to despise the hardships and
rigours of the season, never complaining of heat or Cold, ever sensible of the
fatigues of Others, but never speaking of his own, as if he had been insensible
for himself only. The French Officers, considerably numerous in the States
Army, admiring this young Prince, whose Grandeur of Courage shined in all
things, writ his Circumstances into their own Country, and said, if he lived
the Age of man, he could not fail of one day trumping up his Fame. This made
several Persons of Quality write to him obligingly upon this Subject, and
among Others Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde, who after the Death of Henry the
4th was returned to France with his Wife; for whose sake he had fled into
Foreign Countries: for this Great King being of an Amorous complexion, could
not see that Princess without being strongly touched and Charmed with her Merit:
and this had Created so great a Jealousy in the Prince of Conde, that he caused
his Wife to pack up, and carried her to Bruxelles. In the mean while the
Marshall D'Ancre possessing the Queen Mother's favor, had caused him to be
confined shortly after his Return, and though this Marshall was some time after
killed upon the Bridge of the Louvre, by Command from the Court, yet this
Prince was not released out of Prison, 'till other great Changes had happened
in the State.

But to return to my Subject, the Prince of Conde having Written to the
Viscount de Turenne, as I have newly said, the Viscount made him so modest an
Answer, that this Prince, his Relation, had him still in the more esteem: In
the mean while some days after an occasion served to show his Courage, and this
was the taking of Klundert and Willemstadt, which Prince Frederick Henry caused
to be attacked. He behaved himself in that Occasion, not only as might be
expected from a young Prince for whom the World had a peculiar value; but
seeing his Soldiers suffered themselves to be hurried on so inconsiderately by
their Courage, that they broke their Ranks, and marched in Disorder, he staid
the hottest, and by his Wisdom prevented the Enemies from advantaging
themselves of their Imprudence. After this he fought and underwent as much of
the Peril and Drudgery of the Assault as the meanest Soldier, and having torn
up a Palisade with his own hand, he made a Passage for Others to advance much
farther. The Enemies after a vigorous Defense, were at length compelled to
abandon their R trenchments and betake themselves to their heels. The
victorious Soldier committed great Disorders in those two Places; and tho* the
Inhabitants by their own fault seemed to have incurred that Calamity, for they
had taken up Arms with the Garrison, the Viscount de Turenne could not see so
much blood shed without giving tokens of his Good Disposition. Being come into
Gertruidemberg in the head of his Company, a Woman perceiving more respect paid
him than to the other Captains, made her addresses to him for Justice against a
Soldier, who after having plundered her House of All, would needs into the
Bargain violate her Daughter, a Girl of about Fifteen Years old. The Viscount
de Turenne told her at first that she must address her self to the Commander of
the Regiment, meaning thereby to express the Obedience that People are bound to
pay to their Superiors: but understanding the Case to be urgent, he hastened
into her House, where having sound the Soldier striving to commit violence
upon her Daughter, he put himself into a Posture to disarm him. The Soldier,
being found in the very Action, judging he was lost, resolved to sell his Life
Dearly, and drew his Sword in his own Defense; but the Viscount de Turenne
without considering his Desperateness, which rendered him much stronger than
ordinary, attacked him so briskly, that he pushed him up to the very wall, but
others coming in helped him to take him. Put he was into the hands of Justice,
and found to be related to a number of Worthy Persons who came to intercede for
him. Thus was the Viscount de Turenne daily importuned to grant him, as I may
say, his Pardon; for though he was not the Party to be addressed to for that
purpose, yet they had recourse to him, as knowing him to be in the Generals
favor, besides his being concerned in the Principal Offense: for 'twas a
terrible Crime in a Soldier to have dared to draw his Sword against a Captain;
not only so, but the Nephew too of him who Commanded the Army. But the Viscount
de Turenne without being wrought upon by their Persuasions, told those who
spoke in this man's behalf, that as for what he had done against him, he
willingly forgave him, nay and would employ his Offices to procure his Pardon,
but that God forbid he should beg for a man's Life, who having Power in his
hand, would use it not only to content his Avarice, but also his Brutality.
Wherefore he left to the Council of War to judge him as they pleased, and the
Council having Sentenced him to have his hand Cut off, and to be hanged, the
Viscount de Turenne exerted the effect of his Promises, for knowing they cut
off his hand only for what he had done against him, he so importuned Prince
Frederick Henry, that notwithstanding the repugnance he had to grant a Pardon
of that nature, he could not refuse him what he required. After this the
Soldiers Relations, who had hitherto found Prince Frederick Henry inexorable,
threw themselves at his feet to implore that the Soldiers Pardon might be
absolute; and this Prince who had done a violence to his humor in granting a
thing contrary to the rigor of Discipline, found it more easy to grant
another, though God in it was more offended.

In the mean while matter was preparing in France for his acquiring more Glory.
The Peace between Spain and Us, was daily upon the point of being broken, and
whatever inclination the Queen Mother had for it is Continuance, things hourly
occurred which made it presumed the two Crowns would not be long without coming
to a Rupture. The Spaniards had seized on the Valteline some time since, and
All Italy being by this means menaced with falling under their Power, had
recourse to the King as the only Prince capable of freeing them from servitude.
The Kings Inclination disposed him to march to the succors of those who
reclaimed his Protection, but being Susceptible of all the Impressions People
were minded to give him, a Moments Conversation with the Queen Mother, or the
Ministers, some of whom were Wedded to the Interests of that Princess, Others
to the Crown of Spain, quasht his Noblest Designs. Villeroy especially was
suspected of obstructing the effect of his Resolutions, and the Imputation he
had had, during the League, of being a Partizan of Spain, still corroborated
the Opinion People entertained, that he would not be Sorry if that Nation
subdued Italy. However his Death having made better hopes to be conceived by
those who desired the Crown of France should Embrace Italy's Defense, they
Expected this Event from Puisieux, then entering into favor, and whom the King
had declared Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the Room of Villeroy.
And indeed the Beginnings were answerable to the hopes People had Conceived:
Puisieux in the King's name assured all the Princes who had Interest in the
thing, that they should be powerfully and speedily assisted. The Marshall de
Bassompiere was dispatched into Swisserland to take Measures with the Cantons,
who were in like manner threatened with the loss of their Liberty. But when
People were just upon the point of seeing great things Midwiv'd, the Money of
Spain cooled Puisieux's Zeal, and under the Pretext of reducing the Hughonots,
he made the King let fall the Design he had of relieving Italy.

The Duke de Luines then in great favor with the King, and who without ever
having been in War, was all of a Sudden become Constable, by having had the
trick to ingratiate himself with his Majesty by teaching several sorts of Birds
to fly, promoted this Expedition, which he might have hindered by his Credit.
But being very willing not to Embroil himself further with the Queen Mother,
with whom already he stood not in over-good terms, by reason of the Murder of
the Marshall d'Ancre, of which he was the Principal Cause; for he it was
Whispered the King, that this Marshall was more in a Certain Princesse's
favor than suited with her Honor, and as the King had already admitted some
suspicion from certain occurrences, the Duke found little Difficulty to obtain
Orders to Kill him. In Effect their Intrigue was become so much the Public
Discourse, that nothing was more Common than the hearing it talked of, and the
Count de Lude was banished on that account; for this Lord, who to the Prejudice
of his fortune, loved to flush a Wittycisme, when Occasion served, had one day
answered a Lady, who said, she was going to fetch, that Princess's Voile in
French is Vail and Sail.
Vail, there is no need of a Sail for a Frigate that rides at Anchor.

Great Preparations were made for the War against the Hughonots out of whose
hands the Court was minded to wrest the Places they had demanded for their
Security. Four Armies were brought on foot, one of which was designed against
the Places in the Neighborhood of Rochel, another against the Hughenots of
Berry, another against those of Guyenne, and the King in Person Marched against
St. Jean d'Angel^ with the most Powerful. This War was quickly terminated, the
King Subdued all the Places he undertook, with more ease than he durst have
hoped, for Division reigned in the Party, where the very heads were the First
that Betrayed 'em: For under Color of giving all contentment, they took Care
of a great many Places that could do 'em no Good, and left Others that were
Strong and Desensible wholly unprovided. L^sdiguires was made Constable in the
Room of Luines, Dead of sickness, for the Good Services he did in that
Occasion, and Changed his Religion; La Force had the Staff of Marechal of
France, and Chatillon had money, so as the whole Party had no hopes save in
Messieurs de Rohan and Soubize who remained faithful. Montpellier having by
their means made a vigorous Defense, the King was compelled to stay a long time
before the Town to reduce it, but fearing his inability to compass that Design,
and the hazzarding his Reputation, he made a Treaty with the Hughenots which
proved short-lived. In the mean while the Princes of Italy, not listened to
while the War continued, nicking the advantage of this Peace, brought the
affairs of the Valteline again into consultation* and having accused Puisjeux,
either of corresponding with the Spaniard, or of Maladministration in the
King's Service, he was expelled the Court, and Chancellor de Sillery his
Father involved in his Downfall. The Chancellour's Brother was likewise
recalled from Rome, being there in Quality of Ambassador, on the Pretense he
had exceeded his Instructions, insomuch that the Count de Bethunes was sent in
his stead, for the Pope began to understand the Affair of the Valteline, and
necessary was it to have about him a man in whom Confidence might be put. All
this, as I have said, made the world conclude that a War was drawing on with
the Spaniards; for they, far from listening to any Restitution, built Forts in
several places to secure their Conquests; Besides this, they endeavored to
gain over England, or at least to amuse it with some Hopes, that so it might
not beard and thwart their Ambition. For this purpose they had proposed the
Marriage of their Infanta with the Prince of Wales, Heir Apparent of the Crown,
and the Pourtraict of that Princess flattering the Original, being seconded
with plausible offers and Assurances, invited this Prince to undertake a
journey into Spain, which Court was in reality no wise inclined to conclude
this Alliance; for that Crown aspiring to the Universal Monarchy, and thinking
to attain it by affecting a zealous steddyness to the Court of Rome, was far
from closing-up this Match, and deferred it from day to day under various
Pretenses. At length the Prince of Wales finding the Pageantry of the Spaniards
proceedings, and the insincerity and trifling of their Conduct toward him,
returned thence Extremely Piqu'd against that Nation, and resolved when
occasion served, to make 'em feel his resentment.

The Marquess de la Vieuville, succeeding into favor at the French Court after
Puisieux's Disgrace, and willing to avail himself of this Discontent to do his
Country service, proposed then the Marriage of that Prince with a Daughter of
France, and the thing having been approved of by all the Parties concerned, the
Alliance was quickly concluded on with a War against the Spaniard. For besides
what I have newly instanced, England was Wonderfully Edged against the House of
Austria, that had stripped the Elector of Palatine of his Dominions, and Vowed
his Ruin, for having accepted the Crown of Bohemia to the Prejudice of it is
Interests. Nevertheless this Alliance which must have produced a good effect
between the two Nations, only served to alienate their minds by the Interest of
the two Ministers; for the Duke of Buckingham being come into France in Quality
of Ambassador Extraordinary, fell in Love with a Lady of the first rank, whom
Richelieu loving also, became jealous, and made use of the credit he began to
have with the King to mortify the Duke; so as instead of concuring together to
the Ruin of the Spaniard, their thoughts were wholly taken up how to ruin one
another, and their animosity drew-on in a little time that of the two Nations.

The Prince of Wales coming suddenly after to the Crown, was not wanting to
Arm powerfully by Sea to Execute his first Intentions. But Richelieu, to be
revenged on Buckingham, who had a great Ascendant at the Court of England, not
only refused him the Succors which the French were bound to supply him with by
the Treaty, but likewise prevailed with his most Christian Majesty to forbid
that Duke Entrance into the Kingdom, whither his Master meant to send him in
Quality of Ambassador. And the pretext for all this was a pretended ill
treatment to the Queen of England, and her Domestics, part of whom for their
Insolences were sent back into France, and the others disturbed in the
exercise of their Religion.

Besides the Feud between those two Ministers, some Reasons were there of
Policy, which induced Richelieu to act in this manner, for his being in favor
had Created him a considerable number of Enemies, among whom was the Duke of
Orleans, with most of the Princes of the Blood. Thus he feared that if he
undertook a War against the Spaniard, they would have the more means to harm
him: joined to this, that the Queen Mother, though much declined in her Credit,
never ceased threatening to ruin him, if he was so hardy as to undertake it
against her Consent. These Conjunctures having brought prejudice to the
Intentions of the King of England, his Fleet returned into Port, after having
been notably endamag'd by foul weather.

The King of England being incenc'd at France's Breach of Promise, and having
resolved to be revenged, was still excited by Buckingham, who joined to the
Resentment of the King his Master, his own Private Piques. The occasion was
quickly offered. The Hughenots having found after the Peace they had newly
concluded, that it had been only made to divide and set them at odds, threw
themselves into his Arms, and having implored his Protection, he promised it,
though not so much for their sakes as his own.

This Transaction was not so secretly managed, but that Richelieu, a Minister
that spared no Costs for Intelligence, had intimation of it from several parts;
but though this gave him some Alarm, yet was it nothing in Comparison of the
Disquiet things put him under that were brewing in the Kingdom. The Spaniards
to prevent their meddling in Foreign matters, endeavored to find 'em work at
Home. And knowing the bent of the Duke of Orleans's temper, who turned and
Weather-cock'd it, as I may say, with all winds, they had prepared him for
strange Novelties. This Prince being looked on as Presumtive-Heir of the Crown,
for that his Brother had no Children, nay, and without hopes of having any,
wanted not Creatures to in-blow him with ill Counsel; for some out of the
Spleen they bore the New Minister, and others in hopes of a better fortune, had
a furious grudging for a Change. The Queen her self had a deep hand in this
Intrigue, for the Spanish Ambassador having possessed her she should be
suddenly repudiated, on the score of her Sterility, she bent her thoughts to
ruin Richelieu, whom she looked upon as the Author of that Counsel. The Queen
Mother out of the same Passion of removing him from Affairs, still augmented
her Daughter in Law's Suspicions, so as she was inclined to baulk no means as
might prevent this Misfortune. The Count of Soissons, Prince of the Blood,
espoused the Interests of the two Queens with Messieurs de Vendome, and many
other Persons of the first Quality at Court, and their Intention was to Marry
the Duke of Orleans with the Infanta of Spain; the Queen Regnant's Sister; that
in Case the King came to dye, she might remain in France with Honor, without
being obliged to return into Spain, as a Person unhappy and a Fugitive. The
Duke of Orleans had another Design, he loved the Queen, and would have been
well Content his Brother had been Dead or put into a Convent, that he might be
in a capacity to satisfy his Passion. But the Marshall D'Ornano, who had been
his Governor, and still retained a great Authority over his Mind, jumpt in
neither of their Projects; He was enamored of the Princess of Conde, and to
ingratiate himself the better with her, he had promised her, his Master should
never Marry any other than the Princess her Daughter, since married to Mr. de
Longueville. This Obstacle retarded the Queen's Design. But Madam de Chevreuse,
their Confident, occasioned another sturdy Impediment. For being in love with
Chalais Master of the Queen's Wardrobe, and having told all to him in Private,
he went and told it again to the King, and alarmed him to that Degree, that his
Majesty would have had forthwith confined, his Mother, Wife, and Brother, with
all those engaged in their Intrigue. Richelieu had all the pain imaginable to
Moderate his Passion: But having remonstrated to him, that if he would secure
his Reveng^, it was needful to Dissemble; He went to Fontainebleau, where he
Caus^d the Marshall D'Ornano to be secured* with Mr. de Vendome. The Count of
Soisson's withdrew into Italy, and by his flight evaded ^ like treatment, and
perhaps a Worse, for neither the King nor Richelieu loved him, and perchance
might have made sure of him against the future by some fatal Resolution. The
Queen was Ill treated both by the King and Richelieu, who meant by this means
to be revenged for her slights to him, and had Changed his Love into Hate.
Messieurs de Vendome were released some time after out of Prison, but the
Marshall D'Ornano died in it, not without suspicion of having been poisoned.

The Duke of Orleans's Chastisement was to be matched out of hand to the Courts
mind, and he married Mademoiselle de Montpensier a Princess of the Blood, and
extremely Rich. Nevertheless he would more willingly have Embraced a foreign
Alliance out of the Design he had of raising a Commotion: But what made him
desire it, being a Reason not to grant it, he was under an obligation to
Conform to the Will of the King his Brother, who promised in consideration of
this Compliance to forget all former Passages. The Queen Mother having been at
first desirous for another Alliance, showed herself in the sequel passionate
for this: But the most sagacious, attributed it to her Policy, which did not
allow her to declare her Real Sentiments, So as that the World did this
notwithstanding entertain the Opinion, that this still the more incensed her
against Richelieu, to whom she before bore sufficient ill will, because
gradually as he made Progresses in the Kings Favor, he endeavored to drive
her thence.

All that I have now said; did not however hinder this Minister from making a
Treaty with the Spanaird, for tho* his thoughts were wholly upon the Grandeur
of the Kingdom, he was still retained by the fear of the Queen Mother, who ever
threatened him if he came to an Open Rupture with that Crown. But underhand he
neglected Nothing that might tend to Create it troubles. He sent Money into
Holland, and endeavored to Engage the King of Sueden to make head against the
Greatness of that House, the German Branch of which was become so formidable to
Other Princes, that it had nothing left to do but taking of Straelsundt, for
the reducing them into an absolute Slavery. The Duke of Mantoua's Death,
happened also very seasonably to furnish him with new Designs of Greatness.
Several Princes pretending to his Succession, opposed the Investiture of it
demanded by the Duke of N^vers, the Lawful Heir; and Ferdinand the Emperor
requiring only a Pretext to take Possession of the Dukedom of Mantoua and the
Marquisate of Montferrat, then in Debate, sent vast Armies into Italy. All the
Princes to whom that Enterprise was capable of giving jealousy, had recourse to
the King, as they had done in the Affair of the Valteline, and Richelieu,
notwithstanding the Cabals of the Queens and Spaniards, promised the Venetians;
who seemed more alarmed than Others, that an Army should be sent beyond the
Alps to Secure the Succession to whom it belonged. And indeed the Marquis
D'Vxelles had orders to draw together the Troops that were upon the frontiere,
and Conduct them to the succors of Cazal, which the Imperialists, being
assisted with Spanish Troops had already besieged: But the Duke of Savoye
having opposed the Passage of our Forces, the Army dispersed of it self for want
of Provisions, or rather through the Intrigues of the Queen Mother, who had
gained the Principal Commander, to draw upon Richelieu this Check and Affront:
This Disgrace was rewarded by the English being balked of their expected
Successes; for they being called by the Hughenots of Rochel to free their Town
from it is Blockade, made a Descent into the Isle of The: But having neglected
out of too much Confidence to Secure the Fort de la Pree, Thoiras made such a
Brave Defense, as gave time to Canaples to come to his Succors with Eight
hundred men, and afterward to Schomberg with a Greater Number; So that the
English, leaving their Canon behind, retired in some Disorder to their Ships:
This happy Success hastened the Design of the Siege of Rochel, for the
Execution of which, the Hollanders promised Men and Ships, though the Conformity
of Religion seemed rather, that they should have undertaken the Defense than
the Ruin of that City: But other Considerations having prevailed over this,
they performed their Promises. The Rochellers despised at first this
Enterprise, as being above the Kings Forces, But when they saw that the
Cardinal Caused a Dyke to be made in the Sea to divest 'em of all hopes of
Succors, they joined Joaks and Mockeries to Contempt, imagining this Work
would only turn to his Confusion. And indeed 'twas as a Dream to many People,
to see 'em aim at Subduing so furious an Element: But when they perceived the
Work advanced, they began to change that great Confidence into a fear, which
did not however bereave 'em of the Courage to stand upon their Defense: On the
Contrary the more they saw the Danger was pressing* the more things they did to
remove it: they called in the English to their Assistance: Who Fitted out a
brave Fleet under the Command of the Duke of Buckingham. But still not finding
the Occasion to wreek his Revenge on the Cardinal, against whom he was
infinitely enraged, he returned to England, after having been worsted in two or
three Encounters. The King of England still persevering in his Good intentions
for the Rochellers, having given order for repairing the Fleet, and putting out
new Ships to Sea, the Duke of Buckingham was again nominated for that
Expedition: But was assassinated at home upon the point of his Departure, which
occasioned the King to name another in his stead. This latter was not more
Prosperous than the Lord of Buckingham; for after having in vain attempted to
give Succors to the Beseiged, and been repulsed, he returned in like manner
into England, abandoning the Rochellers to their own Defense. At length after
they had made the utmost efforts of Resistance, even to eating the vilest
things for want of victuals, they Surrendered the City, which held out from the
10. of September 1627. to the 29 of October 1628.

The taking of Rcohelle, looked upon as an Impregnable Place, not only
Surpised Strangers, but likewise most of those of the Nation, who in the
Broiles and Confusions the State had been in for near a Century, had ever found
their Sanctuary in that Town against the Royal Authority. And indeed it was
reckoned as the Center of Rebellion, and this is what most powerfully excited
the King and his Minister to undertake it is Reduction. Thus amidst the Public
Rejoycings, which the Court ordered to be made for that happy Success, tokens
were seen in Peoples faces which belied Appearances: But the King without
otherwise minding what they harbored in their Bosoms, received indifferently
from Strangers and from the French, Congratulations upon that Great Event.
Among those however who played the Plain-Dealers, and spoke from the Bottom of
their Hearts, were the Parties concerned in the Affairs of Italy, who were
under a total Despondency, unless a speedy Remedy was applied: For the
Emperors Troops were not only before Cazal, but also before Mantoua, around
which Place they had seized all the Considerable Posts. For this Reason, When
they made him the Complements upon his new Conquest, they desired him to run in
to the Succors of Italy, certainly lost without his Aid. The Queen Mother
covertly opposed this Expedition, to which the King seemed of himself inclined.
But Cardinal Richelieu to whose management the taking of Rochelle was indebted,
Soaring to blaze his Name among Foreigners, egged the King on in his Design.
Thus the Italian Expedition having been resolved on, notwithstanding the
Rigours of the Season, and the obstacles thwarting it, the King sell to march
with his Army, and the Rumor of his Coming being Spread far and near, long
before his appearing Upon the frontiers: His Adversaries thoughts were wholly
employed in barring him Entrance either willingly or by Force. The first means
seeming more easy than the second, The Duke of Savoy having declared against
the new Duke of Mantoua, sent his Son to meet the King, and encharg'd him with
Sundry Proposals; but not one of 'em being Satisfactory to the King or
Cardinal, to whom the King referred all things, this Prince was obliged to get
him back to his Father, and return with new Instructions. In the mean while the
Pass of Susa was forced: but while the King was preparing to make the Duke of
Savoy repent the Resistance he dared to make, his Son arrived, who in virtue of
the Power he had from him, submitted to all the Conditions the Court of France
thought fitting to impose. As soon as the Spaniards knew of the Accommodation,
they drew their Troops from before Cazal, for that otherwise the Land of Milan
had remained Exposed. The Imperialists did the like, and the King overjoyed
with having saved the place, by the bare Rumor of his Fame, sent Thoiras
thither, without engaging himself farther.

The King's journey into Italy had been the Discourse in all Courts long before
it is being undertaken, for we were very willing to show thereby to Our Allies,
that in the hurry of Domestic Combustions we were not wanting to take care of
Foreign Affairs. The news of it came to the ears of the Viscount de Turenne,
still in Holland, as well as to the ears of many Others, and being enflamed
with a desire to signalize himself in his own Country, he thence took occasion
to desire his return into France. But Prince Henry Frederick would in no wise
grant it, alleging the War of the Hughenots not to be yet terminated, and
perhaps would be again renewed in a very little while; that thus it was not
justice to go draw his Sword against his Brothers, who had ever had so much
regard for their Family; that it became him to follow his Fathers example, who
retired and staid at his own home, as soon as he saw the Ministry ben^ upon
infringing the Edicts, under whose Faith those of their Communion had thought
themselves in safety. His Mother wrote to him to the same purpose upon this
Subject, and as he was all Obedience to her, Monsieur the Duke of Bouillon
being Dead at Sedan in the Year 1623, he was far from insisting any longer upon
that journey. Nevertheless he was in no wise content to remain any longer in
Holland, where the Climate and the Demeanor of the People did not in the least
suit his humor, he said, they in France breathed a more pure and Temperate
air; and to express the aversion he had for those who took Tobacco, he
sometimes maintained out of a kind of Raillery, it to be the smoke that came
out of the Pipes which rendered the air so thick and heavy: yet knowing it to be
a thing the Soldiers could not be without, he said nothing to them when he
found 'em funcking, but had not the same Complaisance for others, but told 'em
freely his Opinion. He had still more aversion for Drunkards whom he could in
no wise endure. He said, if Drunkenness was a Defect in all sorts of Persons, a
much greater was it still in a Martial man, who had not like others the times
of Recreation and Repose; that it became a Soldier to be ever ready for the
first Command, which when Drunk he could not be. He never was the first to
broach these sort of Discourses, for fear of being taxed with the Arrogance of
rebuking others; but when once flushed in Conversation, he could not well
refrain letting them slip without speaking his Sentiments in the Case, for most
of the Officers, without so much as Excepting the French, had such a Propensity
to Debauchedness, that it seemed to make part of their Profession.

In the mean while the occasions of Signalizing himself were not very frequent
in the Country he refided in, since his abode there, they had almost ever been
forced to play the Defensive Part, and though they attempted several enterprises,
not one of them sped: They failed in that of Antwerp, where they had
Correspondence, and this young Courage became pawl'd, as I may say, to see that
Fortune did not appear in favor of it is Party. Afraid he was, that Maurice,
who had not been over-Successfull a Year or two before his Death; had left his
Brother the Heir of his Ill Fortune, as well as of his Estate; and like to
those Hunters who are not content unless they take the Game they have pursued,
he would have had all things tune in Consort with his Expectation. Prince Henry
Frederick blamed him sometimes for his Impatience, but considering it only
departed from an excess of Courage, he found not much to incurr his Censure and
Rebuke: He only told him it, to be sometimes needful to moderate one's self,
and acquainting him with the Reasons for all he did, he instructed him in what
he had the most Passion to learn. In short this Prince being desirous to see
some great Occasion, remained not long without having satisfaction. Boisleduc
at the Extremity of Brabant, was, if a man may say it, a Thorn in the State's
foot, of which they daily found the smart and inconvenience, and being
necessary to pull it out, the States gave order to Prince Henry Frederick,
Prince of Orange since his Brothers Death, to lay Siege to that Place. This
Fortress is much stronger by it is Situation then by Contrivances used for it is
Fortification. It Is Situated in the midst of a Marsh, which seems to secure it
from all Insult, and no Approaches can be made to it, but on the side of the
Gate of Maestricht, wherein two Forts have been raised in which consist all
it is Fortifications. Nevertheless these Fortifications seem sufficient for the
safeguard of the Place, for the Ground is so narrow as not to bear more than
ten men afront, nay and out of this compelled have they been to raise a Caussey
for the convenience of Wagons, for the Water is so deep both on the Right and
Left, that without this Contrivance no means would there be for their Passage.
In this so difficult a place was it the Prince of Orange made his Attack, and
to repair the inconveniences of Nature he employed all the stratagems of Art.
Yet new Difficulties arose to those already in view; for eight hundred men of
the Garrison of Breda, got into the Town, in despite of those that had planted
themselves upon the Avenues to hinder that Design: yet this did not discourage
the Prince of Orange, but as he thence foresaw new Difficulties, he demanded
new Succors of the States, who sent him a Reinforcement of six thousand men.
The Viscount de Turenne's Assiduity was a remarkable thing in the Beginnings
and Prosecution of this Siege, for though he had been present at that of Grol,
which the Prince of Orange had taken the Year before, that seemed to him nothing
in comparison of this. He admired the address used to divert the Course of the
Rivers, the Invention of Mines, that of Bombs, and all the rest employed for
the Destruction of his Enemy. But amid all this, far from being in the least
wanting to his function of his Charge of Captain; he was present at all the
Attacks, nor more nor less than if he had been a Volunteer, and obliged to
expose himself to all sorts of Perils. The Sieur de Vassignae his Governor
being under a continual Disquiet for his Life, made his Complaints to Monsieur
de Bouillon, and to the Prince of Orange himself, desiring them to moderate the
excess of his Courage: But Monsieur de Bouillon, whose humor delighted in
those sort of things, was far from condemning an Action he approved: On the
contrary, being the first to do like him, he stopped Vassignae's mouth, who
after this could not do otherwise than follow them wherever their Courage
carried them to seek out Danger. But the greatest risque the Viscount de
Turenne ran in all the time of this Siege, was in an occasion created him by
the Duke of Bouillon, who being Engaged in the pursuit of four or five hundred
men of the Garrison of Breda, that aimed at putting themselves into the Town,
received two shots in his Clothes. The Sieur de Vassinae seeing him in the
hottest of the Action and all covered with Fire, threw himself in with him, to
do the best he could to bring him off, or at least to interpose between him and
Danger; but was not so happy as his Master, being somewhat dangerously wounded*
After the Enemies had made still some further Resistance, the Duke of Bouillon
drove them from certain Hedges, to which they had made their Retreat, but still
flying to others, he was fain to dismount. The Viscount de Turenne was he that
first set foot to ground, and that had not the least part in their Defeat. The
Prince of Orange well knowing to how great danger he had exposed his Person,
Dissembled the joy he had upon this occasion, by giving him an honorable
Check, but withal could not forbear telling his Principal Officers, that he
was very much mistaken if that Young Prince would not one day come to Eclipse
the Glory of the Greatest Captains. For he was noted to retain a cool temper in
the hottest occasions. He courted indeed the greatest Perils, but did not
expose himself hand over head; he weighed things before he undertook them, and
in a green youth exerted the Conduct of a man of Fifty Years.

Boisleduc was of too great Consequence to the Spaniards to suffer it to be
taken, without endeavoring to relieve it; for which reason the Marquis of
Berghen, one of their Generals, was encharg'd with that Expedition, and
advanced as far as Boxtel with eighteen thousand Foot and four thousand Horse;
but after having in vain endeavored to lure the Prince of O(...)ge out of his
Lines, and perceived he was not in a capacity to force his Camp, without
exposing himself to an evident Defeat, he took his way toward the Rhine, and
having passed without any Obstacle that River, he thought to make him raise the
Siege, by the fear he should be under for the Places that were in the heart of
the Country. In effect the Prince of Orange was alarmed at his March, and much
more so when he heard he had passed the Yssel, taken Amersfort, and made
excursions to the very Gates of Amsterdam. But while he made all the Provinces
tremble, the Governor of Emerick knowing he had led along with him, the better
part of the Garrison of Wesel, took that City by Scalade, and freed his Party
from their Apprehensions. The Marquis of Berghen fearing to be coopt up between
the Rivers, made a hasty retreat, but not without leaving a strong suspicion of
Correspondence with the Prince of Orange. Boisleduc having expected some Great
matters from this Diversion, seeing it self Closely pressed, and without hopes
of Succors, Surrendered after a competent long Siege, and wherein the Parties
on both sides had Signalized their Bravery.

The Affairs of Italy had now had a Breathing while, but were not as yet
composed. Indeed the Siege of Cazal had been raised; but besides that the
Imperialists were still around Mantoua, that Siege was just upon the point of
being renewed. Spinola, having acquired a great Reputation in Flanders, had
quitted those Provinces by the King his Masters order, and after having
Embarked with Numerous Troops without any Bodies taking Wind of his Design, he
came to land at Genoua in order to Execute the Enterprises contrived against
the Repose of Italy. The Viscount de Turenne who notwithstanding the
Remonstrances of his Mother had a great Passion to Signalize himself in the
Service of his own Country, seeing that according to all imaginable appearances
a furious War was upon the point of being kindled between the two Crowns, he
lay perpetually representing to her, that more Honor was to be acquired in
Serving a Great Monarch, than a Commonwealth not yet well settled. But Madam de
Bouillon having been born in those Provinces, Covered under the Cloak of
Religion the Inclination she had for continuing him there: She durst not
however openly oppose a sense of things so reasonable; but to weaken them the
best she could, she gave him to understand, there was no Difference between the
Service he did the King in another Country, and that he did him in his Own;
that besides the Alliance which this Prince had with the Commonwealth, he it
was that furnished it with necessaries for Carrying on the War; maintaining
there actually a Body of ten thousand Men, in the head of whom was a Marshall
of France, and that fighting as he did in those Troops, 'twas fighting for the
King, for whose Service he manifested so much Passion; that besides she had the
Comfort of knowing him with the Prince of Orange her Brother, who would ever
take more Care of him, than would do another not so near related; that he must
have patience, at least, wait till the King desired him; and that if he meant
to enhance his Value, he must not Discover his Eagerness. But the Viscount de
Turenne knew the Thoughts it became him to Entertain of this Answer. For though
Youth is ever very prone to flatter it self, he did himself so much justice, as
not to presume so highly to his Advantage: He knew well enough that at his
years he was only considerable for his Birth, but if that was an advantage in
respect of some Persons, it was not so much considerable with a Monarch that
had so many greaterthan himself that reckoned it their Glory to do him Homage.
Thus through the Passion he had of making himself known to his Majesty more
particularly than he was, he ventured to write to him; but fearing Monsieur de
Bouillon would oppose his Intention, and knowing his Governor would never
suffer him to do it, he Concealed the Business from 'em Both, and gave his
Letter to the Marshall De Chatillon then returning to Court. The Marshall
DeChatillon having delivered it, without acquainting any other as he had
promised the Viscount, the King read it with Delight, and having already heard
advantageous things of this young Prince, he judged the Good they spoke of him:
to be still less than what might be Expected from him, Nevertheless for Reasons
to me unknown, he did not send for the Viscount to him; for to Credit what I
have heard affirmed by certain People, namely, it to be on the Score of some
Dissatisfactions given him by the late Monsieur De Bouillon, is a thing not
meriting much belief. The King was a Prince of too good nature to bear a grudge
so long in his heart. Monsieur De Bouillon had then been Seven years Dead, and
could be of naught else accused, than of having been too free with his Majesty
in favor of those of the Religion. Much more reason is there to believe
Monsieur De Chatillon had served him but by halves, and that at the same time
when he presented his Letter to the King, he represented to his Majesty it is
not being convenient to take him yet from a School, where he rendered himself
capable of doing him one Day Great Services. This was Monsieur De Turenne's
thought: but as he was extremely reserved and Prudent for his Age, he only
unbosom'd his Mind to his greatest Confidents, adding in Excuse of Monsieur De
Chatillon, that if he did so, he did it with a good Intention, that it was out
of fear he might lose his time in France, where there was more prospect of a
Civil than of a Foreign War. In Reality, the Duke of Orleans, suffering
himself to be led daily away by Evil Councils, was still upon the Point of
giving some disquiet to the King his Brother. His Wife was Dead in Childbed,
and aim he did again to match himself with some Foreign Princess, to have
thereby the more means to trouble the Kingdom. The Enemies of Cardinal
deRichelieu taking it ill that he made them so little privy to his Affairs, put
these thoughts in's head, and People were daily expecting that some Commotion
or other would break out, iustead of the advantages that they might promise to
themselves in the Flourishing Estate the Kingdom began to be in at that time.
Though Monsieur de Turenne was vexed to see his hopes miscarry: Yet he comforted
himself, for he thought after having done what lay in his Power, he could do no
more; that he had gone a great way in making known his Zeal to the King, and
that His Prince being informed of it, it was now for his Majesty to Command his
Return, when he judged it fitting. In the mean while the War that had been made
in Flanders with much fury, the Campain before cooled through the Spaniards want
of Forces, they having caused a great part of their Troops to march toward
Italy. The Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia, Governess of the Low Countries,
being afraid the Hollanders might make advantage of that occasion, bethought
her self then to make several Proposals of a Truce; and though the Hollanders
knew on what Account these Overtures were made, the desire they had to enjoy
some Quiet after troubles of Eighty Years continuance, caused 'em to suffer
themselves to be amuz'd. The Cardinal de Richelieu resolving at any rate to
cross these Negotiations, sent an Ambassador to the Hague, who by the help of
Money, which he did not want, brought the States to change their Sentiments,
who instead of that Truce, Struck-up a new Alliance with the King. The Prince
Palatine, then at the Hague, and whose Interest led him to Create Enemies to
the Spaniards, Used also on his part his utmost Power to frustrate their
Negotiations; but with all this, he had but a very slender Prospect of
recovering his Imaginary Royalty, or his Quality of Elector, which the Emperor
had stripped him of, with it to invest the Duke of Bavaria. Daily did he receive
new Mortifications, and People far from acknowledging him as King of Bohemia,
as he fain would have been owned, his near Relations denied him so much as the
Quality he inherited by his Birth, and added to the outrages done him by his
Enemies, Injuries to him still more sensible. The Duke of Newburgh being come
to the Hague, to adjust some Differences he had with the Republic, refused him
the Upper-hand, and this provoking the Prince Palatine, such things passed
between these two Princes, as would have transported 'em to Blows, had not the
Prince of Orange Prudently interposed. But the Viscount de Turenne, the
Palatine's near Kinsman, espousing his Interests, undertook to demand
satisfaction for this Affront, but could not bring it about, because the Duke
of Newburgh would not accept of a Duel. Two or three days passed before this
new Quarrel was terminated, and in the mean while so many Persons thronged to
the Marshall de Turenne to offer him their Service, as sufficiently manifested
the great value the world had for him. The Prince of Orange was not sorry for
this Accident, for he was in the Interest of the Prince Palatine, but out of an
unwillingness to declare himself, he obliged the Viscount de Turenne to make
some Excuses to the Duke of Newburgh.

In the mean while matters of a much greater Consequence occurred in France.
Cardinal Richelieu, whose favor augmented more, and more notwithstanding the
hatred of his Enemies, inclined the King to Succor Powerfully the Duke of
Mantoua upon the point of being oppressed. But the Spaniards to divert this
Blow, induced the Duke of Orleans, with whom they kept Correspondence, to
retire into Lorrain, where the Duke, a great lover of Novelties, afforded him a
Retreat. Though such a juncture was capable of laying by all other thoughts, the
Cardinal de Richelieu, who sutably as Difficulties augmented, perceived his
Courage to increase, after having pacified the best he could Domestic
troubles, procured from the King the Quality of Generalissimo in Italy, and
with a Flourishing Army marched away toward Savoy; For in the occasion that
then offered it self, the first thing to be done was to see if the Duke of
Savoy would keep to the late Treaty, and conformably to what had been resolved
on, join his Troops to those of the King, or if he would take the Party of his
Enemies. The Duke of Savoy upon the first Proposals made him of this matter,
sought out Evasions and Pretexts to avoid declaring himself; one while excusing
the Emperor and Spaniards for what they had done, and another making semblance
of blaming them, contriving thus to gain time. But the Cardinal as Crafty as
He, not contenting himself with these put-offs, pressed him so hard to say what
he would stick to, that he was at length obliged to promise Provisions for the
Army, and to join Troops, in case the Peace then in Discourse, proved difficult
to conclude. But he no sooner fancied he had diverted the Storm, but that
forgetting his Promises, he not only denied Provisions, but also kept upon the
Borders of the Army, to take his advantages on it, if occasion served. The
Cardinal de Richelieu finding there was no trusting him, had a Design to
surprise him at Rivoli, a House of Pleasure, whither he was gone to take the
Diversion of Hunting: but the Duke being advertised of it, as it is believed,
by the Duke of Montmorency, had time to escape to Turin with the Prince his Son.
The Cardinal having missed his Aim, declared openly against him, and without
any more ceremony laid all his Territories Wast; and after this making a show
as if he would besiege Turin, he obliged him to put the better part of his
Forces into that Town. But having made that feint, only the better to Compass
his Designs upon Pignerol, he laid Siege to that Place, and took the Town in
one Days time; Insomuch that nothing now stood out but the Citadel. The
Citadel quickly followed the Town's Destiny, and the Cardinal being become
Master of it, he Employed his Troops in the Conquest of the Places that are in
the Marquisate of Saluces. The Duke of Savoy who had Secret Intelligences with
the Spaniards, having demanded Succors of them in so pressing an Occasion,
they sent him Troops and Money, and while he made head against the Cardinal,
they laid Siege to Cazal. Spinola, Commanding their Troops as I have already
said, detached his Son, to attack Pont-desture which Thoiras had Fortified, and
made himself Master of it, almost at the same time the Imperialists found the
means to Enter Mantoua, Surrendered to them by Treachery. Of all the Dominions
of the Duke of Mantoua, he had only Cazal left; nay, and that so shut-up by
Spinola, that there was no likelihood of its being able to hold out long. The
Garrison wanted Provisions, and no means could be contrived how to get any In.
This Extremity having induced the King to pass himself into Italy, he put his
Kingdom into the Best Order and Posture he could, and having left an Army under
the Duke of Orleans to defend the Campaign, he made his Resentment fall upon
the Duke of Savoy, to whose Infidelity he attributed all these Disorders. Being
entered his Country, he in a few days subdued all Savoy, saving Montmelian, at
which he thought it not convenient to stop. These good Successes gave still
more Courage to the Garrison of Cazal who defended themselves with much
Bravery, and hoping to be quickly Releived, Thoiras found it no difficult
matter to make 'em support patiently, Famine, and other Inconveniences of a
long Siege. In the mean while the Spaniards being startled at these Conquests,
thinking to do much, by gaining of time, they amuz'd the King with some
Ouvertures of Peace; and the King relying on them returned to the Queen at
Grenoble. But they no sooner saw him at a Distance, but that they pressed Cazal
more then ever; Insomuch that it was reduced to Extremity. The King dispatched
forthwith away the Marshall de Schomberg with the Duke of Montmorency to march
into those Parts; and the Duke of Montmorency meeting with the Prince of
Piemont near Veillaine, delivered him Battle, and utterly defeated him. His
Victory was followed with the taking of Veillaine, Salluces, Villa-Franca,
Pontrallier, and with the Desolation of Piemont. Turin still upheld the Duke's
tottering Fortune; but his Troops having been beaten in endeavoring to Defend
the Passage of the Po, in all likelihood the Rest of his Dominions were going
to fall into his Enemies hands, if not hindered by two things; One, the
Pestilence, beginning to make Great Havoc in Our Troops; Other, his Death,
which brought a great Change; for his Son not succeeding to his Passions as he
did to his Dominions, instead of resolving upon Continuing the War, manifested
so much inclination to Peace, that he Peremptorily declared his meaning was to
remain Neuter. After this thinking that another Declaration would still advance
this work, he promised to employ his Arms against that Party as should refuse
to make Peace, so as this wrought a Truce to be made between the Spaniards and
Us, by which Cazal was promised to be delivered to them in a certain time, in
case of Non-Relief, and they bound themselves on their side to furnish the
Garrison with victuals of which it had extreme need. All the Parties believed
they had got by this Treaty, for the Spaniards imagined they had been
sufficiently Cunning in having been able to hinder our Troops from passing on;
We pretended to have saved Cazal, by delivering it from Famine, and gaining
time to relieve it. Be it as it will, Mazarine who had a hand in this Treaty,
and came to the King as far as Grenoble on this Account, thereby acquired great
Honor, and this Beginning of good fortune laid the foundation of his future
Advancement. Spinola, having likewise been employed in this Treaty, did not
gain the like Repute: On the contrary the Spaniards having complained of his
easiness in making this Cessation, they began to misuse him, and their ill
treatment being so much the more sensible to him in that he had rendered them
great Services, the grief of it Killed him. In the mean while as greater
Preparations than ever were making on the one side, to Succor Cazal, on the
other to Attack it, News came that Monsieur de Lion, and Father Joseph, a
Capuchin, the Cardinals Confident, residing at Ratisbon on the King's behalf,
had made a Treaty by which the Emperor was to give the Duke of Mantoua the
Investiture of his Dominions. This Treaty in all Probability must make all the
Parties concerned lay down their Arms, but none being content, because it
contained several matters which each side interpreted to it is Disadvantage,
this notwithstanding the Armies marched. The Marquis de St. Croix succeeding
Spinola in the Command of the Troops of Spain, and being already come before
Cazal, kept close and covered in his Lines, hoping the situation of his Camp
would hinder us from passing the River of Gattola between him and Us: but
knowing we had Crossed it, a terror was spread among his Forces, and Mazarine,
being there as a Sub-delegate of the Pope's Nuncio, taking that time to make
New Propositions, Both Parties ceased Hostilities, 'till they had seen the
Result of his Negotiation. Fortune, that had been already propitious to him,
did not abandon him in this occasion, for after sundry goings and comings, he
prevailed with both Parties not to proceed further. The Principal Conditions of
this Treaty were, that we should remit Cazal into the hands of an Italian
Garrison Subject to the Duke of Mantoua: But having caused some French to enter
Disguised into the Place, the Hostilities were just a going to be renewed, had
not Mazarine interposed again. Nothing more now remained than the restoring to
the Duke of Savoy the Places taken from his Father; but the Cardinal de
Richelieu being minded to retain Pignerol, the taking of which was his
Achievement, he would never listen to any such-Proposals as were contrary to
what he intended.

In the mean while new Troubles arose in France, and gradually as the Cardinals
Repute increased among Strangers, his Enemies endeavored to debase him in
France. The Duke of Orleans, who served for an Implement to all the
Malcontents, who were hewing at, and undermining the Cardinal's fortune, Vexed
that a Certain Person had been confined to Vincennes, took thence Occasion to
withdraw from Court, and went to Orleans. The King no sooner knew of his
Departure, but being Informed at the same time of the Correspondence he had
with Foreigners, he resolved to prevent the Inconveniences that might happen
if he left the Kingdom; For which Reason he sent Men after him to Seize on his
Person, and went himself to Second those Men in Case it Chanced to break forth
into a Rebellion. The Duke of Orleans knowing with what Design the King his
Brother was departed Paris, left Orleans, and fled into Burgundy, where the
Duke de Bellegarde, Governor of the Province had promised him a Retreat. But
having found all things there ill disposed for Maintaining a War, and besides
several Persons who had promised to follow his fortune, having failed him, he
past on into la Franche-Com^e, and from thence into Lorrain, whither he was
called by New-Amours. The Duke of Lorrain, of as Turbulent a Temper at least as
the Duke of Orleans, received him with Open Arms, and to make sure of him, gave
him his Sister Marguerite in Marriage, a Princess of Extraordinary Beauty, but
of somewhat an Odd sort of Humor. The King suspecting the Queen Mother not
only to have ^ent a hand to all these Transactions, but to have been the Cause
of 'em by her Ill Councils, commanded Her to retire to Compeigne, and put Her
under Guards. The Queen Mother provoked a this Ill-treatment, only watched to
deceive their Vigilance, to make her Escape to Capelle, where she had
Intelligence with the Governor; Cardinal Richelieu being her greatest Enemy,
and willing to have her far enough off, though he owed to her the Obligation of
his fortune, commanded the Guards to allow Her the Occasion of making her
Escape: But himself Securing Capelle, that Princess found no Harbor there; so
as not knowing where to put her Head, she entered the Low Countries, where the
Governess received her neither more nor less than if she had been Queen of
Spain. Cardinal Richelieu was overjoyed to see her in the Spaniards hands, for
after this the King could no longer doubt of her holding correspondence with
them, and as he hated them mortally, his Aversion for his Mother became still
so much the Stronger. However still more and more to heighten this Aversion of
his, the Cardinal dispatched away several Courriers to desire her to return, but
as he Expected that the more she saw her self Courted, the more Stiff and
Refractory she would be against all Compliance; the Courriers only brought back
Refusals, with arrogant Propositions, so as this failed not of producing the
effect he expected. In the mean while all the Resentment sell upon the Duke of
Lorrain. The King having assembled a Powerful Army put himself upon the March
to go attack Nancy, while, on another side the Marshall de la Force laid Siege
to Moyenvic. Moyenvic made no great Resistance for a Place so strong; but the
King was not so Quick, as being willing to give the Duke of Lorrain time to
prevent his Anger. This Duke had foreseen this Storm, and Endeavored to draw
Madam de Bouillon into his Party, who in the Absence of her Children had full
Power in Sedan, but this Princess in no wise minded to be concerned in those
sorts of Affairs* had refused his Offers; so as that the Duke having no hopes
left, save in Submission, he came in Person to the King. After he had Excused
himself in the business of the Duke of Orlean's Match, and promised to abandon
him, there remained nothing more than his giving of Sureties for his keeping
his Word, and the King being contented with those he offered him, he retreated
with his Forces out of Lorrain. But the Duke forgetting his Promises,
accordingly as he saw the King drawn farther off, he never troubled his head
further about performing the Treaty, so that bating, that the Duke of Orleans
was gone to Bruxelles, there was not any Change in his Conduct. The King being
well informed of his Designs, had hardly had time to refresh himself, when he
must think of going to Chastize him anew. But during these Occurrences, Madam
de Bouillon had a Secret advice that he might possibly turn his Arms against
her, upon his knowing the Proposals made her by the Duke of Lorrain. At the
same time, she sent a Courrier to her Children to impart to them this News: But
Mr. de Bouillon not thinking the Intimation did Challenge any Credit, left M.
de Turenne the Liberty of going to reincourage her in this Occasion. The
Viscount de Turenne who desired nothing more than to get near the Court, was
far enough from making any longer stay in Holland, and after having taken his
Leave of the Prince of Orange and his Friends, he departed for Sedan, where he
was no sooner arrived, than that he went to assure the King of his Obedience,
and of Madame his Mothers. The King received him very obligingly, and having
declared to him, he never doubted of the fidelity of his House, he sent him
back to Sedan, where the Marshall de la Force, since his Father-in-Law,
arrived some time after on the King's behalf, to Swear Madam de Bouillon in the
Present Conjunctures, and he who commanded in her sons Absence, to remain Loyal
to him. An Act was drawn-up in due form, by which the Marshall obliged himself
in the Kings Name to take their House into His Protection. Which had been
already once done since the King came to the Crown, and once before under the
Reign of Henry the Great of happy Memory. In the mean while the King was Entered
Lorrain, where after having taken Pont-a-Mousson, Barleduc, and St. Miel, he
approached Nancy. The Duke, whose Forces were not capable of facing these of so
Powerful a King, fearing that with the Loss of his Capital City, he might run
the risque of losing his Dominions, Chose to go in Person to the King, to whom
he had already sent several times the Prince his Brother. The King received
him very cooly, and the Cardinal whom he was also obliged to see in this
Occasion, made him yet, a worse Entertainment; but this Prince pretending not
to mind it, in his Present Circumstances, entered into Negotiation with this
Minister, and could not free himself out of this Business, but by abandoning
the Propriety of Clermont, and Suffering Garrisons to be put into Stenay and
Jametz. The Viscount de Turenne being come into the Kings Army, as he had given
a thousand Proofs of his Courage, he received from this Prince and his Minister
all manner of Good Treatments; and the latter, a man well known in all things,
finding him to be a person Excellently well qualified, was willing to oblige
him to the Kings Service, and so procured him a Regiment of foot. The Viscount
de Turenne being highly Satisfied with the manner of his Reception at Court,
longed only for Occasions to Signalize himself, that he might be able to give
proofs of his Acknowledgement. In the mean while as the Eyes of all People,
were upon his Merit, and that his Birth besides rendered him Considerable, he
was quickly courted by those who aimed at Embroiling the State as an Instrument
capable of making them Succeed in their Design. But this Prince too much hated
their Cabals, and their Rebellion, to suffer himself to be Seduced: He had over
and above, so strong an Aversion to the Spaniards, who had a hand in all these
Intrigues, that he was their most Mortal Enemy. He had been train'd-up in this
Aversion by the Duke of Bouillon, his Father, and after having sucked it, as I
may say, with his Milk, he had observed from the time he had any knowledge of
things, the Persecutions they had brought upon those of his Religion: For they,
it was, who to divert the King's Arms from off their own Territories had
fomented the Wars made upon them; and Cardinal Richelieu had too much Wit to be
so grossly deceived; yet considering the State of things at his entering upon
his Ministry, he did not dare to interrupt them, out of fear of the
Queen Mother who would have it so; and least it should be said, that he, who as
a Bishop had more strict obligations to destroy the Hughenots, had saved them,
being so near their Ruin. Yet he let no occasion escape of making known to the
King the little Faith they showed in all things; and principally at the Siege
of Rochelle; for after having promised to send Ships, they deserr'd from day to
day the Execution of their Promises, and when they were at length obliged to do
it, they arrived in so ill a Condition, that they were wholly unserviceable.

The Opinion which the Viscount de Turenne had of them was known to the
Cardinal, and it pleased him infinitely; for whether it proceeded from the Zeal
he had for his Religion, or from an Antipathy natural to him, or the one, or
the other, was still advantageous to the service of the Crown. In the mean
while a man may say that the Hatred he bore them was rather founded upon the
Knowledge he had of their Policy, than upon any Natural aversion, for he could
not endure that under the pretext of Religion, they should seek to Cover the
Invasion the designed to make upon all the E(...)e Emperor Ferdinand followed
the same (...)er the same Pretext had so far depre(...) German Princes, that it
was no longer in th(...)ower to prevent blindly following his (...)t w(...)ly
th(...)g of Denmark now that (...)d some (...) Liberty; but after having (...)
de(...)d in several incounters, he was ready to f(...) as(...) as others. The
Protestant Party thus (...)ping, put the rest of it is hopes in Gustavus
Ado^p^us King of Sueden, a Prince who had already acquired much Reputation in
the Wars he had sustained against the King of Poland. Gustavus seeing himself
called by those of his own Persuasion, resolved not to abandon them, and having
made Peace with his Enemy, he entered Pomerania where he had Secret
Correspondencies. However the Duke of Pomerania to prevent the seeming to have
called him, appeared in Arms upon the Frontier of his Territory; But after some
slight Losses feigning to undergo the Victour's Law, he deliver'd-up his
Towns, and joined himself to the King of Sueden. This irruption was ushered in
by diverse things that might well make the Emperor fear some Change in his then
flourishing condition: For the Duke of Bavaria, who seemed most Wedded to his
Fortune, had been the first to induce him to depose Wallestein, a Famous
Captain, by whose means he had achieved all his Conquests. After this they had
also constrained him to Disarm, and Gustavus his Army was made-up out of the
Ruins of the Emperor's too, insomuch that he had for Enemies those who a
little before were in his Pay, and fought under his Ensigns, but Enemies so much
the more irreconciliable, that after having passed, some Ten Years, others
Fifteen, others Twenty, and some more in his Service, they had been Discarded
for their Reward. The Duke of Bavaria, who had played him these unlucky turns,
had likewise sent secretly into France to hamper him in new troubles, and
Cardinal Richelieu, having a great Soul, and contriving how to render the
Kingdom more flourishing, let not this occasion slip without emproving it to
Advantage: He had besides Correspondence with the King of Sueden, and had
assured him of a Hundred Thousand Francs a Month to help him to make War.
Nevertheless as he had a Wit that foresaw things at a distance, instead of
causing the King to ratify the Treaty of Ratisbonne, of which I have spoken
before, he had brought so many Difficulties in it, that it had been restrained
to the Affairs of Italy, so as that he had an open field to enter into War when
he pleased. The Viscount de Turenne, filled with Piety, was overjoyed to see
such puissant Preparations to destroy the Enemies of his Religion, and could
not sufficiently admire the Cardinals Conduct, who in the midst of the thorny
Affairs raised him in the Kingdom, had the faculty to provide against all with
so much judgment. He desired nothing more than to have his Regiment sent that
way, and this was the Cardinal's Design, of whom he had begged this favor with
much Importunity. But daily was this Minister haunted with new troubles, and in
the number of the Enemies that arose up against him, he could not do all he
would, and was sufficiently happy in doing one thing after another. The
Spaniards who had the Queen Mother and the Duke of Orleans in their hands to
thwart his Designs, excited them to cause their Creatures to rise, of whom they
boasted the having a great number at their arrival at Bruxells. The Queen
Mother only breathing Revenge, would have had the Duke of Orleans without more
ado to enter the Kingdom in the head of a Spanish Army; but the Spaniards would
not proceed to a Declaration till they saw on what fund they were to make this
Diversion. The Duke of Orleans on his side more irresolute than ever, and weary
of Bruxells, listened to the Proposition which the King his Brother caused
privately to be sent unto him: but as the Spaniards knew the bias of his mind,
they took care he should not give them the slip, and in the mean while
endeavored to fortify him in his first Designs. Yet the only Obstacle that
barred his Return to France, was his Marriage with the Princess of Lorrain,
which the King could not resolve to approve of, and which he on his side would
not break. Thus being Both wedded to their Sentiments, all hopes of
Accommodation were taken away, and the Duke of Orleans tampered with the Duke of
Montmorency Governor of Languedoc to support a Rebellion.

The King of Sueden, in the mean while, had not only been happy in the
beginning of his Enterprise, but the Prosecution of it too, had been so
Glorious to him, that he had Conquered whole Provinces in as little time, as it
would have taken to pass them over. After having Reestablished the Dukes of
Meklembourg in their Territories, delivered the Baltique Sea from the Servitude
of the Imperialists, beaten four or five of their Armies, Subdued the Strongest
Fastnesses of Germany, Spread Consternation among his Enemies, and given
jealousy to his Allies, he advanced toward the Rhine, where he rendered
himself Master of the City of Mayence. Cardinal Richelieu, either jealous of
his Fame, or fearing perhaps he might Improve the Occasions offered him by
Fortune to the Destruction of his Friends as well as Enemies, knew not how to
stop the Course of so many Conquests; for to declare openly against him, was a
Dangerous Design, and besides had been wanting fidelity to his Ally; and to
suffer him to advance much farther, might allure him to the Conquest of France,
the Goodness of whose Soil, and the Deliciousness of whose Climate being a
Great Charm to a Conqueror. For the finding out a Medium to all this, he
endeavored to prevail with the Ecclesiastique Electors to depart from the
Alliance they had with the Emperor, that so under the Pretext of Neutrality
the King of Sueden might be obliged to turn his Arms elsewhere. But the King of
Sueden seeing Clearly into his Intentions, redoubled his Hostilitys before the
Treaty could be Concluded, and put those Princes into so great a Despondency,
that the Electour of Trier only threw himself into the Cardinals Arms. For a
Token of the Dependancy he meant to have for him thenceforward, he put into our
hands the fortress of Hermesteim. But before our Army was Arrived to take
Possession of Coblentz, and other the Places of his Territories, the Spaniards
perceiving it to be a way to give the Suedes an Inlet into the Low Countries,
forestalled Us, and Clapped a Garrison into that Town. The Marshall D'Effiat,
who was advanced, with Intention to Seize on it, but had trifled away much time
about Strasbourg, from whence he pretended to be furnished with Provisions,
having learnt this News, fell Sick of Grief, or perhaps by an accident merely
Natural; be it as it will, he Dying some days after, the Marshall d'Estree was
sent in his Room, who laid Siege to Trier. This Place more considerable for
it is Situation than it is Strength, made but a Sorry Resistance: Yet the
Viscount de Turenne, then in the Army, Escaped not running much Danger, having
received a Bullet in his Armor. Coblentz, Clutch'd by the Spaniards,
Surrendered in like manner to the Suedes, and they put it in our hands,
Conformably to a Treaty we had newly made with them, by the Ministry of the
Marquis de Bresse,

These Novelties took away all doubt of a War with the Spaniard, joined to
this, that they had formally declared themselves for the Queen Mother, and the
Duke of Orleans, whom they had furnished with Troops. But the Hollanders having
in that time besieged Mastricht, they were constrained to take them back and
employ them on that side. Mastricht was so important a place, that they
resolved to use their utmost efforts for it is conservation: But their Forces
not being sufficient for so great a Design, they had recourse to Papenheim,
Commanding a flying Camp for the Emperor's Service. Papenheim after having
passed several Rivers, across a thousand Dangers, came at length upon the
Meuse, where he was joined by the Spaniards; But having perceived the Prince of
Orange's Camp to be so well fortified, that he would have much the Disadvantage
in coming to Blows, he caused several Skirmishes to be made, so to draw him out
of his Lines. The Prince of Orange resolving to maintain his Advantage, let him
spend his flame, and rested satisfied with opposing him with some small Troup;
of Horse that risqued nothing; So as Papenheim perceiving he only lost time,
retired without making any further Attempt. Thus the City of Mastricht fell
into the States hands who conferred the Government of it on the Duke of
Bouillon. This Unfortunate Success did not paul the Duke of Orleans in his
sinister Designs, but not being able to get from the Spaniards the Succors he
expected, nor from the Dukes of Bellegarde and Lorrain, he marched away for
Languedoc, where the Duke of Montmorency had caused all the Towns to rise. In
his Passage he endeavored to draw-in Dijon to his Party; but that Town
refusing so much as to receive his Letters, he revenged himself upon the Houses
in it is Neighborhood, which were plundered by his Soldiers. In fine after
having in vain endeavored to urge into an Insurrection diverse of those
Provinces, through which he directed his way, he came into Languedoc, and was
received by the Duke of Montmorency, nor more nor less than if he had been the
King himself: For to attract the more people into the Rebellion, it was
requisite to set up some vain Image of Royalty, to which those People, as well
as the rest of the French, have a strong Inclination. However he still retained
the Authority in his own hands, and this Prince only served him for a Cloak to
cover his Ambition. As soon as this Rebellion broke out, there is no describing
the sensible Affliction it gave the Viscount de Turenne. Besides his being the
Duke of Montmorency's Relation, he had for him a peculiar esteem, and vexed to
see him fully so many noble Actions by one so contrary to the former, he
equally apprehended both the Success of his Enterprise and the Chastizement.
The Criminal was Dear to him, but on another side his fault was Great, and
required the King's revenging his Authority, wounded by so Enormous an attempt;
so that notwithstanding all his great Concern for his Safety, he would have
Condemned him himself, had he been his Judge. In the mean while the King, still
in Lorrain, had detached the Marshall de Schomberg to suppress this Rebellion,
and the Duke of Montmorency having notice of his being already entered
Languedock with full Design to fight him, he went to meet him, so to Spare him
half the way. A River was there between the two Armies, and the Duke of
Montmorency having passed it rather as a Volunteer than a General, his temerity
was attended with a speedy Repentance. Before his men could come-in to his
Assistance, dangerously was he wounded, but not losing Courage, he pierced
through to the last rank of a Bataillon of the Guards, and being only followed by
a few of his men, among whom were the Count of Moret, the Kings Natural
Brother, with the Counts of Rieux and de la Feuillade, he received several
wounds more, and was at length taken fighting like a Lion. As for those three
Counts, they were killed upon the spot, and their Deaths hindered them from
perishing by the hand of an Executioner, as undoubtedly they could not have
avoided, for they were no less culpable than the Duke of Montmorency, and
especially the Count de la Feuillade, who had occasioned the Insurrection of
all the Nobless of Limosin to Conduct 'em to the Succors of the Duke of
Orleans. If the Duke of Montmorency's Rebellion had sensibly grieved the
Viscount de Turenne, his Imprisonment overwhelmed him with Affliction; for he
thence foresaw fatal Consequences; and principally when he made Reflection upon
the jealousy born him by Cardinal Richelieu: For out of the Desire this
Minister had of Promoting his House, he endeavored to debase all others, and
especially those that had been in Luster since the Establishment of the
Monarchy, and which would ever top his, whatever Settlement he might procure
it. And indeed without Vouchsafing to hear those who spoke in the Dukes Behalf,
he referred all the Interceders to the King, whom he had already disposed to
severity; and now the Man wont to be intermeddling in all, even the least
things, was very willing to be thought not to intermeddle in the least in this
Occasion, so to reject upon the Prince, the Spite that might be conceived at
his justice. This however did not hinder several Persons from laying themselves
at the Kings feet to obtain this Dukes Pardon: but showing himself inexorable,
Judges were Commissionated, who sentenced him to be beheaded. The Viscount de
Turenne, whom nothing could divert from his duty, without considering it to be
in no wise, making his Court to the Cardinal, implored Mercy of the King for
this Poor Lord: but the King having not Yielded to the Prayers of the Duke of
Orleans, nor to those of the Prince of Conde, nor would he hear his; so that
the Sentence was Executed to the great Grief of all People. Thus died Henry of
Montmorency Peer and Marshal of France, at Thirty Seven years of Age, a Lord
of a Comely Personage, Brother in Law of the First Prince of the Blood, and
whose House had possessed the first Offices of the Crown, but still more
considerable by his Merit, then by that of his Ancestors; In fine illustrious
in all his Life, Excepting it is last Action.

His Death did not appease the troubles of the Kingdom, The Duke of Orleans
being Exasperated at his Execution, so much the more that Bullion had promised
him his pardon from the King, withdrew anew into Lorrain, where he found the
same Retreat, he had found some time before. For the Duke of Lorrain as
faithless as Ever, desired nothing better than to foment Broiles and
Cumbustions, notwithstanding the losses he had suffered, hoping that if fortune
was once adverse to the Cardinal, a time would not only come for him to recover
what he had lost, but likewise to make some Other Conquests. But the King not
thinking fit to give him time to prepare for his Defense, departed immediately
from Paris, and went and laid Seige to Nancy, where the Duke of Orleans was in
no wise minded to Stay his Coming. The Regiment of Turenne was at first
Commanded on this Expedition; but having received a Counter-order two Days
after, this Prince, who had particularly pleased himself with the Expectation
of signalizing himself in the Kings presence, marched away for Alsace, whither
Troops were sent against the Duke of Feria, there at that time with an Army of
Germans and Spaniards. In the mean while a Great Viciscitude had happened in
Germany. The King of Sueden after having reduced the Emperor to the bare
Hereditary Provinces, forced the Duke of Bavaria out of his Capital City, and
extended his Reputation even beyond his hopes. At last fortune grown weary of
favoring him, had terminated so many gallant Actions by his Death. The
Emperor seeing himself as low as he had seen himself Exalted a little while
before; attributing so great a Change, to the fault he Committed in having
divested Wallestein of the Command of his Armies, and being rosolv'd to restore
it him, had Caused such advantageous Conditions to be offered him, that a man
might say he had with him shared the Empire; for Wallestein had the Power of
making Peace and War, of disposing of Conquests, of the Booty, of Winter
Quarters, and of all that Sovereigns are wont to reserve to themselves, for
fear of giving too much Credit to their Generals. Wallestein, having thus on
these Conditions taken the Command on him again, had no sooner caused his Drum
to be Beat, than that flocking there was from all sides to list under him; for
Martial Men knowing his Liberal humor, and the Kindness he had for Soldiers,
reckoned it unworthy to dissolve in repose, while that he, they looked on as
their father, should Expose himself to hardships and Dangers. Thus he had
quickly brought on foot a New Army, composed of Veteran Officers, and Veteran
Soldiers; and though the Imperial Court had great faith in him, yet could it not
refrain being Surpised at the Suddainness with which he had accomplished so
difficult a matter. Fortune that had ever favored this Captain, till such time
as the Duke of Bavaria had deposed him out of Jealousy, seemed then to make him
a Reparation for that Injury. For this Duke being distressed by the King of
Sueden, dispatched to him diverse Courriers, to entreat him, without remembering
what was past, that he would march to his Relief. But Wallastein being very
glad to Mortify him, contented himself with giving him fair Promises, and
marching sometimes slowly, and sometimes stopping on purpose at Paultry
Borroughs, he had the pleasure to see him reduced to such an Extremity, that he
was already become a Fugitive, and just upon the Point of Emploring his Enemies
Mercy. Thinking it then Glorious to Succor this Unhappy Prince, he turned his
Arms against Nurembourg, expecting the King of Sueden to abandon Bavaria to run
to the Defense of that Place. The Bavarians joined the Troops of Wallestein,
and having rendered themselves still the more formidable by this Means, the
King of Sueden Marched against him, with Design to give him Battle. The two
Armies being but a League and half distant from one another, Wallestein
retrenched himself in his Camp, and the King of Sueden's thoughts were only how
to lure him thence to decide their Quarrel in one Day: But Wallestein rather
using the Skin then the Sword, stopped the fury of his Enemy; Insomuch that the
Two Armies remained some days gazing upon one another: All Peoples Eyes were in
the mean time turned upon these Two Great Generals, to see on which side
fortune would declare her self. But the King of Sueden thinking, that after so
many Victories, it tended to his Prejudice to remain so long without any
Performances, undertook to force his Camp, and gave the Orders Necessary for
the Execution of that Design. The First Successes were answerable to his hopes:
The Bavarians, whose Quarter he had attacked, were forced after a Vigorous
Defense. But just in the Nick when he thought he had won all, Wallestein with
his own Troops ran to Succor his Men, and not only reestablished things by
his Presence, but likewise made them Change face, so that the King of Sueden,
after having left three Thousand Men on the Spot, was constrained to retreat.
The Duke of Bavaria re-conquer'd his Dominions after this Advantage, and having
put a Garrison into Ratisbone, the Empire that had groaned so long, began to
breath again. In the mean while, Wallestein being minded to be revenged on the
Duke of Saxony, one of the King of Sueden's Principal Buttresses, entered his
Territories, through which he Shot Terror and Consternation. The King of
Sueden durst not oppose this Torrent before he had increased his Army with some
Succors, brought him by his Lieutenants her and there dispersed for diverse
Conquests: But when he saw himself strong enough as not to be under any fear,
he Marched against the Enemy, who had attacked Leipsik, and was become Master
of that Place before he could get up to it is Relief.

The Experience of the Commanders and the Valor of the Soldiers, rendered the
two Armies almost Equal; and as Both sides were Cock-a-hoop to fight, they
came to Blows near Lutzen, a little Village of small renown before, but made
famous by so great a Battle. The Fight began at Break of Day, and the
Beginnings were favorable to Gustavus, who drove away the Enemies from Certain
Ditches that Separated the two Armies, took Six of their Cannon, and turned 'em
against 'em, which put 'em into Great disorder. However the German Cavalry
being come up, before the Suedish could fill up their Ditches for their
Passing, it drove away the Enemies in it is turn, retook four Canons, and seized
on the Posts the infantry had Newly lost. The Germans being now become fierce
and haughty with this Success, passed then the Ditches, which hindered them
from joining the Suedes, and now no more Impediment intervening the Designs of
either side, Both Parties fell in Pell-Mell with one another, Each
demonstrating a Great Passion for Victory. The King of Sueden being in the
Right Wing of his Army, and his Presence augmenting the Courage of his Men,
routed all that stood in Opposition: but being minded to go from One Wing to
the Other to see how matters went, he encountered Picolomini, in the Midst of
the Way with Eight hundred Cuirassiers who stopped him when he least Expected
it, for there was so great a fogg that day, that a Body saw not to a ten foot's
Distance. The King endeavored to defeat this New Troup with the Regiment of
Finlanders he was at the head of. But having by a Pistol-shot been wounded in
the Arm, which put him to great pain, he retired to be dressed, and in his
Retreat received a Musket Bullet behind, which made him fall from off his
Horse; He was at the same time trod under the Horses feet of those who pursued
him, without being known by any Body; Insomuch that his Men, as little informed
of his Destiny, as the Enemies continued the Combat with the same Resolution,
and finished the Victory he had rough-drawn. However the Duke of Weyman knew his
Horse that was running up and down, and had some Suspicion of the truth. But
being cautious of showing it, they were all in an inconceivable joy for the
Success of that Day, when the King of Suedens Death Changed their Contentment
into a Sadness beyond Expression.

This Battle lasted from Break of Day, till ten* a Clock at Night, but not so
furious as it had been in the day time, for the fogg having continued all the
Day long augmented toward the Evening, Each being afraid of attacking his
Companion, instead of the Enemy, and thus the German Infantry Escaped, which
otherwise it would have been Easy to have defeated. Papenheim was killed in
fighting generously. But not a Man distinguished himself more than Picolomini,
who having seen all those of his side abandon their Ranks, he with his Regiment
only stood firm, though he had already received several Wounds. Wallestein who
valued virtue, and not wont to leave it without Reward, sent him a Present of
twenty thousand Crowns, and gave him besides the Praises due to his Merit.

Though the Imperialists had lost many Men in this Battle, with some Captains of
Renown, they thought they had gained much by the Death of him who had vowed the
ruin of the Empire, and had sped so well in that Design. Wallestein retreated
to Leipsik, but not believing himself there in Safety, he passed on into
Bohemia where he labored to repair the wrecks of his Army. His flight having
afforded the Suedes the means to disperse, for the Embracing the more
Conquests, they rendered themselves Masters of several Considerable Posts; and
the Duke of Saxony, still in their Alliance, had time to recover Leipsik. In
the mean while the News of his Death being come into France, was received with
more Satisfaction than would have been Expected, for his Conquests began to
Create a Jealousy; for this Cause did the Cardinal de Richelieu's Enemies
publish that he had been killed by his Contrivance and Appointment, and that he
had posted a Man on purpose to Commit such an Enormous Crime: but it is not just
to give Credence to so high an Imposture, and coming from so suspected a Place.
In the mean while, the Emperor was not content with Wallestein's Retreat, who
if he had been minded might have improved the advantages offered him by the
Death of so considerable an Enemy, but as he had no inclination to have the War
so suddenly ended, he was fallen into Silesia, under the Pretense of driving
thence some of the Duke of Saxony's Troops, committing Disorders in that
Province. This Conduct made the Emperor fear he had put the Command of his
Armies into the hands of a Man that meant to abuse the trust; and this
suspicion having strongly possessed his mind, was still augmented by the Enemies
of Wallestein, whom they saw Exalted above them, and in a posture of wreaking
his revenge whenever he went about it. The taking of Ratisbone by the Duke of
Weymar, who since the King of Sueden's Death had obtained the Command of his
Army; Exasperated the Emperor the more against him, and having sent him
positive orders to march to the Succors of the Duke of Bavaria, who became
thereby Exposed to great Distresses, it was the General Doubt whether he would
obey or not. And indeed, instead of Executing punctually what had been ordered
him, He made his Troops return into Bohemia, nay, and Garrisoned some of them
in Austria, under Color that the Enemies might come on that side. But the
Insolence of the Soldiers, to whom he gave full License, quickly rendered the
Remedy more insupportable than the Mischief; Insomuch that there began to be a
General Murmuring against him. But he little minded all these Complaints, His
Army might at his beck go to Vienna, nay, and the Emperor had fears inculcated
into him, that this General had some Designs upon his Person. As it is a Crime
sufficiently great in a Subject to give matter of Apprehension to a Sovereign,
the Emperor vowed his Destruction, joined to this, that he had newly been
informed that he had made a Secret Treaty with Arnheim, General of the Troops
of Saxony, by which they had promised mutual Assistance to one another, to
re-establish the Son of the Electour Palatine, newly Dead of Grief for what had
befallen the King of Sueden, and at length to compel the Emperor to make a
disadvantageous Peace, and to Banish the Jesuits out of all the Empire. The
Spaniards were his most powerful Enemies, because he had also agreed by the
same Treaty, that they should be driven out of Germany. Thus the Count of
Ognate, their Ambassador to the Emperor, insinuated into this Prince to
dispatch Wallestein at any Rate, and with the soonest to Employ Steel, or
Poison for that Purpose: The one seemed difficult, as being passionately
beloved by his Soldiers, and the other was no less so, being Equally cherished
by his Servants, to whom he was ever most Benevolent. In the mean while, the
Imperial Court had Galas and Picolomini then in the Army, sifted, but they
after having refused to take upon them this Crime, they offered however to
Separate themselves from him, and carry along with them part of the Troops,
over whom they had a great Ascendant. The thing was executed according to
Promise, and Wallestein fearing the being abandoned by still a greater Number,
retreated to Egra, from whence he dispatched his Greatest Confidents to the Duke
of Weymar, with Great Promises if he would assist him: But the Emperor
hastening to prevent his Despair, whose effects might be Extremely fatal,
gained Count Lesley, Captain of his Guards, with Colonel Butler, and Gordon;
and these having invited Torsica and Lislo to Dinner, the one Wallestein's
Brother in Law, and the Other his Intimate Friend, and who could Both Oppose
their Designs, they began the Scene with these, whom they Assassinated, after
having pretented a Quarrel with them in drinking: From thence they went to
Wallestein's Apartment, who upon the first noise ran to the Window to call for
help: But his Guards in the Hall, having quickly been dispatched, and his
Chamber Door broak open, he was killed with Hallebards, but not without having
made a Brave Defense, and laid several dead at his feet. After this manner died
Albert Wallestein, Who after having rendered the Empire Flourishing, and been
deposed out of jealousy, had had the Pleasure to see his Enemies so confounded,
that they were reduced to have recourse to him; who saved the Empire when just
upon the point of falling, but having conceived Criminal Designs, was at last
treated as he merited. Though he was of Eminent Extraction, yet born to a very
scanty Estate, but his Courage Supplying this Defect, he found means to acquire
such immense Riches that he several times brought Armies on foot at his own
Cost, built Stately Palaces; in fine, Equaled the Greatest Princes, whether
for the Number of Domestics, for the Sumptuousness of Movables, for the
Delicacy of the Table, or for the Beauty of his Stable. The next day after his
Death, Duke Albert Francis of Saxony, whom the Duke of Weymer sent to agree
with him the Conditions under which they were to make War upon the Emperor,
was Seized on without having had notice of what Occurred.

Such Great Mutations could not happen in the Empire without Occasioning it new
Losses. Cardinal Richelieu having had correspondence with Wallestein, and
having the faculty to improve all things to advantage, imagining some time
would be spent before the Emperor could retrieve and settle his Authority, he
had so prevailed with the Duke of Weymer, as that he had made him beseige
Brisac, while the Rhingrave with another Body of Troops had taken Ensheim,
Fribourg and Rhinfeld. Two Battails had also been fought against him, wherein
he had had the Disadvantage, the one against the Rhinegrave near Tarn, the
other at Lignitz against General Arnhem. So many Great Successes Courted the
Attention of all the World, and at the same time the Admiration: But they still
waited to judge of the Event of Things by what should happen at the Siege of
Brisac, which was to open to us the Gates of Germany, and furnish us with the
means of joining our selves to our Alleys. This only seemed wanting to the
Kings happyness, he having newly reduced the Duke of Lorrain to Reason, and
constrained him to put his Metropolis into his hands, for he could take no
other Assurance of a Prince who had failed him so often in his word. In the
mean while, though the Viscount De Turenne took as much Interest as any Body in
the Success of the Kings Arms, he could not hear so many Great events discourst
of, without being affected with a strong Emulation: It vexed him to remain a
Spectatour of so many Great things, without having more share in them, and it
seemed to him as if all the Glory of 'em was reserved for Others, while he
himself was only an eyewitness of 'em: For which Reason after Alexanders
example, whose Courage he had, he was seen to shed tears several times at the
recital of the Actions of so many Great Captains which the Age was full of: But
as he admired not any one so much as the King of Sueden, he wept and bewailed
him no less than if he had been his Father; He said it to be great Pity, for so
Great a King to dye in the flour of his Age, but that he should nevertheless be
content to Live much less than He, to acquire a like Reputation. He caused all
his Glorious Exploits to be related to him; and cried, so great a Man ought to
be immortal. An Officer unwittingly having told him, that he that had killed
him, had done his Country a great kindness; and I (said he) believe he has done
it a great injury, for never any other will fight with so much Courage for the
Interest of the Religion. These Words seemed very fine to those who took Notice
in what sense he had said them, for by this they perceived that he preferred
Religion before all things; yet he did not love to dispute about it, for he
knew that these sort of Disputes rather engender Division, than reunite Peoples
minds: He said that People never brought the Necessary Disposition for such
sort of matters, that it was rather amidst Wine and Debauchery, that points of
Religion were canvast, than when they were fasting. Though he was very
passionate, as I may say, for the Memory of the Great Gustavus, yet was he not
wanting to bewail and Commiserate Wallestein's Destiny, whose Services he
fancied merited a Better treatment. I do not doubt, said he, but that he
conceived Criminal Designs against his Master, all his Actions are reputed as
so many Crimes; and as things of this World may be diversely interpreted, it is
not to be wondered that if his have been explained in ill part. In reality some
there are that assert he did not fall into Cabals, till after the Particular
Knowledge he had, that his Ruin was resolved on. Be it as it will, the Viscount
De Turenne did not thus take his part, but through the Goodness of his
Disposition, which did not suffer him to hear any Body spoke ill of, for as
well for Others as for himself, he was inclined to judge favorably of all
things. He said, a Worthy Man, that is a man of some Extraction, and had been
brought up by Virtuous Parents, had ever an inclination prone to Good, that
true it is, Ambition, as well as several other Vices often Corrupted Manners,
but that it must be granted that the Ambitious ever retain some shadow of
Virtue, and that before they throw themselves into the Precipice, they are
hurried thither by several ill treatments. People generally delighted to hear
him discourse in this manner, for though his Speech was not absolutely free, what
he said was attended with more gracefullness in his Mouth, than in the Mouth of
many others, gifted with a more easy utterance. And indeed they only considered
the Sentiments without dwelling upon an Infirmity of Nature which served only
the more to Set of and Enhance his Merit; for he was so much the more
Circumspect in speaking, and when he spoke they were as so many Sentences. I
know not whether the kindness we have commonly for those, who have some
conformity of humor with us, made him esteem those who talked little like
himself, or whether this Esteem was natural to him; but as much as he loved
them, as much did he hate great Talkers: He said it to be impossible for those
sort of People to Obviate bolting frequent fooleries, and as there sometimes
arose Quarrels among the Officers from overmuch babbling, he thence took
occasion to remonstrate to Others, that they could not with too much Precaution
abstain from that infirmity: Yet he never addressed his Speech to any one that
could be suspected of this Defect, but spoke indifferently to all People: Nay,
and sometimes out of fear that some one of the Number might apply to himself
what he said, he discourst with the Wisest and most reserved, as if it had been
to him he directed his Discourse. Yet he was very well content not to be
allways applauded, for he was very willing to leave Each one at Liberty to
speak his Opinion. For this reason he said commonly, that those who held their
peace, when they had something good to say, were either Timorous, or Suspected
others did not love Truth; that a Prince was no more Wedded then another to his
Sentiments, and that provided he had good reasons given, he would be the first
to own himself in the Wrong. This he found no harder to do then say, and he has
been often seen to own some fault he had Committed, and known of, only by
himself: But he delighted in declaring it, when it principally served to Excuse
some one who had done the like, for at least without perceiving a Person to be
incorrigible, no better a Protector was there than the Viscount. As soon as
the Officers of his Regiment knew him, it is not to be said the esteem they had
for him, not one of 'em Chanced in Company without speaking of him to his
Advantage, and that he accounted himself happy in serving under so Virtuous a
Prince. In the mean while, the whole Army perceived the Improvements that were
to be made in his Company, for an Officer of his Regiment was easily to be
distinguished from another; he had at least the air of Wisdom though he were not
Wise, nor were they known to be Swearers, or Debaucht: If he could not hinder
them from frequenting Women, he hindered them at least from aspersing and
speaking ill of them, and ordered matters so, as that they might not make them
their main Employ, he made them observe how much the Kings Service was
incompatible with theirs. He himself was the first to practice what he taught,
for though he was Extreme Civil, yet was he an Enemy to Galantry, so far as to
say, that the most Beauteous Woman did not merit a Worthy Man's losing one
Months time with her. Yet he was not ever of this Opinion, and Madame la
Marechale de Humieres made him Change his Sentiment, as we shall show in the
Series of this History.

The King of Sueden's Death, though it had not yet brought any great Detriment to
the Affairs of his Party, gave hopes, however, of great alterations to those
who were in the Emperors Interests, and in this Confidence he daily gained new
Creatures. In effect, the Principal Leaders among the Suedes were divided among
themselves, each having his peculiar aim, as having no longer a brave and
vigorous King to enforce their Obedience. Not that the Duke of Weymar wanted
any of the Qualities that are wont to attract Respect and give Admiration: but
besides his not being born their Sovereign, many found fault that he had been
preferred to the Duke of Saxony, whose Quality of Elector seemed to merit some
Preference. This Duke himself was exasperated at it, and since that time it is
believed if the Emperor had made him some advantageous Proposals, he would
heartily have renounced all the Engagements he had to his Prejudice. Be it as
it will, the Duke of Lorrain being flattered with such fair, alluring hopes,
thought now of nothing but of breaking his late Treaty; however as he had
reason to fear least his Infidelity might make him lose the propriety of his
Estates, which the King had already in his Power, he made a Demission of them
in favor of his Brother, a Cardinal, and who ^ald aside the Purple to invest
himself with that Imaginary Title of Duke. The King, to whom his most Private
Designs were known, far from approving of his Demission, showed himself very
much incensed against him, and as he only required a Pretext to seize on the
rest of his Dominions, consisting barely in the Fortresses de Bitche and de la
Mothe, the Marshall de la Force had Order to besiege them both. The Army
separated into two, out of Obedience to the Kings Commands, and while one part
block'd-up la Mothe, the other performed the Siege of Bitche, which after a
vigorous Defense was constrained to Capitulate. This place having bin thus
reduced to the Kings Obedience, the Marshall de la Force marched against la
Mothe, then invested by diverse Regiments, and among others by that of the
Viscount de Turenne. All that Art and Nature can assemble for the strength of a
place was found in this, Rocks, proof against Undermining, inaccessible ways,
mavelous Outworks; and above all this, a Garrison, whose fidelity had been
tried in sundry occasions. This was a fair field for the Viscount de Turenne,
who desired nothing more than difficult and perilous occasions: but the
Marshall de la Force not suffering him to expose himself as often as he
required, ordered him to march only in his Rank, adding, there would be
business for 'em all. And indeed the Approaches were not made without extreme
Difficulty and Danger, the Canon was forced to be raised in Battery by force of
Arms, and when it came to opening the Trenches, they met with Rocks that
evermore compelled 'em to cease their Labor, and begin anew in another place.
Besides the Beseiged seeing themselves upon an eminence, and our Troops as in a
kind of Abyss, disdained firing, and only made use of Flints, that were of a
hideous bigness, and which ro^'d from top to Bottom, and made our Men open from
the Right and Left to give them room, for nor more nor less than a torrent they
over-turn'd all they met with, and when by chance they came to hit against a
Rock, 'twas with so terrible a noise, that a body would have said all was going
to perish. A certain Monck, called Eustache, the Governors Brother, being in
the Place, was one of those that tumbled down most, whether he was excited to a
Vigorous Defense by his Brothers Interest, or that he had this in common with
Monks of being ever more passionate than others: but having lost Courage by his
Brother's Death, who was killed upon a Bastion, his ardour cooled, and perhaps
through the fear of a like Destiny, he abstained from a thing that was so little
suitable with his Character. At length the Marshall de la Force making use of
this occasion to attack the Outworks, the Regiment of Tonneins Commanded by
his Son marched against the Enemies; but having been repulsed with a
considerable loss, the Viscount de Turenne took his stead, and carried a
Bastion after a vigorous Defense. Most of the Officers that had not yet seen
him fight, had their eyes turned upon him to see after what manner he would
behave himself in that Action: But though they had Admiration for his Bravery,
they were no less at gaze to see with what cold Blood and Stayedness his
Conduct was pondered and regulated in the heat of the fray, for he had been
seen all covered with fire give his Orders just the same as if he had been in a
Camp or at a Review. The Marshall de la Force who had already passed a very
advantageous judgment of his Virtue, wrote to the King after the Reduction of
the Place, that this Prince had not a little contributed thereunto by his
Valor, and on this account did he receive Complements from the Court, as well
as from all the Army, All having already amost peculiar esteem for his Person.
The taking of the Bastion having hastened that of the Place, the Duke of
Lorrain had now nothing more remaining of the Dominions once in his possession,
nay and his Brother had likewise lost his freedom, instead of recovering them,
as they had both expected, by this feigned Demission whereof we have spoken
before. In the mean while, having found the means to deceive the vigilance of
his Guards, and disguising himself in a Gardiners Weed, he made his escape into
Italy, where instead of the Purple he ought to carry thither, he conducted the
Princess Claude, the Duchess of Lorraine's Sister, whom he had Married, and
who became the Companion of his Exile, and Misfortune, almost at the same time
she became his Wife.

In the mean while, the Suedish Affairs had had an ill turn, the King of
Hungary, who after Wallesteins Death had taken the Command of the Armies, not
thinking it beseeming his Rank and Reputation to remain without Performances,
had Courted all Occasions to Signalize himself, and out of the Desire he had to
give Battle, he desired the Cardinal Infant, Governor of the Low Countries
upon the Death of Isabella, to join with him, when required so to do. These
Princes being of the same House, and their Interests the same, after having
promised mutually Succouring one another, marched one against the Hollanders,
the other against Straubhinguen, which he Seized on without any thing being
done by the Adverse Party to put an Obstacle to his Design. This Conquest
having rendered the Attacking of Ratisbonne, an Enterprise more easy, the King
of Hungary marched his Army thither, but doubting that the Suedes would push
harder for it is Relief than they had done at Straubhinguen, he made havoc of
all the Territories on their Way, and hastened to Fortify his Camp. The Duke of
Weymar perceiving the loss of Ratisbonne, would prove a great Blow to his
Party, laid aside all sorts of Affairs for that, and being come into view of
the King of Hungarys, they fought some slight Skirmishes, which decided nothing
in favor of either side. Being drove away by Famine, he fancied that by making
some Diversion, the King of Hungary would be constrained to follow him, so much
the more, as that the Town was still in a Posture of making great Opposition.
But the King of Hungary considering there to be but little Difference between
Yiedling the Victory and Raising the Siege, let him take Landzutz, where
Aldringher who Commanded another Body for the Emperor, was Killed, in
Endeavoring to Succor the Place: But the thing not having sped him better
than the time before, this Town fell into the hands of the King of Hungary, and
it is loss was followed with that of Donavert, and with some other Places of
less importance. The King of Hungary being flusht to greater things by those he
had already achieved, joined then the Cardinal Infant, and they both marched
against the City of Nortlinghen; the Duke of Weymar after his Example joined
Horn, a famed Captain, who had learnt his Trade under the Great Gustavus, and
resolved to fight them before the Siege was entirely formed, and that the thing
was not become more difficult: But the King of Hungary so much the more
pressing his Attacks, that he knew the Succors ready to come, was already
become Master of part of the Outworks, and endeavored to carry the Rest. When
obliged to give some Respite to the Besieged, to provide for his own Defense;
And in effect, the Duke of Weymar without giving the least breathing to his
Troops though wearied with Marching Night and Day, was already preparing to
attack him, having Experienced in several Encounters, that daring and
Precipitate Actions have often a more happy Success than those that are
undertaken with much wariness. Be it as it will, the Beginning of his
Enterprise could not be more Propitious; he not only forced the Lines, but
having also pierced through the Enemies Bataillons, he shot such a Consternation
among those that were on the Guard of the Outworks, that they abandoned a
Half Moon, which he Won with the Peril of their Life. But what fear robbed 'em
of, fear was not long without restoring them, for those who had the head of
all, instead of entering the City, having amuz'd themselves, either through their
own Imprudence, or through the fault of those who Conducted them, to throw
themselves into that Half Moon, they unawares set fire to some Barrels of
Powder, which the Enemy had left there, and imagining it to be a Mine, they
fell of themselves into such a Consternation, that now they thought of nothing
but of seeking their safety in their Heels. Nothing did it avail the Duke of
Weymar to do in this Occasion, what could be Expected from a Brave Man, and a
Great Captain, fear was stronger than his example and Remonstrances, and having
not been able to stop one man, no not so much as the Officers, he thought it
high time and meant to join Horn who was of another side, and so make their
Retreat: But the Enemy had Seized on a Wood between Both, which finished
putting Disorder and Confusion among his Soldiers. After this they had not any
Appearance of Martializ'd men, without keeping or Order, or Rank the Cavalry
fled away upon the Spurr, leaving the Infantry to the discretion of the
Conqueror; about ten thousand of them were killed, Six thousand taken
Prisoners, and they lost all their Artillery. The Duke of Weymar had all the
difficulty imaginable to escape himself, but fortune reserving him for better
things, having made him avoid all the Ambuscades with which he was waylaid, he
had recourse to France, that so he might be able to set on foot again what was
remaining of his Party. Cardinal Richelieu, whose Genius lay in knowing how to
derive Profit from the very things, by which the World Expected he must have
found his Ruin, had the Address to procure for himself the Town of
Philipsbourg; and the Suedes were Cautious of refusing it him, it having newly
been abandoned by the Electour of Saxony. In the mean while, the Cardinal
caused the Marshall de la Force to march with his Army into Germany. At this
Mareschals approach, the Enemies, who had Besieged Heydelberg, raised the
Siege, but renewed it suddenly after, with much greater forces. During these
Transactions a Bridge of Boats was laid at Manheim, over which the Army having
passed, left there the Viscount de Turenne to Guard it: but he thinking them
going directly to an Engagement, importuned so the Marshall, that he Posted
another there in his stead. The Enemies had renewed the Siege of Heydelberg, as
I have already said, nay, and nothing now held out but the Castle. Thus
thinking they could make their Ground good in the City, they Expected the Army
without, and the Marshall after having put Succors into the Castle, turned
his Arms against the City. Thus the Besiegers found themselves Besieged, but
not having any hopes of being relieved, they made use of the Bridge which they
had kept to make their Retreat. The Viscount de Turenne exposed himself in such
manner to these two Attacks, that the Marshall de la Force publicly rebuked
him for it; but the Marquis de la Force his Son, being a Marshall de Camp,
took his part against his father, and maintained there to have been no rashness
in all he had done.

In the mean while, the Duke of Orleans was still at Bruxelles, where the
Spaniards fed him with fine hopes, but they had so much to do on all sides,
that this Duke being hurry'd-on by his humor, and the Counsels of Puilaurens
his favorite, whom the Cardinal had Seduced by his wonted Artifices,
reconciled himself with the King, as being persuaded they were not in a
condition to perform their Promises to him. Puilaurens induced his Master not
to communicate his Design to the Queen Mother: Yet the Spaniard suspecting her
nevertheless of his evasion, she exasperated things so against the Cardinal to
regain their Confidence, that he never forgave her while he lived: And on this
score was it that she was obliged some time after, being as abandoned by the
Spaniards, to go spend her Life at Cologne, where destitute of bare
conveniences, she finished her Life in an Inn, showing by her Example to what
Calamities Fortune sometimes destines those she has most favored. However the
King's harshness to her in Compliance to his Minister, furnished matter for
talk to many People, who could not apprehend that a Prince should forget
Nature, for a man he did not love. For in truth the King did not love the
Cardinal, and what he did for him most commonly was only out of a kind of fear.
But leaving apart things so foreign to return to my Subject, the Spaniards
sorely spighted at the Duke of Orleans's departure, and having no more
Expectations in the heart of the Kingdom, bent all their thoughts toward the
Frontiers, where they surpised the Cities of Trier, and Philipsbourg, the
latter by means of the ^ce, the former by the ill order kept in the Guard of
the Town. This was a sensible loss to France, that after having pacified the
Intestine Troubles, expected rather to archieve new Conquests than to lose
those it had already made. And indeed she had but just renewed her Alliance
with the Hollanders, and thought her self in so good a Posture, as that the
Spaniards must sink under the effort of her Arms, when they were once joined to
that of the States, so as that she had already made the Division of her
Provinces. In execution of this Treaty the Marshall de Chatillon, who had the
Marshall de Breze, the Cardinals Brother given him for his Companion, lead an
Army of forty thousand men toward Mastricht. His Equipage and Artillery were
answerable to the number of Combatants, for the Cardinal being a great lover of
Glory, as well for his Relations as himself, would not suffer there should be
any thing wanting in an Army, wherein he had so near a Kinsman for a General.
To authorize such powerful Arming, the War which had hitherto been only made,
as I may say, in hugger-mugger, was declared by a Herald sent on purpose to
Bruxelles. The Pretext used for Declaring it, was the Detention of the
Archbishop of Trier, who had been seized on in his Capital City, when it was
surpised, and afterward conducted into Germany, where he received scurvy
usage. But the Reason was for their so often endeavoring to debauch the Duke
of Orleans, and for their still endeavoring by the means of the Queen Mother
to make him commit the like faults again. All kinds of efforts were used in
France to bring still other Armies on foot, capable of sustaining so great a
Design, and at one and the same time five were reckoned in the Field, which
being all assembled would have made up near a Hundred and Fifty Thousand men.
The strongest of all however was that sent into Holland; It had directed it is
way, as I have already said, toward Mastricht: but the Spaniards being minded
to hinder it is joining the Prince of Orange, ventured with less Forces to
dispute with it the Passage. Prince Thomas of Savoy was at their Head, and they
had given him the Command of their Army, after they had wrought him to a
Misunderstanding with the Duke of Savoy his Brother, who lay under an
obligation of being in the Interests of France, since that Crown was in
Possession of Pignerol and Cazal. The desire of reigning had occasioned his
heartily receiving their offers, for he saw the Duke of Savoy sickly and a
dying, and was willing to get a support to buoy him up against France, that
would not fail, in case of Accident, to take the part of the Duchess of Savoy,
the Kings Sister, and for whom even before the Death of her Husband, the
Regency, and the Guardianship of her Children was designed. This Prince was
Personally brave, and willing to allow something to Chance, he Encamped near
Avem, where the Mareschals de Chatillon and de Breze were bound to pass. These
Mareschals upon the Notice they had of his Designs, Drew-up their Army in
Battle-Array, and approaching him there happened a sharp Conflict. Prince
Thomas's valor held the Victory for some time in Balance, notwithstanding the
number; but having been at length obliged to to give way after a vigorous
Resistance, the French Army passed on, and joined the Prince of Orange. The two
Armies being thus joined together made up near Seaventy Thousand men, and it
was generally believed that the Spaniards having no Troops to oppose them, they
would quickly have taken the Principal Towns of the Low Countries: But the
Division arising among the Heads, and jealousy between the two Nations, all
these Conquests were circumscribed to the taking of Tellemont and some
Boroughs. Laying Siege afterward to Louvain, there chanced a Famine in the
French Leaguer, so as to constrain 'em to raise the Siege. The Retreat was not
difficult by reason of the feebleness of the Enemies: but the want of Bread
continuing still more and more, by means of the Hollander's Infidelity, they
being very willing to ruin our Army, it was quickly reduced into so piteous an
estate that it became a Subject of Contempt and Laughter for all those that saw
it. These miserable remains not daring to undertake to force five or six
thousand men that had possessed a Passage upon the Frontiere, were obliged to
go and embark in Holland, and being at length arrived in France, it so whetted
the Cardinal's Resentment, that without particular Considerations, his whole
contrivance would have been how to be revenged for this Injury. The Spaniards
advantaging themselves of this Misunderstanding made themselves Master of
Sckincken-schons, while the Imperialists on another side made diverse Conquests
on the Suedes.

However it seemed as if Cardinal Richelieu, with all the Illuminations of his
mind, had chosen an unseasonable time to declare War, for on whatever side a
man took his Prospect, he saw matters in so bad a Posture, that evil
Consequences were to be apprehended. Nevertheless as the Cardinal had the
Courage not to suffer himself to be dejected, he contrived the remedying
speedily these Disorders, and principally in what concerned the Suedes, who saw
themselves in a great exigency, in comparison of what they had seen themselves
in formerly; for they had already lost the City of Francfort with several
others, and the Imperialists had laid Siege to Mayence, a place of so great
Consequence to them, that the greatest part of their Conquests depended on it.
For the affording them a speedy Succor, Cardinal Richelieu sent order to the
Cardinal de la Valette, Governor of Metz and of Pais Messin, to assemble with
the utmost Diligence the Forces in his Government, and having increased them
with some Garrisons of Lorrain, he made him Head of that Army, consisting of
eighteen thousand men. The Viscount de Turenne being his Relation and
particular friend, was in this Number, rather through this Cardinals Choice than
that of the Court, for he required him with great Earnestness, meaning to
testify thereby the Esteem and kindness he had for him. The Court would in no
wise refuse him a Boon of such small moment, Him whom it chose to the Prejudice
of so many great Lords for so considerable an employment, and which seemed so
little to become him; for it was a thing that afforded matter of Discourse to
many People, to see a Cardinal at the head of an Army that was to act in favor
of Protestants, with whom it was to join according as the junctures required
it, and all whose motions were to be followed very often to the prejudice of
Catholics. But this was a kind of Recompense for the Services Valette had
rendered Cardinal Richelieu, whose Interests he had been seen to espouse, in
opposition to his own Father and Family. This Army being assembled, marched to
the Succors of Mayence, then besieged as I have said before, and having taken
Binghen on it is way, it passed the Rhine on a Bridge of Boats, which Cardinal
de la Valette had caused to be made. Upon the Tidings the Enemies had of his
March, they made havoc, wherever we were to pass, but they no sooner knew he
had crossed the Rhine, but that they forthwith raised the Siege. The Army, in
the mean while, being already much distressed for want of Victuals, saw it self
still in a greater necessity, for Provisions it must put into Mayence that
wanted them extremely; this rendered Bread so scarce that a Pound was worth a
Crown. In so great a Dearness the Viscount de Turenne showed himself so liberal
toward the Soldiers, that after having given all he had, he was forced to
sell his own Plate to supply his necessities. So Generous an Action coming to
the knowledge of all the Army, and perceiving every particular Complemented him
on this Account, he spread abroad a Rumor he had lost his Money at Play, and
for this reason had been constrained to sell his Plate: But the truth being
suddenly known again by All, this still the more augmented his Reputation, and
the Amity every Individual had for him. The Duke of Weymar joined Cardinal de
la Valette, but instead of this being of use to him, the Army being become the
more numerous, had so much the more Difficulty to subsist. In the mean while
the Enemies fancying they should have easy work upon the People already half
Vanquished by Famine, came to attack the Bridge of Binghen which had been
brought from Mayence, and after having thundered it with Canon, a keen Conflict
was maintained between the two Parties. The Viscount de Turenne being
retrenched at the Head of the Bridge, after having repulsed the Enemies in
diverse Assaults, seeing his men bent upon leaving their Retrenchments to push
them, hindered them from so doing, and was much commended for his Prudence; for
there needed no more than the least false step and disgrace to ruin the whole
Army, and in the general Dejection, they were more disposed for flight, than to
the performing a Good Action. The Enemies having made some tentatives more but
to no purpose, went and Besieged Sarbrik so to cut off the Victuals that came
from Metz a cross a thousand Difficulties; and this Siege not allowing the
staying any longer in a Country, where they already died of hunger, their
thoughts were wholly set upon a Retreat. Yet this was the Difficulty, for
besides it is being long and the Country Desert, Galas was upon the Wing with an
Army, that far from suffering any misery had all things in abundance. But there
being no other Course to take, they begun their March in the Dusk of the
Evening, and having dodg'd Galas by a false March, he could not overtake the
Arriere-Guard until the Passage of the River Loutre, where it was something
worsted in a Skirmish. Having passed that River almost as soon as we, though we
had broken down the Bridges we had made with an extreme diligence, he continued
his Pursuit, so that the Army having again been constrained to make head at
Waudrevanghes, it came to a hard Combat, but wherein the Horse suffered
morethan the foot; for while the former sustained the brunt of the Enemies
onset, the later passed the Sarre, and Retreated to Metz. During so perilous
a Retreat the famine daily augmenting, the Soldiers were seen to stray at a
distance from the Armies like desperate wretches, without either minding Order
or the worst that could happen. Those who had Bread, durst not Eat it in their
Presence least they should fall upon it, and if retained by Respect they
devoured it with their Eyes, and only rendered their famine thereby the more
insupportable. The Viscount de Turenne having one day invited some Officers to
a halt, was all of a sudden surrounded with several Soldiers of Sundry
Regiments, and not being able to see them without being touched with Compassion,
he distributed to one after another all that he had, Insomuch that only he and
those he had invited of 'em all that had nothing, or at least who had so small
a Matter, that it was not capable of Satisfying them: He did also an Action in
that March which acquired him the Love of the Soldiers, for having found one
of them in a Corner of a Hedge, whom a Feavor and Misery hindered, from being
able to march with the Rest, he alighted his Horse, made the Soldier mount
him, and having held him on 'till he had got to one of his Wagons, he Commanded
his Servants to take such Care of him as that he might have a good Account of
him. As nothing spreads faster or is sooner divulged among Troops, than the
kindness and Civility of the Officers, and Especially of the Principal
Officers, the Army was quickly full of the Rumor of his fame; and for this
Account, a Soldier who had Money gave his Captain Twenty Gold Lewisses to
suffer him to go list himself under the Viscount. This fellow who had served a
long while, and had a sightly Presence, presenting himself to him, and being
ask't how much he required, Extremely Surpised the Viscount de Turenne, when
after he had told him he would have no Money, he on the contrary had given a
Sum to capacitate him to come into his Regiment. The Viscount de Turenne took
instantly out his Purse, and restoring him his Twenty Gold Lewisses, gave him
also Twenty more, with a Promise of remembering in time, and place the kindness
he bore him. And indeed having found him upon Occasion to be a very Brave Man,
he advanced him in his Regiment, and would still have done more for him, if
this Soldier had not been killed five or six years after.

The Disorder Cardinal de la Valette was in, was not the only Misfortune we lay
under. Besides that the Prince of Conde by having ill taken his Measures, or
according as some have believed by having been too Self-Interress'd, had raised
the Siege of Dole, after having lost a Part of his Army, Galas was enter*d
Burgundy, where he laid All in Fire and Blood. All went so ill upon the
Frontier of Picardy, that the Parisians fancied the Enemies to be already at
their Gates, for after having taken la Capelle and le Catelet, not without some
suspicion that the Governors might have made a better Defense, if they had
minded, they besieged Corbie, in the heart of that Province, and from whence
they might make inroads to the Metropolis of the Kingdom. Before the Success of
this Enterprise was known, they hastened to break down the Bridges on the River
d'Oize, the only River that could obstruct their coming to Paris: But the
Consternation, before very great, was now augmented, when the Parisians heard
that this Place was fallen into their hands, and that they were likewise become
Masters of the City of Roye. To remedy such Cogent Disorders the Ban and
Arrieban was Conven*d, and to appease the Discontents of the Princes of the
Blood, who complained they were had in no Account, the Forces of the Kingdom
were put into their hands. The Duke of Orleans with an Army full of the Nobles,
recovered Roye and marched against Corbie: but Cardinal Richelieu being jealous
of the honor he was going to gain by this Conquest, caused the King to remove
thither, who accomplished it is Reduction. The Count of Soissons was not so happy
in his Enterprises, but nevertheless was not wanting to serve usefully; for
after having been a little worsted near de la Fere, he prevented the Enemies
that meant to besiege ` Doullens; Insomuch that having put succors, into that
Place, he retired without doing any thing further. None but Galas now gave any
trouble, he lay Encamped near Fontaines Francoise, from whence his Parties made
remote Excursions. Dijon with some Other Cities of Burgundy, had already
contributed, and not one of 'em was there in a Condition to Sustain a Siege;
but good luck would have it that he having turned his Arms against St. Jean de
Laone, Rantzan got into the Town, and his Valor affording Cardinal de la
Valette leisure to assemble Thirty Thousand Men, he marched against him with
Design to give him Battle. Galas, having contrary Orders, raised the Siege
without staying his coming, Insomuch that all this great Storm, which seemed to
threaten us with utter Destruction, was reduced to the loss of some Cattle the
Enemies had taken out of the open Field. True it is that they had still a foot
left in the Kingdom by the means of the Isles Saint Honorat and Saint
Marguerite, Surrendered to them by the Cowardice of the Governors; but being
separated from the rest of France, and easy to be remedied, no Disquiet was
entertained on this Account, and bating the Charges necessary for their
Recovery, they were not of Concern. And in effect the Count de Harcourt being
enjoined with this Expedition, accomplished it with as little trouble as was
expected, but with a little more Danger, for he found the Spaniards had Shipped
an Army to dispute him his Passage, and he saw himself obliged to fight it, or
to avoid so doing by taking a long Circuit. The success having been favorable
to him, the rest of the Expedition was also so. Insomuch that he rendered the
Realm Serene again, that had been in Danger by so many Unhappy Occasions.

These troubles having been thus appeased, the King in his turn carried the War
into different Provinces of the Spaniards, and was fortunate in certain places,
and unfortunate in others. In the mean while the Services done him by the
Viscount de Turenne, with the things said to his Advantage, and which he
himself acknowledged, obliging him to distinguish him, he made him a Marshall
de Camp, and was not deceived in this his Choice. The Cardinal de la Valette,
having this young Prince in his Army, setting forward for Alsatia, and desiring
to make a Diversion in favor of the Suedes, whose Affairs, far from being
flourishing, were in a bad Posture, besieged Saverne in conjunction with the
Duke of Weymar, while the Imperialists attacked Coblentz and Hermestein.
Saverne was not so strong a place, but there was a good Garrison in it, which
rendered the taking of it the more Difficult. In the mean while the Viscount de
Turenne thinking himself obliged to do more than ordinary to show himself
worthy of the employment the King had given him, exposed himself
extraordinarily in sundry Assaults, wherein we were ever repulsed. At length he
found the means to seize on the Upper Town, which cut off the Communication of
the Lower Town with the Castle. Afterward they raised their Attacks on the
side of the Lower Town, which the Enemies still defended with so much Valor,
that before they could be brought to Yield, they killed several Officers of
note, nay and wounded the Viscount de Turenne. As his wound was but slight, he
did not withdraw out of the Fight 'till the Enemies were compelled to demand
Quarter, nay and would needs render an Account to the Generals of all that
occurred in that occasion before he would seek after Remedy. But as he fancied,
either he might be accused of Ostentation, or that they would not give him a
hearing if they perceived his Wound, he wrapped his Arm up in his Handkerchief,
and as long as his Relation lasted, he knew so well how to keep all concealed,
that they suspected nothing of the matter. Thus when the Generals were
afterward informed of his being wounded, they inquired how that came about,
imagining it to have been since they had seen him. The Castle of Saverne
surrendered quickly after the Two Towns, and the Viscount de Turenne's wound did
not hinder him from being present in all occasions where required by the Duty
of his Charge. However he was not absolutely Cured when he laid aside the scarf
he had put on to sustain his Arm, for he did not approve of the procedure of of
those, who to accquaint others they have received a Wound in a certain
occasion, make Parade, or of a Scarf or of a Plaster a long while after they
are no longer needful, as if such contingencies rendered 'em the more worthy
of Esteem. He said to this purpose, that a Coward was wounded as soon as a
Brave man; that thus it was a mistake to think to derive a Vanity from a thing
which was as common to those that wanted heart as to those that had Courage.
Though his Wound was not considerable, as I have already said, the whole Army not
only expressed their Concern for this Accident, but also all the great
personages in France, from whom he received Letters: But willing to undeceive
them, he writ himself his Answers to them, thinking there to be no better means
to let them see that the mischance was not so bad as they might perhaps
imagine. Some of his Servants having nevertheless told him it would be for his
Advantage not to undeceive so soon the Court, from whence he might hope for the
more favors, he answered him, that he was not of a humor to deceive any body,
and much less the King than any other.

About this time, or a little before, the Duke of Orleans not being able to calm
the Spleen he bore the Cardinal, was retired to Blois, and wanted not a Pretext
to Palliate his Retreat. The Count of Soissons being pusht on with the same
Spirit was likewise gone to Sedan, which made the Viscount de Turenne fear that
this might excite troubles in the Realm and in his House, for Monsieur de
Bouillon his Brother must necessarily have given his Consent to the Count of
Soisson's fault; and as he did not doubt but that the Cardinal de Richelieu
would be very glad to augment the Frontier with so fine a Place as Sedan, he
lay under some apprehension the Cardinal would lay hold on this occasion to
divest his Family of it. And indeed it is to be presumed, that this was
sufficiently this Ministers Design. But as the Kingdom had been, as I may say,
within two inches of it is Ruin, he was afraid least that as he was the Author
of the War, he might be rendered responsible for the bad events that might
happen, if after having introduced a Foreign he also introduced a Civil War.
Wherefore this consideration inclined him to handle things mildly, and having
found the means to sweeten the Duke of Orlean's Discontent, by making him hope
the King would consent to his Marriage, only the Count de Soissons had he now
with whom to treat, but whose humor was more difficult to manage. This Prince,
as all know, was only the last Prince of the Blood, but as he had Pretensions
to become the first, for he had had Process against the Prince of Conde, hoping
to cause him to be declared a Bastard, by reason he came into the world,
thirteen Months after his Father's Death, he carried it so high that many
people thought him to be proud. However the source of his Discontent proceeded
from his imagining his not having Justice done him; and though he had lost his
process by an Arrest of Parliament, that had judged in Consequence of a Result
of Physicians; that the Princess of Conde's grief for her Husbands Death, might
have retarded her Fruit, he treated this as a Trifle, and made Annually
Protestations against this Arrest. Cardinal de Richelieu knowing that this
Affair lay deep in his Heart, had a Proposal made to him by Senneterre, the
Intendant of his family, that if he would Marry Madam de Combalet his Niece, he
would serve him with all his Credit: but this Prince refusing to exalt himself
by a baseness of this nature (for this Lady was said to be one of the Cardinals
comfortable Importances) was furiously angry with Senneterre for having taken
upon him this Commission, and having ratled him with severe language, nay, and
as they say cuff'd him too, he would not see him any more. This ill usage
wrought his Fortune, for the Cardinal thinking himself obliged to take care of
him, conferred on him Benefits, and procured him Honors which before he durst
not have hoped for. In sine, his Son has pusht things still further, and died
Duke, and Peer, and Marshall of France; So true is it that when Fortune once
begins to look on us with a good eye, She Is not weary afterward of Conferring
on us Favors. The Cardinal's Arrogance incensed him, at the manner of the
Count de Soisson's receiving his Offers, but being retained by the
considerations abovementioned, he dissembled his Resentment, and consented he
should stay at Sedan, where to divert him from the thoughts he might have of
embroiling the State, he engaged him in some little Amors by the means of some
of his Domestics that were his Pensioners. Being assured on that side, his
thoughts soared only now at waging War against Foreigners. For that purpose he
desired the Duke of Weymar to take a turn to Paris, that he might conferr with
him; and they took together Measures for the Affairs of Germany, yet without
forgetting those of Flanders, where he designed to make his greatest efforts.
The Duke of Weymar being returned satisfied with the Reception made him by the
King and his Minister, assembled his Army, while that a part of our Troops,
that had served in Germany the year before had orders to file upon the Frontier
of Flanders. The Viscount de Turenne who had been alarmed at the Count de
Soissons* Affair, and had an inconceiveable joy to see it had no sequel, having
been appointed to serve in those Troops, went thither with the Cardinal de la
Valette, who had the Command of them, but to whom they had given the Duke of
Candalle his Brother to Command jointly with him. Besides this, two Other
Armies were there, One under the Conduct of the Marquis de la Meillaraye, Great
Master of the Artillery, Cardinal Richelieus Nephew, the Other under the
Marshall de Chatillon. This, to hinder the Succors of the Germains, advanced
into Luxembourg, where it took Danvillers; the Other marched on the Sea side,
and pretended through some Correspondence to make sure of St. Omer, but the
Traitors having failed in their Word, it was not strong enough to attack a
Place of that Consequence, and whose bare Approches were capable of making it
receive some Affront; for this City is environed with an Infinite Number of
Forts that Defend it, and are not Easy to be Won. In the mean while, the
Cardinal de la Valette was entered Flanders at the Head of an Army of Eighteen
Thousand Men; and had attacked Chateau-Cambresis. Having taken it, he caused
his Troops to march against Landrecies, a Small Place* but strong through it is
Situation and it is Outworks, so that not daring to undertake this Conquest
with such a Handful of Men, he rested Satisfied with investing it till such
time as he was joined by Meilleraye. This Place was likewise Secured with a
Good Garrison, but put its Principal Confidence in the Succors it Expected
from Germany, and to be brought it by Picolomini. As what was a Subject of hope
for the Besieged, was a Subject of fear for the Besiegers, they hastened the
Works and the Attacks, that so the Succors might not arrive in time. The
Viscount de Turenne in whom the Cardinal de la Valette had a most peculiar
Confidence, did not stir out of the Trench, save only to go give him an Account
of Occurrences. But the Continual Rains hindered things from advancing as they
desired, besides the frequent Sallies of the Besieged incommoded the Laborers,
and Occasioned sometimes disorder. Colonel Gassion, whose Reputation was
already very Great in the Troops, having been wounded in the Neck in one of
those Sallies, seemed to Paul the Soldiers Courage, who considered him as a
Man capable in case of a Battle to make the Victory turn on their side: But the
Viscount de Turenne did with Mildness remonstrate to them their Duty, and
insensibly put them again in the Right Way; He was in the Water with them up to
the very Middle, and to animate them by his Example he was the first to labor,
and the last to finish the labor; he told them that the Rain would not last
always, but that in the mean while they were not to lose time, because that the
Enemies who were already but too much pu^t up with presumption, would conceive
at it the more Audatiousness. At length, the Rains ceasing, and the Works being
advanced as much as the foul Wether would allow of, the Place was Won, after
the Governor had done all in his Power for a Brave Defense. From Landrecis
Part of the Army marched to Maubeuge under the Command of the Duke of Candalle,
who had under him the Viscount De Turenne. This Place having made a show of
Resisting, was quickly reduced by force, as well as that of Beaumont belonging
to the Princes of Chimay. In the mean while the Duke of Candalle sent the
Viscount De Turenne against the Castle of Sobre, Whose situation was
advantageous, and where above Eight hundred Peasants had taken refuge with
their Goods. These being inured to fire by the long Wars they had in their
Country, Marched out against him, and he slighted at first this Occasion as
Unworthy of his Courage: But having observed their Countenance, and that they
had Possessed the Hedges from whence they fired briskly, he retained his
Soldiers who would have fallen upon 'em without order, as People that did not
deserve the using so much Caution. After having thus hindered his Men from
Exposing them* selves rashly, he Caused the Enemies to be attacked, who Managed
their Defense with much Courage, but could not however stand against the fury,
with which they were Assaulted. They would have retreated into the Castle, but
the Viscount de Turenne Pursued them so warmly, that he enforced the Place
Pell-mell with them: Some in the mean while making their Escaple into the Town,
they put on again the face of Defense, but the Viscount de Turenne having Sworn
that they should be all hanged if they made one shot; This made 'em warily
consult what Course to take; Insomuch, that they Surrendered upon Discretion.
After this Our Troops had a Design to attack Av^snes, or else some other Place
in the Neighborhood, but upon the Advice that Picolomini had passed the Meuse
at Namur, they thought it sufficient to stand upon the Defensive, or at least
until they had received Succors: Bussy Lamet who had newly defended
Hermesteim with great Renown, having brought Assistance just in the nick, this
kept Picolomini in Awe, and produced the Desire in Cardinal de la Valette to
Besiege la Capelle: But Bussy venturing too near to view it with the Marquis de
Rambures Governor of Doullens, a Marshall of Camp, the one was killed
stone-Dead, and the other Wounded so dangerously that he lived but a few days.
La Capelle, notwithstanding the loss of two such brave men, was pressed so
close, as to be forced to surrender before Picolomini could arrive. Picolomini
endeavored to revenge himself for this Affront upon Maubeuge, which he
plundered as soon as he took it, and made diverse Attempts upon our Army, some
of which he sped in, and others only turned to his Confusion. The Viscount de
Turenne had been an Intimate friend of Count de Bussy Lamet, and was so
sensibly afflicted at his Death, as to render him almost incapable of all
Consolation. And indeed he was a man of extraordinary merit, and had but one
step to make to the being Marshall. But a Sudden Death having ravished him
from his Family and his Friends, he missed that Honor, the greatest a
Gentleman can attain.

While Cardinal de la Valette was performing the things I have now mentioned,
the Prince of Orange, with whom the Cardinal de Richelieu was come to a Right
Understanding, had Besieged the City of Breda, and was stimulated to that
Conquest by more then one Reason. For besides the Glory that must thence
redound to him, he fought for his own Patrimony. Yet as Spinola's staying a
long while before that Place, minded him that nothing was to be neglected, he
Fortified his Camp and Skreen'd it from Insult. The Spaniards also prepared to
go Fight him; but fearing a Descent upon the Coasts, by reason of some Ships
that had appeared at Flushing, they lost time, and when they came in view of
the Enemy, they found him so well entrenched that they durst not proceed to an
Engagement. The Prince of Orange making use of his Advantage pressed the Town,
and his Conduct being no less than his Courage, he took it in Two Months time,
whereas it is Conquest had cost Spinola Nine.

The Spaniards expected Comfort for these Unhappy Successes in the taking of
Leucate, which they thought near at hand. This Place is Situated in the very
further parts of Languedoc, and bordering on Roussillon, and Besieged it they
had with all their Forces. Nothing was wanting in their Camp, they received all
their Ammunitions from Perpignan, just at hand, and Victuals came to them in
abundance, whereas that the Besieged were destitute of all things, and even
without hopes of Succors, for only some few Garrisons were there in the
Province, which we durst not draw out for fear of some Accident. But the Duke
d'Hal^in, the Governor of This Province, having assembled his Friends, and a
good number of the Nobless, with them undertook to march against the Enemies,
notwithstanding their Advantages, and his good fortune was such, that fear so
seized upon their Spirits, that after having stood a feeble Conflict, they
abandoned their Canon, and their Equipage. This happy Success procured him the
Baton of Marshall of France, and since was he called the Marshall de
Schomberg, by his Father's Name.

All these Advantages were capable of giving much joy to the Court, if the Duke
of Weymar had been as Successful in his Enterprises, and if something else had
not given some Subject of Discontent: But the Duke de Rohan, who had made his
accommodation with the King, and had dexterously* seized upon the Valteline,
was newly drove thence by force; Insomuch that all the Pretensions that had
been conceived to the Land of Milan, vanished into Smoke. The Duke of Weymar on
his side having undertaken to Succor Hanaw, besieged by the Imperialists, had
been routed, and put to flight. As fortune was thus balanced on Both sides,
the Pope fancied the Two Crowns would listen the more willingly to a Peace, and
he endeavored to mediate it by the Interposition of his Nuncio's. But he had
to overcome the hatred of the two Ministers, who out of the Aversion they bore
one another, troubled their heads little as to the Mischiefs with which they
were preparing to molest all Europe. These two Men did all in the two Kingdoms,
and the two Kings were only two Phantasmes to amuse the People with the
Grandeur of their Names; The One, was introduced into the Ministry in Spite of
his Master, and in spite of him maintained himself in that Station; the Other
had been called to it by the Princes Inclination, after the Duke of Lerma's
Disgrace, a Man so hated as to have had his own very Son for his Enemy. They
had both the Glory of their Country, in Recommendation, or rather, they only
sought to raise it upon the Ruins of each Other, for their Animosity was the
source of most of their Great Designs. Not but that the Cardinal de Richelieu
was a great man, but he gave himself entirely to Revenge, so as to ruin one of
his Enemies, he would not have much Boggl'd to ruin all the People. Now he
remembered it to be in the View of procuring his Destruction, that Count
Olivarez, vulgarly called Conde-Duke Minister of Spain, had induced the Duke of
Orleans so often to Rebel, and contrived so many Caballs, and his Design was
now to be revenged for these Transactions. For this Reason did he formally
oppose the Peace, to which he o^ purpose raised Difficulties. He would not own
Ferdinand's Son for King of the Romans, and grounded his Opposition upon the
Electour of Treves, having protested against his Election. Ferdinand dying in
these time of the Occurrences, this Cavil occasioned still more Obstacles, for
then the thing in Agitation was no longer a King of the Romans, but an
Emperor, whose Quality was disputed. The House of Austria on it is side did not
want Pretexts to cover the jealousy it had against the House of France, so as
that all the Good Offices of the Pope, were without Effect. Thus the War that
had already made such Waste, and Havocks, Spread still with more fury. The
Spaniards induced Prince Thomas to return into Italy, that so his Presence
might the more powerfully Excite his Creatures, and he framed in a little time
so Dangerous a Party, that with the Succors of the Spaniards he reduced the
Duchess of Savoy to Extremity. This Princess was not as yet, very handy in the
Government of her Dominions, she just came from under the Check of a Husband,
who never having had any Inclination for Us, had not given her any Share in
Affairs, imagining that being as she was a French-woman, she would ever have
much inclination for her Country. However he had been obliged for Reasons I
have before deduced, to declare himself for us; but though he had joined his Arms
to Ours, his Captains had still some Secret order rather to Spinn out in Length
than to finish the War. Now the Duchess of Savoy having followed at first this
Policy, Cardinal Richelieu was very willing to suffer her by little and little
to be undermined, that to be freed out of Danger she might blindly follow his
Will; for this Reason instead of sending her a Succor capable of screening
her, he caused at first only to pass into that Country some troops of New
Leavyes, that quickly for want of Discipline were totally dispersed. In the
mean while the Spaniards taking advantage of the Conjuncture, resolved to drive
us out of the Milanese, where we had made some Conquests; but the Beginnings
were so unfortunate to them, that they were beaten in two Incounters, at the
last of which Martin d'Arragon who commanded them had much ado to Escape. Yet
as it was only a detatchment of the Army, they had quickly repaired this loss,
and thinking themselves in a Posture to take their Revenge, they laid siege to
Breme, wherein a Gentleman of Brittany, called Montgaillard, commanded. The
Savoyards had no sooner been informed of what occurred, but that forgetting
their Policy, they pressed the Marshall de Crequi to give succors, for so
blear'd were they not, but that they foresaw how after the taking of Breme, the
Spainards would turn their Arms againct them. The Common Peril having thus
reunited Peoples Minds, they joined the Marshall de Crequi, notwithstanding
the Aversion they boar him, for they suspected him of having poisoned their
late Duke in an Entertainment, and what the more corroborated their Suspicion,
is, that most the Guests died of some days after, or had like to have died. Be
it as it will, this having not obstructed the Conjunction of the two Armies,
they marched to the Succour's of Breme, wherein they Endeavored to Enter some
Men by the Po. A certain Number of Barks were sitted out for this purpose, on
Board of which they Shipped some Infantry with Ingeniers for whom they had
Occasion in the Place. But the Spaniards possessing the Bancks of the River,
and having provided them with Cannon, fired so furiously, that after having
killed some Men, and sunk two Barks, the Rest chose to return. This
Unfortunate Success Startled the Marshall de Crequi, but not in such manner as
to abandon his Enterprise.

However having no other means, save to attack the Lines, Needs would he view
'em first of all; but as he advanced to that purpose, came a Cannon shot that
killed him stone Dead, and Cast a Great Consternation into his Party. The
Rumor of his Death being quickly Spread among the Enemies, they forthwith
signified it to the Governor as a means to terrify him into a Surrender; but
he did not seem so startled, but that he Defended the Place some time longer
with great Courage. However having yielded sooner than he ought, he was
beheaded at Cazal, whither he had Permission to retreat with his Garrison.

The Marshall de Crequi's Death occasioned much Disorder in our Army, as well
as in the Affairs of Italy, and before the Court could give New Orders, the
whole Army disbanded for want of Discipline and Pay. In the mean while the
Spaniards after having settled their New Conquest, caused their Troops to
march, without our being able to guess at their Design, for Leganes who
commanded them, had daily Protestations made to the Duchess of Savoy, that the
King his Master Designed no War with her, and, that provided she departed from
that secret Intelligence she was suspected of with the French, she might enjoy
in Quiet her Territories and the Guardianship of her Children. These Assurances
were Charming to a Woman little acquainted in Affairs of War, and whose
misfortune was to have her Country Situated 'twixt the States of two Princes,
who pretended both to give the Law: But finally she in a short time perceived
all these fine Words were only to amuse her, for Leganes to the Prejudice of
all his Promises approached Verceil, after having Sacked all the places in his
Passage. As there had been much imprudence in her to listen after this to any
of his Propositions, She had recourse to the King her Brother, of whom she
Earnestly requested a Succor conformable to the Exigency of the present
posture of her Condition: But the concerns of Blood being a small matter among
Princes in Comparison of their Interest, they tied and hampered her so to
purpose, that she had now nothing left but the Name of Sovereign; under Color
of Preserving Piemont for her, we Garrisoned it is strongest places, and from
which the Capital only was exempt; but as all the rest was nothing without our
getting this into our Clutches, so many Distrusts were injected into this
Princess's mind, that daily imagining her self upon the point of being seized,
she of her own accord was the first to demand, we would introduce Troops into
the Town. Yet it was to be feared the Inhabitants would shut up the Gates, if
they had the hint of this Design. This made it thought convenient to manage the
thing so Dexterously as that it could not miss. For this purpose Troops were
ordered to draw up hard by under the pretense of a Review, and the Principal
Persons being gone out for sight-sake, it was easy to seize on the Town, by
keeping in their hands those who might make Resistance. Every one was not
content with this proceeding, and many now favored Prince Thomas, that without
this would not have thought of him.

The Duchess of Savoy having thus thrown her self into the King her Brother's
Arms, it was now his part to espouse her Interests, being henceforward become
his own. In the mean while the great Affairs he had on all sides hindering him
from doing all he willingly would, he could only send her Eighteen Thousand men
under the Conduct of Cardinal de la Valette. And indeed we were very much
perplexed in Flanders, where we had with not overmuch consideration under taken
the Siege of St Omar under the Beard of a Powerful Army. But the Grudging we
had to that Place, making us pass over all things, Provision was made of Men
and Money. Yet could we not hinder the Spaniards from putting Succors into the
Place, and this Misfortune having befallen us twice, this so chilled our
Soldiers Courage, and flushed that of our Enemies, that as much as ours
dreaded fighting, so much theirs desired it. The two Armies coming to Blows
with Dispositions so little favorable to Us, the Success was adverse to Us.
They forced our Lines, beat a Quarter, and at length having put a new Succors
into the Town, they Compelled us to raise the Siege. This Disgrace was rewarded
by taking du Catelet; but as it was a poor pittance in Comparison of what we
had missed of taking, it proved no great Subject of Consolation; add to this
that the Prince of Conde was obliged to raise the Siege of Fontarabia, where
strange things occurred. For this Prince designing to reinforce the Quarter, by
which he knew the Spaniards were to come, those that were there already took up
Arms against those that came to their Assistance, and thus so well-favour'd the
Enemies Design, that they entered the Town without striking a blow. It was
necessary to look out in the mean time to what would happen in Germany and in
Italy, where the War was waged with no less intent and Application. Certainly
though we came by the Lee in Flanders and Navarre, Fortune made us a great
Reparation in Alsace, where the Duke of Weymar did Wonders. This Prince having
been beaten, as I have said, the Year before, in endeavoring to relieve Hanau,
and undergone other more Disgraces; for having pretended to retaliate upon
Bezanson where he had some Correspondence, he had missed his Aim^ From thence
after having giv'^ some repose to his Army and increased it with some Succors,
he went and attacked Rhinfeldt, a Town situated upon the Rhine, and one of the
four Forrest-Towns. This Place being well Garrisoned made a brave Defense, and
gave the Duke de Savilly and Jean de Were time to run in to it is Succors. The
Duke of Weymar having with him the Duke of Rohan, and holding himself secured
by the Presence of so great a Captain, did not stick to accept the Battle,
offered him by the Enemy; But fortune to make him the better relish the
Advantages she was preparing him in the sequel, turned her back upon him
still, and the Duke of Rohan fighting with the same Courage he had so often
fought, received a Wound of which he died in a few days after. He was doubtless
a great man and had all the Parts of an Excellent Captain, but would have
seemed much greater, if he had been in a State where the Prince had been of his
Religion, or He of the Religion of his Prince; for this occasioned the
Conferring on him only difficult Commands, and wherein was designed rather this
Ruin than his Fame. He lived with the Amity of the People of the Reformed
Religion, to whom he rendered great services, as well as the Duke of Soubize
his Brother, but only carried along their Esteem at his Death, being suspected
of having abandoned them for his Interests.

After the loss of this Battle, the Enemies meaning to make advantage of their
Victory, pursued Weymar who was retired toward Offembourg, and reduced him to
the necessity of fighting a new Battle, or of ruining his Army by a new
flight; the one seeming more glorious than the Other, he recalled the Courage
of his men who seemed stunned, and having let 'em know the necessity there was
of Conquering or of Dying, they unanimously demanded an Engagement with the
Enemy: He was too knowing to suffer their Courage to Cool, and having taken
them at their word, at the very same moment, he began the Charge himself, and
was the first that broak in up* the Enemy. The Conflict was Sharp, and
obstinately fought on Both sides, but Weymer performing Wonders with his Arms
as well as with his Head, encouraged his men in such manner that all the
Resistance the others could make proved in vain. The Duke de Savelly, after
having several times been helter-skelter among the Suedes, was forced to be
take himself to flight, abandoning Jean de Were who maintained his Ground still
a while; but seeing himself surrounded on all sides, he laid down his Arms to
save his Life. Weymar having repaired by so great victory the misfortunes that
had befallen him, returned before Rhinfeld which Submitted to his Obedience;
from thence after having reduced the Principal Citys of Alsace, he laid Siege
to Brisac, which was as the Masterpiece and Coronation of so many Great
Actions. The Enemies raised several Armies and fought several Battails for the
Relief of a Place so strong and of such great Consequence: But Weymer receiving
all Requisits in Abundance from Cardinal de Richelieu so Efficaciously defeated
their Endeavors, that after an Extreme long Siege, he accomplished his
Enterprise.

The Affairs of Italy wanted much of being in so good a Posture, the Viscount
de Turenne was there with the Cardinal de la Vallette, but very much perplexed
how in due manner to second him in a thousand Difficulties, arising Every
Moment. As to military Concerns, they were of easy management, but the juncture
required a daily dissipating of factions, the reconciling the Duchess with her
Ministers, the being sollicitous for the fidelity of the Towns, observing the
Governors, and above all a Weathering the Aversion they boar him in this
Country, on the score of his Religion: For the Italians that are even more
superstitious than the Spaniards, said, little could be Expected from so ill
matched a Succors, that it was an unheard of thing to see a Cardinal have for
one of the Principal Officers of his Army, a Heretic, whose father would
have set France in a Combustion, so to have caused his Religion to have
flourished in that Realm, and who had been brought up in a City, which after
the Example of Rochell served for a Retreat to Rebels and Malcontents, and
had in fine performed his Apprentiship in Holland, the very Center and Azylum
of Heresy. But if this Matter had anything Extraordinary, it lay rather in
seeing a Cardinal using a Profession so Extrinsique to his own, seeing him, I
say, daily besmeering his hands in the Blood of an Infinite Number of
Christians, without remorse or any other Disquiet than that given him by an
immoderate Ambition. Yet must the Viscount de Turenne in^re himself to the
Manners and fashions of the Country, not to say the follies, and by his
Patience overcome so many obstacles that all at once interfer'd our Designs. He
durst hardly make Profession of his Religion, and if he had been less zealous,
he would have quickly come to have lived like an Atheist: but nothing being
capable of making him fail in what he owed to God, he slited the hatred of
those who boar him ill Will, and performed his Duty. The Duchess of Savoy was
not altogether so prepossessed as Others; but nevertheless did not refrain
often telling him, that being so very worthy a Person, but one thing more could
there be desired in him, namely the Change of Religion. He heard all this
without suffering himself to be Seduced, being insensible to flatteries as well
as Persecution. But so many other matters were then on foot, that these were
only talked of, as a man may say, for fashions sake. The Viscount de Turenne one
day found a Note under his Napkin, by which he had Intimation that the
Governor of Cazal, corresponded with the Enemies, and that if not obviated,
Evident Proofs of this his Intelligence would be seen in a little while. Having
perused this Note, he took no manner of Notice, but after Dinner repaired to
Cardinal de la Vallette, and having imparted the note to him, they were Both
very much at a loss, not knowing what to think on it; for on the one side they
doubted it might be a forged advertisement to decoy 'em into some false step,
and on the other it required their baulking no Precautions. The Cardinal was of
the first Opinion, but the Viscount de Turenne of the Second, and grounding his
thoughts upon that, the Governors being in the Place on the behalf of the Duke
of Mantoua, he would now no longer mind remaining Loyal, that Prince being
lately Dead, and having left for his Heir only a young Child, incapable of
Exerting his Resentment for the faults committed against his Service. He added
to these a World of Other reasons, and having at length brought the Cardinal
over to his Opinion, the result was to have him narrowly watched, and that in
the mean while a Rumor should be gi'v'n out of a Design to visit the
Garrisons, that so he might not be Startled if they went by Chance to Cazal.
Accordingly they began to go to some, and in the Interim intercepted Letters
that left no Room to doubt of the Correspondence. The matter having been thus
averred, the Cardinal went to Cazal with the Viscount de Turenne, and the
Governor coming to pay them his Respects was Seized, though they had discovered
his Actions to be wholly directed by the Duchess of Mantoua's Orders. For this
Princess having none of the Deepest Reach, and considering only the time
present, and seeing Piemont full of troubles and Caballs, had Entertained a
Fancy she should better secure the fortune of her Grandson, by putting him
under the Protection of the Spaniards than by leaving him under Ours. The
Viscount de Turenne could never Guess from whose hands the Note came, but
imagined it to be through the means of the Duchess of Mantoua, who had repented
what she had done, and would have been very glad to have had another Prevented
it is taking effect.

Having thus quasht this Conspiracy, they had now no Other Disquiet then of
releiving Verceil, besieged by Leganez with all his forces, and he holding
himself cocksure of the Success, for all that commonly contributes to the
Defense of a Place was wanting in this Men, Money, Ammunitions, Provisions,
Ingeniers; and with great Probability might it have been said these Omissions
had been made on purpose to further the Enemie's Design. The Governor merely
by his own virtue made good these Defects in the Instances he gave of his
Courage and Prudence, the situation of the Place having withal much obstructed
the works; for the River of Se^ia, making several little Islands at a
Musket-Shots Distance, occasioned the Circumvallation to be much larger, and
the Lines more difficult to keep. Nevertheless Leganez having by his Patience
accomplished all, before Cardinal de la Vallette had been able to assemble
forces Sufficient to give Battle, he fell to pressing the Town, and reduced it
to so great an Extremity, that it could not thence forward hold out long
without a speedy Succors. The Governor having found the means to make known
it is Circumstances to the Cardinal de la Vallette, the Cardinal fell to March
with twelve thousand Men of his own Troops, and those of Savoy to repair to its
Relief. But Heaven beginning to thwart his Enterprise by Continual Rains, this
so ^atigated the Army, that when it was come in view of the Enemies Camp, it
stood more in need of rest than Labor. Leganez that it might not take any
Repose, would willingly have marched with all his forces to give Battle, if at
the same time he could have maintained his Lines; but having not Men sufficient
for Both, he detach^d his Cavalry to Skirmish, while the Infantry remained upon
the Guard of his Posts. The Weakness of the Garrison hindered the Governor
from being able to advantage himself of this Diversion by ^allies, but
animating his Men by the hopes of the Succors already in sight, nay and
already engaged with the Enemies, he made 'em resolve upon a Vigorous Defense.
Things being in this Posture, it could not well be but that some little
Skirmishes must pass between the two Armies, but this not being decisive, and
on the contrary only the more and more wearying his Troops, and giving the
Enemies time to prosecute their Works, the Cardinal de la Vallette resolved to
push once for all. For this purpose he divided his Army in two, but in such
manner however as to be able to Succor one another, and having committed one
part to the Viscount de Turenne to attack the Quarter of the Germans, he
marched with the Rest against the Spaniards. They received him with much
Courage, and so cooled his heat, that this Attempt would have proved abortive,
if the Viscount de Turenne had not on his side fought with more good Fortune.
For having surpised the Germans by a brisk and Vigorous Charge, he made them
buckle at the very first, then having broke them, Eight or Nine Hundred men
passed through, carrying with them Ammunitions and Provisions. The Marquis de
Leganez exasperated at this Affront, revenged himself upon the Germans, whom he
taxed with Negligence and Cowardice, he caused some Companies of 'em to be
Decimated, and the Sentinels to be hanged, as if they had held some
Correspondence with Us. For to Justify himself as to this Unhappy Event, he did
all he could to have it thought his Men wanted Fidelity, and that he could not
have been beaten without Treachery. This Succors gave some respite to the
Besieged, but did not wholly free 'em from Disquiet, the Garrison being become
more Numerous, consumed more Victuals and Ammunition, and there coming to be a
Want of all things a new, it was quickly reduced to the same Extremities it had
been in before. However what had happened having rendered Leganez more Vigilant
and the Germans more careful, Cardinal de la Valette made diverse other
Attempts without Success, which made him think it his Duty to besiege some Town
for the making a Diversion; but Cardinal Trivulce, Commanding another Army of
Spaniards, being advanced, he was afraid of Engaging in a Country where it
would not be in his Power to have Provisions when he pleased. Whereupon
returning the same way he came, he Encampt again in view of the Enemies, and
after having observed their Leaguer on the side of the River, he fancied that
if he could drive them from an Island, he might the more easily relieve the
Town. The Resolution being taken to attack them on that side, Skirmishes were
begun in several places, for the better Concealing the True Design from the
Enemies; but having nevertheless suspected the truth, they made a Battery of
Six Canons upon the Shore of the Island, which began to fire incessantly, and
to occasion some Disorder. As this Enterprise could be Successful only by
surprise, Cardinal de la Valette sent a Counter-Order, and the Troops being
retreated, he judged it convenient to retreat himself, his Army beginning to
suffer extremely for want of Victuals. The Governor having Spirited his
Garrison with the hopes of Succors, after this found it a difficult task to
prevail with them to do their Duty; Unwilling however to lose the Honor he had
acquired by a Vigorous Resistance, 'till that seeing his Outworks won, the
Place ruined by the Canon, the Enemy lodged at the foot of the Walls, part of
which was already fallen down, and in short destitute, of all hopes of
Succors, he made an Honorable Capitulation.

The loss of this Place created apprehensions that it would be followed with
that of many others, but Leganez falling sick during these Occurrences, the
Members could act no longer for want of a Head, and though the Command was
transferred on another, the Rest of the Campain was spent without any Memorable
Performance on either side. However we were not wanting to be menaced with a
sudden Change in Italy. The Duchess of Mantoua being exasperated for our
having put to Death the Governor of Cazal her Subject, underhand Solicited
Succors from the Emperor and the Spaniards, and though the French represented
to her, that he had merited Death after what he had done, this she did not own,
neither durst she disown it, for fear of veryfying the suspicion we harbored
of her Conduct, for she peremptorily denied that he had done things by her
Order, and though her Proceedings did Sufficiently aver it, she would needs be
thought Innocent at the same time she demanded Reparation for the Death of a
Criminal. In fine, her Resentment went so far, that la Tour then at Mantoua, on
the Kings behalf, was compelled to withdraw thence with his Majesty's Envoy:
but to prevent her executing the sinister Designs she had against the Crown, we
prevailed with the Venetians to put a Garrison into Mantoua, hoping that out of
the Concern they had for the Quiet of Italy, they with all their Power would
hinder the Spaniards from getting that Town into their Possession. We had still
another Remedy for the Affairs of that Country, but which came to us from a
hand we durst not have expected it, for it was from our very Enemies own
selves, they becoming jealous of one another, and thorough that Diffidence were
a long while without making any Attempt. And indeed Prince Thomas and Cardinal
Maurice his Brother being lately arrived in Italy, and already in their
Thoughts devouring the Succession of their Nephew, could not consent to divide
it with the Spaniards, and the Spaniards not being wont to do ought without
their hire, would not Employ their Men and Money without deriving thence some
Recompense and Profit. This misunderstanding having lasted some time, they were
a long while without stirring in the least; But the Spaniards obstinately
persevering in abating nothing of their Interests, in that they were persuaded
these Princes could do naught without their Aid; at last Prince Thomas and his
Brother were obliged to Consent to their retaining their Conquest, but what was
spontaneously Surrendered, should be for those Princes without the Spaniards
having any Pretentions to it. This Agreement being signed on both sides to the
great Disadvantage of the Princes, who already by this means alienated their
imaginary Dominions, they acted in concert, but not without having much
jealousy of one another. However to give some Color to their Enterprises that
were odious to all Good People, they obtained a Decree from the Emperor, by
which the Princes Thomas and Maurice were instituted Tutours of the young Duke
their Nephew, and the late Duke of Savoy's Will was made void, by which he had
nominated his Wife, for the Guardianship of his son, until at Age of
administering himself his Government: But this Duke being of a weak complexion,
nay and sickly too, his Unckles would by no means have that he could live, and
were very willing to reap his Succession before his Death. In the mean while as
they had many Creatures, the Duchess of Savoy lay under dismal Apprehensions;
she was daily abandoned by those she had thought most trusty, and their
Carriage making her have a Diffidence of all Others, she knew not whom to
confide in, nor to whom to communicate the Affairs that offered: Nor had she
more confidence in Cardinal de la Vallette, who being an Adherent of Cardinal
Richelieu, a Minister fiill'd with Ambition, only followed his Movements and
passions; So as seeing her self so universally forsaken, she had recourse to the
Viscount de Turenne, with whose Integrity and Prudence she was well acquainted;
But this Princess having let him know the Suspicion she had of those two
Cardinals, he besought her Royal Highness not to explain her mind further to
him, because that being the one's friend, and bound to serve the Other as his
King's first Minister, he could not enter upon any Affair without their
Participation. The Duchess of Savoy found this answer worthy of him, and not
being so possessed in her own favor, as to find any thing therein to blame, he
shared but so much the more in her Esteem. The first Object of Prince Thomas's
Arms was Chivas, and this still augmented the Dutchesses diffidence, for the
Governor Suffered his trust to be Surpised, without taking order for it is
Defense; but to cover the intelligence between the Prince and him, Prince
Thomas caused a Gate to be broken open by a Petard, and so got to be Master of
the Town. In the mean while Dom Martin d'Arragon, one of the Principal
Commanders of the Spaniards, attacked Cencio, but being minded to dislodge the
Enemies out of a large Neighboring from whence they made Excursions, he was
killed with a Musket shot. The taking of Chivas renewed the jealousy between
the Princes and the Spaniards, Each Party laying Claim to the Possession of
that Town, the Princes as pretending the Governor had of his own Accord put
into their hands, the Others grounding their Challenge upon the Petards having
played, it ought to be deemed as having been taken by force: But the Spaniards
gained their Cause, for that the Princes were not willing to insist any
further, for fear of blasting the honor of him that had Surrendered the Place
to their Highnesses. During these Transactions, Cardinal Maurice not being so
fit for Arms, that he might not remain useless, made it his business to Create
Caballs up and down the Country, and sped better that way than he durst have
hoped, for the People began to dislike the Duchess, saying she had called in
the French rather to Eat them out of house and home, than to desend them: And
indeed the Army was not Sufficient to resist the Spaniards, and Savoyard
Princes, whose forces augmented daily, and Good fortune has this property, that
it creates many friends; they sided with that Party in whose behalf she
appeared, without considering whether that Party had justice on its side. In so
great an Extremity the Duchess knew not what to do, and having no hopes of any
relief save from France, she dispatched several Couriers to that Court, one
while to the King, another to Cardinal Richelieu, to demand of them a Speedy
Succors: but though the Couriers ever returned encharg'd with fair Promises, the
Affairs the Court was plied with from another side, hindered her from seeing so
suddenly the effect of them. The Duke of Weymar, who had acquired such Renown
by the taking of Brisac, died shortly after at Thirty Six years of Age, and
left a Victorious Army, Nay, and Alsace too, his Conquest, for him that with
most cunning could get to head it. For not a Officer was in his Army capable of
Supplying his Room, and Each One was more inclined to listen to Proposals,
tending more to his particular Concern than the Public Weal. Cardinal
Richelieu, a Person not wont to Sleep, when the Kings Service or his own Repute
had the opportunity of being improved, was far from letting such an Occasion
slip as this, and sent at the same time to the Principal Officers of that Army,
whom he disposed by his Money to receive such an One for General as he should
be pleased to give them. In the Interim the late Electour Palatine's Son was
secretly departed England on the same Design, Flattering himself that this Army
would so much the more willingly obey him, as being a Sworn Enemy of the House
of Austria, against whom it so long had fought: but Cardinal Richelieu fearing
he might disturb his Negotiations, had him stopped at Moulins, through which Place
he had directed his Way, without the King of Englands Intercession, having the
Prevalency to obtain his Release. Now this matter, whereon much Money had been
Expended, and for which still more was Expended daily, (For we were obliged to
pay the Garrisons of Alsace) retarded the Succors of Italy; joined to this
that we had been defeated before Thionville, where the Marquis de Feuquieres
commanding our Forces was taken Prisoner. Wherefore this Army was again to be
set on foot, the remains of which were in a bad Condition, but likewise to
sustain the repute of our Arms in Flanders, where we had more advantageous
Successes, for the Marquis de la Meilleraye had taken Hesdin, and being a
Favorite, the King had presented him the Baton of Marshall of France upon the
Breach, for the giving the greater Luster to his Actions. However that the
Duchess of Savoy might not totatally despond, she daily suffering new losses,
the Court resolved to dispatch to her Chavigni, the Cardinals Confident,
enjoined with fair Promises: He could not miss of finding that Court under a
great Affliction, for after the taking of Chivas, Prince Thomas had rendered
himself Master of Chieri, Montcallier, Juree, Verrue, Cresentin, and so many
other Places, that this Princess was upon the point of being reduced to the
single Town of Turin. Nay, and what grieved her most, was, that most places
opened their Gates of their own Accord, and manifested so much affection for
the Princes, that it seemed as if they had made great gains in Changing their
Master. Prince Thomas, who had great Correspondencies in Turin, judged it then
convenient to draw near that place, and the Duchess fearing he might take it
by main force, dispatched thence her Children, whom she caused to be conducted
into the Fortress of Montmelian. Prince Thomas having taken his Quarters in the
Valentin, daily expected in this City Resolutions to his advantage, but the
Duchess having confided it is Defense in Cardinal de la Valette, this General
being seconded with the Viscount de Turenne, took such good care that not a
body durst stir. Prince Thomas seeing things did not speed according to his
desire, drew-off from near the Town, after having rejected Proposals of Peace
which the Duchess sent him by the Popes Nuncio. He also refused advantageous
Offers made him by the King in case he would divorce himself from the
Spaniards, and having joined the Marquis de Leganez, who had recovered his
Health, he made himself Master of Montcalve and Villeneuve d'Ast, of the latter
by Surprise, and of the former by force of Arms. Ast was taken afterward, or
rather surrendered of it self, the Magistrates going out to meet him with a
Present of their Keys. The Governor made a show as if he would defend the
Citadel, but yielded without staying 'till the Canon played, which made the
world believe that what he did was only to guild over his Treachery. The
Spaniards seized the Citadel, and the Princes the Town, conformably to their
Treaty; which revived the jealousy of Both Parties, for the Spaniards had
Ambition enough to clutch all, and the Princes on their side thinking all the
Country ought to belong to them, were sufficiently vexed to see themselves
under an obligation of sharing it with others. Cardinal Richelieu having spies
in all places, laid hold of so favorable a time to endeavor the setting them
at odds; but they were at a loss what course to take, knowing his Ambition, and
fearing his deceiving them after having got of them what he pretended: What
gave them still the more apprehension was, that they knew he sought to make
them jealous of one another, and that while he made them Proposals to Both in
Common, he made others to Each in Particular, seeking only to sow Division in
the Party. And indeed not prevailing in his Design of getting Prince Thomas
over to his side, he had levelled his Intrigues upon Cardinal Maurice, into
whom he had endeavors used to insinuate, that being as he was the Eldest, if
any one, he ought to have Pretensions; that thus it became him not to Suffer
his Brother to acquire all the Authority, while the World considered him only
as a Man having a great Name, but fit for Nothing; that he must not believe
that if the young Duke should chance to dye, Prince Thomas would not put in for
a part in the Succession; that a Man used to Govern could hardly fall again to
truckle in Obedience; that, he already played the Master in his conferring of
all Civil and Military Offices; and that, if matters were communicated to his
Eminency, 'twas when they were done, and rather to have his approbation of
them, than to leave 'em at his Disposal. In the mean while, Prince Thomas was
bid to make a serious reflection upon what he did, that though he took the Pains,
he would not reap the fruit; and that after all his Industry and Endeavors, he
would find he had only ruined his Country to enrich the Spaniards, and invest
his Brother with the Wrecks of a state appertaining to him by Birthright; that
it would be much more Glorious for him to undertake the Protection of his
Nephew and the Duchess his Sister in Law, and that he would besides find
therein more advantage, that what could be his meaning by augmenting the Power
of the Spaniards, and whether he imagined they would be content with their
Dividend; that he was very far from the sentiments of the late Duke his father,
who had ever held for a General Maxim, that a Duke of Savoy ought Equally to
distrust the two Crowns; that France had no other Design in this War than to
hinder the Conquest of the Spaniards, and that as it became his to be the same,
he ought not (if well advised) any longer to deferr joining his Arms to those
of that Crown. But he was so deeply engaged with the Spaniards, that he could
not so easily disintangle himself from them, for aiming to keep him by
indissoluble Bands, they had desired before all things he should send his Wife
to Madrid, and feared they would use her ill upon the least alteration they
should perceive in his Behavior. Thus Cardinal Richelieu not in the least
prevailing by this Intrigue, the juncture required his bending his thoughts
upon Succouring the Duchess, who was in Despair to s^e her sel^ as
aba(...)don'd. However the two Brothers having made Reflection that effectually
they labored more for the Spaniards than themselves, resolved to make a Body
apart of their Troops* in hopes they would quickly multiply, because many of
the Savoyards were detained by the same Considerations, as those which made
them take this Resolution. What made them still the more desirous to separate
from the Spaniards was, that they could not agree among themselves how to
employ the Army for the Spaniards, aiming only at their own ends, after having
opened the passage of Montferrat by taking the Castle of Montcalve, harbored
no other thoughts than those of making themselves Masters of Cazal, which they
considered as a place capable of giving Law to Italy. Cardinal de la Valette
was very much puzzled, how with such a handful of men as his, to oppose so
many things at once, for Trin being surrendered to the Enemies without it is
being in his Power to prevent it, Cazal was in danger of being lost, if the
Viscount de Turenne, newly made Lieutenant General, had not brought thither a
speedy Succors. La Tour, Commanding in Mantoua, entered this place at the same
time, and had it is defense recommended to him, as being then destitute of a
Governor by the Duke of Candalle's Death, who had had that Post after the
Discovery of the Conspiracy before mentioned. This Succors hindered the
Enemies from laying Siege to it, but they blocked it up so close that nothing
more now could enter this fastness. Cardinal de la Valette had writ several
times to France for Succors, but as the Court deferred from day to day the
sending him any, he thought himself obliged to abandon sundry places, and keep
such only as were of most Consequence; by this means he formed a small Body,
with which if he could not keep the Field, at least was he in a Condition to
traverse the Enemies Designs. At length the Court being importuned by the
Generals and the Duchess, whose Afflictions daily augmented, sent the Duke of
Longueville into Italy with a Reinforcement of Seven Thousand men. Cardinal de
la Valette, who with his little Army had not been wanting to recover Chieri*
had not given it some days rest, when he marched against the City of Ast,
wherein he had some Correspondence. The two Princes of Savoye were in that
Town, and he thought they could not escape him: but they having discovered the
Conspiracy, had the Authors of it punished, and were upon their Guards. La
Vallette being on the way informed of what occurred, shifted his Course and
marched against Chivas which the Marquis de Leganez undertook to Succor: but
as he would have been very willing to have effected that Design without coming
to a Battle, he drew near Turin, expecting that the jealousy this march of his
would occasion in La Valette, to be capable of making him raise the Siege; he
also hoped that by Posting himself between the City and him he should cut off
his Provisions; but la Vallette had provided so well against all events, that
pressing his attacques, he obliged Leganez to come to him, seeing that the
Place was going to fall into his hands; there was some slight Skirmish between
the two Armies, but Leganes not having found it to his advantage had the grief
of having lost his time. However the Princes of Savoye improving the time our
Arms were busied, seized on Villa-franca and Nice, through the fault of our
Gallys, that being sent thither for the Security of those Places, were
imprudently decoyed out to Sea by some Ships that had appeared near the Coast.
The Citadel of Nice made some Resistance, hoping to have Succors sent it, but
it gave not Cardinal de la Vallette time to come thither, and the Army was
still two days march distant when it surrendered. The Loss of two such
considerable Places extremely afflicted the Duchess, who saw nothing on all
sides but subjects of Distrust; for Chavigny, who was with her demanded of her
in the King's name that she would put the rest of her Dominions into his hands,
urging for his Reasons that as long as she was Mistress of them, the People out
of the aversion they had for her, would be ever making New Practices and Stirs,
but when they knew that the King was so strongly concerned in them, the fear of
his Power would awe 'em into their Loyalty, that there was no other means to
bring her Brothers in Law to their Duty, who would think more than once how
they continued their Hostilities, seeing they had not so much to do with her as
with a Prince in a State to make 'em repent sooner or later. Though these
Reasons, very far from being capable of persuading, had nothing but what might
be baffled by one single Word, yet the Duchess not knowing what Course to take
in the Extremity she was reduced to* was obliged to acquiesce in all we had a
mind to; she remitted the Citys of Querasque, of Carmagnolle and of Savillan
into Cardinal de la Valettes hands, and though her Ministers did not advise her
to this Resolution, she could give 'em no other answer but that having trusted
us with her own Person, she had nothing more to husband: However as we were far
from being beloved in that Country, this still redoubled the aversion they had
for her, and the Inhabitants of Turin seeking out for some other Protection,
invited her Brothers in Law, promising 'em to deliver 'em up the Town. Yet as
it was not in their Power to Execute what they promised, by reason of the
Exactness used in the Guard of all the Posts, resolved it was, that Prince
Thomas should approach the Town with Petards and Scaling-Ladders, and they
showed him a Place by which he might hope to make himself Master of it the more
easily. The matter having been projected with much Conduct, Prince Thomas
coming on the side of the Green Bastion, there erected his Scaling-Ladders, and
having caused his Men to mount without being discovered, he made himself Master
of the Place, without it is costing him so much as one man: He forthwith broke
open the Castle-Gate with a Petard, and the noise having awaked some Soldiers,
they ran half a-sleep, but did but increase the Victory by their Defeat. The
Duchess found all the pains imaginable to make her Escape into the Citadel,
whither Her Royal Highness withdrew almost stark Naked, having so many other
Affairs in her head that she minded not her present State. The City was
preserved Sound and Entire by the Orders of Prince Thomas, and it was as a
Miracle that amid the Disorder and Confusion that the Darkness the more
augmented, he could hinder the Inhabitants from being Plundered. Cardinal de la
Valette had no sooner learnt this vexatious News, than that he raised the siege
of Cuni, whither he had bent his Course, after having in vain endeavored
relieving the Citadel of Nice, and being drawn near Turin, his thoughts were
less possessed with recovering it, than how to get the Duchess thence, and
give some Succors to what still held out. During these Transactions, Leganez
having Notice of this great Success, quitted all other Business to endeavor
the reducing the Citadel, but in an Interview between Prince Thomas and him,
they had again some hard Words touching this new Conquest; for the Prince
pretended that having been called by the Inhabitants, it belonged to him, and
Leganez that having been taken by Scalado, there was no question of its falling
to the King his Masters Portion. These Contests which had like to have
proceeded very far, having given some Breathing time, the Popes Nuncio proposed
a truce, and Prince Thomas being inclined out of the fear he lay under, that
the Spaniards would render themselves Masters of the Citadel, some hopes there
were that while the truce continued, we should get this Prince wholly out of
their hands. In the mean while, the Viscount de Turenne had an Extraordinary
Passion to leave this Country; and after having Writ about it to Court several
times, without receiving any answer, he resolved to speak of it himself to the
King, then said to be coming from France, to give the more heat to the Affairs
of Italy; for though he had a strong Passion to do the Duchess of Savoy Service,
the goodness of his Nature did not allow him to see the Condition she was
reduced to, without being struck with Grief, and without having a Design to
remove from a Place where he continually had objects of Compassion before his
Eyes. However as naught but pity inspired him with these Sentiments, he
promised the Duchess who reproch'd him for meaning to abandon her, that he
would not harbor such a thought in case she had an Assistance answerable to
his Desires. But imagining that all the Rumors which were spread about of the
Kings coming, were only to prevent her falling into the utmost Despondency, and
to hinder her from coming to an accommodation with her Brothers in Law, during
which Cardinal Richelieu endeavored to do her Affairs on another side.

The Truce I have newly mentioned, was only for Six Weeks, and though this term
was very short to expect great matters thence, yet we improved it to advantage.
Cardinal Richelieu considering at length, that the affairs of Italy were to him
of as much consequence as those of Flanders and of Germany, gave order that a
part of the Troops which were designed for Alsatia should march that waywards.
This Diversion afforded the Emperor some Respite, he having already lost
Alsatia, and was at a great plunge to oppose the Suedes, whose Affairs were
reestablish'd in Germany under the Duke of Weymar, and under the Conduct of
General Bannier, who had Succeeded him in the Command of the Armies.
Nevertheless as he was in a state to gain by this Diversion, he highly
complained against the Spaniards, saying that for their own particular
Interests they cared not though he had lost the Ancient Patrimony of the House of
Austria. Now to appease a little his Complaints, the Spaniards sent him some
Money, with a promise of aiding him Suddenly with a potent Army. And indeed
they began to make many Leavies in their territories; but they were no sooner
Complete, but that their own Interests being dearer to them than those of
another, they designed them for Flanders, whose Conquest the King had laid
aside, though he seemed to apply his thoughts a little more than formerly to the
Affairs of Italy. Nevertheless as the passes were Stopped up, these New-raised
forces were to be shipped to be transported into that Country: But the
Hollanders having as much Interest as we to hinder their landing, put forth at
the same time to Sea under the Command of Admiral Tromp, which so Startled the
Spaniards though much stronger in Men and Shipping, that they retired into the
King of Englands Ports, with whom they had made an advantageous Treaty. Yet as
the King of England was under no rupture with the Hollanders, they hoped still
to find some favorable Occasion to beat the Spaniards: But the King put forty
Men of War out to sea under Color of Securing his Coasts, and those Ships
being posted between the Spaniards and them, broak all their Measures. In the
mean while a thick fogg arising, the Spaniards by favor of the English who
covered their Motions, attempted to pass on to Dunkirk, and the Hollanders not
perceiving it till a little late, could not hinder some Ships from Entering the
Port; nevertheless the greatest part having been cut off before they could Join
the rest, were forced, to fly without the English making any show of giving
them Succors; for the King of England against whom the Hollanders would have
been reduced to declare War if he persever'd thus in protecting their Enemies,
would not proceed openly to Hostilities, for fear of making his People still
more Malecontent, they having through Presbiterian Cant and Artifice been brought
to degenerate much in their Loyalty to the Crown. The Spaniards retired again
into his Ports, but seeing they spent and moulder'd away daily more and more,
without hopes of being able to induce the English to do more for them, they
resolved to return into Spain, as soon as they should find the Occasion. A mist
again arising at two or three days End, they fancied that as it had been
favorable to them the former ^^me it might be st^^^ so this. But Tromp
Suspecting their Design, having been more amply inform^^ of it by some Slight
Vessels, which he kep^ cruizing up and down, that he might have due
information, set Sail immediately, and after an Engagement of Nine Hours
continuance, obtained so signal a Victory that he took Sixteen Ships, and sunck
several Others. This good success was of great moment for us as well as for
the Hollanders, ^o^ it afforded us the means of besieging and taking Arras, the
Capital City of Art^is, and Sheltered the frontiere of Italy on the side of
Doullens. In the mean while the King of England being jealous of this Conquest,
was just ready to proceed to a Declaration, but Cardinal Richelieu who had as
many Creatures in Other Kingdoms as in our own, procured an Insurrection of the
Scotts against him, which giving him as much business as he could turn his
hands to, he was obliged to leave Others at Quiet. Much about the same time was
it that the Portugals being encouraged by his Promises, all so cast off the
Spanish yoke, and that he sent the Prince of Conde against the fortress of
Sa^s^s, standing at the Entrance into Roussillon: but as if fortune delighted
in favoring him still more and more, it happened that the Spaniards meaning at
any rate to defend that Place, caused a powerful Army to march into Catalonia,
which having laid desolate that Province by an Infinite Number of Vexations,
erected a desire in the Catalonians to break out also into a Rebellion. The
beginning of their Revolt burst out against the Count de(...)st. Colombe their
Viceroy, to whom they imputed most of their Sufferings, and to whom the City of
Barcelona Especially boar a great deal of ill will, by reason he had Caused one
of it is Sherifs to be poisoned for opposing his Intentions in the Defense of
it is Privileges. The Viceroy seeing the fury of the People against him would
have escaped into the Arsenal, but not thinking himself there in Safety, he
designed to have embarked upon a Galley, when he was pittiously massacred by an
infinite Number of that Seditious People. Cardinal Richelieu, wont to frame
Revolts, was not wanting to foment this framed to his hand: He sent to assure
the Catalonians of a powerful Protection, and they having deputed some among
them, he rec^iv'd 'em with so much honor and Caresses, that he would not have
done more to the Amb^ssadou^s of the Princes allied to the Crown. Now having
Excited so many troubles in the Dominions of our Enemies, and of those who were
capable of giving them Succors, he the more effi^^aciously set himself to the
Aff^irs of Italy. The King at the very Beginning of the Campagn had taken a
Progress to Grenoble, from whence he had already sent Succors, and where he
had seen the Dutch^ss of Savoy his Sister, she being come so far to implore
his Protection: but she had not bad all manner of Contentment, for such strange
Propositions were made her Royal Highness, ^s those of admitting a French
Garrison into Montmelian, and sending her Son to Paris to be brought up with
the Dauphin, that she perceived, but too late, the French had a design rather
to invade her Country, than restore the Lawful Master to it. However having
had sufficient Constancy to resist these Proposals, in favor of which the
Court offered her a thousand advantageous things; the King at length desisted
from it, and the Brother and Sister parting afterward so so content with one
another, the King returned to Paris, and the Duchess of Savoy to her own home.
Cardinal de la Valette dying during these Occurrences, he left the Army under
Viscount de Turenne's Command, he having been made Lieutenant General, but laid
the Cardinals Death so much to heart, that he could not relish the pleasure he
would have had at another time, for his new Dignity. The Duchess of Savoy
being returned, conjured him anew, but with Earnest desires that he would not
abandon her: but besides it is not lying in his power to do so without order,
Cardinal de la Vallette's Death did not allow him to desire it, not that what
he had done had been out of jealousy, but because it would have seemed he had
refused to take upon him the Conduct of the Army, for that it was a troublesome
Province at that time, as consisting not of above six thousand Men, but his
Prudence supplying all, he put himself in a posture of disturbing the Enemies
Designs, they pretending to avail themselves of the Generals Death. However the
Court had no sooner notice of this Accident, than that it nominated the Count
de Harcourt to supply the Room of Cardinal de la Vallette, which it would not
have done, as having sufficient Confidence in the Viscount de Turenne, if the
Concerns of his family had not been in such a state as rendered him in some
manner suspected. I said before that the Count de Soissons was retired to
Sedan, and had been Suffered to remain there as if nothing was to be
apprehended from his Retreat: but the time and juncture having occasion^d the
harboring other Sentiments, it was believed that Mr de Bouillon having quitted
the Service of the States, and being withdrawn to his own home, with the
Marquis of Berghin's Daughter whom he had Married, fomented his Discontents,
and that they were both contriving how to disturb the Prosperities the Kingdom
at that time enjoyed. The Sanctuary which the Duke of Guise, and the Baron du
Be, who were Malecontent with Cardinal Richelieu, had found with him, still
augmented his suspicions, and the Court fearing the Viscount de Turenne might
Espouse his Interests to the prejudice of his Duty, it was very willing to tie
his hands from doing ill, supposing him so inclined. In the mean while, the
Count de Harcourt was no sooner nominated to go Command the Troops in Italy,
but that he went away Post for the greater Expedition: He found the Viscount de
Turenne had already achieved sundry Exploits, and being very willing to Share
in the honor that must thence redound to him, he went to the Army, the Command
of which he took upon him. Though the Viscount de Turenne had some Occasion not
to be Satisfied with his Arrival, he paid him all the Duties he owed to his
General, joined to this, that his Birth and Peculiar Merit challenged a decent
demeanor to him. The Count de Harcourt, being the best bred of all Mankind,
returned him his Civilities with usury, but neither of 'em stopping at these
outward Marks of Civility, they contracted together so strong a Friendship, a^
not to be able to be without one another Company. The Count de Harcourt
signalized his arrival with very glorious beginnings, and though his Army was no
more than four thousand Foot and three thousand Horse, yet failed he not of
performing Enterprises that seemed above his forces. The Spaniards meaning to
Cross them, advanced to meet him, whilst Prince Thomas marched directly to the
River de -- which the Count de Harcourt was to pass for the making his Retreat.
The Count de Harcourt knowing the Spaniard had double his Number of Men, did
not think Convenient to venture a Battle, and marched away to the Bridge de la
Route as Prince Thomas had well foreseen, but perceiving he was penn'd-up
between the two Armies, he made have to pass the Bridge, while the Viscount de
Turenne by his Order entrenched himself there to stop the Spaniards. He then
marched against Prince Thomas, who advanced, fancying he could not miss of
Victory, but fortune declaring her self in favor of the Count de Harcourt, as
a reward for so bold an Action, and managed with so much judgment, Prince
Thomas was beaten, though his Personal Performances were Extraordinary. As
Leganez could not be ignorant that they were Engaged, from the Noise of Cannons
and the Volleys from the Muskets which he heard distinctly, made have to arrive
at the River, and after having taken some Carriages that had not as yet had
time to pass, he caused the Bridge to be attacked, which was defended with
great Courage. This Resistance cooled the Spaniards heat, and having known
Prince Thomas already to be Deseated, they durst not attempt to force the
Bridge, for fear of enlarging their Misfortune by some fresh Mishap. However
the Viscount de Turenne having caused his Troops to pass the River, was
followed so closely, as reduced him several times to face about; but the
Enemies having perceived by his looks there was no great matter to be got by
him, left him to join the Count de Harcourt, without using any further
Impediment. This Success being equally admired by Friends and Enemies, raised
the Count de Harcout's fame to a high pitch, and though the Viscount de Turenne
seemed to have little share in it by reason the other had the Command in Chief,
yet was part of it nevertheless attributed to him: but this the Count de
Harcourt was so very far from finding fault at, he owned himself that things
would no percha^se have turned so happily, if he had not contributed thereunto
with his Courage and Conduct. The Spaniards joining afterward Prince Thomas*
we durst not keep the Field: however the jealousy they had of one another
hinder*d them from atchieving any considerable matter; and the Duchess taking
that time to make new Proposals to her Brothers in Law, so as the world at
length thought an accommodation must infallibly be brought about, considering
the advantages Both Parties must thence derive; for Cardinal Maurice had the
Dutchesses Eldest Daughter offered him for a Wife with a considerable Portion,
and as he had his mind possessed with an opinion that the Young Duke of Savoye
could not live, he thereby secured to himself the Succession. On the other side
they offered Prince* Thomas to dismember the Duchy, and to invest him with the
Sovereignty of some places. But these Princes began to become jealous of one
another, through these Proposals, which would severally have fitted their turns,
but displeased 'em in Common, out of the Passion each had to attribute to
himself the Sovereign Power; at last they began to harbor a Diffidence of one
another; and Leganez not having 'till then been able to obtain their Consent to
his laying siege to Cazal, took so favorable a time to attack it. The
Spaniards had ever considered that Conquest as the most important they could
make in Italy: but fancying it could not miss falling into their hands, after
the Count de Harcourts retreat and the Bickerings of those two Brothers, they
marched thither with such great Confidence, that they neglected taking a world
of Precautions needful to their Enterprise. But what made them believe it the
more certain achievement, is that the Garrison was weak, and that La Tour the
Commander of the place had reason to distrust the Inhabitants, the most part of
whom held Correspondence with the Duchess. Thus by minding affairs within
doors, this Governor, as I may say, forgot affairs without doors, and gave
Leganez time to make his approaches. Leganez seeing every thing contributing to
his Success, pressed on his point, and met with no other Impediments than the
wonted inconveniences of the Season, not much advanced as yet. In the mean
while he daily expected the Tidings of Rossignano's being taken, having sent
thither a Detachment by reason it might have obstructed and Cut off Provisions
from going to his Army. Rossignano was only a plain Castle, but though the
Garrison had not any hopes of Succors, yet it held out longer than expected,
nay and beyond La Tour's hopes, La Tour took thence occasion to Encourage his
Men, and after having made sure of some Persons to him suspected, he began to
show himself on the outworks oftener than he had done before. His Presence made
the Spaniards find more Obstacles, and beginning to fear the Siege might spin
out into a Length, they worked with great Care on the Lines of Circumvallation,
on which they worked before only for fashions sake: but as it was not a work to
be done in one day* by reason of the situation of the Places, the Count de
Harcourt having drawn out the most Garrisons he possibly could, he marched Day
and Night, and came before it was finished. Whatever Confidence the Spaniards
might have had at first, they were nevertheless Surpised; for though he had but
Seav'n thousand foot, with little less than four thousand Horse, they were
Sufficient however to attack their Quarters, that were remote from one another,
and not equally entrenched, they required a great many men in such Places where
the Lines were not yet completed, and thus unproviding most of the Others,
these latter were under so great a Dread of being attacked, that the presence
of our men was sufficient to Defeat them. All things being thus in disorder and
Confusion, it was easy for the Count de Harcout to promise his men the victory,
they being already sufficiently animated by the sight of the Enemies. The
greatest difficulty was how to get them near, for the rains had so Spoiled the
ways, especially about the town, that it was no small Difficulty to bring the
Canon thither; Yet it was a necessity, because if ours could attain to make a
Battery upon a little Mountain on this side the Lines, they might fire thence
upon the Spanish Camp, and incommode them Extremely. Count Harcourt having
thereupon contrived all imaginable Means to overcome that Difficulty with
Others that offered themselves, at length the Army came in view of the Enemies,
and seized on some rising Grounds within Canon-shot. They raised there a
Battery at the same time, which fired into the very trench, so as that the Men
there a Working, being besides to be upon their Guard against the Besieged,
were under an Extreme Peril. Leganez knew not what to do to re-incourage his
Men, whose fear was Extraordinary, seeing they were upon the Point of being
defeated, for not a man could stir now out of the Lines to fight, being shut
up so Close, that before they could have been drawn up in Battalia, the Enemies
had fallen upon them; Yet making a Virtue of Necessity, he re-inforc'd those
Quarters that were most Exposed, and showed himself indesatigable by the pains
he took. He told his Men that if they could resist the first fury of the
French, they would quickly retreat for want of Provisions, and that after that
the Place being in still greater want than the Army, would of it self fall into
their hands; that this was the means to finish the War of Italy all at once,
which otherwise would last a whole Age; that they wwre much more Numerous than
the Enemies, and that though they seemed remote from one another, he had
nevertheless taken Care for their giving one another a mutual Relief. But the
Count de Harcourt, without losing time thus in useless words, ^ought already
with much Courage and Fortune* ^e routed all that made head against him, and
the General Officers doing as much after his Example, so great a Disorder was
there on all sides among the Spaniards, that it cannot be said, who fled first;
many were killed without fighting, Others fled after the first discharge, and
all in geneneral shew*d so little Courage, that its above wonder they lost the
day so soon. The Germans made a little more resistance, but seeing themselves
abandoned, they betook themselves to their heels as well as Others, so as if
they had been pursued, they would have all been Cut in pieces. The Night coming on
hindered the Count de Harcourt from pursuing his Victory, besides he fancied he
had done sufficient in having relieved Cazal. However meaning to make advantage
of the Consternation the Enemies were in, he conceived a Design which some
accused of temerity, though the Success surpassed his hopes; this was to
beleaguer Turin in which Place were all the forces of the Princes of Savoy, and
where Prince Thomas had shut up himself, for how, said they, can we hope for
any Success from his Enterprise, he having but ten thousand men, being obliged
to a great Circumvallation, beseiging a Place Defended by a Prince, and where
the Garrison falls little short of his forces, and who in a word has so utterly
defeated the Spaniards, but that he ought to apprehend their returning to
beseige him himself in his Camp. And indeed Leganez had no sooner notice of his
being before the Town, but that he comforted himself for the disgrace that had
newly befallen him, as if he had been sure of a very speedy retaliation. Yet as
he had experimented his Enemies Courage, he would not be guilty of any neglect,
and having strengthened his Army with some Succors that came to him from the
Land of Milan, he marched in such great Confidence of the victory, that he sent
word to Prince Thomas Suddenly to see the younger Brother la Perle pass for
that he could no longer escape them. This name the Count de Harcourt had given
him, for that he was the younger Brother of his House, and that he wore a Perle
in his Ear. But the great Actions he had already done with those he since
performed, Occasioned his quickly having another name conferred on him, and
that instead of calling him the younger Brother Perle, they called him the
Perle of Younger Brothers. Being not ignorant of the Greatness of his
Enterprise, and that it is accomplishment must necessarily require a
Considerable time, he neglected nothing on his side either as to fortifying his
Camp, or depriving the Enemies of the means of injuring him, and of making a
long resistance. He diverted the Course of the River Doria on which were the
Mills of the Town; but seeing that the Beseiged brought it again into its
wounted Bed, he caused a Battery to be raised against those Mills, which were
so ruined by the Canon, as made 'em unfit for any use. In the mean while to
favor his Approaches, he made himself Master of the Bridge upon the Po by the
Convent of the Capuchins and of the Valentine. But after having surmounted
these Obstacles, there arose a thousand Others, the least of which was capable
of pauling his Courage, if he had had less than what he possesst. He daily
sustained the Sallyes of the Besieged, and had business sufficient to repel
them and mind his Lines, which Leganez threatened every moment to attack. The
Viscount De Turenne was a great help to him in all things, and he employed him
more willingly than others, either that he had more Confidence in him, or that
he knew him most Zealous for the Enterprise. Leganez in the mean while being
come near with Eighteen thousand Men, made a show as if he meant to recover the
Bridge, but after having attempted it in vain, he thought he should do better
to go pass the River at Montcallier, from whence he might afterward relieve
the Town more easily. This Design was not so secret but that it came to the
Knowledge of the Count de Harcourt, and of the General Officers, the most part
of whom advised him to take so favorable a time to make his Retreat; for to
what purpose, said they to him, should you persevere any longer in a Design,
wherein was nothing but shame to receive and blows to be got; that his Army was
rather besieged than besieging; that Hunger killed equally Men and Horses, and
that the not embracing so propitious an occasion was designing it is Ruin. But
this Prince having a Courage above all difficulties, not suffering himself to
be seduced by their Remonstrances, sent the Viscount de Turenne, who had ever
been of his opinion, to burn the Bridge of Montcallier, that was only of Wood,
and having now nothing to struggle with but hunger, he showed his Soldiers by
his own example that it became 'em to be contented with a little, when the
King's service so required it. He had now nothing but Herbs served up to his
Table, and his men seeing it would ill become 'em to complain while he shared
with 'em to the utmost inconveniences, lived likewise upon Herbs, and by
degrees grew accustomed to so insipid a nourishment. Leganez, having found the
Bridge of Montcallier burnt, turned back, leaving Carlo de la Gatta, one of his
Principal Officers to repair it. This obliged the Viscount de Turenne to have
an eye to what he meant to do, and stopping on the other side of the Water,
there was no likelihood but that there must be a Brush. During these
occurrences Gatta discovered ^ Ford a little higher, but durst not undertake to
pass it in the Viscount de Turenne's presence, and chose rather to make use of
the Convenience offered him by certain little Islands for the covering his
Motions: Having seized those Isles by main Might, the Viscount de Turenne would
have dislodged him thence, but having been Wounded, his men were dis-heartned
by this Accident; and the Viscount de Turenne being disabled from Action, Gatta
laid his Bridge by the means of these Islands, which served him for shelter and
a Retreat. The Bridge being made, Leganez caused his Army to pass it, less with
Design however of fighting, than of distressing and shutting-up the Count de
Harcourt in a narrower compass, he seeming to be reduced to the utmost
extremities, for he had been forced to take Provisions out of the Citadel of
Turin, and other the Places he held in the Neighborhood, to supply the room of
Herbs, of which he began to be in want. Wherefore it was Leganez his opinion to
have him by Famine; but Prince Thomas, who suffered on his side, and through
scarcity of Victuals feared losing the affection born him by the Inhabitants of
Turin, was of a different sentiment, and signified to him that without a speedy
Succors he would proceed to an accommodation with his Sister in Law: Nay, he
gave him but four days time, and Leganez knowing him to Entertain sundry
Dissatisfactions, and that he, perhaps, only sought after some Pretexts to
Change his Party, he resolved both contrary to his own sense, and to what
reason required, to attack the Count de Harcourt. This Prince being upon the
point of dying of hunger, and had been already advised rather to implore the
Enemies Mercy, than see his Army Perish, seeing his Destiny would depend
thenceforward on his Courage, found now Comfort after all his Sufferings; Yet
he stood in great want of the Viscount de Turenne, whose Wound detained him in
Bed, he viewed and Consulted with the Other General Officers what was to be
done, and gave them each their Posts. But the Viscount de Turenne unwilling to
remain Idle while any thing was to be done, left his Bed, and was not one of
those from whom he derived the least Service. Leganez marched in the mean while
with all his Troops, and had agreed with Prince Thomas, that while he attacked
the Lines on his ^ide, He should make a Vigorous Sally on his; but Prince
Thomas making a little too much haste was repulsed with some loss, and this
Success having given Courage to our Troops, they received Leganez with so much
Vigor, that if Carlo de la Gatta had not forced the Post de la Purpurato,
which he attacked, he would have been Every where beaten. But for prevention
sake they in the Camp had felled many Trees to stop the way to the Town, and
this Contrivance having hampered la Gatta in some Perplexity, gave the Count de
Harcourt time to Spur-on thither with part of his Horse. La Gatta was roughly
handled: But Prince Thomas having at length found the means to open to himself
a Passage, came in to his Succors, and after having fought in Conjunction with
him without being able to break our Horse, they both retreated into the Town.
Leganez thinking this Sufficient to produce the raising of the Siege, ordered
the Retreat to be sounded, and having passed the Po again, seized on certain
Hills and Rising Grounds, from whence he saw not only into the Count de
Harcourt's Camp, but also into the very Town. But things fell out quite
contrary to his Expectations. For la Gatta and his Men having only served to
consume the Provisions in Turin, the inhabitants began to murmur against the
Spaniards, and Prince Thomas gave him once more to understand, that unless he
found the means to relieve him with an Other Succors he must Surrender very
Suddenly. Leganez having Experienced how difficult it was to force the Count
de Harcourts Camp, knew not what to promise him, and from day to day deferred
attacking it, hoping the same things which obliged Prince Thomas to make him
those Demands with so much Earnestness, would oblige the Count de Harcourt to
raise the Siege. But the Viscount de Turenne having taking upon him to Conduct
a Convoy to the Camp, having accordingly brought it thither in Safety, his
hopes vanished in such manner as rend'red him well pleased with the Promises
made him by a certain Ingenier, of Conveying meal to the Besieged, by the
means of some Mortar-pieces of his Invention, the trial of which was made at
the same time. And indeed they received some feeble Succors from this
Contrivance, but all the Mortar-pieces not producing the same effect, a great
part of the Bullets wherewith they were charged, fell into the Count de
Harcourts Camp, thus he at the same time he admired, received Comfort from the
Invention. Leganez not finding this turn to Account, relied no longer so much
upon these Mortar-pieces, for as much as another Accident had thence befallen
him, for as the Bullets contained Letters as well as Meal, the Count de
Harcourt got thence intelligence, which it much concerned the Spaniards to have
had concealed. In the mean while, the want of Victuals augmenting daily in
Turin, Prince Thomas resolved to send away Carlo de la Gatta with all the
(...)en he brought, thinking he had Enough without them for a good Defense.
Leganez being in no wi^e minded to oppose this Design as the only means he had
left to Satisfy Prince Thomas, he again passed the Po, and come and attacked
the Lines of Circumvallation defended by the Count de Harcourt, while Carlo de
la Gatta being sustained by Prince Thomas marched against those of
Contravallation, where the Count du Plessis Praslin was advanced with a part of
the Cavalry. Leganez hi(...) attacque being only to savor the other, was not
difficult to sustain, but the Count du Plessis found it a harder task to resist
la Gatta, who after having opened himself a passage, broke through Squadrons, and
at length was going to join Leganez, what ever obstruction was endeavored to
be used, if he had not found a Meadow all Covered over with Water, wherein his
Horses were laid sast in the Mud; He would have sought out another Passage; but
seeing our men fell upon him from all sides, he retreated into the Town, and
had much ado to make his Escape. It failed but little of his being denied
Admission, for the Inhabitants seeing themselves Exposed by his Return to a new
Misery, knew not whether to treat him as a friend or Enemy, this last Quality,
as they thought better becoming him, since that thitherto far from having given
them any Succors, he had only served to augment the Number and bitterness of
their sufferings.

Two or three days after this, did they in the City, and those in Leganez Camp
remain still without making any new attempt, but this General seeing that the
Count de Harcourt had so fortified his Camp on that side where Gatta had
endeavored to join him, that it was as a thing impossible to force it, he went
to view the Posts of the Valentin, and of the Capuchins, and fancied he might
slip between both, if Prince Thomas made himself Master of some forts built on
purpose to render this Passage the more Difficult. Both having agreed on this
Enterprise and on the signal they were to give Each Other. Prince Thomas caused
the Fo^^s to be attacked, and though bravely defended by those within, they were
won by dint of Sword: but the Man that had taken upon him to give the Signal,
being killed in the Occasion, Leganez could not be informed of what occurred,
and Prince Thomas taking it to be his fault, caused his Men to retreat after
having Blown-up the Forts. The Count de Harcourt having been in Continual
Allarums from the beginning to the End of the Conflict, seeing it terminated
without other disadvantage, took Care to erect again New Forts, and provided
them with more Men. Yet was he upon the Tenters, having no rest day or Night,
nor had he had more since the beginning of the Siege; nor fared it better with
the General Officers. But none Suffered more than the Viscount de Turenne,
whose health was not over-well Confirmed: For besides his Wound he had a
lingering feavour which wore him away by little and little. The Count de
Harcourt advised him to withdraw, until he had attained a perfect Cure, but he
begged him not to mention that to him, as long as he had such important matters
on his hands, and he performed the service Equally with Persons in Good Health.
So much circumspection had like to have cost him his Life; for being his turn
to march, the Count de Harcourt commanded him to go meet a Convoy coming from
France, and of which the Marquis de Villeroy, had taken Care as far as the
Frontier. He obeyed notwithstanding his Indisposition: But the hardship he
underwent for fifteen days together, with Continual Rains, brought him so low
as forced him to betake himself to his Bed at his Return. Yet his Illness was
more tedious than dangerous, but troubled him however, Extremely, for he
fancied not that all must go ill without him, but that, in whatever Condition,
he was bound to be present in all Occasions, for which reason he would have
risen ever and anon, and the Physicians forbidding it had been to no purpose,
if the Count de Harcourt had not joined his Commands to their Prohibitions. The
Poor Patient said, he was unhappy, he who had ever been in good health when he
had had nothing to do, to be now Compelled to lie in his Bed when his Honor
was at stake. At each discharge of a Musket he raised himself up, and ask't for
his Clothes, and though informed there was no Action, yet would he not believe
it, till he had it confirmed to him by some Person of Authority.

The Convoy he had brought to the Camp was a mighty Succors to the Count de
Harcourt, for not only was it composed of the Provisions necessary, but also of
four thousand Men, which were a great help to him to Line such Posts as were
unprovided. Several Persons of Quality came besides from France, either to be
present at a Siege that made already so much Noise, or to please Cardinal
Richelieu then uneasy about its upshot: For besides his having reason to be
concerned for it as Principal Minister, he had Married one of his Nieces to this
Prince, and would have been sorry that after having acquired so much fame in
Italy, for want of Succors he had missed a Place that would Cover him with an
immortal Honor. These new Comers were daily in the Viscount de Turenne's Tent,
and hearing them say the Enemies were to make a New Effort, he got up, say they
what they would, and repaired to the Count de Harcourts. This General ran to
Embrace him as soon as ever he came within his ken, but backed his Caresses with
obliging Reproaches, and feign would have had him returned to his Tent: but the
Viscount de Turenne made him answer that his face was not to be minded, and
that his Arm would have Sufficient strength when required by the Kings and his
Service, the Count de Harcourt embraced him anew, and having not been able to
persuade him to a Compliance with his desires, he sent him to perform his
Charge. This Permission which he gave him seemed to be more healing to him than
all the Remedies he could have taken. His Countenance changed in a little time,
and God having granted him the recovery of his Perfect health, he showed
himself so vigilant in all things, that the Count de Harcourt was afraid least
this might occasion him a Relapse. But the Siege was now to be of no long
Continuance, for Prince Thomas having no more Victuals for so Numerous a
Garrision, and seeing no hopes of getting any by Leganez his procurement, who
had made diverse New Attacks without Success, he capitulated at last
notwithstanding the Protestations of that General, who had indeed some
distresses in his Camp, but nothing comparable to those they in the Town had so
long Suffered. This Capitulation, in which Mazarin who had been sent by
Cardinal Richelieu on purpose into Italy, had a great share, gave great
Umbrages to Leganez. And indeed he knew this Minister had made Sundry
Propositions to Prince Thomas, nay, and that this Prince had given 'em so far
a hearing, that he had promised to put himself under the Kings Protection with
his Wife and Children, provided he might have left to him the Places he
possessed. They say too he had promised to join his forces with those of the
Count de Harcourt to wage War in Conjunction upon the Spariards; but whether
it be so or not, o^ that he could not perform this Design, before he had got
his Wife out of their Hands, who was at Madrid, as I said before, he entered
into New Engagements with them, and continued his Hostilities, as he formerly
had done. Nevertheless he made a Truce with his Sister in Law, during
Endeavors which were used to reduce him to his former sentiments, by offering
him still greater advantages both for himself and for his Adherents: but he
still waved Compliance on the score of his Wife, who was narrowly guarded in
Spain as a sure Pledge of his fidelity. And indeed the Spaniards having without
much difficulty got the Wind of these Negociations which we were not over-Exact
in Concealing on our side, that so we might render him suspected, fancied this
to be the only means to keep him Close to their Combination.

The Success of Turin, and the raising the Siege of Cazal, gave not only
reputation to the Count de Harcourt, but also to the Crown; which had been
sufficiently slighted 'till then in Italy, but seeing it to have the Alps open
by the means of Pignorol, and its Power mightily augmented by the Possession of
Cazal, all Princes with Emulation courted its Protection, and the Amity of the
first Minister, to whom they attributed so many prosperous Events. Yet this did
not hinder his particular Enemies from declaring against him. I have before
said how that the Count de Soissons was withdrawn to Sedan, with other Persons
of Consideration, and there was br(...)ng a Rebellion then, just upon the point
of breaking-out. Mr de Bouillon had been tampering very far in these Practices,
and besides several Leavies he had made, he had also sent to the Enemies who
had promised him great Succors. The Duke of Lorrain, to whom part of his
Dominions had been newly restored, combined also with these Malcontents, and
they all prepared for War. As it was impossible but that this must be come to
the Viscount de Turenne's Knowledge, he lay under an unconceiveable
Apprehension, and daily Expected such sad news from all these things that he
had not one Moments repose. At length the Design broak out by the Troops Lamboy
put into the City of Sedan, and as this Town was under the Kings Protection,
which Monsieur de Bouillon by this means renounced, the Cardinal having for a
while connived at Passages of this nature, seeing he could no longer do it at
least, without betraying Weakness, caused an Army to march under the Conduct of
the Marschal de Chatillon. The Count de Soissons, to whom, as Prince of the
Blood, the Duke de Bouillon had deferred the Command, assembled his on his
side, and being come in sight of one another, they fought and the Battle
proved fatal to Both Partys. For after the Count de Soissons had entirely
broaken the Marshall de Chatillon, a certain Person calling out to him at some
distance that the Enemies rallied again, he lift up the vizor of his Helmet
with his Pistol, either to take air or view the man that brought him this
tidings; But the Pistol going off he killed himself to the great Grief of all
his Party: Others say he was killed by a Trouper of the Company of Orleans, and
some by the hand of an Assassinate, hired for that purpose by the Cardinal: but
I have heard it affirmed by Persons then present, and among Others by Lamesan;
who died Sub-Lieutenant of the Kings Gendarmes, that he kill^d himself in the
manner I have now related. Thus I think it more fitting to credit those then
upon the Spot, than such as speak out of passion, or upon the testimony of
Persons at that time far remote. His Death did not Change the face of the
Battle, but wrought a great Change in the affairs of his Party, whom this
accident having plunged into amazement or rather Consternation, gave the
Marshall de Chattillon time to bring his Army again on foot. The Cardinal
being rid of so dangerous an Enemy sent this Marshall more fresh Troops, and
the Marshall drawing near Sedan after having given out the report that the
King himself was going to follow with another Army, the Duke de Bouillon had
recourse to Supplications and Prayers, and obtained by this Marschal, his
Kinsman's Intercession, a Pardon for all that had passed. As for the Duke of
Lorrain he was divested anew of his Dominions, and pitty'd by none, as ever
occasioning his own misfortune. The Cardinal after having so happily terminated
this Affair* seeing himself above all, had a design to be revenged on the
Prince of Conde, Whom he accused of having Clandestinely Conspired his Ruin,
and as he never wanted a Pretext when he meant to use one, he resolved to
revive the Business of Fontarabia and Dole, which had been discourst to that
Princes disadvantage The Prince of Conde having an infinite deal of Wit,
entertained some suspicion of what was in agitation, and attributed it to the
Coldness he had showed to a Proposal that had been made him on this Cardinal's
behalf touching a Match with his Eldest Son: But going one day to make him a
visit, he converted his suspicions into Certainty, when he observed at his
going away Guards had been set to secure him; he mounted up again immediately,
and pretending he had forgot something* he returned into the Cardinals Chamber
with whom he discourst of a marriage of his Son with his Niece. This
Proposition mollify'd the Cardinal, and having at the very instant sent orders
to the Guards to withdraw, he reconducted the Prince of Conde to the very Door
of his Antichamber, giving to understand by this Civility which none received
from him, that a great Change was wrought in his Mind.

The Viscount de Turenne, whom his Brother's Concern had Extremely ruffl'd,
being again at rest through the Upshot it had had, thought himself obliged to
make his Acknowledgements to the King, who had the goodness to declare it to
have been in consideration of him that he abated of his justice: He also wrote
to the Cardinal upon this matter, and this Minister having a particular value
for the Viscount, and willing to Wedd him to his fortune, had him offered by
the Count de Harcourt to marry one of his Kinswomen: But this Prince having
more Disposition to a Single Life than to Matrimony, waved the Match upon
account of Difference of Religion, which appearing a valuable Reason to the
Cardinal, this matter did not in the least lessen the regard he had for him.

In the mean while the Count de Harcourt longing to take a turn into France to
receive there the applauses due to his Great Actions, left his Army under the
Conduct of the Viscount de Turenne, after having received leave from the Court.
The Viscount de Turenne having not till now been Commander in Chief, was not
willing to lose the occasion offered to acquire Glory, but took the field
though it was still Winter, and having beleaguered Yvree, he shut up that Place
so Close, that the Enemies believed it lost without a speedy Succor: But the
Viscount de Turenne had laid his measures so well, that after they had
approached his Lines, they durst not undertake to offer Battle. To make a
Diversion, they laid Siege to Chivas, whereat the Viscount de Turrenne was not
much Concerned, as hoping before they could push on their Attacks, he should
have rendered himself Master of Yvree, and be in a Condition to make 'em raise
their Siege.

The Count de Harcourt being full of Ambition, and thinking that the Honor
accruing to Others, tended to the Diminution of his, in lieu of staying some
time at Court he only showed himself there, and taking Post again, came before
Yvree, when his Presence was not in the least Expected. He found all things in
as good a posture as he could wish, but pretending he had news of Chivas being
Extremely pressed, he raised the Siege and marched against the Enemies. Their
Aim having been only to make a Diversion, were far from staying his Coming, and
were contented with making a Detachment of fifteen hundred men, which having
joined the Garrison of Yvree, came upon the Banks of the Loire to dispute the
passage. The Viscount de Turenne, who had the Vanguard, seeing himself thus
stopped, caused a Battery to be made of his Canon, and while he amused the
Enemy in little Skirmishes, he sought out a Ford where he caused a Thousand
Horse to pass; The Enemies seeing themselves nabb'd before and behind,
retreated at the same time: But before they had got under shelter, the Viscount
de Turenne fell upon their Rear, which he put to some Disorder. The Count de
Harcourt having thus passed the River* without receiving any opposition, framed
several Enterprises, but not finding any one more advantageous than laying open
for him the Passage of the Sea, he marched to the little City of Ceva,
fortified with a Citadel. Prince Thomas made a show as if he meant to relieve
it, and advanced for that purpose to the very Banks of the River Tanaer; but
having found the Count de Harcourt on the other side, turned back after some
Canons had been discharged by both Partys: After the taking of Ceva, the Count
de Harcourt led the Army against Cosny, and Prince Thomas not daring to venture
giving Battle, fell upon Montferrat, where he sacked some Villages: From thence
he attacked Quierasque, where while he lost his time, the French pressed Cosny
that made a vigorous Resistance. Prince Thomas after having thus failed of
Quierasque, returned before Chivas, but hearing Cosny began to capitulate, he
raised the Siege for the Second time, and joined the Cardinal Trivulee, who
rendered himself master of the Castle of Moncalve. A Conquest of such small
Concern was not capable of repairing so many losses, and Prince Thomas
complained bitterly against the Spaniards; Whom he accused of having abandoned
him, for they had drawn part of their forces out of Piemont, and with them the
Marquis de Leganez, in whose Room they had sent the Count Sirovela, a man more
of the Cabinet than of expedition; But they could not do otherwise by reason of
the Insurrection in Catalonia, the most of whose Towns had put themselves under
the French King's Protection. The Marquis de los-Velez had the Supreme Command
of the Spanish Arms in that Province, and endeavored to reduce it to
Obedience, one while by Mildness, another by main force. He had already brought
the Inhabitants of Tortose to repent their fault, and excited those of
Terragonna, among whom he had many Creatures, to follow their Example: but as
many opposed his Intentions, he was reduced to join hostilities to his
Persuasions, and by these means brought 'em to his Bow. This Conquest opening
him the Way to Barcelona, he made a show of attacking Montjo^y, a fortress made
for the Defense of that Place, and while he battered that fastness, he caused
the Magistrate of Barcelona to be summoned to return to his Duty. The
Magistrate made answer that the Place was in the French Kings Possession, and
that he must address himself to his Officers: but as he had no hopes from that
side, he retreated with all speed, and the rather for that la Motte Houdancourt
was then on the march to give him Battle. La Motte not having been able to
overtake him, laid Siege to Terragona, but the Spaniards having found the means
to put Succors into that place by Sea, he raised the Siege, and passed on into
the Kingdom of Arragon, where he repaired the Affront he had newly received by
a world of considerable advantages. In the mean while Cardinal Richelieu
imagining he could do nothing more advantageous for the Crown, than to foment
the Rebellion in that Province, resolved to make way for sending Succors
thither when he pleased, and Roussillon only being capable of putting an
obstacle to his Design, he sent thither Forces under the Conduct of the Prince
of Conde, who seized on some Buroughs. Nevertheless they made a shift to block
up Couilloure and Perpignan, the two only considerable Places in that Province;
and nothing more then impeding the Passage of the Pyrenee's, he caused a
considerable Body to march into Catalonia, which settled Barcelona till then
disquieted by the Marquis de los Velez. Having thus taken Care for those parts,
he used his utmost endeavors to set again on foot the Treaty that had been
proposed to the Princes of Savoy; and as they were dissatisfied with the
Spaniards, on whom fortune seemed to have turned her Back, they accepted the
last Proposals that were made them, and joined their forces to those of France,
so as that they became the friends of those on whom they had made War, and made
War on those, whose friends they had been a little before. However to conferr on
Prince Thomas the more Honor, he had the Command of the Army. But Cardinal
Richelieu unwilling to do that wrong to the Count de Harcourt of making him
Obey another, after having performed such great Actions, he made him General of
an Army in Flanders, and sent the Viscount de Turenne into Roussillon, where
was like to be the main Scene of the War. And indeed the King seeing the Prince
of Conde more a Politician than a General, was preparing to go thither himself
in Person, and was to be followed by the Cardinal and the Marshall de la
Meillerare, who notwithstanding the H^tred born his Uncle, was generally
acknowledged a man Skillfull in the trade of War: For he had newly taken: Air,
a strong place in A^^ois, and though the Cardinal Infant had recovered it, yet
had he not the less repute. The Viscount de Turenne having ever been desirous
to fight in the Kings Presence, was overjoyed at his being Chosen to serve in
his Army, and thinking he lay under an Obligation of making his acknowledgments
for it to the Cardinal, of whom he had several times begged this favor; he
mentioned it so handsomely to him, that this still the more redoubled the
kindness that Minister had for him. In the mean while the rumor which ran of
the Kings journey proved true, and the Viscount de Turenne his having kissed
Majesty's Hand, this Prince took him aside, and confirmed to him by word of
Mouth what he had Written to him several times, namely that he had much regard
for him, and that on his account he had so soon forgot the Offense of his
Brother the Duke of Bouillon. The Viscount de Turenne not knowing what thanks
and humilities to pay his Majesty for his Grace and Bounty, and as the Duke of
Bouillon had been newly nominated to go Command in Italy, under the Authority
of Prince Thomas, so many favors at a time seemed to incapacitate him of being
ever able to acknowledge such great obligations. He testified to the King the
Sentiments he entertained, but the King Embracing him tenderly, told him, that
he was too well satisfied with him, that he had it from good hands, all
possible Endeavors had been used to Embark him in the affair of the Count de
Soissons, but that before he knew his answer, he had rightly judged he would do
nothing contrary to his Duty. The Viscount de Turenne begged his Majesty to
believe he had never had that matter mentioned to him, but if they had he would
not have failed of informing his Majesty: But the King taking him up short,
told him, that he ought to be content he was satisfied with his Conduct, and
that as so near a Relation of his had been concerned in that occasion, he had
been the first to excuse him. In the Interim the Army assembled around
Perpignan, and as we had not been able to hinder Provisions from being conveyed
into that place from Couilloure, which was continually supplied by Sea, the
French resolved to attack Couilloure, and to shut up Perpignan so close, as
should bar all Entrance and Conveyance into it for the future. The Marshall de
la Meilleraye directing his Ma^^h to Couilloure with the Viscount de Turenne
attacked it on the Land side, while the Kings Fleet battered it from Sea. The
Marquis of Montarre was in the Town with a strong Garrison, and had built
several Forts around to hinder the Approaches. The Marshall de la Meilleraye
having thereupon judged convenient first of all to take in those Forts, sent
thither the Viscount de Turenne, who carried them by dint of Sword: but before
he could render himself Master of the Town, the Spaniards seeing Perpignan
lost, unless they relieved Couilloure they entered Cani with a Body of Horse and
Reformed Officers, while la Motte Houdancourt who had an eye to their Motions
took the Field on his side. The Spaniards who had their Design would have
declined fighting, but la Motte having overtaken them at a Pass, made 'em face
about against their wills, and after having defeated their Rear, pressed 'em so
close that he forced 'em to a second Engagement. The success now was as little
to their advantage as before, and they lost full Eight Hundred men more.
However la Motte not being yet satisfied, pursued 'em Night and Day into the
Mountains of the Copsi, and having overtaken them near Villa-franca, he so
completed their Defeat, that what remained of 'em were either slain upon the
spot or taken Prisoners. The King, whom this Army had given some Disquiet, was
overjoyed to see it so happily defeated, and as he had already received great
Services from la Motte, and that his last actions recalled others into his
mind, he sent him the Staff of Marshall of France. Couilloure was quickly
forced after so signal a Victory. Yet as the Marquis de Montarre had fulfilled
the Duty of a Good Captain, and of a Brave Soldier, the Marshall de la
Meilleraye would not refuse him the three days he still required before he
surrendered, rather to save his Honor, than in hopes of any Succors. The three
days being Expired, the Garrison marched out, and was found still Eighteen
Hundred men strong. This Conquest having much facilitated the Reduction of the
rest of Roussillon, the Blocade of Perpignan was converted into a Siege, and
the King meaning to be there in Person, le^t Langue doc where he had staid some
time, and arrived at Pia, whither came the Marshall de la Meilleraye to give
him an account of all his Actions In the mean while this Town lay under all
sorts of wants, except M^n; of whom it had a sufficient number, but as they had
no Provisions, the French resolved not to Press it, but to husband the
Soldiers as much as they could. The Marquis de Flores d'Avila perceiving after
what manner we designed to have him, distributed his Victuals in such small
parcels, that he made them last much longer than was expected, and in the
interim had hopes of Succors, or of some Change in our Affairs, for the Kings
health rather impaired than augmented; and besides that of the Cardinal was in
so bad a Condition, as had obliged him to stay at Narbonne where he suffered
inconceivable pains. But what troubled him most, was the account he had of the
Cabals then on foot against him, which so topsy-turvy'd the King's mind, that
he was contriving to rid himself of this Great Man, whose exalted Genius was
nevertheless the Cause of all his Prosperities. Cinqmars the Marshall
d'Essia^'s Son, whom the Cardinal had been the means to introduce very far into
the King's Favor, but whose Destruction he endeavored for a Recompense, was
the most Dangerous of his Enemies. This Young Man being not content with his
Favor, nor with the Charge of Master of Horse which he possessed, pretended
himself to the Ministry; and as he fancied the King near his end, he entered
into so particular an Engagement with the Duke of Orleans, that he promised him
not only to Kill the Cardinal, but also to do all he required. The Duke of
Orleans being naturally fearful, and dreading least after the Cardinals Death
his Relations and friends might take up Arms, he engaged Cinqmars to send into
Spain for Succors, so as while the King endeavored to ruin that Crown, his
Brother did his utmost to uphold it. The King of Spain seeing no other
ressource but this to save Roussillon, Entertained with great Caresses the
Person sent him by Cinqmars, and promised him all his Demands, as well as to
the Duke of Bouillon, unhappily engaged, in that Affair. But the Cardinal who
had Spies in all Places, having been informed of this Intrigue, resolved to go
to the Army, and Cause Cinqmars to be Secured when he least expected it.
Cinqmars having taken care to Exasperate the King against him, and knowing he
was the day following to set forward on his Journey, so ordered the Matter that
the King sent to tell him he should not take the pains, but remain at Narbonne,
under the pretense however that this would be injurious to his health. But this
Minister understanding at half a Word, fancying himself lost after this
Proceedure, pretended to need the Baths of Tarascon, that at all adventures he
might, draw near the Province of Daup^ine, whose Governors were at his
Devotion. However after having thus taken Care for the security of his Person,
he wrote a very secret Letter to the Marshall de Grammont, Commanding an Army
in Flanders, and a man entirely at his Disposal. This Marshall following his
Orders, or at least as Politicians have conjectured, Suffered himself to be
beaten at the Battle of Honnecourt, and his Defeat having left the frontiere to
the Spaniards Discretion, the King fancying none but the Cardinal could salve
up this Business, sent him Courier after Courier to desire him to return: but
fearing he might not repair soon enough to him, he quitted the Siege of
Perpignan with a Resolution to go to him as far as Tarascon. On the way the
Cardinal sent him the Treaty Cinqmars had negotiated in Spain, and he was
believed to have received it from Fontrailles, being the same who went thither
on his behalf. Be it as it will, the King highly incensed at this treason
caused Cinqmars to be taken into Custody at Narbonne, with Mr. de Thou, to whom
Cinqmars had imparted his secret. The Duke of Orleans had order to Withdraw,
and Letters were sent with all have into Italy, with Orders to the Count du
Plessis Praslin to Secure the Person of the Duke of Bouillon. This Conspiracy
being thus dissipated, the Marshall Meilleraye having been left before
Perpignan, with the Marshall de Scomberg, who had led thither the Troops of
his Government, played his part so effectually, that having hindered the
Succors that came by Sea, he reduced the Town to the Obedience of his King.
The Viscount de Turenne pretending from his Majesty the same Recompenses newly
conferred on la Motte Houdancourt, saw himself far from them, as soon as he was
acquainted with his Brothers Case, of whom they talked no less than of
beheading. Thus instead of the hopes with which he was animated a little while
before, he found himself Seized with fear, Expecting every hour the News of his
Brothers being in Prison. And indeed this Unhappy Prince, whom his Destiny had
hurried into the Precipice, having as it were a Secret foreknowledge of what
was like to befall him, harbored no Mirth for some time past; he was wont to
be affable and Courteous to all People, but his Melancholy having wholly
Changed him, Every one perceived he shunned Company, and if the Duty of his
Charge could have permitted him to be all alone, he would have taken the
leaving him to himself as a very great Complement. As it was impossible but he
must note himself this Change, he attributed it to some remorses which came
upon him from time to time, for having Embarked himself in so dangerous an
Affair: He considered he had already several Children, and that he Exposed
them to a strange fortune, if what he had undertaken missed of being
accomplished; for to pretend to any favor from the Cardinal, was a thing not
to be thought of, he had had a thousand troubles to appease him the last time,
and if the King had not been more indulgent than his Eminency, he would never
have obtained his Pardon. All these Considerations however held his Mind in
suspense, for on another side he made Reflection, that he should be ever Exposed
to his Caprices, and that as long as he stood possessed of the Authority he
had, there would never be any safety for him. He still remembered a saying of
his Uncle the Prince of Orange, Namely, that he would never be a Sovereign as
long as he was obliged to remain under the Protection of France, which Crown
was wont to appropriate to it self the things it could once lay hand to. He
besides remembered a thousand grating Letters he had received from the King and
his Minister, wherein both of 'em spoke to him with that Absoluteness and
Superiority, that they made no difference between his Character, and that of a
Subject; he fancied at least that if he must depend on some body, he ought to
derive more regard than he did from his Dependancy, and this he hoped to
Compass by humbling the Cardinal, and something some Division in the Kingdom.
As his mind was solely possessed with these sorts of Reflections, he lay under
an Extraordinary impatience to know, whether Cinqmars would perform his word*
but having been told, i(...) had lain in his Power several times to have killed
the Cardinal, whom he had privately discourst, he grew sensible that people
often Engage themselves to more than they mean to do, either out of Imprudence,
o^ for want of Consideration. This failing of his Confederates word made him
Prognosticate no good of the Upshot; However he seemed absolutely re-incourag'd
by Cinqmars his Letters, who let him know he had entirely gained the Kings Good
Opinion, and that this Prince had refused to see the Cardinal. But just as he
began so sooth himself with fin^r hopes, came a Courier to him in private,
having got half an hour the start of the Messenger sent to the Count de
Plessis, and acquainted him with the Wretched Estate of his Concerns. As the
Peril was urging and he had no time to lose, he was already thinking of making
his Escape into the Land of Milan, when he knew that the Count du Plessis,
after having receiv^d his Courier, had given order for stopping the Passages,
and had left his House with design to Execute the Orders that were sent him. In
so great an Exigency he chose to hide himself in a Hay-rick; but the Count du
Plessis having notice of it, had him Seized, and Conducted into a place of
Safety. The News of his Imprisonment being come to the Viscount de Turenne, it
is impossible to conceive the bitterness of his Affliction. He already
represented to himself that Dear Brother upon a Scaffold, and being unable to
dwell upon this thought without shedding a torrent of tears, he struck all that
saw him with Compassion. He a thousand times Cursed the Spaniards, by whose
artifices his Brother had been will-ith-wispt into this Precipice, and knowing
they were marching a Body toward Sedan to offer Madame de Bouillon their
Protection, he dispatched to her a Messenger, to beg her not to accept on^t,
unless she meant to ruin her Husband: He sent another to the Prince of Orange
to desire him to intercede for his Brother with the King: but not relying so
much upon these sort of things as to neglect those that might serve him on
another side, he posted to Court, where he laid himself at the Kings feet, who
being prompted by the Cardinal spoke displeasure in his looks; not prevailing
with his Majesty, he had recourse to that Minister, who after having made him a
kind Reception, told him, he knew very well he had no hand in all these
Intrigues, and then falling to Exaggerate Monsieur de Bouillon's Crime after
the pardon he had newly received, he asked him his own thoughts of the Case, and
whether the King could well pardon him, that it was a thing wanting an Example,
and that he was sure, as much concerned as he was, he would be the first to
approve of his Majesty's Resentment. The Viscount de Turenne had to do with the
Craftyest man upon the Earth, but on his side he had wit enough to see at what
he aimed, so as he let him talk on without giving him any Interruption: But
when he had done speaking, he made him answer, that the King was too just in
all his Actions for him to find fault with any thing his Majesty did; that
Monsieur de Bouillon was really Criminal, but the King so good, that he hoped
his Majesty would have regard to a poor Desolate family, whose Ancestors had
rendered some services, and had the honor of being related to Princes that
still, actually served the Crown; that it was rather out of Imprudence than a
Premeditated Design, that his Brother was engaged in this Intrigue, nay that he
had heard it said, that bating the Treaty of Spain the King was privy and
participated in all he had done; that he told him not this to Extenuate his
fault, but to make him observe, that having offended his Eminency more than any
Body, 'twas to him particularly they addressed themselves for the obtaining of
his Pardon; that as to the Treaty of Spain, it would not be found he had
thereunto consented; that Fontrai'lles had indeed declared him to be one of
those that were to serve for Lieutenant Generals in the Duke of Orlean's Army,
but had not said he had sent him to make proposals on his part; that it was the
Duke of Orleans who had done all things of his own Head, and to whom the
Correspondence with foreigners ought to be imputed. The Cardinal seeing the
Viscount de Turenne did not come to his Bow, thought fitting to interrupt him,
and asked how he would reconcile what he said with the Promise his Brother had
made of delivering up his Town of Sedan to the Duke of Orleans and his
Partisans. But as the Viscount de Turenne was preparing his Reply, he
interrupted him anew, and told him, that this Place had made his Brother so
often faulty; that it would still serve him for an Instrument to Commit new
Crimes; that the King could never put any Confidence in him, or any Prince as
long as they had such a Town as that at their Disposal; that it was the
Sanctuary of Rebels, and surpassed even Rochelle, that had only afforded a
Retreat to those of the Religion; but that as for Sedan, the Duke of Bouillon
offered it indifferently to all manner of People, sufficiently manifesting by
his Conduct that his thoughts were wholly bent upon embroiling the State. The
Viscount de Turenne did not seem to understand his meaning, and being withdrawn
without having obtained any thing in his Brother's behalf, he again presented
himself to the King to implore his Mercy; but the King with a stern and angry
countenance turned his back upon him, after having told him, he wondered he
durst importune him upon such an Account as that. The Prince of Orange in the
Interim having sent a Gentleman on that purpose to Court, had no other answer
save obliging words in what related to himself, but as to what concerned
Monsieur de Bouillon he had for answer, the Court was very sorry he could not
have granted him what he demanded, and colored their Refusal with the same
Pretexts that had been so amply deduced to the Viscount de Turenne. This Prince
presented himself daily to the Cardinal, but this Minister seemed to him more
reserved, nay and of more difficult access, so as that he plainly saw the Court
had set Sedan, as the rate of his Brother's Pardon. The Spaniards lay perdue,
as I may say, as to this Affair; they had made a Thousand plausible tenders to
Madam de Bouillon: But this Princess having nothing Dearer then the Life of her
Husband, had been advised to reject them all, and to lose rather her fortune
than to see so Dear a Prince perish. At length as she waver'd between the love
of her Husband and the love of her Children, whose interest did not suffer her
to divest her self of her Sovereignty, she had notice that Cinqmars and de
Thou's Process had been made, and that they had been beheaded at Lions.
Wherefore apprehending the like Destiny for her Husband, she no longer boggl'd
at what Course to take, having sent a Gentleman to the Viscount de Tu^enne with
a Letter of Instructions what to do; that Prince repaired to the Cardinal and
offered to give him Sedan for his Brothers Pardon. The Cardinal, who had ever
made him a very Civil Reception, was neither more or less Courteous at this
offer, though Extremely acceptable to him. Yet being full of Dissimulation, he
made him answer that he knew not whether the King would be therewith contented,
as being extremely exasperated against Monsieur de Bouillon; that in the fear
of a refusal he was willing to tell him* as making Profession of being his
Friend, that it became him to employ all sorts of Recommendations in this
occasion, and particularly that of the Prince of Orange, for whom the King had
much regard. The Viscount de Turrenne thought it strange he should now make a
Difficulty, after the knowledge he had given him of his Intentions; but as
there was a Necessity of Submitting to the Law of the Conquerours, he was
obliged to send the Second time into Holland, to desire the Prince of Orange
once more to make that step. This Prince entertaining an Affection for the Duke
of Bouillon, he having born Arms under him for several years together, and
whom, as a man may say, he looked on a his foster-Son, having passed over all
sorts of Considerations in favor of so Dear a Person, and who, besides, was
his so near Relation, granted the Viscount de Turenne what he demanded of him,
and having sent again a Gentleman into France, they would fain make him believe
it to be upon his Recommendation, rather than on any Other account, they
granted the Duke of Bouillon his pardon. But not a Man but believed the
contrary, nay, and openly affirmed Cinqmars to have been very unfortunate in
not having had such a Place as Sedan to redeem his Life.

The matter being thus terminated with so much trouble, the World believed this
to be capable of making the Viscount de Turenne go serve in some Foreign
Country: But this Prince seeing his family Extremely under the Hatches, on the
Contrary redoubled his Zeal for the Crown, hoping in time to oblige the King to
distinguish it. However, he had great Mortifications, for his Brother having
lost his Sovereignty, it seemed as if his rank would have been disputed which
he had acquired by his Birth: Such as gave him the hand before, pretended now
to take Place of him, or at least to be considered as his Equals; These
Contests arose principally at Court, so as that he staid there the least he
could, for at the Army the rank was regulated by the Charges, and he did not
look on it as strange to Obey a Marshall of France, it ever having been the
Practice. However, he found much had not yet been done for him, since Bodies
apart had been given to Persons of neither more merit nor more Service. He
above all wished to Command in Germany, where it seemed to him War was better
made than in any other Place whatever: But though the Court had born him some
good will, yet what had newly befallen him, must needs discard all his hopes.
And indeed they were far from considing in him such a Command as that, after so
fresh a fault. Yet he desired it that he might signalize his fidelity, and told
his Friends, this to be the principal reason^ that made him desire it. As it
could not be but that he must have some Pique against the Cardinal, of whom he
had not so kind an Opinion, but that he imputed to him the misfortune of his
House, it goar'd him to the very Heart to be obliged to remain under the
Command of the Marshall de Meilleraye, who was another Cardinal to the
Viscount. He wondered that the King notwithstanding the suspicions he had
against this Minister, left all his Armies under the Command of his Relations,
as if there had been none in the Kingdom capable of that Employment, for the
Count de Harcourt commanded one, as I have already said, the Marshall de
Grammont who had married one of his near Kinswomen another, and though he had
behaved himself so ill at the Battle of Honnecourt, as has been before
observed, this did not prove sufficient to deprive him of his Charge. But the
point the most extraordinary in all this, is that the King himself knew that
during his illness before Perpignan, all these Generals had made Cabals in
their Armies to maintain their Kinsman in the Ministry, so as by that his
Majesty might judge how fast they were linked to the Cardinal's Service, since
to the prejudice of all Ties and Duties, their whole Endeavors had been how to
preserve the Authority their family stood possessed of. Not but that he did
justice to Each sutably to his Deserts, he was the first to say that the
Marshall de Grammont had a great deal of Wit, that la Meilleraye understood
sieges to Perfection, and that the Count de Harcourt, though None of the Most
Consummated of all Men in the Trade, had a Courage that rendered him
recommendable above the Greatest Captains. And indeed this Prince had still
done things in this Campaign, which had been very glorious, though not allways
attended with a prosperous Success. He Commanded in Flanders, as I have already
said, and had found it somewhat a difficult Province to resist Don Francisco de
Melo, General of the Spanish Armies, who had double his Number of Men: However
he had with his Courage supplied that want, and though France had been in great
danger, especially after the Marshall de Grammonts Defeat, he had hindered the
Enemies from making advantage of their Victory, and had Confined their
Conquests to so Scanty a Business, that we were hardly sensible of them. The
truth is Melo had been faulty, being not to be prevailed with to join the
Imperial Troops that acted toward the Rhine. But this did not at all lessen
this Prince's Glory, who had ever Exerted the same steddyness, and who not
being in a posture to venture a Battle, had done so much by his Address that he
ruined the Enemies Army, and recovered from it before the year Expired, all
that it had been able to take during the Compagne. Thus we may say that this
year was a most Glorious one to France, as having reduced the Princes of Savoy,
to the Obedience they owed their Sovereign, conquir'd Roussillon, preserved
Catalonia; dissipated Domestic troubles, carried it is Arms, into the very
Kingdom of Arragon; and in fine augmented it is Reputation in Germany, without
so many successes, having been Clouded with any considerable loss, unless that
of the Marshall de Grammonts. But this Defeat was nothing in Comparison of
that of General Lamboy, to whom the Count de Guebriant, who began to render
himself famous in Germany, had delivered Battle, after having rendered himself
Master of Orlinghen, though he saw himself threatened on another side by General
Ha^field, who endeavored to coop him up between Lamboy and himself. The
Benefit derived from this Victory was the taking of Nuitz, of Kempen, and of
some Other Towns of less Moment; join to this, that the Imperialists had been
forced to give breathing time to the Suedes, whom before they followed without
intermission. The Count de Guebriant had also derived thence particular
advantages for his own fortune. For besides some benefits he had received from
the King, he was made Marshall of France. But as Fortune does often grow weary
of favoring one and the same Person, he was compelled sometime after to raise
the Siege of Lekenik. He quickly revenged himself for this little Disgrace by
the Defeat of Jean de Were, who had like to have drawn him into an Ambuscade
wherein he himself was caught. The Suedes reveng^d him also wonderfully well;
for having decoyed the Duke of Sax^-Lawemburg into a Trap they laid for him,
most of his men were then killed, and he himself so dangerously Wounded, that
he hardly survived his Defeat. Then they took Schuwi^z and Olmutz, and would
have pusht their Conquests further, if the Archduke Leopold having joined with
Picolomini, had not compeli'd them to raise the Siege of Bring, which they had
undertaken after the Conquest of O'multz; However the same misfortune befell
the Arch-Duke's men in a while after, who had undertaken to recover Olmutz, and
had also beleaguered Groslgloglaw, for they were forc^d to retreat from before
both places, which so encouraged the Suedes that they besieged Leipsick, where
the Canon made so great a Breach that they resolved to give the assault: But
not prospering in that, they raised the siege to go meet the Archduke, who
advanced with Design of relieving that Place. The two Armies met near
Brite^field, and having Both a Desire to come to Blows, they fought it out
Briskly, the beginning of this Battle threatened the Suedes with a total Defeat,
for while their Right Wing fought with an Equal advantage, their Left having
lost Colonel Sclang that Commanded it, wwre so disheartened that they would have
never rallied, if Count Coningsmark had not hastened up to them, and done
personal Wonders. Having thus restored Courage to those that had lost it, he
caused a Body of Reserve to advance, who turned the Victory on his side, which
seemed as yet unwilling to declare it self; The Archduke with Picolomini
betook themselves to flight, and the Principal Commanders of the Army, some of
whom however died upon the Spott; all the Baggage was left to the Suedes with
the Generals Silver Service, they having had enough to do to Escape in their
own Persons. After this Victory the Suedes laid siege again to Leipsick,
notwithstanding the inconveniences of the season, already far spent, which
made the Garrison believe they could never prosper in their Design, they made
so vigorous a resistance that the Suedes were ready a thousand times to desist
from their Enterprise; However standing to it, they made themselves masters of
the Town, contrary to the Opinion of many People. With this Exploit did they
end the Campaign of 1642. But Seasonable weather was no sooner returned then
that they augmented their Conquests with the taking of Tornaw, Mellerstald, and
Melvick: Then they block'd-up Magdebourg and Ostervic, and Surpised the City
of Halberstat; whose Garrison they put to the Sword. Galas would have stopped
the Current of these Prosperities, but Ostervic being the Closer shut up, this
did not hinder it from falling also into their hands. In the mean while they
failed little of surprising the Emperor himself as he was coming to his Army,
and if he had not turned out of his way, it had been a terrible augmentation to
so many losses; but through a great happyness having avoided this Ambuscade, he
sent his Troops against Olmutz, while these of the Suedes were Employed in
taking of Demitz. The Army, we had in Germany, fought not with so much good
luck, for it had been forced to detach a part to the Succors of the frontier
of Champagne, then menaced with an Army of five and twenty thousand men
Commanded by the Count de Fontaines, and the Enemies had still another in
Artois which Employed the rest of our forces. The Duke of Anguien who had
hitherto served only as Volentier, but in whom was noted an Unparalleled
Courage, and a Conduct above his Age, was sent against the former, and the Duke
of Angoule'me observed the other with a flying Camp. Neither the One nor Other
had found Occasion to do any great matter, but the Count de Fontaines having
beleaguered Rocroy, the Duke of Anguien marched against him, and having given
him Battle, he won so signal a Victory, that the Spaniards could not of a
long while recover it. The Count de Fontaines was killed in that action, all
his Infantry cut in Pieces with part of the Horse, and what remained in such
Disorder that much ado had it to escape. Then the Duke d'Anguien without
trifling away his time turned his Arms against the frontier of Germany, and
having opened himself a passage by taking of Thionville and Cirq, he marched to
the Succors of the Marshall de Guebriant, then penned up between the Troops
of Bavaria and those of the Duke of Lorrain. The Enemies not daring to stay his
Coming up, he re-inforc'd the Marshall de Guebriant's Army, and this having
enabled this Marshall to make Enterprises, he beleaguered Rotwiel, where he
was wounded with a faulcon Canon Bullet, whereof he died. His Death was
followed with a sad Event, the Army that had a Wonderful Opinion of him,
having lost all manner of Confidence after his Death retracted to Teutling,
after having however taken Rotwiel, and suffered it self to be Surpised in
it is Quarters by the Duke of Lorrain, who gave it a Total Defeat.

In the mean while great Alterations occurred at Court, where Cardinal
Richelicu died the year last past, and the King on the fourteenth of May
following: Naught but Cabals were then on foot, who should have the Regency,
and after the Example of the Court of Savoy, where the Unckles had sided
against the Nephew, the Duke of Orleans was just ready to set the State in a
Combustion. Not but that the King had settled all things before he died; but
none were pleased with his last Will, because he limited the Power of those to
whom he attributed some Authority. The Queen his Widow, being vexed that he had
tied her hands, said openly, that Tutours were rather appointed Her, than she
Elected the King her Son's Tutour, and with Design of having His Will broken,
she was liberal of her Caresses now to One, then to Another, and Especially to
the Parliament that had much Power at that time. Mazarin who had rendered
himself recommendable by several Services he had done in Italy, and had been
made Cardinal at the late King's Recommendation, was in her Confidence, with
the Bishop of Beauvais. But this Bishop being not a man of Sufficient ability
to Support the Burden of Affairs, the Other Supplanted him quickly, and
governed the Queen's mind at his Pleasure. At length the Queen having found the
means by her Address to Extend her Authority, thought her self obliged to gain
Creatures, and having a most peculiar Esteem for the Viscount de Turenne she
made him Marcschal of France. This Prince returned into Italy after his
Brothers Business, and had so won the heart of Prince Thomas, that he undertook
nothing without him; Insomuch that having advised him to the Siege of
Villeneuve d'Ast, the Troops had forthwith Order to march thither. This Town
made but a sorry Resistance, after which they marched against Alexandria, and
havi^n there fixed their Quarters just as if they meant to take it by force, it
created a Fancy in the Governor of Millan to leave unprovided Other Places
for the relieving of this. To decoy him on to this Design, by facilitating to
him the means, some Interval was left between the Quarters, and the Spaniards
having slipped between, imagined they had gained a mighty point, but their
Enemies fell immediately upon Trin then unfurnished of men, and where according
to all appearances they could meet with no great opposition. Prince Thomas
finding himself indisposed at the very beginning of the Siege, Committed the
care of it to the Viscount de Turenne, who was wonderfully well seconded by the
Count du Plessis. All the Outworks were won with much Vigor, and the
Governor of Milan despairing of being able to Succor it, marched toward Ast,
and Nice, thinking that the jealously this would give him, would oblige him to
raise the Siege. But the Viscount de Turenne having provided against that by
sending a Reinforcement to those Garrisons, pursued battering the Town so
briskly, that it Surrendered upon Composition. This was the last Enterprise he
was present at in Italy, for having been made Marshall of France a little
before, and received the Staff, he left the Army under the Orders of the Count
du Plessis, whose Right it was to Command it.

Prince Thomas his Illness still Continued, and though he remained in the Camp
till the Town was taken, he had now left it for the better Convenience of his
Cure. The Count du Plessis who was already very expert in the trade of War,
meaning to make advantage of the Season, which allowed him still the
opportunity for some Enterprise, he sat down before Pontesture, and having
battered it with twelve pieces of Canon, the Beseiged Surrendered it after
having done all in their Power for a Stout Defense. These Successes were still
Seconded by Others, which we had in Catalonia by the valor and Conduct of the
Marshall de la Mo^he* which gave so much alarm to the King of Spain, that he
resolved to go himself unto his Army: But his Catholic Majesty's Presence
having not been able to repair his Losses, His Council thought it would lessen
his Honor to remain there any longer, so as that he returned to Madrid very
little Satisfied with the pains he had taken. This Year was there also an
Engagement sought between the Fleets of France and Spain, in which all the
Advantages fell on our side. But notwithstanding all these happy Events, We saw
our selves daily threatened with a strange Revolution through the Ambition of the
Grandees, and the Audaciousness of the Parliaments, that under Pretense of the
Public Good, made such Continual Usurpations, as were no longer in the Power
of the Queen Mother to dissemble, for at least without suffering her Son to
fall under the same Destiny with the King of Great Britain, whom the
Parliament of England, Aimed at Robbing of his Crown, as they at Length robbed
him of his Life, she was timely to oppose all these Innovations that were
odious to all Honest People. On the other side it was needful to provide
against the necessities of the Leaguer in Germany, whose wrecks were Retreated
on this side the Rhin, without a Head, without Arms, and without other
Reputation than that of being the wretched Remains of an Army, formerly the
terror of the whole Empire, for in truth these were the men, with whom the
Duke of Weymar acquired so much Glory, and the Marshall de Guebriant had
rendered himself so recommendable. This Monsieur de Guebriant after having
served for Marshall de Camp in the Valteline, had been sent into Germany to
Command under the Duke de Longueville; But this Prince refusing to obey the
Duke of Weymar, and the Duke of Weymar to receive him for his (...)ner
Guebriant had of a sudden Mounted a Degree* and the Duke of Weymar dying
shortly after, as I have before related, His Merit occasioned that no other
than himself was pitched on to Confide in the Command. But to leave this point,
the business now being to Supply a Place that had been possessed by two such
great men, the Queen Mother made choice of the Viscount de Turenne to the Great
Contentment of the Army, and of the Princes allied to the Crown, to most of
whom he had the Honor of being related by his Mother's side. As soon as he had
been nominated to that Employment, he repaired immediately to the frontiere,
where he found things in so bad a posture, as required his Wisdom and Conduct
to restore them to any good estate: But as nothing seemed to him impossible
when the Kings Service was the point in agitation, he Surmounted these
Obstacles by his Cares and Patience, insomuch that all began to Change face:
The greatest Difficulty was to find Money to Cloth the Soldiers then stark
naked, for through the Disorder the Court was in at that time, it had been forced
to bestow its Liberalities on the several Parties, and for prevention of
Mischief had incapacitated it self from remedying what was most pressing.
Besides Cardinal Mazarin having got an Absolute Ascendant over the Queen, had
lavisht the Moneys in the Treasury to gain Creatures to himself, and she was so
prepossessed in his favor, that she imagined it to be for the Interest of the
State, though it was only for the private Interest of the Minister. Thus all
these Disorders having reduced the Army in Germany into the Pittious Estate I
have newly Represented, the Viscount de Turenne was obliged to borrow a
Considerable sum upon his own Credit, and making also use of some Money which
the Queen Mother had made him a Present of before his Departure, he laid out
both in Clothing the Soldiers and in the Other Necessities of the Army. This
once done, he caused it to pass the Rhin, as believing that after what had
happened the Year before, it behooved the Kings Reputation, and principally of
his Minority, to re-incourage his Allies, who seemed still all in a maze at the
last Defeat. Now to make a powerful Diversion, the Queen Mother wished that the
Duke d'Anguien would likewise repair to the frontier of Germany, where the
whole Stress of the War was like to be; not but that she likewise meant to make
some effort against Flanders, but she cou*d in no wise decline promising the
Duke of Orleans the Command of the Arms on that side, and he was already
preparing to take the Field at the head of an Army of Twenty Thousand men. The
Siege of Gravelines had been resolved on at Paris, for which reason he directed
his way thither after having detached the Marshall de la Meilleraye to secure
the Passage, and take in some Forts that might be some Obstruction to his
Enterprise, that of Gaiette was won first, and by that means did they cut off
from the Enemies the Communication with St Omer, and procured that with the
Marshall de Gassion, who was hovering up and down with a flying Camp. Those of
Gravelines having by this step perceived the Design to be levelled upon them,
let open their Sluyces: But the Duke of Orleans having found the means to
drawoff the Water, invested the Place on all sides, and had his Canon brought
up with much Difficulty, for the ground being thus soaked, sunk under the
Horses, and they were so tired that it required twice the ordinary number.
However all these Difficulties being overcome by a little Patience, they
reduced the other Forts that were around the Town, and though they could not
hinder Succors from getting into it, yet was it so briskly attacked, as
compelled it to Capitulate. This siege having lasted some time, and c^st a
Great many Men, hindered the Duke of Orleans from daring to engage in any other
Enterprise, Especially having Picol mini to oppose him; Besides all this he had
a hank^ring to return to Court thereto wrest new favors, for he had rather
sold than granted his Protection to Cardinal Mazarin, so as that this Minister
had been obliged to give way to all his Pretensions, so far as to grant a
Pa^ent of Duke and Peer to one of his Favorites. The Prince of Conde, seldom
letting slip any opportunity of improving his Interests, in like manner sold
his favor to this Minister, and refused him nothing, provided he paid roundly
for it; and indeed he ever sold it him as Dear as possible he could, for as he
was considerable of himself, and gained daily more and more regard by the Merit
of the Duke d'Anguien, he fancied all things were due to him. The Cardinal saw
himself in truth at the head of Affairs, but was reduced to such an Exigency,
that all the pains he took was for Others. And indeed the Duke d'Anguien
himself, prompted perchance by these Examples, or perhaps also because his
Father was not over-Liberal, had not been so strongly affected with Glory, to
which nevertheless he was very sensible, as to be prevailed with to be gone
without that Ministers having given him wherewithal to supply to a Great
Expense. Thus all the Treasures were for these Three Princes, and as the
Cardinals own affairs were not in over-good terms, and that he had as good an
Appetite as Others, he on his side appropriated to himself all he could;
Insomuch that the finances being thus unprofitably Squandered away, recourse
was to be had to Edicts, which made the People Clamor, and rendered his
Ministry Extremely Odious. Not a man of 'em besides the Viscount de Turenne,
who Neglecting his own Interests, only Studied those of the Crown, though the
Consideration he was in, might have made him hope as well as Others to have
gained by the Weakness of the Ministry, for the Grandees after the Example of
the Princes set their Services at a Price, and in Case the least Neglected,
they fell into Caballs, which made the Cardinal quickly recall them, with a
grant of still more than they had demanded. The Duke d'Anguien after having
obtained what he desired was departed for the Army, and having caused it to
pass the Meuse, he joined the Count de Marsin, who brought him a Considerable
re-inforcement. General Bek being to observe his Motions retreated from before
him, and being under apprehensions for the Towns in Luxemburg, he provided them
with Men: But this Princes Design was not to stop so near at hand, and he had
reasons which obliged him to pass on. The Imperialists to give the Suedes.
work, had set upon them their Ancient Enemies the Danes, who having no want of
Pretexts to declare War against them, made so powerful a Diversion of their
forces, that hardly any of 'em were left in Germany. Thus the Viscount de
Turenne found no small Difficulty to resist with Six or Seav'n thousand. Men,
the forces of Bavaria and Lorrain that were joined together, for as to those of
the Emperor, the Prince of Transylvania had been raised up against them, and
he gave them Sufficient Employment: Thus the War was extended into so many
Parts, that one would have said Men had been bent upon Worrying one another. In
the mean while the Hollanders gained daily by these Disorders, and by little
and little settled their State, which we have since seen so flourishing. As for
Us, besides Domestique troubles, some Sparks of which were already perceived,
the Affairs of Germany began to render us uneasy. The Viscount de Turenne with
all his Experience and Capacity found himself so weak as has been already
hinted, that he was obliged to retire upon the Rhin and put himself under the
Shelter of Brisac, while the Bavarians, and Lorrainers being puffed up with some
petty Advantages they had gained, marched with displaid Ensigns against
Fribourg. As their Forces were Numerous in Comparison of those of the Viscount
de Turenne, he durst not venture a Battle, but neglecting naught of what could
serve for the Defense of Fribourg, he provided it with men, Provisions and
Ammunition, and keeping hovering himself, he sent to the Duke d'Anguien to
advance with all speed. This young Prince naturally coveting Glory, but whose
hands itch'd still more than usual since his victory of Rocroy, marched day
and night to come up in time: But the Garrison not having made the Resistance
Expected, he found the Town taken at his Arrival, which provoked him to a high
degree against the Governor. Being however a thing for which there was no
Remedy, he conferred with the Viscount de Turenne to see what course was
thereupon to be taken, and Comforting one another in that it was neither of
their faults, they went together to view the Enemies, who upon the rumor of
the Duke d'Anguien's arrival were Encamped upon two Mountains, whose Access,
though Difficult of itself, was rendered still more so by several
Retrenchments, and by the Trees they had felled to Embarasse the ways. But all
these Empediments having rather Whetted than paul'd their Courage, the Duke
d'Anguien sent Marsin order, with whom he had left his Army, to bring it him
with all Expedition. Hardly would he allow it a day or two's Rest after so long
a March, and as if he had been afraid the Enemies should have escaped him, he
lead it himself on to the Battle, which was long and obstinate on both sides.
The Enemies trusting in the strength of their Retrenchments and Situation of
their Camp, seemed at first to make a mock of the efforts he made, but coming
to perceive that the Viscount de Turenne after having made himself Master of a
Wood which they had lined with Infantry, came to attack them thorough a Place
not so difficult, they caused their Horse to march, which Stopped our foot that
had passed sooner than our Cavalry, by reason the Wood was filled with trees
and Ditches that hampered the ways. The night coming on hindered things from
proceeding farther: The Viscount de Turenne spent that time in passing the
Cavalry, which he had drawn up in Batalia at Break of Day. But the Enemies
making use of the Darkness to Conceal their Rerreat, abandoned their Camp,
without having had time to break their Baraques, or Carry away a thousand
Conveniences we found there both for Men and Horses. The Duke d'Anguien having
suffered his Army there to rest, after being Extremely tired and harrass'd with
the Business of the day before, by reason of the Continual Rains, departed
again at Break of day, with a resolution to pursue the Enemies, who were
retreated near to Fribourg. He found they had Chosen an Advantageons Post,
which caused him to make a halt before he attacked them. But as he was Squaring
his Measures by the Viscount de Turenne's and some Other Officers Advice, the
Soldiers fell a Skirmishing, and had so far engaged into a Battle, as would
have rendered it impossible to have avoided it, if the Viscount de Turenne to
hinder the Disorder which began to appear among our men, had not placed himself
at the head of the Regiment of Flex^eim, with which he repelled the Enemies.
The vigor wherewith he broke in among them made them return into their
Retrenchments, out of which they came in hopes of an impending victory. Things
being thus retrieved as well as could be desired, the Resolution was to attack
them in their very Camp; But we found the Passes so well entrenched, that after
having fought on till night, Our men were obliged to leave them at Quiet. Yet
was this of no long Duration, For the Duke d'Anguien, who delighted in Blood,
and was not daunted at the loss he had suffered in that Occasion, thinking it a
lessening of his Glory, if after having prosper'd so well in the Beginning, he
desisted for so small a matter, he removed his Camp to Landeslinghen, that so
by cutting-off their victuals they might quit so advantageous a Post. His
hopes were not abortive, the Enemies coming quickly to be under all so^^s of
wants, would seek out a Place where they might live with more Conveniences; But
the Duke d'Anguien falling upon them on the one side, while the Viscount de
Turenne attacked them on the other, they were constrained to abandon their
Canon, and make their Escape into the Mountains. The Duke d'Anguien having thus
dispersed their Army, would have retaken Fribourg, provided with a strong
Garrison: But the Viscount de Turenne remonstrating to him that the Enemies had
left unprovided all the Other Places to Secure that, persuaded him to go rather
to Philipsbourg, which being stronger by its ^c(...)tuation and Outworks, must
afford him more Honor. This was a sufficient hint to a Prince, who valued
nothing so much as things of great Renown, to Wing him to this Enterprise: He
forthwith drew near that Place, and having beleaguered it, he had it
surrendered to him, after the Trenches had been twelve days open. This Conquest
having been put into a Good Posture, the Viscount de Turenne Advanced toward
Worms, and after having beaten part of General Bek's Cavalry, he caused that
Town to be Summoned, which submitted without striking a Blow. From Worms he
marched against the City of Mayence, whose Electour had Embraced the Enemies
side, and after having on his way reduced Oppenheim, he came before Mentz,
already invested by part of his Troops. The Electour, neither whose Will nor
Character led him to be in a Town besieged, had timely left it to retire to
Cologne; He had Carried along with him, if it may be said, the Courage of the
Garrison; so as the Chapter, that besides had its Interests apart from those of
the Electour, sent a Deputation to the Viscount de Turenne, to desire him not
to ruin so fine a Town, when just ready to open its Gates to his Exeellency.
The Viscount de Turenne in his Answer told those Deputies that he must also
have put into his hands the City and Castle of Binghen, which the Chapter had
under its Protection; and seeing that after some Consults they had had with
those of the Town, they had at length thereunto consented, he gave notice of
all to the Duke d'Anguien, that being greedy of Honor, he might himself repair
to the Camp, that the World might presume his Highness to have made this
Conquest. The Enemies were retreated to Heilbron, where they endeavored to
reinforce their Army: But the Succors came in so slowly to them, that before
they were in a posture of forming any Enterprise, the Viscount de Turenne had
taken also Landa^, and Baccarach, with several Castles which secured all those
Conquests. But the have the Duke of Anguien was in to go to Court to receive
fresh Applauses, having occasioned many to leave the Army, it became so Weak,
that the Enemies were no longer afraid to show themselves. Whereupon they began
to march after so long a repose, and having attacked Manhein, that had no more
than Two Hundred Men in Garrison, they carried it with Ease. This Succes having
puffed up their Courage, they conceived a Design upon Spire, which opened it is
Gates to us before the Siege of Philipsbourg: But as this had been Suffering
Philipsbourg to be blocked up on that side, the Viscount de Turenne did not
content himself with putting Succors into that Place, but having also lined
the Banks of the Rhin with his Infantry, he hindered the Passage of some
Boats, that by the means of Certain Traitors in the Town, thought to have been
received therein upon sight. He likewise saved Baccarach, threatened with such
another Enterprise; and as the Governor by his valor had afforded him time to
come to it is Succors, he gave him two hundred Pistols of his own money, and
Writ to Court in his behalf: for this Prince had no greater Pleasure than in
procuring favors for those whom he found Worthy of them; but he did these kind
of things without affectation, vanity, or attributing to himself honor as most
others do, so as that many found themselves by him rewarded, without knowing to
whom they had the obligation. Thus he rarely promised, but nevertheless
employed his Offices as much as if he had promised, for he said, that those who
promised with so much Earnestness, seemed to Engage to bring that about which
they had promised, which ought not to be done, unless it depends on one's self.
He said further, that a man that had been amuz'd with specious Promises, oftener
blamed him that had engaged to be his Intercessor, than him in whose Disposal
the favor he demanded lay, that this proceeded from the fault of a Certain
Number of Persons, whose Character was to promise lightly, or not to remember
what they had promised.

In the mean while, the Enemies having missed of Spire and Baccarach, as I have
newly said, attempted Creusenach, which the Viscount de Turenne had in like
manner reduced to his Obedience: But he being on his march to relieve it, they
passed the Mein, and went and beleaguered Hochst, a small Place in Possession
of the Lantgrave of Hesses Arms, a Prince in our Alliance. The Viscount de
Turenne being afraid it was not in a Posture of making a Defense, hastened to
its Relief, but having Notice on the Way of its being already Surrendered, he
turned his Arms against Gernsheim, which compensated him for that loss. He
wanted nothing more now to Complete so Glorious a Campaign, than to Encounter
the Enemies again, which he wished above all things, as Phancying whatever Glory
he had acquired at the Defeat of the Bavarians, and Lorrainers, the Duke
d'Anguien had robbed him of part of it, being Commander in Chief of the Army.
Nothing did it avail his telling himself, that that Prince being still Young
and with small Experience, the World would do him so much Ju^lice as to
believe, that he had Contributed at least as much as his Highness, to so many
Great Successes, but this was not capable of Satisfying him; he told himself
also at the same time, that this Prince was one of the bravest Princes in the
World, and that his Bravery had perhaps produced all these Great Events; he
remembered to have seen him all Covered with Fire in the Midst of the Enemies,
and he had often been more afraid for him in those Perils he saw him Expose
himself to, than he could hope to see him come Happily off; For as he was one
that most admired that Young Princes Virtue, the Affection he had ever had for
his Highness, was improved to so high a Pitch, that he could not have had more
for a Son. Not that withal this there was any great Sympathy of Humor between
them. The Dake d'Anguien loved all sorts of Pleasures, even to becoming the
Slave of Voluptuousness; whereas the Viscount de Turenne's whole Delight
Consisted in his Duty. The Duke d'Anguien was Choleric and full of Fire; the
Viscount de Turenne, Mild and Temperate. The Duke d'Anguien Eloquent, and a
great Talker; the Viscount de Turenne spoke little, and had, as I have already
said, some difficulty to Express himself: In short, they had no affinity but
that they were both Brave and Cool in Command: but otherwise so different of
Humor, that People had reason to Wonder how that Nature having made them
generally so unlike, had nevertheless given them two Qualities so resembling.

In vain did the Viscount de Turenne seek out the Enemies: their precaution to
shun Meeting him, was greater than his Cunning to find them out; so as that
fearing to lose his time, if he persever'd in his Design, he drew near
Philipsbourg that stood in Want of Sundry Necessaries; He had there a World of
Proposalls made him on the behalf of the Grandees of the Kingdom, who being
dissatisfied with Cardinal Mazarin, sought to wrest new favors from his
Eminency, by making themselves formidable; but nothing being so Dear to him as
his Duty, he would not give the least hearing to any of their Offers, though they
would have assured him of vast Pensions, and promised him a thousand fine
things capable of staggering another's fidelity. The Spaniards, assisting also
in the Attacque, offered him great Advantages, and endeavored to Engage him
through the Resentment they fancied he could not otherwise than harbor for the
Concerns of Sedan, but his answer to him who broke their business to him was,
that in case he was ever urged upon the like point again, he would make him
that did it from ever more being capable of making such like Propositions. Yet
he knew not whether he ought to mention these sorts of things to the
Queen Mother, having no proofs in hand, and fearing he might be faced down into
a Lie, for he suspected the Greatest of the Kingdom to be tampering in this
Intrigue, and his Suspicion reached even as far as the Duke of Orleans. And
indeed that Prince, less to content his own Ambition that that of his
favorites, was not satisfied with the Place he held in the Council, and though
it was the first, yet he had it buzzed in his Ears, that while the Cardinal
left his Royal Highness the superficial Badges of Authority, he attributed it
all to himself. The Prince of Conde on his side, though he accumulated immense
Riches, found fault if he was refused the least thing either for himself or his
Creatures, and would have listened to any sort of Proposal that tended to
render him still more powerful than he was. The Cardinal was very much at a
plunge how to buoy himself up amid such self-Interest'd and such Turbulent
Spirits, and all his Policy tended only to make the Duke of Orleans his Rempart
against the Prince of Conde, and then again the Prince of Conde against the
Duke of Orleans.

The Spaniards had a fair opportunity to do their Business amid all these
Divisions. And indeed the King of Spain being unwilling to let slip such an
Occasion as this, returned himself into Catalonia, where he beleaguered Lerida,
which the Marshall de la-Mothe tried in vain to Succor: A part of our Army
was there defeated; but this having not hindered that Marshall from
undertaking to besiege Terragona, he was also compelled to raise that Siege,
which a little lessened the same he had acquired in that Country. Yet some
there were who found he had reason for doing what he did. For besides that His
Catholic Majesty had forces infinitely above his and that it was not safe
staying his Coming, he was afraid least that King might have some Design upon
Barcelona or upon Balaguier, and that it would be too late to redress it if he
stayed any longer before Terragona. Be it as it will, the Court imposing to him
those unhappy Events, sent the Count of Harcourt in his Room, hoping that after
the Glory he had acquired in Italy, his bare name would be capable of Creating
a Terror in the Enemies. The Spaniards were not altogether so happy beyond the
Alps, Prince Thomas, though he had only a feeble Succors from us, sustained
the Affairs of Italy by his own Repute and Credit, Insomuch that after having
taken the Citadel of Ast, he laid Siege to Final, which, nevertheless, he
could not take. As concerning Portugal, that had revolted, as I have already
said, the Spaniards could do no great matters there, because that the Affairs
of Catalonia having robb'd'em of many of their Measures, their Thoughts were
wholly taken up how to reduce that Province to it is Obedience, preferably to
all the Rest. Thus the Duke of Braganza, who had been elected King by an
Universal Consent of all the People, dexterously making use of that Conjuncture
to secure his Power, he dispersed some Conspiracies, which a Remnant of love for
the Spaniands had fostered in the hearts of some Persons of Quality.

The Beginning of the year 1645. was not over-propitious to France, nor to the
Viscount de Turenne, Who had still the Command of the Army in Germany. The
Efforts the Enemies had made on that side, having obliged him to pass the
Winter upon the Rhin, he was at a very great loss how to provide for the
Security of several Towns that were Equally threatened. Having nevertheless
effected it by his Prudence, so much trouble undergone seemed now to require
his enjoying some Quiet, when that he had Notice that the Enemies were marching
toward France, He immediately passed the Rhin at Spire, hoping that if he
could possess himself of the Passes, they would find it a hard matter to
Execute their Enterprises. It was now toward the End of Winter, which is very
severe in those parts, so as that an Army suffered much in a march long and
difficult: But the Viscount de Turenne Encouraging his Soldiers with his
wonted Sweetness, made them find things less painful, because that he shared
with them even to the least Inconveniences: And indeed he would have 'em Want
for Nothing, and Especially recommended to the Quarter Masters, to take Care to
pitch upon such Posts as where the Soldiers might be sheltered, as far forth
as the Place and Enemies would permit; If he was obliged to make them Encamp he
commonly Encamped with them, without making use of the Privilege of a General,
for his Opinion was, that for the well disciplining of an Army, the Head must
Serve it for an Example: When there was a Want of Victuals he would have it
appear upon his Table, though his Men could have got for him in sufficient
Abundance; he said it was not justice he should feast, while others endured
Thirst and Hunger; that would to God he could afford them all sustenance by
abstaining himself from Eating; that this would be the most grateful thing to
him in the World, since to him nothing seemed Good, as long as he knew them in
Indigency. Thus in those times of Misery and Affliction, however long the march
might be, he never stopped to Eat; he said that one ought to spare the
Soldiers a sight that rendered them still more sensible of their Misfortunes;
that a man that was Hungry, was still more Hungry when he saw Others Eat, and
since he partook with them the Honor which redounded from their Actions, it
was but very just to partake their Pains and Miseries: When it happened that in
those Marches some Town or Community, which he could not oblige to
Contribution, made him a Present, he refused it, saying, they would please him
more in bestowing their Liberalities upon his Soldiers, who had more need of
them. And that he might in some manner oblige them to it, he would often come
back again, for fear they should forget his Recommendations: for though these
sorts of Presents were commonly Chargeable to his Excellency, he had no longer
that Consideration when they tended to the Ease and Comfort of his Men. Easy it
is to apprehend that by this sort of Demeanor he gained their Love to
Infinity; and indeed he might have led them to the further End of the World,
without one of them Complaining, for they were already persuaded that he caused
them not to take one needless step. After having marched near three weeks amid
the Mountains, and during Continual Rains, and having Crossed diverse Rivers, at
length he found the enemies upon the Bank of the Nekre, who Changing the Design
they had of attacking him into that of providing for their own Defense, they
retreated into the Mountains. The Viscount de Turenne to whom Nothing could
have happened more agreeable, since it was Sufficient for him to have Crossed
their Enterprises, fancied however that to hinder them from returning he ought
to pass the River, and falling upon their heels he pursued them without
Intermission. At length his Army being almost harast off its Legs, he was
constrained to Stop; but that he might have certain news of what became of the
Enemies, he detached Colonel Rose after them, who still followed them four
whole Days. Rose seeing he could not overtake them, and contenting himself with
having rendered an Account to the Viscount de Turenne of what he had done, this
Prince fancied he might send his Troops into Quarters; but being far from
suspecting any Surprise, the Enemies returned back at the same time with Rose,
and falling upon him when he least expected it, they found his Quarters here
and there dispersed, so as that they had him at a Cheap Rate. The Viscount de
Turenne who had placed his Headquarters at Mariendal, being Surpised at such
unexpected Tidings, thought it became him to advance to receive his Troops, to
whom he sent orders to repair to a certain Rendezvouze; but accordingly as they
came thither, as they were but in a small number, they were defeated before
they could join together, and what might have escaped by flight, knew not
whither to run, the Enemies having seized on the Passes. This put the Viscount
de Turenne into an inconceivable Despair: Yet the vastness of the Danger having
not, bereft him of his judgment, he held firm at a Defile, and having thereby
given some Runnaways the opportunity to join him, he marched again to Mariendal
where he had left the better part of his Infantry: The Woods and the Night
favored his Retreat; however being briskly pursued he was forced to face about
several times: but as his men were still in a pannique terror, he, with what
Officers he had left, performed the Duty of a Sonldier, often fighting hand to
hand, even as far as the passage of the Mein, which he was the last that crossed.
The Enemies then thinking it to be in vain for them to pursue him any further,
fell upon the territories of the Lautgravinne of Hesse our Ally, which obliged
Count Coningsmark then Employed against the Danes, to quit the Siege of
Rensbury, to come to her Succors: Nevertheless he left there General Wrangel
then begnning to enter into some sort of Repute: But whether that he had not
Experience sufficient to effect that Enterprise, or that Count Coningsmark had
left him too few forces, he was obliged to retreat from before him, after
having lost much time and many Men. This defeat brought not only this Prejudice
to the Suedish Affairs, but also hindered Tortenson, who Commanded another Body
for them, from pursuing his Conquests with more effect. This General having Won
a great Battle at Janwitz in Bohemia, wherein He that Commanded the Emperors
Army had been taken Prisoner, and Major General Coentz killed, was fallen upon
Moravia, which he had totally Conquered, saving the Castle of Brin; Nay, he had
Extended his Conquests as far as the Gates of Vienna, from whence the Emperor
was retreated for fear of a Siege: But upon the rumor of these Unhappy
Successes, he seemed to lose Heart at the same time the Garrison of Brin
recovered Courage. The Prince of Transylvania himself, who pretended to join
him, durst not venture to enter any further into Hungary, where he had already
spread such a Terror, that they had removed from Presbourg the Regal Crown
that is Wont to be put upon the Heads of the Kings of Hungary, incontinently
after they have been raised upon the Throne; for those People are so
Superstitious, that they would imagine that Realm would fall into the hands of
Strangers unless they kept that Pledge, it being so Sacred among them, that
they make their Happiness or Unhappiness therein to Consist.

While things were in these Terms in Germany, France endeavored to repair this
Disorder by procuring Advantages to it self from another side, and sutably as
the King of Spain made his Greatest Efforts to reduce Catalonia to its Duty,
the French on their side did the like to foment the Rebellion in that Province.
The Count du Plessis was ordered from Italy, with a part of the French Troops
that had served in that Country, so as that Prince Thomas having now only very
mean forces, saw himself reduced to stint his Enterprises to the Conquest of la
Roque de Vigevane. France brought two Other Armies besides on foot; the One it
designed against Flanders; the Other against Germany, without reckoning a
Flying Camp, Commanded by the Marquis de Villeroy. The Duke of Orleans had
still the Conduct of that of Flanders, for to amuze him with some vain
appearance of Command, Cardinal Mazarin had so Ordered matters with the Abbot
de la Riviere, who ruled him as he pleased, that he should take the Government
of Arms, while he left him the management of Affairs. This Prince thus feeding
himself with the fumes fostered by his Favorite, was on his march into
Flanders, while the Kingdom was left a Prey to that Minister, who daily
Empoverish'd it by New Edicts. The Duke of Orleans had the Marshall de Gassion
for his Lieutenant General, and being drawn near the Fort of Mardyk, he Won it
after a Siege, wherein he lost some men. The Prince of Orange was in the mean
while upon the Wing to Awe and Create jealousy in the Spaniards, and one while
making a show as if he meant to attacque Bruges, and another some Other Place,
he gave the Duke of Orleans all so the leisure to take likewise the Fort of
Link and Bourbourg. The Army standing in need of some Repose after these last
Conquests, at fifteen days end they took the field again, and the Prince of
Orange still favoring our Designs, we took Bethune, Lislers, St. Venant, and
Armentieres. The Duke of Orleans being after this inclined to take a Turn to
Court, being either disposed to it of himself, or by his favorite who had a
mind to wrest some new kindness from the minister, left his Army in the hands
of Gassion, and Rautzau who had been lately made Marshall of France; and these
two Generals to return the Prince of Orange, his Complement, opened to him the
Passages for his going to besiege Hulst, which he compelled to Capitulate.

As for the New Army going into Germany, the Cardinal put it under the Command
of the Duke d'Anguien, as he had done the Year before: But though Affairs were
pressing on that side, this Duke had order to favor the Enterprises of the
Marquis of Villeroy, then busied in reducing some Places in Lorrain that still
Obeyed their Natural Prince. For the Duke of Lorrain being ashamed to suffer so
many brave Men to Perish without giving them Succors, he remounted all along
the Meuse, thinking that nothing would oppose his Passage, but having met with
the Duke d'Anguien advantageously Encamped, he was forced to stop on a Sudden,
and the Marquis de Villeroy in the mean while rendered himself Master of La
Mothe, whose Governor had acquired much Honor by his Defense. This Affair
being thus completed, the Duke d'Anguien continued his Way, and was Urged to
make the more have by the bad News which arrived every Moment: For besides
that, the Imperialists had retaken Gernsheim, the Viscount de Turenne having
joined the Suedes, and the Troops of Hesse after the Disaster that had befallen
him, was continually sending him Word that he was ready to be abandoned by
Both, Especially by the Count de Coningsmark, who being wont to give much
License to his Soldiers, could not keep them in Discipline, which the posture
Affairs were in at that time, did nevertheless require them to Observe. All
these things were sufficient enough, as a man may say, to give Wings to the
Duke d'Anguien. Having thus marched Day and Night, he used so much Diligence
that he was but one days journey from the Viscount de Turenne, who on his side
drew near the Nekre where they were to join. The Viscount de Turenne secured
Wisloc on his Way, and having Conferred with the Duke d'Anguien, they resolved
to pass the River, though the Enemies already appeared on the Other side. But
Coningsmark refusing to fight under the Pretense of his being obliged to give
Tortenson Succors, who was Encompassed with two Armies, the Troops of Hesse,
after his Example, demanded in like manner to retreat, which occasioned the
Enterprise to be deferred. The Rest of the Day and a good part of the Night was
spent in gaining over Coningsmark, and the Officer that Commanded the Troops of
Hesse; but Coningsmark having shown himself inexorable, Ours durst not attempt
the Passage of the River, though the Troops of Hesse offered to stay. The Duke
d'Anguien was vexed beyond imagination, the Viscount de Turenne no less so, though
of a much more Temperate Humor, for he hoped this Occasion would afford him
the means of Retaliation. But in short there being no Remedy, they took leave
of Coningsmark, and after that squared their Measures otherwise. Coningsmark
being gone, they beleaguered Wemphem, and by taking it, which the Enemies could
not prevent, became Masters of a Pass upon the Nekre, by which they intended to
make themselves a way into Bavaria. The Enemies needing their Forces to defend
the entrance of their Country, dreading the fortune of the Duke d'Anguien,
would not accept of the Battle he offered them, and having put some Troops into
Dunkespiel, they retreated near to Norlinguen. The Duke d'Anguien whom that
Place had already afforded so much Glory, hoping that it was still destined to
acquire him fresh Lawrells, after having taken Rotembourg marched to
Dunkespiel, being willing to insinuate into the Enemies that he meant to fasten
upon that Place: But passing on, all of a Sudden, he would have Surpised
them, if they had not happily met with a marsh behind which they drew
themselves up in Battalia. The Duke d'Anguien whose Courage was above all sorts
of Difficulties, would needs fall upon that Post, whatever the Danger in
attacking them: But the Viscount de Turenne having made him sensible that they
could not stay long there, tempered the furies of his Youth; so as that he
resolved upon driving them thence by famine. In the mean while he Caused his
Canon to advance, and the Enemies having also pointed theirs, this Din lasted
till night, and two or three hundred men were killed on either side. At the
long run the want of provisions having, as the Viscount de Turenne had well
foreseen, obliged the Enemies to discamp, the Duke de Anguien fell upon their
heels, and having overtaken them before they could reach Norlinguen, they drew
up their Army in Batalia; after having seized on a village, wherein there was a
Competent strong Castle, they put into it a good part of their infantry, and
having placed their Cavalry behind, they Phancy'd themselves so much the more
in safty, as that their Camp was upon two Mountains of Difficult access, by
reason of a Marsh on the one side, and a Wood on the Other. The Duke de Anguien
after having viewed all these things gave the Command of his Right Wing to the
Marshall de Grammons, and that of the Left to the Viscount de Turenne, and
having resolved to Cause the village to be attacked, he caused a Detachment to
march thither led on by Marsin, that was repulsed with great loss; Marsin
himself having been dangerously Wounded was obliged to retreat, and la Moussaye
who had order to take his Room had not a better fortune. The Duke d'Anguien
imagining all things were to Square with his Courage, marched himself to see
what was the matter, they went not better: But his Horse having been killed
under him, and having also received a Bruise, the Battle began to cool, when
the' Viscount de Turenne found the means to pass between the village and a
Mountain; the Enemies Cavalry Seeing him coming endeavored to stop him, that
he might remain exposed to the firing of the village which took him in the
Flank; but the Viscount de Turenne after having Changed his Horse, his first
having been wounded, received 'em so bravely, that he quickly made them betake
themselves to flight. Gleen, Lieutenant General of the Imperial Army, was taken
in that Occasion. But General Mercy's Destiny was still more Unhappy; for as he
endeavored to sustain the Battle with the Right Wing that had not yet buckl'd,
he was killed stone Dead upon the Spot. The Officers Disaster drew on that of
the Soldiers; These wanting Leaders to Conduct them, fought now no otherwise
then in Disorder, so as it was rather a Slaughter than a Battle, their Ordnance
with most of their equipage was the Booty of the victours, and the Duke
d'Anguien not being of a humor; to let the fruit of his victory slip, Seized
on Norlinguen and Dunkespiel. The Duke of Bavaria whose states were left as a
Prey after the loss of the Battle, had recourse to the Emperor, of whom he
demanded Succors with great importunity, and the Emperor fearing he might
proceed to an accommodation with the enemies, who made him some Proposals,
caused Immediately the Arch Duke Leopold with Galas to march away; by this
means Tortenson found himself freed from fear, and continued with the more
repose, but not with the more Success at the Siege of Brin. The Coming of
Archduke Leopold and of Galas gave Bounds to the Duke d'Anguien's Conquests,
who falling sick besides, had been Obliged to cause himself to be carried to
Philipsburg. Before his Departure he Commanded the Marshall de Grammont and
the Viscount de Turenne, to whom he left the Conduct of the Army, to stand only
upon the Defensive, either that he had secret Orders from the Court, or that
hoping to be Suddenly cured he meant to reserve all enterprises to himself.
But though he had not given them these Orders, yet Prudence required their not
following any other Course; For the enemies were much stronger than we, so as
that there was no other way to play the Game then that he directed: Thus after
having put Men into Dunkespiel and the Other Places we had taken, the Marshall
de Gramount and the Viscount de Turenne marched away for Philipsburg, and the
Arch Duke thinking to engage them in a certain Occasion that was favorable to
him, offered them Battle, which they were far from accepting, Seeing he could
not oblige them to it, he himself drew near Philipsburg, but having found the
place in too good a Posture to dare to Beseige it, and all the Passes on the
Rhine so well guarded that he could not enter into Alsatia, he wheeled about,
and bent his Arms another way. The French Leaguer, being no longer under any
Apprehensions, for Philipsbourg, Separated into two, under the Conduct of the
Mareshal de Grammont and of the Viscount de Turenne; and this Prince, though
weak, unwilling to lose time, went and took Trier, while the enemies attacked
Dunkespiel, and Rotembourg; they also made themselves Masters of Wisl^k and
Wimphem, so as fortune seemed to take delight in favoring sometimes one side,
and sometimes the other.

In Catalonia only was it where she appeared the least inconstant; for the
Count de Harcourt advancing into the Plain d'Vrgel to stop the enemies while
the Count du Plessis performed the Siege of Roses, she declared her self so far
in his favor, that a man would have said she had wedded his Party. In the mean
while the enemies being very strong could hardly brook to be thus Check-mated,
and made diverse Attempts, and not being paul'd by ill Success in the
Beginnings, daily undertook new matters. The King of Spain was still at
Saragossa from whence he pressed his Generals to open him the Passages, and as
he distrusted his fortune, he had not dared to come himself into his Army, for
fear of receiving some Affront. His Generals seemed to participate in his
fears, and seeing His Catholic Majesty so wary, they were also the more
Circumspect in their Enterprises. So as that the Count du Plessis availing
himself of their delays obliged the Town to Capitulate. The King to whom this
Count had already rendered manyfold services, made him Marshall of France, and
sent him back into Italy, to stop Prince Thomas his Complaints, he not being
over-well satisfied to be left thus without Succors: In the Interim the Count
de Harcourt after having in this manner ascertained the taking of Roses,
resolved to Cross the Segra whose passage the enemies defended. But as it was
difficult to compass that Design in their Presence, he sent a detachment
toward* the mountains, where they were not upon their Guard, and this
Detachment having passed the River upon a Bridge of Boats, entrenched it self
on the Other side, till the Rest of the Army was come up. The enemies having
had notice that part of the Army was already passed, marched that waywards, and
having begun a Brush to hinder the Rest from passing, they were repulsed and
pursued even into the Plain of Liorens; the two Armies being there in Battalia,
the Conflict that had been only managed by Detachment became General; But the
Spaniards having again been beaten, betook themselves to their heels, and made
their escape by favor of the night. The Count de Harcourt being encouraged by
so many happy Successes, laid Siege to Belaguier, which had been Surrendered to
the enemies the year before, and after having re-taken it, he returned to
Barcelona by reason of a Conspiracy framed by the Baroness d'Alby, a Woman of
Great Beauty, with which she allured many People into her Interests.

The Spaniards seeing themselves worsted in so many Places, endeavored to
retaliate in Portugal and in Italy; But the Marquis de Leganez having made an
Invasion upon the Dominions of his Portugheze Majesty, found more Difficulty
than he had foreseen, and the Governor of Milan that had hoped to have had
Prince Thomas at a cheap rate, saw himself frustrated of his expectation by the
arrival of the Marshall du Plessis. However the Governor not yet despairing
of being able to impede their Junction, posted himself upon the River of Mora,
and having possessed himself of Certain Posts made head against Prince Thomas,
while that on another side Endeavors were used to stop the Marshall du
Plessis; But that Prince laboring under a want of Provisions made an Effort to
get open the Passage, and behaved himself so Valiantly in that occasion, that
the Spanish Troops were put to the Rout. After this there being nothing more to
hinder his joining with the Marshall du Plessis, he met him on the Way; this
Marshall having on his side done all in his Power to come up to share with him
in the fortune of that Day.

The War that was spread in so many Places during the year before, ceased in
some by the Peace, made between the Emperor and the Prince of Transylvania,
and between Sueden and Denmark: But it continued with more force in other
Places, because that the Troops of the Emperor and of the King of Sueden
being reunited Each to their Party, several Bodies of them were formed, which
carried the War into so many Parts, that not a Place was there but became a
Bloody Theater; the Winter it self, a time that seems destined for repose, was
spent in making diverse enterprises, as if the other Seasons had not been
sufficient. The Spaniards impatiently supporting the taking of la Roque de
Vigevane, from whence excursions were made as far as Milan, laid Siege to that
Place, and continuing their Attacks, notwithstanding the bitterness of the Cold
made themselves Masters of that Fastness. This enterprise having been begun
toward the end of the Year 1645. and completed at the beginning of the Year
following, far from disheartning Prince Thomas, stimulated him to take his
Revenge upon some other place, and having taken a turn to Paris, he prevailed
with the Court to send a Fleet into Italy, to favor a certain Design he had
upon the Coasts of Tuscany: But fearing least this might alarm the Grand-Duke,
he had the Secret imparted to him, and a Bargain was struck up with his
Highness that he should not give any Succors to the Spaniards. The Court
having thus settled matters on that side, the Duke de Breze, Admiral of France
and Brother in Law to the Duke d'Anguien, put to Sea with a Fleet, while Prince
Thomas bent his March to Orbitella, which place he had taken a Resolution to
beleaguer. This Town could not be Releiv'd by Land save by the Forces of the
Kingdom of Naples; but this Succors being slow and besides very uncertain,
the Spaniards assembled Ships, and made in the interim some Attempts with the
Garrisons of Porto-Ercole and of other Forts they held in those parts. Carlo de
la Gatta being in the place, performed on his part all that could impede the
Approaches, and having by his Bravery spunout things into a Length, the Fleet
put to Sea, and the Succors departed from Naples, but in so Scanty a Number,
that according to all Appearances they were not much to be relied on. The Fleet
being ready before the Succors, the Spaniards offered an Engagement, and the
Duke de Breze being Young and desirous to signalize himself, having met them
half way, they fought on both sides with great Courage. At length the Spaniards
not being able to resist the French Fury, thought of nothing now but of
retreating, and would perhaps have been mauled in so doing, but that, by good
luck for them, the Duke of Breze was killed by a Canon Bullet, which made the
French not mind pursuing them. Carlo de la Gatta had no other hopes now but in
the Succors of Naples, and which I have already said to be so poor a business,
that he did not presume of it much to his advantage: but the Issue of the
Engagement that had been lately fought at Sea, having alarmed the Neighboring
Princes, each of 'em underhand augmented this Succors, and it proved so
considerable before it came in the presence of the Enemies, that Carlo de la
Gatta might well entertain a better opinion of it without fearing to be taxed
with too much Vanity. And indeed after having rested a day or two, this
Succors attacked the Lines with so much Valor, as forced Prince Thomas to
untrim the Trenches to line a Thousand several places where the Enemies
appeared: But Carlo de la Gatta laying hold of so favorable a time to make a
Vigorous Sally, he drove out those that were left in the Works, and having set
fire to the Bavins and filled the Trench, Prince Thomas had no other course to
take than of making his Retreat.

The ill Success of this Enterprise gave some disquiet to France, that had
found by this occasion the little kindness the Princes of Italy had for that
Crown; and as Prince Thomas after this saw himself slighted by his Adherents,
and that his Despair was capable of hurrying him to great Extremities, it was
resolved that a New Effort should be made to endeavor a Diversion of the
Spanish Forces that were preparing to find him Work sufficient. The Marshall
de la Meilleraye had Order to fit out a New Fleet, and being embarked he laid
Siege to Piombino, where the Marshall du Plessis came and joined him with some
French Troops. This Enterprise, being more Prosperous than that of Orbitella,
repaired in some manner our Reputation in Italy; But the taking of Piombino
having been followed with that of Porto-Longone, the jealousy of the
Neighboring Princes was stronger than ever, fatal marks of which, had it been
in their Power, they would liberally have bestow'don us.

In the mean while though the War was carry'd-on with so much heat in Italy, yet
did it in no wise cool in Flanders or in Germany. The Duke of Orleans was
entered Flanders with an Army, containing the flower of the Troops of the
whole Kingdom, and had the Duke d'Auguien under him. The Principal Aim was upon
Dunkirk, and this Design had been Sufficiently manifested the year before by the
Enterprises that had been made on that side; for which reason the Court of
France had prevailed with the Prince of Orange who had surpised Tirlemont in
the very heart of the Winter, that he would send Ships before it, and into
other parts where they might be requisite. This Prince advanced himself in
Person, flustering at a rate as if he meant to attack the Best Places, and
thereby make a Great Diversion, he gave the Duke of Orleans Means who was not
yet willing to give vent to his Design, to go besiege the City of Courtray:
Having Secured that, he passed the Canal of Bruges and the Prince of Orange
drawing near on that side, the Marshall de Grammont went into his Camp with
Six Thousand Men. Thus the Spaniards imagining him as ready for any sort of
Attempt, were obliged to divide their forces; but the Duke of Orleans drawing
near Mardik, which the Spaniards had recovered the year before, he laid siege
to it. The Duke d'Anguien, who Exposed his Person as much as the Meanest
Soldiers, ran there a risque of his Life, and was wounded in several Places.
In the Interim Picolomini endeavored to impede this Conquest as much as he
could; but the Prince of Orange, Crossing his Design, he had the Vexation of
not being able to effect his Ends. Mardyk being taken, the Duke of Orleans
returned to Court, and the Duke d'Anguien, marched against Berguen, which after
he had taken he beleaguered Dunkirk. The Siege of this Place, being a Seaport,
at another time would have Created much jealousy in the English, and perhaps
they would have used their utmost endeavors to hinder it: But the Execrable
Rebellion they were Engaged in at that time, rendering them incapable of any
other Sentiment, they with great Tranquillity beheld the Beginning, Prosecution
and End of this Enterprise. The Duke d'Anguien having Completed his Lines of
Circumvallation, pressed the Town briskly, and though Picolomini had laid all
other Business aside, to attend the Relief of this Place, he took it, to the
great amazement of Strangers, who Expected this Place must have held out much
longer. This Conquest augmented still the Glory which that Prince had acquired
in Germany, and the Court had so much regard for him, as began to create a
Jealousy in the Duke of Orleans: but as the Duke d'Anguien had a Sly and
Cunning Wit, he managed his Royal Highness so dexterously, as that he removed
all his Suspicions. The Prince of Orange thinking to make advantage of the
Consternation the Spaniards were under after this loss, laid Siege to Venlo;
but having undertaken it only to his own Confusion, he Retreated into his own
Country, while the Marshall de Grammont had much ado to get into France.

The happy Successes we had had in Flanders were a little tarnished by raising
the Siege of Lerida, undertaken by the Count de Harcourt, and where he consumed
many Men and much Money. But the heat of the War was no where so manifest as in
Germany, where the Viscount de Turenne's Prudence exerted it self in many
Instances: The Imperialists, having had a little Respite by means of the
Winter, endeavored to Improve it to advantage, and as they were in their own
Country, and had advantages the Suedes wanted, they retrieved many Places in
Bohemia, and in other Provinces where they had been losers. The Viscount de
Turenne being upon the Rhin, was too remote to give Succors to our Allies, yet
he endeavored as much as lay in him to oblige the Enemies to Divide their
Forces; for which reason he now and then was Tampering in some petty
Enterprise, and by that means kept 'em in Suspense and Jealousy: But in short
his Forces were not sufficient to Archieve what he otherwise would, he had but
Six Thousand Men both Horse and Foot, and with such a handful he was not
capacitated for any great matter. Thus having not been able to hinder the
Enemies from taking their Quarters in Hesse, this had Cut him off all
Communication with the Suedes, and when the Season came to prepare to take the
field, he knew not what in the World to do to give them Succors: In the mean
while, he was at a sufficient Plunge himself how to be upon his Defense against
the Surprises of the Enemies, who at any time supplied the want of force with
all sorts of Stratagems against him; He had newly discovered a Correspondence
they had in Philipsburg, and though he had Caused it is Authors to be punished,
he knew not whether there might not be still some Other, and so durst not
remove far from hand; the time however pressed, the Imperialists laid Hesse
desolate, and so incommoded the Suedes, as reduced 'em to strange Distress. The
Land-Gravinne of Hesse solicited him to give her Succors, the Suedes demanded
the same thing of his Excellency, and he saw little likelihood of effecting
either, through the Dfficulty of the Ways, and the fastnesses the Enemies had
between Both. At last, after having weighed well what he had to do, he sent to
the Prince of Orange to desire him to lend him a Bridge of Boats he had upon
the Rhine, and having passed that River above the Borders of Wesel, he framed a
Design in his Turn, to cut off the Ennmies Communication, and to pen them up
when he had once joined the Suedes, in which he could not have been hindered,
if he had the Good luck to compass the Conjunction. The Enemies might as yet
have exempted themselves from that inconvenience, but fearing he would march
into Bavaria, whose Passes were open, they quickly left Hesse, and while they
were marching in a Body they made Detachments to advance in all have upon the
Mein. The Viscount de Turenne upon the news he had of all these motions,
fancying that the Success of his Enterprise depended only on his opening the
Passage of that River, Caused some troops to advance, and these Troops having
driven away three hundred men that defended a Ford, the whole Army passed,
being a days March before that of the Enemies: In the mean while he Seized on
Aschaffembourg and of some other Places of less importance, and having left a
Garrison in some, and blown up Others, he marched toward the Danube, where
most of the Citys opened their Gates without making other than a mean
Resistance; Rhenen however stopped our Arms for some days; but having been Won
as well as the Rest, all Bavaria remained a Prey to our Army, it having also
passed the Lek. Ausburg only now wanted to be reduced, it having at first
demanded a Newtrality, but calling in the Enemies afterward, this step obliged
the Viscount to lay Siege to it. The Duke of Bavaria had like to have been
surpised in a Country House where he was taking the Diversion of Hunting; for
having not foreseen that so many Rivers could be passed in so short a space, he
was far from suspecting a misfortune to be so imminent; he withdrew into his
Capital City, but not thinking himself there in safety, he would have gone
much further off if he had found the means to remove off the storm with which
he was threatened by proposing to remain Neuter. This Prince, notwithstanding he
appeared the Most formidable of our enemies, having ever kept a Secret
Correspondence with Us, for We were not over-willing that the Suedes should
become so Potent, and he for his part was not Sorry that the Imperialists now
and then received some small Mortifications. Thus were poor Miserable Wretches
Sacrificed for the public weal, by some times giving ground and at others by
making a fluster of pushing on; This is the reason of our Army in Germany's
being ever so Weak; and if Succors had been sent thither the two years before,
'twas rather to show what France was capable of, than to make any Considerable
Conquests. And indeed Experience had shown in the Course of one and the same
year, that Victorious Armies had been obliged to give ground and retreat, for
these two Powers had the Secret to make Detachments so in the Nick, as to bring
matters again to the Equilibrium they had underhand agreed on; but now at this
time it fell out quite otherwise, and the Viscount de Turenne not knowing the
least of all these secret practices, had pushed things so far, as neither side
knew how to remedy. In so great an Extremity, only were there two Expedients,
One to send the Viscount de Turenne order to retire; the other to direct him to
suffer himself to be beaten. The former could not be done without manifesting
the Intelligence, the Other was dangerous, because it had been imparting the
Secret to him, which they would not do notwithstanding. As matters were urging,
and that Bavaria suffered extraordinaryly by the stay of so many Troops, they
Chose to offer a Treaty, under Color of which the Viscount de Turenne had
order to repass the Rhin. This Extremely Surpised this Prince, for the Court
trusted entirely in the Duke of Bavaria's Word, he promising to abandon the
Emperor: but as it was not for him to Pry into the Secret, and that it became
him to content himself with obeying, he Marched whither he was Commanded, to
the great grief of the Suedes, who fiercely Exclam'd against this Treaty. Thus
they Separated with much coldness, though not a person in their Army but had
conceived a peculiar esteem for him, for he exerted his Benignity even to the
Common Soldiers, not one of whom but he had done some kindness to, Especially
those who had been long in the Service, and he delighted in hearing them
discourse of the various Occasions in which they had been. Now it once
happening that one of them was giving him a Relation of the Battle of Leipsick,
coming to the King of Suedens Death, he fell a sobbing, and Tears gusht out to
that degree as hindered him from Prosecuting his Discourse. This Soldier's
affection for his King so edified the Viscount that he would needs have him
into his Service: But this Soldier made him answer, that he would have no
other Master than his Captain; and that after having performed all his Life
long so Honorable a Trade, he was resolved not to engage in any other of less
Esteem. The Viscount de Turenne far from being Scandalized at this Answer, was
so pleased with it, that he desired Wrangel, Commanding the Troops of Sueden,
to give him this Soldier, and a Lieutenancy of Horse falling Vacant some days
after in a Regiment of his Army, he made him a present of it, with Moneys
necessary for his Equipage: For this Prince was not only ever ready to speak
well of deserving Persons, but he also did them as much good as he was able,
and even sometimes beyond his Forces; he also said, that a man need never fear
to Want, if he had been Isntrumental to procure the fortune of Others, and
that they were as many grateful Persons that would never abandon a Man at a
pinch. If he was free to give without being asked, it is to be presumed without
my saying it, that he never refused what lay in his Power: Nay, he often met
those who needed him, or whom he thought under some sort of Necessity, and he
did not then inquire whether he altered his Expense, or whether it would not
incommode him himself; and indeed he commonly said, that he that was not good
for himself was good for no Body, that a Prince could never want, and that
having so many Helps, he had but very little Charity, if he did not pity the
Misery of a Man, who often knew not where to put his Head. Nevertheless once
these sorts of Liberalities brought his Money to fall short, and his Steward,
who told him roundly his Mind, began to grumble so far as to tell him, that
since it was his fault he saw himself reduced to this Estate, it was for him to
look out for Remedy; Friend, said he to him, let us not be in this Passion, and
we will go see in a Moment whether we have any Friends; at the same time he
publicly declared the streights he was brought to, of which the whole Army
being informed, brought him its Money, even to the very Soldiers, who desired
him to accept of their Loan, saying they should be never the more at a loss for
their Maintenance. The Viscount de Turenne was Overjoyed at their good Will,
and taking what he had Occasion for out of his Friends Purses, He thanked the
Rest, who were under an Unconceivable Grief that Others had been preferred
before them.

The Credit he had, made him however not to be at a Penny Charge more than
Necessary, and even in his Greenest Youth he was peculiar in this, that he had
Ever squared his Expenses according to his Purse; For which reason he said,
that a man should never mind what Others did, because he would ever find those,
whom he would have reason to Envy; that by this means a man did often
incapacitate himself from serving; and that a man that had a Noble Ambition,
had no need of so much Equipage for the doing his Duty; that Luxury it was
which occasioned this Disorder, and not greatness of mind, as many People did
imagine. Upon which he told what one of his Friends had done, who being obliged
to go to the Army, and being without Equipage, had refused to accept of Money,
for fear of not being able to get thither at the time required. He said that it
became a Man to demean himself in this manner, and in an Age wherein
Licentiousness and Luxury reigned beyond Imagination, he endeavored to
re-establish Virtue in the Room of Vice: And indeed, as well among Strangers,
as the French, his repute was mounted so high, that he was considered as a
Prince, less Conspicuons for his Birth than for the Grandeur of his Sentiments.
His very Servants observed nothing but what was lofty in him, for though none in
his House but have Manifested some Weakness, he was so Exempt from all
Infirmities, that his least Actions gave Admiration; Nevertheless this made him
not the more Arrogant with his Equals, nor the more proud with his Inferiors.
As for his Domestiques, he Carried himself toward them with so much Goodness,
that they openly averred, that being under the Misfortuue of Service, they were
over-happy in having met with so good a Master; He never spoke to them
Otherwise, than if they had been his Equals, Ever Mild, ever Affable; and
indeed he said their Condition did already sufficiently Challenge
Commiseration, without aggravating their misfortune by ill usage: Nevertheless
he exacted from each their respective Dutys, for if he had found out the least
Debauchery, he had thence-forward no further regard for such Persons, and they
must Change their Master; but this was done so mildly and without violence, and
he contented himself with letting them know the Occasion of their being turned
away, that so they might reform. This Conduct procured his family to be made up
only of Civil Worthy Persons, or at least of Persons who seemed so to his Eyes
and to the eyes of all People: Such as were prone to a Disorderly Life had no
Business in his Retinue, but provided they made appear good Inclinations, they
were sure of his Protection; both for themselves and their family; for which
reason he did not mind whether they were married or not, and such as were had
no need to fear that this should divert them from his Service, since he
phancy'd this would render them the more affectionate to him; If they had any
business he made it his own, and Solicited it in Person, without contenting
himself to recommend it by Letters: For he said that Presence produced a
greater effect than all the Writing in the World, and how a man that had a mind
to do Others service ought never to take Notice if he sometimes did more than
he ought; but in Soliciting a Judge, he never said I beseech you do this for
me, but I beseech you do it if you find it Just, for he would not that his
Credit should be injurious to any Body, and he told those who desired him to go
interpose their Recommendation in his behalf, that they should not engage him
in it, in case their affair was ticklish in the least.

The Treaty, abovementioned, being concluded with the Duke of Bavaria, the
year 1647. was already far spent, when that the Suedes having no mind to
evacuate the Places they held, were not in a humor to ratify the Treaty unless
they might be left in Possession of what they then had in their hands. In the
mean while the Prince of Conde Died before the Year was finished, and the Duke
d'Anguien assumed his Name, so as when I shall henceforward mention the Prince
of Conde, I shall mean that Duke. The Contests that arose between the Suedes
and the Duke of Bavaria occasioned the Viscount de Turenne to remain still
sometime upon his Territories, where he fought a short and smart Battle; for
having Notice that the Enemies were marching toward the Rhin, he attacked them
Vigorously, and pursued them to the very Gates of Newbourg; he also took
several small Cities of of his Electoral Highness's Country, for to oblige him
to give all manner of Contentment to the Suedes, it became him to exert still
the same heat. In the mean while as Affairs spun-out into a Length, a Part of
the Army advanced toward the Lake of Constance, and alarmed the Cantons by
the taking of Bregens and of some other places: They sent Deputies to the
Viscount de Turenne to know his Intentions; but this Prince having assured them
that the King his Master had not the least thoughts of making any Innovation in
their Regard, they returned very well satisfied, as being persuaded he would
not have given them this assurance, if he meant afterward to Violate it. And
indeed those who knew him, knew that for any thing in the world he would not
have been prevailed with to deceive any body. And it was also a Common saying
of his, that there was a great Difference between the Stratagems of War and
Cheats; and forasmuch as a man was esteemed who knew how to put the former in
practice, so much ought he to be blamed who made use of the later to bring
about his Designs; that a man's word ought to be inviolable as well to Enemies
as to Friends, and that if they were to be surpised, 'twas not to be by
promising them, what a man never meant to perform. At l^st the Treaty
beforementioned, being made, the Suedes having been thereunto obliged by the
French, harbored a Secret Resentment in their Hearts, of which they were not
long without giving them Instances.

During these Transactions the Viscount de Turenne having left Bavaria, turned
his Arms against the Electour of Mayenz and the Land^grave of Darmstadt from
whom he recovered the Cities of Aschaffemburg, Sclingenstadt, and some Others;
for while he was busied on the One side, the Enemies Acted on the Other, and
sometimes in one and the same Campagn, a Town Charged its Party three or four
times. He also took the City of Darmstadt, the Capital of the Landtgrasts of
that name's Dominions, and having Cast a Terror into the Electorate of
Cologne, he obliged those Princes to demand a Neutrality. All these Treatys
would have startled the Emperor; if he had believed them any thing long-lived;
but he expected what in effect happened, that the Duke of Bavaria having left
his Principal Towns in the hands of the Suedes, and being Constrained to remain
Armed, could not Subsist any longer without endeavoring to affranchize himself
from their Slavery; that this would rather make him Choose the hazzards of War,
than Moulder away by little and little: For which reason he resolved to try if
he could induce him sooner to the Rupture, than he would have fallen to it of
himself. In the Interim his Circumstances were so low, that all his Credit
seemed lost in Germany; For we were Masters of the Bancks of the Rhin, from
Colin to Basel, and as the means to pierce into the Country, We had also
reserved to our selves Heilbronn and Lawinghen, which afforded us a free
Passage as far as into the Hereditary Countries. On another side the Suedes
possessed an infinite Number of Places in the heart of the Country; but the
Emperor hoping to avail himself of the strangeness between them and Us, since
the Treaty of Bavaria, expected not only to recover what he had lost, but also
to sustain with some sort of Repute the Affairs of Flanders, that were under
great Decadency since the taking of Dunkirk. For considering that if the King
could once render himself Master of those Provinces, he would be capable
afterward to give Laws to all the Empire, he fancied that though he had not so
much Interest therein as the King of Spain, he ought nevertheless to Espouse it
as his own Business: For this purpose he sent the Archduke Leopold thither,
that so the Grandees being Excited by the Grandeur of his Birth, might rid
themselves of a certain jealousy to which he attributed the Unhappiness of the
foregoing Campagns. The Archduke being accompanied with Numerous and
well-disciplin'd Forces, and being desirous to Signalize his Arrival in
Flanders by some Considerable Exploit, he lead his Army against the City of
Armentieres, whose Governor made a Valiant Defense; but after having held out
about three Weeks without the prospect of any Considerable Succors, it at
length Surrendered upon Honorable Conditions. From Armentieres the Archduke
Marched against Landrecies, where he had Intelligence with the Marquis
d'Haudicourt, Commanding in that Place. Thus having taken it with much Ease,
the French Leaguer, then Marching to its Succors, was obliged to turn its Arms
another way. To repair these Losses it took Dixmuyden and La Bassee, but it
kept the former of these Two Places so little a while that it is not worth the
pains to boast of it; for the Archduke laid Siege to it immediately, while the
Marshall de Gassion Attacked Lens. At the siege of this fastness, was it that
this Captain, who had acquired great Renown in all his Enterprises, received a
Musket Shot of which he died; he was much Lamented by his Men, esteemed by the
Enemies, and his Relations, who were great Losers by his Death, nevertheless
lost still less by it than the State did, to which he was more than ever
capable of rendering great Services. In the mean while, the Arch-Duke's Army
still Augmenting, and the Court being afraid it might make advantage of
Gassion's Death, sent Orders to the Viscount de Turenne, who staid upon the
Banks of the Rhin to Secure his Conquests, to repass it on to this side: But by
taking Care of the Affairs of this side, those on that fell into Decay, for the
Emperor improving this Diversion, drove the Suedes from several Posts. For a
Height of Misfortune, Colonel Rose, who served in the Viscount de Turenne's
Army, being gained and egg'd-on by his Countrymen, who as I said before, were
Exasperated at the Treaty of Bavaria, made Caballs in his Regiment, and in that
of some Suedes that served as well as he under the Viscount de Turenne, so to
stir up some Sedition; and though this Priuce having intimation of his Practices
had him taken into Custody, the thing was not wanting nevertheless to have
strange Consequences: For as this Prince would have led them into Flanders, he
heard a Muttering that passed from File to File, and suspecting it to be the
effect of the underhand practices he had discovered, he thought it his best
way to show himself to repress them; But instead of meeting with the Obedience
he expected, the Officers as well as Soldiers told him that having been raised
by the Great Gustavus, they had not made any difference of the Services they
had rendered to France from those his Majesty himself had exacted, because the
Alliance between the two Crowns, interwove their Interests, and made, as a man
may say, but one Party; but now the thing in Agitation being the Carrying the
War into Flanders, this was not the Interest of the Crown of Sueden, and that
by Consequence they would not go. The Soldiers had all this while the Match in
readyness nor more nor less than if they had been before an Enemy; but the
Viscount de Turenne, without being startled, told the Officers that they were
to answer for the Rest; that they should come to a Resolution in four and
twenty hours time, if not he knew how to execute his. That time was spent in
Parleys of both Parties; the Mutineers demanded to have paid them what was
owing them* and that afterward they were ready to go wherever their General
should lead them: but as this was only a Pretext to cover their Disobedience,
they separated themselves from the rest of the Army upon asking them time to
Content them. They were Two Thousand Five Hundred men or thereabouts, and
Marching in Battalia with an Extraordinary Courage, they resolved
notwithstanding their being severely Threatened, and the Difficulty of the Ways,
to go and find out Coningsmark, who made them a Thousand Advantageous Offers to
draw them to him. The Viscount de Turenne having spared them till then, by
reason of their Bravery, which he had so often tried, having now no other
Course to take, followed them at their Heels, and having overtaken them in a
Straight, where they had put themselves in a Posture of Defense, he defeated a
part of them, and pursued the Rest. Having taken some Prisoners he resolved to
have them Hanged, and to begin with some Officers; But an Old Man with a White
Hoary Head of Hair, and Venerable for his Years, having opened his Breast, on
which were Two and Thirty Wounds, We do not fear Death, said he to the
Viscount, let it present it self in what manner it will to our Eyes, and my
Companions can show thee as well as I, that they have confronted it a Thousand
times without turning Pale; lead Us whither thou will provided it concerns the
Service of the Crown, whose Subjects We are Born; But let us not follow thee for
the Interests of thine, which We will not do without having first received
Orders for that purpose from the Queen of Sueden, our only Mistress. Thou say
we are Mercenaries, and as such ought to follow thee over all; If we have been
in the Pay of the King thy Master, we have Served him well for his Money. Here Is
Thirty two Wounds I have got within these Ten Years that I have been in his
Service, and though I have born Arms since Fifteen Years old, I never was in so
many Battles, nor so many Sieges, as since I have been under his Banners. Every
man of us will tell thee as much, and there are those of them that could show
thee much otherguess Wounds, and yet have had no great Recompense. I don't say
this to Reproach thee, thou do^st all thou can for men in Service, and if thou
do not do more, it is because thou have not the Power. But do not think I say
this to Flatter thee, or for that I am at thy Mercy, nothing but the Truth
obliges me to it. I am above Sixty Four Years old, and thus having a foot in the
Grave, thou can only very little advance my End; but have a care of
Dishonouring thy Life by inflicting an Infamous Punishment upon Brave Men, and
Consider well the Consequences this may be of to the King thy Master. The
Assurance wherewith this Old man spoke, had matter to surprise all those that
heard him. It was generally expected that having failed in his Respect to his
General he was going to be sent to Execution; But the Viscount de Turenne
admiring the greatness of his Courage; I pardon thee, said he, the freedom
with which thou speak to me, and in favor of the Blood thou have shed in so
many good Occasions, I spare thee what thou have left, and that of thy
Companions: But, me thinks, all thy Long Service has not over well taught thee
Due Obeence, let the Danger thou art in, teach thee, if possible, to be wise,
and I am content that thou should know that if I did my Duty, thou would
not perhaps come-off at so Cheap a rate. He dismissed him after this answer,
and having given him and his Adherents leave to go whither they pleased, they
went and joined their main Body, to meet whom Koningsmarck was advanced.

This Disobedience having much diminished the Viscount de Turenne's Army, he
found no more now than Six Thousand men when he was on this side the Rhine;
Being nevertheless advanced into Luxembourg, this did not hinder him from
Sacking the Open Country, and from taking some Castles with the little City of
Wirton. The Enemies being then obliged to send Troops to make Head against him,
this so weakened their Army, as incapacitated it from any further Attempt. The
Viscount de Turenne was however in hopes to meet with some favorable occasion
to fight, but having notice of the City of Worms being Besieged, he turned
back to go to it is Relief: And indeed needful was it to oppose the Emperor,
who waged War with Success: For though the Suedes had taken the City of Stinfwrt
in Franconia, and that of Egger in Bohemia, they had lost several others that
were of much greater Moment; Upon which the Duke of Bavaria seeing his Country
eaten up by their Troops, took occasion to break the Treaty he had with Sueden;
for he was not only vexed to see his Territories Garrisoned, but was also
willing to partake with the Emperor in the Spoils of that Crown, which he saw
abandoned by France, and which he thought could not be so suddenly Succored,
for the King had his hands full in Flanders, and besides in all likelihood
would resent what had newly occurred in Relation to the Viscount de Turenne.
Thus the more to oblige us not to intermeddle in his Affairs, he openly
Protested he had no Design to come to a Rupture with us, and forbid his Troops
to commit any Hostility in places under our Jurisdiction. We let him alone for
some time, as not being sorry, as I think I have already said, to curtaile a
little the Power of the Suedes: But when we saw, that after he had drove them
out of his Country, he Pretended to extend his Conquests, even upon the other
Places they held in Germany, we began then to think of giving them Succors.
Whereupon the Viscount de Turenne had orders sent him to pass the Rhine again,
and he reinforced his Army with some Garrisons in Lorrain and Alsatia, through
which Provinces he directed his Way.

During these Transactions News came from Catalonia, that the Prince of Conde
being gone thither to relieve the Count de Harcourt, had not been more
prosperous before Lerida, which Place he had also beleaquer'd. This Unhappy
Event, joined to some other small Disgraces which befell us in Flanders and in
Italy where the Spaniards had Sacked Montferrat, obliging the Court to take
Care least Matters should grow still worse in Germany, they endeavored to
regain the Suedes Confidence, who were not so dull, as not to entertain some
suspicion of the Sentiments we had in their regard. However nothing perplexed
us more in the Conjunctures that offered themselves, than the Conduct of the
United Provinces, who managed, unknown to us, a Treaty of Peace with the
Spaniards; for though we remonstrated to them, upon the suspicion we had on this
Account, that their only safety was to remain inseparably linked to us, they
were so Weary of the War, that they thought any Peace, however bad, to be
preferable to it. The Court having, got the Wind of their Intentions, Servient
was sent to the Hague, and He, notwithstanding the fine Words they gave him,
judged they had a Design to abandon us; for which reason orders were sent to
the Ambassadors we had at Munster, and who were Assembled there to Treat of a
General Peace, to mind Carefully the Paces of the Ambassadors of Holland,
whose Conduct was so much the more suspected, in that it was concealed. The
Prince of Orange's Death happening just in that Nick, still contributed to
inspire them with this Desire; for they considered that after having lost this
Prince, a Person of such vast Experience, their Affairs would perchance, change
face under the Conduct of Prince William his Son, who would need much time to
acquire as much knowledge as his Father had had, and in War, and in Policy. Be
it as it will, they remained without doing any thing, as if they repented their
having Assisted us in the taking so many Good Places. And indeed this was said
to be the Reason why they most desired to make Peace, and that they already
began to distrust our Neighborhood; For they considered that Flanders being so
Remote from the King of Spain's other Territories; Nay, and the Passages of
Italy stopped by the means of Lorrain which we had in Possession, this Prince
was not in a Condition to defend himself against so formidable a Power as Ours,
and principally when there should be any Diversion in our favor. But what
vexed them most was, that by giving them a Sum of Money, we obliged them most
commonly to favor our Conquests, without affording them any share in them, as
had been practiced in the Two last Campagns: They said that after having fought
for their Liberty for a whole Century together, a great want of Judgment would
it be to suffer others to gather the fruits of all their Labors; that if they
could not enlarge their State, it was sufficiently flourishing in what it
contained for them to be contented; that the Peace would infinitely improve
it is advantageous Condition, and that at length after so much pains and
Bloodshed, it was high time to enjoy some rest and dye in their Beds. The
Spaniards being no Strangers to these Sentiments endeavored to foster them;
but the Hollanders on their side knowing the desire the Others had to divorce
them from us, set the Peace at so high a Rate, that some hopes were still left,
that they would not proceed to an Accommodation.

Things being in this Posture at the beginning of the Year 1648, a sad Year for
us, as I shall show in due Place, yet not by the Advantages the Enemies gained,
for they were rather Conquered than Victors, but through our intestine Divisions,
which had like to have occasioned the ruin of the State. The Prince of Conde,
who had tried a Reverse of Fortune before Lerida, was returned to Court, where
he Solicited the Command of the Army in Flanders, little minded now by the
Duke of Orleans; so as after having obtained it, he took the field against
Archduke Leopold, who had missed of Courtray, which he meant to have Surpised
by Scalado. The Enemies were Extraordinary strong that Year, and menaced no
less then to Invade France through Champagne and Picardy, which they Equally
threatened. To remedy this Disorder, Troops advanced from Sundry Parts; nay, and
some were drawn out of Brisac, making a show of Investing Fribourg, to the
intent to draw a small Body of the Enemies to March that way to dispute with
them their Passage. The Marshall de Rantzau, who had had the Government of
Dunkirk, drew together on the Other side, diverse Garrisons; and the Archduke
being obliged to divide his forces, the Prince of Conde being of a daring,
Enterprizing Humor, laid Siege to Ypres. The Archduke who expected to be
Master of the Campagn, was strangely Surpised at his Boldness, as being in a
Condition to give him Battle; but fearing Fortune might declare her self for
the Prince of Conde, he durst not attempt to force his Lines, and suffered his
Highness to Complete his Conquest, without giving him all the Obstruction he
might have done As many of our Men died before Ypres, and that besides this the
Army was Weakened by the Garrison that was put into that Place, the Archduke
who had taken on his side the City of Courtray, and had had time to know his
own strength, thought it his Duty to make some Enterprise, and went and
Besieged Elters. This Place had neither the Strength of Ypres, nor was it
worthy of so great an Army; Nevertheless, the Prince of Conde imagining it to
be a lessening his repute to Suffer it to be taken without offering its relief,
decamped in all have; and marched that waywards. Yet whatever diligence he
could make, it was Surrendered before his Arrival, which made him a little Angry
with the Commander of that Place; but quickly comforting himself he drew near
the Enemies, who after having provided for their New Conquest, had led their
Forces against Lens: He found them Masters too of that Town; Insomuch that
being prevented of his good Intentions for that Place, he resolved to Wreak his
Revenge on the Enemies, to whom he offered Battle, remaining two days in
Battalia without their stirring from the Town. At last being afraid of being
famished, they made some motions, but the Prince of Conde being at the same
time at their Heels, did not suffer them to Escape without fighting. Now as he
had undertaken to retrieve his Reputation, which had suffered some blemish by
raising the Siege of Lerida, he of his Person did Wonders, and after having
defeated their Left Wing, He fell upon their Right, which the Marshall de
Grammont had attacked with less Success. The Disorder was great among the
Archdukes Troops, and this Prince was never able to rally them, whatever Peril
he himself confronted for the setting them an Example, Rantzau taking the
Advantage of this Victory, went and Attacked Frondatte, who with a small Body
of Spaniards Covered the Places on the Seaside; and after having beaten him
into his very Retrenchments, he beleaguered Furnes, whither the Prince of Conde
repaired. He received there a Musket Shot on the Reins, but the Bullet being
flatted by his Buff, that happened to lie in folds, he came off with a Bruise.
These losses so allarum'd the Spaniards that they resolved to pass over all
Considerations that had thitherto hindered 'em from coming to a Conclusion with
the Hollanders, and the Treaty having been signed, they imagined they might be
in a Capacity to take their Revenge. However their Concerns went not only ill
on that side, but they had been also compelled to raise the Siege of Flix in
Catalonia, and the Marshall de Schomberg had taken Tortose from them; they had
likewise been obliged in Italy to abandon some Islands they had possessed
themselves off upon the Po, and the Duke of Modena, having the Command of the
Army, by reason of some Discontent Prince Thomas had given the Court, had
besieged Cremona in the State of Milan with an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men.
They apprehended the Event of that Siege as a thing fatal to their Grandeur.
The Duke of Modena used all possible Care and Industry in this Occasion, as
well as the Marshall du Plessis and the Marquis Ville, who particularly had
the Whole Care of the Attacks, but the latter having been been wounded by a
Cannon shot, of which he died two days after, seemed to carry all Good luck
away with him. In effect the Duke of Modena having Suffered some Losses in
diverse Sallies, thought it became him not any longer to prosecute that
Enterprise, and though he had lost Men and time in it, he made less reflection on
the Shame that would redound from raising the Siege, than on the Obligation he
was under to save the Rest of his Men. The joy the Spaniards received from
raising the Siege of Cremona, was preceeded by another Event, to which they had
been still more sensible; and indeed the thing was of much greater Consequence
to them, and as I have not yet Spoke of it, I shall here drop a Word or Two,
since the Occasion serves. The Viceroy they had at Naples, having displeased
the People, as well as the Nobless, a General revolt there was against him the
Night before; and fearing least the King of Spain might inflict an Exemplary
Punishment, they called in His most Christian Majesty to their Succors, who
sent them the Duke of Guise, a Person to them acceptable. This Duke being
brave, sustained things for some time with great Vigor; but being addicted to
his Pleasures, he suffered himself to be led away by his Temper, without
considering the humor of the Nation, jealous even to fury. Thus they not
pardoning him some little Amors, that had made but too much noise, they framed
several Conspiracies against him, nay and rendered him so suspected to the
King, that his Majesty left him, as it were, to himself. In so great an
Exigency he would have opened to himself a Passage, to introduce Provisions
into the Town, then laboring under great want of them; but going out himself
imprudently, those that had a Design against him delivered a Gate to the
Spaniards, who on another side seized on his Person. Now this Event was to them
of too Great a Consequence, for them to refrain entertaining an Extraordinary
joy; but it would have been still much greater, without what occurred in
Germany. I have said before, that the Duke of Bavaria having broke his Treaty,
the Viscount de Turenne was marched away again for Germany by order from the
Court; and as this Prince knew the necessity there was to make have, he marched
long Days journeys till he had passed the Rhine: He joined the Suedes, whose
great occasions for him, from them extorted great excuses, for having received
his Mutinous Troops, and having offered to put them again into his hands to
Chastize them as he pleased, his answer was, that all thoughts should be laid
aside of what was passed and that provided they were more Obedient, he
willingly pardoned them. This Affair being thus terminated without there
appearing any bitterness on either side, the Army marched directly to the
Danube, where the Enemies waited with thirty thousand men, as if they meant to
give Battle, but upon the Tidings they had that the Viscount de Turenne drew
near, they marched to Donawert, where they passed the River. The Viscount de
Turenne perceiving by this, that they had no Intention to fight, designed to
force them to an Engagement, by passing it himself at Lawinghen, and to make
the more have, he left there his sick and his Baggages. Melander who commanded
two years before the Troops of Hesse, but out of some Discontent had sided with
the Emperor, thought it not yet fitting to accept of the Battle, and thinking
to reach the little River of Armuth, he was much Surpised to see that his Rier
attacked before he could pass Sommerhawen. He immediately repaired thither, to
put things in the best posture he could; but in his striving to stop the enemy,
that pusht him briskly, he received a Pistol-shot in his Reins. He easily
perceived the Wound to be Mortal, but being a man of Great Courage, he told
those that were very earnest to give him help, that they should only think of
saving the Army, and having commanded them to press it on as much as they
could, he Surrendered his Soul in uttering these Words, Advance, Gentlemen,
Adv-a-n-ce. The Rier had much ado to pass the River, and a great Number of
them were killed upon the Bancks, but the rest having at length got over, they
broke down the Bridges and still pursued their way. In the mean while the Duke
of Wirtembourg posted himself in a Meadow with twelve hundred Horse, sustaining
two Batallions, placed to impede our Passage, and he behaved himself so
valiantly in this employ, that a Man cannot say too much to his Honor. And
indeed, though he had lost above the half of his Men, they being killed by our
Canon, he stood firm in his Post, until Night, when he made his Retreat. The
Darkness made the Viscount de Turenne not dare to pass in his Pursuit, but at
break of day, the Army began to work upon the Bridges, while the Cavalry were
seeking out a Ford. At length having found the means to pass in less than three
hours space, it fell a tracing the Enemies who fled toward Lek. As they had
got a nights start, and that besides fear gave them Wings, the Viscount de
Turenne could not overtake them, and being come to the Banck of the River, he
saw them on the other side, a making intrenchments. He brought up his Canon,
that made not disorder enough to oblige them to give ground, so as that he
turned toward Rhain, where there was a Bridge, he had a mind to surprise. The
Garrison defended it for some time with reasonable Courage, but fearing to be
forced, they set fire to it, which ours immediately extinguished. After we had
repaired it, the Army passed over, and entering into the heart of Bavaria,
spread there such a Consternation, that the Duke did not think himself there in
Safety: Feign would he have brought the Treaty again on foot, but as there was
no trusting him since his former behavior, they would not so much as give him
a hearing. Being thus debarred the ways of Accommodation, his Electoral
Highness departed from Munik with all his Family, and 'twas a thing worthy of
Compassion to see such a great Prince, as his Electoral Highness, fly away at
the Age of Seaventy Eight Years old, after having been 'till then so Potent,
that he had often Created a Jealousy in the Emperor. He Embarked upon the
Iser, and for a Retreat repaired to the Bishop of Salzburg: But Fortune being
minded to make him sensible of her Power in his own regard, before his eyes
caused a Boat to sink, containing a part of his Adherents and Servants. This
Duke having thus abandoned his Territories, they were given up to Plunder, and
the Soldier had matter to sat his Avarice. Nevertheless the Viscount de
Turenne had a grudging to pursue the Enemies, who had made their Retreat
toward Passaw; but Wrangel opposed it, under pretense of some Correspondence
he had in Lower Austria, having a mind to Invade that Province. The Viscount de
Turenne not prevailing with this General to be of his mind, was obliged to
follow his, least through a Separation the Enemies might fall upon his back. Thus
away they marched toward the River d'Inn, where after having in vain attempted
the Castle of Wasserbourg, they fell to making a Bridge; but the Waters
increased so in the Night, that they carried away all the Boats. After they had
been got together again, they sought out another place where they fancied they
might with more ease effect their purpose: But the Commons being assembled from
all parts, and presenting themselves on the Bank of the River, they needed only
to second the furious Impetuosity of the Water, which already put a sufficient
obstacle to our Passage. As Wrangel was fully bent upon his Design, he was not
paul'd by all these Difficulties, and we still sundry times attempted to make a
Bridge. Thus having lost much time to no manner of purpose, the Enemies had the
means given them to call for Succors from several parts. During these
Transactions Koningsmarck surpised the little side of Prague where he got an
Inestimable Booty, and which for his own share only was said to mount to above
Twenty Millions; and as he had a Design to render himself Master of the rest of
the Town, he Besieged it in the forms. This Success whose Sequels were of great
Consequence for the Imperialists, made them think of forcing the Passages, to
go to the Succors of the Besieged; So as that the Viscount de Turenne caused a
Bridge to be laid at Neufburg, that in case they passed in any Place he might
Cut 'em off on the Way. The Business of Prague plunged the Duke of Bavaria into
utter Despondency; for as the Emperor abandoned all other Designs to attend
this, His Country remained Exposed as a Prey, without hopes of being able to
save it. However Picolomini, whom the Emperor had sent in the Head of his
Forces, had some regard for his Electoral Highness, and for fear that Despair
might Compel him to Conclude some disadvantageous Treaty, he made head against
the Viscount de Turenne, then Eating Bavaria out of House and Home; while the
Suedes pressed Prague. Thus came they daily to Blows, but without Engaging all
their Forces, which they husbanded on both sides, through the inconveniences
that were inevitable if any considerable loss befell them. However they were
not sometimes so absolutely Masters of their Soldiers, but that their Courage
hurried them beyond their Orders, and in one of those Occasions did the Enemies
lose the Duke of Wittenburg, who had signalized himself so Gloriously, as I
said before, in Defense of the River of Armuth. To comfort them for this loss
they had some petty Advantage Two or Three days after, but as these Conflicts
were, (properly speaking) only Skirmishes, they decided nothing; The World
daily Expected some Considerable Event, when all of a Sudden the Peace was
known to be concluded at Munster between the Emperor, and France, wherein
their Allies were comprehended, with exception however to the Spaniards. It had
been Ushered, as I said before, by that of the Hollanders, who had hereby
incurred the Blame of the Potentates that had any Alliance with them; but as
they had their Reason, as is before related, they let Others talk their fill,
and in the mean while enjoyed the Advantages they had thereby procured. As this
News was quickly confirmed by several Expresses dispatched on purpose to Both
Armies, they stopped all Hostilities, so as that the Leaders having nothing
more to do, 'till such time as the Ratification of the Peace should come,
courted such amuzements as were conformable to their Inclinations. The Viscount
de Turenne made diverse Matches of hunting with the Principal Officers of his
Troops; but being one day at that sport with Wrangel, who on his side was
attended by all the Considerable Officers of his Party, Jean de Were passed the
Iser at Munic, and drew near a Place, that was the only inlet into the Forest;
In a trice did he cut off some Dragoons, that had been posted there more for
form's sake than out of any Suspicion; and having cast such a terror among all
these Officers, as that there was not one of them but imagined himself lost, he
was preparing to take the Advantage of his Enterprise, when God roused a Buck
that showed 'em a Way, in the midst of a Marsh, Surrounding the Forest on all
sides. An Officer having tried whether there was any safety in following him,
found it to his desire, and they all following his Traces, thanked God for the
Miracle he had that day performed on their Behalf. In the mean while, the
Ratifications being come, the Armies retreated. But we on Our side were in no
good Estate to enjoy the fruits of the Peace. Dismal troubles arose in France,
and though they were even to Extremity, did nevertheless continue, tho Violent
things are said to be of no long Duration. I have already remarked that the
Squandering away of the finances compelled the making of New Edicts. This
occasioned Murmurs in the Populace, but as they could do nothing without the
Succors of the High and Mighty, their Complaints would have been little
minded, had they not joined effects to menaces by the Occasion that was
imprudently afforded them. Emeri, the Super-intendant, having Exhausted his Wit
in a vast Number of Edicts, not knowing what to have recourse to, for the
filling the Exchequer, insinuated to the Cardinal that he should retain the
Pensions of the Officers of the Parliament, of those of the Other Sovereign
Courts, and in short of the Presidials, and of the other Jurisdictions. The
Edict having been Sealed by the Chancellor, a man devoted to the Cardinals
Designs, the Parliament far from verifying it, gave an Arrest of Union; that is
to say, an Act by which the Sovereign Courts should Unite themselves with one
another, to bring a Change in Affairs, so as that the Interest of some Private
Persons, did what the Interest of so may Provinces had not been able to bring
about, that had groaned under Oppression since the Regency. The Court,
Dissembling this Affront, made semblance of disgracing Emeri, and gave the
Administration of the Finances to Meilleraye, and the Edict was revoked with
many other tokens of weakness. During these Occurrences the Prince of Conde
having won the Battle of Lens, whereof I have before made mention, the
Queen Mother who had not without difficulty consented to all these things,
thought her self now in a State of Exerting the Royal Authority, and the
Parliament having assisted at the Te Deum, sung at Notre-Dame, as a
Thanksgiving to God for that Signal Victory, two of it is Members were taken
into Custody at their going out of the Church. The People who hated the
Cardinal, were in Commotion upon these Tidings; All thronging into the
streeets, and as the Sedition was going to break-forth, the Queen Mother sent
Persons of Consideration to the People to reduce them by Lenity and Mildness;
But being returned to the Palais-Royal, where the King then Resided, after
having ran a hazard of their Lives, the Queen Mother Commanded them to take
some Troops of the Guards, and to seize on the Mutineers that pursued the
Chancellor, when a going to carry new Edicts to the Palais. The Command was
easyer to give than execute, a Hundred Thousand men were there already in Arms,
and those that were at the Head of those Troops having had the Imprudence to
cause fire to be given, were quickly forced to betake themselves to flight, so
to steal away from the fury of a Mobile, no longer capable of Obedience. The
Queen Mother, who had word brought every moment that the Sedition augmented,
would not believe it in the least, and continued to take Vigorous Resolutions;
On this Account was it she received so ill the Coadjutor of the Archbishop of
Paris, He advising her to give way for a time to that fury, which she could no
longer suppress by force, but having intimation that they were every where
Barricadoing it, Necessity required her taking Designs more Moderate and more
conformable to the time. In the mean while, the Parliament being assembled,
sent a Deputation to the King and his Counsel, to have its Members released
that were then in Durance; But these Deputies returning, without having been
able to obtain any thing in their favor, the People sent 'em back with
Menaces, that if they were once again refused the return of their Members, they
would go set fire to the Palais-Royal, and stab the Cardinal with all his
Adherents. The Deputies having not in the least Concealed any of these Things
from the Queen Mother, and her Council, an Answer was to be glv'n at the very
Instant, and though the Queens Opinion still was to sustain the Royal Authority
to the very last, the Duke of Orleans and Mazarin having been of another
Sentiment, they prevailed over Her Majesty so as the People had promised them
what they demanded. This Success gave a new audaciousness to the Parliament,
and as it found it self backed by the People, it Pretended to turn out the
Cardinal and put in a Minister to its Fancy; for this purpose Measures were
taken with the Duke of Orlean, he being egged on to the same thing by the Abbot
de la Riviere, then become Bishop of Langras, but not being contented with this
Dignity, would needs join to it the Luster of the Purple, which the Cardinal
had, in vain soothed him with the hopes of: Thus accusing him of having amuz'd
him, he was become his Enemy, and lay at Watch for all Occasions to ruin his
Eminency. The Cardinal having the Duke of Orleans and the Parliament against
him, had now no other Recourse than to the Prince of Conde, then in great
Consideration for his New Victory: But the Duke de Chatillon, his Relation, and
a Person that had a great Ascendant over his Mind, endeavored to direct his
Highness from siding with his Eminency, Complaining, as well as la Riviere,
that the Cardinal had long promised him the Baton of Marshall of France,
without his seeing any effect of his Promises. In fine, all depended on the
Bias this Prince should give to his Resolution, when the Marshall de Grammont
being instigated by the Affection he bore the Cardinal, found means to make him
incline on his side. Whereupon the Prince of Conde having declared he would
take the Court and his Eminencies Part, the Parliament that had already passed
an Arrest against the Cardinal, which Enjoined him to depart the Kingdom, durst
not push things farther, and the Duke of Orleans, whose Spirit was so-so
Moderate, unwilling to draw upon his Back a Man of the Prince of Conde's fame
and Courage, consented to a Conference demanded by the Court, to Salve such
Matters as were complained of. Nevertheless as La Riviere still possessed the
Duke of Orleans, Cardinal Mazarin judged it Convenient to Confirm to him the
Assurances he had given him of a Cardinals Cap, which the Crown was to demand
for him at the first Promotion; and la Riviere having taken his Sureties as far
forth as such an Affair would allow off, the Obstacle vanished that retarded
the Public Accommodation. The Cardinal being thus delivered from the
misfortune that threatened him, instead of thinking to Content la Riviere, he
phancy'd he ought to be cautious how he procured him such a settlement, which
would have put him into some manner of Concurrence with him: Nevertheless, he
was very much at a loss after what manner to break his word with him. But the
Marshall de Grammont, who had an infinite deal of Wit freed him out of this
Plunge, he so ordered matters by the Prince of Conde's means, that the Prince
de Conti his Brother demanded to be made Cardinal at the first Promotion; and
as his Birth did not allow of any one soever to dispute with him that Honor,
la Riviere saw himself as far off from his hopes as he had phancy'd himself
near their Accomplishment. He could not refrain showing his vexation, he
hindered his master from going as he was wont to the Palais Roial, and when he
could not dispense himself from going, his Discourse with the Cardinal was tart
and eager, and much more ready to quarrel with him, than to give him any good
words. The Queen Mother, being justly incensed that a man of la Riviere's
Birth, should so embroile affairs again; that the Kingdom was ready to relapse
into Disorder, and Confusion, proposed to the Prince of Conde, without whom her
Majesty durst not venture upon any thing, to have him taken into Custody. But
the Prince fearing lest this might the more exasperate the Duke of Orleans, and
as he was at that time far from the Resolutions which he since embraced, he
desired the Queen to take Milder Courses. The Queen followed his Advice, and
things were Pacified more easily than expected; for La Riviere having had the
wind of what was proposed against him, fearing lest the Prince of Conde might
suffer him to be Exposed to that Princesses just Resentment, was the first to
Suggest to his Master the Renouncing of that Danger. Yet though the times hereby
seemed to have retrieved their Serenity, yet was it not of any long
Continuance; The Parliament being made up of many Members, who out of private
Considerations hated the Cardinal, they were not at quiet till they had raised
new Combustions. They had recourse to the Coadjutour, whose haughty Spirit and
full of Ambition was equally inflamed with the Desire of wreaking his Revenge
for the Contempt the Queen had had of him, and to fi^^ the Cardinals Room:
However as he did not find his Shoulders strong enough all alone to accomplish
so great a Design, he tempted the Prince of Conde's fidelity, and insinueted
into his Highness such great hopes, that he prevailed with this Prince to
promise him something. However he did not keep his Word with him, which so
Vexed the Coadjutour, that without having regard to the Respect owing to his
Birth, he spoke of him in very ungrateful Terms, and which being again told to
this Prince, gave the start to that strong Aversion which they since prosecuted
against one another. The Coadjutour no longer minding to husband him, Phancying
he might pester him so much the more by striking up an Union with the Prince of
Conti his Brother, out with him at that time upon the account of some Amors,
he sought to regain his Confidence, and having but sped too well in that
Design, He had him declared Head of the Party of the Frondeurs, a name given to
those that had Sworn the Cardinals Ruin. In the mean while the Parliament
still continued its meeting, and the Princes of the Blood were there for the
most past present, by their Authority to divert the finister Resolution, that
Assembly would otherwise have taken. The Prince of Conde, whose hatred to the
Coadjutour, Extended to all those who had any Affinity with him, seeing that
Viole, one of the Boldest Frondeurs had bolted out something against the
Cardinal, interrupted him smartly, and the Other nevertheless continuing his
Invective, he threatened him with his Hand. This Action did not please the
Company, that pretended a Right to Command Powers still above him: But as they
were fearful, all their resentment only appeared in a surd Murmur, which
nevertheless went to his very heart. And indeed whether that his Highness
imagined he had lost it is Affection by what had happened, or that he was
Stimulated by the Marshall de Grammont, he undertook to humble it to that
Degree, as that it never more might be in a Condition to attribute so much
Power to it self. Yet a Difficult matter was it for him to effect his Purposes,
for the Parisians, infinite in number, made its Cause their own, and the Court
had Sufficiently perceived by what had happened, that there was no imprifoning
any of its Members with Impunity, wherefore he took another Course, which was
to block up Paris, hoping the Parisians would no sooner find Scarcity and
Dearness in their Town, but that they would attribute their Miseries to those
they then styled their Protectors. The Design was Great, this Prince having but
Seav'n or Eight thousand Men, but his Passion showing him more things easy than
they really were, he prevailed with the Duke of Orleans, to Strike in with this
Resolution, by the means of the Abbot de la Riviere, to whom he promised that
the Court would abandon the Prince of Conti's Interests at Rome for the giving
him satisfaction. This Resolution being taken, they caused the King to leave
Paris with the Duke D'Anjou his Brother, and the Queen carried him to St
Germain en Lay, to see from thence, as from off a Theater, what would be the
result of so great an Enterprise. In the mean while the Grandees were
solicited by each side to declare themselves, and the Parliament allur'd-in
some of them daily to come and offer it their Service, for they did not speak
their Intentions to be against the King, on the Contrary they published
Manifests, by which they made appear that the Cardinal to stretch the Royal
Authority too far shocked all the orders of the Kingdom, and brought the State
within an ace of it is Ruin. Besides the Prince of Conti, who had embraced it is
Party, as I have already hinted, the Duke d'Elboeuf, the Duke de Bouillon and
several others had already declared themselves in it is favor. The Viscount de
Turenne was pressed to do the same with his Army, and the Duke de Bouillon,
expecting these Commotions would make way for his Restoration in Sedan, never
ceased soliciting him to draw near Paris. He was Deaf to his Persuasions, as
long as there were any Enemies in the Field, but seeing the Peace made, he
began to think it no such Criminal business to improve his Brothers
Pretensions, joined to this that he was piqu'd against the Cardinal, who, after
such long Services, had newly refused him a favor he had required of him for
one of his Friends. The Cardinal, distrusting his Resentment, forthwith
dispatched away Hervart, Controlleur General of the Finances, to his Army; and
Hervart, by the means of his Money, having gained the Colonels, they abandoned
the Viscount de Turenne, though they had promised his Excellency to assist him in
all his Undertakings. Hervart's Design was after this to have seized on his
Person, but having notice given him by an Officer, he stepped aside betimies, and
made his Escape. The Spaniards knowing his Experience, did all in their Power
to get him enter France in the Head of one of their Armies; but as things were
not long without coming to an Accommodation, they could not derive all the
Advantages they expected from these Commotions.

In the mean while the Blockade of Paris made so numerous a People Clamor, and
perceiving a Scarcity on the very first day of the March, above half of 'em
repented of what they had done; however now it was too late, the Parliament, in
whom resided the Sovereign Authority, not being reduced to such great Distress,
far from talking of humbling themselves passed a new Arrest against the
Cardinal; but the Prince of Conde, without stopping thus at such frivolous
things, proceeded from menaces to deeds, and the Parisian^ being still Masters
of Charenton, a passage upon the River de M^rne, he resolved to drive ''m
thence, He encharg'd the Duke de Chatillon with that Attack, while he himself
advanced upon an Hill on this sine Paris to oppose the Succors. And indeed an
infinite Number of People departed out of this Great City, that having repelled
them with two or three Squadrons, he Surpised his own Party, as well as the
nemies by so Extraordinary a Boldness; This having favored the Duke de
Chatillon's attack, he won the first Retrenchments with a singular Bravery: But
when there was but one Barricade more to force, he received a Musket Shot, of
which he died the next day, to the great grief of the Prince of Conde, who
loved him sufficiently to have procured him the greatest Employments. His
Disaster did not hinder the Royalists from making themselves Masters of the
Barricade; but this Borough was of too small Censequence to comfort the Prince
of Conde for the loss he had had. There were several other petty Engagements to
gain or defend Other Posts, but they were all Disadvantageous to the
Parliament, which as much enhanc'd the Prince of Conde's Glory, as it lessened
that of the Generals that had undertaken its Defense. The Parisians who had
daily promises of having the Passages opened, knew not what to say of all this,
and muttered aloud enough against the Parliament, to give occasion to fear they
would abandon it. They began to say publicly that the Peace was preferable to
so Unhappy a War, and the Parliament not being in a Capacity to continue it,
would willingly have found out a favorable means to have returned into its
Duty. Of all the Persons of Quality that were in its Party, there was not one
but had Commerce at Court, none of 'em thus standing out, but to reap the more
Advantage. Thus now were they the Impediments to the Conclusion of the Peace:
Nevertheless not a man of 'em would be the first to propose it, for fear such a
tender might be Injurious to his Fortune: But the Court whose Interest required
the appeasing these troubles with the soonest, sent an Herald to the Parliament
with a Letter, and the Parliament Embracing that Occasion to make its Peace,
sent back the Herald with his Letter, under Color that Heralds being only sent
to Sovereign Princes, and to Enemies, they had neither of those Qualities to
receive him; but that if it pleased the King they would send Deputies to St
Germain to be informed of his Will and Pleasure. The Queen Mother was too
sagacious to miss of perceiving from whence these Submissions departed, but
laboring under the Apprehension, that the Spaniards might improve these
Disorders, to whom the Prince of Conti had already sent an Agent, she took
that Occasion by the foretop to make proposalls of Accommodation; they agreed
upon a Congress at Ru^l, and at length after some Contests on Both sides. a
Treaty was made, which brought some Appearance of Serenity* I say appearance,
because the Minds of the Grandees were possessed with too much Ambition to
leave the People long in Quiet. A general Amnesty was granted to those that
had been tampering in this Affair, and the Viscount de Turenne returning by
this Means, he kept Close about the Prince, who after such Signal Services had
reason to Expect Compliance from the Court to all his Desires. During all these
hub-bubs, the Enemies had Caused the Siege of Cambray to be raised, which the
Count de Harcourt had attacked with all his forces, and they recovered the
Towns of Ypres and of St. Venant, with some Other Posts on that side. All these
Places had been so ill Desended, that it is incredible how much Weakness, not to
say Cowardice, our Men showed in those Occasions. But all these Losses would
have been quickly repaired, without the Civil War which began more siercely
for the Reasons I am going to deduce. What the Prince of Conde had newly done
in favor of the Cardinal, produced two effects; One that this Prince pretended
all was owing to his Deservings; the Other, that the Cardinal seeing he was
nearer to be satisfied, resolved upon getting ridd of the Dependancy he was
going to fall under. For that purpose he instilled a jealousy into him of all
People, so far as to persuade his Highness, the Frondeurs had a design upon
his Life. The Prince of Conde that did not love them overmuch before,
redoubled his aversion for them, and they not thinking themselves in safety at
least without joining themselves to the Cardinal, they diving into his
Sentiments, forgot the hatred they had for his Eminency. The Cardinal finding
his Advantage in treating with them, did not boggle on his side to follow that
Course; Insomuch that the only difficulty lay in engaging the Duke of Orleans,
or rather la Riviere, who was entirely devoted to the Prince of Conde, upon his
giving him his Promise to Serve him, as has been already mentioned, in
obtaining him the Cardinals Cap. But the Coadjutour being in no ill terms with
this Duke, having found the means to inject into his Royal Highness a jealousy
of the Prince of Conde, who had had the imprudence some days before to beat an
Officer of his Guards, He made him Swear he would not reveal o the Queen what
he had to tell him, and after having taken his Oath, which he caused him to
make upon the Bible, he proposed to him the Securing the Person of the Prince
of Cord of that of the Prince of Conti, and of the Duke de Longueville their
Brother-in Law. And indeed this feat was not to be done at twice, because there
had been danger in Confining some without All. The Duke of Orleans after having
acquiesc'd in the Reasons the Coadjutour brought him, to make bim approve of
this Design, conferred with the Cardinal, and the thing having been resolved on
between them two, they purposely brought a Cause into Debate, then depending in
the Council, for one of the Duke of Longueville's Relations, hoping they would
all three meet there for i^s Accomplishment. In the mean while, the Guards were
doubled, but that this might not give the Prince of Conde any suspicion, he had
a forged Secret paulm'd upon him, as under the Rose, so as that he thought it
only with intent of Securing certain Persons that held insolent Discourses
against the Present Government; Yet he had notice from several Parts not to go
to the Palais-Royal, and that there was some Design against his Person; but his
Destiny hurrying him into the Precipice, he was Secured in the Queens Closet,
with the Prince de Conti, and the Duke de Longueville. He was committed into
the hands of the Count de Miessens, who at the head of Sixteen Gens-d'armes,
conducted him to Vincennes, taking his way through the field, least by going
through the Town some Accident might befall him. As soon as this News was spread
about Paris, His friends, fearing to be involved in his Misfortune, fled their
Ways, some into Normandy, Others into Guienne, in hopes of Causing those two
Provinces ^o revolt. But the Queens forecast rendered all their Designs
Abortive, so as that there would not have been the least Bustle or Commotion,
if the Viscount de Turenne, who had received new Outrages from the Cardinal,
His Eminency having refused him the Government of Avergne after having promised
it him, had not Repaired to Stenay, a Place given to the Prince of Conde, as a
Reward for his Services. He had so little Money when he left Paris, that he had
not wherewithal to perform his Journey; But in Champagne he met with a
Gentleman at his Devotion, who gave him Six Hundred Golden-Lewisses. The
Duchess of Longueville arrived at Stenay in a few days after with her Jewels,
which she offered the Viscount de Turenne to raise Forces, and 'for the more
efficacions endeavoring the Freedom of her Brothers and her Husband. As the
Money that could be raised upon them was not sufficient for so great a Design,
they resolved upon sending an Agent to the Archduke. But while they were in
expectation of his Answer, the Viscount de Tu enne not being proof against the
Charms of that Princess, fell in Love with her Highness. She was of a
Complexion extremely tender, and of which several Persons neither of his Merit
nor Quality had had Instances: But some reason I know not of rendering him more
Unhappy than others, she was not contented with being Cruel to him, but she
also past railleries upon his Passion with la Moussaye, Governor of Stenay, so
as that instead of continuing to love her, he slighted her extremely. At length
came the Arch-Duke's Answer, and being conformable to expectation, the Viscount
de Turenne departed with some Troops that were at his disposal to go join the
Body of an Army the Archduke was to commit to his Conduct. They Conferred and
Consulted together what Course they had best to take, and having laid their
measures, the Viscount de Turenne entered France, while that the Duke of
Lorrain, who had Correspondencies in his own Country, advantaged himself of so
promising a juncture. The Marquis de la Ferte Seneterre was sent against the
Duke of Lorrain, while that the Marshall du Plessis, who had been sent for
from Italy, marched against the Viscount de Turenne. This Prince's Design was
to draw as near as he could to Paris, to seize on the Passes of the Rivers, and
to advance with Two Thousand Horse as far as Vincennes, from whence he
pretended easily to free the Princes. And indeed he had already got Possession
of all the Passes as far as Vela-Ferte Milon, when by the Treachery of the
Count de -- the Archdukes Favorite, who had a Pension of a Hundred Thousand
Livres from the Cardinal, and to whom the Archduke had revealed the Secret,
the Princes were removed to Marcoussis, and from thence to Havre de Grace. This
Count had also Correspondence at the Court by the means of the Duchess de
Chevreuse, with whom he had had a Charming Engagement, at the time of her being
at Bruxelles, under the Reign of the Late King, and she had procured him this
Pension in Acknowledgement for the Pleasant Pastime he had procured her during
her abode in Flanders: But though this Pension was so considerable, the Cardinal
did not grudge his money after having received so wholesome an Advertisement.

The Viscount de Turenne having missed his Aim, brushed back the the same way
he came, and went and posted himself near Sompais, where the Archduke was
arrived in Person. The Marshall du Plessis had Coasted him in his Retreat, and
the two Armies Skirmish'd daily without daring to Engage in a Battle; for on
the one side th'Arch-Duke was afraid, that if he lost the Day, he should find it
difficult to make his Retreat, and on the other the Marshall du Plessis left
the very Heart of the Kingdom for a Prey, if Fortune proved adverse to him.
While that such weighty Considerations withheld both sides, Cardinal Mazarin
repaired to the Marshall du Plessis's Army, and giving him order to Fight, he
staid in the Camp where he lay upon the bare Ground, without fearing to fully
his Purple. He made some largess to the Soldiers to oblige them to do their
Duties, and having spent the Night under some disquiet for the event, Break of
day was no sooner come, than that the Marshall du Plessis drew-up his Troops
in Battle-array; The Archduke and the Viscount de Turenne did the like on
their side, and the two armies being separated only a Musket Shot from one
another, quickly came very furiously to Blows. The Success was equal on both
sides at the first brush, the Arch-Duke's Right Wing, where he was in Person,
was put to Rout, while the Viscount de Turenne, Commanding the Left, broke the
Marshall du Plessis's Right Wing. The Viscount thinking to improve the
advantage he had, and to complete the Battle at a blow, attacked the Enemies
left Wing; but this being in good order made such a Defense, as gave the Right
leisure to rally* and the Archduke having not been able to do the like with
his, the Viscount de Turenne was quickly encompassed on all sides: He did
wonders to dispute the victory, but having been forsaken by the Archduke, nay
and by a part of those that fought under him, he was forced to Court his safety
in his flight. He had not gone a League when he perceived himself pursued by a
Squadron, which made him say to those about him, that there was no other Course
to take than to face about upon the Enemies: These his followers, being all
Officers and men of great Courage, having declared to him they were ready to do
all he thought expedient, they marchall'd themselves in order, and the Viscount
de Turenne leading them forthwith to the Charge, they utterly routed this
Squadron, the most of whose Troupers were killed upon the Spot. Having thus got
rid of this importunate Attendance, they continued their way with the more
freedom; but to this inconveniency there Succeeded another, which though not so
dangerous, was not the less pressing. Hunger and Thirst began to distress them
in such manner, that it was impossible for them to support them any longer. At
leng^h the Viscount de Turenne pitying them more than he did himself, made up
to a Wood, with whose least Paths he was acquainted, and having bid em ^ollow
one that led 'em to a Spring, he alighted off his Horse, and having unbridled
him, h^ held him to graze himself, while his men went to squench their Thirst,
One of whom brought him water in his hat, and having found it in this manner
the most delicious Beveridge in the world, he mounted again on Horseback, and
marched until he saw a light. He went directly thitherwards, and found it to
be a Mill, where, some of his Men that had timely made use of their Heels, were
retired; they had a Gigot of Mutton, and a Loin of Pork upon the Spit, of which
he Eat with such an Appetite, that he thought he should never have been sated.
The Horses also met with Provender, so as that after having made so good a
meal, he reachs the frontiere, where he joined the Wreeks of his Army. T^is
D^f^^t so puffed up the Cardinal, that he troubled not much his head about
contenting the Frondeurs. And this making them consider that they had only
labored for his Settlement, res^lv'd to ruin him* The Duke of Beaufort who
immediately after the Kings Death had had singular marks of the Queens good
Will, had, as well as the Prince of Conde, Experienced a strange Reverse of
fortune. The Cardinal, through the Ascendant he had got over this Princesses
mind, had found the means to render this Duke suspected, and he had undergone a
hard Captivity, instead of the favors he might reasonably have Expected.
However he had happily made his Escape out of the Donjon of Vincennes; but was
so animated against the Cardinal, that his Sufferings were as present as if he
still endured them: He was become Head o the Party of the Frondeurs, but had
little Commerce with the Court, which made him grateful to the People, having
withal Popular Manners. The Disposition of his mind would have been very
advantageous for the Liberty of the Princes, if another thing had not been a
great Obstacle. He was a Sworn Enemy of the Prince of Conde, who on his side
having declared himself absolutely against his House, was partly the Occasion
of his Misfortune, for he had openly opposed the Match which the Cardinal would
have made 'tween one of his Nieces and the Duke of Mercaeur; this Dukes Eldest
Brother, and the Cardinal had resented this so highly that he had hastened his
Ruin. The Duke of Nemours being in the Interests of the Prince of Conde, and
having married a Sister of the Duke of Beaufort, might indeed, be a mediator
between them, but he was not in over-good terms with his Brother-in-Law, for
that his Carriage was not over-kind to the Sister. He was in Love with Madam de
Chatillon, and either out of Complaisance to his Mistress, or that he did not
Love his Wife, he refrained her Bed. The Prince of Conde's friends fearing lest
his Imprisonment should be very long, and not seeing any speedier Remedy than
to come to an Accommodation with the Duke of Beaufort and his Cabal, they went
to the Duke of Nemours, and engaged him to remain some time without seeing
Madam de Chatillon. This Prince did still more, He lay with his Wife, and
having hereby regained her Affection, She reconciled him with the Duke of
Beaufort her Brother. This good understanding having made way for what was
desired, the Affair of the Princes was brought into Deliberation: But as the
Frondeurs demanded Conditions, which the Duke of Nemours could not grant,
without first knowing the Prince of Conde's mind, he was sent to, under
pretense of Madam the Princess of Conde his Mother's Last Will and Testament,
she Dying at Chatillon upon Loir a little while before. The Person that went to
his Highness, having had leave to discourse him in private, he explained to him
The Occasion of his Journey, and having told him that there wanted only his
Consent for his being again at Liberty, the Prince of Conde gave a Promise in
Writing, touching the Prince of Cont^ his Brothers Marriage with Mad^moi^^lle
de Chevreuse, which was the unravelling of the whole Affair, from the very
Moment that the Promise was seen by the Frondeurs, they imagined it to be a tie
that was going to ^ink them so fast to one another, that it would be
indissoluble: Upon this supposition they went to the Duke of Orleans who was
not over-well satisfied with the Cardinal, and having still animated him by
Reports full of Cunning and Artifice, and wherein some Truths were blended,
they made his Royal Highness vow that Eminency's Ruin. The Parliament far from
extinguishing the hatred it bore him had still augmented it. Thus finding so
sai^ an Occasion to ruin him, all these Powers combined together to effect
that Design. The Parliament passed Arrests against him, the Duke d'Orleans told
the Queen that he would come no more to the Council as long as he should be
near her Person, and the Frondeurs though they durst not talk altogether so
loud, yet said enough to make the Queen apprehend some fatal Revolution. In
the mean while, they all demanded the Princes Freedom, as a thing on which
depended the Peace of the State; and it was a wonder to see that those who had
alone Conspired to ravish them of it, showed themselves so Zealous for their
recovering it. As the Parliament perceived the Queen had much ado to resolve
upon the Cardinals remove, and to the Princes being set at Liberty, it
redoubled its Arrests against that Minister, and passed one in favor of the
Prisoners; so as that the Queen apprehending some Disorder, consented at the
long run, that the Cardinal should go off, and the Princes be released out of
Prison. Yet this notwithstanding she was some days without, Expediting an Order
under the Privy Signet necessary for their Liberty; but being pressed she could
no longer refuse it. The Cardinal being the cause of this Delay, though absent
from Court, having notice of what Occurred, received at the same time an Order
just like that which had been Expedited, and was dated two days before, and
departed immediately for Havre, he pretended the Princes should have the
obligation of their Freedom to him; Yet he durst not come into their Presence
till he had first pumpt them by the Marshall de Grammont. But the Prince of
Conde had too much Wit to be slurr'd upon in this manner, and having told his
mind to that Marshall, his friend, the Marshall feared he should not prevail
with him to see the Cardinal. In the mean while, the Marshall plied him with
so many reasons, and represented to him so many inconveniences in this
refusal, that this Prince at length consented to his Introduction. The Cardinal
entered trembling, and setting about Excusing himself, the Marshall de
Grammont perceiving he would make a Blundering Business on it, interrupted him,
saying, that all thoughts were to be discarded of what had passed, He invited
them to drink together, and the Prince of Conde being loath to do it, as longing
to be out, would not suffer any thing to be dressed. But calling for a
relishing Bit, and taking a Glass, he drunk the Cardinals Health, and then rose
up immediately. Each having done the like, though they had not had time to put a
Crumb into their Mouths, the Prince of Conde went down out of his Chamber, the
Cardinal keeping Close at his Elbow, desiring him to remember upon Occasion
that his Imprisonment was the work of the Frondeurs and not his, that he it was
on the Contrary that contributed to his Freedom, and that if his Advice had
been followed, his Highness had obtained it sooner. The Prince of Conde made
him no great Compliment, and taking Coach he drove away for Rouen, from whence
he got to Paris in three days. All the Town went out four Leagues to meet him,
and the Duke of Orleans went to receive him at St. Denis, where he presented
the Duke of Beaufort, and the Coadjutour to him. He Embraced 'em both, and
after having thanked 'em all for procuring him his Freedom, he mounted into the
Duke of Orleans's Coach, wherein went also the Prince de Conti, and the Duke
de Longueville, with the Duke of Beaufort, and the Coadjutour. They went to
alight at the Palais-Royal, followed by an infinite Number of People, who
proclaimed by their Huzza's and Acclamations the joy they had for their Return:
They were received by the King and Queen Mother, with seeming Marks of Good
will; But this notwithstanding the Cardinals Spirit still reigned at Court,
though his Person was at a Distance; this Manifested it self Two Days after by
the Reproaches the Queen made certain Persons that went to visit the Prince of
Conde; Nay she happened to bolt out publicly, that the Court was become a
Desert now since the Prince of Conde's Return, which being told again to this
Prince, he conceived suspicions, as by what happened afterward, were found not
to be ill grounded. In the mean time the Exiles returned, that is to say, those
that withdrew upon the Princes Imprisonment. The Viscount de Turenne returned
also, though the Spaniards had endeavored to get him stay with them by a
Thousand fair offers, with which they thought to have tempted his Fidelity; but
this Prince made great difference between such an Action as this, and that he
had done. Being come to Paris, the Prince of Conde received him with open Arms,
and as a man that had for his sake exposed himself to all sorts of Danger: But
some days after, this Prince appeared more cold and reserved through the Duchess
of Longueville's persuasions, she complaining he had aspersed her with poynant
Railleries, when he was with the Archduke. The Viscount de Turenne finding by
this unjust carriage how things went, and how unworthy it was after what he had
done for him so lately, thought not fitting to enter upon great Justifications,
but laying hold on that occasion to divorce himself from him, he made his Court
more assiduously to the Queen who had given him a favorable Reception, and let
nothing slip that might wed him to her Service. In this Design she caused some
Offers to be made him by Messieurs de Lionne and le Tellier, who in the
Cardinals Absence were her most trusty Agents, as being very affectionate to
the Cardinal: But he made answer, that his humor was not to sell his Services;
that his Refusal did not however proceed from the desire of embracing other
Interests; that he should thence-forward espouse those of that Princess as much
or more than those in whom she most Confided, and that when he should have
thereby merited some Reward, he would receive it more willingly than at
present, that he owned himself unworthy of her Bounties. The Queen knowing the
occasion he had to complain of the Prince of Conde, found something so handsome
in this Answer that she used still further endeavors to gain him; but he
neither changed his Sentiment nor Style, which the Queen attributed to his
Policy, imagining that what he did to be only that he might not come to an
absolute Breach with the Prince of Conde. In the mean while matters were more
than ever embroiled at Court, Letters had been intercepted from the Cardinal to
the Abbot Fouquet, and from the Abbo^ Fouquet, to the Cardinal, by which a
Thousand Engines were discovered for the procuring his Return: All the Grandees
muttered, and cut at the Root of all these Mischiefs, the Frondeurs pressed the
Prince of Conde to conclude Mademoiscille de Chevreuse'* Match with the Prince
of Conti, that was to remove all the Jealousy they might harbor of his
Conduct. In effect this Prince having forgot that his Freedom had only been
mediated and obtained on this Condition, daily found Pretexts to retard that
Alliance, and the least delay being Suspicious in the then present posture of
Affairs, the Frondeurs fell into inconceivable Diffidencies, and such as were
not without Foundation. In effect the Prince of Conde being covered with Glory
by his past Actions, seemed to think only of his own Interests; he had listened
to some Proposals made from the Queen, and though he feigned at first that he
could not enter upon any Negotiation to the Prejudice of his Friends. This was
only to wrest the more advantage to himself: And indeed when he had got with
the Promise of the Guyenne Government of a world of considerable matters for
his Relations and Creatures, he no longer showed himself so scrupulous; but as
there would have been weakness in him to be the Author of the Cardinals Return,
he that had made him undergo so harsh a Captivity, he demanded to clear himself
in some manner in the world, that the Queen should not oblige him to contribute
thereto, and that she should be contented with his not interposing any
obstacle. This was all the Queen desired, thus it proved no Difficulty. But
another made the Prince of Conde more at a loss, which was to disengage himself
handsomely from the Match of Mademoiselle de Chevreuse, with whom the Prince of
Conti being fallen in Love, it was not easy to dissuade him from it. As the
Prince of Conde had kept all very Secret, he had Negotiated with the Queen, it
had been difficult for the Frondeurs to shrift into it; but perceiving by his
Deportment, that there must need be something more than ordinary in Agitation,
they desired to make so sure of the Prince of Conti, as to prevent his giving
ear to the Counsels that should be inculcated into him. For this purpose they
resolved to proceed to the Marriage, and secretly sent to Rome for a
Dispensation, by reason of the Kindred between those Parties. The Coadjutour
being Allmighty in Paris for these sorts of matters, they pretended by his
means that the Dispensation being once come they should be married without the
Privity of any. The Prince of Conti to content his Passion furthered their
Designs, Madam de Chevreuse to see her Daughter a Princess of the Blood desired
it, and the Daughter longed for nothing More than to be Married. In a word all
Paris had an Extreme desire to see this Matter brought to a Conclusion, when
the Prince of Conde having intimation of what occurred, told the Prince of Conti
that being so well shaped and handsome a Person, he had reason to seek after
some further Pleasingness; that his Marriage was going to adorn his head more
than he imagined, that he would have horns loaded with Mitres, Arms and
Corner-Caps, and in fine by taking Mademoiselle de Chevreuse for his Wife, he
was going to make sure to himself of the Church, of the Nobless and of the
third Estate. Thereupon he pointed out to him the Coadjutour, the Marquess de
Noirmoustier and Commartin to be his Mistresses Intimate friends; and as the
Distance is not great from a great Passion to a great Jelousy, the Prince of
Conti was so Strongly seized with the later, that he reproached his Brother
with not having given him notice sooner. Nothing at all had been known of this
Conversation, but for the Prince of Conti, he being too much smitten to hold
his Peace; He discourst his Mistress upon the Matter, but in such bitter terms,
as provoak'd her. Madam de Chevreuse shared as far as became her in her
Daughters Resentment, as well as all the Caball; but the Coadjutour, a Man
naturally violent, Suffered himself to be hurried to so great an Excess of
Anger, that if he had been of the Quality and Profession of the Prince of
Conde, he would not have staid so long without taking his Revenge. For want of
this Satisfaction, he made his Party resolve upon Contriving the Means to ruin
that Prince, and having none more certain than by salving up Matters again with
the Queen, he made all the Advances, and thereby break the Treaty which the
Prince of Conde had rough-drawn with her. The Queen, to keep some Measures
nevertheless, pretended that le Tellier and de Lionne had Engaged her beyond
the Orders ^he had given them, she retrenched her self to less advantageous
Offers, she proposed still some Accommodation, Suspecting he would not abate
the least of what had been promised him. In effect this Prince seeing he had
been paulm'd upon, was rather contriving to engage the Queen in New Troubles,
than to accept of the Proposals tendered him, and the Duke of Orleans being
necessary to his Design, for the gaining him, he buckled his Spirit to all
sorts of Complaisances. The Duchess of Longueville, who for some little Amors
was out with her Husband, who daily threatened her to carry her into his
Government of Normandy; Nay, to shut her up, did in the mean while all she
could by the means of her Lovers, to whet him on to raise a Civil War,
imagining that in a time of Confusion and Disorder, they would have something
else to do than to mind her Conduct. Thus the Prince of Conde being Excited by
his Resentment, by the Interest of his Sister, whose Reputation he had a mind
to Spare in the Eyes of the Public, and by the Persuasion of his friends,
employed his thoughts wholly upon gaining new Creatures, and to assure himself
of those over whom he formerly had Power. As he stood not in the same terms
with the Viscount de Turenne as he had done before his Return, he grew fervent
again in his Regards for him, hoping this new Ardour would produce its effect:
But the Viscount de Turenne without unbosoming himself either one way or the
Other, received as became him the marks of his Amity which not satisfying the
Prince of Conde, he Engaged him in a Design of Pleasure he was to be present at
in the Marais, hoping that amidst Wine and Debauchery, wherein the greatest
Sages commonly discover their Sentiments, it would be easy for him to
conjecture what was from him to be Expected. The Viscount de Turenne would not
deny him going thither; but showed himself so reserved, that the Prince of
Conde not being able to fix any judgment that tended to his Advantage, was
obliged to induce him to a Clearer Explication of his Sentiments. Whereupon
Persons having spoken to him on his behalf, he made them answer, that he was
his Highnesses Servant, but that his Highness had used him so ill, that he was
not resolved to Espouse his Interest to the Prejudice of his own; that he had
not thought of his friends since his return, though he might have done them
Service; that on the Contrary he had affected to rob 'em of the Knowledge of
all he had treated of underhand, as if he had been afraid of their Partaking
in his good fortune, as they had done in his bad; that to have an Occasion, not
to do any thing for him, he had laid hold of some ill-grounded Complaints of
Madam de Longueville, though he had let him know that she it was that had held
Discourses to her own Disadvantages, that he had run himself over Head and Ears
in Debt upon his Account, and that being lately Married, it became him to mind
more narrowly his Affairs. In effect, he had newly Married the Daughter of the
Duke de la Force, an Extreme Virtuous Lady, and more considerable thereby, than
by a thousand other Qualities, which nevertheless rendered her very
recommendable, for besides her being of one of the Best Families in France, she
had a vast fortune, and was besides handsome enough to invite the Affection of a
Husband. The Viscount de Turennes answer having made the Prince of Conde
presume that it would be difficult for him to Engage him on his side; Yet would
he try all sorts of Ways rather than be balked of his hopes; and as the Duke
of Bouillon did not seem so Malecontent, though he would not give him any
positive Word, he tendered him a World of Advantageous things for them both; he
desired the Duke of Bouillon to hint it to his Brother, for the Viscount de
Turenne had a Regiment of Horse of Sixteen Hundred Troupers, with his Regiment
of Foot, which rendered him still the more considerable to the Prince of Conde,
whose posture of Affairs at that time needed both Troops and Friends. These
offers mounted to a Hundred Thousand Crowns each, and the Prince of Conde
Engaged to procure them, besides this ample Pensions from the Spaniards, with
whom he was already in Treaty. The Duke of Bouillon suffered himself to be
insensibly lured by these fair Promises, and considering that his House had at
all times been linked to that of Conde, he endeavored to gain his Brother, who
took other measures; for he had Commerce with the Queen, who to take them both
off from the Prince of Conde, made them on her side a very advantageous Offer.
However they were both deep in Debt, and for the paying their Creditors,
needful was it to procure themselves the best fortune they could, they did not
absolutely break off with the Prince of Conde, that they might Whet the Queen
to do still more. The Prince of Conde knowing their Negotiations, and
foreseeing that, considering the State things were in at that time, the Queen
would not let them Escape her, pressed the Duke de Bouillon to tell him what
they both required, that so this Affair might with the soonest be termina^ed.
The Duke of Orleans, who by the means of his Daughter was in the Prince of
Conde's Interests, said the same thing to the Duke de Bouillon; and being at
length obliged to come to a Declaration, he demanded two hundred thousand
Crowns for himself and his Brother; that the Parliament of Bordeaux should pass
the like Arrests against the Cardinal as that of Paris had done, that so they
might be thereby assured that Guienne, whither they pretended to carry the
War, would side with the Prince of Conde; that they should have in the Places,
appertaining to him the same power he had there himself, and that, in fine, the
Spaniards should give them Sureties for a hundred and fifty thousand Livres
Pension for them Both. The Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde found these
Pretentions Extreme great, Especially in reguard of the Places, for they
pretended to no less than the Power of appointing or deposing Officers; but in
short the State of things obliging them to pass over all sort of
Considerations, they agreed to all, and the Hour was set for Signing the Treaty
at the Palais d'Orleans whither the Prince of Conde repaired. But the Viscount
de Turenne having struck up an Engagement with the Queen, and pretending his
Duty obliged him rather to take her Part, than that of the Prince of Conde, who
aimed at Embroiling the State, told his Brother that he had not given his Word
to sign any Treaty, nay that he advised him to turn as well as himself to the
Queens side, and having both sought out expedients to come off handsomely from
this matter, they treated with the Queen, who caused the Duke of Bouillon to be
declared Minister of State, and destined the Command of the Armies to the
Viscount de Turenne. During these Transactions matters grew to that
exasperation between the Queen and the Prince of Conde, that the Frondeurs
proposed to her to rid her hands of him by a Violent way. The Queen being a
good-natured Princess and at a distance from such sorts of Sentiments, rejected
this Proposal, but concluded afterward on that of securing his Person. The
Frondeurs took upon them to make the Duke of Orleans agree to the Matter, he
being properly speaking a Weathercock for all Winds; and having achieved what
they had promised, nothing now remained but to contrive the occasion; which was
some time after Met with when the Queen least expected it. Going the Tour with
the King, she there found the Prince of Conde all alone in his Coach, but not
having had her Wit so ready as to make use on it, she missed a stroke that would
have prevented many Disorders. The Prince of Conde having had intimation of the
Design that was upon his Person, trembled when he saw he had so imprudently
given himself up into the hands of his Enemies, and going his ways presently,
he resolved to have more Caut^on for the future. However he fell from one
extremity into the other, for having notice that two Troops of Guards were
Commanded out toward the Fauxbourg St. Germain, he fancied that it was to
invest his House, and not willing to stand to that extremity, he took Horse,
and advanced toward the Chartreux, the nearest place to the Hostel de Conde to
get into the fields; This Alarmed him extremely, having heard at a distance
Horses coming toward him, but it was found to be nothing, this noise being
only caused by Market-People, bringing their Provisions to Paris. Daylight
being come he got upon a high place to see what he could discover, and then
perceived that those Troops, which had put him into that fright, were going to
Tournelle to assist with main force the Loyalifts that were affronted, for in
the then unhappy State of Affairs, every one took such freedoms as would have
been sharply punished at another time. He was at a great loss whether it was
best for him to return to the Hostel of Conde, or pursue his first Design of
retiring from the Town. But as he had already undergone a hard Captivity, it
made him more Susceptible of fear than he otherwise would have been, so he
chose to repair to St. Maur, one of his Houses, but three small Leagues distant
from Paris. His Retreat being generally known, so great a number of Persons of
Quality went to offer him their Services, that he thought himself more in a
State of Creating Fear than of Entertaining Apprehensions The Queen sent the
Marshall de Grammont to him, under Color of asking him the occasion of his
Retreat, but in Reality to work him to return to Paris, where she imagined it
would be more easy for her to Surprise him: But the Prince of Conde bearing an
ill will to the Marshall de Grammont for not having Revealed the Design in
hand to Secure his Person, to which he was Privy, waved entering into any Parley
with him, and only told him that the Cardinals Spirit still reigned too much at
Court, for any relyance to be had in the Queens Word. However to place his
Family in safety, he sent his Wife and only Son to Montrond, a strong Place he
had in le Berry, and Madam de Longueville being desirous to free her self from
the Apprehension she justly labored under, of her Husbands designing to punish
her for her Infidelities to him, went along with her Sister-in-Law. Thus the
Prince of Conde having no longer the trouble of a Wife and Son, the Weakness of
the former's Sex, and the Greenness of the others Years, made him dread ill
Consequences in case he was forced to a Sudden Departure, he returned again to
Paris to re-animate his friends, Especially such as were Members of Parliament,
whom endeavors were used to Spirit away from him. He found the thing more
difficult than he Expected; for besides the Credit the Coadjutour had in that
Assembly, the first President to whom he had done an ill turn rendered him as
much suspected as he could. Yet as the Present juncture of Affairs required his
seeming united with this Body, from whom the People seemed, if a Man may so
say, to borrow its Motions. He assisted at all its Assemblies, Caressed One,
and Caressed Another, and appeared very wide from that Violence which formerly
made him threaten one of its Members. The Coadjutour who would have thought it
would have been abandoning the Party, for him not to be present there too
assisted at it in like manner as Counselor of Honor, a Quality attributed to
the Archbishops of Paris: But knowing the Prince of Conde to be persuaded,
that him it was that would have insinuated into the Queen the Causing him to be
Killed, he went not thither without being well attended. The Prince of Conde
not knowing with what Intention he did this, for his part he invited his
friends to do the like with him, and Each side bore Arms, nor more nor less
than if they were going to War. The Queen siding in this Occasion, would have
the Coadjutour to be Guarded by a Brigade of Gens d'armes, and of the Kings
Light Horse, and the Prince of Conde that knowing what she did to be rather out
of the hatred she bore him, than out of any Love she had for the Other, more
then ever thwarted her Intentions. The only design of this Princess tended to
procure the Cardinals Return, but she had difficulties to overcome on all sides
before that could be effected; For though the Frondeurs were seemingly in a
strict Union with her Majesty, they had a very different Aim; They were in the
Interests of Chateauneuf, Keeper of the Seals, who after having possessed the
first Place in the Council, had tried a Reverse of fortune that had distanc'd
him thence; Yet the most part did not despair of his being restored, and not a
Person besides the Coadjutour but wished it, as not being of a humor to leave
to another what made him do so many things unbeseeming his Character. However
being one day at the Palais he happened into a great perplexity, for going out
of the Great Chamber to hinder any Disorder from happening between his Friends,
and those of the Prince of Conde, that staid in the Great-Hall, he saw himself
all of a sudden Surrounded with Swords, and if every Individual had not
retired to his own Company, he would have fancied, that not a man of 'em All
but had his Person for the mark of his Revenge. At length having distinguished
his friends from his Foes, he ranged himself among the Former, while that the
Duke de la Rochefoucaut placed himself at the Head of the Latter. Thus a man
would have said they were just going to fight; but the fear they were under of
discrediting their Party in the Parliament, occasioned their resting satisfied
with threatening one another. After this they would both return into the Great
Chamber; But as the Duke de la Rochefoucaut had got the Start, he waited the
others coming behind the Bar-Door, and just upon his passing he Clapped it
strongly to, and Caught his Head between the other half of the Door that
remained shut. The Coadjutour* schream'd-out as if he had been upon the point
of being Assassinated, and the Parliament being interrupted by all these
things, was rather contriving how to appease this Disorder, than to deliberate
about the matters for which it was Assembled. The Duke de la Rochefoucaut that
he might not shock the Parliament, answered the Complaints the Coadjutour made
immediately against him, that he had ^^d no Design of insulting him in any
manner, and that if he had shut the Door, it was only to hinder those of his
Party who pursued him from wanting Respect to so August a Body: But the Respect
born it was so small, that the Duke de Brissac, the Coadjutours near Relation
fell to using bitter Words, which the Duke de la Rochefoucaut would never have
suffered without taking satisfaction, if the Duke of Orleans had not interposed
to bring 'em to an accommodation. This was a more vexatious Business to the
Coadjutour than can be imagined, he was Universally blamed for offering to
measure himself with the first Prince of the Blood, and as his Profession did
not allow him to do any thing Violent of which all his Actions had the
Appearance, what the Prince of Conde gave out of him found the more easy
Credit, namely that he had a Design of Assassinating him. As the Queen could
not doubt of the hatred they bore one another, she looked upon it as a great
piece of Merit from the Coadjutour to her Majesty; and for th'engaging him to
continue as he began, she promised him the first Cardinals Cap, which the Court
of Rome should grant to France. Thus in that time of Disorder and Confusion,
Vice had the Compensation of Virtue, for sufficient was it for a man to be in a
capacity to make himself feared by his Intrigues and Cabals, and provided one
did not directly thwart the Queens Intentions, he had fair hopes of obtaining
any sort of favor. During these Transactions, the Parliament being backed by
the Duke of Orleans, who through his natural inconstancy changed his Party as
often as his Shirt, daily perceiving more and more that the Queens whole aim
tended to bring about the Cardinals return, who in lieu of distancing himself
from France, as she had promised, staid at Liege, passed new Arrests against
him, importing that not any Cardinal, though of the same Nation, should
thenceforward have admittance into the King's Council. The Queen not daring
openly to declare her Intensions, was obliged to subscribe to so hard a
Condition, by causing an Edict to be expedited in Conformity with the Arrest.
This did not hinder her however from sending him money, and the Duke of Orleans
caused a Carriage designed for him to be stopped, that came from the Provinces
bordering upon the Loire, where the Blood of the People was not spared no more
than the rest of the Kingdom, which was lavisht upon him to facilitate his
Return. The Cardinal by the means of this money raised Forces, and having
wherewithal to keep in with his Quondam-Friends, and get new, he Fortified his
Party as much as he could, and did not yet renounce the hopes he had of
becoming more than ever Potent. The People suffering by all these Novelties,
complained in the mean while, that for the interest of one single man, the
whole State was near it is Ruin: but withal most of the Grandees were, glad
that they had this Pretext given them to render themselves the more Powerful,
and though that amid their Disobedience they had ever the Public Good in their
Mouth, when it came to the making of Proposalls, all turned upon their
Interests, and not a Word was there about the Poor People. In the mean while
the King entered into his fourteenth year, being the time six'd for the Majority
of our Kings, and People hoped that being a Major he might possibly apply some
Remedy to the Evils that afflicted the Realm, principally when he should be let
know whence they proceeded, and the Means to be made use of to put a Stop to
them: But the wisest Expected but little Ease from that side; they said it to
be a great mistake to believe that a Child fostered in the Love of his Mother,
and in the hatred of the Princes of the Blood, whom he was made to believe had
a Design to bereave him of his Crown, had the judgment to discern truth from
falsehood; that if Our Kings were declared Majors at fourteen years of Age,
'twas rather through Custom than Reason; that well known it was that at that Age
a Man was not capable of any great matter; that it was also Manifest they
needed Council more than Ever, by cause that beginning to have some Intentions,
yet without being able to distinguish what was wholesome from what injurious,
they were to be redressed and set to Rights when they had made a false Step.
And in truth this Ceremony was performed with more Pomp and Luster than Profit,
and all the Change there was, consisted in there being no more than the Kings
name in the Declarations, whereas that of the Queen was there also before. But
the same Maxims, and the same Sentiments still appeared, so as that it was
plainly seen the Peace of the Realm was not hence to be expected. In the mean
while the Parliament still continued it is Sessions, and not a Week passed
without receiving two or three Letters under the Privy Signet; but this did not
hinder it from pursuing it is Road, and when it had done what it pretended to,
they contented themselves with remonstrating to the King the inconvenience
there would be in complying with his Desires; They sent him Deputies ever and
anon, that spoke siercely against the Cardinals Return, which was whispered up
and down, notwithstanding all the Assurances given to the Contrary. But at
length diverse Letters that were intercepted having left no room for Doubt, the
Prince of Conde who had long minuted the War took his journey toward Guyenne,
after having sent Orders to the Counts de Tavanes and de Marsin to bring him
the Forces that Espoused his Interests: By this piece of Treason those two
Leaders, one of whom commanded in Champange and the other in Catalonia, left
those two Provinces as a Prey, which very much furthered the Affairs of the
Spaniards, as well as the Civil-War, which kindled at the same time in sundry
parts of the Kingdom: For several Governors, either egg'd-on by the Zeal they
had for the Interests of the Prince of Conde, or hoping to advance their
Fortune, declared themselves in favor of his Highness. The King seeing the
main of the War was going to fall in Guyenne, went into Poitou, that so he
might be the nearer at hand, after having provided for the Frontiers as far
forth as his present Circumstances would allow of. During these Transactions he
called about him those in whom he could put any Trust, and having Written to
the Viscount de Turenne, he repaired to his Majesty at Poitiers. Since his
return from the Enemies, he had staid in his owu Family, where he enjoyed Ease
and Quiet; he had endeavored to set his Affairs to Rights by the means of some
Benefits he had received from Court, and seeing that in the Troubles that
arose, a great deal of Ambition was mingled with the Pretexts laid hold of to
trouble the State, he was very glad in having avoided the Ambuscades that had
been so long laid to trepan him. Being arrived at Poitiers he received from the
King and Queen Mother all the kind Treatments he could desire: For besides
their being acquainted with his Merit, as they stood in need of him, they did
not stick sometimes doing more for him, than they would have done in another
occasion; the Queen especially embraced him, recommending her Son to him in
such terms as Created Compassion; for she had every moment Tidings brought of
new Insurrections, which made her afraid that this bad example might seduce
others. The Viscount de Turenne comforted her the best he was able, and having
assured her of his Loyalty, he received her Orders, which were to go oppose the
Duke of Nemours, who with a Body of Seav'n or Eight Thousand men was on the
side of Montargis. The Count de Harcourt Marched in the mean while against the
Province of Guyenne, many Towns of which already repented of their Revolt; for
when the business is Waging War against one's own Prince, so many things arise
that were not foreseen, that one would often wish it were again to begin.
Bordeaux was divided into Factions that were all in Appearance for the Prince
of Conde, but were so opposite one to another, through the Private Interest of
those at the Head, that the City was daily upon the Point of it is Ruin. The
other Towns in the Province after their Capitals example were not in a better
Posture; the most part had declared themselves through the hatred they bore the
Cardinal, but seeing the Remedy they thought to have applied to their Evils was
worse than the Disease it self, they complained that those they had called to
their Succors were only come to render them still the more miserable. The
Prince of Conde dissembled these things to his Principal Officers, for sear
they might be palled by seeing the Weakness of his Party: Bur at the long run
he could not bar them of the Knowledge of it, by a Sedition that happened at
Again, wherein he would have put a Garrison; He found it a difficult business to
disentangle himself handsomely from that matter, whose Consequences he dreaded,
as fearing the other Towns might thereby Square their Conduct. But having
terminated things in an amicable manner, though a little to his own Diminution,
he had news brought him which rendered him again uneasy. The Duke of Beaufort
had some days before joined the Duke of Nemours, with four or five thousand Men,
and pretended, by reason of his having the hand at Court of Foreign Princes,
to retain also that Prerogative in the Army: The Duke of Nemours did not agree
to the matter, and though Brothers in-Law they had often come to Blows, if those
about them had not narrowly Watched them. This Division was injurious to their
Party, and both remained without the least Action, while the King drew near
Anjou, where the Duke of Rohan had formed his Party, thinking to pen him up
between the Prince of Conde and his Adherents. This News gave (as I have
already hinted) a great deal of Vexation to the Prince of Conde, and lessened
the joy he had for some happy Successes gained over the Marquis de St. Lue, the
Kings Lieutenant of Guyenne. However the time present made him less uneasy than
the future, he received daily new Advertisements, how that the misunderstanding
increased between the Duke of Beaufort, and the Duke of Nemours, and fearing
that this might at the length produce some bad business, he resolved to march
that way, that so by his Presence removing the Subject of Division between
those two Leaders, he might by that means sree himself from Apprehensions. The
Enterprise was extreme Dangerous, several Provinces, and several Rivers had he
to Cross, and this journey was to be performed without Attendance, so not to
abandon Guyenne; but his Fortune having carried him through all these
Difficulties, after having evaded sundry Dangers, he came into the Army of
those two Dukes, to the Great Contentment of all his Adherents. The King had
newly reduced the Duke of Rohan to Reason, and was again mounting up the Loire
to secure the Towns situated upon that River. The Viscount de Turenne having
joined the Marquis d'Hocquincourt, who had been made Marshall of France for
having shown Great Affection to the Cardinal, to meet whom he had been upon the
Frontiers, and had Conducted him afterward to the very Court, Commanded the
Army jointly with him; they were in Quarters where Hocquincourt thought himself
in Safety, as imagining the Prince of Conde far distant; But this Prince being
desirous to signalize his coming by some illustrious Action, marched all the
Night, and won two of this Mareschals Quarters, before he could put himself
into a Posture of Defense. At last Hocquincourt having re-assembled all he
could in have, in the general fear by reason of the night, he advanced toward
the Prince of Conde, who after having Plander'd two more of his Quarters,
thought to gain the Rest as Easily; His Countenance giving this Prince to
understand there not to be that facility in the undertaking as he had imagined,
he made a halt, to give his Men time, that were here and there dispersed in
Plundering, to rally, and leading them forthwith to the Charge, he Compelled
the Marshall d'Hocquincourt to abandon the Head of a Quarter, and to retreat
behind it. The Prince of Conde's men set fire to it, and pretended to have
pass'd-on further, but the other Quarters had had leisure to stand to their
Arms, so as that saving some Equipages that were still taken, the Marshall
d'Hocquincourt was quit for what he had lost; He put his Infantry into Blenean,
and the Horse retired on another side. In the mean while, the Viscount de
Turenne upon the Notice he had of the Marshall d'Hocquincourts being attacked,
with the utmost Expedition he assembled all his Quarters, and without staying
for his Infantry, he advanced within a Hundred Paces of a Wood that was upon
the Way; Had he had his Foot with him, he had possessed himself of it, before
the Prince of Condes Arrival; but his not being come up, he durst not Engage
his Cavalry in so disadvantageous a Place. The Prince of Conde, who after
having beaten, as he had done, the Marshall d'Hocquincourt, did not imagine
that the Viscount de Turenne durst stay his Coming, advanced on in the mean
time, aiming to Surprise the Court in Gien, a Place of small Defense, and
incapable to hold out against him. And in truth some Run-aways having carried
thither the News of their Defeat, it gave such a General Alarm, that they knew
not whither to save the Kings Person, and that of the Queen his Mother; as for
the Cardinal he was already Booted to betake himself to flight. But the
Viscount de Turenne having stopped the Prince of Conde, the Court had more time
to come to it self again, and recovering Courage, upon his sending Word
thither, that it had no reason yet to be in any fright; the Prince of Conde
hoping nevertheless utterly to rout him, caused his Infantry to Advance, that
lined the Wood, and as the Viscount de Turenne suffered Extremely, he Retreated
some Paces, which gave him a little Respite. The Prince of Conde thinking he
gave Ground, caused his Horse to march, but the Ground was so inconvenient,
that besides it could not hold above Seven or Eight Squadrons afront, there
were several Ditches that hindered him from drawing up in Battalia. In the mean
while, the Viscount de Turenne apprehending that if he Suffered him to Advance
further, the whole Army would by Degrees be upon his Bones, he repassed a
Defile behind which he had posted himself, and making his Onset upon that
Cavalry, he overturned it upon one another. The Prince of Conde was not of a
Humonr to be paul'd by the first stroke, but the Disadvantage he had in
fighting in so disadvantageous a Place, Curbing his Courage, they played the
Canon the rest of the Day. The Court being very uneasy about the Success of the
Battle, sent Couriers after Couriers to be informed of it in time; but having
Notice that the Prince of Conde had not been able to gain his Point, it sent
Orders to the Viscount de Turenne to retreat at the beginning of the Night;
which he easily achieved, by the means of Sundry Defiles that Separated the
two Armies. He received from the King, the Queen, and Cardinal, all the
Testimonies of Acknowledgement that he could hope for, after so signal a piece
of Service; and the Marshall d'Hocquincourt only, from whom the vexation of
having been beaten, dropped words to the Viscount's Disadvantage, as if he had
accused him of having contributed to his Defeat, by not Succouring him in due
time: But a man overwhelmed with Affliction had easily granted him the freedom
of Complaining, and the Viscount de Turenne himself slighted these sorts of
Matters, the Diligence he had used being by all Sufficiently known. And indeed
the Prince of Conde, whose humor was to render justice to his very Enemies,
did himself openly Proclaim, that but for the Viscount, he had at one stroke
put an end to the War, and taking a Pleasure in exaggerating his Valor and
Conduct, he seemed to aim at rendering him suspected to his Party: On the
contrary he made a Thousand keen Railleries on the Marshall d'Hocquincourt,
which did not at all please the Viscount de Turenne, who knew that in the
present Posture of things, and in an Age wherein each one gloried in being
Disloyal, there needed no more to make his Fidelity be suspected. The Prince of
Conde after having gained this Advantage, led his Army toward Chatillon, and
having a Design to take a turn to Paris, he took the Duke of Beaufort along
with him, that his absence might obviate all fresh Disputes with the Duke of
Nemours, who nevertheless was inlittle condition for any, as having been
dangerously Wounded in the last Battle. During these Transactions the
Parliament had pass^d an Arrest, by which it is hatred broke-out more than ever
against the Cardinal, for they set his Head at Fifty Thousand Crowns, and to
give some sort of Assurance to those that undertook to Kill him, this sum was
raised by the means of a new Imposition laid upon the People; so as that in
The Unhappy State of the Kingdom, they were become equally the Victims of the
Cardinal and his Enemies: But the Odium born this Minister was so Universal,
that no body complained of this Tax, and never had they paid any so cheerfully.
The Prince of Conde being come to Paris found the Parliament and the People in
so favorable a disposition for his Highness, that he had nothing more to
desire: He was looked upon by both with Admiration, and he at last conceived
such vast, such towering hopes, that the Cardinal having made him new Proposals
of Accommodation, he cluded them all by Exorbitant Demands. The Cardinal, who
was a great Politician, prolonging these Negotiations, sometimes by granting
him a part of what he demanded, another by opposing him, gave in the mean while
the People to understaud, that the Prince of Conde's hatred for him was not so
strong, but that it might be extinguished if he would content his Ambition; so
as that this People, that had flattered themselves that he had taken up Arms in
behalf of their Interests and for their sakes, and had so often exposed his
Life and Fortune, seeing themselves undeceived, dwindled insensibly in the
kindness they bore him. During all these Intrigues, his Army which he had left
on the side of Chatillon upon Loin falling under the want of all Necessaries,
the Baron of Clinchant and the Count de Tavannes, under whose Command it was,
led it toward Estampes that sided with his Highness. In the mean while the
Court seemed to have a Design of Blocking-up Paris again, for it had Troops in
several Places around it, which obliged the Prince of Conde to send a
Detachment on the side of St. Cloud, which the Kings Forces had a Design to
seize on. This Detachment being weak, and St. Cloud no place of Defense, it
rested satisfied with making it self Master of the Bridge, an Arch of which it
blew-up; by this means did they hinder the In-roads that were made to the very
Gates of Paris, and which had occasioned some Clamor in the Inhabitants of
that great City. But the King meaning to Mortify them and punish so many
Disobediences, sent to recover the Bridge, and upon the notice the Prince of
Conde had of it, he left Paris to go encourage his men, being attended by
several Persons of Quality, nay and by several Citizens that had taken Arms.
His Presence having stopped The Enemies Design, he marched against St. Denis,
where the King held a Garrison, and after having taken it he retired to Paris,
where there was more Caballing than Ever. The King was advised to draw near it,
to retain there some Servants that were still Loyal to his Majesty, and he did
so upon their Desire, after they had remonstrated to him, that otherwise all
was lost. And indeed his Remoteness had made it presumed that he abandoned that
Beauteous Town; but his Presence having given another Opinion, those who had as
it were forsaken his Party, made reflection upon the fault they had Committed,
and their thoughts were wholly how to repair it. The Viscount de Turenne still
Covered the Kings Person in a March that lasted above forty Leagues, and after
having Notice of his being arrived at Melun, he lead his Army toward Chastres,
that so the Prince of Conde, then at Estampes, might have no longer any
Communication with Paris. All these motions that could not be made without the
Desolation of the Country, raised a Murmuring in the People, that began to
grow weary of the War, so as that several Deputations were made to the King to
beseech him he would distance the Cardinal from his Person, after which he
should find as much Obedience as ever in Paris, and in all the Rest of the
Kingdom: But the most trusty servants his Majesty had in that great Town told
him without mentioning to him the removing this Minister out of the way, that
there needed no more than his returning thither to make all things hush again;
that the greater part of the Parliament and of the Citizens were very much
undeceived of the Prince of Conde, after having seen him neglect their.
Interests to think barely of his own; that this Disposition was to be improved,
and not to wait till he had regained their Confidence by new Artisices: In a
word, that they stood Warrantees for the Event, and that their Lives should be
answerable for it. These Reasons joined to the Desire the King had to make the
Parisians still sensible of the Inconveniences of the War, that so they might
have still the more Passion for Peace, made his Majesty resolve upon Causing
Estampes to be attacked, the taking of which would have cut off the
Communication with Orleans, from whence they received a world of Wines, and
other things necessary to Life. Yet would ^e first know of the Viscount de
Turenne if he approved of this Resolution: But this General having represented
to the King a world of Inconveniences that might thence ensue, the King left
all things to his Ordering, and continued still in his Quarters near Chastres
and Montlery. In the mean while the Viscount de Turenne having Intimation that
Mademoiselle d'Orleans, the Duke of Orleans's Eldest Daughter, had in her
passage, thorough Estampes, desired to see the Prince of Conde's Leaguer in
Arms, he broak up with his own, and Surpised one of the Suburbs in the time
the Enemies were Sprucing themselves up for that Review. The Disorder therein
was so great, that most of the Troupers abandoned their Horses, and without
Lauville, the Mestre de Camp of the Regiment of Conti, and who commanded the
Guard, and did effectually his Duty, the Disorder had been much greater. This
Success having Surpassed the Viscount de Turenne's hopes made him Change his
mind, and thinking to improve the Consternation the Enemies Army had plunged
them in, he beseig'd Estampes, that far from being a place of War has but one
bare wall with a sorry Castle on the side of Dourden, without Outworks, without
a Ditch, nay and open on sundry sides. But the Army within the Town supplied
all these Defects, and an enterprise was it Sufficiently great to attack it
there, how ever sorry the Place. Nevertheless the Viscount de Turenne having
taken his Precautions, raised his Assaults and Batteries, and as he pressed the
Town, he had Notice that the Duke of Lorrain advanced to cause him to raise the
Siege. The Court having no Ressourse left, if it chanced to loose it is Army,
was extremely Surpised at this Tidings, and not standing to consider what
Course to take, it dispatched away an Agent to this Duke to see whether his
humor would lead him to treat for some Money. In the Int'rim the Viscount de
Turenne had orders sent him to raise the Siege as soon as that Duke should draw
near; but his answer imported the thing not to be yet so Urging, and that when
it were so, he would take such Care, that nothing ill should come on it. The
Duke of Lorrain having no greater Passion than to heap up Money, was byast to
the offers of the Court: but as the point was the more or less, he stayed in
the Neighborhood of Paris, under Color of coming to Conferr with the Duke of
Orleans and the Prince of Conde; there arose a Contest between him and the
Prince of Conde for the rank, and he caused it to last some days, that so the
Court might have time to bethink it self whether it should give him what he
demanded. At last the Court, not very opulent at that time, having found the
means to furnish the sum he required, it was agreed in Concert with the Duke of
Orleans his Brother-in-Law, that the Siege of Estampes should be raised, on
Condition that as soon as the King's Army was drawn-off, the Prince of Conde's
Forces should Evacuate the Town. The Duke of Lorrain having thus provided for
his Honor, talked of returning, according to the obligation he lay under by a
secret Treaty he had made with the Court: But the Duke of Orleans and the
Prince of Conde exclaiming against him, he promised to stay, and instead of
directing his March back for Flanders, as he had engaged to do, he Marched away
toward Cor^^al, where he laid all the Open Country in Fire and Blood; This
obliged the Viscount de Turenne to March against him, and some Hostilities
having passed between the Two Armies, the Duke of Lorrain took a Pretext from
thence, to say, that the Court failed in its Parole to him, and both Parties
were obliged to come to New Explications. But the Viscount de Turenne having
learnt by Experience, that mild Remedies had no effect upon him, prepared to
give him Battle. The Duke of Lorrain being stripped of his Dominions, and his
Repute and Credit subsisting only by his Troops, he did not think fit to hazard
them, but Caused a Bridge to be laid over the Sein so to have that River
between the Two Camps: But seeing himself pressed in such manner, that he could
no longer avoid fighting, he desired My Lord Digby that his Lordship would
interpose in a New Treaty, then on foot. The Viscount de Turenne would by no
means hear it mentioned, and with the Sword pretended forthwith to decide the
matter: But the Court, standing then also in need of his Forces, would husband
every thing with the utmost Waryness, and Chose rather to grant the Duke of
Lorrain some farther favor, with which, as I may say, it drove him out of the
Kingdom.

Though all these Successes were not great on either side, the Court however
thence derived great advantage; for the People growing impatient to see an End
put to their Miseries, did more earnestly wish for Peace than before, and
complained of the Violences the Duke of Lorrain had Exercised, in lieu of the
Advantages they had Expected by his coming. The Prince of Conde's Troops, being
drawn near the Bancks of the River Seine, made a Shift to render these
Complaints altogether Legitimate, by the Desolation they spread through all the
Country, whose Grain and Forage they not only consumed, but Pillaged the very
Houses. The Prince of Conde, had daily Complaints made him of 'em; but whatever
Care he used he could not Suppress the Licentiousness of the Soldiery, who
imagined that a Civil War Entitled 'em to all Exorbitancies, and whom besides
he durst not command absolutely to refrain, having not the means to pay them.
All these things stimulating thus the Parisians to return to their Allegeances;
the Prince of Conde was obliged to place himself at the Head of his Forces,
that so they might not only live in better Order, but also to preserve them
from Danger; For the, Viscount de Turenne seeing himself freed from the
Lorrainers, pretended to force them to a Battle, notwithstanding they thought
themselves secured from that by the Bridge of St. Cloud, which afforded them
free passage to either side the River. The Court seeing no better means to
terminate the Civil War, than to Defeat the Remains of that Army, which daily
diminisht for want of Pay, sent for the Marshall de la Ferte, with the Troops
he had in Lorrain, and this Marshall having caused a Bridge of Boats to be
made over the Seine near St. Denis, pretended to nab the Prince of Conde on the
one side, while the Viscount de Turenne should attacque him on the other. This
Prince to avoid his Defeat, otherwise inevitable, discampt forthwith, and
having abandoned the Bridge of St. Cloud, he had a Design to demand Passage at
Paris, to shelter his Forces with the Rivers of M^rne and Seine, but not
knowing whether that the Parisians would grant it him, and fearing besides that
his Army would totally disband in the City, he directed his Way upon the Left
to gain the Upper-end of the Fauxbourg St. Martin, from whence he pretended to
make toward the Bridge of Charenton, beyond which is an Island capable of
containing an Army: But the Viscount de Turenne plying him Close at his Heels;
not having given him the leisure, His Rier was obliged to face about to stand
the Brunt of some Squadrons which the Viscount de Turenne had detached, with
intent to begin the Battle: Much a do had it to disengage it self, and to gain
the Point of Faux-bourg St. Antoine, where the Van was drawn up in Batalia; the
Prince thinking that by reason of Paris, and some Intrenchments, made to hinder
the Inroads of the Duke of Lorrains Army, the Viscount de Turenne would be
Cautious how he attacked him. Wherefore he chose this Post, as the only one
that could hinder this Defeat, for the Viscount de Turenne was much stronger
than he, and besides, Expected the Marshall de la Ferte, who upon notice of
the Prince of Conde, March, was to come suddenly with his Troops. All these
things making him presume, as I have newly hinted, that he would find it a
Difficult matter for him to come off from this Push, he meant however to have
saved his Baggage in Paris: But those that held there the Kings Party, caused
him to be denied the Gates, and he was obliged to place 'em upon the Ditch
that is between the Town and the Fauxbourg. In the mean while, the King, who in
so tender an Age already manifested his Warlike Humor, mounted upon the top
of du Mesnil to have the Pleasure of seeing his Troops fight; they forthwith
Filled and Marshalled into Order, and the Viscount de Turenne unwilling to leave
the Prince of Conde any further time to contrive his Matters, Caused him to be
attacked by a Batallion, which the Prince repulsed, he having placed himself at
the head of a Squadron made up of Men of Quality. The Viscount de Turenne
perceiving it would be a hard Matter for him to force that Place where the
Prince of Conde was himself with the flower of his Troops, weakened that attack
to re-insorce those that were made on another side; the Prince of Conde having
not minded it, could not hinder his Men from being forced, and though the Marquis
de St. Maigrin, one of the Cardinals Favorites, and who had boasted he would
seek out the Prince of Conde, was killed, with several other Persons of
Condition, the Rest continued nevertheless to march in Batalia, as far as the
Abbey of St. Antoine. The Prince of Conde who had done Wonders wherever he had
been present, hearing this bad News, marched immediately that Way-words, and
with the same Squadron, at the Head of which he had already fought several
times, he also beat these Troops: But his forces vanished, and grew Evidently
thinner, and as the Marshall de la Ferte began to come in sight already, they
abandoned after some Dispute, a Post they kept at the End of Charenton street.
The Viscount de Turenne caused several Houses to be pierced thereby to maintain
his Ground, and the Prince of Conde having no hopes of driving him thence with
his Horse, caused the Infantry to come up, which shamefully ran away. It is not
to be Expressed how angry the Prince of Conde was at this sight, nor the
Disorders some Squadrons were in that were Exposed to the firing from the
Houses beforementioned; However the Prince of Conde having a Courage too great
to be dejected by any Disgrace, meaning to try if he could not Speed better
than the Rest, marched himself with all the men of Quality in his Army: But as
he Advanced, one of his Squadrons that were upon its Retreat, taking him for an
Enemy, Charged him, and he did the like, while that those of the Barricade that
had other thoughts fired upon both. In the mean while, all Paris was thronged
upon the Rampart to see what would be the Issue of this Battle, and every one
was possessed with various sentiments according to the various Passions with
which he was animated. Mademoiselle d'Orleans, though such a Spectacle ought not
to be over-agreeable to a Person of her Sex, was come her self to the Bastille,
from whence she viewed all that passed; but at length considering that
notwithstanding all the Prince of Conde's admirable Performances, he was upon
the point of being oppressed by numbers, she caused the Canon to be pointed
upon the Kings Army, and sent to tell the Person that was upon the Guard at the
Gate St. Antonie, that unless he so^^^with opened it, she would have him hanged
within an hour The Person at the Gate having received so precise a Command
durst not Countervene it, though he would very willingly have rendered the King
Service, for he knew this Princesses humor that would absolutely be obeyed,
and who under a female Attire showed the face of a man, and a Heart capable of
the Greatest matters, she once had harbored hopes of marrying the King; But
both the Queen and Cardinal having opposed it, she expected to match with the
Duke d* Anguien, notwithstanding the Disproportion of Age, and the Prince of
Conde fed her with these hopes, either that effectually he had such a design
through the temptation of her great Riches, or that he did it only for the
Service she might do him with the Duke of Orleans her father. The King seeing
that Paris had declared it self against him, sent to the Viscount de Turenne to
retreat; and the King embracing him, as well as the Queen Mother and the
Cardinal, they promised him all three, they would never forget his Services.
The King could not however refrain giving Praises to the Prince of Conde, whose
Valor and Conduct had appeared with such a luster, that his very Enemies
proclaimed, that only he was capable to disengage himself from so dangerous a
point. The Cardinal distrusting the Affection of most of the Grandees,
interrupted this Conversation as much as he could; but the King peculiarly
delighting in discoursing upon such sorts of matters, would needs know of the
Viscount de Turenne all the Particulars of the Action, and the Cardinal was
forced to give him a hearing as well as others: The Prince of Conde's Army
having thus saved it self in Paris, the Citizens being excited by his Great
Actions seemed never to have born him so much Affection; they crowded their
Windows to see his Entry, and nor more nor less than if he had been victorious
they covered him with Praises: but this Kindness extended even to the very
Soldiers; they carried 'em drink to the very Gates, and those that had occasion
for Linen for their Wounds, found twice as much as they needed. The Prince of
Conde was a person of too much shrewdness to suffer their Affection to cool, he
had new Treatyes concluded for the Extermination of the Cardinal, and that this
Design might be General, the People were obliged to give outward marks of it,
by carrying straw in their hats. Thus naught else was seen in all Paris than
straw hatbands, nay and Trophys were made of the same material for Coaches and
for Horses: Those that had not timely notice of the Necessity of Wearing them
had like to have been killed by the Populace, and they ran after them as after
mad Dogs, crying a Mazarin. During these Occurrencies an Assembly was held at
the Hostel de Ville, but much disorder happened there, which some attributed to
the Prince of Conde, who to destroy some Persons whom he suspected of not being
well-affected to him, did not care though Others were exposed to the like
Danger; some Musket-shots were made into the Windows, and some meaning to look
out of the windows to see what was the matter, they were obliged to retire. The
thing proceeded much farther, the Gates were forced, and some Members of the
Parliament were kill^d. This Violence, which many attributed, as I already
hinted, to the Prince of Conde, made him lose the Peoples Affection, and his
Enemies gave our, to take away all Doubts, that it was him; that among those
Seditious Persons there had been seen Soldiers of his Army, and that they had
been seen going into his House a Day or Two before. This Misfortune did not be
fall him singly, it was followed with his losing the Duke of Nemours, who
quarrelling with the Duke of Beaufort upon such another matter that had set 'em
at Odds before, he was killed in Duel by a Pistol-shot. It was doubtless great
Pity, for he was as brave as a Man could be, Gentile, Civil, Liberal, and
having in short all the Good Qualities that can be desired in a Person of his
Condition.

Neither of the Two Armies did any thing in the mean while; that of the King
was withdrawn into the Neighborhood of St. Denis, and that of the Prince of
Conde into the plain of Yvry, the River of Seine between both; Paris suffered
equally from Each Party; the one made Excursions to the very Gates of St. Denis
and St. Martin; the other laid all Desolate, as far as the Suburbs of St.
Victor and St. Merceau, the Prince of Conde not having a Penny to pay it. The
Parisians, who had already dwindl'd in their Affection to him, by what
happened in the Hostel de Ville, lost all the Rest through the sacking of their
Houses. However their Odium to the Cardinal still prevailed over all other
Considerations, and while the Prince of Conde endeavored to make his
Accommodation, by the means of the Duke of Bouillon, Deputies were sent to the
King to beseech him to distance that Minister: The King detained the Deputies
without vouchsafing them an Answer, and having left them at St. Denis, while he
went to Pontoise, the Prince of Conde went to fetch them away at the head of
Two Thousand men, and brought 'em as in Triumph back to Paris. During these
Occurrences, the Viscount de Turenne had a great Affliction, occasioned by his
Brother the Duke of Bouillon's Death, which happened after a sickness of but
few Days Continuance: He was Lamented by Both Parties, by whom he was Equally
Esteemed for his Merit and Probity; He was a Faithful, Loyal Friend, a Man of
Wit and of the Cabinet, but whose Humor had seemed Changed within this Seven
or Eight Years; for as much as he had formerly loved Intriguing and Cabals, as
much did he now love Rest and Tranquillity. This must be attributed to his
Consideration of his Numerous Family, and to the Affection he bore his Wife, by
whom he left Ten Children, five Boys and five Girls. For his Principality of
Sedan, he had as a Recompense the Duchy of Eureux, with several other Large
and Noble Lordships. He died in the Kings Esteem and Affection; but in the
Aversion of the Hughenots, whose Religion he had forsaken at his Wifes
Persuasion.

In the mean while, the King endeavored to gain over the Topping Men of the
Parliament, and of the Citizens, and to sow some Division in that Body, he
Transferred it to Pointoise; but few of 'em repaired thither, which making the
King presume that it would be a Difficult thing to reduce the City to it is
Duty, without distancing the Cardinal, he complied with the time, yet with a
resolution however of recalling him when occasion served. Then thinking he had
removed all sort of Difficulty he demanded of the People and Parliaments
the effect of their Promises; But they quickly manifested that this Removal
which they had demanded with so much Passion, had been only a Preteuce to cover
other Interests. Their Disobedience put the King into great fits of Anger, he
resolved to employ Force, since he had not prosper'd in Mildness, and having
Reinforced his Army as far sorth as his present Circumstances would allow of,
he Block'd-up Paris so close that the Parisians were pincht with great
Necessity: The continual Taxes they were over and above to pay for the
maintenance of the Prince of Conde's Army undermined 'em utterly, so as being
no longer capable of furnishing what was requisite to raise Forces to oppose
the King's, they for the second time call'd-in the Duke of Lorrain to their
Succors. He came with an Army of Twelve Thousand men, and Encamping near the
Viscount de Turenne, the Prince of Conde's Troops did the like, while that the
Duke of Wittembourg on another side endeavored to shut him up between those
two Armies and his. Never did the Court lie under so much Disquiet as at that
time, it would needs also bargain with the Duke of Lorrain for him to get him
gone his ways; but the Viscount de Turenne pretending daily to discamp, at
length took his time to pass the River d'Hieres, and having broke his Bridges,
he was far off, before The Enemies were in a condition to pursne him. The Prince
of Conde being sick at Paris, fancied that this could not have been done
without Correspondence with the Duke of Lorrain; but he durst not express his
thoughts of it, as fearing he might have occasion for him in the condition he
was reduced to. And indeed the Parisians would no longer furnish Money for the
maintenance of his Troops, and being enraged at the Violences committed by the
Duke of Lorrains Army and that of the Duke of Wirtemberg in the Country, they
resolved at length to recall the King. The Prince of Conde did not at all
prevail in his opposing this Resolution, Deputies were sent as far as Compeigne
to beseech his Majesty to return, and all the Prince of Conde's Credit could
prevail no further than to deserr the business for some days. In short seeing
all his Intrigues abortive, he chose to withdraw out of France to the
Spaniards, an Action that tarnish'd many of those he had done before. Thus the
King returned to Paris, and recalled the Cardinal, who was already come upon
the Frontier, for his Remove had been only, properly speaking, a pure Grimace.
The Kings was followed with several Novelties, the Duke of Orleans withdrew to
Blois, a Town of his Appanage, with his Wife and Children, several of the
Parliament were Exiled, and the Coadjutour Confined; nevertheless having bribed
one of his Guards, he made his escape from Vincennes, and went to find out the
Prince of Conde, his most Mortal Enemy: But this Prince thought him
sufficiently Punished in his Misfortune, without adding to it, by making him
sensible of his Resentment, wherefore he received him with Humanity; and having
shown himself more Generous in Pardoning him, than he would have done by
treating him after another manner, he won so much upon him, that the Coadjutour
gave himself absolutely to him. All these Mutineers having been thus punished,
the world expected that the Partisans of the Court were going to be Rewarded,
the most part of whom had great need of Recompense, having been at vast
Expenses, in a time when the necessity of the State obliged 'em to take all
upon themselves: But the Cardinal, whose Credit was much greater than ever,
bent his thoughts much less upon contenting his Old Friends than in acquiring
New ones. Thus the Viscount de Turenne who had reason to expect something for
his Services, received only fair words, while others received Effects.

The Rebellion was still on foot in diverse Provinces, and especially in that of
Guyenne; but the Prince of Conde having not been able to retain Paris where he
had a world of Creatures, and where his great Valor was equally admired by all
Parties, it is not to be wondered if the Prince of Conti, who had no other
repute than that he derived from his Brother, could not hinder Bordeaux from
being lost. However L'Aine who was in the Interests of the Prince of Conde, did
all in his Power to dispell the Practices that arose against him; But Father
Favre, a Cordelier, to whom the Cardinal had promised a Bishopric for a Reward
of his Cares, got that Ascendant over the minds of both Male and Female Bigots,
that those of his Order confessed it to be impossible for him to remedy this
Misfortune. Yet this was not effected without showing a Fleet in the River of
Garonne; for Marsin who had the Command of the Arms in Guyenne under the
Authority of the Prince of Conti, threatened to put all to Fire and Sword, if he
saw the least Appearance of a Conspiracy. He had moreover sent for Succors to
Cromwell, who under the name of Protector had usurped the Crown of England,
after the most Execrable of Parricides committed on the Person of the Late
King. This made it necessary, the Court not being sure of the Answer he would
give to let a fleet appear ready to oppose his Enterprises. But two things
hindered Cromwell from declaring himself; One, he had a War to Sustain against
the Hollanders; the Other, he was willing to make as few Enemies as possible
for him in the Beginnings of his fortune. However he allowed the Spaniards to
make Leavyes of Irish, of whom he was very glad to rid himself, as being his
most formidable Enemies; By this means the Spaniards, whom Marsin had also
called to his Succors still for a while fostered the Rebellion in Bordeaux:
But the Duke of Vendome commanding the Fleet of France, having Seized on the
Borough and Castle of Lormont, and having Battered Two Forrs upon the Garonne,
shut up Bordeaux so Closely, that they found themselves reduced to Great
Extremities. Thus the Rich beginning to grow as sensible of the famine as the
Poor, the Number of the Conspirators augmented daily, and if Marsin had not
repaired in all have to the Town, they were going to deliver it up into the
Kings Hands. Nevertheless, falling suddenly at Odds with the Prince of Conti,
and they conceiving a jealousy of oue another, quickly occasioned this Prince
to Listen to some Proposalls made him on the Courts Behalf, or rather he made
use of this Pretense to abandon a Party, not only already Staggering, but
already fallen: For though the Prince of Conde had taken Rhetel, Chateau
Porcien, St. Menchou, and some other Places in his retiring: All this was not
capable of being brought into Comparison with the Great Losses he had Suffered.
Thus the City of Bordeaux returned under the Kings Obedience, and this happy
Success having been Usher'd-in by the Reduction of other Places of the
Province, France that had been near five whole Years in Civil Wars, Reunited
it self to oppose Strangers that had advantaged themselves much from these
Disorders. The Spaniards during this time of Misfortune and Division, had not
only Extended their Frontiers on the side of Flanders, but had also reduced
Catalonia and Cazal, besides Piombino and Portolongone which they had retaken.
This made it necessary to retrieve our Reputation, then lost among the
Neighboring Princes. Italy especially fancied already that the Spaniards who
had so often endeavored to settle their Sway there, were going to Subdue it;
so as that the Duke of Savoy, who had more Occasion than Others to apprehend
them, either by reason that he had Embraced our Party, or that his Country was
more for their Bienseance, only thought of appeasing them by some Treaty. The
King, whom it notably concerned to detain him in his Alliance, immediately
dispatched to him de Plessis Besancon, a Man both for War, and the Cabinet, who
remonstrated to his Highness, that France being no longer divided in it self,
as it had been in the Years last past, His Neighbors were going to find the
Effects of its Protection, that after having Subdued the Rebels that were
buoyed up by all the Forces of Spain, it would be no hard matter for him to
vanquish those same Forces, that were no longer Seconded with the Rebellion of
the Towns, and the Revolt of the Principal Subjects; that All being returned
to their Duty by the King, and his Ministers Wise Conduct, the World was going
to see great Changes; that we had still a Door left us into Italy, by which to
Enter Succors proportionable to the Occasion of Our Allies, and that in short
he would suddenly have tokens of this, as to his own Particular. He for whose
Interests the King ever showed himself as Affectionate as for his own. The Duke
of Savoy would not have been Contented with all these fine Words if they had
not been followed with the March of Five Thousand Men, that having joined Three
Thousand that we had remaining in that Country, made a small Body of an Army
that re-incourag'd him a little. From thence le Plessis Besancon passed on to
the Duke of Mantoua, to whom the Spaniards had Surrendered Cazal in Appearance,
but of which they were in effect Masters, by the Garrison which they paid with
their own proper Moneys. He made him some Proposals: But either that this Duke
did not think us in a Condition to perform what we promised him, or that the
Alliance of Blood he had with the Emperor, did not Suffer him to close with
Interests that were opposite to those of his Imperial Majesty, He answered this
Envoy, that his Resolution was not to disturb the Repose of Italy, which would
ever Subsist so long as Cazal should remain as it then did in his hands. Le
Plessis Besancon having sped so ill on that side, proceeded on to the
Venetians, whom he endeavored to Egg-on to some Motion; but those Wise
Politicians, whose Grandeur only Subsists by Peace, were far from being
influenc^d into these sentiments, and as they were jealous when they saw us
Masters of Cazal, they were in no wise inclined to assist us in the recovering
it; Nevertheless they gave this Answer to the Proposals made them by le Plessis
Besancon, that if the Spaniards offered at any Innovation, they wou^d proceed
to take Other measures. But as it was their Interest that made them speak in
this manner, the King was not at all content with this Answer. In the mean
while the Marquis de Caracene who had had Conferred on him the Government of
the Duchy of Milan, was preparing to enter into Piemont, where he had already
made some Conquests the years before; which being necessary to be remedied, Our
Troops marched toward the Alexandrin, that by this Diversion they might induce
them to forsake their Enterprises. And in truth the Spaniards thinking it more
for their Advantage to keep their own than acquire another, brusht back the
same Way, and the two Armies encountering, fought for three hours by Detachment,
the Ground not being proper to bring all the Men up to the Charge yet this did
not hinder the Battle from being Sharp, and both Parties boasted their having
gained the Advantage: But the French seemed to have more Reason than the
Others, for the Marquis de Caracene was wounded in that Occasion, besides the
Spaniards abandoned the Field of Battle. Be it as it will, after the two Armies
had thus tried their Forces, they made Truces and open repeated them, which
consumed the Rest of the Campaign, so as that nothing Considerable occurred in
that Country. As for Catalonia, the Marshall d'Hocquincourt was sent thither,
rather however to give a jealousy to the Enemies, than to recover what had been
lost: Nevertheless the Marshall d'Hocquincourt besieged Gironne, and had taken
it, if certain flies that are very rife in that Country had not destroyed the
better part of his Cavalry. The Enemies that had not as yet dar'd'to appear in
the field, having nothing more to fear after this Accident, drew near Gironne,
and the Marshal d'Hocquincourt having no more Horse to oppose them was forced
to raise the Siege. The Enemies pursued him, and thought easily to have
defeated him: but having entrenched himself in a Placa where he had more need
of Foot than of Horse, he let 'em see that they were very remote from their
hopes having killed or wounded them above nine hundred men. This little
ndvantage Comforted the Court for the vexation it had had for raisi^g the Siege
of Gironne. However all these things were of small Consequence to it, in
Comparison of what occurred upon the Frontiers of Picardy and Champagne. The
Prince of Conde after having been obliged, as I hintted before, to forsake the
heart of the Kingdom, employed his thoughts wholly in establishing his Power in
those two Provinces, he had already in Champagne, Rhetel, St. Menchou, and
Mouzon, and by the means of those Places he made Inroads within fifteen or
twenty Leagues of Paris. The Kings whole Design was to recover them, for as
long as the Prince of Conde should have footing in the Kingdom, it was to be
feared this might foment the Rebellion therein. The Clubbs too and Meetings
were continued in the very Metropolis, what ever Prohibitions were issued out
to the Contrary; and the Parliament as well as the Grandees seemed to lie at
watch for an Occasion to set All again in a Combustion. The King in the need he
had of Money, had caused thirteen Edicts to be verified, which were laid upon
the Commonalty, and the Cardinal had been so cunning as to cause 'em to be
passed before his Return, that they might be imputed to some others, and not to
him: But being known to give the turn to all things as well at a Distance as
near at hand, this piece of Craft rendered him but so much the more Odious. The
Duke of Orleans, as I have said, was withdrawn to Blois, and the Duke d'Anvilie
being his Confident, but who, out of hopes of a Greater fortune had promised
friendship to the Cardinal, performed several journies, to endeavor to prevail
with him to return to Court. The Duke of Orleans who suffered himself to be
easily governed already complied; but his Wife who had still more Power over
him than the Duke Danville, interrupted his Negotiations, out of the Aversion
she bore the Queen Mother and the Cardinal; Besides she loved Solitariness,
which making her Desire to spend her days remote from the tumult of the Court,
and from so many Intrigues with which she had been overwhelmed since her
marriage she at last prevailed with her Husband to renounce all sorts of
Caballs; which was what the Cardinal most desired. Thus this Ministers good
luck having made him meet with easynesses, which he could not with any
likelihood have entertained the hopes of; for if the Duke of Orleans had been
so minded, he might have derived considerable Advantages for him and his, if he
had only feigned to do in ConsIderation of the Cardinal, what he did out of
Complaisance for his Wife. Fortune having thus declared her self for the
Cardinal in a matter of such great moment, his thoughts were wholly employed
how to fix his Power by Allyances with the most considerable Persons in the
Kingdom; and as the Prince of Conti, who had been allways designed for the
Church, had a Spirit far remote from that Profession, he caused one of his
Nieces to come from Italy, being the Daughter of Roman Gentleman, and offered
her to this Prince with Considerable Advantages. The Prince of Conti was loath
to close with this Match; but after having seen the Young Lady, who had Merit
and Beauty, this Alliance did no longer Bugbear him so very much; to which he
was still the more egg'd-on by People about him the Cardinal had gained; They
were perpetually representing to him that the Duke of Mercoeur had not made so
much scruple, though his did not turn so well to Account; that the Prince of
Conde his Brother being with the Enemies, all his Riches, all his Offices, and
all his Governments were for him if he knew but how to make use of his Good
Fortune; that there was no likelihood of his ever making Peace after the
Measures he had taken with the Spaniards; that he was not to stand
S^illy-Shallying 'till some other was enriched with his Spoils, that the
sooner the better, and that perchance by overmuch pa^sing and Deliberation, he
would lose an Occasion never to be retrieved. These Discourses being familiar
to the Prince of Conti, he had no reluctance to resolve upon a thing, he was
already egg'd-on to by his natural Levity. In the mean while the Cardinal, who
had not yet lost hopes of coming to an Accommodation with the Prince of Conde,
deferred this Alliance until he had seen his last Resolves, and was very glad
to give him Intimation of it, that so out of the fear of losing all his Estate,
which was considerable, he might not push things to Extremity: But this Prince
after having gone so far as he had done, did not one minute stand pondering
what Resolution to take and being besides Instigated by the Spaniards, who
promised him no less than giving him some Places in Sovereignty, He used his
utmost Endeavors to Enter France, where he had still good Acquaintance. This
broke the Cardinals Measures, who had spared nothing to put the Army of
Champagne in a state to reduce the Places which this Prince possessed in that
Province. The Viscount de Turenne Commanded it, to whom the Cardinal had at
length granted the Government of Limosin: He had besieged Rhetel, which very
much incommoded the People of Rheims, they having sent to Court several times
to beseech the King to deliver them from that Servitude: The Prince of Conde
making use of that time to Execute what he had resolved, passed the Sum, and
being entered France, caused all to Tremble to the very Gates of Paris. Roy
offered at some Opposition, but its Chastizement for so doing, followed so
Close, that the Other Towns became Wise at its Cost, so as that they received
in Garrisons, and furnished him with all he stood in need of; However he would
not divide his Forces, wherefore resting satisfied with the Assurances they
gave him of their Fidelity, he still marched further on, hoping perhaps to
cause some Sedition in Paris: But seeing that no body stirred in his Behalf, he
repassed the. Sum after having gained much Booty. The Viscount de Turenne
having had time to assure the taking of Rhetel, marched toward Picardy to
oblige him to a Retreat: But seeing he had prevented him, His thoughts were
only how to secure the Places upon the Sum, which the Prince of Conde seemed
to threaten All Equally; He put Succors into Peronne, St. Quentin and Guise,
and staying in the Neighborhood of Ham, he kept in a Readiness to march where
occasion required. The Prince of Conde seeing he broke all the Measures he
could take on that side, made a feint of designing to attacque Arras, so to
draw him into Even Ground: But the Viscount de Turenne having not forces to
resist him, troubled his Head not much about this Enterprise, knowing the Place
to be well provided with all Necessaries, and keeping in his Camp, he deferred
resolving what Course to take, till he should be more particularly informed of
his Designs. The Prince of Conde seeing him remote, took that time to beleaguer
Rocroy, and repairing thither with all his Army he Won it, while the Viscount
de Turenne made himself Master of Mouzon; not but that he would rather have
relieved Rocroy, but the Cardinal would by no means venture a Battle, fearing
that if the Success proved adverse to him, this might renew the Faction, by the
Advantages the Prince of Conde would derive from his Victory. Wherefore he
Chose rather to reprisal that Loss by the taking of Saint Menchou, whither he
sent the Marshall du Plessis, while the Viscount de Turenne observed the
Prince of Conde.

During these Occurrences, another Party was framing in Alsace, where the Count
de Harcourt seemed to Erect a Sovereignty. He had been Employed in the
Beginning of the War of Guienne; but being become Suspected to the Cardinal, he
was gone aside Malecontent, upon a Suspicion he had of a Design to secure him:
He had afterward found the means by forging false Orders, to get himself
received in Alsa^ia, where he had so gained the Hearts of the Principal
Officers, that he made himself to be Master of the Principal Towns; He g^ve out
however that he held them for the King, but insensibly attributed to himself a
Power, that in Process of time would not have brook'd Dependency. The juncture
of things, obliged the Cardinal to dissemble these Enterprises; but laying them
not the heart, he dispatched away to the Respective Places, Shrewd Persons, and
in whom he put great Confidence, and these agents won so well upon the Garrison
of Baisac, that the Governor left there by the Count de Harcourt, going out of
the Town upon a March of Hunting, the Gates were shut against him, when he
would have come in again. They Secured Philipsbourg almost in the same manner,
and this Province having thus been reduced to Obedience, the next Design was to
besiege B^tfort, which the Count de la Suse pretended himself Lord of, He being
a Person that Espoused the Interests of the Prince of Conde: As it is a Pass
Bordering upon Lorrain, this Commission was given to the Marshall de la Ferte,
the Governor of that Dukedom, and who in the beginning of the Campaign had
joined his Troops to those of the Viscount de Turenne. But their two Humors
did not Cotton; the Marshall de la Ferte was of an Extraordinary Violent
Temper, and so self-conceited of his mean parts, that he would feign have had
the World thought him to have been the only Man of Universal Knowledge, In the
Campaign before a thousand little piques had Occurred between them. But the
Viscount de Turenne had so ordered matters by his Wisdom, that all came to be
appeased without making a Noise. However the Marshall de la Ferte daily found
a thousand Occasions for his jealousy of him; for as much as his fiery Humor
made him hated by the Officers, so much did that of the Viscount de Turenne,
that was opposite to it, gain him the Love of all sorts of People: And in the
Truth, the Marshall de la Ferte knew so well the hatred they bore him, that he
never Engaged in any Battle, without first going to ask Pardon of those he had
Offended, for he feared them more than he did The Enemies; he did nevertheless
these sorts of things by way of Derision, I mean in regard of those who saw him
do it, for in regard of others he did it heartily. I remember how that one day
when the Battle was just ready to begin, some body having asked him whither he
was going because he removed from his Post, he made answer, that he was going
to seek th'Amnesty, a word extremely in use at time, on the account of the
Motions before related, and for which People were often compelled to have
recourse to it. All th'Officers smiled at these kinds of Whims, and knowing the
Reason the Viscount de Turenne had not to bear him any good will, they
sometimes delighted to discourse of 'em in his presence: But this Prince not
taking any Pleasure in hearing any body spoke Ill of, minded them at the same
time of the Respect they owed a Person of the Rank of the Marshall de la
Ferte, and thus took his part that goar'd him on all occasions; for when ever
the Viscount happened to be the Subject of the Discourse, the Marshall de la
Ferte never failed of Darkening the luster of his Actions or of his Virtue, of
objecting that he had born Arms against the King, and from thence pretended
that All that he could do would never be capable of repairing what he had done.
The Viscount de Turenne to whom these Discourses were told again, far from
being in Anger, answered gravely that he was very much obliged to him for
putting him in mind of his fault, that it was however needless, because he had
it ever present to his Imagination; not that he pretended to make the Juncture
of Times his Excuse, on which many People would have rejected All that
Occurred; that nothing could Excuse a Subject for his Disobedience, and that it
was also only in the Mercy of God that he hoped for his Pardon. So Worthy, so
Handsome and Moderate an Answer should, one would have thought, have made the
Marshall de la Ferte abstain thence-forward from such like Discourses: But
this was far from rendering him Discreet, if I may say so, of a Marshall of
France, his Violences were but the greater, and proceeded even to extremity;
For one day finding one of the Viscount de Turenne's Guards out of the Camp, he
asked him who had sent him thither, and whether he knew not that it was
forbidden to pass the Guards, and without giving him a hearing Can'd him to
some purpose. The Guard made his Complaints to the Viscount de Turenne: But
this Prince calling immediately for the Captain of his Guards, bid him go from
him to the Marshall de la Ferte, and tell him, that since the Guard must needs
have very much offended him to make him do what he had, he sent him him to
complete his Punishment; and that he would also Discard him if he thought
fitting, and that he needed only to give him the hint to be obeyed. At the same
time the Marshall de la Ferte, who after having made Reflection on what he had
done, knew not how to Clear himself in the world, was still the more surpised
at this Complement; he endeavored to Excuse himself the best he could; but
having dismissed the Captain of the Guards, he told such as were then present,
that the Viscount de Turenne's manner of receiving this Offense, gave him much
more Confusion than if he had shown Resentment; and the dint of Truth
compelling him to divest himself of Self-Love to do his Adversary Justice, he
could not forbear saying, that the Viscount de Turenne was as Discreet as he
was Passionate.

However, though all this came to the Cardinals Knowledge, it was not capable of
procuring them a Command apart; For it was one of this Minister's Maxims to
foster in the Grandees a Continual Jealousy of one another; being withal
unwilling to give so much Credit to the Viscount de Turenne, as that he might
abuse it; We shall nevertheless see in the Process of this History, that this
Maxim was none of the best, and there-thence ensued Inconveniences as were
sufficiently considerable as to induce him to change it. The Prince of Conde
would in the Interim have made Advantage of so Propitious a Juncture, if the
Spaniards had not harbored a Diffidence of his Conduct, for they saw him still
irresolv'd whether or not he should come to an Accommodation with the Cardinal,
who to render him the more suspected, still amused him with new Treati^s; this
Prince had besides quitted several little acquaintances in the Kingdom that
held him by the Heart; and though it seemed that so great a man as he, ought to
be but little sensible to such s^rts of things, yet they sufficiently possessed
him as to make him regret what he had forsaken: More especially he had a
Jealousy of the Prince of Conti, who meant to build his Fortune on his Ruins,
and he could not think of his being upon the point of going to fatten himself
with his Spoils, without desiring to traverse him in his Pretensions. In the
mean while on another side he knew not what Confidence to put in the Cardinal,
who had so often broke his word with him, and who wou^d perchance wreak his
Revenge on him by still a harsher Imprisonment than the former. In so uncertain
a condition he was extremely to be pitty'd, when after having made Reflection
upon his last Actions that gave him little hopes for Pardon, he resolved to
think no more of France, and to abandon his Fortune entirely in the hands of
the Spaniards. And in truth he had notice that his Brother's Marriage had been
concluded on at Fontainbleau, and that his Place of Grand Maistre of the King's
Household was already conferred on Prince Thomas, which did not over well
please the Prince of Conti, for it had been promised him before his Marriage:
But the Cardinal who thought he had him fast enough by that Match, no longer
minding to husband him, chose rather to gain a New Creature than keep his word
with him. In the Interim, this Minister who had his own Interest in a peculiar
Recommendation, had caused a great part of the Benifices he possessed to be
resigned up to him, and it being seen how that he enriched himself with all he
could clutch, while that he Empoverish'd others, he was daily the more and more
hated, though People were less in a condition to give him tokens of it, for he
had been careful to gain such of the Grandees that could still foment Stirrs
and insurrections; and those that had done him most Mischiefs, were those that
had been the best Rewarded. Thus they had seen the Count d'Ognon, the Marquess
de Saint Germain Beaupre's Younger Brother, made Marshall of France, with a
Present of a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Livres for having abandoned the Prince
of Conde s Interests.

In the mean while, the Court of Spain practiced a different Policy toward the
Duke of Lorrain, then become suspected to it; more Especially since he had
suffered the Viscount de Turenne to Escape, as was before related; for when he
fancied himself in the best terms with them, and thought he had regained their
Confidence by new Treaties, he was Seized on at Bruxelles, and conveyed thence
into Spain, from whence he did not stir out of Prison, 'till the Peace had been
made between the Two Crowns. The Prince of Conde having daily disputes with him
for the Rank, was not otherwise Sorry for his Misfortune; but having learnt by
his own Experience, that the Spaniards were not of a humor to pardon, he was
more than ever Confirmed in his Design of renouncing all the Intrigues he had
kept a-going on that side. Wherefore being willing to give them certain Marks
of his Intentions, he Egged them on to besiege Arras, which was no sooner known
of at Court, but that the King went on purpose to the Parliament, to have him
declared Guilty of High Treason, and one that had forfeited the Quality of
first Prince of the Blood, with all the Prerogatives due to his Birth; and in
short to dye such a Death as his Majesty thought fitting: Those who followed
his Party were in like manner Condemned to be Beheaded, and among Others
Marcin, Persan Senior, and President Violle, for in regard of the Others, they
were only cited in judgment to give them time to know themselves; but not a man
of them All would abandon him on this score, save the Prince of Tarante, for
though they hereby lost their Estates, yet they lost not their Lives, the Court
not daring to push things to that Extremity, for fear the Prince of Conde might
use Reprisals. And, indeed, since his being in France, those of his Party had
caused an Officer of the Kings Army to be Hanged, upon the Notice they had that
the Cardinal had served one of theirs in the same manner, and the Prince of
Conde far from Checking them for their Proceedings, had uttered his mind so
roundly upon this Article, that the Court could not doubt of his Intentions.
The Viscount de Turenne upon the Suspicion he had that the Enemies had an Eye
upon Arras marched that Waywards in all haste, and after having put a
re-inforcment into that Place, he passed the Meuse, and marched against Stenay,
which had been too long the Azylum of Rebels, to leave it any longer in their
hands. The Concern the Prince of Conde had in it, the Propriety of the Place
appertaining to his Highness, as I suppose I have already intimated, making the
Viscount de Turenne nevertheless believe that this Prince would not suffer it
to be taken without a push, he thought not fitting to stay within the Lines,
but took an Advantageous Post to fight him. And this was indeed the Prince of
Conde's main Design, who pretended at any rate to save this Place; but the
Spaniards, who would have got nothing thereby, choosing much rather to Besiege
Arras, which if they could take, was to be their Potion, invested it the same
day the Trenches were Opened, before the other Place. The Viscount de Turenne
thereby perceived he had no Apprehensions to lie under as to the Succors of
Stenay; for which reason after having given the necessary Orders to the
Marquess de Faber, whom he left before the Town, he repassed the Meuse, with a
Design to Starve the Enemies, 'till such time as he had forces sufficient
brought him to fight them. The Marshall de la Ferte joined his Troops to the
Viscounts; and both drawing near the Lines of the Spaniards, they Seized on
certain Posts, from whence it was Easy to Cut them off their Victuals and
Forrages. The Neighborhood of the Two Armies daily produced some Skirmishes,
wherein fortune did not yet seem to decide any thing, for they were one while
to the advantage of one side, and another to the adverse Party; but at last the
Chevalier de Crequi, now Marshall of France, having found the means to get
Succors into the Town, caused it to declare for his Party. And indeed this
Success as much flushed the Courage of the Besieged, as it dejected that of the
Besiegers: The later besides standing daily more and more in need of Provisions
and Forrages, so as that they were ready to raise the Siege, if the Duke of
Luxembourg, then called Bouteville, had not conducted a Convoy to the Camp,
across a thousand Ambuscades that were laid for him. This Succors having thus
made them persevere in their Design, they pusht on briskly their Attacks,
insomuch that Mondejeu that Commanded in the Place, sent to the Viscount de
Turenne to come and relieve it. This Prince having hitherto deferred doing it,
thinking to Effect it without Fighting; but having seen the Contrary by what
had happened, he made all things ready for the Succors, wherein he was
Seconded by the Mareschals de la Ferte, and d'Hocquincourt, the last of whom
had brought him the Troops that had taken Stenay, and others which he had drawn
out of the Towns above the Sum. The Enemies seeing themselves upon the point
of being attacked, daily fortified their Camp, wherein they had made great
holes not only to stop the Cavalry, but also to serve for Precipices to the
Infantry, for they were Extreme deep: But the Viscount de Turenne being
informed of all this, as well as the Other General, they resolved no longer to
defer the Attacque, which they gave notice of to Mondejeu, that so he might
take that time to make, Sallys. In the mean while, to give a jealousy to all
the Quarters, they were all viewed in their Turns, which the Prince of Conde
not being able to endure without showing himself, he went out of his Lines, and
Fortune having Seconded his Courage, he beat all that stood in his Way, after
which he Forrag'd at large, which without this he durst never have undertaken.
As this Success was capable of damping our men, if not suddenly repaired, the
Viscount de Turenne attacqu'd diverse Posts, which the Enemies held upon the
Avenues, and making himself Master of them, he caused Part of the Army to march
about five a Clock in the Evening on the side of Mount St. Eloy, while the
Mareschals de la Ferte, and Hocquincourt, led the Rest toward de Mouchy le
Proux through several Ways. The Enemies having Parties out were quickly informed
of this March, and having fired a Canon which was the signal they had agreed
among themselves to give notice of Our Approach, they stood to their Arms. The
Viscount de Turenne seeing their Design discovered, as well as the other
Generals, nevertheless continued their March, and false attacques were made on
the side of Mouchy, to cover the true one that was made on the side of St.
Eloy. In the mean while, Several Matches were shown fastened at the end of
great Sticks, which made the Enemies run that way-wards they were seen: But the
Viscount de Turenne having used this Diversion for the making of his Attacque,
all buckl'd before him, the Lines of Circumvallation were forced, and after
having been filled by the Infantry, the Horse passed, and fell in pursuit of
the Enemies, most of whom betook themselves to flight without fighting. None
but the Prince of Conde made any resistance, but it rather tended to save his
Men, than repair the Affairs of his Party. As for the Spaniards they abandoned
their Canon, their Tents, and their Equipages, of which the Soldiers made so
considerable a Booty, that many of them enriched themselves for all their Life
long. Above Sixty Canons were found in their Camp, with Five or Six Thousand
Tents, All still standing, many Sumpter-Horses half laden, but which they had
not had time to take along with them; In short, all the tokens of a great
Disorder, and a strange Surprise. The Prince of Conde made his Escape to Doway;
but he was still in the Lines, when the Van was already arrived; for that he
might not abandon his Troops, he several times Exposed his Person, even to
mingling in among the Enemies like a Common Soldier. The Viscount de Turenne
knowing him in the hurry, often admired his Valor, but at the same time
deplored his Destiny; which thus kept him linked to the Interests of those
against whom he would have more gloriously Employed it. The Enemies Defeat was
no sooner known at Court, but that all the Honor of it was given to the
Viscount de Turenne; For though he had two Mareschals of France that were his
Equals in the Command, yet it being known to have him that forced the Lines,
and that the Others on the Contrary would not have sped by having lost their
Ways, they thought themselves bound not to Confound him with them. And in
truth, the Cardinal, who was, as I may say, the Soul of the Kingdom, thought he
lay under an Obligation to congratulate him alone, and made him such great
Promises, as rendered it easy to guess how deeply he thought himself concerned
in that Success. In Effect, this Minister had daily new Disquiets, and there
had been lately stopped upon the Frontiere, a Certain Person, Beaulieu by name,
who had Commerce with the Spaniards, and pretended to kindle anew the Sedition
in diverse Provinces. Thus an unprosperous Event was capable of replunging the
Realm in the Troubles it had but just got ridd of: Wherefore he thought himself
bound to testify his Acknowledgment to him that had Secured his own repose, and
that of the State. In the mean while, the Viscount de Turenne relying on his
Promises, having of him demanded the Effects of them some days after, found, as
many others had done before him, that they were not to be overmuch trusted; for
having asked of him the Charge of Colonel General of the Horse, fallen Vacant by
the Duke of Joyeuse's Death, he shamm'd him with so many Put-off's, that the
Viscount de Turenne saw plainly he made a Mock of him: He would not speak of it
to the King and Queen Mother, who had several times assured him, nothing could
be denied his Services. The King himself came into his Camp during the Siege of
Stenay, and there renewed to him all he had promised him in other Occasions:
But though his last Action spoke also in his behalf, he did not think it
convenient to Expose himself to the Master's Denial, and that it was sufficient
to have undergone that of the Minister. This notwithstanding, he showed not any
Resentment, and continuing to serve with as much Zeal as ever he manifested, he
went and Beleaguered Quesnoy, a Place in Hainaut, and of more importance for
its Situation than its Outworks, that were imperfect; yet as it might be
improved to an advantageous Post, he was resolved to fortify it, as soon as he
had got it into his hands; and the Prince of Conde having had time to gather up
the Wrecks of the Spanish Army, advanced to interrupt the Works; But the
Viscount de Turenne, after having seized on certain Posts reduced his hopes to
Weak Skirmishes, wherein not having had all the Success he Expected, he shut up
the Place in several sides, as if he had a Design to Block it. The Viscount de
Turenne seeing the Party he had Embraced, let the Cardinal know it, who had
long before designed the Besieging of Clermont, that he might now with ease
effect this Enterprise, and the thing having been resolved on in Council, the
Marshall de la Ferte had Orders to sit down before that Town, while the
Viscount de Turenne should observe the Prince of Conde. Thus la Ferte having
not been disturbed in his Enterprise, finished it without much trouble. After
this the Viscount de Turenne seeing that in the present State of Affairs, and
in the Season no longer proper to keep the Field, it would be losing his time
not to send the Army into it is Winter Quarters, resolved to depart himself for
Court, after having given Orders for that purpose. However he staid on the way
at Mouchy, a House of the Marquis de Humiers, very agreeable for Hunting, but
whither other Pleasures invited him; for before he went to the Army he had
found this Marquis's Lady so Charming, as gave him an Urging to see her again.
The Marquis de Humieres being come to his House, received him there as one of
his most particular Friends, and the good Reception he met with both from him
and his Wife, obliged him to return often thither. These Visits which he paid
still more frequently at Paris, made him at length so very much in Love, that
he no longer seemed to be the same man. The Marquis de Humieres after the
wonted rate of Husbands, did not take notice of these sorts of things, and
attributing to the freedom which reigns among Persons of Condition, this
Assiduity, which would, perhaps, have given suspicion to another, he continued
to live with him as he was wont. In short, this Fancy lasted Eight or Ten
Years, and was not unprofitable to the Marquis de Humieres's Fortune, who
having a great deal of innate Merit and much acquired, has attained to the
Dignity of Marshall of France, through what the Viscount de Turenne said daily
in his behalf. And indeed the Chevalier de Grammont knowing whence this
proceeded, and loving a little Drollery, could not refrain breaking a Jest to
the King, upon his Majesty's asking him at the time of his Promotion to that
Dignity, if he knew whom he had made Marshall of France, he answered him,
Madam de Humieres; which so offended this Prince, who did not love Railleurs,
that he Banished the Chevalier at that very Instant.

The King's Arms had not been altogether so flourishing in other Countries as
they had been in Flanders, no not by much. The Court had sent the Marshall de
Grancey into Italy, and though the Kingdom of Naples, that began to rise again,
might have very much facilitated him in his Enterprises, he was under a
continual uncertainty of what he ought to do. Thus did he suffer much time to
slip, after which he passed into that part of the Land of Milan, called the
Alexandrin: but the Rivers being swelled by continual Rains, his whole Campaign
terminated in Consuming the Forrages, and some slight Skirmishes. In the
Interim as the Fleet bound for the Coast of Naples under the Conduct of the
Duke of Guise, was forced to return into our Ports, after that our men who had
made a Descent had been repulsed with great loss; the Marshall de Grancey was
also constrained to repass the Tanare, for fear of seeing all the Forces that
had been employed in that Kingdom come pouring upon him. The Duke of Guise and
He did not want reasons to excuse the failings they had made, and they charged
all to the fault that had been committed in having been too sparing of all
things that had been sent them, as if what passed in that Country had not been
of any Moment; and indeed a man would have said the Cardinal had discarded all
Solicitude for those Parts, nay and he would have little minded the Affairs of
Catalonia, if he had not been willing to content the Prince of Conti, whom he
had sent thither on purpose, that he might not yet disrelish his Alliance. This
Prince had no great Experience, but to supply that want he had good
Lieutenant-Generals in th Army, who unwilling to suffer it to lie Idle, caused
it to march against Villa Franca, a small Town at the Entrance into Conflans,
Situated between two Mountains, and seems to have been Built rather for the
retreat of Bears, than for the abode of men. Yet as it obstructed the Entrance
into Cerdaigne, a small Province so-so Pleasant, and that the taking of it must
besides bereave the Enemies of that of Roussillon, it was attacqu'd and won
almost at the same time. Puicerda, the Capital City of Cerdaigne surrendered
afte^wards, after having sustained a Siege of Eight Days. But the Prince of
Conti growing quickly Weary of War, was very willing to find a Pretext to go
hold the States in Languedoc, that he might gratify his Natural fickleness. His
Wise repaired to him thither, though already dissarisfy'd with him, for he had
made her a Present, which Modesty does not suffer specifying, and which after
having reduced her to strange Extremities at the long run, occasioned the loss
of her Life: Thus was the Year 1654 spent. But I ought not to forget what
befell the Viscount de Turenne. whose Wisdom was so generally known, that the
Count de Montbelliard, who had disputed together for their Principality,
referred themselves to him, and the Duke of Wittemberg, for the Determination
of their Differences. And indeed after having Examined into the Rights of Each,
he passed his Judgment, which so pleased those two Brothers that they resolv^d
to Submit to it. It was not only with those two Princes that he passed for
Prudeht, and for a Lover of Justice; His Virtue was known much farther in
Germany, and he daily received Letters, by which he was desired to give his
Opinion upon certain Matters that fell under Debate: He did it immediately, but
without pretending to derive thence a Vanity; far from suffering that his
Advice should be taken for a Sentence, These are my thoughts, Writ he back to
those that had sent him these Letters, you will needs have me give you my
Sentiment, it is for you to judge whether I am now mistaken or not, for that I
often am. God grant I am not so at this time, that so you may receive from my
Councills the Consolation you Expect from them. He was as modest in all things
as he was in that, for whether that he was desired to give a particular Account
of an Action he had been present at, or to say rather, whose Primum Mobile he
had been, or that he was obliged by Reasons that would be needless to specify,
to entertain the Company with Discourse, he never spoke of himself, but in
confounding himself with others. We did such and such things, said he, such a
Regiment did this, or that such an one did by such a motion occasion the Defeat
of the enemies: But he was never heard to say, that it was I, that gave this
Command, who took the Enemies in the flanck, and a thousand other such like
things, which all Generals are wont to attribute to themselves, and which he
might attribute to himself as well as others. But he did not do so when he was
to blame himself, he was the first to tell his own failings, and he often found
out such as no body else had taken notice of; which happened more Especially
when he was to excuse any one: Not a man, said he, is there exempt from
Committing faults, this is what commonly renders us wise, and if there were no
vicious People, Virtue would not be in such Great Admiration. But his Goodness
never appeared more than when any one had done something in War for which he
might be blamed; to prevent the Reproaches that might be made him, he told
every one a thousand things in his favor: it is none of his fault, added he, if
he has been unprosperous, and if all People that have been beaten were to be
slighted, it is long ago that I should have been of no Account. Do You not
remember what befell me at Mariendal, and what happens to me still daily;
believe me, the Worthyest Persons are subject to such like Adventures, and for
this do I not esteem a man the less. However to furnish him with the
opportunities to repair his Reputation, he sent him back to Warfare till he had
gained some Advaintage, and then there needed no other Trumpet than the
Viscount to proclaim it. Did not I tell you, said he, that he was a Brave man,
and that he would not be long without having his Revenge; I am seldom mistaken
in the Judgment I pass of a Person, and I ever thought he did not want either
Courage or Conduct. This Carriage got him to that degree the Affection of the
Officers and Soldiers, that they all began to call him their Father; and in
effect they bore him as much kindness and respect as if he had been really so.
He did the like on his part, that is to say, he loved them as his own Children;
And indeed he never had any greater joy than when he had th'opportunity of
procuring any one's Advancement. We are only in the World, said he, to do good
to one another; and those to whom God has given some Credit, ought t'employ it
only in procuring th'Establishment of those who stand in need of their
Protection. But he did not content himself with saying it, he did it also as he
said it, for then he did uot mind passing for troublesome with the Minister,
and he who durst not speak in behalf of his own Interests, never let him rest
when it required his promoting of others. Though the King was still pretty Young,
yet as he was of a sharp understanding, he had so much respect for the Virtue
of this Great Captain, that it seemed as if only he in his Kingdom was worthy
of his esteem; His Majesty discourst him sometimes for whole hours together,
which made the Cardinal seem a little uneasy: But she Viscount de Turenne who
delighted in cultivating the Sentiments of this Young Prince, that was entirely
inclin^d to Virtue, not taking notice that he minded it, troubled his head
little with having his Friendship, provided he had that of his Master. For this
Reason did he spend so many Winter Quarters at a distance from the Court; for
the Cardinal under Color of the least things, sent him Order not to leave the
Frontier, which still discriminated him from the other Geneneralls, who exposed
themselves for the most part only to share the deeper in the favor of that
Minister. In the mean while the Year 1655. began, and as the Enemies had
Block'd-up Quesnoy to all Intents, and that the Garrison began to be
distressed, the Viscount de Turenne resolved to lay open the Passes. For this
purpose he divided his Troops into several little Bodies, as if he had had
several Designs, and causing them to March some one way, others another, the
Marquis de Castlenau, a Lieutenant General surpised Five Hundred men that were
in the Bas Catelet, and having put them to the Sword, he set fire to the four
Corners and to the Heart of the Town. This exploit having made the Enemies
afraid that the Viscount de Turenne had some Design on the places on that side,
they made use of the Troops that were employed in the Blocade of Quesnoy: But
they were hardly got to the Rendezvouze, when this General caused a Convoy to
pass he had ready, and revictuall'd the Town. Holding it then in safety, he
Rendezvouz'd all his Forces, and Marched against Landraecies: As he had once
already taken this Town, he knew both it is Strength and Weakness, which much
facilitated to him his Enterprise, joined to this that the Kings Presence, who
was come into his Camp so animated the Soldiers, that they contemned all sorts
of Danger. The Besieged being in hopes of a speedy Succors would never hear
talk of Surrendering, though the King Summoned 'em sundry times: but the Spaniards
having not been able to raise Forces sufficient for raising the Siege, they saw
themselves at length obliged to capitulate The King after his wonted rate
showed an extreme Confidence in the Viscount de Turenne, and would by all means
have him upon every occasion give him a Reason for what he did. This pleased
this General more than it did Cardinal Mazarin, who would very willingly have
brought up his Majesty like a Private Person, and not like a King, that was
called to the Government of the Noblest Kingdom in all Christendom; He took him
off most commonly from those Conversations, under pretext of some other
Affairs; but the King did not leave them without regret, and though the Queen his
Mother had fostered him up in a great Complaisance for this Minister, he could
not so well curb his Inclinations, but that he manifested the Violence he did
him. Thus did Mazarin endeavor to make a weak King, that he might still secure
to himself the Administration of his Dominions. But the Advantages of Nature
were so great in this Prince, that he had no need of Education, and we see in
his Majesty one of the Greatest Kings that ever wore the Crown, and yet,
perhaps, the Worst Educated. This was a Subject of Admiration for the Viscount
de Turenne: However without minding what this Minister could say to the matter,
he instructed the King in what he had a mind to know, and gave him Lessons of
War, wherein he wonderfully delighted. Mazarin durst not tell him openly his
thoughts of this Carriage; but sometimes without making semblance of any thing,
he told him, that the King was yet too Young, to have confided in him things of
Consequence, and that in the Post he was it became him to keep all Secret. Thus
did he conceal under the pretext of Mystery, Motions full of Ambition, and
perchance of Jealousy; for in short this great familiarity of the King's with
the Viscount de Turenne displeased him extremely, and he feared least the
Viscount should get that Ascendant over his Majestys mind, as that he should
not be able to drive him thence. For this Reason had he for some Years last
past Associated the Marshall de la Ferte with him in the Command of the
Forces. But the Difference of their Humors had produced an effect quite
contrary to what he had expected: The King being a Lover of Mildness and Lenity
could not wont himself to the Violences of that Marshall, who was ever seen in
Anger even at his up-rising. In the mean while the Cardinal to lessen the Glory
that might redound to the Viscount de Turenne for so many happy Successes, laid
a part of them to the Other, and the Generality to please this Minister,
endeavored to conferr on him Praises, often without mentioning the Viscount de
Turenne. This Prince smiled in himself, and still continued his old Road, being
well persuaded that many were there that did him Justice: But in short the
Enemies quickly decided the Question, and made appear with whom they most fear
to have to do. After the taking of La drceies, the Army divided into Two. Ths
Viscount de Turenne took one part of it, and the Marshall de la Ferte the
other; the later Marched against St. Guilain, the former against Conde. The two
Garrisons were very different. As the Enemies were particularly under
Apprehensions for the later of those two Towns, they had put two Thousand men
into the place and above three Hundred Reformed Officers. The other was nothing
near so well provided. However the Marshall de la Ferte having lost time to no
purpose in trifles, the Enemies Marched against him, and obliged him to
Retreat. He returned and joined again the Viscount de Turenne's Army, who had
been more cautious, and directed his Measures better, so as that the Enemies
drawing near, durst not undertake to force his Lines. Having thus had time to
continue his Attacques, he won the Outworks, and forced the Garrison to
Surrender: The Spaniards having lost this Town, made diverse motions to hinder
him from attacquing St. Guilain; but having provided for all the places they
might threaten, he laid Siege to it, and carried it under their Nose. They
endeavored to Revenge themselves on Quesnoy, round which they held diverse
Posts; but the Viscount de Turenne went and Encamped upon the Avenues, and
their Army durst never attempt to open the Passage. So prosperous a Campaign
still augmented his Repute, and if the Cardinal had not still had a Secret
jealousy of him; the King would have heaped on him so many Bounties, as would
have put him into a Condition to Envy no Bodies Fortune. But this Minister told
the King in Private, that it was not conveuient to raise him so high, and that
after having twice sided with Rebels, he was more than rewarded for the
Services he had since performed. The King was not wont to resist the Cardinals
Wills; thus things stopped there, though there was a great deal of difference
between his Actions, and those of the other Captains that Commanded the Armies:
In effect, People observed sundry faults they committed during this Campaign;
and yet all the Rewards were for them. The Prince of Conti, who was in
Catalonia, after having taken Cepdaquiers that incommoded the City o^ Roses,
instead of quickly passing the Mountains, trifl'd away his time in Debauchery
with the Duke of Mercoeur, his Brother-in-Law, who was arrived upon the Coast
with the French Fleet, so as that he gave the Enemies time to Assemble, on whom
he might have made considerable Conquests. For the Cardinal to take away a
thousand Distasts that People endeavored to give him of his Alliance, had done
all he had been able to put him in a Capacity of acquiring Honor: But all this
was bounded in taking Castillon and Solsonne, two sorry Places, but whose
Conquest was Highly Boasted among those who knew not what they were, for the
offering Incense to the Cardinal. This gave him Occasion to shed his Bounties
upon this Prince, who was in no good Condition to enjoy them; for in the Middle
of the Campaign he was forced to leave the Army, to go seek for Remedy to a
Malady that was become too inveterate to be cured. The Count de Merinville had
the Command of the Army after his Departure, and made the Spaniards raise the
Siege of Solsonne, which they thought to have recovered: But the same
Misfortune befell him before Bergues, which they had taken, and he would have
retaken from them; Insomuch that neither side had any great reason to Vaunt of
its Great Successes. Much the same thing was it in Italy, where if we had the
Advantage of Causing the Siege of Reggio to be raised, which the Governor of
the Milanez had laid out of spite to the Duke of Modena, our Ally, We had
afterward the vexation of discamping from before Pavia, whither we marched
under the Orders of that Duke, and under those of Prince Thomas: As diverse
faults had been noted in the Conduct of all those Generals, it was a Subject of
enhancing the Viscount de Turenne's Glory, who knew so well how to digest his
Entirprizes, that without some great Misfortune, he was sure of bringing them
about. However though his friends made use of all these things for matter in his
Praise, it was not needful to go seek it so far of, and there needed only to
make reflection upon what he daily did, to judge that few there were like him:
For without mentioning Military Actions, he gave every moment Occasion to
admire his Virtue; this was principally manifested in point of Interest, which
may be said to be the touchstone of Men, since the truth is, few there are but
show Weakness upon this Chapter. As his Charge gave him the Power of
Establishing Safe-Guards, this was a sure means of making himself Rich, and the
Marshall de la Ferte set him the Example, deriving thence daily three or four
hundred Crowns; for he sent Troupers thither, to whom he gave a Crown of the
five or six he Exacted of each Place, and the Number produced him a vast
Revenue. The Viscount de Turenne did not want People that advised him to do the
like, Especially those that had the management of his Expenses, who
remonstrated to him, that this was a Succors ready at hand for a thousand
things that were wanting in his family. But the Prince was ever so far from
being prevailed with to be tampering in so Villainous a Commerce, that he chid
those very much that made him the Proposal, and left those sorts of Profits,
one while to his Captain of the Guards, and another to Officers that needed it.
Not a man could refrain admiring a Generosity, that had no Example among the
Generals; but he said when he was spoke to upon the point, that he did not
believe they did all that was imputed to them, and that he would lay a Wager
the same thing was said of him, though the truth was he was never reckoned in
that Number. Thus did he endeavor to excuse others for the avoiding the
Praises People would have conferred on him, and he evaded them in such manner,
that often he prevented them by Discourses as would have made it believed he
had been in Anger, if the reason of his speaking so had not been known. However
to hinder any one from being so hardy as to give him the like vexation, he was
wont to say, there was nothing savored more of the Flatterer, than a man that
pretended to commend another in his Presence; That it was with them as with
those Women, who after having told one another a Thousand obliging things, are
no sooner at a distance from one another, than that they bespatter one another
as much as possibly they can. However in the time that this Prince was the most
esteemed, it wanted little, but that an unexpected Death had cropped him in the
flower of his Age. As he was extremely wearied in the foregoing Compagn, he was
hardly arrived at Paris but that he fell ill, and having been obliged to keep
his Bed, People were afraid that his sickness might have Dangerous
Consequences, for he had a fierce feavour with Redoublings; Insomuch that the
Physicians did not tell their Opinions. The King sent twice a day to enquire
how he did, as well as most of the Grandees; But the Cardinal in this Occasion
laying aside the jealousy he bore him, by reason of the Interest of the
Kingdom, paid him not only diverse visits, but brought him also some
Medicaments, which he had been told to be wonderfully effectual against his
Distemper. In a word the Viscount de Turenne Escaping more happily than the
World expected, he returned his visits as soon as he was in a Condition of
going abroad, and being daily more and more confirmed in his health, nothing
any longer hindered him from repairing to the frontiere, but the Marriage of
Mademoiselle de Bouillon, Courted by the Duke of Elbaeufi's Eldest Son. This
Prince was of so Illustrious a family, that all the kindred agreed immediately
to the Match: For besides this he had a great Estate, and might also pretend to
some considerable Settlement at Court: but the Viscount de Turenne, seeing
farther than Others, opposed it Clandestinely, and Remonstrated to Madam de
Bouillon, that this Prince having used his first Wife Ill, whom he had kicked
when with Child, of which she died, 'twas exposing her Daughter to the like
treatment; that he was addicted to Wine and Women, Qualities not only unworthy
a Person of his Rank, but all so to a little Catamitism; that besides he had a
Son by his first Bed, who by Birthright would have all his Father's Estates and
Offices; that thus it would be rendering the Children that should come of her
Daughter and him so Unhappy* that they would uot have wherewithal to uphold
the Luster of their House; that it would be better to think of providing for
her in Germany, where they had already some Allyances, and where Enough other
Matches might be found; that she ought not to consider that she distanc'd her
self from her by doing this, that it were much better for her Daughter to be
happy far off, than unhappy at her Door; that the true kindness of a mother
consisted in procuring her Children's felicity and not her own; and that in
brief any farther thoughts of this Match were steering the quite Contrary
Course. Madam de Bouillon in all things relied very much on the Viscount de
Turenne, but would not refer her self to him at this time, for she imagined it
would be the same thing to her to have her Daughter Dead, as have her married
so remote; However this was not the only Impediment; She was Extremely Wedded
to her Religion, and afraid that if ever her Daughter went into Germany, she
might with the air of the Country have instilled into her the Sentiments of her
Ancestors, that had been all Protestants. Thus the Viscount de Turenne having
not been able to dissuade her, was obliged to consent as well as Others to this
Marriage, which was performed in the presence of the King and Queen Mother, and
of all the Court, their Majesty's meaning thareby to testify to the Viscount de
Turenne, the Consideration they had for a Person of so near Relation. This
Match was quickly attended with a great ^ecundity, whereas the Viscount de
Turenne was not Blessed with any Children; which was the only Subject of
trouble in his Marriage, for he had otherwise a Wife that loved him infinitely,
and was an Example of Virtue: He resigned himself however to the Will of God,
and through this want he looked on his Brother's Sons as if they had been his
own; He had also other Nephews, but as they were his Sisters Sons and did not
bear his Name, he made some sort of difference between 'em: Not but that he
strove to give 'em testimonys of his kindness in all Occasions, and principally
to the Counts de Duras and de Lorge, who had great need of it. For they
followed the Prince of Conde's Party, wherein they were so Engaged, that they
had all imaginable trouble to get out of it. However the Viscount de Turenne
lost no time in his endeavors to disentangle them thence, and having at length
effected his purposes, he obtained the King's leave for their Kissing his
Majestics hand; After that, he sent them to serve in Italy, for as they were
Young, he thought it not fitting that they should be exposed to the Jealousy
and Suspicions that might arise, if they staid in the Neighborhood of a Prince
they esteemed, and with whom they had newly broke as a man may say against
their Wills. In the mean while the Campagn drew near, and that having obliged
him to leave Paris, at a time when all his Family was in joy for the Match
beforementioned, he repaired to Flanders whither all the Troops directed their
March. We had newly made a strict Alliance with Cromwell, who after the most
Enormous Crime that had been ever heard of in the world, had found the Secret
to become formidable not only to the English, but also the neighboring
Princes. In virtue of this Alliance he was to give us Succors by Sea and Land,
and we were Engaged to share with him the Conquests we might make. These
Conventions amazed the Spaniards; this, notwithstanding, they omitted nothing
of what might contribute to their Defense, and Don Juan of Austria being newly
arrived in the Low-Countrys, showed himself indefatigable, after the Prince of
Conde's example, who was on Horseback Day and Night: they had in the Winter
missed of the City of St. Guilain, which rendered us a little haughty, not to
say insolent: but fortune prepared them matter of Consolation, which we were
far from distrusting. I said before that the Marschal de la Ferte had great
jealosie of the Viscount de Turenne, this had been already adverse to the Kings
Service in Sundry Occasions: But the Cardinal out of I know not what Policy
being not willing to Separate them, they had orders to march jointly against
Valenciennes, one of the strongest Towns in all the Low Countries, but whose
out-work were not in an overgood Condition: They worked on 'em with great
Application, yet if we had made right use of the Conjunction, it might have
been taken without Difficulty, before they had put it into a Condition. But the
Marschal de la Ferte laboring under an Indisposition, on purpose staid the
forces that were under his Command, for fear the Viscount de Turenne might
without him accomplish that enterprise. Being somewhat recovered of his health,
he came before the place which the Viscount de Turenne had already invested,
and where there arose between 'em new subjects of Division; for after they had
opened their Trenches, and pushed on their Works very far, the Viscount de
Turenne having signified to him to have a Care of his Quarters, that were
Separated from his by a Canal, which was impossible to fill, and on which there
were Bridges for the having Communication together, he took this advertisement
as an Injury, and refused to receive four or five Regiments of Re-inforcement
which the Viscount offered him for his Security. The Viscount de Turenne having
notice by his Spies, that he was to be attacked in the Night, did not desist
for this forced Refusal, and having sent him Word that the Kings Service
required his making him once more the same Offers, he Expected his Answer; but
that having been no more favorable to him than the former, he stood upon his
own Guard and left the other to do as he pleased. The Night being come, the
Enemies did not fail of approaching under the Conduct of the Prince of Conde
and of Don Juan, who had used their utmost Contrivances for the Relief of so
considerable a Place, and thinking to have a better hand over the Marshall de
la Ferte than of the Viscount de Turenne, they attacked his Lines with so much
Vigor, that they were forced after a Conflict but meanly disputed. The most
part endeavored to escape over to the Viscount de Turenne's side; But the
Waters, which the Enemies had caused to disgorge on purpose, after having
ruined some Bridges upon the Dyke, and the others were so over-burden'd by the
great Numbers of men that fled away, that some of 'em broke. The Viscount de
Turenne caused Men to march immediately that Way-wards to hinder the Enemies
from mingling among the Runaways; but this being a difficult matter to
accomplish by reason of the darkness and Disorder, he caused the remaining
Bridge, to be broke down, and thereby took away all hopes of safety from the
Vanquished: After this it was nothing but a Slaughter, many were drowned in the
Dyke in endeavoring to avoid perishing by the hand of the Enemies, the Others
were killed fighting, and the rest were taken Prisoners, and among others the
Maresehal de la Ferte, who was led to Rocroy; the Wagons, Tents, and Baggages
were the Booty of the Conquerours: But meaning to push on their Victory
further, they endeavored to repair the Bridge, to Pursue the Viscount de
Turenne in his retreat to Quesnoy. In the mean while, having Seized on an
advantageous Post, he staid in Battalia for the Fugitives, and there came a
much greater Number than could be Expected, considering the Mighty Disorder
that had been; But the Night had often confounded a Frenchman with a Spaniard,
and the later for fear of destroying a friend had often spar^d an Enemy. This
Unhappy Success amazed the Court, that gloried a little too much before in all
the advantages it had gained; However, putting a great Confidence in the
Viscount de Turenne's Prudence and Conduct, he had sent him a re-inforcement of
some Troops, with which he durst not only keep the Field, but likewise perform
Enterprises. In effect, seeing that the Enemies had Attacqu'd St. Guilain, he
went and took La Capelle, and then marched to give them Battle. The Enemies
judged it not convenient to stay his Coming, and having raised the Siege he
revictuall'd the Town. The Court having been afraid of some new Blow, was
strangely Surpised at this Wonderful Performance, and the Cardinal thinking
he had too great an Obligation to the Viscount de Turenne to remain without
giving him Instances of his Acknowledgment; promised him many things. But this
Prince placing all his Ambition in serving well the King, demanded no other
Recompense but that he might never more be coupl'd with the Marshall de la
Ferte, which was granted him. This Year passed thus in Flanders with a fortune
Intermixed with Good and bad, while that in Catalonia we stood upon the
Defensive, and that in Italy we beleaguered Valence. This Siege was long and
doubtful, for the Enemies having Assembled all their forces, and drawing near
our Lines, thought to put us under the Constraint of raising it, after having
got some succors into the Town; but the Duke of Modena commanding our Army,
obstinately persevering notwithstanding this Unhappy success, minded his
Business more narrowly, and having shut up the Passes better than he had
before, he at length reduced the Beseig'd to so great an Extremity, that they
were obliged to capitulate. This was a great Mortification for the Spaniards,
who began to tremble for the Land of Milan, that had been so successfully set
upon. In the Interim they endeavored to revenge themselves on Roses, which we
still held in Catalonia; but we so well broak all their Measures, that they
durst not come nearer than two Leagues from the Town: All these Prosperities
made the Cardinal forget the vexation he had had for the Marshall de la
Ferte's Defeat. But fortune being willing to put him in mind that he should be
Exposed when she pleased to her Caprices, made him feel a New Afliction by the
loss of Madam de Mercoeur his Niece after some few days illness. This Grief,
being particularly only to his family, was followed by another wherein the
Public shared, which was the taking of Saint Guilain, of which the Spaniards
made themselves Masters, what ever Precautions were used on our side. Nay, and
Suddenly after this too we under went a New Disgrace, which was the raising
the Siege of Cambray, whither the Viscount de Turenne had marched with all his
forces. This Place, whose Conquest was of such importance to the repose of
Picardy, having only a Weak Garrison, the Viscount de Turenne fancied a more
propitious time could not be taken for the reducing it to Obedience; for which
reason he made haste to invest it, and to work upon the Lines of
Circumvallation; But Fortune, that breaks, when she pleases, the justest
measures, popt the Prince of Conde in his way, which disappointed his
Enterprise. The Prince, without foreseeing this Siege, had appointed his Horse
to Rendezvouve near K^urain, to see what Condition it was in, before it was
commanded to leave its Winter Quarters: As he was marching to this Rendezvouze,
attended only by some Servants, Chance made him meet with a Man, whom the
Governor of Cambray sent to Bruxelles to give notice of his being Besieged,
and the Person having told him the News, which he would hardly believe at
first, he caused his Horse forthwith to march, though they had neither
Provisions, nor Equipages, they all hoping to return to their Quarters after
the Review; and having bated them on the Way, and taken a Guide to pass the
Wood, he came at Night within a Musket Shot of the Viscount de Turenne, who had
not yet finished his Lines of Circumvallation. Thus the way being all Smooth, he
passed without any Obstacle, and marched very close, until that having been
discovered by some Squadrons that marched against him with Sword in hand, they
fell just upon that his Highness led, where were most of his Servants, and
having routed it, several were taken, so as that he would have ran a risque of
falling into the Enemies hands, could they have known him: But scaping by
favor of the Night, he joined his Other Squadrons that were advanced toward
the Town. Thus Cambray having been relieved by a throw of Hazard, the Viscount
de Turenne's part was now to retreat; for though he had not lost a man, yet as
the Weakness of the Garrison was his invitation to the undertaking that siege,
it required his altering his Conduct. Things having thus Changed their Aspect,
this did not hinder the Court from thinking of Other Conquests, and that of
Montmedy being important, the Marshall de la Ferte received orders to march
thither, and the Viscount de Turenne to oppose it is Relief: the Enemies seeing
him Encamped between Montmedy and them, and a difficult task to make their way
through him, made a fluster as if they aimed at all Our Places so to get him
leave his Posts. But the Viscount de Turenne contenting himself with providing
for those that were threatened, did not distance himself in such manner as to be
Cut Off. Having thus kept the Enemies in Breath, they marched toward
Charlemont where they had a Passage upon the Meuse, which obliged the Viscount
de Turenne to throw himself into the Lines of Montmedy with a Detachment. The
Marquis de Castlenau, Lieutenant General, remained in the mean while with the
rest of our Army to have an Eye to and ward our Places, so as that the Enemies
having no hopes on that side, assembled a flying Camp of the Garrisons of
Dunkirk and other the Towns bordering upon the sea, and after having made a
show one while of falling upon Ardres, another upon Bethune, all of a Sudden
they poured upon Calice, whose Garrison had been Weakened to provide for another
side. They at the very first carried the Lower Town, by having met with small
Opposition in the first surprise; but upon their assaulting the Upper Town,
they were vigorously repulsed, after having nevertheless gained some petty
Advantage as might augment their hopes. The Enemies having thus missed their
Stroke, resolved to Enter France, hoping that this wou^d oblige us to raise the
Siege of Montmedy: But the Viscount de Turenne drawing near the Sum, they
were afraid least he might reposs that River; so as that after having made an
Inroad into le Santerre, they retreated in all haste. All these Motions gave
the Marshall de la Ferte time to continue his Assaults, and having won all the
Outworks, those of Montmedy Surrendered, after having obtained an Honorable
Capitulation. The Viscount de Turenne being then no longer obliged to observe
the Enemies, marched against Saint Venant, which made them believe they should
have time to take Ardres. And indeed the Viscount de Turenne sound much more
Difficulty than he expected in his Enterprise, not however through the Resistance
of the Besieg^d, but because the Commissary of the Army had not Money
wherewithal to further the Works: Seeing this, he caused his Plate to be cut
in pieces to much about the worth of a Crown, and distributed it among the
Soldiers in due Proportion. Having thus remedied that Obstacle he marched
against the Enemies, who upon the Tidings of his Coming raised the siege of
Ardres; but they having seized on certain Posts by which he was to file off,
they attacked his Rear, and after having put it to some Disorder, they
plundered several Wagons, part of which were nevertheless recovered. This
Exploit having not however been capable to comfort them for the losses they
daily under went, they beleaguered Mardyk after having received some
Reinforcements; But this Enterprise speeding them no better than the former,
they retired without Showing themselves any more that Campaign. The Viscount de
Turenne having them no longer upon his hands, fell to fortifying Saint Venant
and Bourbourg, the Enemies having been so imprudent as to abandon this last
Place; for by the means of those two Posts he pretended to shut up Dunkirk in
such manner, as to hinder any thing from entering that fastness. However in the
Midst of so many happy Events he was not Exempt from feeling the lashes of
fortune. Madam de Bouillon, a Princess extremly Virtuous and very necessary to
his family, dying, he saw himself Encharg'd with his Nephews, the Eldest of
whom was not yet in his Sixteenth year; He endeavored to bring 'em up in
Virtue, and having shown them by his own Example, that they should less apply
themselves to the heaping up Riches than to the acquiring a good Reputation,
they improved so well by his Lessons, that they gave him all kind of Content.

Our Successes in Italy had not been so propitious as in Flanders. The Prince
of Conti after having tasted repose was grown as weary of that as he had been
of War, and out of a Genius that it was impossible to fix, he had demanded the
Command of the Army in Italy, which had displeased the Duke of Modena. The
Spaniards hoped that this Division would the more facilitate to them their
recovering of Valence, and they had Blocked it up so close, that they expected
necessity would make it fall into their hands without their striking a blow.
The Marquis de Vallavoir, Commanding in this place, never ceased representing
to these two Princes the want he labored under of all things; which made them
Prorogue their Differences to give him Succors. Good luck having seconded
their Enterprise, they opened a Pass, and having put in two Convoys, their
Misunderstanding renewed as before. The Town being nevertheless Secured by this
means, they were ashamed to have it said that with so considerable an Army as
that they had, they lay still without any Performances; For which reason they
went and beleaguered Alexandria, but their Dissension still more and more
augmenting, things spun out into such a ^^^g^n, that the Enemies had time to
prepare for it is Relief. Whereupon they came with an Army of Twelve Thousand
Men and approaching the Lines, they placed Twelve piece, of Canon up(...) Hill,
which occasioned great Disorder; After this Marching in Battalia, they so (...)
Men, who were already terrified by the S(...)r the Canon had made, that they
chose rather to raise the Siege, than to expose themselves what might possibly
be the Issue of the Engagement. Having made such a scandalous Retreat* the
Enemies Block'd-up Valence anew, being not strong though to attacque it by main
Force. In truth they had sent a great part of their Troops into Portugal, where
the War was re-inflam'd after some Cessations that had interrupted the
Hostilities: This Diversion did likewise incapacitate them from undertaking any
thing considerable in Catalonia, where the War was but just kept alive, without
any great Advantage on either side, for while one side took a Castle the
adverse took another; and thus passed the Campagn, none but the People
suffering, who had already suffered sufficiently by so long a War. The Two
Crowns could not be otherwise than weary, as well as their Subjects, for Misery
had raised Revolts in Spain as well as in France, which did but too much
manifest the need there was of Peace. The Cardinal had already (a Year or two
past) caused some Proposals to be made to Don Antonio ^imentel, at his passing
through Paris in his return from Sueden, where he had been the Ambassador of
Spain; but they had been ill received at Madrid, because at the same time was
proposed the King's Marriage wi^h the Infanta of Spain, the Presumptive Heiress
of the Crown. Thus the Council of his Catholic Majesty had judged with some
sort of Reason, that all the Offers that were made of causing the King to
renounce her Succession, would hold good no further than this Young Prince
should please, since by the Laws Established in his Kingdom he was acquitted
whenever so minded of what was to his Prejudice. These things putting thus an
Impediment to the Peace, the King resolved to push on his Conquests in
Flanders, and to oblige the Viscount de Turenne to serve him still with the
more Affection, he gave the Charge of Lord High Chamberlain to the Duke of
Bouillon, for which however the Duke of Guise, that had it before, had some sort
of Compensation. After the Viscount de Turenne had thanked the King, and taken
his leave of him, he repaired to the head of his Army that assembled upon the
frontier of Boulonnois, and being entered into the Country he caused Cassel to
be attacked, that was guarded by five hundred Men; Ours would not receive them
otherwise than at Discretion, after which the Army approached Dunkirk, which
was invested by four thousand Horse. The English on their part, according to
the Convention before mentioned, shut up the Passages of the sea with a Good
Fleet; and the Viscount de Turenne Expecting the Enemies would spare nothing to
relieve a Place of This Consequence, made have to press on his Works and
Attacks. But the Garrison being good, retarded both by it is saillies, at length
the Enemies had time to take the field. The Marshall d'Hocquincourt had
Exposed their Party, upon some affront he pretended to have received from the
Cardinal, and of which having demanded Reparation without having been able to
obtain it, he had run to that Extremity, in hopes of meeting with an Occasion
to Wreak his Revenge. As he was a Soldier, he meant to Signalize his Coming by
some Action that might make him noted by both Parties. Whereupon he advanced to
view us, but having been wounded at the same time with a Musket Shot, his hopes
ended two hours after with his Life. His Disaster was a fatal Presage for those
of his Party, but as Brave Men are not startled at such like things, the Prince
of Conde and Don Juan pursued their enterprise. The Viscount de Turenne to
spare them the pains of coming to attacque his Lines, marched out of them at
the Head of his Army, leaving however in the Trenches as many men as were
necessary to guard them; They drew-up in Battalia, as soon as they were out,
and the Enemies having done the like, the Battle began very obstinately on both
sides: But the Enemies having been overwheIm'd by numbers, gave ground by
little and little; after this their Ranks growing still more and more thin, the
Disorder was still the Greater; Insomuch that they were put totally to slight.
None but the Prince of Conde, who at the head of some Squadrous he had rallied,
and where all those Brave men placed themselves, that followed his fortune,
that endeavored to make any further Resistance: But the most part having been
either Killed or taken Prisoners, he was very happy in having a good Horse to
save himself. The Victory could not be more signal than it was for us, the
Enemies fled away 'till Night, without facing about, and far from being in a
Condition of returning to Dunkirk, they could hardly bring six thousand men
together all the Rest of the Campaign. After the Viscount de Turenne had given
the Orders necessary for the pursuing them, he returned into his Lines, where
he was no sooner come, but that he made known the Success of the Battle to the
Besieged, that so they might take their Measures accordingly. They pretended
not to be in any wise daunted, and, in Effect, made several Sallyes more: But
the Viscount de Turenne having shut 'em up by little and little, and taken all
their Outworks, at length he rendered himself Master of the Town by
Composition. This Conquest would have occasioned Great joy through all the
Kindgom, if we had not been bound by the Treaty made with the English to put it
into their hands. However in a few days after, we were in no Condition to make
that Reflection, by an Accident of a far greater Moment. The King, whose
Inclination was all Warlike, being not to be prevailed with for two or three
Years last past, to abstain from repairing into his Armies, he came during this
Campaign, to visit the Fort of Mardyk, an Unhealthfull hole of it self, but
whose Infection was still the Greater through the Garrisons way of Living, that
Eating only Fruits and filthy things, was for the most part sick. However this
Prince being Young, and not knowing the Danger, must notwithstanding needs stop
there, that he might see All, and having taken-in the Ill Air, he returned to
Calice with the Sun on his head, which complicated his misfortune. Whereupon he
began to undergo great pains, but having concealed his Malady for two days, for
fear they should oblige him to keep his Bed, at last on the third he found
himself so weak that he could no longer dissemble it, on the, fourth he was
still worse, which alarmed the Court and especially the Cardinal, who saw his
Fortune lost, if this Young Prince happened to dye; for though his Majesty had a
Brother, he could not promise himself that he should have his favor as he had
the Kings. The Queen Mother was also under an Affliction that is beyond
expression: But it was quite another thing at some days end, for it was not
only believed he could never escape, but the very Curtains were drawn, the
Physicians having declared him Dead. Some Courtiers being deceived by these
words, went to pay their Homages to the Duke of Anjou his Brother, but they had
occasion to rue it, for as those sorts of things are rarely pardoned, the King
looked on them with an ill eye, when he had recovered his health. In the mean
while, the Queen never leaving him day or night, seeing he was abandoned by his
Physicians, caused one to come from Abbeville, whom she had heard well spoken
off, and he having given him two Potions of Emetique wine being not yet in use
at that time, freed him from his illness to the Courtiers great Satisfaction,
whose hearts this Young Prince had won by manners altogether Engaging. They
alone did not rejoice at this happy Success, the People shared in it as deeply
as became them, and gave a thousand testimonies of their gladness. But not a
man had more joy than the Viscount de Turenne, who had often discourst the
King, and discovered in his Conversation many great things, which Others knew
not so well as he; yet as he could not testify it to him orally, he testified
it to him by Letters, to which the King made a most obliging Answer, signifying
to him among other things, that what he daily performed for his Service,
persuaded him sufficiently of his good will, without its being necessary for
his confirming it to him by Letters. This having given him still the more
desire to Sacrifice himself for his Majesty, he pursued his Conquests, which be
still augmented with that of Bergues, Furnes, and Dixmuyden: But when he was
preparing to push things further, several Seditions broke out in the Provinces
of France; which occasioned the sending Troops thither: As there were no
considerable Persons that buoy'd-up the Rebels, they were quickly reduced to
Obedience by the punishment of some; Bonneson was Beheaded, some others were
hanged; and all this having required only the time of going and coming, there
remained still enough to terminate this Campaign, as it had been begun. Whereupon
Orders were dispatched to the Marshall de la Ferte, to Advance with the Troops
that had Wintered in his Government, and the Viscount de Terenne having
promised to make head against the Enemies, La Ferte Besieged Gravelines, which
we had lost again in the time of our Civil Wars. The Marshall de la Ferte
having accomplished this Enterprise, the Viscount de Turenne took Oudenarde, and
Menin, after which he marched against City of Ypres. The Prince de Ligne, who
Commanded the Spanish Cavalry, knowing we were coming to invest it, quitted the
Neighborhood of that Place, under which he was Encamped, and advanced as far
as a Defile, where he not only disputed the pass, but also repulsed two or
three thousand House: The Viscount de Turenne was strangely amazed to see 'em
come back in Disorder, and having Commanded the Count de Roye to march with the
Regiment Royale Aranger, of which he was Colonel, he retrieved the Others
Reputation, and obliged the Prince de Ligne to retreat; whereupon the Place
having been invested by this Count, who was the Viscount de Turenne's Nephew,
the Siege was quickly formed, and had the Success as so many Others had had.
This startled the Spaniards, who saw so many good Towns wrested out of their
hands, without being able to use any Prevention; for as their Dominions are
divided from one another, the Succors they might draw thence, were reduced to
a small matter, before they arrived where they were necessary. In the mean
while, little more prosperous were they in Italy, where the Neighborhood of so
many Principalities and Kingdoms, seemed, to shelter them from such like
Disgraces, for they had not been wanting to lose also that Campaign, the City
of Trin, which they had kept at least Six or Seven Years, that is to say since
our Domestique Divisions had rendered our Allys unprovided of all sort of
Defense. They endeavored to repair this Loss by the taking of Valence, which
they pretended to Surprise by Scalado; but they were so well repelled, that
they lost three or four hundred men in that Action: Besides this we took
Mortare; and having made Inroads as far as the Gates of Milan, the Inhabitants
of that Town thought themselves irrecoverably lost, though the Spaniards had put
their Principal Forces into that Pl^ce. We were not altogether so Successful
in Catalonia, where having Beleaguered Campredon, we were compelled to raise
the Siege: However as this was a small matter in Comparison of what had
happened in Flanders and Italy, all the Neighboring Potentates were
wonderfully Surpised to see so great an Alteration in the Spanish Monarchy,
which gave, as I may say, the Law to all Europe, not above fifteen or sixteen
years before. Yet it self was startled, and as it saw no Remedy, i^ held diverse
Councels to stop the Course of our good fortune. Many were of Opinion to
conclude the Infanta's Marriage with the King, but the Difficulty mentioned a
little before still subsisted, the King of Spain could not resolve upon it, so as
that recourse was to be had to other means. The Court of France knowing the
Repugnance the Spaniards had to this Match, set their thoughts to work, to
provide for the King on another side, and there being not a more agreeable
Princess in Europe, nor that better suited his Majesty, than the Daughter of the
Duke of Savoy; Her Picture was sent for, which so pleased the King, that he
resolved to go see the Original; whereupon the Court took a Progress to Lion,
whither the Duchess of Savoy repaired with her Children. The Princess of Savoy
did not by her Presence deface the agreeable Ideas the King had formed of her,
and as he was susceptible of Amorous Impressions, he was in a great Disposition
to Love her; when the Spaniards, seeing the War Eternal, if this Match came to
be consummated, sent Pimentel to Lions to break it off. His coming Extremely
pleased the Queen Mother, who above all this wished that the King her Son might
not Engage in any Alliance with any other than the Infanta of Spain; Mr. de
Lionne was commissionated to Conferr with him, and these two Ministers having
agreed most of the points, the rest was remitted to the Discretion of Cardinal
Mazarin, and of Don Lewis de Haro, the two Crowns two Principal Ministers In
the mean while, the Spaniards fearing lest the Rest of Flanders would be ^on in
the following Camp^gne, demanded a Truce, which was gra^^^d them, and the two
Ministers repairing to the Frontier agreed upon what remained ^o regulate;
Insomuch that after a War of so long a (...)ance, the people began to taste the
fruits of Peace. The King knowing that all things were regulated, made
Preparations to go receive his Bride, who was to be brought him as far as the
Entrance of his Dominions. He would needs have the Viscount de Turenne to
attend him in this journey, and sent for him on purpose from the Army, whither
he had sent him to have an Eye to all things: For as in Truces a Surprise is
more particularly to be apprehended, the Viscount de Turenne himself had been
of Opinion to repair to the Army. The King being come to St. Jean de Luz, was
very willing to see the Infanta without making himself known; but the King of
Spain, who would needs conduct his Daughter himself, and had often seen the
Kings Picture, easily knew him; the King being discovered, no longer concealed
himself. The two Kings Embraced with great Cordiality, after which they
presented to one another the Principal Lords of their Court. The Viscount de
Turenne, not advancing one of the first, the King of Spain asked to see him,
saying he was very willing to make his Peace with him, that he franckly
confessed he had often born him an ill will, considering he had been several
times the Cause that he had not Slept heartily; but that since the Peace was
made, he was content to pardon him. The Viscount de Turenne received as became
him these testimonies of Esteem, and this first Interview of the two Kings
being terminated with much Civility on either side, each withdrew his own Ways.
In the mean while, all things were put in readiness to forward the Marriage,
and Don Lewis de Haro, to whom the King had sent his Procuration to Marry the
Infanta, having satisfied this Ceremony, she was put into the King her
Husband's hands, who after having Married her anew in the face of the Church,
returned to Paris, where a Magnificent Entry was prepared for his Majesty. The
Viscount de Turenne did not leave him one step in all this journey, and from
his Goodness he received Sundry takens of Esteem and Acknowledgment; for the
King being not contented with giving him the Charge of Colonel-General of the
Horse, vacated also that of Marshall de Camp General, with which he gratif^'d
the Viscount. The King would have conferred on him many other savours, if he
had not been chilled in those his kind Intentions, by the Aversion he bore
People of the Religion; for which reason he himself proposed to him to turn
Catholic, and made him hope, that in case of Conformity, he would revive the
Charge of Constable in his favor, that had been Suppressed after Lesdiguicre's
Death, who had last possessed it: but after having thanked the King for his
goodness toward him, he desired to be Excused if he could not obey him in this
point, adding that he would not betray his Conscience for all the Riches and
the Honors in the World. The King did not Esteem him the less for this, nor
did any of the Courtiers, knowing the Offers he had slight^d. In the mean
while, the King being come to Paris was received there with an admirable
Magnificence; Every Individual with Emulation striving to testify the Value and
Affection he had for his Majesty, and this Prince began from that time to
attract the Admiration of his People, by the manner of his management of the
Government. But it became quite another thing after the Cardinals Death, which
happened suddenly: For as all Transactions could only be attributed solely to
his Majesty, they plainly saw that nothing but great matters were to be
Expected from this Prince, who from the beginnings gave such great Marks of
Prudence and Wisdom. Both which were principally manifested in the Choice he
made of his Ministers, after he had caused Fouquet the Superintendant of the
Finances, to be Confined; who being become Suspected to his Majesty by the
Memoires the Cardinal had left him, Completed his own Downfall, by an Expense
above the Power of a Subject: For besides his Houses and his Movables, wherein
Profusion equally reigned, he gave the King one Entertainment, that cost him
above fifty thousand Crowns. He was secured at Nants, and the King having
intimation that he had gained many of the Governors of the Places by the means
of his Money, he bid the Viscount de Turenne follow him, that if any thing
happened he might have him ready at hand to serve him with his Counsel, and to
Execute what he should Command: But no Body stirring, though Memoires were found
among his Papers, that justified the Intelligences I have mentioned, the Court
returned to Fountain-Bleau, where the Young Queen had staid with the
Queen Mother. In the mean while, this Superintendants Process was drawn-up; But
the Desire that Colbert, His Successor, in the management of the Finances, had
to destroy him, having made him seek after shameful means to bring that Design
about, this latter Crime made the other appear the more Innocent, so as that
the Judges saved him. In effect, as if Colbert had been afraid of his
justifying himself, he caused his Papers to be taken away from his House of
Saint Mande; but it being the Will of God, that Berier, whom he had Employed in
that business, should leave there, out of Carelessness, a Request that was
Presented to Colbert: This justified the Robbery that Fouquet had Suffered, and
this later alleging it to be impossible for him to make his Defense, since he
was bereaved of the means by taking his Papers from him, he was only condemned
to Banishment, though there was more than needed to put him to Death. Colbert's
favor occasioned his Punishment to be commuted into a perpetual Imprisonment,
wherein he remained till his Death, which did not happen till above twenty
years after: but this may be said to have been for his happyness, for making a
good use of his Prison, he acknowledged his faults, and repented his having
lived as he had done amid Disorder* he composed in his Confinement some Books
of Devotion and Morality, which were published in his Life time, but out of
Modesty would not attribute them to himself. Be it as it will, the long
Penitence he underwent, attracted him the Compassion of the People, and as they
extremely hated Colberts Ministry, they regretted his, and they expressed as
much grief for his Death, as they had expressed joy for his imprisonment.

During these Transactions, the young Queen was brought to Bed of a Son, which
rejoiced all France; All the Grandees complimented the King on this occasion,
and the Viscount de Turenne having acquitted himself of it as well as Others,
the King told him, he should be very glad he would be one day like him, but
that his Religion would be the Cause he could not commit to him the Care of his
Education, which he would have willingly have desired for th'inspiring
Sentiments into him worthy of his Birth. The Viscount de ^urenne did not answer
this new Onset otherwise than with a low Bow: but the King not for this
desisting, was daily attacquing him with the like Discourses; which did not at
all perplex the Viscount de Turenne, for he was still so zealous for his
Religion, that the Offer of a Crown would not have been capable of Making him
Change it. Three or Four years Slipped away in this manner, without any
considerable matter occurring in that State, unless that the War, that had
been Extinguished had like to have been reinflam'd by an Unexpected Accident.
The Count d'Esirades was th'Ambassadour of France at London, and the Baron de
Vatteville that of Spain. In an Entry made by another Ambassador, as it is
usual with those possessed of the Same Dignity, to send their Coaches to such
a Solemnity, the Baron de Vatteville bribed some Englishmen to favor his
Design of getting his to pass before that of the Count d'Estrades. In effect
th'Ambassadour of France his Coach coming up, they cut his Horses Harness, and
while he was setting them again to rights, the Baron de Vatteville's took the
First place, which obliged the other to return Home. As this was a signal
Affront for the Crown, the King made a great noise at this Action, and having
demanded satisfaction for it in Spain, without prevailing, he sent Orders to
his Ambassador at Madrid to return to France, and his Majesty prepared for
War. He held diverse Councils thereupon with the Viscount de Turenne, who
advising him against his own Interests that were to be at the Head of the
Armies, told the King, that it sufficed him his having shown his Resentment
without still pushing things to extremity; that the Spaniards not being in a
State to renew the War, little Appearance would there be, that upon so Unjust a
thing they would expose themselves to the Inconveniences that might happen from
this Rupture; that his opinion was, that they should much rather abandon their
Pretensions, and that a little time would Inform him what Measures were to be
taken. Having thus stopped this Young Princes Courage that hurried him to
Actions of great* Renown, he gave the Spaniards leisure to consider this Action
more warily than they had yet done, so as that after many Deliberations, they
resolved to disown this Business of the Baron de Watteville. The King did not
speak himself content with this satisfaction no more than with the Offers that
were made him to declare that they did not pretend to dispute the Step with
him, he required to have this Declaration given him in Writing; for as
th'Affront had been Public, words seemed not to be sufficient to repair i^.
The Spania^ds, having granted this Satisfaction in hopes of things one day
changing their Aspect, it would be easy to disown this weakness, obstina^ely
persever'd in a Non-Complyance, so as that Matters would have come to the last
extremity, if the King in consideration of his People, whom it was necessary to
ease after so long a War, had not found this expedient; that the Declaration
should be in the presence of all the Foreign Ministers, which was accepted by
the Spaniards. This Affair having been thus pacified, there arose another,
which though it came from quite another side than that of the Spaniards, yet was
not wanting to occasion it to be believed that the King of Spain had a hand in
it by reason of his Concern in preserving the repose of Italy. This Dispute
arose between the Pope and the King, upon the Subject of some Violences, that
had been done to the Duke of Crequi, his Ambassador at Rome by the Pope's
Guards. The King having Reason on his side, and knowing his Strength, did not
consider, as some of his Predecessors had sillyly enough done, whether it was
with the Pope he had to do, and pretended that his Holyness's Dignity did not
exempt him from doing his Majesty Justice: But the Pope, pretending the
Contrary, caused his Army to March into Italy, after having sent his
Amb^ssadour Orders to repair to his Royal Person. The Spaniards, being not
sorry that the King undertook this War that they might have occasion to Create
him Enemies, endeavored to Provoke the Pope against him, and incline to the
Venetians to undertake his Defense: But the Pope wisely considering that the
Spiritual Arms were not sometimes sufficient to resist the Temporal, and that
he would be oppressed before he could be Relieved, he chose to come to an
Accommodation with the King. Wherefore he granted his Majesty, that for a
Reparation of The Offense done to his Ambassador, a Pyramide should be erected
in the Place where the thing happened, that so it might be an Eternal Monument
to Posterity of the Satisfaction he had pretended to give him; but the King
contented himself with having caused it to be Erected, consented some time
after to have it taken down. In the mean while the Kings Honor Augmented
daily, and gradually as he grew in Age, the world discovered new Qualities in
his Majesty, which would have exalted him above all the Princes in Europe, if
he had not suffered himself to be too much led away with Love, and with an
excessive desire of acquiring Honor. He fell in Love with Mademoiselle de la
Valliere, Madam's Maid of Honor, and this Amor made the Young Queen sometimes
pass her time sorrily. After having gratified his fancy on that side, he set
his thoughts to satisfy it on the other, to which he was excited by the Marquis
of Luvoy, a Minister that began to enter into Credit, and has since acquired a
great Authority by his great Services. He was the Son of Monsieur le Tellier
Secretary of State, aforementioned, a Personage that had never abused his
favor, and who in a time when it was difficult to Screen one's self from
hatred, had made many Envyers, but few Enemies. The Marquis de Louvoy who had
the survivance of his Place having much Ambition, thought that the War would be
more favorable to him than the Peace; for which reason without minding the
Renunciation the King had made by his Contract of Marriage, he insinuated into
him the War against the Spaniard, under pretext that the Queen had Right to
diverse Provinces in Flanders, according to a certain Law, which he caused to be
explained in his favor. Thus the War was undertaken upon this Process, to
which the Parties were not Summoned, and Flanders was all on a sudden Invaded,
the King meaning to go thi^her himself. He did not Communicate this Design to
the Viscount de Turenne 'till some few days before his departure, having told
him that he relied upon him for this Expedition, wherein he would follow only
his Council; for though the Prince of Conde returned to Court immediately after
the Peace, the King still kept him at a distance, and had given him some
Subjects of Mortification. The Viscount de Turenne, who had experienced the
King's goodness in sundry Occasions, principally when the point in Agitation
was to Marry the Duke of Bouillon, his Nephew, whom he caused to Marry a
Person, accounted to be of a much higher Birth than she seemed, was overjoyed
to see himself still distinguished in this. However he lost much of his wonted
Gayety, for he had tried one of the heaviest Misfortunes that can befall a man.
He had lost his Wife, after a long tedious sickness: and as he loved her as
much as he was obliged to do by her Virtue, it was impossible to find
Consolation. The King had done all in his Power to alleviate his Grief, what by
testifying to him the share he took therein, or by granting him daily some new
favor; He had made the Count de Duras Duke and Peer in his consideration, and
his Relations and Friends were so well treated, as Created a Jealousy in
others. But as time alone could cure him, all the other Remedies used for that
purpose proved in vain. The King, whose Goodness could not be greater in his
regard, being willing to spare him a Remembrance so sensible to him, discourst
him now only on the approaching Campagn; And having given him wherewithal to
make his Equipage, the Viscount de Turenne took Care to assemble The Army,
whether the King repaired in a few days after with all the Court. This Young
Prince being greedy of fame, would needs have him tell him all things, and as
he shutt himself up with him sometimes sev'n or eight hours together without
admitting any Minister, he was by all looked on as a favorite in a Condition
to do whatever he pleased. The Marquis de Louvoy became jealous, and though the
War gave him still the more access to the King than he commonly had, he was
afraid he might bereave him of his Majesty's kind opinion. The King, the longer
he converst with the Viscount de Turenne, the more he relished his Wit, pressed
him then to accept the Charge of Constable, upon the Conditions he had offered
him; for an Example he cited to him the Duke de Lesdiguicres, who had not
boggl'd to Change Religion upon the like Account: But the Viscount de Turenne
stopped his Majesty's Mouth, with telling him, that he thought himself in the
Right Way; and that if he had another Opinion, he should be very unhappy if he
did not do what he desired.

In the mean while, the Campagn began, or rather the Disorder of the Spaniards,
for properly speaking I cannot call War, what was not attended with any
Defense. Charleroy opened his Gates as soon as we came before the Town. Douay
made but little more resistance, nor Tonrnay, Ath, Courtray and Oudenarde, and
if L'Isle had not held out a little longer, all this Expedition would rather
have had the Appearance of Intelligence rather than of any thing else. All
these Conquests with some Others of less Importance were owing to the Viscount
de Turenne's Prudence and Conduct, while that the Marescal d'Aumont with a
flying Camp took Bergues, Furnes and Dixmuyden, which we had restored to the
Spaniards upon the General Peace. They saw all this without being able to
oppose it; for they could hardly bring five or six thousand men into the field,
with whom Marsin, who had been Excluded the Amnesty upon the Conclusion of the
Peace, attempted the Relief of L'Isle: but not coming near it 'till the Town
was reduced to Extremity, it Surrendered before they had news of one another.
The King then passed through L'Isle to go to Marsin, and surpised him in such
manner as that he thought only of retreating. However as the King had marched
only with one Detachment, he was not only in a Condition to make his Defense,
but also of giving a stroke that might have repaired so Disadvantageous a
Campagn: but thinking he should have to do with the Whole Army, he gave ground,
by which his Rear suffered much. The Spaniards feebleness, was matter of much
thinking to such Potentates as did not love such Neighbors as the French. The
Hollanders, especially, whom the thing more nearly touched than Others, were
alarmed, and not having been able to oblige the King upon their Requests to
leave the Spaniards in Peace, they resolved to Employ Arms to that purpose,
since there was no other way to secure their Quiet. For this purpose they made
a Treaty with England and Sueden, by which these three Powers united themselves
together to save Flanders, which ran a great risque without their Succors.
However as it was none of their Interests to proceed to War, they only put
themselves into a posture of making themselves feared, after having made
considerable warlike Preparations, they signified to the King that they would
declare against whoever would not make Peace. Though this Term was a little less
harsh than another they might have made use off, the King had not the less
resentment against the Hollanders, to whom he imputed more than to Others the
Obstacles that intervened to his Enterprises: However as after so formal a
Declaration it was for him to choose his Course, he promised to lay down Arms,
if the Spaniards for a Compensation for his Pretentions, would leave to him his
Conquests. These Offers appeared harsh to the Spaniards, who gave out that
these Pretentions were only imaginary; but the Other Powers having their
Reasons, as I have newly said, to terminate Matters by mildness, these
proposals of the King were put into Deliberation, and a Convention was held at
Aix-la-Chappelle, where the Spaniards, after their Wonted rate, Spinning out
things into a Length, gave the King time to make New Conquests; He took the
Franche-Comte in Eight days space, not in truth by the force of his Arms but by
the Treachery of the Governor, who had sold it to him, before he left Paris.
The Marquis de Louvois, who as I said before, could not Support Mr. de
Turenne's favor, Employed the Prince of Conde in that Conquest, that by
substituting so famed a Captain in his Room, the King might insensibly lose the
Esteem he had for the Viscount. The Loss of the County not only startled the
Spaniards, but also the Assembly of Aix-la Chapelle; so as that to stop the
Course of so good a fortune, they all determined at length to grant the King
what he had demanded; but he would needs have comprehended in his Conquest,
that which had been newly made, which none agreeing to, the World Expected
things were coming to Extremity, so much the more as that Preparations for War
were made on all sides. However the King making Reflection that it was exposing
himself to strange Consequences; He that had not any Ships, to resist the
English and Hollanders, who were extreme Powerful at Sea, as to expose himself
to a War, whose Success might have been so uncertain. It Is inconceivable how
much Confidence the King put in the Viscount de Turenne. in all those Parleys
of Peace and War; and but that the Interest of the State required that the one
should be preferred before the other, I should say that the Jealousy the
Viscount de Turenne conceived on this account, smoothen'd many Rubbs that
otherwise would have been met with. Be it as it will, never Courtier appeared
so Moderate in his favor as did the Viscount de Turenne, he required not of
the King either the least favor for himself or for his Friends, which
extremely pleased the King, who offered him again several times the Charge of
Constable, on the Conditions he had proposed to him before. But it was for the
Glory of this Great Captain not to Change his Religion in a time when it might
have been thought to have been done out of Interest; and though that one of his
Nephews, who had obtained a Cardinals-Cap from Rome, had already begun to
stagger him very much in his Opinion, he would not make a step in a time when
the least Motion might have been suspected; yet he had still a certain Scruple
left, which made him dread taking that leap: But the Fathers of the Oratory
with whom he had secret Conferences at the Celastins, having found the means to
persuade him to all intents, he at length declared his Design, which as much
Rejoiced the King as it Afflicted the Protestants. But it was impossible but
that a Prince who knew better how to manage the Sword, than to disentangle
himself from so many things as lay not within his Sphere, could resist able men
as plied him on all sides. However as he still feared it might be said to have
been Interest that caused him to do it, he refused all the Favors the King
offered him, which gave admiration not only to those whose Party he had newly
embraced, but also to those he had newly forsaken. The Fathers of the Oratory,
who had contributed most to so great a Change, had after this the greatest
share in the Affairs of his Conscience: But though that their Party was entirely
opposite to that of the Jesuits, he did not forbear following Father Mascaron,
whose Sermons pleased him above all others, on the score of his Eloquence, and
of a most peculiar Gracefullness he had in the Pulpit. Thus he spent three or
four Years in the Exercises of Piety, without being troubled by Motions of War,
from which the Kingdom was Exempted. But the King who had a Grudging to the
Hollanders for what they had done, having found the means to disunite them from
the Kings of England and Sueden, prevailed with the former to make War upon
them by Sea, after having promised him to declare against them by Land: As
among Sovereigns there is never a want of a Pretext for a rupture when they
please, the two Kings found quickly matter to pick a Quarrel with the
Republique; but withal this, they would, perhaps, have found great
Difficulties in the effecting their Designs, if it had not been divided in it
self by the different Interests that Reigned there. Three Parties were there,
of one of which the Prince of Orange was the head; John de With of the Other;
and the Other had none, nor would it have any, as believing it to be derogating
to the Dignity of the Republique to have one. The First had for Object the
rendering of the Prince of Orange as Potent as his Predecessors had been: The
Second would exclude him from all sorts of Employments to Establish it self
upon his Ruins, and the Third was for the advancement neither of the one nor
of the other, because that, as I have newly said, the Republique after having
rendered it self so Flourishing of it self, had no need neither of the Prince
of Orang nor of de With, to maintain it self in the Splendor it was in:
However, when the two Kings came to Declare War; this third Party perceived
there to be a necessity to have a head for the opposing such Dangerous Enemies,
so as that the thing only turning between the Prince of Orange and de With, all
the Provinces found themselves as it were divided between the One or Other: But
the most part still remembering the great Actions of this Prince's
Predecessors, to whom, as I think I have already said, was owing their
Liberty, they suffered themselves insensibly to be led into the desire of
seeing him at their head, and he was at length, nothwithstanding all the
Obstacles de With used to the Contrary, proclaimed Captain General of the
State. This Prince, though without Experience, by reason of his Green Youth, was
not wanting to give all the Orders necessary for a stout Defense, and, if his
Advice had been followed, many Places had been abandoned wherein a Number of
Garrisons had been maintained to no Purpose: But not having been Master of the
Resolutions, he saw himself a General without an Army; for the States far from
having Troops sufficient to put an Army into the field, they were far from
having enough to line all the Towns they pretended to keep. The King meeting
with so much ease in his Designs, entered into the heart of the Country by the
means of the Electour of Cologne, who had also declared War against the
Hollanders; and the Bishop of Munster attacking them on another side, the
Republique was in great Perplexity. The King who had made extraordinary
Preparations for this War, had given Employment to the Prince of Conde. This
Prince marched away before with an Army of thirty five thousand men, and the
King followed him at five or six Leagues Distance with as numerous Troops. He
would not have the Viscount de Turenne to leave him, for being to advance very
far into the enemies Country, he was very willing to have such a Person as him
about him to free him out of Danger. And indeed, such things might have
happened as would have put him in some Danger; he was going to engage himself
amid Powers that ought to be extremely suspected to him, joined to this that he
left Mastricht behind him, which might give him a furious Disquiet, for the
enemies had put so great a Garrison into that Place, that many Armies were not
more considerable, and things might turn after such a manner as to make the
Retreat difficult. To remedy this, it would have been necessary to have
attacqu'd that Place: But the King fearing it might take him up too much time,
or that he might lose there a part of his Army, he drew near the Rhin, where he
should not meet with so much resistance. The Spaniards who watched all his
Paces, being little less concerned in them than the Hollanders themselves, had
still reason to augment their jealousy, by the ill Treatments, they saw
themselves exposed to; for the King having not been able to make that step
without passing over their Territories, they were ravaged whatever Care he had
taken to prevent it. However, as he had them re-inburs'd for the forrages his
Army took, it would not have been to them a Subject for a Rupture, if his
Conquests had not augmented their Distrusts; they paid him, nevertheless, in
his Passage, all the Honors that are due to a Great King, the Governor of the
Low Countries sent to Compliment his Majesty, and those that Commanded in the
Towns, caused their Canon to be Fired when he passd by them. However, it was
not they only that had their Eyes turn^d upon this Expedition, all Germany,
knowing the King to be powerfully Armed, trembled, if I may say it, lest he
should carry his Arms beyond the Rhin, where he was known to have Considerable
Allyances; for the King of Sueden, though he already offer^d himself to be
Mediator between the Hollanders and his Majesty, was his Pensioner, as well as
the Electour of Cologne, the Palatine, the Duke of Newbourg, and the Bishop of
Munster; and all this Procedure made it apprehended he might have quite
different Aims from what appeared to the Public. Thus every One endeavored
to precaution himself by making Leavyes. But the King's first Exploits gave
quite another Apprehension, in four days space he took Orsoy, and Rhinberg,
while the Prince of Conde, and the Viscount de Turenne reduced Wesel, and
Burik. These Conquests so startled the Enemies, that they animated the King to
make new Ones: But not being able, if a man may say so, to be without the
Viscount de Turenne, he caused him to repair to him again, and after having
passed the Rhin^ at Wesel, he marched in the Traces of the Prince of Conde, who
had directed his way against the Town of Rhees. The Garrison knowing that
Wesel, a much stronger Place, had Surrendered, forthwith deputed to the Prince
of Conde to have some favorable Composition: But this Prince, who would sooner
have granted it some favor, if it had made an answerable Resistance, would not
receive it otherwise than a Prisoner of War, no more than that of Emmerick,
which he afterward attacqu'd, The Garrison of Wesel, of Orsoy, and Burik, had
not a better Treatment, and that only of Rhinberg had been distinguished, yet
not in consideration of its Bravery, but because it had not stopped the King,
who had a Design to pierce farther into the Country. Many other Places
Surrendered still without striking a Blow; Nay, and without waiting for the
Person of the King, or that of the Prince of Conde, for the fright was so
great, that every Individual thought he gained much in currying the Conquerours
favor. By this means the King made himself Master of all that was not
sheltered by Rivers: But as the Rhin, by the means of two Branches it makes,
contains a good Part of the Country, he thought himself at the end of his
Conquests, or at least that they would cost him Dearer than they had hitherto
done: He thereupon consulted the Viscount de Turenne, who was not of Opinion to
attempt to force the Yssel, one of those two Branches, on the Banks of which
the enemies had entrenched themselves. However to make them believe that we
marched directly against them, he persuaded the King to take that way: but at
the same time he sent orders to the Prince of Conde to inform himself where the
Rhin might be passed with less peril, that he might fall upon the back of the
Enemies. The Prince of Orange, who had an eye to all, suspecting this Design,
sent Mombas to the Castle of the Tholus, where the Prince of Conde had caused
the Passage to be Sounded: But Mombas having abandoned his Post either through
Correspondence or Cowardice, another was to be sent in his Room, for they durst
not yet abandon the Yssel by reason of the neighborhood of of the Enemies
Army, which still made a show of entering that way into the heart of the
Country. And indeed the King Skipt on the Right and Left, as if he had had no
other Design: But all of a sudden he departed with his Horse to repair to the
Prince of Conde's Army and having marched all the night, he arrived upon the
Bancks of the Rhine in the same place where the Prince of Conde had caused the
passage to be Sounded. Wurtz was there to defend it, and had with him some
Horse and foot: but instead of going against the Enemies, he gazed on them
while they passed one by one, thinking perhaps they would never have the
Boldness to pass before his eyes, or that he should defeat them easily when
they were passed, by reason that he should attacque them in as small numbers as
he pleased. But if the Contempt which the Regiment of Cuirafieers had shown of
Death, in passing so large and so rapid a River, and wherein several of that
Body had been Drowned, h^d wherewithal to surprise Wurtz, he was much more so,
when that going to oppose it, he saw it come with Sword in hand, though as yet
no more than the Van passed. We cannot say that the Brush was great or
Obstinate, since that Wurtz his Troops gave ground as soon as they had made the
first Discharge; and this Success having put Courage into those that were still
in the Water, they made have to join their Companions, who after having thus
drove away the Enemies, staid for them upon the Shore. The Prince of Conde
being willing to render himself considerable to the King by the Success of this
Action, which particularly regarded him, passed also the River with the Duke
of Anguien his Son, and the Duke of Longueville his Nephew; and as this latter
had been debauching it in the Prince of Conde's Camp, where the King had made
some stay at his Coming, the sumes of Wine not being yet dissipated, made him
Commit a fault, which Occasioned his Death, and that of several Persons of
Quality: For instead of following the Prince of Conde, who advanced toward
some Infantry that were entrenched on this side the Castle of the Tholus, and
demanded nothing more than to be assured that they should have good Quarter
given them to lay down Arms, he himself alone went to insult them in their very
Retrenchments, which caused it to make a Discharge upon him, and upon the
Prince of Conde, who doubting of his Imprudence was advanced to prevent his
Nephew: But not coming soon enough, he had the regret to see him fall Dead
before his face, as well as several Persons of Condition, who were ranged
around him. However as they did not discontinue their firing he was wounded in
his hand, which so inflamed him, that instead of the Promises he had before
passed to the Enemies of giving them Quarter, he had them all put to the Sword.
In the mean while, the King, who staid on the other side the Rhine, pressed his
Troops to pass with all imaginable Diligence, and this occasioned their
throwing themselves by Squadrons into the Water; but though this seemed to be a
much greater Contempt of Death, yet they did not hazard so much as the Others
had done, because that as the Great Number of Horses broke the Stream, they
withal animated one another. Thus a great part of the Army having already
passed, the King caus^d a Bridge to be laid over the Rhine, which was however
needless, for the King was hardly got over the River, when he had an Account of
the Enemies having abandoned the Yssel for fear of being taken behind. Upon
this Notice he turned back and at the same time sent a Relation to the Viscount
de Turenne of the success of this day, which would have been one of the most
Glorious of his Life, without the Duke of Longueville's Imprudence, who had
caused a World of brave Men to perish with him. The Viscount de Turenne
received this News with an inconceivable joy, and having divulged it among the
Troops that staid with him, Every Individual regretted his not having been
present at an Action that was like to make so much Noise in the World. And
intruth it was not very usual to see such a River as the Rhine passed in the
Enemies Presence; so as they may be said to have been very faulty, for if they
would but have advanced into the Water, when our men still passed but one by
one, we should without Difficulty have been obliged to retire; It is also
certain, that from hence proceeded the Disorder the Republique was in, for the
King would have thought twice before he would have attempted to pass the Yssel,
which was thought to be much more Dangerous than indeed it was, for the King
had been assured that the River was not fordable, that the Entrance, and going
out were Difficult, for the Year was so dry, that there was hardly any Water in
the River, yet when they came to pass it, they found little more than a foot
and a half.

The Prinee of Orange Retreated toward Vtrecht, but the Consternation of this
Town was so great, that his Presence could not Encourage it. And indeed though it
was still Covered by several Citys that were not yet attacked, it sent its Keys
to the King, who was marched to the Siege of Doesburg. In the mean while, the
Prince of Conde being much incommoded by his Wound, could not take on him again
the Command of his Army, and it was given to the Viscount de Turenne, who had a
long Conference with the King and with the Prince of Conde, touching the
Present State of things. The King asked them their Opinion, and they told him
that they were mistaken if he held the Conduct he had thitherto held, if he
pretended to keep so many Places; that he saw as well as they that his Army
daily diminisht by so many Garrisons; that he ought to be satisfied with
retaining some Passes, and that at least without being ever strong in the
field, he would quickly see Germany in Motion, that must needs be jealous of
his Conquests. The King declared that he relished their Reasons; but having
discourst the Marquis de Louvoy, who daily acquired more and more Ascendant
over his Mind, he forgot the Consequences that these two Princes had made him
observe; Insomuch that contrary to their Advice he resolved to follow that of
this Minister, which was to keep all the Conquests he could make. We cannot
truly speak the Marquis de Louvois's Design in doing this, unless that he
thought to reduce the Hollanders so low, that they should be obliged to Submit
themselves to all sorts of Conditions before that they could hope for Succors.
Thus believing that the King would be in a Condition to retain his Conquests,
he would not abandon them; he might have still another reason, viz. That as he
had Intelligence with the Prince de Lokowitz, the Emperors first Minister, he
trusted in the promises this Prince made him of Prevailing with his Master to
keep the Peace. Be it as it will, his Advice having been followed preferably to
that of the Prince of Conde, and of the Viscount de Turenne, the King found
himself with Six or Seven Thousand men in a few Days after, though he was entered
the field at the head of so flourishing an Army. That of the Viscount de
Turenne was little more Numerous at some days End, for after having taken
Arnheim, he reduced Eight or Ten Places more, wherein he was obliged to put
Garrisons. However though that among these there were many strong Ones, not one
made any reasonable opposition, unless that of Nimmeghen, which held him tack
Seav'n or Eight days; not but that he might have taken it in less time if he
had so minded, but he would not Squander away his Soldiers as they did in the
Kings Army, where they caused 'em to carry the Bavins, and mount the Guard in
open Day, as if the Life of so many brave Men had not been a thing to be
carefully preserved. But the Marquis de Louvois said, that more Soldiers
perished by fatigues, than in thus Exposing them sometimes: that this was
necessary, particularly, in Sieges, where the least delay was of so great a
Consequence, that it was in no wise to be remedied afterward; Wherefore to
make Dispatch, they no longer minded to open the Trenches at a reasonable
Distance, but opened it so near as cost a great many men. Yet this did not
hinder the King from pushing-on his Conquests as far as the Gates of Amsterdam:
But the Marquis de Rochefort Commanding on that side, having missed of Muideim,
of which he might have made himself Master, without striking a Blow; the
Enemies who had committed some faults on their side, remedied them after they
had rid themselves of de With, who was become suspected to several, and
principally to the Populace, by whose hands he fell. In the mean while, the
King, who had stopped at the Gates of Vtrecht in hopes that the Peace which the
States had caused to be proposed to him, having not been able to obtain what he
demanded, plainly perceived the fault he had committed, in not having believed
the Prince of Conde, and the Viscount de Turenne, for if he had advanced
toward Amsterdam at the head of a Potent Army, this Town that was already
wavering, would never have dared to take Vigorous Resolutions: But seeing him
with not above Six or Seven Thousand Men, it had breathing time, and he for
his part durst not Engage further with so small a Number. But the greatest
misfortune that befell him from this Oversight, was, that the Marquis de
Brandenbourg being gained by the Hollander's money, took the field at the head
of twenty five thousand Men, which began to set all Germany in Motion, and the
more since the Emperor was also upon the point of declaring himself: But the
Prince de Lokowitz having deferred the Causing his Orders to be Executed, the
Campaign passed without any thing considerable being done, which being come to
the Emperor's knowledge, he caused this Minister to be secured and deprived
him of his favor. The Marquis de Brandenbourg's, March did, nevertheless,
produce this Effect, that the King returned home, after having endeavored to
surprise Bolduc, where there was only a Simple Garrison; but it chancing to
rain two or three days together, the Town was secured by it is situation, which
in such times renders it impregnable: for being Seated in a very low Place, and
all surrounded with a Marsh, the water quickly Spreads it self around, nay and
came as far as to Boxtel two Leagues from thence, where the King had fixed his
Quarter. Having thus perceived that there was nothing for him to do on that
side, he took his journey for France, after having given the Viscount de
Turenne order to re-assemble the most Troops he could, to march against the
Marquis de Brandenbourg who advanced in long Marches. The Viscount de Turenne
would not mind him, that if he had been so pleased he might have prevented this
Accident; but having seen the Prince of Conde who had caused himself to be
carried to Arnheim, he took measures with him to divert the King from having so
much Confidence in his Minister, who had not yet Sufficient Experience to
regulate all things according to his Fancy. Monsieur le Tellier having got the
Wind of this Design, and fearing this might stop his Sons fortune, found the
means to gain the Prince of Conde, by the Promises he made him, that the King,
thenceforward, should only employ his Highness in the most considerable
Expeditions, and as this Prince had a Secret Jealousy of the Confidence the
King put in the Viscount de Turenne, he did not trouble himself much about
keeping the Promise he had given him. In the mean while the King was very
uneasy as to the event of matters beyond the Rhine, where the Viscount de
Turenne was advanced with Twelve Thousand Men, for he had found it more
convenient to go meet the Marquis de Brandenbourg, than to give him time still
to Exercise his Army; However as such a handful of Men did not capacitate him
to hazard a Battle, the King sent him a Reinforcement of Four Thousand. The
Marquis de Brandenbourg had many more, as I have already said; but as the
Viscount de Turenne had only Choice Troops, he drew near him, with a resolution
to deliver him Battle. The Marquis de Brandenbourg fearing that in those
beginnings, the French Fury, which is extremely dangerous, might cause him to
receive some Check, thought it convenient to cover himself with a River;
wherefore he repassed the Weser, and having put some Men into Vnna and other
small Cities, that were upon the Viscount de Turenne's Passage, he waited to
take other Resolutions by the Enemies March. Many would there have been who in
the Viscount de Turenne's room would have contented themselves with having
drove the Marquis de Brandenbourg as far as beyond the Weser, but having had
notice that diverse Motions were made in the Empire in favor of the Hollanders,
he thought it became him to prevent their running to a head, which might have
pernicious Consequences if he found not the means to stop them: and as this
might seem to depend on the Success he should have against the Marquis de
Brandenbourg, he passed the Weser, after having made sure of the Towns wherein
he left Garrisons: They suffered themselves to be Battered for a day or two,
but the Breach being made they opened their Gates. The Marquis de Brandenbourg
had no sooner notice that he passed the River, than that he found himself in a
great Perplexity, for on the one side it seemed to him to lessen his Reputation
thus to Retreat before an Army weaker than his own, and on the other he saw a
Thousand Inconveniences, if he chanced to lose the Battle; but Security
seeming to him preferrable to all things, he took the way again for his own
Teritories, hoping the Viscount de Turenne would also retreat, upon his having
nothing more to fear either for himself or the Allys of the Crown. The Viscount
de Turenne who had fatigated his Army by a long March, resolved then to give it
some repose, but hardly did he give it three or four days Respite, but that he
Pursued the Marquis of Brandenbourg, who had left some Troops upon the Guard of
the Passages. These Passages having been forced, he put his Men into
Winter Quarters in the County de la Mark, which extremely surpised the Marquis
de Brandenbourg, who instead of taking his in the Enemies Country, as he had
expected to have done, saw his Teritories desolated as well by his own Troops
as by those of the Viscount de Turenne. For though he possessed a Country of an
extent sufficiently large to lodge them, as he had been obliged to put them all
together, for fear the Viscount de Turenne might pierce further, they extremely
harrass'd the places they possessed, and those they did not possess were
burdened with many Subsidies to Supply to the present Necessities. In the mean
while the Viscount de Turenne's Army had all things in Abundance, which made it
forget the hardships it had suffered in so long and painful a March. In effect
it had been sometimes obliged to go Eight or Nine German Leagues, so as that
both Horse and Foot found themselves equally ruined: But the Viscount de
Turenne applying himself wholly to repair both, he employed to that purpose not
only all he could exact from the Enemy's Country, but also all the ready Money
he had, without minding what would become either of himself or of his Family.
The Officers being little accustomed to serve under Generals like him,
strangely amazed to see him so dis interessed, for he sometimes gave to a
Regiment a Quarters from whence he might have got Twenty Thousand Crowns, but
this without any Partiality, for Merit alone had the Ascendant with him: He,
however, sometimes said, that some regard ought to be had to those that were
not rich, for he was not of the Marquis de Louvoy's humor, who imagined that
when a Man had Wealth he was obliged to spend it in the King's Service. Thus he
procured them Advantages as well as to Others, when he was in a Capacity to do
it, and all the Difference he made, is, that the Poor had ever of them the
Preference when there was an Occasion to do Good. What the Viscount de Turenne
had newly performed against the Marquis de Brandenbourg Equally Surpiz'd both
Friends and Enemies. Those who bore us ill will endeavored to prevail with
that Electour to take Patience; but others remonstrating to him, that
considering our height of fortune, he risqued much by siding against us, at
length they disposed him to lay down Arms. Count Beauveau De Spence, having for
some years past found a retreat with his Electoral Highness, did wonderfully
well second this Design, and as this Count was Monsieur de Turenne's friend, he
interposed his Offices for the bringing an Accommodation about. The Electour
demanded that our Troops should be drawn from off his Territories, that we
should restore him Wesel and some other Places that were Dependances of the
Duchy of Cleves, that apperrain'd to him, and promised in Consideration of
this to abandon the Hollanders: But as there was little security in his
Promises, and that we were besides very glad to make him Rue what he had done,
things were spun out into a Length under Sundry Pretexts, during which we made
a shift to ruin the County Vandermark to all Intents. The Electour complained
of this Proceedure, and seemed to desire the Peace: But being known to
Entertain Commerce with the Emperor, we required such assurances of him, as he
could not give, until at length the Duke of Newbourg, interposing also in the
Treaty, promised that he should Execute it in good Earnest. All these Delays
having thus given time to our Troops to recover themselves, we agreed to leave
his Country, and to grant him what he required, on the Conditions, however,
that he had the reserve of taking up Arms again, in case it tended to the Weal
of the Empire, that had served him for a Pretense for what he had done. This
Accommodation, which the Hollanders and their Allies had endeavored to
traverse as much as lay in their Power, had matter to Surprise 'em All, so much
the more, as that the Duke of Luxembourg, who had been seen toward Vtrecht in
the Room of the Marquis de Rochefort, had Extended our Conquests by the taking
of Woerden and of some Other Towns of the Province of Holland. The Enemies, to
preserve the Rest, had been obliged to open their Sluices, which was a terrible
Remedy, and having thereby put themselves into some sort of Security, the
Prince of Orange formed an Army of fifteen or Sixteen thousand Men, to which
were joined four thousand Spaniards sent him by the Governor of the
Low Countries; for, in short, though they had thitherto been so Circumspect as to
declaring themselves, it was only fear had retained them, and not the desire of
keeping the Peace. The Prince of Orange, not wanting Courage, and seeing
himself now in a Condition of making some Enterprise, which he had not yet been
able to do since the Beginning of the War, resolved to attreque some Place, and
having feigned that he would besiege Nareden, he puzzel'd the Duke of
Luxembourg, who repaired forthwith that way-wards: but the Prince of Orange all
of the sudden turning toward Nerden, he laid Siege to that Town; and drew two
forts at the head of the Dykes, by which the Duke of Luxemburg might come to
him: he lost not a moments time to put those Forts into a Posture, as well as
to batter the Town briskly, and taking no Rest either day or night, his
Courage, which seemed Seconded by the Situation of the Places, put him in such
a State as was free from Apprehensions, when he knew that the Duke of
Luxemburg, notwithstanding a thousand Reasons that ought to divert him from his
Design, did, nevertheless, march against him. In effect, as the Prince of
Orange had dexterously concealed his Enterprise, the Duke had had time to
assemble only three thousand men, which was but a small business to go attacque
a Considerable Army, joined to this that he could advance only upon the Dikes,
at the head of which, as I have newly said, two forts had been erected, and
provided with Canon. However as the Duke of Luxemburg had sent the Marquis de
Genlis Marchal de Camp to bring him Succors, he still persisted in his Design,
and marched directly to Camprict, where he was afraid the Bridge might have
been broken: But the enemies having not thought of that, either that they were
too buisy, or that they imagined it to be needless, he caused his men to pass
over it, and having made a halt to wait for the Marquis de Genlis, he was
strangely Surpised at his having no Tidings of him. Being afraid of engaging
himself hand over head, he held a Council of War with the Colonels and
Principal Officers of his Detachment, and they being for the most part young,
and having more Courage than Experience, were of Opinion this notwithstanding
to continue their march, so as that he jogg'd-on till that being come pretty
near the enemies, he caused the Inundation to be sounded that was on the side
of the Dyke; for to go to the attacque of a House where the enemies had lodged
some Infantry, and from whence they would have fallen upon the Rear of his men
when they should have marched against the first fort, the Water was of
necessity to be entered, there being no other Passage. The Water was found but
three foot high or thereabouts. Thus the Duke of Luxemburg took it first, after
having ordered a part of his men to advance against the Fort. This Duke did
wonders of his Person, as well as those that followed him, and having taken the
House notwithanding a strong Resistance, he facilitated to his Party the attack
of the fort which was preceded by a mill, around which some Intrenchments had
been made. Our Men drawing near them forced them with ease enough, so as that
those that were in the Fort already trembled, as I may say, out of fear of the
like Success, when the Imprudence of our Men revived their Courage: Instead of
making use of the Darkness which had thitherto favored their Enterprise, they
set Fire to that Mill, which gave such Aim to the Enemies, that with their
Canon which they Charged with Cartridges, they killed in a trice above two
Hundred Men. Then matters began to change their Aspect, Ours gave back instead
of advancing, and if the Duke of Luxembourg had not re-incourag'd them by his
Presence all had been lost without Difficulty; but as he was very brave he
Exposed himself the first of All, and our Soldiers who would have been ashamed
not to follow their General, behaved themselves so well that the Fort was won
notwithstanding all the Efforts that Zuilesteim could make, he being the Prince
of Orange's natural uncle, who was killed in defending it. This Action that
had, perhaps, more temerity than Conduct, having nevertheless sped so well, the
Enemies not only abandoned the Other Fort, but also raised the Siege. The
Prince of Orange drew off his Canon and his Infantry, and standing firm with
his Horse, he secured Both. But the Duke Luxembourg aiming only to put Succors
into the Town, wherein being come himself, he conferred with the Count de la
Mark, who was Governor of it, and who had made diverse sallies wherein he had
shown much Courage. The Prince of Orange Supported this misfortune with a
Constancy as Created Admiration in all People, and seeking less to Excuse
himself by Words than by Actions, he resolved to surprise the Duke de Duras,
who was with a flying Camp on the side of Tongres. For which purpose he gave
out he had a Design upon that Place, and upon Maseik, appertaining to the
Electour of Cologne, which obliged the Duke of Duras to send to Montal,
Governor of Charleroy, to take Care of Tongres, while he would Watch on
another side. The Prince of Orange to render his Design the more feasible, did
at Mastricht make great Provision of Shovels, and other Instruments proper to
break Ground, and the Spaniards on their side, Acting in Concert with his
Highness, though they had not declared War, did the same thing at Namur, at
Ruremonde and Venlo: But all of a sudden Bolting from their Garrisons, they
Seized on the Passes by which the Duke of Duras might retreat to Charleroy.
While that the Prince of Orange drew near the Meuse to cut him off, it had been
easy for the Duke of Duras to shut himself up in Tongres, or in Maseick; but as
he could not do it without famishing those Towns, he chose to retire toward
Cologne, hoping the Priuce of Orange would leave him in Quiet, out of the fear
he might be under of wanting Victuals by Pursuing him: But this Prince holding
his Victory certain, passed the Meuse after having joined the Spaniards, and
pursued him so briskly that he compelled him to cross the Roer, upon the Banks
of which he would have Defeated him, if the Spaniards, who had the Vanguard,
would have marched after having also passed that River; but having been of
Opinion to stay for the coming up of the Rear, this gave the Duke of Duras time
to make his Escape; and as he ruined all in his Passage, and that besides the
Enemies began to want Provisions, they durst not Engage farther, and repassed
the Roer. They directed their way along the Meuse, as if they had been still
uncertain where to let fall the Effort of their Arms: But having passed the
River, they made a show as if they designed upon Tongres, which obliged Montal
to put himself into that Place with two or three hundred men. The Prince of
Orange knowing him penned up there, sent Seav'n or Eight hundred Horse around
the Town to make him still believe the same thing, but repairing in all have
before Charleroy, he sorely afflicted Montal, who being Consummated in
Experience, was disconsolate that he had been thus trepanned by a Young Prince,
who as yet performed but the Apprenticeship of his Trade. The King was no less
amazed than Montal, and as the thing was of great Consequence, he let the
Courtiers know, that they would make their Court much better to him by
resorting to the Army, than in staying, as they did, about his Person. This was
sufficient to put 'em all upon the Spurr; all the Road from Paris to Charleroy
was Covered with Persons of Condition, who to please the King scoured to the
Rendezvous, without having had the least time to make any Equipage: On another
side, Montal being resolved to perish or Re-enter his Town, departed Tongres at
the head of a hundred Choice Cavaliers, and having marched in the Woods, he
mingled himself among the Enemies as they descended the Bivao; Insomuch that
they took him to be of their Party. Thus did he continue his way without
discovery, 'till that being drawn near the Town, an Advanced Guard distrusted
something, which obliged him that Commanded it to call out the Who goes there:
But having been only followed by a part of his Men, the Rest having not had
time to Bridle, Montal routed him, and got safe into the Town. There without
trifling away his time in receiving the Compliments of Every Individual that
would have congratulated him upon his Action, he repaired to the Rampart, where
he caused furious Discharges to be made as well from the Canon as the Infantry;
after that he made a Sally, wherein he had some Success, so as that the Enemies
having grounded their hopes, principally, upon his Absence, resolved to raise
the Siege, having, besides, intimation that the Marshall de Humieres was
bringing a great Succors. The Prince of Orange appeared more sensible to this
Misfortune than he had done to that which had befallen him before Naerden, he
retreated under a great Despondency: But this notwithstanding continuing to
assist the Commonwealth with his Arm and his Head, he attracted more
Compassion than Contempt, which is, nevertheless, almost an inevitable
Attendant of Unhappy Events.

Nothing but the Season hindered the French from attempting New Conquests, or
rather the Waters which Covered the Surface of the Earth. The Duke of
Luxembourg, being still at Vtrecht, hoped however, that if it once came to
Freeze, he might by means of the Ice surprise several Posts, that were
otherwise inaccessible. As the Enemies were not unacquainted with his Design,
they had ever the Shovel and Pick-Ax in their hand, to precaution themselves
against this Misfortune, upon the first Frost that should come; they broke the
least Ice, hoping by taking such strict Care, they should render all his
Measures Abortive: But it falling a Freezing all on the Sudden, it was
impossible for them to repair in several days, what happened in one Night. This
cast so great an Alarm into the Places that were the most Exposed, that
Peoples Minds were wholly set upon removing thence what they had most Precious.
The Consternation spread it self to the very Hague, which being destitute of
Walls and Defense, could not otherwise Expect than a strange Desolation, if the
Posts that covered it came to be forced. However, the Prince of Orange, who
laid the Public Miseries as much to heart as if they had only regarded him
himself, had not from all this been under any Apprehensions, if his Troops by
having been so often beaten had not utterly lost their Courage; for though the
Ice seemed to give a great Advantage to the Enemies, they would however run a
great risque in coming to attack him in Places well Entrenched, and where his
Highness might oppose against them, as many Men as they could have. He was
busied Day and Night, either in adding New Fortifications to those that were
already made, or in Encouraging his Captains and his Soldiers: But whatever
Care he took, Colonel Pinvin Abandoned his Post upon the Request of the
Inhabitants of Dergau, who sent for him to maintain their Walls, The Duke of
Luxembourg, trusting rather to their Terror than his own Forces, Marching in
the mean while, toward Bodegrave, and Swammerdam, Won both at the Point of the
Sword; and as if his Action had not been sufficiently Glorious, by reason of
the Little opposition he met with, he would render it the more remarkable, not
only by a Slaughter that was made, not only of those that were found in Arms,
but likewise of all sorts of Persons, Even of Women and Children. He was often
heard amid the pittious Cries that Every one made to move him to Compassion, to
bid his Soldiers, No Quarter; Plunder, Kill, and Ravish. He himself did what he
said, and his Men, after his Example, having deluged the streets with Rivers of
Blood, entered the Houses where they Committed inconceivable Cruelties: Several
Women were Violated in their Husbands Arms, several Maidens in their Fathers,
and whoever went about to oppose such Criminal Excesses, was pittilessly
Massacred by those Furies, who suffered themselves to be no longer Governed but
by their Disorderly Passion, and by their Cruelty: They did the same thing at
the Post that was to defend Colonel Pinvin; but not being yet content with the
Mischiefs they had done, they set fire to those Places, and thus burnt all they
could not carry away. Heaven to punish an almost unexampled Barbarousness,
even among the most Savage Nations, sent a Thaw at the same time, and the Duke
of Luxembourg had much ado to retreat with his Troops, that by reason of the
bad Weather were forced to leave behind a part of their Booty. The Inhabitants
of the Hague, who could not have avoided the like Misfortune, were thus
preserved by a kind of Miracle, as well as that Beauteous Place, for I know not
whether I onght to term it a City or Village, for if the Beauty of its Houses,
of its Public Places, of its Walks, may Rank it with the most flourishing
Cities, the want of Walls makes the difference so great, that it resembles
neither a City nor a Village. The Duke of Luxembourg being retired to his
Quarters, the Hollanders Endeavored to repair the Mischief he had done: But
for an Example to the Officers, they caused Colonel Pinvin's Process to be
drawn up, who was Sentenced to be Beheaded. In the mean while, the German
Princes seeing the Danger this Commonwealth was in, resolved to give it
Succors, and Allowed it not only to make Leavyes in their Dominions, but did
the like themselves for the making some Diversion in its favor. On another
side the Diet of Ratisbonne after having been along while assembled at the
Emperors Requisition, who complained that His Most Christian Majesty, had
Committed diverse Hostilities in the Empire, at length declared the taking up
Arms to be necessary for the Public Security, so as that the Generality
having so fair a Pretext to Cover their jealousy, resolved to declare War
against us. Thus the Palzgrave, and the Duke of Newbourg prepared to turn their
Backs upon us; the Electour of Cologne, and the Bishop of Munster, being
threatened with being put into the Ban of the Empire, if they persisted in our
Allyances, had also the same Design: But as they could not Execute it without
hazarding much by reason of the Dependancy they were under, they Surceas'd it
till a more favorable time served. The Spaniards, by reason of the bad Success
they had had, had rejected all that had hitherto occurred upon the Governor of
the Low Countries, seeing we were going to have a good part of Europe upon our
hands, no longer feigned to declare open War against us, and after having drawn
up a Manifest, they put Troops into Mastricht, with which Place in all
likelihood the King would begin his Campagn. The King, seeing so much Business
on all sides, endeavored to remedy it with his wonted Prudence, he caused New
Troops forthwith to march, with orders to the Officers to repair with all
possible haste to the Rendezvouze: And having held a Council of War with the
Prince of Conde, and the Viscount de Turenne, he made five or six Bodies of
Armies, which he caused to march where there was Occasion. The Marquis de
Louvoy through whose fault all this Perplexity happened, was obliged to caress the
Principal Officers, in whose hands he saw his fortune; for he had reason to
fear that upon the least Reverse the King would make him Expiate by his
Disgrace so many bad Councils he had given his Majesty: Among those he did not
forget the Viscount de Turenne, who was entrusted with the Conduct of the Army
that was to march into Germany. This Prince received his Compliments without
manifesting to him either too much Arrogance, or too much Baseness, and having
listened to all he was minded to tell him, he made him answer, that he knew as
well as any Other to acknowledge the Zeal wherewith he served the King, but
that he ought to be persuaded that others had no less than himself; that he
told him this to mind him, that he ought not to make his Court sometimes at the
Expense of those that were Absent, because they had to do with so Sagacious a
Prince, as not to be easily imposed upon. He made him this Reproach on the
score of some Discourses he had held to the King, by which he had endeavored,
to do him a Disservice with his Majesty: But the Marquis de Louvoy, having
feigned he did not apprehend with what Design he spoke in this manner, the Rest
of their Conversation passed in Assurances of Service on his Part, and in some
Civilities from the Viscount de Turenne.

In the mean while, the Hollanders seeing the King made Great Preparations for
a Siege, and not doubting but that his Aim lay upon Mastricht, they were at a
loss to find out one to put into the Governors Room, who was Dead after a fit
of sickness. The Spaniards offered them Faria^, a Brave Man that had been all
his Life long in their Service, wherein he had acquired some fame: And his
Person was so much the more agreeable to them in that he was of a Religion
conformable to that of most of the Inhabitants; they sent him his Commission,
with Orders to the Garrison to own him. Faria^ being in the Town found it
Convenient to make some New Fortifications, but having converted to his own
Profit part of the Money he received for that purpose, the Inhabitants lost the
Esteem they conceived from his Reputation; Insomuch that they began to desire
the Kings coming, under whose Sway they hoped to enjoy the free Exercise of
their Religion, as well as of several other Advantages: For besides a thousand
advantageous things they had heard of his Person, wherein certainly fame was no
Liar, they were invited to be under his Obedience by the Luster that had
appeared in all his Court, when that he came into their Neighborhood. Thus
they hoped to partake in that Greatness, which is, nevertheless, but imaginary
in the mind of the People, since certain it is that this Grandeur being only
Achieved at their Costs, it is rather the means to render them Unhappy, than to
make them find the felicity wherewith they sooth this Phancies. Be it as it
will, such was the Disposition of the Inhabitants of Mastricht when the King
arrived before its Walls: For as it was a Siege of Renown, he would perform it
himself. The Prince of Orange was far from suffering such an Occasion as that
to Slip without endeavoring to signalize his Bravery and Conduct; but thinking
it Expedient to suffer the Kings Army to consume, he pressed not much, hoping
that the Place would hold out time sufficient to afford him that of relieving
it: The Generality were of the same Opinion, which they built on the strength
of the Outworks, and the Governors Repute. The King being not Ignorant of his
Highness's hopes, took in the mean while all his Precautions, and as he was
perfectly well served, the Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation were
not only quickly finished, but Batteries were also raised, of which that of
Montal having Eighteen pieces of Canon did much incommode the Besieged; for
according as they made Sallys it battered them in the flank, and made such a
Disorder in their Ranks that they knew not where to put themselves under
shelter. In the mean while the Trenches were opened, and the Works having been
push'd-on with a wonderful diligence, the King caused the Outworks to be
attacked by his Musketeers, who carried a Work with ease enough: but these
Youths being more proper to fall-on than Defend, they were in like manner
repulsed. Artagnan who Commanded them, was killed in this occasion, whom the
King very much lamented; fot besides, that his Services merited that a great
regard should be had for his Person, he was one of the best-bred men living.
The Duke of Monmouth having charged himself with this Attacque, and in it
Conspicuously distinguished his Gallantry, being resolved to perish in it or to
come off with Honor, demanded new Troops of the King, and his Majesty having
granted his request, the Musketeers represented to his Majesty that it was
blasting their Honor to Command others in their room; that if he would Command
them again to the Assault, they were absolutely resolved to take the Work
again, or Dye in the Attempt: but the King being minded to preserve them for a
better occasion, being not to be wrought upon, the Commanded men marched, and
effected their Design. This Success was quickly followed with the taking of
another Work, wherein Fariau having through overmuch Precipitation, caused a Mine
to play, his own Men were blown-up instead of ours; This lessened his esteem
among his own Party, and particularly among the Inhabitants, who held diverse
meetings to oblige him to Surrender; All the Priests that were in the Town
repaired to them with a great Number of Women, and their Design being come to
Faria^'s Knowledge, he was at a great loss how to remedy it. In the Interim,
the Town was thrice set on fire, which still augmented his Distrust, so as that
being as much afraid of those within, as those without, he demanded to
Capitulate. The Prince of Orange, having found more Obstacles than he Expected
in Conducting of the Succors, coming acquainted with this News, was much
startled; for as he had been Newly Promoted to the Charge of Stadtholder, and
Lord High-Admiral, and that in a Word he was more Powerful than had been any
of his Predecessors; He was afraid lest this Event might lose him the Affection
of the People, by whose suffrage he had attained to this Greatness.

The King, after having repaired Mastricht, would have carried his Arms into
the other Places of Holland's Brabant, if the Enemies had not let loose their
Sluices; but the Water being all around, the King con'd not do otherwise than
march another way. And as Occurrences in Germany made him uneasy, he drew near
the Frontier, as well to oblige the People of Strasbourg not to favor the Arms
of his Enemies, as to show himself in Lorrain, where his Presence was
necessary. And indeed Every Individual being Excited by the Love he bore his
Sovereign, contrived to affranchize himself from a Sway that was very Different
from that he had Experienced under his Majesty; for there was more to do to
satisfy the Intendants, than there was to satisfy the King, and they most
commonly made use of their Authority to the Ruin of the People. who were in
Despair to see that those who were to use all means for their Protection,
contributed most to render them Miserable. The King after having given order on
that side, entered Alsace. The Inhabitants of Strasbourg being Engaged through
their own Inclination, and a thousand Other Reasons, to declare themselves in
favor of the Enemies, giving his Majesty only fair words, he caused an Arch of
their Bridge to be burnt, wherein however, he used more Cunning than Strength,
for having caused some Carpenters to be Embarked at Brisac with a small Number
of Soldiers, the thing was sooner known to be done then the Design suspected:
Strasbourg, that was wont to enjoy Peace, finding by this Hostility how
prejudicial it would be for it to engage in the present Motions, the more
willingly listened to the Kings Proposals, and fear bringing them to all manner
of Compliance, the King thought himself secure since that Town did not declare
it self against his Majesty. In the mean while he omitted nothing for the
putting Alsace in a Posture of Defense, whither he did not doubt but that the
Emperor would endeavor to carry his Arms. On another side to wreek his
Revenge on the Spaniards, he backed the Revolt of the Marquis de Meximieux, one
of the Principal Lords of the Franche Comte, who hoped that all the Nobless
would take his Part: but his Pretensions not prevailing, he was obliged to
retire into France, he and his Family. The King gave a Regiment of Dragoons to
the Marquis de Listenay, one of his Sons, and this Young Lord behaved himself
extremely well in all the occasions he was present at, insomuch that he would
have made his Fortune, if he had not been Killed in a Conflict two or three
Years after. In the mean while the Viscount de Turenne, after having provided
for Philipsbourg which seemed the most in Danger, passed the Rhin, and having
retained by his Presence a number of Princes that were upon the point of
Declaring themselves, he spread such a Consternation wherever he bent his
March, that those that had already taken Arms durst not advance very far. They
sent Deputies to him from all sides to demand safeguards of him, and it was a
wonder to see that those who had threatened so loud some few days before, were
obliged by the Neighborhood of this Great Man to have recourse to Entreaties
and Submissions. Thus the Electour Palatin, though he had already made his Treaty
with the Enemies, durst not divulge it, nor durst the Bishop of Wirbourg and
some others. However as the Viscount de Turenne was too illuminated to miss of
prying into their Designs, he pressed the Court to allow him to reduce them by
Arms, which the Marquis de Louvoy opposed, still pretending that he could draw
'em over to the Kings Party by the means of Negotiations and Treaties. However
to make them sensible of the Kings Power, the Viscount de Turenne had leave to
enter their Territories; but being forbidden Sieges, this only ferv'd to
provoke those Princes, whom it behoov'd more or less to manage. The Marquis de
Brandenbourg seeking only a Pretense to take the Field again, complained of
these Hostilities which disturbed the repose of the Empire, and as his Troops
were a Burden to his Electoral Highness, in time of Peace, he was very glad we
afforded him this means to break the Treaty abovementioned. The Emperor on
his side caused his Army to March, and the Viscount de Turenne not being able
to oppose such an Inundation as that, withdrew toward the Rhin, where he to no
purpose waited for Succors: For though this Storm had been long before in ken,
the Marquis de Louvoy could never resolve upon abandoning an infinite number of
Places, wherein were above Forty Thousand Men in Garrison; so as that without
considering that this was it that had ruined the Hollanders, he persisted in
the Design of keeping them. The Marquis de Louvoy seeing Peace was no longer to
be expected, caused Trier to be artacqu'd, which held out three Weeks, by
reason of the Incapacity of those he sent before it. In the mean while the
Spaniards to draw-off the Prince of Conde, who was about Vtrecht, that the
Prince of Orange might execute an Enterprise he had upon Naerden, made a show
as if they would oppose the Passage of some English Forces that Landed in one
of our Ports; and, having sped in their Design, the Prince of Orange Besieged
Naerden, which he pressed so briskly, that he made himself Master of it, before
the Town could receive Relief. As we were not wont to suffer Losses, we were
willing to reject this bad event upon the Governor, who was clapped into Prison,
and his Process made. In the mean while there was no talk yet of abandoning the
Places, so great was the obstinacy; which gave the Prince of Orange means to
March against the City of Bon, which the Electour of Cologne had remitted into
our hands. This Prince having there Conferred with Montecuculi, who Commanded
the Emperors Troops, this later made head against the Succors that might
offer it self, while the former besieged the Town, where the Count de
Koningsmark, Lieutenant General of his Army was Killed: But whatever Vigorous
Defense was made by the Besieged, this having not hindered the Besiegers from
becoming Masters of the Town; then was it that the Marquis de Louvoy perceived,
but a little too late, the necessity there was of abandoning so many needless
places. The thing at length having been resolved on, the Court signified it is
Resolutions to the Duke of Luxembourg that he might draw-off his Troops: But as
Parcimony and Griping had the Ascendant at Court as well as over that Dukes
temper, who had in all things ever manifested much self-Interest, he obliged
the Towns to give him Money, and having in all this, lost much time, the Prince
of Orange had Ieisure to intercept his way, so that if we had not come-in to
his Succors, either he would have been oblig^d to fight with unequal Forces
and in a disadvantageous Post, or would have Perished for want of Victuals. Of
so many places we only retained the City of Maestricht, and that of Graves,
both upon the Meuse, and of an extreme importance, by reason of their
situation, and of the Contributions that might be exacted by their means.
However the Generality murmured that this had been so long deferred, and the
Viscount de Turenne more than others, who had by this means been obliged to
retreat. The Marquis de Louvoy to appease him, promised that he should be
thenceforward distinguished from all others, which he had often the hopes given
him of without effect; for though that the King had Created on purpose in his
favor the Charge of Marshall General of his Camps and Armies, this was a
Dignity which subsisted rather in the Imagination than in Reality: For the
Ministers that they might not give any body Discontent, had never sent a
Marshall of France with him: Thus he had never seen himself in a condition to
enjoy the advantages of that Charge. Nevertheless the Marquis de Louvoy kept
his word with him this time, and the Mareschals de Crequi and Humieres, having
been Commanded to Serve in his Army, they repaired thither, but refused to obey
him, which occasioned their being Exiled. Though the Viscount de Turenne had
reason to Complain of them, and particularly of the Marshall de Humieres, to
whose Fortune he had no been ill friend, as I have already said, he would not
however be the Cause of their Disgrace. Thus having himself desired the King to
recall them, he showed that the goodness of his temper did not allow him to do
any body harm. The King answered him several times, that it was not his
business but his own, for he did not willingly Pardon Disobedience: But this
not making the Viscount de Turenne desist, he persecuted him in such manner,
that he could not at length refuse him what he demanded of his Majesty. In the
mean while some hopes there were of Peace, by the diverse Glimmerings that had
appeared of it. The Marquis de Grana being at Cologne the better to Cut Off all
hopes of the Peace then there in agitation, seized on some Money the King had
there, and caused Prince William of Furstemberg to be kidnapt, being a German
by Nation, but who had abandoned the Interests of his own Country to espouse
the Adverse Party: By this means and by that of the Bishop of Strasbourg his
Brother, had the King attracted the Electour of Cologne to his side; and to
render the Marquis de Grana's Action odious to all Good People, France
proclaimed it, as it was true, to be contrary to the Right of Nations; for
Prince William wa^ at Cologne, on the behalf of this Electour, and ought to be
considered as a Public Person. Nevertheless whatever noise the King made, he
was conveyed to Neustald where they talked even of making his Process, as a man
that had betrayed his Country. But the King taking this Affair to Heart
Protested that if any Person of Consideration fell into his hands, he should be
treated in like manner as the Emperor should use that Prince: Thus for fear of
Reprisals all his Punishment lay in a harsh Captivity. The King did what he
could to have him released; but the Emperor showing himself inexorable, the
Assembly of Cologne was broken, insomuch that His Most Christian Majesty
pressed the King of Sueden to lay aside the Quality of Mediator, to take up
another, from whence he might derive more Advantage. And indeed his Majesty
needed Succors in the Present State of things; for England having granted a
Peace to Holland; the Most Christian King was then in great Perplexity; For the
Hollanders, who were much more Potent than he at Sea, prepared to enter France
by the Coasts of Normandy aad Brittany, so as that the King was constrained to
cause the Ban and Arriere-ban to advance. The Spaniards, pretending to derive
great Advantages if this Prosper'd, treated with the Chevalier de Rohan, who
promised them to deliver them Quilleboeuf by the means of the Intelligences he
had in Normandy, and they, suffering themselves to be amused by his Promises,
gave him a great deal of Money, as well as to La Treaumont, whom he had
entrusted with his Secret. The Chevalier de Rohan was a Man of Great Quality,
but of a very mean Credit; He had never had any considerable Martial
Employment, not that he wanted Courage, but because his Intellectuals were not
over-sound; he had spent the better part of his fortune, so that not knowing
where to put his head, no more than La Treaumont who had in like manner
Squandered away all he had, they both sought the means of Supplying to their
Debaucheries, and the Spaniards having been so Credulous as to put Credence in
their Promises, the Hollanders, to whom they had imparted this Intrigue, put to
Sea, to see what might be hoped for from it: But the Chevalier de Rohan having
not sufficient Credit to procure so much as one Village to rise, they quitted
the Coasts of Normandy to try if they could speed better in Brittany, where
however they had not any Correspondence. Being near the Isle of The, a Ship
Arrived from the Indies, and was so fortunate to escape them, the Enemies being
on one side, while on the Other it put into the Port of Rochelle. In the mean
while the King having got the Wind of the Chevalier de Rohan's Treason, his
Majesty sent Brissac, Major of the Gardes du Corpse, to Rouen to secure
La-Treaumont, and had the Chevalier de Rohan taken up at Saint-Germain. Brissac
being come into the Town, went to La Treaumont's Lodging whom he found in Bed,
and having shown him his Commission, he suffered him as he was his friend, to
go into his Closet, where La-Treaumont said he went to fetch something: But
having seized a Pistol, he Clapped it to Brissac's Cheek, who having bid him
fire, two Gardes du Corpse that were with him thinking that he spoke to them,
Discharged their Pieces, and wounded la-Treaumont, of which he died on the
Morrow-Morning. As he had been the Person that had Managed all this Intrigue,
the King was much vexed at the fault Brissac had Committed, in suffering him to
go into his Closet, and it was believed this wou^d have Occasioned his
Disgrace: But the King having pardoned him upon the Account of the Services he
had done him in Other Occasions, the Chevalier de Rohan was Committed to the
Bastille, with the Chevalier de Preaux, the Marchioness de Villars and a
Schoolmaster that were impeached of the same Crime. Commissioners were
forthwith appointed for their Trial, who were much to seek, for there was not
any Proof against any of the Parties; for which reason the Chevalier de Rohan's
friends, went Every Night around the Bastille, crying out aloud, La Treaumont
is Dead, that so as he only could Charge him, he might thereby apprehend that
he should retrench himself to, and stand upon the Negative; but being too far
off to hear any thing, he could not make use of this Advertisement as might
have been wished for his Good. In the mean while, the Commissioners, who were
Counselors of State, having represented to him at sundry times, that the only
means to soften and prevail with the King, was to have recourse to his Mercy,
that they brought him insensibly to fall into the Snare, under the Assurances,
nevertheless, which one of those Commissioners gave him of his Pardon; but he
had no sooner got his Secret, than that he went to tell it to the King, who
commanded the Proceeding on to the Judgment of his Process; He was Condemned to
lose his Head as well as his Accomplices, bating however the Schoolmaster, who
was Hanged. As soon as the Sentence was passed, he had a Glass taken from him,
wherein he drunk, as also a Knife he made use of at Table, and asking the
Reason of it, perceiving that instead of giving him an answer, his Guards cast
down their heads, he suspected his Misfortune, and inquired into the matter. He
was but too soon informed how the Case stood. However having received this Blow
with much Constancy, he desired he might have sent him Father Bourdaloue the
Jesuit, who brought him to think of dying. Though his Relations were of the
first Persons about the Court, not one durst ask his Pardon of the King, so
true it is that real friends are only to be known at a pinch, and in Necessity.
Thus being by all the World forsaken, he was led to Execution, which instead of
being performed in the usual Place, was done in the Bastille, where three
Scaffolds were raised with a Gallows. Thus dy^d the Chevalier de Rohan, who had
been Grand Veneur, and had spent part of his Youth in Debauchery: but his
misfortune, that happened in the slow'r of his Age, joined to a Majestique
Deportment, and some other good Qualities he had in him, having caused his
Infi^mities to be forgotten, he was unquestionably, more pitty'd than he would
have been, had he died in his Bed. The King had formerly shown him some good
Will; but had hated him Extremely of late years, because that upon playing with
him, and winning his Majesty's Money, the Chevalier de Rohan threw four or five
hundred Pistols out of the Window, upon the Kings having returned 'em upon his
hands, saying, they had agreed before they had begun to play, to pay one
another only in Golden Lewisses. Since that time the Chevalier de Rohan,
without being retained by the Respect he owed the King, had held such Insolent
Discourses of his Majesty, that they merited Punishment; for this Reason did
many People believe that Naturally he was not over-Wise, wherein he resembled
his Eldest Brother, for he had been Cag'd for his Extravagancy, and thus the
Younger Bother's Behavior was attributed only to an Infirmity of Nature, though
for the most part it ought to have been attributed only to his Resentment. In
the Interim the Enemies, who upon the Account of this Intrigue had soothed
themselves with some happy Events, having found how far they were from this
hopes, turned their Arms, as I have said before, against Brittany, where after
having made a Descent, they were forced to retire. In the mean while, His Most
Christian Majesty, notwithstanding the King of England, had Abandoned him, and
that his Other Allies not content with having done the same, had likewise sided
against him, he nevertheless harbored new Conquests in his Mind. For this
purpose he marched against the Franch-Comte, a Province from whence the Enemies
might have derived Great Advantages, would they have taken the Duke of Lorrains
Advice, who Counseled 'em to fix there the Seat of the War. He represented to
them that they might from thence easily enter into Burgundy, and pass perhaps
into the Remotest Provinces of France, where there were Malcontents enough to
Expect they would rather favor the Success of their Arms, than oppose them.
The King, through the fear he was under this Advice would be followed, had
proposed, by the Suisses Intercession, the Neutrality for that Province; but
the Enemies by no means agreeing to it, the King improved this Refusal to the
gaining over the Suisses, among whom he Insinuated, that the Hostilities would
spread themselves to their very Doors, if the War once drew near la Comte.
Having thus prepossessed their minds, he gained over their Principal Men by the
means of his Money, and these having brought the Others to a Compliance to bar
the Enemies the Passages, the King repaired into the Comte, where he laid Siege
to the Principal Places. The Duke of Lorrain, who had taken upon himself to
have an Eye to the Conservation of that Province, did what he could to make the
Suizzars Change their Opinion, to whom he plainly demonstra^ed, that if they
suffered this Conquest, it was themselves laboring to the loss of their
Liberty; but not being able in any wise to bring them to his Bow, he was
obliged to stop, so much the more as that the Viscount de Turenne was got near
him to oppose his Passage. Thus the King having not found any Difficulty in his
Enterprise, finished it in a short time, and without undergoing any Considerable
loss.

The taking of la Comte had wherewithal to startle the Enemies; however as
they built great hopes on their Army in Germany, which was to be Composs'd of
the Emperors forces, of those of the Marquis of Brandenbourg, of those of the
Princes of the House of Brunswick and of sundry Others, they were not the more
inclined to make Peace. The King to oppose so formidable an Army, sent some
Succors to the Viscount de Turenne; but as he had not Troops sufficient to
resist on all sides, the King Summoned the Bar and Arrier-bar of his Realm,
which quite ruined the nobles, that were already much distressed; the service
he derived from them was so inconsiderable, that the year following he chose
rather they should give money than serve themselves; for which reason the fiefs
were taxed in proportion to the Revenue, which made many Gentlemen Clamor; but
they were all so Low, that whatever Disposition they had to Revolt, Indigency
was the Cause that not one durst give any tokens of his ill will. In the mean
while all the World was amazed at the taking of La Comte, at a time when the
King seemed to have so much business upon his hands: but his Conduct being
Seconded with his good fortune freed him from all things with advantage: In
effect about that time was it that the Messinezes revolted, which hindered the
Spaniards from availing themselves of a victory they gained in Roussillon. As
they had sent Troops thither, the King had caused the Count de Schomberg to
march that waywards, a Captain that had acquired great fame wherever he had
served, and principally in Portugal: but his presence having not hindered the
enemies from Seizing on the Castle of Bellegrede, they were masters of the
passage of Roussillon. After this from Catalonia they received as much victuals
as they desired, which made them resolve to encamp on this side the Pyrenees.
They placed the Headquarters at Morillas, and the Marschal Schomberg, being
posted at San Juan de Pages, nothing now but the River of Boullon separated the
two Armies. This River was fordable in several places, so as that we daily
expected the Enemies to pass it to march against Perpignan, where we had
discovered the Winter before that they kept some Correspondencies. But as there
was no coming to one another without Engaging themselves in Great Defile's*
each side remained above three weeks in it is Camp, without stirring, and though
so very near, all ended in some Musket-shots, which the Outgards fired upon one
another, the River being between Both. The Count de Schomberg caused his Camp
to be fortified, as also the enemies did theirs, which daily occasioned new
Difficulties in the Design each Party fostered. Mr de Schomberg was much
stronger in men then the Spaniards; but the latter had much more experience;
for properly speaking Mr. de Schomberg had only with him the Militia, saving
two or three Regiments, for as to the Others, they were new Leavies, joined to
this, that his principal forces consisted in the Militia of Lanquedoc,
amounting at least to eight thousand men. This rendered him reserved and wary
in his undertakings, besides he had no great Confidence in Mr. le Bret, who
commanded the Army under him; for this latter being jealous that he was not
entrusted with the Command of the Troops in Chief, which he had before the
Arrival of Mr. de Schomberg, would willingly have suffered himself to have been
beaten, merely to spite the Marschal, which Mr. de Schomberg had perceived in
two or three Occasions.

Thus stood matters when the Duke de St. Germain, who commanded the Spaniards,
made use of a stratagem to engage Mr. de Schomberg in some false step; he sent
to tell him, but without declaring that this came from him, that he was
retreating into Catalonia. The Baillif of Ceret, a small Town at the foot of
the Pirenees was the Person he made use of in this Occasion, and this later
being come to tell this news to Mr. de Schomberg, colored it with several
things which rendered it the more probable; Insomuch that he gave the Army
order to stand to their Arms at break of Day: But he not having been able to
rise so early by reason of some indisposition, Mr. le Bret thinking to have all
the honor of that Day, caused the Horse to pass the River without staying for
his Orders, and the enemies Guard having notice to give way, he imprudently
engaged in floods, on whose banks he found Infantry that gave him the
entertainment of their Muskets. As that was not a place for his Horse to fight
in, he was at a great plunge how to make his Retreat, and lost a great many
men: But Mr de Schomberg being come up with the foot, the Disorder was not
altogether so great, though still many fled away as far as Perpignan. The
Militia of Lanquedoc was of this number, as well as sundry new Regiments, which
made Monsieur de Schomberg fear he might receive some greater Rout; But the
enemies resting satisfied with having dispersed his Army, repassed the River
after having killed twelve or fifteen hundred men, and taken many Prisoners;
Monsieur de Schomberg's Son was of this Number, and he was carried to Barcelona
with Monsieur de la Rabbiere, who commanded our Horse. The Enemies Design was
after this to go besiege Couilloure, which they had infallibly taken-in through
the Disorder we were in, if the Revolt of Messina had not obliged them to
repass the Pirenees, and go Embark in Catalonia, the same Ships which they had
designed for the Siege of Couillours served them for this Enterprise, which was
of an Extreme Consequence to them, for the Other Towns of Sicily were already
Wavering, besides that the Kingdom of Naples seemed more inclined to revolt,
than to contain its self in its Duty.

In the mean while, the Messinezes having perceived but too late, how difficult
a thing it is to cast off the Yoke of one's Sovereign, were obliged to send to
the King to beseech him that he would be pleased to send them Succors. The
King was far from denying them; and as he was in hopes of great Advantages from
this Revolt, their Deputies were promised they should have Men and Provisions
forthwith sent them, having equally need of Both. At that time, did the King
stand possessed of a Marvelous Reputation: For besides, the Conquests he had
newly made, the Viscount de Turenne had found means not only to stop the
Germans, but also to make them repass the Rhin, they repairing upon that River
without any Difficulty. All the Princes that had embraced Our Party, had
abandoned us, as has been said before, and what is Extraordinary, we had not any
more Cruel Enemies than those very People that Excited us to the War. But among
all Others the Prince Palatine made himself remarkable through the hatred he bore
us, either that he thought he had reason for so doing, on the account of the
little Consideration, he said, we had had for his Electoral Highness in diverse
Rencounters, or that being more exposed to our Arms, the Mischief we did him
rendered his sentiments the more Violent. Be it as it will, as he had a Vast
Wit, he so well gained all the Princes, that the most part of 'em Acted only by
his Movements. However though the Main Cause of his Renouncing our Party was the
hopes he had given him of Besieging Philip^bourg, whose Garrison desolated his
Petty Dominions; yet could not he oblige the Emperor to keep his Word with
him: for as that Place was strong of it self, and that besides all manner of
Art, and the utmost Industry had been employed to render it impregnable, the
Emperor was afraid of losing his time before such a Fastness, for which reason
he chose rather that a part of his Army should march for Luxembourg so to
advance upon the Meuse, while the rest should direct it is way to the Rhin. The
Detachment designed for the Meuse having passed without any Obstacle, entered
Flanders, and joined the Prince of Orange, under the Command of the Count de
Souche^. The rest pass^d into the Palatinate under the Orders of the Duke of
Lorrain and Count Caprara; But as they were to be suddenly followed by the Duke
of Bournonville, the Marquis of Brandenbourg and the Princes of Brunswick, the
Duke and Count were only to be entrusted with the Command 'till their Arrival:
For this reason had Montecuculi, an Old and Crafty Captain, desired the
Emperor to dispense him from coming that Year upon the Rhin; for as he would
have been likewise obliged to obey, he considered that the Honor of the Good
Success would redound to the Marquis de Brandenbourg, to whom the Command was
to be given up; and that, on the Contrary, if thing sped ill, he would be
taxed, as a Person that having more Experience ought to regulate all by his
Councels. Besides these two Armies that were Numerous, the Enemies made still
flying Camps on Several sides, One of which Rabenhaut Commanding attacked
Graves, a Place whence we too much galled the Enemies for them to forbear
endeavoring to take it from us. As it was the most Exposed, we had not failed
to provide it in due manner; thus Rabenhaut not meeting there the facilities he
had Expected, Changed, as I may say, his Siege into a Bloccade, that is, he
thought much more of saving his Men than of Exposing them; for he hoped that
having two Armies of his Party upon their Wings as strong as were those of the
Duke of Bournonville and the Prince of Orange, they would quickly have so
favorable a Success, that they would be in a Condition to relieve him As the
Viscount de Turenne plainly foresaw all this, he would not give the Enemies
time still to increase, and as they every Moment expected the Duke of
Bournoville without reckoning the Troops of Brunswick and of Brandenbourg, he
resolved to give them Battle before all these Succors were arrriv'd. The Duke
of Lorrain and Caprara, were Men of too much ability to concur to his Design;
wherefore they no sooner suspected it but that they contrived to elude it by a
speedy Retreat. And this was indeed the only means to prevent the Purpose. But
the Viscount de Turenne having made as much way in Six days space as they had
done in Twelve, obliged them to face about at Seintzeim, from whence they
pretended to reach Wimphem or Hailbron to pass the Nekre. They were Surpised
at this Diligence, so much the more as that they had left some Garrisons on his
Passage, which they thought must have stopped him. But the Viscount having
foreseen that this might make him miss of his Enterprise, did not spend his
time on them, well knowing that they would quickly be obliged to surrender if
he could but gain the Victory. However though that Seintzeim, where the Enemies
Infantry was entrenched, was no more than a Village, that is to say, though it
had not any fortifications, yet did it, nevertheless, give them a great
Advantage; it sheltered their Horse, posted beyond it upon a Mountain, of so
Difficult Access, that there was no coming at it but by Defiles, and these too
in a very small Number, for the way was faced with hedges and Vineyards, and
broaden'd gradually as you grew near, so as that when we should have taken the
Town, they had still the Advantage of a large Front, which is considerable for
the winning of a Battle. The Viscount de Turenne, having been long acquainted
with the ground, was not daunted by these Difficulties, but caused his Army to
file off along the way of Wisloc, and not doubting but that the Enemies had
lined the hedges near the Town with Infantry, he sent Dragoons thither, that
dislodged them thence; they forthwith retreated with the Rest of the Garrison,
and with it making fire, they for some time kept our Dragoons in Awe: But the
Viscount de Turenne having caused them to be sustained by the Infantry, the
Enemies durst no longer show their heads, and firing thence forward only at
Rovers, and much higher than was requisite, our Men advanced to the very foot
of the Walls, and sought to force some Gate or Other. The Cavalier
d'Hocquincourt, a son of the late Marshall of that Name, whom we have
heretofore mentioned, that was a Colonel of the Queen's Dragoons, having found
one where they had not had time to lay Dung, as they had done to the Rest, had
it Cut and Burst open, and seeing that the Enemies thronged from all sides to
drive him back, he was afraid of being overwhelmed with the Multitude, and
Caused his Men to enter the Houses on the Right and Left, which he caused
immediately to be boar'd: He from thence not only stopped them, but gave also
time to those that followed him to enter the Town, so as that the Enemies
seeing they could resist no longer, retired to their Cavalry. The Town being
taken in this manner, the Viscount de Turenne caused on his side some Bridges
to be laid over a River; which rendered the way impracticable for the Horse,
nay, and for the very foot; for it reaches round a kind of Mocrass, which even
in the greatest heats of Summer, renders the ground so soft, that those of the
Place are obliged to seek Paths: He caused his foot to pass over these Bridges,
for he was afraid lest they should break under the Cavalry, for which reason it
filled through the Town. The Enemies prepared to receive us, and had put Foot and
Dragoons into the Vineyards and Places that were most favorable to them, which
obliged the Viscount de Turenne to Post Infantry upon a Hill, that stood a
little beyond Seintzeim, from whence it fired upon that of the Enemies: But it
suffered much from their Canon, that was placed to advantage, and hardly made
one useless shot. As there was no Advancing the Cavalry without its Succors,
there was a Necessity of leaving it there, and according as our Squadrons drew
near, the Viscount de Turenne had them followed with Balls, which served them
extremely. The Enemies Horse had 'till then contented themselves with beholding
all that was done; yet by their Countenance manifested they only waited Orders
to March: In effect being not willing to give ours time to form a larger Front,
it Charged us Vigorously, and put us in Disorder. Saint Abre, a Lieutenant
General that was at our Head, was Mortally Wounded in this Occasion, which
still augmented our Disorder, so as that without the Infantry, which had drove
away that of the Enemies out of the Vineyards, and fired continually, it had
been impossible for us to rally. The Viscount de Turenne, who after such fair
beginnings was in Despair to see his Cavalry so hardly used, went nevertheless
from rank to rank, to exhort them to do better in a Second Charge that was
preparing: But the Enemies being Armed, Breast and Back, and having besides
each a Crescent in his Hat, having to do with People that were stark naked, put
us into so ill a condition, that they thought we should never have rallied:
And, indeed, our Disorder was extraordinary, and if the Infantry had not
stopped the Enemies Cavalry by an almost unexampled Bravery, ours were not only
ready to betake themselves to flight, but we should also have quickly abandoned
Seintzeim. Thus the Enemies having not been able to improve the advantage, they
might in all likelihood have expected from those two Charges, retreated slowly,
thinking that ours would venture to follow them without the help of the
Infantry: But the Viscount de Turenne, who had found to his great Regret the
Difference there was between his Cavalry and theirs, would not suffer it to
budge a step without it: Insomuch that though they still sir'd b^^^dy, we durst
not mingle on either side. What (...) be said of this Occasion, is, that the
Enemies (...) saved their Infantry, and that our Infantry (...) our Horse.
After this the Enemies advanced (...) the Nekre, which they passed to go meet
the Duke of Bournonville, who was on the March with the Troops of the Circles.
The Viscount de Turenne, who had tried their Bravery, thought it not fitting to
stay the coming up of this Reinforcement beyond the Rhin, and as he hoped the
King on his side would send him some Succors, he repassed on this side till
such time as this Reervill should be arrived. The Prince Palatine, lying at
watch to see what would be the Issue of this Conflict, was very much troubled
it had passed in this manner; and as for his Misfortune, his Country was upon
the Frontier of both Parties; it was he also that was obliged to lay the Cloth,
and defray the two Armies. For from the Moment that the Duke of Lorrain and
Caprara had joined the Duke of Bournonville, they directed their March on this
side the Nekre, and while they wasted the Country that lies between that River
and the Rhin, the Viscount de Turenne was on this side that River, where his
Army subsisted at the cost of the Lands appertaining to his Electoral Highness.
This Prince, that had more Wit than any one in all the Empire, was in Despair
to see himself thus the Victim of both Parties, and required of the Emperor,
either to free him from the abode of his Troops by making them enter Alsatia by
the way of Strasbourg, or by making them undertake the Siege of Philipsbourg,
which was the Subject of the movement of the two Armies. But there was little
less difficulty in the one as in the other. Stra^bourg, though an Imperial City,
refused to give the Enemies Passage, and there was little likelihood, as I have
already said, that they could undertake any thing upon the other Town. To get
out of this plunge he advised those of his Party to fight a new Battle, and it
seemed as if the Occasion was going to offer it self very speedily; for the
Viscount de Turenne, after having received some Succors, was already
preparing a Bridge to pass the Rhin, and if the Common Rumor might be
Credited, it was only with Design to go seek them out. They held diverse
Counsels of War thereupon; but the Duke of Bournonville and Caprara, who had
Order from the Emperor to husband his Troops, being in no wise to be
persuaded, in vain was it that the Prince Palatine endeavored to bring them to
his Opinion, though he had already gained the Duke of Lorrain. The Viscount de
Turenne was quickly informed of the Resolution that had been taken in this
Council, and hoping to render it abortive if he could once come up to them, he
passed the Rhin with a wonderful Diligence, and followed 'em Closely: but they
had timely provided for their Retreat, as they held themselves not in surety
beyond the Neker, they also passed the Mein. The Viscount de Turenne seeing the
part of the Palatinate that is Situated beyond the Rhin, at his Discretion,
extended his Troops thither, and put the Electour to that fright, that he fled
from Heydelberg, the Capital City of his small Dominions. In fifteen days this
Country, the finest in Europe, was utterly ruined: full five and twenty Great
Villages, and four or five small Cities were wholly reduced to Ashes.
Impossible is it to represent the Electour Palatine's Affliction, as soon as he
saw the Conflagration of his Country; he Swore before all People that he would
be Revenged, and without harkening to what his Reason might dictate to him, he
sent a Letter to the Viscount de Turenne, the Substance of which being, that he
would never have believed that a Prince, making Profession of Christianity,
would have proceeded in such manner; that Burning was only held good among
Barbarians, and if sometimes used among Christians, 'twas in such Cases as
could not be attributed to him; that he had not refused paying the
Contributions, nor done any Act so Barbarous as to merit this Reprisal; that if
he had had some Soldiers Massacred, his Subjects were Innocent of the matter,
and that this had been done by those of the Bishop of Spire; that therefore
this was a wilful Cruelty against him, for which he should be overjoyed to be
revenged, if he would distance himself from the head of his Army; that he
needed only to Chose the field of Battle, and the Arms he was minded to make
use of; that he was ready not only to grant him both the one and the Other, but
also to give him all the Sureties he should require.

The Viscount de Turenne was amazed at the Resentment of this Prince, accounted
so Wise, and who nevertheless had suffered himself to be so hurried away with
the Desire of Revenge, that he had presumed he might fight with him. Not to
leave him any longer in this Error, he signified immemediately to his
Electoral Highness that he was under great Affliction for what had happened;
that far from going about to Excuse his Soldiers, not one of All those that
Occasioned that Conflagration had Escaped punishment: But that if he durst
speak something in their Excuse, the Cruelty that had been Exercised upon their
Companions, was so strange, that it was not to be wondered if they had Avenged
'em upon inanimate things; that in their first Motions they had not taken the
pains to Examine who had been the Authors of so Cruel a Usage; that having seen
their Comrades Hanged upon Trees, some having their Hearts torn out of their
Bellies; Others their Privy Members cut off; Others their feet burnt, and in
short all so inhumanely used, as gave Occasion to believe they had passed through
the hands of Executioners, he left his Electoral Highness to think with himself
whether they were come to consult him about taking their Revenge; that if it
were so he had reason to blame him; but that if it were not so, and that on the
Contrary he had caused Justice to be done by Examplary Punishment, he did not
think it reasonable to be taxed in such a manner by his Electorel Highness;
that as for the Combat mentioned in his Letter, he should take it for a very
great Honor, if the Post he was in would allow him to Embrace it: but that his
Electoral Highness knew better than any man, under what obligations he lay
through his Employ; that he could not flatter himself that the King would give
him the Permission; that it would be o^ too pernicious a Consequence, and that
for his part he would not expose himself to his Denial. These reasons, though
very pertinent, were not capable of easing that Princes Resentment, he being
daily more and more Exasperated by the ruin of his Country: But what
overwhelmed him with Grief was to see the slowness of his Allies, who with such
numerous Troops durst not venture upon any enterprise. Rabenhaut was just as
much advanced as at the first day before Grave, and the Prince of Orange,
though he had not yet been joined by the Count de Montorey, did nothing but eat
up Flanders out of House and Home, though his Army was above fifty thousand
men. The Prince of Conde was ever at the side of him, and they had often been
within a League of one another without any considerable matter occuring. This
the Duke of Lorrain found fault with as well as the Prince Palatine: and though
fortune had left some difference between them, since the one still enjoyed his
Dominions, and that the other was despoyl'd of his, yet as they were Both in
tribulation, they jumped almost altogether in their sentiments; However when
they muttered most against all these Transactions, the Prince of Conde engaged
an Occasion, wherein he might have acquired much Glory, if he would have
contented himself with the Advantages fortune at the first offered his
Highness. The Prince of Orange marched toward Le fay, a woody Country, as is
most part of Flanders, and the Ground obliging his Highness to leave some
Interval between the Van and the Rear, or rather the Van being not able to join
the Rear, but by passing several Defiles, the Prince of Conde, who was prompt
to Conceive, resolved to cut it off. For this purpose he caused the King's
Household to march, of which the right wing of his Army was composed, which
having totally defeated some Troops nearest at hand, so startled those that
were most advanced, that without thinking any longer of joining the Van, they
put themselves into the Church of Senef, and into other places where they
expected most resistance to be made; thus they abandoned some Carriages, that
were forthwith plundered: but this having not hindered our Troops from doing
their Duty, All those Places were forced, and a number of Prisoners were taken
and many men killed. This Good Success had not cost us a hundred men, whereas
the Enemies had lost full three thousand in the Action, besides the Equipages I
have mentioned. This was Sufficient to content another General than the Prince
of Conde: but his Highness thinking his Victory Imperfect if he did not render
it greater, caused the enemies to be pursued, who had drawn themselves up in
Batalia behind le Fay, after having garnished all the Avenues with Infantry and
Dragoons. He pusht there after a Surprising manner to drive away those Dragoons
and that Infantry: but the Enemies having the Advantage of the hedges over us,
they killed us so great a number of men, that in less than a moment all the
field of Battle was Covered with the Dead. The Prince of Conde began to be in
Despair that he had so lightly engaged in so great a Peril: But the Affair
being embarked, he would needs see if there was no means to come Happily off.
He caused fresh Troops to Advance, but the Enemies having done the same, his
New Efforts only served to make him try New Disasters; he lost an infinite
Number of Officers, and the end of the Battle was so dis^dvantageous to his
Highness, that it defaced the Honor he had acquired in the Beginning. In
short, the two Parties being Paul'd with so many Charges ceased firing upon one
another; and though the Night that had overtaken them had not been capable of
Separating them, Labor and Weariness did what Night had not been able to
Effect. However the two Armies remained in One Another view till Eleven a
Clock at Night, which made it presumed that at break of Day they would
re-ingage. The Prince of Conde being quite spent as well as the rest, had laid
himself down upon a Cloak at the corner of a Hedge, where his mind being full
of Care and Disquiet, he knew not how to repair the loss he had undergone, and
still less how to reincourage his men who seemed quite dejected; in effect, the
enemies meaning to retreat, spread a Universal fear and terror among our men,
by a discharge they made to hinder us from penetrating their Design: Insomuch
that had they charged at the same time instead of be taking themselves to a
Retreat, all our Army had undoubtedly been put to flight. The Prince of Conde
was overjoyed at the Course they had taken, and his Troops having had time to
recover Courage, he observed the enemies, who had a Design to beseige some
Place; not one was there but what was afraid, and some Governors manifested so
much weakness, as proved sufficient to depose them. In fine after having made
all Flanders tremble, they fell upon Oudenarde, wherein the Prince of Conde had
newly put the Marquis de Rann^s, Colonel-General of the Drag^ons. This Prince
knowing some Discourses were held to his Prejudice since the Affair of Senef,
hardly allowed himself time, to stay for some Succors that the Marshall de
Humieres was to bring him, to March against the Enemies, and breaking up as
soon as Ever it was come, not a man but imagin*d, that as his Highness was full
of Resentment, a great Slaughter was impending. The Diligence he used did not
permit the Enemies to take the Place before his Arrival; and the Counts de
Souches, and Monterey, having been of Opinion not to hazard their Troops, which
the Circumvallation held Severed from one Another, the Prince of Orange was
forced to Conform himself thereunto, though his Opinion lay rather to leave
something to Chance than receive this Affront. The Siege of Oudenard having
been raised in this manner, the Enemies Troops resolved to Separate, and the
Prince of Orange seeing that Rabenhaut, who was still before the Grave, would
remain there a long while, unless he was Succored, went thither himself with
his Forces. The other Enemies made also a great Detachment, with which they
directed their way toward the Meuse, where they took the City of Dinan, and
that of Huy, both situated upon that River. Impossible was it for the Prince
of Conde to oppose these Enterprises, for as much as that a part of his Troops
had been drawn out to be sent to the Viscount de Turenne, who every Moment saw
those Increased that made head against him. This had at* length obliged him to
retreat on this side the Rhin; and as there was reason to believe that the
Enemies could not pass that River at Strasbourg, whose Magistrates had promised
Exactly to observe the Neutrality, he had (...)e to the Conservation of
Philipsbourg, on which, after many ^^resolutions they seemed to have a desire
to fasten. That way-wards had they directed their March, and were in a posture
for any sort of Enterprise; for in short, their Army was now composed not only
of the Troops of the Emperor, and of the Duke of Lorrain, but also those of
the Princes of Brunswick, of the Archbishop of Cologne and of the Bishop of
Munster, without reckoning those of the Circles under the Command of the Duke
of Bournonville. They made up at least fifty thousand men, and only waited for
those of the Marquis of Brandenbourg: But as it had been a shame for 'em to
hide themselves being already so very numerous, they appeared in the Field, and
scattered different rumors as concerning their Designs. The Viscount de
Turenne was none of th^se that dwelt upon these sort of things; thus minding
their Paces more then all the rest, he quickly perceived their Aims were not
levelled upon Philipsbourg, and that their whole scope was to pass the Rhin*
This he opposed for some time with all the Success he could desire. But the
Enemies drawing near Mentz, they engaged the Electour, notwithstanding his
having passed his Word to the King to remain Neuter, to suffer them to pass
t^ro' the Town. To Cover his Infidelity, he signified to the Viscount de
Turenne that they had trepanned him, and that having promised them passage only
for the Sick, and for the Equipage, they had made use of his easyness to mingle
therewith the greatest part of their Cavalry. Easy is it to judge how little
satisfactory those Reasons were to the Viscount de Turenne. But not being in a
Condition to exert his Resentment. he was obliged to dissemble, and to run to
what was most urging. For the Enemies, after having thus caused their Horse to
pass, had built a Bridge near the Town, which served for their Infantry, and
they already began to appear in Alsatia, where they had ev*n seized on sundry
Posts. The Viscount de Turenne having judged by all these movements that their
Design was to enter into Lorrain, entrenched himself in their Passage; and though
he had but Twenty Thousand Men, he so hampered them that they durst not venture
to give him Battle. The Duke of Lorrain who had Correspondencies in his own
Country, received every moment* News from thence, by which he had signified to
him that his Highness would no sooner appear but that he would find People in a
readyness to follow his Fortune; for which reason he proposed to his Allies
that if they would grant him some Horse, he would so order Matters as to break
through into his own Territories: But as they were afraid that the desire of
returning thither, would make him attempt things beyond his Forces, they
refused him this Succors. This so exasperated him against them, that he openly
showed his Vexation, nay and Writ concerning it to the Emperor: But as he had
lived in so strange a manner that he was suspected upon the least thing, the
others easily washed their hands of his Accusation; and on the contrary made
the Emperor believe, that he minded much more his own particular Interest than
the Common Concern. In the Interim so Vast an Army having much ado to subsist
in such narrow Quarters, the Enemies resolved to repass the Rhin, to which
they, moreover, saw themselves excited by several Caballs they had in
Strasbourg, that endeavored to engage the Magistrates to Declare in favor of
them. The Viscount de Turenne being ignorant of these Practices, was afraid
lest they should return on the other side that River to Besiege Philipsbourg,
and being willing to oppose it, he set his Men to work upon a Bridge about half
a League from that Town. The Enemies being overjoyed he had thus followed the
lure, endeavored to augment his suspicions to make him pass the Rhin: But as
he was not a man to lie long under a mistake, he quickly discovered what
passed, and endeavored to apply Remedies accordingly. For this purpose he sent
Machaut, the Intendant of the Army, into Strasbourg, with order to remonstrate
to the Magistrates what they exposed themselves to, if they were wanting in
their Word. That after the Intelligence he had given him, as he had reason to
harbor some Umbrage, he wished that either they would remit to him the Guarding
of their Bridge, or would give him other Sureties; that it was for them to
consider whether they would rather choose to give Hostages, but that he was not
resolved to trust to their bare Promises. This Complement surpised those
Magistrates, and being spread among the Common People that were gained by the
Imperialists, there happened a Sedition; So as that they were for falling upon
the French. This Diorder still augmented very much at the approach of some
Troops, which the Viscount de Turenne had Detached to seize on the Bridge; for
he had been informed that those of the Town were under an engagement to deliver
it to the Enemies, and he meant to endeavor to prevent them: But the Marquis
de Vaubrun, who led them, having not been able to win the Redoubt they had made
to shelter it from Insult, he found himself so engaged, that had not the
Viscount de Turenne come up, he and his Men were in great Peril. In the mean
while Caprara* being advanced at the Head of a Thousand Dragoons and Three
Thousand Horse, seized on the Bridge* and the Viscount de Turenne having given
the Marquis de Vaubrun the Means to retire, the whole Army joined, and went to
seek out an advantageous Post. There being then no more obstacles to hinder the
Enemies from entering Alsace, they had nothing more to mind than to provide for
their subsistence in that Province, for the Viscount de Turenne caused all that
could be of use to them, to be removed into Savern and Haguenaw. The King being
informed of the People of Strasbourg's Infidelity, sent speedy Succors to the
Viscount de Turenne; but this Viscount Countermanded a great part of it* which
startled many People, being generally thought in great Danger. But he seeing
farther than Others, already meditated an extraordinary enterprise, and which
hardly any man besides himself could have happily managed. In the mean while
the enemies were advanced toward Ens^im, wherein they had deceived this
Prince, who had expected they would march against him, and principally, after
having seen some Horse appear. They made a great Trophy of this Stratagem,
which had sped them happyly, and this piquing the Viscount de Turenne, he would
needs let them see, that notwithstanding the inequality of the forces, he was
still in a Condition to ply 'em with work Sufficient. In effect, knowing that
they kept themselves in their Leaguer as if they had nothing to fear, and that
they slept out the whole morning in a great Confidence of their forces, he left
his Camp at two a clock after midnight, and endeavored to get to them before
they had notice of his march. Without a continual Rain, which lasted all the
night and all the day following, he had effected his Design: but his Army not
coming till five a Clock in the evening upon the Hills of Moltzheim, the
Enemies had time to precaution themselves, and to prepare for Battle. Though his
Men were very much fatigated, he made them possess themselves of the out-Posts
without suffering them to breath, and having stood to their Arms all the Night,
he led them to the Battle at Break of Day. It was more obstinate on Both sides,
than any that had been yet fought, and as it was the Viscount de Turenne's
Opinion, that when a General had five and twenty thousand Men, he had nothing
to fear, he did not mind, as I said before, that the Enemies had twice as many.
However, though that the two Armies were drawn-up in Battalia, they fought only
by Detachment, and what was considerable passed in a Wood, that was between
Both, and where the Enemies had entrenched themselves, that they might be able
to take us in the flank. They did Wonders to Defend it; but our Infantry and
our Dragoons rendered themselves Masters of it, after a long Conflict; Nay, and
kept it tho* the Duke of Lorrain Entered it with the Cavalry fthe Left Wing.
The Horse of the Right Wing seeing that all but they were engaged, fell upon
our Left, which it overturned upon the Body of Reserve; Insomuch that with one
single Charge it broke us entirely: But the Viscount de Turenne having an eye
to all, caused the Infantry to advance, and it again saved the Cavalry as it
had done at the Battle of Seintzeim. The Viscount de Turenne had a Horse
Wounded under him, as he passed from one Battallion to another to give his
Orders, and the Night having interrupted the Battle, he retired with Ten
Cannons he had taken in the Wood. The Enemies were ^^rely vexed they had not
been able to speed with such considerable Troops, and they resolved* after
having tried his Valor, not to engage in any Enterprise 'till the Marquis of
Br^ndonbo^rg was come up. His Electoral Highness being come at length, they
fancied the Viscount de Tarenne had no other Course than to retreat i^^o his
Mountains, and that they might go wherever they pleased: But his Excellency
meaning to show them, that he feared them not the more for their having
augmented their Number, he provided Savern and Haguenaw under their very Nose,
then Posted himself so to advantage, that he was in a Condition to Crosbite all
their Designs. They made a show of Aiming to Besiege those two Places, to
oblige him to quit his Posts; but he looking upon all their Motions, as so many
Snares which they laid for him, he so tired them out by his Patience, that they
fell to contriving how to enlarge themselves into upper Alsace, where they had
not met with any Fortified Place; they were obliged to take this Course,
because that so great an Army could not Subsist altogether. The Marquis of
Brandenbourg was on the side of Colmar with the Troops of Brunswic; and those
of the Other Allies took their Quarters on both sides the River d'Ill. The
Viscount de Turenne feigning he would follow their Example, caused his Troops
to march toward Lorrain, but instead of distributing them up and down, he
crossed that Province, wherein he had given order to have Oats and H^y ready
for his Horse: By that means he put it into a reasonable good posture; Insomuch
that it was hardly sensible of so long a March. In the mean while, not a Man
dreamt whither he was going, and the World was far from imagining he was
Marching against the Enemies; but having seen him direct his Way for Be^fort,
they began to suspect the Business, and at the same time enter into Admiration.
The Enemies, who had been far from Shrifting into his Design, had spread
themselves still more since his Departure, nay and some of 'em were come as
far as Remiremont, and to Espinal in Lorrain: These were the first he
attacqu'd; but escaping by flight, they carried to the Rest the tidings of what
Occurred. The Alarm was great among them, and they endeavored to defend the
Passage of the River d'Ill. The Viscount de Turenne did suspect that would be
the Course they would take; for which reason quitting the Main Body of the
Army, with all Expedition did he advance with three thousand Horse, he beat
some Squadrons, that were posted upon the Bank of the River, and they were so
Surpised, that they never thought of giving Notice to some of their Garrisons
that were Scattered up and down in Castles. The Army being come beyond the
River, he detached Great Parties to cut off those that were abroad, and we took
a great Number of Prisoners. However, though we passed in fight of several Places
wherein still Troops were, yet would not we attack them for fear of losing too
much time. By this means was the Marquis of Brandenbourg Surpised as well as
the Rest, which was perceived by the fault he committed in abandoning Turquem,
which is upon the Canal of Colmart. The Viscount de Turenne being come thither,
seized on it, and his Troops were no sooner in the Place, but that the Enemies
returned to drive them thence; this Occasioned a Sharp dispute, wherein many
Men were lost on both sides: But the Night coming on without the Enemies having
been able to drive us thence, they took that time to make their Retreat, and
repassed the Rhin at Strasbourg. In the mean while, they were not twenty
thousand strong on the Other side, and all the rest perished either in the
foregoing Engagements, or in this Occasion.

Tho* the Success the Viscount de Turenne had had against so numerous an Army,
had surpassed, as I may say, the hopes of the Court, yet was it not without
apprehensions, through the fear of the like danger; For we were from all parts
informed that the Germans made Extraordinary Preparations to return more
powerful then Ever. The Viscount de Turenne being repaired to Court, the King
made him so favorable a Reception, as could have no Addition, and having shut
himself up with him in his Closet, he would needs know all that had Occurred
during the Campagn, and could not sufficiently admire a Conduct that had
Screen'd the Kingdom from many Calamities. The Viscount de Turenne would have
laid hold of that Occasion to have made his Complaints of the Marquis de
Louvoy, who had often sent him Orders he had reason to Complain of, and
pretended that all the Generals should obey him, as if he had had more Skill in
Martial Affairs than they; but knowing that the Prince of Conde had no less
resentment than he himself had against this Minister, by reason of certain
Discourses he had held after the Battle of Senef, he resolved to see him first,
and, if possible, to act in Concert with his Highness, to disabuse the King of
the Great Confidence he had in him. The Prince of Conde being provoked against
the Marquis de Louvoy, with joy received the Proposal made him by the Viscount
de Turenne, and they agreed together, that the Prince of Conde should speak of
it to the King first, and that the Viscount de Turenne should back what he
should say. But Mr. Le Tellier having known, by I know not what means what had
been resolved of between these two Generals, he employed the Bishop of Authun
much in favor with the Prince of Conde, so as that this Prince, no longer
remembering what he had promised the Viscount de Turenne, let several days slip
without speaking to the King. The Viscount Suspecting the Occasion of it, would
not suffer this to make him be wanting to what he owed to himself, and without
complaining to the Prince of Conde, for his having forgot his word, he repaired
to the King, beseeching his Majesty to give him a private Audience. The King
having granted it him, he told his Majesty that as perhaps, he was not informed
of what passed, he was very glad to acquaint him with it; that he knew not
whether it was by his Order that the Marquis de Louvois had Written to him
several times touching what he had to do during the Campaign, but as the
Directions he had received were sufficiently ill digested, he attributed them
rather to his Minister than to his Majesty, who was too Illuminated to commit
those so^ts of faults; that he who was upon the place was more capable to
decide what there was to to be done, than the other, that was at a Distance;
that besides he left him to judge which was the man of the two that had the
most Experience; that he did not tell him this, to gainsay what was necessary,
but to let him know that the Marquis de Louvois, not content with doing his own
Office, would needs also perform that of Others; that if he had resolved to
confer on him again the command of his Army, he besought his Majesty that he
would vouchsafe to send him his Orders himself, and receive his Letters; that
the Cardinal de Bouillon his Nephew would encharge himself with Both, if not,
his Majesty would Extremly oblige him by dispensing him from serving any
longer, because that as it too much lessened his Honor, to Commit the faults
he was caused to make, he was very willing to husband his Reputation. The King
received this advertisement as a Wise Prince, and who was not so blinded with
his Minister as to refuse to do justiee to others, he permitted him to write to
him directly by the means of the Cardinal de Bouillon, adding also that he
would have him to be the Person to convey him his Orders. However as the King
knew that the Viscount de Turenne could not forbear speaking a little bitterly
to the Marquis de Louvois of what had happened, he would needs, for the keeping
of Peace between Persons so necessary to his Service, have this Minister go to
the Viscounts House, and desire his Amity. Many Others in the Viscount de
Turenne's Room would have thought themselves very much honored in the Visit of
a Man possessed of the Kings favor, and would, indubitably, have made use of
that Occasion to the Advancement of their fortune: But this Prince acting only
through a Motive of Glory, received the Compliment of this Minister with such
great Indifferency, that the Marquis de Louvois remained altogether Surpised;
However, as he had order from the King, as I newly hinted, to require of him
his friendship, he made all imaginable Advances to obtain it: But the Viscount
de Turenne answered him with his wonted phlegm, that as he knew very well that
these Words proceeded only from the Kings Command, he would thenceforward
Examine his Conduct, and when he should have done as many things to be of the
Number of his friends, as he had done to be of his, he would see what it became
him to do. This Answer was admired by the Prince of Conde, who could not
forbear saying, That the Viscount de Turenne had in this performed a finer
Action, then in Winning so many Towns and Battles: And indeed, we meet with
more Captains capable of those great Successes, than such as struggle thus
against favor: And of this the Prince of Conde himself gave testimony in that
Occasion, since he had, as was said, so soon forgot what he had promised the
Viscount de Turenne. In the Interim, this Affair that had made so much noise
among the Courtiers, far from puffing up the Viscount de Turenne, seemed to
render him still more affable toward All People. All those that had admired
what he had done in the foregoing Campagn, no less admired his Modesty, for he
generally went all alone in his Coach, and without the Attendance of more than
two or three footmen; Every one stopped to see him pass, and he returned to
Every Individual the Salute with so much Goodness, that the Parisians that are
easily Won upon by Civility, would as I may say, have Sacrificed themselves for
him, and this pleased 'em so much the more, as that other Persons of Condition
did not do the like, Especially the Marquis de Louvois, who Affected minding no
Body in his passage.

In the mean while, the King did not suffer the Winter to while out, without
endeavoring to attract several Foreign Princes to his Party, by the means of
his Money, and among others the King of Sueden, who had till then deferred
proceeding to a Declaration; but at length, resolving upon it at the
suscitation of several of his Council, that were Pensioners of France, he took
the field, and obliged the Electour of Brandenbourg, and the Princes of
Brunswic to draw back the greatest part of the Troops they had upon the Rhin.
As it was a long way to return into their own Territories, Especially for the
Marquis de Brandenbourg, His Subjects were very much alarmed at the Approach of
the Suedish Army, which must needs, if it had been well managed, have made
advantage of this Sovereigns Absence: But stopping, without any Necessity, at
some Sorry Buroughs, the Marquis of Brandenbourg had time to draw near as well
as the Troops of Brunswick, those of Munster, and those of the King of Denmark,
that joined all together against this Common Enemy: However as there needed not
so many to bring him to reason, they quickly separated to act in different
places. The Marquis de Brandenbourg having reassured his Dominions by his
Presence, pursued the Suedes, who had given ground upon the Notice they had of
his being near at hand, and having over-taken them at Ferb^rlin, he beat their
Rier. This Victory having opened him the way of Regal Pomerania, he attacked
several Places that made not any Resistance, while the Troops of Brunswick and
Munster fell upon the Duchy of Br^m^n. As concerning the King of Denmark, he
took the Isles of Dussedom and Wolin, and laid siege to Wolgast; Insomuch that
a Man would have said, that Fortune that had formerly caused the Great Gustavus
to make all these Conquests in a short space, would by no means that the
Enemies of his Successor should Employ more to take 'em away from him: Though
that these Disorders that Besell a Prince allied to the Crown, had matter to
startle the Court; yet as this had nevertheless made an advantageous Diversion,
the King repaired into Flanders where he made a show as if his Aim was upon
Charlemont: but having passed the Meuse, he caused Limbourg to be attacked,
while his Majesty himself made head against the Succors preparing by the
Prince of Orange. But this Prince being to cross the River of -- which he found
Guarded by a good number of Troops, his March proved Abortive, being not in a
Condition to undertake to force this Pass. Thus Limbourg being past all hopes,
it Surrendered to the Prince of Conde, whom the King had sent before it. The
Marquis of Rochefort took also the City of Huy, besides that Dinant had been
won at the opening of the Campaign, which afforded us still two Passes upon the
Meuse* and shut up close the Garrison of Namur. The Enemies having not been
able to hinder this Loss, resolved to Besiege the City of Trier* for the
opening to themselves the Passes of Luxembourg. The Duke of Lorrain being in
Those parts with his ^^cups, and some that appertained to the Princes of
Brunswic, having taken the Enterprise upon him, he left Cob^n^z behind him, and
having given some Jealousy by his March, the King sent the Marshall de C^^qui
to observe him. The Duke of Lorrain to Conceal from him his Design, made a
feint, as if he meant to Invade Lorrain, and having thus distanc'd the
Marshall from the place he designed to attacque, he of a sudden wheeled about
to Trier which he beleaguered. The Marshall de Crequi was very much at a
plunge how to relieve the place, not that he wanted Courage to undertake it,
but because he had newly given a Detachment of his Army to go into Brittany,
where the People were Revolted: The Inhabitants of Guyenne had done the like,
and both were brought to this extremity by the number of the Subsidies the King
had laid upon them, by reason of the pressing necessity he was in to raise
Money. Yet this did not hinder the Marshall de Crequi from drawing near Trier:
but as he was not the strongest, he entrenched himself at Tavern, the Mos^lle
being between him and the Enemies. Nevertheless he signified his Motions to the
Governor, whom he excited to a Vigorous Defense by the Promises he made him of
Relief, for he hoped to receive some Troops from the Bishoprics to supply the
room of those that were gone into Brittany. The Duke of Lorrain being an Old
Captain, filled with Experience, and unwilling to give him time to augment his
Forces, sent to scann the Moselle, which was found to be fordable in several
Places, so as that having left before Treves, only what was Necessary for the
Guarding the Lines, he marched directly to the River, with all his forces; he
crossed it immediately, yet not without the Marshall de Crequi's being
informed of his so doing, which obliged him to draw-up his Army in Battalia:
but his Horse chanced to be gone to Forage, which almost made him mad, for
out of fear of what might happen, three whole days had he forbidden any to stir
out of the Camp; but under the Pretext that he had given two hundred Horse
leave to go Forage, the Rest went along, contrary to his Orders. He fell into
an Extravagant Passion against the Marshall of the Cavalry's Lodgments, of
whom he demanded the Reason of their being gone, and this latter having no
other answer to make, but that he had delivered his Orders Exactly as he gave
them, His Head turned in such manner as that he was past knowing what he did:
Instead of possessing two Hills that were upon his Right, though he had been
minded that it was absolutely necessary so to do, he trifled away his time in
many things that were of less importance, and when he would have done that, it
was too late. The Count de la Mark, whom he had Commanded out for that purpose,
was killed in endeavoring to repair this fault, as well as several Officers
that backed him. This Disaster was followed with the like Success in all the
Posts the French endeavored to defend, because that our Infantry having not
Horse to make head against that of the Enemies, it was surrounded beyond the
Possibility of Prevention. The Regiment of Guards escaped into a Marsh, the
others betook themselves into the Woods, and the Disorder was so great, that
the Marshall de Crequi fled himself at last. He knew not at first whither to
Retreat; but his Despair inspiring him to go to Trier, he fancied he should do
well in following it is Dictates, forasmuch as that he had had tidings the Night
before, that the Governor was fallen from off the top of a Bastion, whither he
would needs go on Horseback, by which fall he was Killed Stone-dead. We know
not to what to attribute the faults which the Marshall de Crequi Committed in
this Occasion, unless to the loss he had suffered the evening before of his
Equipage, which had been burnt, which had put him into so bad a Humor, that he
was hardly to be known again. The Absence of his Cavalry did also thereto much
Contribute, but more than all this the Will of God; who would needs that such
Disasters should follow that we had newly undergone; and which was much
greater, for we had newly lost the Viscount de Turenne. Be it as it will, the
Marschal de Crequi being entered Trier without any other accident befalling
him, he comforted the Garrison for the loss it had suffered of the Governor,
and though the Place was not much worth of it self, he would have shown that
Courage is capable of supplying great Defects, if one called Boisjourdan, a
Captain of the Garrison, had not Debauched his Companions. This Captain, either
being afraid to fall in the Attacques, or being excited by some other movement
which it is difficult to apprehend, insinuated into the other Captains, that
the Marshall de Crequi being become a Bankrupt of his Reputation after what
had newly befallen him, was very willing to get to be Killed on the Breach, or
to render himself considerable by some desperate Exploit; that it was for them
to see if they would imitate him, they who had no share in his fault; that he
had ever used the Officers, as Servants, and that it was time for them to show
their Resentment on that score; that this was all they could have done for a
Turenne; but that a Turenne had been too wise to suffer himself to be beaten as
this Marshall had done, or to demand of them that they should Court being
Killed to repair his Honor; that for his part, he was resolved to expose
himself rather to all sorts of Perils, than thus to be an Implement to his
Intentions; that if they believed him, they would treat with the Enemies about
the Surrender of the Place; that the King could not take it ill of them, since
this was not done, 'till after having defended the Walls in all Points as far
as their Honor and the Duty of their Commands could require; that on the
contrary he would have reason to complain of them, if to satisfy a Desperate
Person, they exposed their Soldiers beyond what Reason and the Laws of War
prescribed them. Bois jourdan's Discourse was listened to with the more
Delight, out of the hatred that each one bore the Marshall de Crequi, who, as
he had very well urged, had ever been very Course in his Behavior to his
Officers. Thus All having approved what he had said, he was authorized to treat
with the Enemies. The Marshall de Crequi, having had the Wind of so
extraordinary a Transaction, could not believe it, if Boisjourdan did not
assure him of it himself, and knowing him to be upon the Rempart, he repaired
thither with Motions of Anger, which, nevertheless, he endeavored to
dissemble. But Boisjourdan, joining Impudence to Treason, made him quickly
burst out from the Constraint he was under by his Insolent discourse to him.
Then the Marshall de Crequi being no longer able to curb himself, laid his
hand to his Sword, and obliged him to leap into the Ditch. Boisjourdan went to
inform the Enemies that it was time to render themselves Masters of the Town;
but though they made use of his Advertisement, they let him see the Esteem People
have for Traitors, for they would not give him a Retreat: This obliged him to
endeavor to make his Escape; but being known at Metz, he was secured, and
afterward Beheaded, too mild a Punishment for such a piece of Treason as his.
In the Interim Trier was taken, half willingly, half by force, and the Marschal
de Crequi having refused to sign the Capitulation that had been agreed on by
Boisjourdan, was made Prisoner of War. The Enemies kept but ill the Conditions
they had granted, for as there had been those that had turned their Arms
against them, at their Entrance into the Town, they made use of that Pretext to
content their Avarice and their Cruelty; Several Soldiers were Stripped, several
Houses Plundered, and several Women ravished: which made the French, for
reprizals, severely treat some Towns they took. But all this was not capable of
Comforting them for the losses they had newly made, and which would have had
great Consequences, if the Duke of Lorrain had known how to improve the
victory: But having embroiled himself with the heads of the Troops that had
helped him to win it, he could not enter France, as otherwise would have been
easy for him to have done, for there was no longer any Army to defend the
Frontier; and the heart being inclined, as it was, to revolt, he had put the
State into a strange Combustion. On the side of Catalonia matters went a little
more happily, the Count de Schomberg recovered the Castle of Bellegarde, and
having thereby affranchiz'd Roussillon from the Servitude it was under, he
carried his Arms into La Cerdaigne, a Province of small extent, but
sufficiently fertile. We also gained some petty Advantages in Sicily, where we
took the City of Augusta. However the King having had the Complaisance to send
thither the Duke of Vivonne in the room of de Vallavoir, who minded more his
own Concerns than those of his Party, he achieved nothing considerable though
he had forces sent him capable of putting Affairs into a better Condition. The
King, after having Committed this fault, Committed a Second in not recalling
him, for he knew very well, that he had not sufficient Experience for an
Enterprise of that Moment; add to this, that though he had had sufficient, he
loved his Pleasures too much to apply himself in due manner to Affairs; but he
was linked to his Majesty by too Charming Considerations for him to inspect
matters so narrowly, he was Madame de Montespan's Brother, who had taken Madame
de la Valliere's place, which this latter had laid so to heart that she had
thrown her self into a Convent. Nevertheless all these things would not have
much troubled the King, but for the loss of the Viscount de Turenne, who on the
twenty seventh of July had been killed by a Canon shot. This Prince was
advanced at the head of his Victorious Troops against Montecuculi; an old
Captain, that had made War for above these fifty years, and who on the Account
of his Age was Excused from serving the year before. These two Generals
possessing almost an Equal Experience, having put in practice all that War had
most refined and crafty, made appear in five or six weeks time, that a Good
General is not forced to fight but when he pleases; for though they were still
near one another, not one of the two found the Occasion to attacque. The
Viscount de Turenne seeing these Difficulties, was contriving to take Welstadt,
thereby to Cut off the Enemies Communication with Strasburg, that in appearance
remained in Neutrality, but would have been very willing to break it in their
favor. Montecuculi having Suspected his Design, caused Troops to file off
thither; but the Viscount de Turenne having taken his measures remote, they got
thither first. All these Paces did not please the People of Strasburg, whose
Territory was equally a Prey to both Parties; for which reason many would have
had them declare themselves Speedily: But the wisest being of a Contrary
Opinion, remonstrated, that though they suffered every year by the
Neighborhood of the two Armies, it was notwithstanding more advantageous to
them, than to be Exposed to those Inconveniences, as to Espouse any Party; that
Both were Equally dangerous, because that in endeavoring to show themselves
Independent, they would perhaps suddenly fall into servitude; that after this,
they could not refuse the entrance of their Town to those on Whose side they
should have declared themselves; and who should assure them that either the One
or Other would not Seize on it, seeing themselves there the masters; that good
sense required the never receiving into ones Walls any Body that could be
suspected; that the Efforts Both sides made to Engage them on their Respective
sides, should sufficiently acquaint them what Importance their Town was of. The
Emperor and the King made them a thousand fair Promises to bring that about;
but the former, nothwithstanding the advice of the Wisest, advanced his Affairs
much more then the latter, all whose offers were Equally Suspected. The
Viscount de Turenne knowing the Disposition People were in at Strasbourgh, sent
thither to Threaten them, which a little Curbed their Spirits; for they All
making Reflection that this great Man might still this Campagn have again the
same Success he had had in the former dreaded least he might turn his Army
against their Town. In brief, his Reputation alone retained them rather than
his Forces; and indeed there was little likelihood that a Town having Eight or
Nine Thousand men in Garrison should quake before an Army, that often was
hardly more numerous. It was not Strasb^urg alone that had so much fear,
Montecuculi knew not what Course to take to Supply and keep on foot his Army,
which no longer derived from Strasb^urg, all the Succors it was wont to
receive thence: He Sought for field ou all sides where he might find Forrages,
that were not Common in a Country where War had so long been made: Besides
this, it became him to find an advantageous situation, where he might be
sheltered from the Viscount de Turenne who still coasted him. In short he saw
himself reduced to fight or dye of Hunger, when a Fatal day happened for us: I
mean that Unhappy day wherein we lost the Viscount de Turenne. He had never
been seen more gay and joyful, nor more Content, he fancied that the Enemies
could no longer* Escape him, and though it was not his Custom to say any thing to
his own Advantage, he could not forbear blazing the then present State of
things; nay he Signified it to the King; But during these Occurrences meaning
to go view a Hill, on which he might erect a Battery, he received a Canon-shot,
which hit him in the Breast, and made him fall Dead upon the Spot. St Hillaire,
the Lieutenant of the Artillery, whom he had brought with him, having been
wounded at the same time, his son began to make Complaints conformable to the
misfortune that was befallen him: But St Hillaire, melting all into tears,
showed him the Viscount de Turenne's Body, adding that if any thing ought to
grieve him, it ought to be the loss they had newly suffered of so great a man;
this news was forthwith divulged throughout our Army, and occasioned so great a
Consternation, that one would have said that every man had been Condemned to
Death: After Silence for a while, they fell a Sobbing nor more nor less than if
they had lost each Individual his own Father; the new Soldiers as well as the
Old broak-out into Skreams and Howlings capable of Softening the most hardened
hearts, it was a Won 'er to see that People that had so little a time to know
him, were as sensible as those that had been often gra^ify'd with his favors.
In the Camp nothing more but Lamentations were heard: the Soldiers cried to one
another, what our Fathers then Dead; What shall we do? Who shall bring us over
the Rhine again in safety? nay and when we have passed it, under whom can we
Serve from whom we may expect the like Treatment. Each Individual then took
Delight in relating the Obligations he had to him; but notwithout interrupting
his story with abundance of tears that bedewed his face. Yet would every one
see the ^^dy of his General: But this Spectatle renewed their Cries and their
Wailings. In so general a Sadness, it was impossible to discern the Relations
from strangers, so real was the Grief; Nor indeed was it without Reason, that
the Soldiers called him their father, since that they bore him the same
Affection, as if he had been really so. The Count de Lorges, his Nephew, being
then at the Army, suspended for some Days the tokens of his Grief, for fear it
might be capable of daunting the Troops, that remained under his Conduct. After
this fatal Accident he made them direct their march toward the Rhine* and
knowing that the Enemies were brushing after him, he Mareshall'd his Army in
Battalia for fear of being Surpised. The Enemies perceived plainly by his
Countenance, that matters would not go (...) Swimminly on their side, as they
had Expected: But being wholly posses^'d with the thought that the Viscount de
Turenne's Death must* needs afford them a Great Advantage, they made up to the
Count with a Resolution to fight him. Then was it necessary for the Count de
Lorge to put in Practice the Lessons his Uncle had see him he prepared for
Battle, and did it in so much order as spoke him to be a great Proficient. The
Battle was long and doubtful, but the Enemies having throughout found an
Extraordinary Opposition, they judged more Convenient to retreat, than to
fasten any longer upon a thing that had been less useful than Damageable. The
Count de Lorges no longer finding any Impediment in passing the Rhine,
Conducted his Troops into Alsace, where he resolved to wait the Kings Orders,
to whom he had dispatched a Courier. In the Interim being willing to pay his
last Duties to his Uncle, he had him a Service performed, whereat, if
Prevention had not been used, Every man of all the Troops would have assisted.
For the least Soldier being hurry'd-on by the Affection he had for his Memory,
thought himself no less obliged than the Count, to be at this Ceremony: Not one
was there however, that Contented himself with wearing Mourning in his heart,
Every Individual would needs by outward marks show his Affliction; and if as
much Crape could have been got as they would have had, we should have seen what
perhaps, had been never seen in any Army, that is to say, All the Soldiers in
Mourning, in Reality they did not mind what it might cost, and he that could
get any, thought it a great favor of Fortune. The King having received the
Count de Lorge's Courier, was so very much Afflicted that he would not see any
Body for several days together, he said publicly that he had lost the Wisest
Man of his Kingdom* and the Greatest of his Captains; and fearing that after
this the Enemies might easily enter into the heart of his Dominions, he sent
the Prince of Conde into Alsace, and this Prince found the Means to stop them.
The whole Court was sensible to this loss, as well as the King, saving only the
Minister, who was not so very sorry, though he durst not let it outwardly appear.
The Archbishop of Reims, his Brother, was not, altogether, so Circumspect, he
did such things to show his joy as displeased his father, who being one of the
Wisest Courtiers of the Age, reprimanded him for this Carriage. Nevertheless
what ever Grief was shown at Court, yet was it still much less than that of the
Parisians, who though Commonly sufficiently tenacious, would willingly have given
the half of their fortunes to have redeemed his Life; several Instances did
they give of this their Affection, by the Consternation the whole Town was in
at this News, and by their Lamentations for his Death: They were not afraid to
say, that after the loss the Kingdom had newly had, it was in great Danger. In
effect, the King being of the same Opinion, was very willing to make sure of
the Grandees, by conferring* New favors on them; he made Eight Marshals of
France, though there were those of the List that were not in overgreat Esteem;
the Duke of Vivonne was of this Number, that gave Occasion ^o a jest that past
upon that Subject, for there were those that said, that the Seven O^^ers had
been made Mareschels of France by the Sword, and that the Scabbard dubbed
Vivonne. In the mean while, the King to Honor the Memory of so great a
General, would have him Buried at St. Denis, the Place of Burial of the Kings;
an Honor, that had been very rarely granted, and which also is not to be hoped
for, 'till after having like him performed such very Important Services.
Whereupon he was transferred from Sansbak, where he had been laid-up, to
Brie-Comb^ Robert, a small City, Six Leagues from Paris. The Minim's went to
receive him at the Gates, with the Clergy of the Town, and having laid him in
their Church in State, they let him remain there until the Twenty Ninth of
August, when he was transferred to St. Denis: His Guards and his family
accompanied the Corpse, followed with a Great Number of Domestiques, whom his
Relations had sent to adorn the Funeral Pomp. These forts of Ceremonies, ever
sad of themselves, yet never had had any thing so Doleful as this; Every
Individual Wept even to the very Peasants, who flocked from the Neighboring
Villages, being attracted by the Fame of so great a Man: These ^ears redoubled,
when the Body was taken out of the (...), which the Religious came to receive
at the Abbey* Gate, every one having a large Wax-Candle in in his hand; his
Guards carried him into the Quire, where a State had been prepared, (...) which
they laid him. On the morrow ^e had a Magnificent Service performed, but which
came nothing near that which was performed some days after at Nostre-Dame,
where the Parliament, the Chamber of Accounts, the Court of Aids, the
University and the City had notice to be present at b(...)an Order under the
Signet; the Clergy received also one for the same purpose, and repairing all
thither, the Marquis de Rhodes, Great master of the Ceremonies, accompanied
with Mr Sain^o^, that performs that Office under him, went to fetch the
Relations that were in the Archbishopric. Fifty Poor People Clothed in Gray
Cloth, and having Flambeaux of White Wax in their hands, attended at the Gate
to march before the Mourning; The Four and twenty Tipsta^^s with their Robes of
Ceremony, on which were fastened the Scutcheons of the Deceased's Arms,
followed them; and after them four Heralds at Arms in their Coats, and holding
their Batons in their hands. The Officers of the Ceremonies came after; and
these went before the Mourning, at the head of whom was the Duke of Bouillon,
having on a Cloak, whose Train was born up by Gentlemen, as well as that of the
other Relations. A Stately Mansoleum was there in the Quire, around which the
Heralds at Arms being ranged, the Archbishop of Paris began the Service, at
the end of which the Bishop of Lombes Preached the Funeral-Sermon. This
Ceremony having been first proclaimed by the Heralds at Arms, attended by the
Tipstaffs before the Palace where the Deceased dwelt, and in several Public
Places in these Terms.

Noble and Devout P^rs^^^* pray to God for the Soul of the most High, most
Generous, and most Potent Prince, Henry de la Tour d Avergne, Viscount de
Turenne, Marshall of the Kings Camps and Arms, and Colonel-General of the
Light House of France; and having renewed the Words a Second time, they added,
Who was killed on the 27th of July last, by a Canon shot near Sansbak, as he
was going to view the Enemies Army to deliver it Battle, for whose Son the King
Causes Prayers and 'Services to be Perso^m'd in the Church of Nostre-Dame of
Paris. This day at Three a Clock in the Afternoon, the Ves^ers and Vigils of
the Dead will be Sung, and to Morrow a Solemn Service will be Celebrated at Ten
of the Clock in the Morning. Pray to God for him.

Thus the King having omitted nothing for the paying to the Memory of this
Great man all the Honors due to his Virtue, manifested also much
acknowledgment to his Relations. He gave to the Count d'Auvergne the Duke of
Bouillon's Brother, the Charge of Colonel General of the Horse, and the
Government of Limosin: The others shared also in his Bounties and Esteem; and
amongst others the Count de Lerges, who was quickly after made Marshall of
France, and Captain of the Guards du Corp.

The END.
Some Books Printed, and sold by R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden.
BEamount and Fletchers Plays: In all 51. in large Fol. Mr. Shakespeare's Plays:
In one large Fol. Vol. Containing 43 Plays. Bishops Brownrig's Sermons, in Fol.
Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple and Altar: In Fol. Dr. Alistry's 40
Sermons: In Fol. Towerson on the Creed: In Fol. Hudibras Complete: In 8o
Present State of England: In 2 Vol. in 12. Enter into the Closet: In 12. Mr.
Evelin's Calendarium Hortens. In 8o. Rules of Civility: In 12. Mauger's French
Grammar: the Twelfth Edition: In 8o. French Common Prayer: In 12. French
Psalms: In 12. French Testament and Psalms: In 12. Moral Essays, in 4 Vol. in
12. Plato's Apology of Socrates: In 8o. Natural History of the Passions: In 8o.
Dr. Whitby of Idolatry: In 8o Dr. Whitby of Host-Worship: In 8o Dr. Whiteby's
Answer to D. Cressey: In 8o Prospect of Humane Misery: In 12. Cornelius
Agrippa's Vanity of Arts and Sciences: In 8o Bp. Andrew's Devotions: 12. -- His
Manual for the Sick: In 12. Perswasives to the Commun. By the Author of Enter
into thy Closet. In 12. The Secret History of the House of Medicis.

