Distressed CHILD, OR, The Cruel Uncle: BEING A True and Dismal Relation of one
Esquire; Solmes of Beverly in Yorkshire; who dying, lest an only Infant Daughter,
of the Age of two Years, to the care of his own Brother; who with many Oaths,
Vows, and Protestations, promised to be loving to her; but her Father was no
sooner Dead, but out of a wicked Covetousness of the Child's Estate of three
hundred Pounds a Year, carried it into a Wood, and there put it in a
Hallow-Tree to Starve it to Death: Where a Gentleman and his Man being a
Hunting two Days after, found it half Famished, having gnawed its own Flesh and
Fingers ends in a dreadful manner. With an Account how the Cruel Uncle to hide
his Villainy, had caused the Child's Effigies to be buried in Wax, and made a
great Funeral, as if it had been really Dead: With the manner of the whole
discovery by a Dream, and taking the Wax-Child out of the Grave. With the
Uncle's Apprehension, Examination, and Confession before Justice Seubbs, and
his Commitment to Goal, in order to be Tried the next Assizes, for that
barbarous Action. Note, This Relation will be attested at the Three-Nuns, and
Rummer- Tavern without Aldgate: As also at the Three-Cups in Aldersgate-
street, by the Huttington-Carriers, etc.

Licensed and entered according to Order.



London, Printed by D. Brown in Bartholomew Close.

The Inhumane Brother, etc.
The Love of Money is the Root of all Evil; and is the Cause of the most
barbarous Vices, as may be seen by this following Example.
IN the Town of Beverly in Yorkshire, about two Months ago, there lived one
Squire Solmes, a very Honest Gentleman of about Three Hundred per Ann. His Wife
dying, by whom he had one little Daughter about two Years of Age, he continued
some Months a sorrowful Widower, he could not well enjoy himself after the Loss
of his Dear Spouse: And it so happened, that partly out of Grief, partly from a
violent Fever, he was brought to his Bed of Sickness, where he continued not
long, for he died within a Fortnight after he was taken by that Fever. He
expressed a great concern for little Girl; and therefore called his Brother, a
Gentleman that lived about 14 Miles from him, and begged him to take care of
his Daughter upon him. Brother, said he, I leave with you the Dearest Thing
that I have in the World, my little Daughter, and with her to you I entrust my
Estate; manage it for her Use, and take care of her Education in Virtue and
Religion; use her as if she were your own, and for my Sake see her married to
an Honest Country Gentleman.

All which was faithfully promised by the Brother: Thus when all things were
settled, the Gentleman dies, and the Brother takes Home the Child to his House,
and for some time used her kindly. But at the last the D -- l of Covetousness
possessed him; nothing run in his Mind so much as making away with the Child,
and so possess the Estate. After many ways, he at last concluded to take her
with him, and hide her in a hollow Tree: Which one Morning he effected, and
left the poor Infant with her Mouth stopped that she might not cry. For he had
so much Grace, not actually to Murder her, therefore he left her alive in the
hollow of the Tree; and the better to hide the Matter, gave out that the Child
was Dead; and therefore caused an Effigy of Wax to be made, laid it in a
Coffin, and a Shroud, and made a great Funeral for the Child. Thus the Effigy
was buried, and no notice at all taken of the Matter. At the same time, a
Neighboring Gentleman Dreamed, That that Day he should see something that
would sufficiently astonished him: He told it to his Lady, who dissuaded him
from going a Hunting that Day; but he was resolved, not giving any credit to
Dreams, and so takes Horse in the Morning: As he was a Hunting, he happened to
be in the Wood where the Child was. And as he was Riding by the Tree, his Horse
gave a great start, so that he had liked to have fallen down; and turning about
to see what was the matter, he saw some thing stir in a hole; and being
inquisitive to know the Cause, his Dream presently came in his Head. And
therefore he calls his Man, and bids him examine what was in the hole: Who
having searched the Tree, discovers the Child in the Tree. He took it out, and
his Master carried it to his Lady almost Dead; he told him his Dream was out,
declaring how he found the Child, and begged her to take Care of it. The Child
was revived, and in a little time brought to its self again; but they could not
imagine whose it was; till at last it happened that some Women came to the
Gentleman's House a Singing at Christmas; and seeing the Child, knew it, and
declared whose it was, and that it was supposed to be dead and buried. The
Gentleman goes and prevails with the Minister of the Parish to have the Grave
opened, and found the Waxen-Effigie of the Child in the Grave. He went to the
Justice of the Peace. to whom he declared the matter; who sent his Warrant for
the Child's Trustee: Who being convicted of the matter, was not able to deny
it, but confessed all the business. But seeing the Child was alive, it is
supposed he will not be tried for his Life; but it is thought a severe
Punishment will be inflicted on him; and the Justice appointed the Gentleman
that found the Child, to be its Trustee, till the Assizes. The Child is now at
the Gentleman's House, who loves it as if it was his own; for he has no
Children himself, and is a Man of a good Estate, and is likely to augment very
much the Child's Fortune.

POSTSCRIPT.
WE have this further Account from Huttington concerning the Child aforesaid,
That when the Gentleman and his Man found it in the hollow Tree, it was almost
quite Dead, it having been put there by the Inhumane Uncle two Days before, so
that the poor innocent Creature for mere Hunger, had in a lamentable manner
sucked and knaw'd its own Fingers ends till the Blood ran about its Cheeks and
Mouth to such a degree, that when it was brought to the Gentleman's Lady, she
fell in a Swoon at the sight of it.

The manner of the whole Discovery of the Uncle's ^ickedness, was thus: He
having some time before got the Child's Effigies exactly made in Wax, as
abovesaid, gave out the Child was Dead; and thereupon bought Mourning, and
buried the said Counterfeit Corpse in a Stately and Sumptuous manner: And he
being a Rich Man none in the least had any Suspicion of his being Guilty of so
barbarous a Wickedness, as to make away with his Brother's Child: So that had
not Divine Providence, in almost a Miraculous manner preserved the Child's
Life, it would have been impossible by humane Endeavors to have detected him
of the Crime. However, after he thought himself past danger, a Woman that had
often seen the said Child at his House, happened after to came by the
Gentleman's Door some days after it was found, and seeing it in the Maid's
Arms, (the Gentleman being by) says she, That Child is as like Squire Solmes 's
little Daughter as one Apple is like another; and further added, that if (quoth
she) I had not seen his Child buried some days ago, I should have positively
sworn it had been the same Child: Upon which the Gentleman called her into his
House, and told her the whole Story, how and where he found it almost starved
to Death, in a hollow Oaken-Tree as he was a Hunting; so that getting Knowledge
of the Woman where Mr. Solmes Lived, he was first of all Apprehended and kept
in Custody till the Grave was opened, at which time the Wax Child was taken
out, to the Uncle's great Shame and Confusion; and the more, when the Gentleman
told him how he found the living Child in the hollow Tree as he was Hunting:
Upon which he confessed the whole matter to the Justice, and wrung his Ha^^^
(...) ^^^mented after a sad and dismal mann^^ (...) guilty of such a monstrous
B^^^ (...) Flesh and Blood.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe best and most Experienced Romedy for Sore or Weak Eyes, that ever yet was
made known to the World, being of that wonderful Efficacy, that it infallibly
dispels any Humor or Salt Rheum distilling from the Head; and takes away all
Soreness, or Redness: or Swelling: It also strengthons weak Eyes (sometines
occasioned by the Smallpox) and will disperse any Films or Cataract growing
over the Eye, whereby the Sight oftentimes becomes dim; in a few times using
this Excellent Remedy, to those that will be persuaded to use it often, it will
preserve the Sight to an incredible Age, and read the smallest of Prints. It
being a Sacret acquired by a Gentleman in his long Study, whereby he has
wrought wonderful Cures among his Relations and Acquaintance; and now made
public for the Benefit of all People that will make trial of it.

For those that are really Poor they shall have it for Nothing; to Others for 6
d. the Bottle.

To be had only at the Bible in Westmoreland-Court in Bartholomew-Close, near
West-Smithfield.


