AN ACCOUNT Of the First VOYAGES and DISCOVERIES Made by the SPANIARDS in
America.

Containing The most Exact Relation hitherto published, of their unparalled
Cruelties on the Indians, in the destruction of above Forty Millions of People.

With the Propositions offered to the King of Spain, to prevent the further
Ruin of the West Indies.

By Don Bartholomew de las Casas, Bishop of Chiapa, who was an Eyewitness of
their Cruelties.

Illustrated with Cuts.

To which is added, The Art of Traveling, showing how a Man may dispose his
Travels to the best advantage.

LONDON, Printed by J. Darby for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, J. Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain, and Andr. Bell at the
Cross-kevs and Bible in Cornhil.

M.DC.XC.IX.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. page 1. A particular Account of what the Spaniards did in
Hispaniola. 6. Of the Kingdoms contained in the Island of Hispaniola. 9. Of the
Islands of St. John and Jamaica. 18. Of the Island of Cuba. 19. Of the
Continent. 23. Of the Province of Nicaraqua. 28. Of New Spain. 32. A more
particular Account of New Spain. 34. Of the Kingdom of Guatimala. 41. Of New
Spain; of Panuco and Xalisco. 47. Of the Kingdom of Yucatan. 52. Of the
Province of St. Martha. 60. Of the Province of Carthagena. 63. Of the
Pearl-Coast, and the Island of Trinidado. 64. Of the River Yuya-pari. 73. Of
the Kingdom of Vencuela. 74. Of the Provinces of the Continent called Florida.
80. Of the River de la Plata, or Silver River. 82. Of the great Kingdoms and
Provinces of Peru. 84. A Letter from Friar Mark de Xlicia to the King* of Spain
against the Cruelties of the Spaniards. 87. Of the new Kingdom of Grenada. 92.
A Letter of Bartholomew de las Casas concerning the Spanish Cruelties in the
Well-Indies. 100. A Fragment of a Letter relating to the same Affair. 104. The
Bishop of Chiapa's Discourse to the King of Spain in order to prevent the ruin
of the West Indies. 115. His Propositions concerning the Title of the Kings of
Spain to America. 138. A Dispute between the Bishop of Chiapa and Dr. Sepulueda
concerning the lawfulness of the Wars made by the Spaniards on the Indians. 150
The Bp of Chiapa's further Sentiments of that affair. 160 His Reasons at large
for subjecting the West Indies to the Crown of Spain, and thereby preventing
the Ravages of the Spaniards there, etc. 184.
Newly published,
AN Inquiry concerning Virtue, in two Discourses: the first of Virtue, and the
belief of a Deity; the second, of th^^ Obligations to Virtue. Price bound in
Calf 3 s. An Argument, showing that a Standing Army is inconsistent with a Free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the Liberty of this Nation. In two
Parts. Price 12 d. A Letter from the Author of the Argument against a Standing
Army, to the Author of the Balancing Letter. Price 3 d. The Militia Reformed,
or an easy Scheme of furnishing England with a constant Land-Force, capable to
prevent or to subdue any foren Power, and to maintain perpetual Quiet at home,
without endangering the Public Liberty. Price 12 d. A Letter to a Member of
Parliament, showing that a Restraint o^ the Press is inconsistent with the
Protestant Religion, and dangerous to the Liberties of the Nation. Price 6 d. A
Letter to his Majesty King William concerning the Expedients used by his
Predecessors to support the English Monarchy. Price 6 d. Some Remarks on the
Providence of God to this Nation during the four last Reigns. The 2 d Edition.
By Slings by Bethel, Esquire; Price bound 12 d. Discourses concerning Government,
by Algernon Sidney, Son to Robert Earl of Leicester, and Ambassador from the
Commonwealth of England to Charles Gustavus King of Sweden. Published from an
Original Manuscript of the Author. Price bound Sixteen Shillings.
The PREFACE.
AMerica was first discovered by Christopher Columbus a Genoese in the year
1492, in the Name of Ferdinando King of Arragon, but takes its Name from
Americus Vespucius a Florentine, who discovered the Country of Brezil five
years after, by order of Emanuel King of Portugal.

The Europeans had no sooner entered on this vast Continent, and the Islands
about it, but the Natives showed 'em all imaginable Kindness and Respect, and
were ready to worship 'em as Gods; but these soon took care to convince 'em of
their Error, and to deliver 'em from the danger of falling into this sort of
Idolatry, by treating 'em with all manner of Cruelties, and tormenting 'em like
so many Devils: so that these barbarous People received as great a turn in
their thoughts concerning the Spaniards, as the Barbarians of the Island of
Melita did in respect of St. Paul; for as these believed him to be a God whom
they had just before taken for a Murderer, so the other really found them to be
Murderers, whom they had a little before esteemed as so many Gods.

The following Relation of the Destruction of many Millions of Indians by all
the inhuman methods the Spaniards could invent, would appear incredible, were
not the truth of it confessed, and attested by the Spaniards themselves, and
among others, especially by Don Bartholomew de las Casas Bishop of Chiapa, who
made large Complaints of these Cruelties to the King of Spain, and to the Royal
Council for the Indies, with a design to put a stop to 'em if possible. That he
is a Person of irreproachable Credit in this case, will appear by the following
account, wherein he challenges all the World to disprove the truth of the
matters of Fact he asserts, while he stood the Test of a Court who could easily
have detected him, if he had attempted to impose on 'em by a malicious Falsehood.

This Bishop writes with such an Air of Honesty, Sincerity, and Charity, as
would very well have become one of a better Religion than that in which he had
the unhappiness to be educated. It may well surprise the Reader to hear a
Spanish Prelat declaim so loudly against Persecution, and plead so freely for
Liberty of Conscience in a Country subjugated to the Inquisition. To hear him
in his dispute against Doctor Sepulueda, decry all methods of Violence for the
propagation of the Truth, as more suitable to the Maxims of Mahometism than the
Principles of Christianity: To hear him assert the Natural Right of all Mankind
to Liberty and Property, and inveigh against all Usurpation and Tyranny in the
smartest Terms, is enough to move any one's Wonder, and Pity too, when on the
other hand it is observed how much he magnifies the Power and Authority of the
Pope in some of his Propositions contained in the following Treatise. But all
may serve to convince one how great an advantage or disadvantage a Man has as
he pleads the Cause of Truth or Error; and of the great difference there is
between the genuin Language of Reason and good Sense, and the servil Prejudices
of Bigotry and Superstition.

It Is no less a Subject of Admiration that a Book of this stamp, which reflects
so sharply on Persecution and Tyranny, should see the light cum privilegio at
this time of day in France, where the Civil and Religious Liberty of Subjects
have not been provided for with the utmost Care, where the Will of the Prince
has long since been the Law, and Dragoons of late years the principal
Missionaries for the Propagation of the Gospel.

This Treatise was first composed in Spanish in the beginning of the Reign of
Charles V. and was long since translated and printed in more Languages than
one; but having lately received a new dress in Modern French at Paris, it is
hoped this Translation from the French will not be unacceptable to the English
Nation. I Am sure the abovementioned Principles of the Bishop of Chiapa
concerning Property and Liberty both Civil and Religious, are more agreeable to
the Genius and Constitution of this Island, than to the present temper of that
part of the Continent which lies nearest to it; and so this Book may expect at
least as favorable a reception in this Nation as in that where it has been
lately published.

What the Bishop says here and there in favor of his own Religion, is so weak,
and has been so often exploded here and every where else where the Reformation
has obtained, that 'twould be unnecessary to confute any of those Popish
Fancies in this Preface. It Is enough for me that I have faithfully discharged
the part of a Translator. And if some particular things occur more than once,
it must be considered on the one hand, that the Bishop had need to mention them
on diverse occasions, as when he disputed, and when he wrote his Arguments for
the use of the King of Spain, etc. and on the other, that the Importance of the
Affair, and the Greatness of his Zeal to have the Grievances he complained of
redressed, made so deep an Impression of some things on his Mind that he could
not forbear to repeat 'em.

As for the Translation it self, I hope those that shall have the Curiosity to
compare it with the French Copy, will find that I have done it Justice. And if
there is not that exactness of Method and Style the present Age expects, it may
be the better excused, when it is considered how long since the Original was
composed. However, the extraordinary things contained in this History will make
sufficient amends for any Defects in the Composition of the Bishop of Chiapa,
and for the abrupt Transitions sometimes used by the Compiler of this Treatise
in putting the Bishop's several Pieces together, of which it almost wholly
consists.

I shall only add, That as no History in the World can parallel this for the
inhuman slaughter of such vast numbers of People; so these Barbarities,
together with the bloody Croisades in the 12 th and 13 th Centuries, as well as
the many Persecutions and Massacres since the Reformation, render it no
difficult matter to discern to what Church that Prophetic Character agrees,
that in her was found not only the Blood of Prophets and of Saints, but of all
that were slain upon the Earth. Rev. 18. 23.

The Cruelties used by the ^^^niards on the Indians Page 8.
Page 8.
Page 14. 15. 51. 81.
Page 14. 25. 65.
Page 44.
Page 44.
Page 128.
Page 35.
Page 8. 55. 108.
Page 8.
P. 9. 54. 99.
Page 8.
P. 47.
P. 25. 45. 50.
P. 97.
P. 49. 94.


The Spaniards Cruelt(...) the Indians etc P. 21.
P. 36.
P. 46.
P. 35.
P. 37.
P. 54.


A RELATION OF THE VOYAGES and CRUELTIES Of the SPANIARDS in the WEST INDIES.
THE West Indies were discovered in the Year 1492; the year after the Spaniards
settled there, and inhabited this new World. But for the space of these 49 years
last past, an infinite number of People have left Spain to dwell in these
Countries: they generally touch at Hispaniola, which is a very fertile and
large Island, and is become very famous: The Extent of it is above 600 Leagues;
it is surrounded with a multitude of small Islands, and abounds so with
Inhabitants, that there is no Country in the World more populous. The Continent,
which is above 250 Leagues distant from it, is of a vast Extent; a great part
of which has been already discovered, and fresh Discoveries are made every day:
and such great numbers of People inhabit all these Countries, that it seems as
if Providence had amassed together the greatest part of Mankind in this part of
the World.

All these People are naturally simple, they know not what belongs to Policy
and Address, to Trick and Artifice; but are very obedient and faithful to their
rightful Governors: They are Humble, Patient, and Submissive, even to the
Spaniards who have subdued and enslaved 'em: they love to live quietly, and are
enemies to disputes and quarrels, hardly knowing what it is to be malicious, and
seldom meditating Revenge.

They are a weak effeminate People, not capable of enduring great Fatigues;
they care not to be exposed to Toil and Labor, and their Life is of no long
continuance; their Constitution is so nice, that a small fit of Sickness
carries 'em off. The Children of their Princes and Nobility, are in all
respects dealt with like those of the meanest Subjects: in which they differ
much from our Europeans, among whom the Children of Kings and great Men, are
brought up with all the delicacy and tenderness imaginable.

The People of this Island are so very poor, that they live in the want of
almost every thing; they are very cool and indifferent in the pursuit of
temporal Advantages, and seem not to be inclined to Pride and Ambition; their
way of living is so frugal, that the ancient Hermites in the Wilderness were
scarce more Sober and Abstemious. All the Indians in general go naked, only
they have the modesty to wear a sort of Apron about their Waste. They sometimes
use a kind of shaggy Covering, or a piece of Cloth an Ell or two long: Those of
the best Fashion lie on Beds made with Girts tied in Knots at the four Corners:
their Apprehension is quick and subtle, therefore they are very docile,
capable of receiving the impressions of sound Doctrine, and easily inclined to
embrace the Principles of the Catholic Religion: They are no Enemies to good
Manners, but have a greater disposition to Civility than many other Nations,
because their manner of Life is free from that care and distraction in which
the perplexity of Business involves others. The very first Ideas and
Instructions that are given 'em of our Religion, kindle in their Souls so great
a desire to the Sacraments and Divine Service of our Church, that those Monks
that instruct 'em, have need of a great deal of Patience to moderate the
impetuosity of their Minds, and to answer all the Questions they have the
curiosity to ask. And it may truly be said that these Indian Nations would be
the most happy in the World, if endued with the knowledge of the true God. The
Spaniards themselves who have treated 'em so ill, cannot but confess the
goodness of their natural Temper, and the great disposition of their minds to
every kind of Virtue.

The Almighty seems to have inspired these People with a meekness and softness
of Humor like that of Lambs: and the Spaniards who have given 'em so much
Trouble, and fallen upon 'em so fiercely, resemble savage Tigers, Wolves, and
Lions, when enraged with pressing Hunger. They applied themselves forty years
together wholly to the massacring the poor Wretches that inhabited the Islands;
putting them to all kinds of unheard of Torments and Punishments, (a part of
which Cruelties exercised on these miserable Indians we design to describe in
the sequel of this Work) insomuch that this Island which before the arrival of
the Europeans, contained about three Millions of People, is now reduced to less
than three hundred. The Island of Cuba, the length of which is equal to the
distance between Validolid and Rome, is entirely desert and destitute of its
Inhabitants, and nothing but Ruins now to be seen in it. The Islands of St.
John, and Jamaica, have met with the like Treatment, which were very fertile
and populous, but are rendered desolate and waste by the like means. The
Islands near Cuba and Hispaniola on the North-side are sixty in number, which
are commonly called the Isles of Giants, of which the least fruitful abounds
more with Plenty than the Royal Garden of Seville; but they are destitute of
Inhabitants, tho it is as wholesome an Air as men can breath in. When the
Spaniards first landed in these Isles, there were above five hundred thousand
Souls; they cut the Throats of a great part of these, and carried away the rest
by force to make 'em work in the Mines of Hispaniola. When some pious Persons
embarked to visit these Isles after the Ravage the Spaniards had made in 'em,
they found but eleven People left there: It was from the motives of Charity and
Compassion they undertook this difficult and perilous Voyage, in hope to
instruct these poor Creatures in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Above 30 Isles
near that of St. John were entirely depopulated, tho of a vast Extent, so that
there is scarce an Inhabitant to be found in them.

As for the Continent it is certain, and what I my self know to be true, that
the Spaniards have ruined ten Kingdoms there, bigger than all Spain, by the
commission of all sorts of Barbarity and unheard of Cruelties. They have driven
away or killed all the Inhabitants; so that all these Kingdoms are desolate to
this day, and reduced to a most deplorable Condition, tho this was formerly the
best peopled Country in the World. We dare assert, without fear of incurring
the reproach of exaggerating, that in the space of those forty years in which
the Spaniards exercised their intolerable Tyranny in this new World, they
unjustly put to death above twelve Millions of People, counting Men, Women, and
Children: and it may be affirmed without injury to Truth, upon a just
Calculation, that during this space of Time, above fifty Millions have died in
these Countries.

The Spaniards who invaded these Isles, and boasted of their Christianity, made
use of two ways principally to exterminate the Inhabitants: the first of which
was by an unjust and bloody War carried on with the utmost Barbarity and
Cruelty; the other was that detestable Policy which inspired them to massacre
all that had any remains of Liberty, or endeavored to shake off their
Tyrannical Yoke, and to free themselves from so unjust and intolerable a
Slavery; for this the bravest, most potent, and most warlike Nations off the
Indians attempted. When the Spaniards had killed all the Men in the War, they
suffered the Women and Children to live, but with the imposition of a Yoke so
cruel and insupportable, that their Condition was rendered as miserable as that
of Beasts. A multitude of other particular methods were taken for the
destruction of these poor Americans, but they may be reduced in general to
those two we have mentioned.

The Gold and Silver these People had in their possession, was the Motive that
violently prompted the Europeans to persecute and destroy 'em. The earnest
desire they had of speedily enriching themselves, in order to procure such
Honor and Dignity as far exceeded their Condition, inspired 'em with all this
inhumanity. In a word, their Avarice and Ambition were arrived to an excess
beyond Imagination; the immense Riches of the new World, the tractable, sweet,
and good disposition of the Indians, which rendered a descent into their
Country easy to any that would attempt it, have occasioned all the Ravage and
Spoil, all the horrid Massacres and Cruelties which the Spaniards have caused
'em to suffer. They made so little account of the miserable Inhabitants of
these Islands, that I may aver, without fear of being accused either of
Imposture, or of speaking inconsiderately, since it is that of which I have been
an Eyewitness, that they valued them less, and treated them worse than Beasts.
They had so little regard to the Salvation of their Souls, that they would not
give themselves the trouble so much as to speak of the Christian Faith and
Sacraments to those numberless multitudes of Men and Women whom they sacrificed
to their Ambition and Tyranny. And that which aggravates the enormity of their
Crimes, is, that these poor Indians had offered 'em no Injury, but on the
contrary, gave 'em as much Honor and Respect as if they had been sent from
Heaven; till they were wearied out with repeated Outrages and Massacres, and
constrained to betake themselves to Arms contrary to their inclination, and to
repel force by force, to secure themselves from the horrible Violences and
Insults of their Enemies, who invented diverse kinds of Torments for them, with
a Barbarity beyond all Description.

A particular Account of what the Spaniards did in Hispaniola.
AT this Island the Spaniards arrived in their first Voyages, and here began to
persecute and murder the Indians, taking away their Wives and Children, and
using 'em, or rather abusing 'em at their pleasure. They devoured all that
these poor Creatures had amassed together for their Subsistence with a great
deal of Care and Labor, not content with what they freely offered 'em as far
as their Poverty and the meanness of their Condition would permit: for they are
satisfied with what is of pure Necessity, not troubling themselves with
superfluities, or laying up great stores before hand. One Spaniard would
consume in a day, that which would have sufficed three Indian Families of ten
Persons each, for the space of a whole Month. This ill treatment and spoil soon
made the Inhabitants of this Island lose the Esteem they had conceived of the
Spaniards, whom they at first looked upon as messengers from Heaven: so that at
length they began to hide their Wives and Children, and whatever Goods they had
from 'em. Some retired into Caves, others fled up into the Mountains to avoid
meeting with the Spaniards who now appeared so terrible and cruel to 'em. The
Spaniards did not content themselves to beat 'em, and to offer 'em many other
Indignities, but cut their Throats in cold Blood: and without any respect
either to Age or Quality, put their Princes, and the Governors of their Cities
to death: They came to that height of Impudence and Villainy, that a Spanish
Captain had the Insolence to abuse the Wife of the greatest King of the Island.
This vile fact drove 'em quite to despair, so that from that time they sought
means of driving the Spaniards out of their Country; they betook themselves to
Arms, and did what they could to defend themselves against these Tyrants: but
the Weapons they used were neither capable of defending them, nor of offending
their Enemies to any purpose; and were more like those that Children use to
play with, than such as are fit for Soldiers to use in War.

The Spaniards, who were mounted on fine Horses, and armed with Lances and
Swords, looked upon Enemies so meanly equipped with the greatest Contempt, and
committed the most horrible Slaughters with Impunity. They passed through the
several Cities and Towns, sparing neither Age nor Sex, but killed Women and
Children as well as Men: They ripped up Women with Child, that Root and Branch
might be destroyed together. They laid Wagers one with another, who should
cleave a Man down with his Sword most dexterously at one blow; or who should
take his Head from his Shoulders most cleverly; or who should run a Man through
after the most artificial manner: They tore away Children out of their Mothers
Arms, and dashed out their Brains against the Rocks; others they threw into the
River, diverting themselves with this brutish Sport, and giving great shouts
while they saw 'em in this misery: And to add insulting Scoffs to their
Cruelty, advised 'em to struggle in the Water, and try if they could save
themselves from drowning. They held up the Bodies of Mothers and Children
together upon their Lances: they set up Gibbets, and hanged up thirteen of
these poor Creatures in honor to Jesus Christ and his twelve Apostles (as they
blasphemously expressed themselves): They kindled a great Fire under these
Gibbets, to burn those they had hanged upon 'em: They cut off the Hands of
those they saved alive, and sent 'em away in that miserable condition, bidding
'em carry the News of their Calamities to those that were retired into the
Mountains to escape the Spaniards.

They erected a small Scaffold, supported with Forks and Poles, upon which to
execute their Chiefs, and those of the most considerable quality among 'em.
When they had laid 'em at length upon this Scaffold, they kindled a gentle
Fire, to make 'em feel themselves die gradually, till the poor Wretches after
the most exquisite Pain and Anguish, attended with horrible Screeches and
Outcries, at length expired. I one day saw four or five Persons of the highest
Rank in this Island burned after this manner. But the dreadful Cries this
Torment extorted from 'em, incommoding a Spanish Captain; and hindering his
Sleep, he commanded 'em to be presently strangled. But a certain Officer whose
Name I know, and whose Relations are well known at Seville, put Gags into their
Mouths to hinder 'em from making a Noise, that he might not be deprived of the
brutish Pleasure of broiling them gently, till they breathed out their Souls in
this Torment. I have been an Eyewitness of all these Cruelties, and an
infinite number of others which I pass over in silence.

And because these poor People took all the care they could to hide themselves
from a Generation of Men so barbarous and wicked as the Spaniards, who had no
Sentiment of Humanity, Honor, or Religion left, but acted as if they were made
for nothing else but to destroy Mankind; to add further to their brutish
Cruelty, they taught Dogs to go a hunting for these poor Wretches, and to
devour 'em as if they had been Beasts. And because the Indians after they had
been provoked with so many unheard of Injuries, now and then killed one of them
when they met with 'em straggling; the Spaniards made a Law among themselves to
massacre a hundred Indians for every Spaniard they should kill.

Of the Kingdoms contained in the Island of Hispaniola.
HIspaniola contains five great Kingdoms, the Kings of which were very
powerful, and governed all the other Chiefs, whose number is very great: yet
there are some independent Countries which have their particular Lords, and are
not subject to any of those Kings. One of these Kings they call Magua, which
signifies a Plain, his Name being taken from the situation of his Kingdom,
which is extremely pleasant. This Plain is 80 Leagues in extent from South to
North, but is only five, eight, and sometimes ten Leagues in breadth. It Is
encompassed on every side with high Mountains; it is watered with a great number
of Brooks and Rivers, of which there are twelve that come not behind those
famous Rivers the Ebre, the Duere, and the Guadalquivir for bigness. The Rivers
that water this Plain, especially those falling down from a Mountain that looks
toward the West, abound with Gold. This Mountain bounds the Province of Cibao,
where the Mines bearing that Name produce that pure Gold of the fineness of 24
Carrats, so much talked of in Europe. The Sovereign of this Kingdom was called
Guarionex; he had under him such powerful Subjects, that one of 'em could bring
16000 Men into the field for the King's Service. I knew some of these Indian
Lords. This King was very submissive to the Kings of Spain, and expressed a
great deal of Affection to them. His Humor was mild and peaceable; and his
Soul capable of every Virtue. He once ordered all his Subjects to bring him
each of 'em a great Purse of Gold; but finding they were not in a condition to
answer his Requirement, he remitted half this Tax. The Inhabitants of this
Island have not the Art of extracting Gold out of the Mines. This Cacique
voluntarily offered himself to the Service of the King of Spain, on condition
the Queen Isabella would take care that those Lands should be cultivated, which
the Spaniards inhabited at their first Arrival in the Indies, extending about
the space of 50 Leagues toward St. Domingo: for he said his Subjects had no
Experience or Skill to extract Gold out of the Mines. If this Condition had
been accepted, he would faithfully and joyfully have accomplished his Promise,
which would have been of vast advantage to the King of Spain, who might have
taken above three Millions of Gold every year out of these Mines; and
consequently there might now have been fifty Cities in this Province as fine as
Seville.

But what greateful Acknowledgments did the Spaniards return to the kind Offers
of this Prince, who gave such Proofs of his Good Will to 'em, and sincere
desire to serve 'em? They covered him with Shame and Infamy, his Wife was
violated (as has been said) by a Spanish Captain, a Wretch unworthy of the
Christian Name. This Prince might have waited for an opportunity to revenge
himself of this Outrage, but chose rather to retire and live in Obscurity and
Exile in the Province of one of his Subjects, voluntarily abidicating his
Kingdom and Government. The Spaniards being informed of the place of his
Retreat, pursued him with the utmost Fury, without giving him time to hide
himself. They cruelly declared War against that Indian Lord that had given him
Sanctuary, and had received him with a becoming Humanity and Respect; they
ravaged all his Country, and never left off their Cruelties till they had found
and seized this Fugitive Prince, whom they loaded with Chains, and put on
Shipboard to be carried into Spain as their Prisoner. This Vessel was cast away
in the Voyage, a great many Spaniards drowned, and an incredible sum of Gold
and Silver lost: Among the rest there was a prodigious lump of Gold as big as a
great Loaf, which weighed 3600 Crowns. Thus did the Vengeance of God meet with
'em for the enormous Crimes they had committed in the Indies.

The second Kingdom is called Marien, where there is a fine Port just at the
end of the other Kingdom on the North-side: This Kingdom is larger than
Portugal, and more fruitful, and was stored with vast numbers of Inhabitants;
there are diverse Mountains in it, and several Mines abounding with Gold and
Copper. The Name of the King of this Country was Guacanagari, who had diverse
Lords under his Jurisdiction. 'Twas in this Country that famous Pilot who first
discovered America landed. Guacanagari received him with all imaginable
Hospitality and Civility; he made the best Entertainment he could for all the
Spaniards who accompanied him: when their Ship was sunk, they were received at
this Prince's Court as kindly as if they had been in the Houses of their own
natural Relations: here they met with all manner of Refreshments and Recruits
the Country afforded, which were given 'em with great Expressions of Humanity
and Compassion on the account of their Hardships. This King afterward to
secure himself from the barbarous Usage of the Spaniards, when they began to
commit their Massacres in his Country, abandoned his Kingdom, and was forced to
retreat into some of the remote Mountains, where he died with the Fatigues and
Inconveniences to which he was exposed. Those Indian Lords that depended on
him found no better Treatment, but perished under that horrible Slavery to
which the Spaniards had reduced 'em.

Maguana is the third Kingdom of this Island, and is an admirable Country, both
for Health and Fruitfulness. Here is made the best Sugar in America. Caonabo
was the King of it, who surpassed all the other Kings both in regard of his
Power, the Riches of his Kingdom, and the Respect and Ceremony with which he
was honored. This Prince not keeping on his Guard, nor at all distrusting what
Tricks the Spaniards designed to play him, was surpised in his own House by
the Artifices they had laid to ensnare him. He was put in a Ship to be carried
into Spain, and there were at the same time six Vessels in the Port ready to
set Sail, when all on a sudden there rose a horrible Tempest, which battered
the Ships to pieces and sunk 'em, with all the Spaniards that were on board.
King Caonabo loaded with Chains perished, together with the Vessel in which he
was embarked. The Almighty was pleased to display his just and terrible
Judgment by this sudden Storm, in destroying so many Spaniards, and thereby
punishing the Crimes they had committed in abusing the poor Indians. This King
had three or four Brothers, all of 'em valiant and courageous Princes; who
being much provoked at the unjust Captivity of the King, their Brother and
Sovereign, and informed of the Ravage and Massacres the Spaniards had made in
other neighboring Kingdoms, and after all hearing the News of the fatal End of
their Brother, betook themselves to Arms, and sought means of revenging
themselves on their Enemies. The Spaniards attacked 'em with their Cavalry,
which is very formidable to the Indians, whom they soon conquered, and made so
prodigious a Slaughter among 'em, that half the Kingdom was depopulated and
became desert after this Defeat.

Xavagua is the fourth Kingdom of Hispaniola, and is as it were the Heart and
Center of all this Island; the Language of it is the most refined and polite.
The People of this Kingdom are the most civilized, and their Manners more
cultivated than those of other parts of the Country: and there are a greater
number of great Lords and Persons of Quality among 'em. These People are better
shaped, and have a finer Aspect than those of the other Kingdoms. The King's
Name was Behechio, he had a Sister called Anacaona; both of 'em heaped their
Favors on the Spaniards when they landed in their Country, and with a great
deal of Generosity saved 'em from Death, which they could not otherwise have
avoided: They left no Stone unturned to show themselves obliging to the Kings
of Spain. After Behechio's Death his Sister Anacaona continued absolute
Mistress of the whole Kingdom. One day the Governor of the Island, accompanied
with 60 Horse and 300 Foot, sends a Summons to about 300 of the greatest Lords
of the Country to attend his Person. These few Horsemen alone were able to have
ravaged and laid waste not only all this Island, but even the whole Continent,
so defenseless were these poor People. The Indian Nobles, not at all suspecting
any treacherous Design, were by the Governor's Order brought into a House
covered with Straw, which he commanded to be set on fire, where they perished
miserably. Those of 'em who attempted to escape were pursued by the Spanish
Troopers, and killed without Mercy. They also killed a vast multitude of the
common People, cutting 'em and running 'em through with their Swords and
Lances. This same Governor caused Queen Anacaona, who had the sovereign
Authority after the Death of her Brother (as has been said) to be hanged, that
he might disgrace the Memory of that Princess as much as he could by so vile
and ignominious a Death. If at any time a Spaniard, either touched with the
Sentiments of Compassion, or prompted with those of Avarice, thought fit to
spare one of these poor Wretches for his own Service; another would come
transported with Rage, and fall upon him in his presence, and either run him
through the Body, or cut off his Legs, so as to render him unserviceable. Some
of these Indians who escaped this Massacre retired into an Island not above
eight Leagues distant from this Kingdom, to shelter themselves from the Fury of
the Spaniards; but these were condemned by the Governor to perpetual Slavery.

The Name of the fifth Kingdom is Hiquey: Hiquanama the Queen, who governed it,
tho very much advanced in Years and decrepit, was hanged by order of the
Spaniards, who tormented an infinite number of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom
by diverse kinds of cruel Punishments. Some they burned alive, they cut off the
Arms and Legs of others, and made Slaves of the rest. There are so many things
to be said of the ill Treatment and Cruelty the Spaniards exercised against the
People of this Island, that it is impossible to recount 'em all; and if that
could be done, the recital of 'em would appear incredible: and yet the Indians
gave the Spaniards no occasion to engage in so barbarous a War against 'em, and
to commit such Violences upon 'em; but one may truly say, these poor Creatures
lived in as great Subjection and Obedience to the Spaniards, as the most
submissive and obsequious Order of Monks do in the most regular and
well-disciplin'd Monastery; so that there was no lawful occasion given 'em to
rob those of their Property, or condemn 'em to a rigorous Slavery, who had
found means of escaping their bloody Massacres. It Is further to be observed,
that the Indians offered no Affront to the Spaniards when they first arrived in
America: So that they had no colorable Pretext for Revenge, or the least right
to punish 'em after so cruel a manner. As for those Sins, the Punishment of
which God has reserved to himself, such as Hatred, Envy, the passionate desire
of Revenge, the Spaniards had no occasion to reproach 'em on this account,
since these People have scarce more Strength and Courage than Children of ten
Years old. On the other side, the Indians had a thousand just Reasons to make
War with the Spaniards, tho these had no reasonable pretense to treat them as
they did with a barbarity equal to that of the most savage and inhuman Tyrants.

After this unjust War was ended with the Destruction and Massacre of all the
Inhabitants of these Countries, having reserved few besides the Women and
Children, they divided these among themselves, some keeping 30 of them, others
40, others 100, some 200, according to the Interest they had in the Tyrant of
the Island, whom they honored with the Title of Governor; for 'twas he that
gave 'em these Indians, on condition they would cause 'em to be instructed in
the Maxims of the Catholic Religion, tho the Persons to whose care he
committed 'em were the most ignorant, cruel, covetous, and vicious of all
Mankind. These (as might well have been expected) took no care to instruct 'em;
but confined the men to the Mines to get out Gold with incredible Toil and
Labor; they used the Women for Husbandry and Tillage, tho this last was a
Labor hard enough for men of the most robust and vigorous Constitution. They
fed 'em only with Herbs, or such like Food, that had but little Substance or
Nourishment in it: So that the Milk dried up in the Breasts of the Women that
gave suck, and their Children in a little time pined away and dyed with
Faintness and Hunger. The Men having no Conversation with the Women, but
dwelling in separate Houses, there could be no farther propagation of Children
by 'em. Thus at length the Men perished in the Mines with Hunger and Labor,
the Women dyed under the pressure of their servitude in the Fields; so that all
the Inhabitants of this populous Island were exterminated in a short time. And
indeed if the same course were taken every where else, all Mankind would be
destroyed in the space of a few Years. The Spaniards obliged these poor
Creatures to carry Burdens of fourscore or a hundred pound weight for a hundred
or two hundred Leagues. And that they might travel the more at ease, they would
make these Indians carry them in Chairs and Horse-litters on their Shoulders:
They used 'em like Beasts of Burden to carry their Utensils, and what they
pleased either for their Profit or Pleasure, so that the Backs and Shoulders of
these poor Slaves were black with Bruises occasioned by the great weight of
their Burdens. These incredible Fatigues did not secure 'em from Blows with
Cudgels and Whips, accompanied with Curses, nor from a great many other
Punishments. But 'twould be endless to describe all the Miseries these
unfortunate People were made to suffer; it would require whole Volumes, and the
reading of so deplorable a Story would deeply affect and soften every Mind not
quite divested of Humanity.

It is to be observed that the Destruction and Desolation of these Provinces
began since the Death of the most serene Queen Isabella, who departed this Life
in the Year 1504. Before this time the Spaniards never durst exercise their
Cruelties on the People of this Island, nor destroy their Country: if they
offered 'em any Violence, 'twas as it were by stealth, and with great
Precaution. But after the Death of this Princess, the Desolation became
general. Before this fatal time, they took great care to conceal whatever
Hardships they made these People endure, because the Queen was marvellously
zealous both to promote the Instruction and Salvation of the Inhabitants of
this new World, and to advance their Temporal Advantages; and accordingly she
gave us many Examples of her Piety and Zeal.

In whatever part of America the Spaniards set their Feet, they perpetrated the
same abominable Villainies and Massacres, to oppress and exterminate these poor
Innocents. They seemed to take Pleasure in the invention of new kinds of
Torments, and their Fury augmented every day more and more, till God Almighty
provoked by so many horrid Crimes, abandoned 'em to a reprobate Sense, and
permitted 'em to fall as it were from deep to deep, and from one Precipice to
another.

Of the Islands of St. John and Jamaica.
IN the Year 1509 the Spaniards went into the Islands of St. John and Jamaica
(which resemble delicious Gardens) with the same Intentions and Designs they
had carried on in the Island of Hispaniola. Here they committed a world of
Robberies and Cruelties, just as they had done in other places wherever they
came. The Marks of their Devastations and Murders were every where to be seen.
They laid all places desolate where they arrived, exposing Men to the Mercy of
Beasts. And after having inflicted all sorts of Torments on 'em, put 'em in the
Mines to work like Slaves as long as they lived. They entirely depopulated
these Countries, so that in these two Islands, where there were computed to
have been above 600000. Inhabitants before their Arrival, there are scarce 200
now to be found: The rest being all destroyed with Misery and Hardship, and
that without having any Pains taken with 'em to instruct 'em in our Religion,
or to administer the Sacraments to 'em.

Of the Island of Cuba.
THE Spaniards passed into the Island of Cuba in the year 1511, which contains
as much ground in length as from Vallidolid to Rome. There were formerly fine
and flourishing Provinces to be seen, filled with vast numbers of People, who
met with no milder or kinder Treatment from the Spaniards than the rest. On the
contrary, they seemed to have redoubled their Cruelty upon those People. There
happened diverse things in this Island that deserve to be remarked. A rich and
potent Cacique named Hathuey was retired into the Isle of Cuba, to avoid that
Slavery and Death with which the Spaniards menaced him: and being informed that
his persecutors were upon the point of landing in this Island, he assembled all
his Subjects and Domestics together, and made a Speech to 'em after this
manner. You know (said he) the Report that is spread abroad, that the Spaniards
are ready to invade this Island; and you are not ignorant of the ill Usage our
Friends and Countrymen have met with at their hands, and the Cruelties they
have committed at Hayci (so Hispaniola is called in their Language) they are
now coming hither with a design to exercise the same Outrages and Persecutions
upon us. Are you ignorant (says he) of the ill Intentions of the People of whom
I am speaking? We know not (say they all with one Voice) upon what account they
come hither, but we know they are a very wicked and cruel People. I Will tell you
then (replied the Cacique) that these Europeans worship a very covetous sort of
God, so that it is difficult to satisfy him; and to perform the Worship they
render to this Idol, they will exact immense Treasures of us, and will use their
utmost Endeavor to reduce us to a miserable state of Slavery, or else to put
us to death. Upon which he took a Box full of Gold and valuable Jewels which he
had with him, and exposing it to their view: Here is (says he) the God of the
Spaniards, whom we must honor with our Sports and Dances, to see if we can
appease him, and render him propitious to us; that so he may command the
Spaniards not to offer us any Injury. They all applauded this Speech, and fell
a leaping and dancing round the Box, till they had quite tired and spent
themselves. After which the Cacique Hathucy resuming his Discourse, continued
to speak to them in these terms: If we keep this God (says he) till he is taken
away from us, he will certainly cause our Lives to be taken from us; and
therefore I am of opinion 'twill be the best way to cast him into the River.
They all approved of this Advice, and went all together with one accord to
throw this pretended God into the River.

The Spaniards were no sooner arrived in the Isle of Cuba, but this Cacyque who
knew 'em too well, began to think of retreating, to secure himself from their
Fury, and resolved to defend himself by force of Arms, if he should happen to
meet with them; but he unfortunately fell into their Hands: and because he had
taken all the precautions he could to avoid the Persecutions of so cruel and
impious a People, and had taken Arms to defend his own Life, as well as the
Lives of his Subjects; this was made a capital Crime in him, for which he was
burned alive. While he was in the midst of the Flames, tied to a Stake, a
certain Franciscan Friar of great Piety and Virtue, took upon him to speak to
him of God and our Religion, and to explain to him some Articles of the
Catholic Faith, of which he had never heard a word before, promising him
Eternal Life, if he would believe, and threatening him with eternal Torment, if
he continued obstinate in his Infidelity. Hathuey reflecting on the matter, as
much as the Place and Condition in which he was would permit, asked the Friar
that instructed him, whether the Gate of Heaven was open to the Spaniards; and
being answered that such of 'em as were good men might hope for entrance there:
The Cacyque, without any farther deliberation, told him, he had no mind to go
to Heaven, for fear of meeting with such cruel and wicked Company as they were;
but would much rather choose to go to Hell, where he might be delivered from
the troublesome sight of such kind of People: To so great a degree have the
wicked Actions and Cruelties of the Spaniards dishonored God and his Religion
in the Minds of the Americans.

One day there came to us a great number of the Inhabitants of a famous City,
situate above 10 Leagues from the place where we lodged, to complement us, and
bring us all sorts of Provisions and Refreshments, which they presented us with
great marks of Joy, caressing us after the most obliging manner they could. But
that evil Spirit that possessed the Spaniards put 'em into such a sudden Fury
against 'em, that they fell upon 'em and massacred above 3000 of 'em, both Men
and Women, upon the spot, without having received the least Offense or
Provocation from 'em. I was an Eyewitness of this Barbarity; and whatever
endeavors were used to appease these inhuman Creatures, 'twas impossible to
reduce 'em to Reason; so resolutely were they bent to satiate their brutal Rage
by this barbarous Action.

Soon after this I sent Messengers to the most noted Indians of the Province of
Havane, to encourage and engage 'em to continue in their Country, and not to
trouble themselves to seek remote places to hide in, and advised 'em to come to
us with assurance of our Protection. They knew well enough what Authority I had
over the Spaniards, and I gave 'em my word, no Injury should be offered 'em:
for the past Cruelties and Massacres their Countrymen had suffered, had spread
Fear and Terror through all the Country; and this Assurance I gave 'em was with
the Consent and Advice of the Captains and other Officers. When we entered into
this Province, two and twenty of their Chiefs came to us, and the very next
Morning the Commander of our Troops, without any regard to the Promise that had
been made 'em, would needs sentence 'em to be burnt, pretending 'twas best to
put these People to death, because they might one time or other use some
Stratagem to surprise and destroy us: And I had all the difficulty in the world
to prevent 'em from throwing 'em into the Fire.

The Indians of Havane seeing themselves reduced to a state of severe Slavery,
and that there was no Remedy left, but they were irrecoverably undone, began to
seek Refuge in the Deserts and Mountains, to secure themselves if possible from
Death: Some strangled themselves in despair; Parents hanged themselves,
together with their Children, to put the speedier end to their Miseries by
Death. Above two hundred Indians perished here after this manner, to avoid the
Cruelty of the Spaniards; and abundance of them afterward voluntarily
condemned themselves to this kind of Death, hoping thus in a moment to put a
period to the Miseries their Persecutors inflicted on 'em.

A certain Spaniard who had the Title of Sovereign in this Island, and had
three hundred Indians in his Service, destroyed a hundred and sixty of 'em in
less than three Months, by the excessive Labor he continually exacted of 'em.
The Recruits he took to fill up their places were destroyed after the same
manner; and he would in a short time have unpeopled the whole Island, if Death,
which took him out of the way very happily for those poor Wretches, had not
sheltered 'em from his Cruelties. I saw with with my own Eyes above six
thousand Children die in the space of three or four Months, their Parents being
forced to abandon 'em, being condemned to the Mines. After this the Spaniards
took up a Resolution to pursue those Indians that were retired into the
Mountains, and massacred multitudes of 'em; so that this Island was depopulated
and laid waste in a very little time. And it is a most lamentable Spectacle to
see so fine a Country thus miserably ruined and unpeopled.

Of the Continent.
IN the Year 1514, a merciless Governor, destitute of the least sentiment of
Pity or Humanity, who was deservedly accounted a barbarous Tyrant, and cruel
Instrument of the Wrath of God, pierced into the Continent, being followed by a
great many Spaniards, all animated with the Spirit, and pursuing the Designs of
their Leader. Tho some of his stamp had entered the Continent before him, and
had killed a great many People, yet they had only exercised their Robberies and
Cruelties on the Seacoasts. But he of whom I am now speaking, surpassed all
his Predecessors in Cruelty and Impiety. He was not content to ravage the
Seacoasts, but laid waste great Kingdoms and vast Countries, and destroyed an
infinite number of Indians in the gross Darkness of their Idolatry. He run
through above fifty Leagues of the finest Country in the World, and carried
Desolation with him wherever he went, ruining in a little time the most
pleasant and fruitful Country in the West Indies. There were before the Arrival
of this Tyrant, abundance of Villages, Towns and Cities, that excelled those of
all the neighboring Countries. This Country abounds more in Gold than any yet
discovered. The immense Riches that have filled Spain since she has traded to
the Indies, have been chiefly drawn out of the Mines of the Country of which I
am now speaking.

The Governor of this new World invented various kinds of Torments to constrain
the Inhabitants to give him all the Gold they had heaped together. In one
Progress which some of his Captains made by his Order to pillage and rob the
People of their Riches, they put above forty thousand of 'em to the Sword;
others they burnt, others they exposed to be devoured by Dogs, and the rest
they destroyed with diverse other kinds of cruel Punishments.

The wretched Ignorance of those that have been sent to govern the Indies, has
occasioned a great many Mischiefs and Disorders, and hindered the Conversion of
the Indians: for what they endeavored to persuade 'em by their Words, was
contradicted by their Actions; and the Sentiments of their Minds were no ways
conformable to the Pretensions of their Tongues. They commanded the Indians to
embrace the Christian Religion upon pain of Death, they menaced 'em with cruel
Slavery, or the most exquisite Tortures, to force 'em to turn Christians, or to
swear Allegiance to the King of Spain: As if the Son of God, who died for the
Redemption of Men, had ordained those whom he sent to preach the Gospel, and to
declare the Kingdom of God, to constrain People that lived peaceably in their
own Country, to make profession of his Doctrine, on pain of being plundered of
their Goods, of being separated from their Wives and Children, of losing their
Liberty, and of being condemned to a cruel Death, without having ever been
instructed in the Maxims and Principles of our Religion. And the poor Creatures
must be obliged to render an exact Obedience to a King they had never seen or
heard of, till they were informed of him by these Messengers of his that
treated 'em so inhumanly.

This bloody and impious Governor, urged with the insatiable desire of heaping
up Treasure, pillaged the Indians that dwelt both in the Villages and Cities
with Impunity, while they little thought of securing themselves against his
Robberies. He ordered his Soldiers to go privately to the places where they
suspected any Gold was to be found, and to declare his Orders to the
Inhabitants of this new World after the following manner. Caciques and Indians
of this Continent, we are come to declare to you that there is but one God, one
Pope, and one King of Spain, who is Lord and Master of the Country you inhabit;
we therefore require you to come immediately and take the Oath of Allegiance to
him. After such kind of Preambles as these, they would choose the Night to fall
suddenly upon these poor Wretches, when laid fast asleep, without having taken
any measures to secure themselves from the Artifices of their Enemies, who
would set fire to their Houses, which being thatched with Reeds and Straw, were
burnt to Ashes in an instant. The Women and Children were devoured by the
Flames almost before they had time to consider where they were. They massacred
such as made a shift to escape the Fire, or kept 'em for Slaves; they used
Tortures to force 'em to tell where they had hid their Gold. They printed Marks
on their Bodies with red hot Branding-irons; and after all these Cruelties,
used their utmost diligence to make a strict search for the Gold of these
miserable People, of which they got vast Quantities together, besides Pearls
and Diamonds, which the Indians gave 'em to avoid their Fury. All the Spaniards
who had any Office or Place of Trust, committed the same Rapine; every one sent
as many Soldiers as he could to make their Progresses, and ravage all the
Country. The first Bishop that was sent into America, imitated the Conduct of
these covetous Governors, and made use of his Servants to procure himself a
share of the Spoil. The Spaniards in a little time carried away above three
Millions out of this Kingdom; of which vast Sum the King of Spain had scarce
3000 Crowns for his share. Here were above 800000 People slaughtered; and the
succeeding Governors continued the like Massacres till they had destroyed the
rest of the Natives.

I must not pass over in silence one Action committed in this Country by the
Governor, of whom I have been speaking. A Cacique, whether voluntarily or out
of fear I know not, gave him the weight of 9000 Crowns in Gold: This great Sum
not contenting the Spaniards, they tied this unhappy Prince to a Stake, and
setting fire to his Feet, endeavored by this means to extort a greater
quantity from him. This Torment being intolerable to him, he gave 'em the
weight of 3000 Crowns of Gold more, which he had reserved; upon this they
renewed their Tortures, to get still more out of him: but whether he had no
more to give 'em, or whether he was resolved they should exact no more of him,
he expired amidst their Tortures. They put to death many of the most
considerable Persons of this Kingdom after the same cruel manner.

A Company of Spaniards happening to light on a Body of Indians that had
retreated into the Mountains, to avoid the Tyranny of their Persecutors, in a
great rage fell upon the poor Wretches, and killing all the Men they could
catch, carried away three or fourscore Women Prisoners. The Indians that
escaped being highly incensed, came in Arms to attack the Spaniards, to try if
they could oblige 'em to let go their Prey: These seeing the Indians draw near
'em, and being unwilling to surrender the Booty they had taken, stabbed the
Women and Maids in the presence of their Husbands and Fathers, who were seized
with Horror and Despair at the sight of so lamentable a Tragedy; and smiting
their Breasts, cried out, O merciless Men! O cruel Spaniards! who can murder
poor Women that never offended you without Pity! And indeed they must be more
savage and bloody than Beasts of Prey, who can be capable of such brutish
Actions as these.

One of the greatest Lords of this Country, whose Name was Paris, had a House
about ten or fifteen Leagues distance from Panama; he was very rich, having a
great quantity of Gold in his possession. When the Spaniards came to his House,
he received 'em with as much Kindness and Civility as if they had been his
Relations. He frankly gave the Captain the value of 15000 Crowns: This Captain,
and the Spaniards that accompanied him, concluded that this Indian must needs
have immense Treasures, from the parcel of Gold he had given 'em; and since
they had undertaken this Journey on purpose to rob him, to make the more sure
of succeeding in their Design, they pretended they would be gone, and
accordingly took their leave of him, but returned in the middle of the Night,
and rushing into the City unexpectedly, they set it on fire, and destroyed
abundance of the Citizens in the Flames, and carried away thence 50 or 60000
Crowns. A Person of the most considerable Quality of any in this City escaped
the fury of this Fire; and after a Respite of three or four days, having got as
many Men together as he could, fell upon the Spaniards by surprise, killed
about fifty of 'em, and retook all the Spoil of the City which they had burnt,
and particularly the Value of 40000 Crowns, of which they had plundered him:
the rest of the Spaniards made the best of their way and escaped, but not
without a great many Wounds. Soon after this they returned with a greater Force
to attack this Cacique, and destroyed the greatest part of his Troops, making
Slaves of the rest.

Of the Province of Nicaraqua.
IN the Year 1522, the forementioned Governor undertook to subdue the Province
of Nicaraqua. The great Fertility of this Country, the Goodness of the Air, and
the vast number of the Inhabitants cannot be sufficiently expressed. There were
Cities in this Province four Leagues in length. The great quantities of
excellent Fruits that grow there, drew together those great multitudes of
People. These Cities being situate in vast Plains, the People had no Mountains
near in which to hide themselves; besides, the Climat is so sweet, and the
Country so agreeable, that the Inhabitants could not easily resolve to quit it,
and consequently were the more exposed to the Outrages and Persecutions of the
Spaniards; yet they suffered all with as much patience as was possible, that
they might not be obliged to change their Dwelling. And tho these People are
naturally of a mild and peaceable Temper, the Governor, or rather the Tyrant,
with the Ministers of his Cruelty, resolved to treat the Indians of this
Province after the same manner he had done those of other Kingdoms. Here he
committed so many Enormities, such Robberies and Massacres, that it is
impossible for any Pen to relate 'em all. He sent 50 Troopers into this
Province, which is bigger than the Country of Rousillon, who massacred almost
all the Inhabitants, without any regard to Age, Sex or Quality. If these poor
Creatures failed to bring 'em a certain measure of Corn which they exacted of
'em, or did not send into their Service such a number of Slaves as they
demanded, they killed 'em without Mercy. And this being a plain Country (as has
been said) there was no place to shelter 'em from the Spanish Horse, who
pursued 'em with the utmost Fury.

The General permitted these Villains to commit all the Insolences and
Robberies they pleased, and to take as great a number of Prisoners as they
desired. These they sometimes loaded with Chains of sixty or eighty Pound
weight; so that of 4000 Captives, scarce six were able to endure this Fatigue,
the rest all died by the way under the intolerable weight of their Fetters.
That they might not have the trouble to open the Chains of such as died with
Hunger, Thirst, Weariness and Toil, they cut off their Heads. When the Indians
saw the Spaniards prepare for these kind of Journeys, well knowing they were
never likely to see their Friends and Countrymen any more, they, with many deep
Sighs and Groans, and floods of Tears, uttered their Complaints after this
manner. Time was (say they) when we have traveled these Journeys to serve the
Christians, and have been suffered after a certain space of time to return home
to our Wives and Children, but now there is no hope of any such return; and
this Separation must be for ever.

One day a Fancy came into the Governors Head, to make a new distribution of
the Indians; he took 'em away from those for whom he had no kindness, and gave
a greater number to those he respected. This chopping and changing of Slaves
occasioned a great scarcity for one Year, there being but a very small Crop on
the ground. The Spaniards endeavored to supply this defect by taking from the
Indians all the Corn and other Provisions which they had laid up in store for
the Subsistence of their Families. This Disorder produced a Famine among 'em,
which destroyed above thirty thousand People. There was one Woman so
intolerably pressed with Hunger, that she killed her Child to appease her
Appetite.

All the Cities and Fields round 'em are like pleasant Gardens, which the
Spaniards cultivated according to the share each one had assigned him by Lot:
and to save their own Revenues, they fed upon the Stores that belonged to the
Indians, and lived at their Charge, devouring in a few days what these poor
People had been a long time getting together with a great deal of Care and
Toil. There was no Spaniard but had an Estate of his own, and kept abundance of
Indians in his House to manure his Land, and to do other Domestic Business:
and none of these were exempted from Slavery, their Nobles, their Women and
Children were made to work day and night for the advantage of the Spaniards,
who exacted Tasks of 'em quite beyond their Strength, and miserably wore 'em
out with excess of Labor and Hardship. They drove 'em out of their Houses, and
took possession of 'em; they seized their Goods and Lands, and instantly
consumed their Provisions, thus reducing 'em to extreme necessity. Many of 'em
died under the heavy Burdens they obliged 'em to carry on their Shoulders as
far as the Port, which was above 30 Leagues; for hither they made 'em bring
Planks and pieces of Timber for the building of Vessels. They forced 'em to go
and seek for Honey and Wax in the Mountains, where they were devoured by
Tigers: Women big with Child were not exempted from these hard Services, and
often perished together with their Fruit, under the pressure of this rigorous
Slavery.

That which contributed yet farther to unpeople this Province, was the liberty
the Spaniards took to exact of the Caciques, and richest Indians, a great
number of Slaves. This kind of Tribute was authorized by the Governor, and
levied with a great deal of Severity; for he threatened to burn 'em alive if
they failed to send him a Recruit of fifty Slaves every three Months, or as
often as he should give order: tho the Indians have no great number of Slaves
ordinarily, and it is much if a Cacique has three or four among his other
Domestics. If a Father had two Children, the Spaniards would take away one of
them, or two if he had three: The Parents must submit, with how great
Reluctance soever; but their Children were not ravished from 'em without
abundance of Tears and dolorous Complaints; for they have a very tender
Affection to their Offspring, and breed 'em up with abundance of Care. This
kind of Tribute being often extorted, all this Kingdom was in a few years
depopulated. There arrived five or six Ships here every year, which were laden
with Slaves, whom they transported into Peru and Panama, and there sold 'em,
where they died in a little time; for it has been confirmed by many
Experiments, that those Indians that are transported from their Native Country
into other Climats, seldom live long: And that which contributed to kill 'em
the sooner, was the neglect of supplying 'em with sufficient Sustenance, and
the excessive Labor with which they were over-charg'd. In the space of a few
Years there were above 500000 Slaves drawn out of this Province, tho they were
all burn free: and during the War that was made against 'em, there died about
fifty or sixty thousand besides these: the rest were condemned to cruel
Slavery, in which a considerable number died every day. There are about four or
five thousand People still to be found in this Province; but it was once one of
the best peopled Countries in all America: And in a little time in all
appearance the rest will be destroyed by the ill Treatment they continually
suffer.

Of New Spain.
NEw Spain was discovered in the year 1517, and the year following the
Spaniards began to ravage it, and to massacre the Inhabitants, tho they pretend
to go out of Europe to people this Country. Their Violences and Oppressions
arrived to such a height, that they had no regard either to God or the King,
but forgot both that they were Men and Christians. Since they came into this
Country, there has been nothing but Rapine and Spoil, Massacres, and buring of
Cities, nothing but Tyranny and Violence; so that they have in a short time
depopulated and ruined vast Kingdoms from one end to the other. The remembrance
of the Villainies and Cruelties committed there, has cast such a Terror into the
minds of the Natives, that they cannot think of a Spaniard without trembling.
They have not yet left off tormenting 'em; on the contrary they rather grow
worse and worse, and their Persecutions augment every year. The Spaniards since
they first entered into New Spain have destroyed 450000 by violent Deaths in
and about Mexico. This Country contains four or five Kingdoms, that come not
short of the Kingdom of Spain for Extent, Fertility, and Plenty of all things:
Here were Cities to be seen more populous than Toledo, Seville, Vallidolid,
Saragossa, or Barcelona; for tho all these Cities are well stored with
Inhabitants, those of the new World are yet more populous. The Country of which
I am now treating is above 1800 Leagues in compass. Here the Spaniards have
killed above four Millions of People by Fire and Sword, and other violent
Deaths, both Men, Women and Children, within the space of 480 Leagues. They
call the Countries they have got by their unjust and cruel Wars, their
Conquests, into which they entered with the bloody design of exterminating the
Inhabitants, and behaved themselves worse than Turks, or the greatest Enemies
of the Christian Name would have done. I don't now reckon in the number of
those they have killed, such as have perished in Slavery, or died under the
Hardships of their Tyrannical Oppressions. No Tongue is capable of describing
to the life all the horrid Villainies perpetrated by these bloody-minded Men.
They seem to be the declared Enemies of Mankind, and act as if they were
destined to destroy the whole Human Race: And how accuratly soever one
endeavors to relate the Cruelties and Ravages of the Spaniards, the thousandth
part of it cannot be uttered.

A more particular Account of New Spain.
IN the flourishing and famous City of Cholula, which contained more than
thirty thousand Families, the principal Inhabitants, together with the Priests,
led by him whom they looked upon as their High Priest, came with abundance of
Solemnity and Pomp to meet the Spaniards; and that they might receive 'em with
the greater Honor and Respect, they had ordered matters so amongst themselves,
that those of the highest quality in the City should conduct the Spaniards to
their Houses, and give 'em the best Entertainment they could. Notwithstanding
this, the Spaniards resolved upon the spot to make a horrible slaughter of 'em,
thereby to render themselves the more formidable, and to spread Terror through
all the Country. And this method they used to observe in every Country through
which they passed, viz. to make a great Massacre at their first Arrival, that
the People, who are as meek as Sheep, might not look upon 'em without dread.
They deputed some to go and treat with the chief Men of the City, and places
adjacent, to engage 'em to come and meet 'em, that they might confer together.
These were no sooner come to 'em, but they put 'em in Chains, while the
Inhabitants of the City knew nothing of this Treachery. They demanded 6000
Indians of 'em to carry their Baggage, their Utensils and Provisions: When they
were come, they shut 'em up in diverse Yards, and 'twas a miserable Spectacle to
see the poor Wretches prepare to carry the Burdens they were to lay upon 'em.
They were almost stark naked, and stooped down prostrating themselves upon the
Ground, submitting like Sheep to the Blows and Wounds these Tyrants gave 'em.
When they were all thus pounded in several Courts or Yards, part of the
Spaniards armed with Lances and Pikes filled up the Avenues to hinder the
Indians from escaping, while the rest put 'em to the Sword; so that none of
these escaped. Two or three days after they found some of them among the
Carcases all covered with Wounds and Blood, that had been left for dead; these
cried for Mercy, and begged they might be suffered to live; but these bloody Men
were not at all softened by their Groans and Tears, and the submissive manner
in which they asked their Lives, but cut 'em in pieces upon the spot with a
kind of nameless Cruelty. Above a hundred of the principal Indians of this
place were put in Irons, and kept alive as yet: But the Commander of the
Spaniards ordered Stakes to be fixed in the Ground, and these unhappy People to
be fastened to 'em and burnt. The King of the Country happened to make his
Escape, and retired into a Temple with thirty or forty attending him, hoping to
find Sanctuary there: Here he defended himself for a whole day. But the
Spaniards, who never gave Quarter to any one whom they found in Arms, set fire
to the Temple, and burnt all that were in it. They cried out of the midst of
the Flames: O vile and cruel Men! what hurt have we done you, that you should
kill us after this manner? Be gone, be gone to Mexico, where our King Montecuma
will punish you according to your deserts. It Is said the Spanish Commander was
at play during this Tragedy; and that when the Flames had quite consumed these
poor Indians, in a Transport of barbarous Joy, shall I say? or Fury, he uttered
these words: Nero, says he, beholding from Mount Tarpeius the Flames that laid
Rome in Ashes, heard the Cries of his Citizens without any Emotion of
Compassion.

The Spaniards made another great Massacre in the City of Tepeaca, which is a
yet finer and larger City than the former, and comprehends in it a greater
number of Houses. Here they killed a multitude of the Inhabitants with their
Lances and Swords. They afterward went to Mexico, where King Montecuma
accompanied with his Nobles, and those of the most distinguished Rank in his
Court, entertained the Spaniards with all sorts of Divertisements, to testify
how mightily they were pleased with their Arrival. The King's Brother came to
meet 'em with a splendid Retinue; he made 'em noble Presents in Gold and
Silver, and gave 'em rich Stuffs painted with diverse Colors: the King himself
received 'em at the entrance of the City with all his Court, being carried upon
a Golden Frame, or Chair of State, and conducted 'em to the Palace that was
provided for 'em. But the same day they seized this unfortunate Prince, who
thought of nothing less, and posted fourscore Soldiers to guard him, having
loaded him with a heavy Chain. This Action put all the Indians in a
Consternation and Fear. But to augment their Terror, they contrived to
signalize their Cruelty by some memorable Action. All the Nobility of the City
was engaged in representing Plays and Shows, and in dancing round the place
where their King was imprisoned, to allay the Troubles of his Mind during his
Captivity; in these Plays they exposed to view all their Riches and
Magnificence. These were the Demonstrations of their Joy, and of the desire
they had to please the Spaniards. The Nobles and Princes of the Blood,
according to their several degrees, were employed in these Plays and Dances (as
I have said) round about their Prince's Prison; so that there were about the
Palace two thousands young Men that were the very flower of the whole Kingdom,
and the Pride and Glory of the Court of King Montecuma: While they were thus
engaged, the Commander of the Spaniards with one of his Troops came to fall
upon 'em. He had sent the rest of his Soldiers into the other quarters of the
City, where the People were using the like Divertisements, ordering 'em to seem
to join in with these Indian Sports, as if they were mightily pleased with 'em,
but withal giving 'em a word to put these Dancers at a certain time to the
Sword. Accordingly they fell upon 'em, pronouncing the word St. James, which
was the Signal for massacring these poor naked Indians, that were in no
condition to defend themselves from Soldiers armed with Swords and Lances:
with these they made large Wounds in the tender Bodies of the young Noblemen of
Mexico, who were all massacred, and not so much as one of 'em escaped. The
Indians in the other parts of the City were seized with so much Horror and
Trouble, that they knew not where to seek for shelter to secure themselves from
the fury of these Cutthroats, whom they loaded with a thousand Curses. Since
this time they don't forget to celebrate the memory of this barbarous Action
with their Sighs and Tears, and have put this day in the Rank of their most
unfortunate ones, since in it they lost in a moment the most illustrious
Nobility of the whole Kingdom.

The Indians who had suffered the Imprisonment of their King with so much
patience, hearing of the Massacre of so many young Noblemen, could not but
express their Detestation of this so bloody and wicked a Fact, and took up Arms
to revenge themselves: and tho Montecuma had forbidden 'em to offer the
Spaniards any Violence, they attacked 'em vigorously, and killed diverse of 'em,
and the rest were constrained to retreat. The Spaniards put a Dagger to their
Prince's Breast, and showed him in this posture to his Subjects through a
Window, hoping the sight of it would oblige 'em to lay down their Arms, which
the Prince himself likewise commanded them to do; but they were too much
provoked now to obey even his Orders. They chose one to head 'em, and having
put all their Troops under his Command, attacked the Spaniards so furiously,
and fought with so much obstinacy, that these concluding they were not able to
withstand 'em, left the City, and retreated in the middle of the night; which
the Indians perceiving, pursued 'em, and killed a great number of 'em as they
passed the Rivers. However the Spaniards returned soon after with a greater
Strength, and assaulted and took the City, in which they made a horrible
slaughter, and burnt those Indians that were of greatest Note.

After they had committed all this Cruelty and Spoil in the City of Mexico,
they carried Desolation with them into the Province of Panuco, which is not
above twenty Leagues distant from it, and here exercised their ordinary
Barbarity. This Province was mightily stocked with People: but since the
arrival of the Spaniards, the greatest part of 'em has been cut off. The
Province of Tute-peca, and that of Colima underwent the same Fate; each of
which Provinces is as big as the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile.

It Is to be observed that the Spaniards invaded these Provinces only to plunder
and inslave the Inhabitants. One of the first things they did was to oblige 'em
to take the Oath of Allegiance to the King of Spain; which if they refused to
do, they were presently massacred, or made Slaves. They declared those of 'em
Rebels who came not to meet the Spaniards, and to submit to their unjust and
cruel Orders. Those of the highest rank among the Indians were accused of this
Crime, and this was improved against 'em to the King of Spain, without
considering that it is a plain Rule in Law, that none can be termed Rebels but
Subjects that are revolted from their Prince.

There Is no good Christian will make any difficulty to conclude, that such
Missionaries as the Spaniards have not the Qualifications necessary to
insinuate the Maxims of our Religion into these People, who are naturally free,
and know not how to bear the Haughtiness and Insolence with which they have
been treated: for they are peremptorily told, you must without any more ado
submit to the Obedience of a Foreign Prince, whom you never saw nor heard of;
and if you refuse so to do, we'll cut you in pieces; and this no sooner said
but done. But that which is more unaccountable is, that those who yield a blind
Obedience to all they command 'em, are no better treated than the others; for
they are made miserable Slaves, they exact intolerable Tasks of 'em, and
condemn 'em to all sorts of Torments: So that whole Provinces, both Men, Women
and Children, are destroyed in a short time: Nay, those whom they kill outright
are the happier sort, as having an end put to their Miseries in a moment. But
when they are forced by Menaces to promise Fidelity and Obedience to a Foreign
Prince, can it be pretended they are obliged to it in Conscience, when this
supposed Duty is neither founded on the Laws of God, nor those of Nations?
Besides, the Threatenings that are made 'em are capable of terrifying Men of the
greatest Courage and Resolution; wherefore all the Promises obtained by such
menaces have no value nor obliging force. I pass over in silence the Affronts,
the Insults and Injuries that were offered the King of Mexico. In a word, they
have violated all the Laws of Nations, and infinitely wronged and abused the
poor Indians. This is all the Service the Spaniards have done these People.

The Governor of this new World, supported by his imaginary Titles, sent two
Captains, scarce inferior to himself in Impiety aad Cruelty, into the Kingdoms
of Guatimala, which are situate toward the South: they pierced as far as the
Kingdoms of Naco and Gaymura, which extend Northward for the space of about 300
Leagues; these Kingdoms border upon that of Mexico. These Captains traveled
both by Sea and Land, accompanied with a good party of Horse, and a
considerable number of Foot.

The Captain whose Lot it was to travel into Guatimala, did a world of mischief
there (the other soon dying) he carried Desolation with him every where, and
filled this Kingdom with Blood and Ruin, to render the Spaniards formidable
even to future Generations. I am of opinion, that the mischief this Captain did
here surpassed whatever the Europeans had done before in the new World. He went
by Sea, and carried Sword and Fire throughout all the Coasts. Some of the
Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Yucatan, which is in the way to the Kingdoms of
Naco and Gaymura, made him magnificent Presents: yet as soon as he had entered
their Country, he sent his Soldiers into every part of it, who committed
horrible Spoil, and massacred an infinite number of these poor People. A
furious Spaniard at the head of 300 Men, entered the Country adjoining to
Guatimala, set fire to all their Cities, and cut the throats of all the
Inhabitants, without giving any quarter: he carried away what Booty he could,
and continued to pillage the Country for the space of sixscore Leagues. This
Captain had rebelled, and revolted against his General; and his design in
ruining the Country after this manner was to put the Spaniards out of a
condition to pursue him, by preventing their finding Subsistence in a Country
thus ruined, and by exposing 'em to the fury of the Indians, who would omit
nothing to revenge upon 'em the Injuries and Mischiefs they had received from
their Companions, which fell out accordingly: For the Spanish General
attempting to pursue this Rebel, was killed by the Indians. Those that
succeeded him exercised all manner of Cruelties on 'em, and reduced almost all
of 'em to Slavery, after they had spoiled 'em of all their Goods, Provisions,
Clothes, Corn, Wine and other necessaries of Life. The Provinces of Naco and
Hondure, which were like Gardens of Pleasure, were turned into melancholy
Deserts, although this Country was very full of People. It Is impossible to reflect
on these things without being sensibly touched and softened into Compassion,
tho one were naturally of an obdurate and sour Temper. They killed two Millions
of People in this Country in less than ten years; so that there are scarce two
thousand left in all the vast Extent of it; and these are groaning under a
heavy yoke of Bondage. When they proposed to 'em to take the Oath of Allegiance
to the King of Spain, they would give 'em no time to deliberate; they must
immediately obey, or else die by Fire or Sword.

Of the Kingdom of Guatimala.
THE Spaniards signalized their entrance into this Kingdom by diverse Massacres,
tho the King came to meet 'em in his Chair of State supported by his Slaves,
followed by a great number of his Lords, and with Trumpets and Drums before
him, to give the greater Testimony of Joy; he showed 'em all the Courtesy and
Civility in the world, manifested a great deal of Kindness in readily supplying
'em with plenty of Provisions, and gave 'em whatever they could reasonably
desire. The Spaniards lodged without the City the first night, thinking they
should not be secure enough in a place so well fortified. The next day they
engaged the Prince of the place to come out to 'em with the greatest part of
the Persons of Quality, obliging to bring with them a certain quantity of Gold.
The Indians made answer that 'twas impossible for them to do what was required,
because their Country did not yield this Metal. However this refusal so moved
the Indignation of the Spaniards, that for no other Offense, without any formal
Process, they cast 'em all alive into a great Fire. The most considerable
Inhabitants of these Provinces, seeing their Masters so cruelly treated, only
because they gave not the Spaniards all the Gold they demanded, retired with
all speed into the Mountains, ordering the common People to submit to the
Spaniards as their Masters, and giving 'em a strict charge by no means to give
the least notice of the places where they were gone to hide themselves.
Abundance of these poor People came accordingly to the Spaniards, begging of
'em to receive them into the number of their Servants, and promising to serve
'em faithfully as far as they were capable. The Spanish Commander roughly
answered 'em, that he would not so receive 'em, but cut 'em to pieces without
Mercy, unless they would discover the places whither their Masters were
retreated; the Indians replied, they did not know: however they readily offered
themselves, their Wives and Children to their Service; and said, they would
continue in their Houses expecting their Orders; they further told 'em, they
might treat 'em as they pleased, 'twas in their power either to kill 'em, or to
save 'em alive to employ 'em in their service. The Spaniards upon this went
into their Villages and Towns, and found these poor Indians with their Wives
and Children busy at their Work, and in great security, believing they had no
need to fear the Spaniards would attack 'em; yet these blood-thirsty Men
massacred 'em without pity. After this they went to another great Town, the
Inhabitants of which confiding in their Innocence, thought themselves in no
great danger; but this whole Town was destroyed in less than two hours, and the
Massacre was so general, that no Age, nor Sex, nor Quality met with Pity, but
all were put to the Sword, unless such as fled before the arrival of the
Spaniards.

The Indians at length finding it impossible either by their Patience, their
Submissions, or their Presents to soften the cruel and savage Temper of the
Spaniards, who cut their Throats without any reason, or any sentiment of Pity,
resolved to get together in a body, and take Arms to defend themselves: for
seeing Death was inevitable to 'em, and become a necessary Evil, they chose
rather to die with Weapons in their hands, thereby to sell their Lives at as
dear a rate as they could, and to revenge themselves as much as possible on
their Persecutors, than to suffer their Throats to be cut like Sheep without
making any resistance. They wanted effectual Arms, they were quite naked, and
knew their Strength was much inferior to that of their Enemies; they had no
Horses, nor did they understand the use of 'em in Battle: they had to do with a
furious and warlike Enemy that gave 'em no quarter, and designed nothing but
their Extirpation. They therefore thought it necessary to use Stratagems: it
came into their heads to make Pits up and down the ways by which the Spaniards
were to pass, and to cover 'em with Straw and Leaves that they might not be
perceived, that so their Horses might fall in 'em, and break their Necks or
Legs. Some of the Spaniards were two or three times taken in these Traps, but
afterward took care to avoid 'em, and resolved to cast all the Indians they
could take into these Pits, whether Men, Women or Children, of what Age or
Condition soever; they threw in Women big with Child, and old Men as well as
others, till they had quite filled 'em. It was a most lamentable sight to see
some Women empaled together with their Children, and so exposed to the fury of
greedy Dogs, and others run through with Lances and Halberts. They burnt one of
the greatest Lords of the Country with a gentle Fire, and insultingly told him
'twas to do him the more honor, that they put him to death after this manner.
These Butcheries and Cruelties were committed for seven years together. The
Reader may conjecture what multitudes of poor Indians were slaughtered during
so tedious and bloody a Persecution.

It Is fit to be remarked, that the Spaniards were received with great
Acclamations, and with all the demonstrations of a sincere Joy in the Province
of Cuzcatan, which is situate on the Seaside, and extends forty or fifty
Leagues in length. In this Province is the famous City of St. Savior; Cuzcatan
is the Metropolis of the Province. These People sent 30000 Indians to the
Spaniards laden with Indian Poultry, and all other Provisions the Country would
afford in great abundance. After they had received these Presents, the Spanish
General ordered his Men to choose as many Indians as each of 'em desired for
their Service, while they remained in that Province: Accordingly one took a
hundred, another fifty, as they had occasion to carry their Baggage. These poor
Wretches served them with all the care and diligence they could, and were even
ready to worship 'em. At length the General demanded of 'em a great quantity of
Gold, that being the main business for which he came: they with a great deal of
Humility and Submission, told him they would readily give him all they had, and
presently got together all the Lances they had, which were made of Copper gilt,
and which they took for pure Gold by the looks of it. The General soon made
trial of it, and finding what it was, addressed himself to the Spaniards in
these terms: We must carry Destruction with us (says he) through all this
Country, seeing here is no Gold to be found: Every one of you may keep the
Indians you have chosen for your perpetual Slaves: You may load 'em with
Chains, and brand 'em with the marks of their Slavery: Which was immediately
done: For they printed the King's Arms with a hot Iron upon all they could
take. Those of 'em that escaped, provoked with the ill Treatment which they
every where met, assembled all the Indians they could to make an Effort to
deliver themselves from the Persecutions of their Enemies by force of Arms; but
their Enterprise was not successful, so that an incredible number of 'em was
killed.

After this Expedition the Spaniards returned to Guatimala, where they built a
City; but God was pleased by his just Judgment utterly to overthrow, and
destroy it. They killed all without Mercy whom they supposed to be in a
condition to incommode 'em by their Arms, and the rest were condemned to
Slavery. They extorted from 'em a Tribute of Boys and Girls, and sent 'em into
Peru to be sold. The other Inhabitants of this Kingdom, which is 100 Leagues in
length, were likewise destroyed. Thus one of the most pleasant and fruitful
Countries in the World was reduced to a melancholy Desert. The Governor himself
has freely confessed, that this was the most populous Country in the
West Indies, not excepting Mexico it self, which is certainly true. In this
noble Country the Spaniards have destroyed no less than four or five Millions
of Men in fifteen or sixteen years, and continue every day to treat those that
remain after the same manner.

These inhuman Creatures were wont when they declared War against any City or
Province, to bring with 'em as many of the conquered Indians as they could, to
make 'em fight against their Countrymen; sometimes they had fifteen or twenty
thousand of these new Subjects among 'em. But because they were not able to
furnish 'em with all necessary Provisions, they allowed 'em to eat those other
Indians whom they took in War, so that in their Camp they had Shambles stored
with human Flesh. Infants were killed in their sight, and then broiled and
eaten; Men were slaughtered like Beasts, and their Legs and Arms dressed for
food; for the Indians like the taste of those Parts better than others. The
News of these horrible Practices soon alarmed the neighboring Countries, and
filled 'em with Terror and Consternation.

Many of the Indians were worn out with carrying the Tackle of the Spanish
Ships, which they would needs have brought from the North to the South Sea,
which are 130 Leagues distant: They made 'em carry Anchors of a great weight
all this long way; they laid great Guns upon the naked Backs of these poor
Creatures, under the weight of which they were not able to stand; so that the
greatest part of 'em died by the way, not being able to endure these Fatigues.
To increase their Misery, they divided their Families, taking Husbands from
their Wives, and Wives from their Husbands; their Daughters were taken from
'em, and given to the Seamen and Soldiers to satisfy their Lust, and to
appease their murmuring. They filled the Ships with Indians, and suffered 'em
to perish with Hunger and Thirst; because they would take no care to furnish
'em with Necessaries. But to give a particular account of all their Cruelties
would require large Volumes, the view of which would astonish all that should
have the curiosity to look into 'em.

The Spaniards had two powerful Fleets destined to the same purpose of
destroying the poor Indians. How many Parents have they bereaved of their
Children! How many Children of their Parents! of how many Adulteries and other
infamous Practices have they been the Causes, the Actors, and Accomplices! How
many People have they enslaved! What Miseries and Calamities have they not
brought upon this new World! What Fountains of Tears have they opened! What
Rivers of Blood have they poured out! How many Lives have they taken away after
such a manner as might render 'em yet more miserable in the other World! which
is a melancholy Reflection both in regard of the Indians who have suffered so
many Cruelties, and of the Spaniards who have been the Authors of so much
Mischief and Villainy.

Of New Spain, of Panuco and Xalisco.
AFter the Spaniards had committed all the forementioned Cruelties and
Massacres in New Spain, there came to Panuco another Tyrant as barbarous and
unmerciful as the former. He loaded his Ships with multitudes of the Natives,
and carried 'em to Cuba and Hispaniola, where they were sold for Slaves: so
that in a little time he rendered the whole Country destitute of People.
Fourscore of these Indians (tho they have reasonable Souls as well as other
Men) were exchanged for one Horse. When the President of the City of Mexico was
made Governor of all New Spain, there were also a great many Assessors and
Auditors made, who all ruled like so many petty Tyrants, and committed
unparalled Cruelties and Outrages in the exercise of their Offices. They
acted such abominable things, and made the Country so desolate in a very little
time, that if the Franciscan Monks had not opposed their Disorders with a great
deal of Courage and Resolution, and had not the Royal Council by their Messages
given Orders for the preservation of this Province, all New Spain had been
ruined in less than two years, and been made as desolate as Hispaniola. One of
the President's Companions employed eight thousand Indians to make a Wall round
his Garden, but he gave 'em neither Wages nor Victuals; so that they almost all
died before the Work was finished: neither the hard Labor they endured, nor
their Death could make this merciless Man relent.

After the former General, of whom we have spoken above, had made an end of
destroying and wasting the Province of Panuco, and was informed that the Royal
Council would arrive in a little time, he advanced farther into the Country,
hoping to find some new Province on which to exercise his wonted Rapine. He
forced fifteen or twenty thousand Indians to attend him, to carry the Spaniards
Baggage and Provisions, which they did till they all died in the way except two
hundred. He came at length into the Province of Mechuaca, about forty Leagues
from Mexico. The King of this Province very civilly came out to meet him, and
was as officious to serve him as could be desired; but for his reward was
loaded with Irons, because supposed to have a great Treasure by him; and the
better to extort great Sums from him, he was made to suffer a great many
Torments. His Hands being tied to a Stake, and his Legs stretched out, they
dropped burning Pitch on 'em, and basted his Body with boiling Oil from time to
time, that his Skin might be gradually roasted. Over against him stood a
furious Soldier with a Bow shooting Arrows into his Breast: Another let loose
hungry Dogs to bite and tear him in every part; all these Tortures were to make
him confess where he had hid his Gold: And these Cruelties would have been
continued longer if a Franciscan Friar had not happened to come and rescue him
out of their hands; however he could not save his Life, for he expired soon
after. Many Caciques and great Men of this Province were put to death after
this manner, to make 'em confess where they had hid their Gold and Silver.

About this time there arrived another Person in this Country, who was more
greedy of Money, than solicitous about the Salvation of the poor Indians. He
happened to find some of their Idols which they had hid, (for the Spaniards
would very seldom give themselves the trouble to inform these Idolaters of the
True God) Upon this he imprisoned the most considerable Persons in the Nation,
till they should discover to him where they had put their Idols, because he
supposed theirs were made either of Gold or Silver; but he failed in his
Expectation: however to mend the matter, he imposed great Sums on the Indians,
which they were to pay for the redemption of their Idols, that they might
worship 'em after their wonted manner. These are the Improvements the Spaniards
have been making in the West Indies, and this is their Zeal for the Glory of
God and Religion.

After this Tyrant had run through the whole Province of Mechuaca, and pillaged
it, he came to Xalisquo, a Country very populous and fruitful, and the most
famous in all America; there are Towns in it of seven Leagues in length. These
Indians, as the others had done before, came out to meet him with great
expressions of Joy; but he soon left upon 'em the marks of his Cruelty, which
he had cultivated by long Experience. The noble Presents made this Tiger could
not mollify him. His design was to heap together a great quantity of Gold, this
was the only Idol he adored; and all means were indifferent to him, so he could
but attain his end. He set fire to all the Cities through which he passed, and
destroyed 'em to the very Foundation. He kept those of the highest Dignity
prisoners, after he had inflicted diverse kinds of Torments on 'em. The
Spaniards loaded all the Indians they could take here with Chains, which was a
great number. The Soldiers made Women big with Child carry their Baggage, till
they fainted and sunk under their Burdens with hunger and weariness. Others not
able to carry both the heavy Burdens they gave 'em, and their Children too,
were forced to leave these by the way, by which means a prodigious number of
Children perished.

A Spaniard attempting to ravish a Virgin in the presence of her Mother, the
Mother did what she could to hinder him; upon which, to prevent her from
farther opposing his brutish design, he drew his Sword and cut off her Arms,
and afterward killed her Daughter because she would by no means consent to his
filthy Desires, but resisted him with a virtuous Indignation and Courage to her
last breath.

Four thousand and five hundred of these poor Indians were branded with a hot
Iron by the Spaniards, who marked 'em thus for Slaves, tho they were born free
and independent. The very Children, as well as those that were grown to
maturity, suffered this Punishment and Infamy: They pretended they had right to
make a great number of 'em Slaves, to defray the Charge of their long Travels;
and that they might lawfully make these poor Creatures endure all sorts of
Torments, to force 'em to declare where they had hid their Gold: Some of 'em
they burnt, others were torn in pieces by hungry Dogs; they cut off the Feet,
Hands, Arms, Tongues, and sometimes the Heads of others, to terrify the rest by
these sad Spectacles, that they might oblige 'em the more easily to submit to
Slavery, or to show 'em the places where they had secured their Treasure. And
all these things were acted with the knowledge and consent of the Governor, who
would sometimes order more Blows to be given 'em, when they were beat or
whipped, to complete their Misery.

Fourscore Towns and Villages at least were burnt in the Kingdom of Xalisco:
Which tragical sight, together with all the various Cruelties they suffered
every day, so provoked the Indians, that they armed themselves and fell upon
the Spaniards, and killed some of 'em: after which Expedition they fled up into
the Mountains, but at length were massacred in this place of Refuge by other
Spaniards who made Excursions through these Provinces to lay 'em waste. They
put all of 'em to the Sword who made any offer to defend themselves, so that
this place became a horrible scene of Blood: And there is scarce any Remnant of
this once numerous People left. The Spaniards were certainly blinded, hardened
and abandoned by the Almighty, that they made no Reflection on the Laws of God
or Men, which all forbid the exercise of such Violence as they have been guilty
of in America. They had no just occasion given 'em to drive the Inhabitants of
those Provinces from their Native Country by force of Arms, and to massacre 'em
so barbarously: they did not consider how unjust and criminal these Outrages
were, and how contrary it was to all the Laws of Nations, for them to treat
those who had never injured 'em with so much Cruelty. They pretend the Wars
they have made against these People are just and lawful; that God has left 'em
to their Mercy, and that they have right to make such Conquests as these, and
to destroy all these Nations: So that it seems they would fain make God himself
Partner with 'em in their Tyranny and Wickedness; and one may well apply the
words of the Prophet Zechariah to 'em: Feed the flock of the slaughter; whose
Possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them
say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own Shepherds pity them not.
Chap. 11. 4, 5.

Of the Kingdom of Yucatan.
A Very profligate Person who had neither Honor nor Conscience, was made
Governor of the Kingdom of Yucatan in the year 1526; which Dignity he procured
by his Lies and Artifices, and the false accounts of Matters which he sent to
the King of Spain. A method which other Tyrants have hitherto likewise followed
to obtain places of Trust: For under the umbrage of the Title of Governor,
which seems to give some Dignity and Authority to all they do, they take the
liberty to exercise their Robberies and Violences with Impunity. The Kingdom of
Yucatan contained a prodigious number of People; the Air of this Country is
very temperate and pleasant: it has great plenty of Fruits, and all the
Necessaries of Life; it exceeds Mexico it self in Fertility: There is more Wax
and Honey found in this than in any other part of America that has been yet
discovered. This Kingdom is 300 Leagues in compass. The Inhabitants of it are
more polite, more civilized, and better disciplined in Morals, and in what
belongs to the good order of Societies, than the rest of the Indians. There is
a remarkable Prudence and Justness of Mind in them, which is not to be found in
others. These natural Endowments without doubt ought to have encouraged
Christians to take the pains to instruct 'em in the knowledge of the true God;
and they seemed to have no small disposition to receive the Maxims of the
Catholic Religion. The Spaniards might have built great and flourishing Cities
in so pleasant and commodious a Country, where they might have lived in the
midst of Pleasure and Plenty, as it were in another Earthly Paradise: but their
Stupidity, their Avarice, and the enormous Crimes they have committed in
America have rendered 'em unworthy of these Advantages. They attacked these
poor Indians, who lived in profound Peace and Security, with the utmost
Violence of a cruel War, and massacred a prodigious number of 'em, tho the
number of the Spaniards was but three hundred. This Country produces no Gold;
if the Spaniards could have found any Mines there, they would have condemned
the Indians to 'em, who must have perished with Hunger and Hardship. These
covetous Wretches esteemed Gold more than Souls, which were purchased by the
Blood of Jesus Christ; they made Slaves of those whom they saved alive, and
filled the Ships they had brought to the Coasts of this Kingdom with 'em, and
so exchanged 'em for Wine, Oil, Vinegar, salt Pork, Horses, and all other
Necessaries. They would give fifty or a hundred of the handsomest young Girls
for a measure of Wine, Oil or Vinegar, and would sell a hundred or two of lusty
well-made young Men at the same rate. They swop'd a Prince's Son for a Cheese,
and a hundred Persons of Eminency for a Horse. They continued in this Country
till they heard of the Riches of Peru, the News of which made 'em leave it
immediately, and thus their Persecutions ended in the Kingdom of Yucatan.
However, before they went they committed all the Excesses and Disorders that
can be imagined against both God and Men: so that those three hundred Leagues
of one of the finest Countries in the World, that was very rich and full of
People before their arrival, were in a little time reduced to a vast Desert.

It Is not easy to believe the Account of all the villainous Actions they
committed in this Kingdom: I Will recite but two or three particular Facts. They
had prepared fierce Dogs which they kept hungry to go a hunting after the poor
Indians; as they were hunting they lighted on a Woman that was sick, who not
being in a condition to fly to avoid being devoured of the Dogs, hanged her
self, after she had hanged a Child she had with her of a year old; the Dogs
presently camt to her, and began to devour her: but a certain Friar that was
happily there perceiving the Child not to be yet quite dead, baptized it.

When they quitted this Kingdom, they invited the Son of one of the Princes of
the Country to accompany 'em, who showed a great unwillingness to abandon his
Country to follow 'em, on which they threatened to cut him in quarters if he did
not consent to their desire. The Child still persisting in the same mind, one
of the Spaniards drew his Sword and cut off both his Ears: This ill Treatment
however could not make him alter his purpose, upon which this Brute cut off his
Nose and Lips, and laughed while he was committing this barbarous Action.

Another bragged that he had got many Indian Women with Child, that he might
sell 'em for the more Money. Some of the Spaniards have been so inhuman as to
give Infants to their Hounds when they were hungry: they would take these poor
Babes by the two Legs, and violently tear 'em asunder into two pieces, and then
feed their Dogs with 'em, They were left of God to such a reprobate mind, that
they made no more account of human Creatures, that were ransomed by the Blood
of Jesus Christ, than of Beasts.

I pass over an infinite number of other unheard of Cruelties, which surpass
all Imagination. When these covetous and ambitious Tyrants left the Kingdom of
Yucatan to go in search after the greater Riches of Peru, four Franciscan
Friars came thither to comfort these miserable People, and to endeavor by
their preaching to bring those that had escaped the fury of the Spaniards to
the knowledge of the true God. The same Friars were very earnestly solicited by
many other Indians to come into their Country likewise to teach 'em the Maxims
of their Religion. They assembled in great companies to inform themselves what
sort of Men these Religious. Persons were, who called one another Father and
Brother, to inquire into their true designs, and to know wherein they differed
from other Spaniards, who had exercised so much Cruelty over all the
West Indies. They were willing to entertain 'em on condition they would come
alone to instruct 'em, without any other Spaniards to attend 'em; which the
Friars promised very readily, assuring 'em they would not offer 'em the least
Injury. The Governor of New Spain likewise now ordered 'em to promise the
Indians, that they should be treated more kindly for the time to come, and
should find no farther occasion to complain of the Spaniards Severity. Thus
these Religious Men began to preach the Gospel of Christ with a great deal of
Zeal, and informed these People moreover of the good Intentions of the King of
Spain toward 'em; so that in about forty days time, they brought all their
Idols to throw 'em in the fire: they as readily brought their Children, whom
they bring up with a great deal of tenderness and fondness, to be instructed;
and built both Houses and Churches for these Friars with all the Affection and
Forwardness imaginable. All the several Provinces strove with great Emulation
for their Company, their Zeal was so great for the new Religion they preached
to 'em. So that what the Governors could never obtain of the Indians in many
years, these Friars accomplished in a very little time: for the Princes and
Great Men of these Provinces, at the head of their People in a General
Assembly, voluntarily submitted to the Government of the King of Spain, whom
they acknowledged for their Sovereign, and put themselves under his Protection;
as may be seen by the account these Friars sent into Spain signed with their
own hands.

These pious Men were transported with Joy to find a door opened to 'em to
preach the Gospel in these vast Provinces, to those that had escaped the
Barbarity of the several Governors, who had massacred such prodigious numbers.
About this time there came into these parts eighteen Spanish Troopers with
twelve foot Soldiers, who brought with them abundance of Indian Idols which
they had taken out of other Provinces; the Commander of these Soldiers sent
for one of the principal Chiefs of the Nation, and commanded him to take these
Idols and distribute 'em throughout the Country, and to bring him Indian Men
and Women in exchange for 'em, threatening him with a severe War if he refused
to obey him. This Prince was so terrified with these Menaces, that he carried
away all these Idols, and disposed 'em in the several Cities of his Province,
requiring the People in the name of this Spanish Captain to worship these false
Gods, and to render 'em all the Honor and Service they were formerly wont to
do. To recompense this Action they gave him liberty to make as many Slaves as
he pleased. The Indians, frighted with the threatenings that were made 'em,
delivered up their own Children; he that had two gave one, and he that had
three gave two. This was the Event of this impious Traffic, the Cacyque being
forced to obey the Orders of the Spanish Captain. One of these ungodly
Wretches, whose name was John Garcia, being taken dangerously sick, and ready
to expire, bethought himself that he had a considerable number of these Idols
under his Bed; and therefore ordered an Indian Woman that he kept to sell 'em,
telling her she might make a good market of 'em, the matter of which being very
valuable, he told her every Image was at least fairly worth an Indian in
exchange. This was the Spaniards last Will and Testament, and these were the
marks he gave of the pious disposition of his Mind, and in the midst of such
Cares as these he gave up the Ghost. By this Story it may easily be conjectured
what good Examples the Spaniards set before the Indians, and what progress the
Catholic Religion is likely to make among these People; who being
Eyewitnesses of such Actions as these, easily perceive that the Europeans have
so little sentiment of Religion, that they don't much care whether poor
Infidels be reduced to pay the true God that Worship and Honor they owe him,
or not. It can hardly be said that Jeroboam's Crime, who caused two Golden
Calves to be cast, and obliged his Subjects to worship 'em, is more heinous
than that of the Spaniards, who drive such an abominable trade with Idols, and
occasion so much scandal by this shameful kind of Traffic. This is the manner
of their Conduct and Behavior in the new World. They sacrifice every thing to
their detestable Avarice, and sell Christ Jesus himself for Gold. They are
every day renouncing him, and dishonouring his Religion by the many infamous
Crimes of which they are guilty.

The Indians seeing the Spaniards still continue to ruin their Country,
notwithstanding all the express Promises the Friars had made 'em that they
would abstain for the future from their wonted Robberies; and that instead of
mending their own Lives, they brought Idols even from other Countries to expose
to sale among them, who had voluntarily resigned their own to the Friars to be
committed to the Flames, being resolved to worship but one God in their Country
for time to come: Seeing all this (I say) they were extremely enraged at the
Spaniards, and no less provoked against the Friars, whom they accosted after
this manner. Why (say they) have you deceived us thus by your false Promises?
Did not you assure us the Spaniards should no more invade and oppress us? Why
have you burnt our Gods, to bring us strange Gods out of other Countries? Are
these better or mightier than our own? The poor Friars endeavored to appease
'em as well as they could, tho they scarce knew how to answer their Complaints,
having no good Reasons to offer to excuse the matter. However they applied
themselves to the Spaniards, reproached 'em for having so exceedingly
scandalized the Indians, and conjured 'em to leave the Country, which they
absolutely refused to do; and which was still more vile and unworthy, they
persuaded the Indians that they had not come into their Country but at the
request of these Friars: Which pretense had the success they desired; for the
Indians giving credit to these Stories, resolved to kill the poor Friars; but
some of 'em giving 'em notice of the Design, they made their escape in the
night. After they were gone, the Indians perceived they were imposed on, and
received full information of the Malice of the Spaniards, and the base trick
they had played 'em, and therefore dispatched a Message to the Friars to
entreat 'em to return, and forgive the fault they had committed, assuring 'em
they heartily repented of their Ingratitude.

These pious Men that were devoted to the Service of God, and animated with an
ardent Zeal for the Salvation of Souls, confiding in the Protestations of the
Indians, returned to 'em according to their request, and were received as if
they had been Angels come down from Heaven: they continued three or four Months
among 'em, receiving abundance of respect and kindness from 'em. The Spaniards,
who still refused to quit the Country, tho the Viceroy had expressly ordered
'em so to do, and had used all his Authority to oblige 'em to it, were declared
Rebels and Traitors; however this did not hinder 'em from continuing their
Rapine and Insolence. And tho the Friars were satisfied they would not always
escape with Impunity, yet they feared it might be a long time before they
received their Deserts; and considering moreover that the continual Insults
they made on the Indians, deprived them of the liberty of preaching to 'em,
upon the whole they thought meet to resolve to leave this Kingdom, which was
deprived of the light of the Gospel by the Malice of the Spaniards: and thus
these poor Indians who manifested such good Inclinations toward Christianity,
were abandoned to their former Darkness and Idolatry, in which they continue to
this day, while those profligate Wretches still by the same Obstacles in the
way of their Conversion. When these Friars were constrained to retire out of
the Country, the Indians began to embrace the Christian Religion with a great
deal of Zeal and Fervor; but being unhappily deprived of all means of
Instruction, they withered like tender Plants, for want of Water.

Of the Province of St. Martha.
THE Province of St. Martha was famous for the rich Golden Mines that are near
it, and for the fruitfulness of its Soil. The People are numerous, and very
skilful in getting Gold out of the Mines, which easily engaged the Spaniards to
go thither, and that in great numbers; they made continual Excursions over all
this fine Country to ravage and spoil it; they massacred vast numbers of the
Inhabitants, took away all their Gold, and filled their Ships, which served 'em
for Magazines, with the Booty. They soon laid waste this flourishing Province
by the Robberies and Villainies they committed: they did the greatest mischief
upon the Seacoasts, but they soon after pierced higher up into the Country,
where they endeavored to make a Settlement. The Country being rich and
fertile, diverse Spanish Captains successively invaded it with their Troops, and
the last was still more cruel and inhuman than his Predecessor. They seemed
ambitious to outvie one another in the Enormity of their Crimes and Villainies.
In the year 1520, a Spanish General attended with a great many Soldiers
entered into this Province with a resolution of ruining it entirely. He
continued there for seven years together, and carried away an immense Treasure
with him; at last he was condemned to be banished, and dyed in his Exile
without showing the least token of Repentance. Those who succeeded him went on
to massacre those Indians that he and other Tyrants had spared; they made both
the common People, and the Nobility of this Province suffer most horrible
Torments, to oblige 'em by the violence of their pain to discover their Gold:
they laid this Country waste for above 40 Leagues, not leaving one soul alive;
tho this Province was well stocked with Inhabitants before their arrival.

To give a particular Relation of all the Extravagances, Massacres and
Desolations, of all the Impieties and Villainies committed by the Spaniards in
this Province against God, against the King, and against the innocent Indians,
would require a large History: I must therefore content my self to pass over
many Circumstances after a cursory manner. The Bishop of this Province, writing
to the King of Spain in the year 1541, among other things thus expresses
himself: Great Sir, To redress the Grievances of this Province, it ought to be
delivered from the Tyranny of those that ravage it, and committed to the Care
of Persons of Integrity, who will treat the Inhabitants with more kindness and
humanity; for if it be left to the mercy of the Governors, who commit all
sorts of Outrages with impunity, 'twill be destroyed in a very little time. The
same Bishop farther adds in his Letter: The ill Conduct of the Governors may
well engage your Majesty to deprive 'em absolutely of their Places, to relieve
these Provinces; and if this course be not taken, the disease will be
incurable. I am necessitated to let your Majesty know, that the Spaniards who
come into this New World, live here rather like Devils than Christians; they
neither serve God nor the King; they violate all the Laws of God and Men with
Impunity. Nothing can be a greater hindrance to the Conversion of the Indians,
than the ill Treatment and Persecution they make 'em suffer continually. These
People naturally love peace and quietness; but the barbarous usage they meet
with from the Spaniards, inspires 'em with horror and indignation against all
Christians, whom they therefore call in their Language Yares, that is to say,
Devils. Nor is it without reason that they appear so odious and abominable to
these poor Creatures, since the Actions they see 'em commit, are more like
those of Devils, than of reasonable Creatures, or Christians. For while the
Indians see the Officers as well as Soldiers commit such detestable Crimes;
they believe the Laws of Christianity authorize these inhuman Actions, and that
neither our God nor our King forbids 'em. It Is to no purpose to pretend to
undeceive 'em, and remove these Prejudices, as the Case stands; it is but only
to expose the Laws and Religion of Christ the more to the Contempt of these
Idolaters. The Indians now begin to defend themselves from the Spaniards by
force of Arms; and choose rather to perish together at once than to suffer a
thousand deaths by the Cruelty of these unmerciful Men. Your Majesty has more
Servants in this New World than you imagine; for there are none who bear Arms
in these vast Countries, and make it their business to plunder, kill, and burn,
but give out that they are employed here in your Majesty's business, and
endeavor to persuade the World that it is by your Majesty's Order, and for your
Interest, that they do all this Mischief to the Indians: tho the Truth is, they
use 'em after this violent manner, only to enrich themselves by plundering 'em
of all they have. It seems absolutely necessary for your Majesty to stop the
Course of these Robbers by some Exemplary Punishment; and that your Majesty
declare you will have none of their Services, who so highly dishonor God and
Religion.

Thus far the Letter which the Bishop of St. Martha wrote to his Catholic
Majesty: By which it may be conjectured how the Spaniards have abused the poor
Indians. They in derision and scorn call those the Warlike Indians, that fly
into the Mountains to save their Lives. And when they force these miserable
People, to travel in rough and difcult ways, sweating under the great Burdens
they oblige 'em to carry, not content with having overloaded 'em, they
aggravate their misery by beating 'em unmercifully, and bruising their Faces
with the pommels of their Swords, till the poor Wretches driven to despair with
all this Oppression, often cry out, I can hold out no longer; kill me
outright; put an end to my Miseries by a speedy Death. And many deep sighs
accompany these Expressions, which sometimes they are scarce able to utter,
their Strength is so exhausted with their Toil, their Weariness, and the
unmerciful Blows which they give 'em, without any regard to their other
Miseries.

Of the Province of Carthagena.
THIS Province is situate about 50 Leagues distance from that of St. Martha
Westward, and borders on the Country of Cenu; it stretches along the Seashore
as far as the Gulf of Voaba, the space of a hundred Leagues; and is still
larger on the South Side. All this Country from the year 1498. to this time
has suffered great Persecutions from the Spaniards, who have exercised a World
of violence, and made a great many Massacres here, till they have made all this
Country as desolate as that of St. Martha. But I begin to be weary of
mentioning so often the Barbarity and Impiety the Spaniards have discovered in
America.

Of the Pearl-Coast, and the Island of Trinidado.
THE Spaniards have made horrible Ravage and Spoil from the Coast of Paria
quite to the Gulf of Venecuela, which is the space of above 200 Leagues; and
after having committed their wonted Robberies, have taken as many Indians as
they could, and either sold 'em, or made Slaves of 'em themselves, contrary to
the promises often made 'em, that they would treat 'em as their Friends, and as
a free People; which Protestations they never took care to observe. And tho
these poor People did 'em all the good Offices they could, and were very ready
to serve 'em on all occasions; tho they liberally gave 'em all they had to
subsist on themselves; yet it is not to be expressed with what Injuries and
Mischiefs the Spaniards requited all this kindness. I purposely omit a great
many Disorders which they committed along this Coast, being willing to insist
only on those matters that are most remarkable.

The Isle of Trinidado is larger and more fruitful than that of Sicily, it is
joined to the Continent on that side where it touches Paria; the Inhabitants
are a very honest sort of People, teachable enough, and well inclined to
Virtue. A Spanish Captain, accompanied with 60 Cutthroats like himself,
invaded this Country in the year 1510, and immediately commanded the Indians to
come to him, pretending he was come to live peaceably with them in the Island;
who received him and his Company with as great Testimonies of kindness, as if
they had been their own Children. The chief men of the Country as well as the
common People all waited on 'em with abundance of alacrity and joy; they every
day brought 'em a quantity of Provisions sufficient for a much greater number
of men: For the Indians are very much given to hospitality, and readily supply
Strangers with all the Necessaries they have. In a little time the Spaniards
would needs make 'em build a vast house, that all the Indians might lodge
together in the same place; they used this Artifice to catch 'em in the snare
they were preparing for 'em. When the work was carried up about the height of
two men, they enclosed a great many Indians within, that the work might be the
sooner finished, as they pretended; but the design was to hinder any
Communication between them that were within and those that were without: part
of the Soldiers kept the doors of the house with their Weapons in their hands
to prevent any from going out; another part went in among 'em with their naked
Swords, threatening to cut their Throats, if they made any stir or disturbance;
and so bound 'em all like so many Sheep. If any one attempted to make his
escape, they immediately cut him in pieces; however diverse of 'em escaped, some
whole and others wounded, who joining with those that had not yet been shut up
in this fatal House, and arming themselves with Bows and Arrows to the number
of 200, retired into another House, where they thought themselves secure, if
they could defend the door against the Spaniards; but these set it on fire on
the other side, and cruelly destroyed these poor Creatures. After this
barbarous Expedition they retreated into the Island of St. John with about 180
Prisoners, who had suffered themselves to be bound; where they sold half of
'em, and the rest in Hispaniola. When I severely reproved this Captain for his
perfidiousness and cruelty, he satisfied himself with making me this answer:
Don't you trouble your self about these matters; they that sent me gave me
Orders to act after this manner, and to take all those by force that I could
not bring away under the shadow and pretense of Peace. The Spaniards were
guilty of a world of such base Actions, in seizing these Indians contrary to
their promises that they would treat 'em like Friends.

Let any one now make reflection on the Conduct of the Spaniards, and see if
they have any appearance of right to reduce the Inhabitants of America, as they
do, to such a miserable state of bondage. It was resolved among the Dominican
Friars to send some of their Order, to display the Light of the Gospel among
the Indians that lived in the gross darkness of Idolatry, and were out of the
way of Salvation: They first sent one that was a Licentiate in Divinity, of
great reputation for his Piety and Virtue, who took with him a Lay-brother:
they both went through this Country to seek a commodious place for the building
of a Monastry; and conferred with some of the Inhabitants what measures to take
to succeed in this design. When the other Friars were arrived, the Indians
received 'em as if they had been Messengers sent from Heaven; they manifested
abundance of affection to 'em, heard what they said with great attention, as
far as they were capable of understanding them; for these religious Persons not
being yet sufficiently acquainted with their Language, were constrained to make
use of signs to express their meaning.

No sooner was the Ship that brought the Friars gone off, but there came
another full of Soldiers, who made use of Treachery and Artifice, according to
their wicked Custom, to seize the Prince of this Nation, unknown to the Friars.
This Prince's name was Alfonso, which was given him either by the Friars, or
some other Spaniards; for these Indians take upon 'em Christian Names with a
great deal of Joy; and before they are instructed in our Mysteries, very
eagerly desire to be baptized. This Prince Alfonso, together with his Princess,
not aware of the Artifices of the Spaniards, and the deceitful trick they had
resolved to play 'em, were persuaded to go on board one of their Ships, and
many other Indians did the like, being all made to believe there was a great
Feast prepared for 'em; and they needed the less importunity to entice 'em into
the Ship, because they supposed the Friars, in whom they put abundance of
Cofidence, had Interest and Authority enough among the Soldiers to secure 'em
from all manner of danger: otherwise they would not have so easily trusted
themselves in the hands of the Spaniards. The very moment they entered the
Vessel, these perfidious Men set sail, and carried 'em to Hispaniola, where
they sold 'em for Slaves. All the Country was alarmed at the sad tidings that
the Spaniards had carried away their Prince and Princess; and came in Crowds to
seek the Friars, who narrowly escaped being killed by 'em. These good men were
extremely grieved at the treachery used with these poor People; and would
rather have died than suffered these Outrages to be on all occasions committed
against 'em, if they could have prevented 'em, because these were the great
obstacles that hindered 'em from embracing the Catholic Religion. However, the
Indians were appeased by the promises the Friars made 'em, that they would
write by the first Vessel that should go to Hispaniola, to procure their Prince
and Princess to be sent back. Accordingly a Vessel being in a little time
prepared for this Voyage, they made use of the opportunity to write to
Hispaniola, to engage these Robbers to restore their Prey, which they
obstinately refused to do, the Governors of that Island having had a share in
the Booty. These good Friars who had given their word to the Indians, that
their Prince Alfonso and his Princess should be restored to em in four months,
seeing twice four Months elapsed without any hope of their return, were obliged
to prepare for death; there was now no way to avoid shedding their blood for
the Glory of Christ, and in his Service, which Sacrifice they had offered in
the ready disposition of their Minds to suffer before they came from Spain: In
short, they were massacred by the Indians, who believed they were Accomplices
of the forementioned Treachery; and thought their suspicion well founded,
because the Friars had promised to redress their Grievance in four months time;
and yet they saw these promises produced no effect: Besides, these Barbarians
make no great difference between those religious Men that go to the Indies only
to instruct and preach to 'em, and the Spanish Soldiers who go thither only to
enrich themselves by robbing 'em. However, these good Fathers were unjustly put
to death; and one may without scruple place 'em in the Order of Martyrs, and
conclude they are now enjoying God in the glory of Heaven. They obediently
resigned themselves to go into America according to the direction of their
Superiors, and had no other intention in their Voyage, but that of preaching
the Christian Faith to these Idolaters, and of putting 'em in the way of
Salvation, with a resolution to suffer any hardships, or even death it self, in
the prosecution of so pious a Design.

The cruel Treatment the Indians met with from the Spaniards occasioned 'em
likewise to kill two Dominican Friars about the same time. There was in these
Provinces, near the Gulf of Codera, a City, the Prince of which was named
Higuerote; who was naturally of a sweet and amicable temper, and his Subjects
civil and complaisant: when the Spaniards came first ashore in his Country, the
Inhabitants treated 'em with abundance of Kindness; they supplied 'em with
Provisions and Stores in great plenty; and omitted nothing they were capable of
doing to refresh and recruit 'em after the fatigues and troubles of their
Voyage. This Prince had saved the lives of a great many Europeans, who had
exercised their Cruelty and Oppression in other Provinces, when they came to
his Coasts half dead with hunger and weariness; and after he had recruited 'em
with his good Entertainment, sent 'em safe and in a good state of health to the
Isle of Pearls, which was the ordinary Residence of the Spaniards, tho he might
have securely killed 'em all, without being ever suspected of the fact. Upon
this the Spaniards were so well persuaded of Higuerote's good inclination
toward 'em, that they took his house for their home, and were as kindly
entertained in it as they could expect to be in their own. While this Country
thus enjoyed a profound Peace, a Spanish Captain coming ashore there, invited
diverse of the Inhabitants to come on board his Vessel; which they often did,
from the entire confidence they had in the repeated Promises the Spaniards made
'em that they would do 'em no injury: At length when many of 'em were got into
the Ship, the Captain gave a Signal to put out to Sea, and sailed directly for
the Isle of St. John, where he sold all the poor Creatures, whom he had thus
perfidiously surpised. I soon after arrived in the same Island, where I saw
this Robber, and had a particular account given me of the Circumstances of this
villainous Action; and it seems, to complete the Crime, he utterly destroyed
this Prince's City. These things were not well resented by the rest of the
Spaniards that used to cruise up and down the neighboring Coasts to pillage
'em; for they could not but abhor the Action of this Captain, that he should by
so infamous a piece of Treachery abuse this Indian Chief, who had done 'em so
many good Offices from time to time, and was wont to entertain 'em as if they
had been his own Children.

The Spaniards took away above two Millions of Men from the Coasts of these
Provinces, and transported 'em into the Islands of Hispaniola and St. John,
where the greatest part perished in the Mines, or by other Hardships which they
made 'em suffer. It would produce Compassion in the hardest Hearts, to see
these Coasts that were once so full of People now absolutely desert. It has
been observed by many Trials, that one third part of the Slaves which the
Spaniards take on board their Vessels die by the way, besides those they kill
when they search their Houses to take these poor Wretches away. The end the
Spaniards propose to themselves, which is to get Riches at any rate in the
world, induces 'em to commit all this Violence; they carry away great numbers
of Slaves, to produce considerable Sums of Money, and yet take but a small
quantity of Provisions in their Ships to maintain all these People, for fear of
being at too great a charge in transporting 'em; nay sometimes they have scarce
enough for the Spaniards that man the Ship: so that many of the Indians perish
miserably with Hunger and Thirst; and sometimes they cast the greatest part of
'em over board, to preserve the rest. A certain Pilot told me, that in a Voyage
he once made from the Lucay Islands to Hispaniola, which is about seventy
Leagues, he had no need either of a Compass, or the observation of the Stars to
guide his Vessel; for he assured me the floating Bodies of the Indians that had
been thrown into the Sea, served for his Guide throughout this Passage, and
conducted him straight to the port to which he was bound.

To see the Indians arrive in any Island where they design to sell 'em, cannot
but excite Compassion and Trouble in every Mind that is not divested of all
Sentiments of Humanity: To see a great number of Men. Women and Children stark
naked, and so worn out with Hunger and Hardship, that many of 'em can scarce
stand, and others fall down with Faintness; and to see 'em divided into several
Companies like Sheep, Husbands separated from their Wives, and Children from
their Parents; for the Spaniards are wont to divide 'em by ten or twenty in a
Company, and then to cast Lots which share each Man shall have. This is the
trade of these Pirates, who arm and fit out Vessels on purpose to carry away
these poor Wretches from their own Houses, to enrich themselves by selling 'em
for Slaves. When a Spaniard happens to have an old or sick Man fall to his
share among the rest, he will complain of such a Lot, and say to his Companions,
Why do you give me this old Fellow that is good for nothing? he is not worth his
keeping: What shall I do with this sick Slave, that will only be a charge to
me, and can do me no Service? It Is easy to see by all this how little account
they make of these People, and what little regard they have to the Rules of
Christian Charity; it is too evident they neither have any love to God, nor to
their Neighbor, tho on these two (as our Savior says) both the Law and the
Prophets depend.

The detestable Cruelty and Tyranny of the Spaniards in insnaring and seizing
these poor Indians, when they go in quest of 'em to inslave 'em, and employ 'em
in fishing for Pearls, is scarce to be imagined. The Torments they make these
unfortunate People endure, can scarce be compared to any less than those of
Hell. What they suffer in the Gold Mines, tho very terrible, yet is far
inferior to that we are now relating. They make 'em dive in the Sea five or six
fathom under water (where they are forced to hold their Breath) to take up
Mother of Pearl; and when they come up to the surface of the Water with Nets
full of those Shells, to get a little Breath, if they keep above water
something longer than ordinary to refresh themselves a little, a merciless
Spaniard who attends with a Boat, beats and abuses 'em without measure, and
often takes 'em by the hair of the head, to force 'em again under water, to
continue their fishing. They feed 'em with a little Fish and a piece of dry
hungry Bread, and don't give 'em a Belly full of that neither; they have no
other Bed than the hard ground on which they make 'em sleep in their Chains,
for fear they should run away. They are often drowned in fishing thus for
Pearl, or else devoured by a sort of Seamonsters, that will swallow a Man
whole, so that they hear no more of 'em.

It Is no hard matter to perceive by what has been said, that the Precept of
Christian Charity is ill observed in this kind of fishing, seeing these poor
Slaves are exposed to imminent danger of perishing both in Soul and Body. The
Avarice of the Spaniards, who mind nothing but Gain, is such, that they scarce
take any care to instruct their Slaves, and to fortify 'em by communicating the
Sacraments to 'em. They oppress 'em with so much Labor and Fatigue, that they
die in a little time; and it is impossible Men should continue long under water
without Respiration, and endure the great Constraint they suffer in holding
their Breath: The coldness of the Water sometimes makes 'em vomit Blood; and
they soon die, partly by having their Stomachs so violently pressed by long
holding of their Breath under water, and partly by the excessive Cold they
endure, which causes that flux of Blood of which I have just now spoken. Tho
they have naturally black Hair, the Fatigue they undergo changes the color of
it; so that it becomes like the Hair of Sea-wolves. The foam of the Sea sticks
so fast to their Shoulders, and in such a manner, that they look more like
Monsters than Men. By this fishing trade the Spaniards have destroyed all the
People of the Lucay-Islands, which were the most skilful and experienced in
this Employment; and the reason why one of those Indians was sold for fifty
Crowns or more, and sometimes for a hundred, was because they were marvellously
dextrous at swimming and diving. However, those of other Provinces were
employed too in this work when they could take 'em; so that by this means an
infinite number of People have been destroyed.

Of the River Yuya-pari.
THIS Province is watered by the River Yuya-pari, tho the source of it is two
hundred Leagues distant. A Spanish Captain once had the boldness to go up this
River to penetrate farther into the Country, and to ravage and spoil it. He
massacred abundance of People in his way, laid the Country waste with Fire and
Sword, and ruined them by whole Families, while they were peaceably enjoying
themselves in their Houses, and thought of nothing less: But after all this
mischief, himself perished miserably, and his Soldiers quarreled and destroyed
one another. They that afterward came into this Country succeeded him in his
Cruelties, and are still laying it waste; they commit abundance of Massacres
and Robberies there with Impunity, and seem to undertake their long Voyages and
Journeys on purpose to precipitate an infinite number of Souls into Hell, that
were redeemed by the Blood of the Son of God.

Of the Kingdom of Vencuela.
IN the year 1526, the King of Spain, abused by the Artifices of some
ill-designing People, who made use of a thousand fetches and excuses to conceal
from him the great Devastations the Spaniards had made in the new World, to the
great prejudice of the Glory of God, the Christian Religion, and the Salvation
of the poor Indians, gave the Government of the Kingdom of Vencuela, which is
bigger than all Spain, to several Flemish Merchants, with full Jurisdiction and
Power to do what they pleased there, and to dispose of the Country as they
thought convenient. They accordingly entered it with three hundred Men, and
found the People there to be of a meek, tractable and peaceful Disposition, as
indeed the Indians generally are when left to their natural Temper, and not
enraged by the Abuses so often offered 'em. These were still more brutish and
cruel than those Spaniards of whom we have been hitherto speaking: They
exceeded Tigers, Wolves and Lions in Barbarity, when they saw themselves
Masters of this great Kingdom, in possession of it, and the Jurisdiction of it
entirely put into their hands: they thought they had ample liberty to do there
whatever they pleased, and that they might satisfy their Covetousness at any
rate, and by all the methods they could imagine, tho never so unjust. They took
no care but how to heap up vast Treasures of Gold and Silver; and the
abominable means they used to this end, showed they had no regard either to God
or their Prince; nay, they seemed to have utterly forgotten that themselves
were Men, having put on such an inhuman and savage Fierceness; or to come yet
nearer to their true Character, they appeared like so many Devils in the shape
of Men.

They ran through these rich and pleasant Provinces, and instantly laid the
Country waste for forty Leagues together, wherein were fruitful Valleys of a
prodigious extent, and Towns and Villages stored with great quantities of Gold.
The destruction they made was so general, that scarce a Man was left to carry
the News of the Cruelties they exercised in this Kingdom to other Provinces:
none but those that hid themselves in Caves and Holes of the Earth, could
escape the Sword of these furious and inhuman Creatures. They invented new
kinds of Punishments wherewith to torment 'em, to force 'em to part with their
Gold by discovering the places where they had hid it: After this manner they
destroyed three or four Millions of People. The Instances of three or four
Facts will sufficiently discover how these Brutes behaved themselves in this
Kingdom.

One of the first things they did, was to seize him, whom they looked upon as
the Sovereign Prince of the whole Kingdom; they loaded him with Irons to get
the more Gold out of him: they endeavored by the Tortures to which they put
him, to make him discover the places where he had secured his Treasures; but he
had the good fortune to escape their hands, and fly into the Mountains: His
Subjects surrounded him, and hid him in the Woods; but their number was too
great to be long concealed: so that the Spaniards pursued 'em with Swords in
their hands, and made a dreadful Massacre among 'em; others of them they took
alive, and sold for Slaves.

Before the Spaniards had took their King Prisoner, they were received in all
these Provinces with singing, dancing, and all the highest demonstrations of
Joy, as if come to bring Peace and Plenty with 'em into the Country: They
frankly and voluntarily gave 'em immense Sums of Gold and Silver; for which all
the Compensation they had was to be run through, and cut with Lances and
Swords, and massacred without pity. One day when they came out to meet the
Spaniards to do 'em the more honor, the Flemish Commander having ordered a
great number of 'em to assemble together in a certain House, cut 'em all in
pieces immediately, only some of the poor Wretches got upon the Beams to avoid
the fury of the Soldiers; upon which this Commander caused the House to be
fired, and destroyed them in the Flames. The whole Country was soon turned into
a Desert; for all that escaped the Soldiers Rage retired into the Mountains.

The Spaniards after this passed into a vast Province upon the Confines of that
of St. Martha, where they found the Natives following their ordinary business
in profound Peace. All the while they continued here they lived at the charge
of the Indians, who served 'em with as much Affection and Diligence, as if they
had owed their Lives to 'em: nay, they bore with their troublesome Humors, and
continually received ill Treatment from 'em with incredible Patience. The
Indians moreover to qualify their ill Temper, brought 'em a prodigious quantity
of Gold, and many other things of great value. Yet these Tyrants, when upon the
point of leaving 'em, instead of gratefully acknowledging all the good Offices
they had received of 'em, resolved to put 'em all to the Sword. The Flemish
General (who has since been supposed to be a Heretic, because he never went to
Mass himself, nor suffered others to go) commanded his Men to take all the
Indians with their Wives and Children, and put 'em into some very large place
capable of containing 'em all; and then to declare to 'em that if they had a
mind to redeem their Liberty, with that of their Wives and Children, they must
necessarily lay down a certain Sum, which this unjust Governor had taxed 'em
according to his own capricious Humor; and to urge 'em the more to answer his
Requirement, he barbarously prohibited his Men to give any Victuals to these
poor Creatures, till each of 'em had paid the Sum imposed on him. Many of 'em
sent to their Houses for the Sum demanded, being willing to do what they could
to redeem their Liberty, and to have leave to go seek something to eat: Yet
they were no sooner got out of the Clutches of this covetous Governor, but he
instantly sent Soldiers to take 'em again, and subject 'em to the same
Confinement from which they had ransomed themselves with so much difficulty: so
that they died in this Captivity with Hunger and Thirst, unless they speedily
bought their Liberty again, which they forced 'em to do by this barbarous
usage. So that many of 'em were taken and retaken thus three or four times, and
every time obliged to ransom themselves with great Sums. Those that were not
able to pay the Tax laid upon 'em, continued in this cruel Prison till they
pined away with Hunger and Misery. Thus was this opulent Province that abounded
with Gold, made desolate in a very little time. There was one pleasant and
fertile Vale ravaged by these Brutes, which extended no less than forty
Leagues; they burnt a Town in it consisting of a thousand Houses. After this
resolving to advance farther into the Country to discover a new way to Peru,
they made use of a multitude of Indians in this Journey, whom they loaded with
Chains, and their Baggage together: those that fainted under their Burdens with
weariness, they killed upon the spot, cutting of their heads; and divided the
Burdens of them that died among the Survivors.

If one could exactly describe all the Ravage and Massacres the Spaniards
committed in this Province, together with all the Towns they fired, so
deplorable a Story would fill every Reader with horror, and almost surpass
belief. Many other Tyrants came afterward into this Province, who followed the
steps of the former in searching for Gold and other Treasure; but they found
the Country so burnt, pillaged and desolate, tho it had heretofore been both
very populous and fertile, that they themselves could not but stand amazed to
think what Cruelties the poor Indians had endured.

All these Violences were plainly proved by the Procurator of the Treasury of
the Council of the West Indies. The Acts and Proceedings made in this Affair
are yet preserved upon record; yet not one of these Tyrants was ever put to
death for the Injuries offered these poor Indians: so that all the Process that
was made against 'em proved to very little purpose. Those Ministers of Justice
that have been hitherto sent into the Indies have regarded nothing but their
Interest; and studied how to enrich themselves without taking the trouble to
examine and punish the Crimes of these Tyrants, who did so much mischief, and
committed so many Outrages on the poor Indians. They content themselves to say
in general, that such and such have committed great Crimes, and abused the
Inhabitants of the New World; that they have lessened the King's Revenues to
such a degree. But when they have made these loose and general Enquiries, they
go no farther: Whereas more effectual Remedies ought to be used to stop the
Course of all these Mischiefs. There is not so much care taken as to evidence
and verify these matters; nor do they give their Acts and Proceedings all the
Life and Authority they ought: for to discharge their Duty faithfully to God
and the King, they should make such Tyrants as these restore all the Plunder
they have so unjustly got. And 'twould be no difficult matter to prove that
they carried out of this Kingdom of Vencuela above 3 Millions of Gold, having
utterly ruined the Country for 40 leagues together in the space of 17 years;
for so long they continued spoiling this noble and fruitful Region. They have
cheated the King of above 2 Millions of his Revenues; nor can they ever be able
to repair the damage they have done this delicious Country, unless the many
thousand People they have cruelly murdered could be raised again from the dead.
What I am now speaking of, only respects the King's temporal Interest, which
they have so ill managed, without saying any thing of their Blasphemies, their
Impieties and Outrages committed immediately against the Divine Majesty. And
who shall make reparation for the loss of so many Souls they have precipitated
into Hell, in not suffering the Missionaries to instruct 'em? These are the
Fruits of their detestable avarice and profanity. As soon as ever they entered
this Kingdom, they several times loaded diverse Ships with great numbers of
Indians, whom they carried into the Isle of St. Martha, and sold for Slaves.
Great multitudes of these poor Creatures were likewise carried into Hispaniola,
Jamaica, and the Isle of St. John, to the number at least of a million of Men.
The Royal Council has been sufficiently informed of all these Disorders and
Cruelties; but they are pleased to connive at 'em, and are as willing to shut
their Eyes, and take no notice of all the Robberies and Villainies the Spaniards
have committed on the Coasts of the Isle of St. Martha; tho they might have
easily hindered all this mischief if they had applied themselves to it. 'Twas
the infamous Avarice of these Tyrants, that induced 'em to take so many Indians
to sell 'em for Slaves: and the very same covetous humor and phrenzie has
seized all the Europeans that have hitherto set foot in America. Their Custom
has been to take the poor Indians out of their houses, with their Wives and
Children, to load 'em with Chains, to mark 'em like Sheep that they might
distinguish 'em one from another, and afterward to sell 'em as if they had
been born Slaves.

Of those Provinces of the Continent called Florida.
THREE merciless Tyrants have invaded these Provinces one after another since
the year 1510, all animated with the same Spirit, and moved by the same
designs. They all committed the same Outrages throughout this Country, to put
themselves by robbing and pillaging into a capacity of buying places of honor
and profit, far above their quality: but God was pleased to punish 'em after a
very signal manner; for they all came to a miserable end; they were buried in
the ruins of those Houses, which they had built with the Spoils of so many
miserable People whom they had ruined and murdered. Thus were these Provinces
left desolate. These Brutes would doubtless have committed yet more Villainies,
had not the just Judgment of the Almighty shortened their days, and punished
'em in this Country for the Massacres and Robberies they had committed in other
parts of the Indies.

When they came into Florida, they found it plentifully stored with People, who
were wise and well disciplined both in Civil Affairs, and in Morals: they
immediately began to cast a Terror throughout the Country by I know not how
many Massacres; so that the poor Indians who had never known any thing like it,
were put into a mighty Consternation. The Spaniards used 'em instead of Beasts
of burden to carry their Arms, Utensils and Provisions: yet the Inhabitants of
one great Town expressed abundance of Joy at their arrival, entertained 'em
with the best they had, and furnished 'em with plenty of Provisions as long as
they continued there; they offered 'em 600 of their strongest men to carry
their Baggage, and look to their Horses. Yet the Spanish General was so little
touched with the courtesy of these People, that he killed their Prince with a
Lance, that so he might be in a better condition to pillage them, who little
thought of such a bloody fact as this, and other Cruelties with which their
barbarous Guests requited their kindnesses. They with their Swords and Lances
killed all the Inhabitants of another Town, who stood upon their Guard, and
endeavored to defend themselves from the Hostilities of these Tyrants. They
put Men and Women, great and small, Masters and Servants all to the Sword,
without any respect either to Age, Sex or Quality. In another Village a Spanish
Captain killed above 200 Indians: he cut off the Lips and Noses of others, and
sent 'em away in this condition to terrify the rest of the Country by so
horrible a sight. These Cruelties hindered the success of the Missions of our
Apostolic Men in the Indies, who had no good reasons to produce to these poor
Wretches to excuse such Barbarities as these. One may easily guess by this
Instance what love the Indians must have for the Catholics, and what
confidence they can put in their Promises. What Idea can they have of God, when
he is described to 'em as infinitely good and merciful? What can they think of
his Law, which they are told is so holy and just; when they see those that
profess to observe it, not scruple to commit all these Crimes?

Most of these cruel Villains perished miserably without the least contrition
or repentance; and tho God is infinitely gracious and merciful, there is reason
enough to fear they are condemned to eternal Torments.

Of the River de la Plata, or Silver-River.
SEveral Spanish Captains have undertaken Voyages to the Silver-River, since
the year 1502. The Country upon it is of a vast extent, and contains many great
Kingdoms and noble Provinces. The Inhabitants are a very rational and civil
sort of People, and live at a considerable distance from the other Indians;
which rendered it an easy matter to the Spaniards to molest 'em with impunity,
and to exercise all their wonted Rapine and Cruelty among 'em. They every where
carry with 'em the same design of enriching and making themselves great and
powerful at the cost of these unhappy People, whom they plunder of their
Treasure, as if it were the spoil of a just and lawful War. Wherever they come,
they use the same ways and means to compass their design; they torment and kill
the People, pillage and destroy the Country, ruining whole Nations to possess
themselves of their Gold and Silver.

On the Banks of the Silver-River they have destroyed diverse great Provinces
and Kingdoms; and cut the Throats of multitude of Indians, treating 'em with
all the Cruelties they could invent: for when they were at this vast distance
from Spain, they did not much fear the King's Authority; believing the
remoteness of the place where they committed their Crimes, would secure 'em
from the danger of suffering for 'em. This hope of impunity made 'em more
barbarously cruel in this Country than in others; so that they lived here after
the most licentious manner imaginable, without the least regard to Law or
Justice. However some of their Actions have been reported to the Council of the
Indies. A certain Governor one day commanded his Soldiers to enter into a
Town, and massacre all the Inhabitants, if they should refuse to give 'em what
provisions they wanted. The Soldiers prompted by this Order, and supported by
the Authority of the Governor that sent 'em, killed 5000 of these poor
Creatures; who looking on the Spaniards as their declared Enemies, were not
willing to trust 'em, or to have any commerce with 'em; and therefore hid
themselves, not so much to avoid giving 'em what they as'kd, as to escape the
points of their Swords. The other Indians were so terrified by this slaughter,
that they readily offered themselves in great numbers to serve the Spaniards.
These Indians when they were one day called by the Governor to receive some
orders from him, I know not by what hap, made some delay to present themselves
before him; upon which he commanded 'em to be delivered up to another Nation of
Indians who were their mortal Enemies. The poor Wretches as soon as they heard
this cruel Sentence, cried out most hideously, entreating the Spaniards with
tears in their Eyes rather to kill 'em outright with their Swords and Lances,
than to abandon 'em to the rage of their sworn Enemies. Nor could they by any
means be got out of the house were they were; upon which the Spaniards hewed
'em in pieces one after another; while the poor Indians complained to 'em of
their barbarity, expressing themselves with hearts full of anguish and despair
after this manner: We came voluntarily to meet you, to offer our Service to
you, and to show you all the respect we could; and all the return you make to
our kindness is to murder us without pity. Our Blood that is dashed on every
side upon the Walls of this House shall be an everlasting witness of your
cruelty, and cry for vengeance against you for the unjust death you make us
suffer. It Is impossible to reflect on this Action without being moved both with
horror and compassion.

Of the great Kingdoms and Provinces of Peru.
A Spanish Commander with a great number of Soldiers entered these Kingdoms
with the Title of Governor; and with a Resolution to heap up a vast Treasure
in a little time. He had already given some proofs of his skill and capacity on
the Continent; and he every day perfected himself more and more in the Art of
cutting of throats and pillaging. He was naturally cruel, without Faith, Honor
or Religion; he knew no other God than Gold or Silver, and therefore gave
himself liberty to commit all sorts of Crimes, to get these Metals any way in
the world. He did abundance of mischief in the large Provinces of Peru. It Is
not possible to represent to the life what Persecutions the Inhabitants of this
rich Country underwent; and what cruel sorts of death they were made to suffer,
to extort their Gold and Silver from 'em.

When this Governor first entered Peru, he rifled diverse Villages, and took
away prodigious quantities of Gold. He then passed into an Island (not far from
this Kingdom) which is very pleasant, fruitful and populous. The Prince of this
Island, together with the Inhabitants, came out to meet the Spaniards, and
received 'em with great joy and civility. But in the space of six months, which
time the Spaniards continued here, they consumed all the Corn and other
Provisions they found in the Island. After this they discovered that the
Indians had hid some Corn under ground, to keep against a time of scarcity, for
the subsistence of their Wives and Children; which they were constrained to
leave to the discretion of the Spaniards, who took possession of it as their
own Property; and hereby reduced these poor People to the utmost necessity.
Soon after this they left the Island, but first killed a great many of the
People, and carried away the rest with 'em for Slaves. Thus by the many
Cruelties they committed, this Island is quite depopulated.

From hence they went into the Isle of Tumbala, which is situate near the
Continent; here they massacred all the Inhabitants that fell into their hands.
The rest frighted at this cruel slaughter, fled every way they could to avoid
'em; and tho they did this only to save their Lives, it was interpreted a
Rebellion against the King of Spain; but was only an Artifice of this Tyrant to
entrap these miserable People, that he might make 'em surrender to him all the
Gold and Silver they had: which they brought to him in great quantities, while
he still demanded greater, being resolved to leave 'em nothing: And when he had
stripped 'em of all they had, he told them he received 'em into the number of
the King of Spain's Subjects, and pretended a great deal of kindness to 'em,
promising he would treat 'em as his friends, and not do 'em the least hurt for
the time to come. This Hypocrite was for plundering the Indians, and terrifying
'em with menaces of the King of Spain's displeasure; but had the Policy not to
receive 'em into the number of this Prince's Vassals, till he had robbed 'em of
all they had. And yet the Title of the King of Spain's Subjects did not secure
'em for the future from his Insults and Robberies.

The name of the Sovereign Prince and Emperor of all these Kingdoms was
Atabalipa, who brought with him an innumerable Army of naked men, who made use
of a ridiculous sort of Weapons, not understanding the force of the Spaniards
Swords and Lances, and Horses, with which these Indians had never been
acquainted; he advanced his Troops near the Spaniards, crying with a great deal
of courage, Where are these Spaniards? I Will never leave 'em till they have made
me satisfaction for all my Subjects that have been killed by them; of all my
Towns which they have burnt, and of all my Riches which they have carried away.
The Spaniards came to meet this Prince in good order and well-arm'd, and made a
horrible slaughter among his Soldiers; they took the King himself, who was
carried on a stately Seat upon the Shoulders of his Subjects. This Prince
finding himself in this miserable Condition, began to treat with 'em about his
Ransom, for which he promised to give 'em 4 Millions of Crowns: for this Sum
they engaged to give him his Liberty; yet would not stand to their own
Agreement, but obliged him to assemble all his People, who to obey their
Prince's order came together in Crowds. This King bore such a sway in the minds
of his Subjects, that he boasted that the Leaves of the Trees in the Woods
durst not move without his order. He told the Spaniards he was their Prisoner,
and they had now power to put him to death if they pleased. Upon this they held
a Council of War to deliberate what to do with him; and resolved to burn him
with a gentle Fire: only there was one Captain not quite so inhuman as the
rest, who told 'em they ought to content themselves with strangling him, and
then burning him after he was dead. When the King was informed that he was
condemned to die, he thus expressed himself; Why will ye needs put me to death?
What Crime have I committed against you? Did you not promise to restore me my
Liberty, provided I would pay that Fine of Gold you imposed on me? Have not I
given you a greater Sum than you demanded? However if you are resolved to kill
me first send me at least to the King of Spain. But all his Complaints, all his
just Reproaches and Protestations could not hinder them from burning him. It Is
easy to see that the Spaniards had no right to make War with this Prince and to
treat him so inhumanly. But the Captivity of this King, the Sentence of Death
pronounced against him, and the Cruelty with which they put it in execution,
after they had extorted such vast Treasures from him, all sufficiently discover
the Genius of these Tyrants, and of what Injustice and Violence they have been
guilty both against the Princes and People of the new World.

I have a Letter from a Monk of the Order of St. Francis written to the King of
Spain, by which it will appear how the Spaniards behaved themselves toward the
Indians: The very Terms of which Letter I Will here set down.

I, Friar Mark de Xlicia of the Order of St. Francis, General of all the Monks
of the said Order in Peru, who came into this Country with the Spaniards that
first invaded it, do testify what I have seen with my own Eyes of the manner of
their treating the People of this new World. Having been an Eyewitness, I have
a certain knowledge of the Disposition and Manners of the Inhabitants of Peru;
they are a meek, good-humored and peaceable Nation, and have shown a great
deal of Affection and Respect to the Spaniards; I have seen 'em give 'em great
Sums of Gold and Silver, and Pearls of a great value very readily; they
rendered 'em all the Services they could require of 'em with all the diligence
that could be reasonably desired. They never offered to make War with 'em, nor
so much as to put themselves in a posture of Defense, till they had received
all imaginable Injuries from 'em, and were thereby constrained to it contrary
to their Inclinations. They gave the Spaniards as many Men and Women as they
needed for their Domestic Business; and when they had received 'em into their
Towns and Villages with all the Honors they could think of, they supplied 'em
liberally with all the necessary Accommodations of Life.

I farther testify, that the Spaniards without having received the least
occasion of Offense from the Indians, seized their great Cacique Atabalipa,
soon after they entered his Country, and burnt him after they had received four
Millions of Gold of him, and after having taken immense Sums out of his
Province without any Resistance. They inflicted the same Punishment on
Cochilimaca his Captain General, when he came to meet them in an amicable
manner with many other Noblemen of Peru. A few days after another great Lord of
the Province of Quitonia suffered the same fate; for the Spaniards burnt him
without having the least occasion given 'em for so cruel an Action: With the
like Barbarity and Injustice they burnt Schapera the Prince of the Canaries.
They also burnt the feet of Aluis, the first and greatest Lord of the Province
of Quitonia, and put him to a great many other Torments to make him reveal K.
Atabalipa's Treasures, of which he was utterly ignorant, as it evidently
appeared by the sequel. They condemned Cocopagaganga to the same Punishment,
who was Prince of the Province of Quitonia: He suffered himself to be over
persuaded by the Treaties of Sebastian Banalcacar a Spanish Captain, to come in
an amicable manner and surrender himself to the Spaniards; this Captain having
given him his word that no Injury should be done him; yet, contrary to this
promise, he was burnt alive, with several Caciques besides: and I have been
informed, that the Spaniards designed to show no Mercy to any Indian in the
Country.

I moreover affirm, that I my self have seen the Spaniards in several places
cut off the Noses, Ears and Hands of Indian Men and Women, without any
Provocation, in cold Blood (as it seemed) purely for the sake of doing
Mischief, which is a most inexcusable sort of Barbarity. I have seen the
Spaniards set their fierce and hungry Dogs at the Indians to tear 'em in pieces
and devour 'em. And I have seen 'em set fire to so many Towns and Villages,
that it is impossible I should recollect the number of 'em. It Is certain they
have torn Children from their Mothers Breasts, and thrown 'em with all their
might as far as they could, to divert themselves with this brutish Sport. I
have often been a Witness of many other Cruelties of this nature, which have
filled me with Dread and Horror; but I should be too prolix and tedious to give
the Detail of 'em.

I protest, that once the Spaniards when they had assembled the greatest number
of Indians they could in three great Houses, set fire to 'em and burnt 'em all
alive, without any reason, having not received the least affront from 'em. And
a certain Priest, whose name was Ocana, happening to attempt to take a young
Child out of the Flames, a Spaniard that saw him, took the Child from him, and
immediately cast it again into the Fire, where it was burnt with the rest. This
Spaniard the same day be committed this black and cursed Action, died suddenly
as he was going to the Camp; and I was of opinion that his Carcass ought not to
be interred.

I have seen the Spaniards send Deputies to the Caciques and chief Indians, to
engage 'em to come and meet 'em without fear, promising 'em to employ their
Interest with the King of Spain on their behalf: but as soon as they were come
upon the Credit of the Promises that had been given 'em, they were burnt
without Pity or any formal Process. Two of the most illustrious and
considerable Indians were burnt in my sight, one at Andonia, and the other at
Tumbala. All the Efforts I made to secure 'em from the Flames, and to get 'em
out of the hands of these bloody Wretches, were to no purpose; my Discourses
and Exhortations made no impression on 'em. I can say with a good Conscience,
and in the presence of God, that so far as I have been able to learn, by the
long time I have been among 'em, the Inhabitants of Peru have never fomented
any Mutiny or Rebellion, or done the least Injury to the Spaniards, who have
treated them so inhumanly; but whatever Torments they have suffered, they
seemed to have laid aside the thoughts of Revenge. And when they found the
Spaniards were always deceiving 'em, and breaking the Promises they made 'em;
when they found they treated 'em with so much Tyranny, contrary to all Law and
Equity; and that they did not scruple to commit all sorts of Outrages against
'em, they rather chose to die, than to be continually exposed to such Miseries.

I have been informed by the Accounts the Indians themselves have given, that
there is a great deal more Gold among 'em undiscovered than has been yet found;
the ill Usage and Cruelty of the Spaniards having made 'em conceal it: and they
are resolved never to discover it while they are treated with so much Injustice
and Tyranny, but will rather die as their Companions have done, who have been
put to death with so much Cruelty. The Injuries offered these poor Indians are
very heinous Sins in the sight of God, and contrary to the Interest and Service
of the King, who has been cheated of more Treasure in Peru than would keep all
the People in Castile.


Thus far the Letter of that Monk, which was confirmed by the Attestation of
the Bishop of Mexico: He was an Eyewitness of what he here relates, for he
went through this Country for the space of fourscore or a hundred Leagues, and
continued there nine or ten years, in a time when there were but few Spaniards
there. But as soon as it was reported in Spain that this new World was so full
of Gold, there presently came four or five thousand People, who spread
themselves through these noble Provinces, and possessed five or six hundred
Leagues of the Country, which they entirely ruined, committing all those
Disorders and Crimes that have been mentioned before. They have destroyed a
great many more People here than this Friar takes notice of in his Letter: and
without having any fear of God before their Eyes, or any regard to the King, or
the least sentiment of Compassion to their Fellow Creatures, they have almost
destroyed one half of Mankind; for in the Provinces of Peru alone they have
killed above forty Millions of People.

A few days after what I have related above, they killed a great Queen with
Arrows made of Reeds; she was Wife to Prince Elingue, who still governs this
Province in quality of King: the Spaniards did what they could to seize this
Prince's Person, and omitted no Tricks and Artifices to accomplish it; this was
the occasion of his Revolt against the Spaniards, and he has ever since
continued their declared Enemy. They took his Queen contrary to the Rules of
Equity and Justice; and it is said they killed her at a time when she was big
with Child, merely to vex and grieve the King her Husband, who loved her very
tenderly. If all the Massacres the Spaniards have committed in Peru should be
recounted, every one would be astonished at the recital, and the number of 'em
after an exact Computation would surpass all probability, and appear too great
to be believed.

Of the new Kingdom of Grenada.
A Great number of Spaniards went from Venecuela, the Isle of St. Martha, and
Carthagena in the year 1536, to make a Discovery of Peru: Diverse others went up
higher, three hundred Leagues beyond St. Martha and Carthagena, to discover
those excellent Countries that were very fertile, and full of People of a mild
and sociable Temper; where is abundance of Gold and precious Stones found,
especially Emeralds: they gave this Kingdom the name of New Grenada, because
the Captain that first set his foot in it was born at Grenada. They that
accompanied him were very profligate Men, and extremely cruel; they shed human
Blood without any scruple or remorse, for they had been long accustomed to all
sorts of Wickedness, and therefore it is the less to be wondered at that they
have committed so many Crimes in this New Grenada, where they abandoned
themselves to all manner of Abominations. I shall only mention some Instances
of 'em, because an exact recital of their Cruelties would fill the Minds of all
that read this History with too much Horror.

A certain Governor that could not get his share of the Booty another had got
before him in ravaging this new Kingdom of Grenada at his pleasure, tho he
could have seconded him with all his heart in the Cruelties and Robberies he
committed here; yet being enraged to see such a valuable Prey escape him,
thought meet to appease his Trouble after a sort, and to revenge himself on the
other by making authentic Informations confirmed by the concurrent Testimony
of many Witnesses, which exposed to light all the Vexations, Murders and
Cruelties which this Tyrant had been guilty of in New Grenada. The said
Informations were read in the Council of the Indies, where they have been
hitherto preserved, and are yet to be seen.

In these Informations the Witnesses depose, that this new Kingdom enjoyed a
settled Peace before the Spaniards came thither; that the People showed 'em all
the kindness imaginable as soon as they came among 'em; that they maintained
the Spaniards with their Labor, and the Fruit of the Ground which they
manured; that they gave 'em prodigious quantities of Gold, and abundance of
precious Stones, amongst others a great many Emeralds; that they freely brought
'em whatever was most valuable in their Cities, the Government of which the
Spaniards divided among themselves when they had cantoned 'em into several
parts: for this they counted a proper method, the better to compass their
design of heaping together all the Gold they could possibly find.

When the Indians were first subjugated to the Tyranny of the Spaniards, the
chief Captain, who was General of the rest, took possession of the King's
Person as well as of the Country, and kept him Prisoner for five or six Months,
without any reason in the World, demanding Gold and Emeralds of him
continually. This King, whose name was Bogata, in the midst of his fears,
promised the Spanish General to deliver up all the Gold-plate he had, hoping by
this means to get out of the hands of this Tyrant: he sent a great many Indians
to his House to fetch these precious Goods; and at the several turns they made
he gave the Spaniard a great quantity of Gold and Emeralds; who was not content
with all this, but threatened to kill him. Accordingly he commanded this
unfortunate King to be brought before him to receive his Sentence. This is the
Treatment these Tyrants give the most illustrious Persons of the new World:
This haughty General pronounced a fatal Sentence against this Prince, by which
he was condemned to most horrible Torments if he did not immediately send for
all the Gold he had: Accordingly this Tyrant's Executioners laid hold of the
King, stretched him out at length upon the ground naked, and poured boiling
Rosin upon his Belly; besides this, they put his feet into a Fire, having
fastened his Neck to a Stake fixed in the ground, while two of these Hangmen
held him by the Arms. The cruel General came from time to time to look upon him
while this Torture continued, threatening to take away his Life if he did not
speedily deliver up his Gold. God seemed by his Providence to signify his
Displeasure against these Cruelties, in suffering the City where they were
committed to be consumed with Fire in a moment. The rest of the Spaniards took
pattern by their General, and filled up his steps: And having no other trade
than that of tormenting the Indians, and cutting 'em in pieces, they practiced
the same Villainies in diverse parts of this Kingdom: They inflicted terrible
Punishments on several Caciques, and all their Subjects, who too imprudently
depended on the good words and promises the Spaniards made 'em: And this after
they had given 'em incredible Sums of Gold, and many Emeralds. These Presents,
tho so valuable, could not soften their obdurate Hearts, and render 'em civil
to their Benefactors* The Tortures to which they put the Indians were to make
'em bring yet more Gold and precious Stones; and the same motive has induced
'em to burn all the great Lords of the Country with a slow fire. A great
multitude of Indians one day came to meet the Spaniards with a great deal of
humility and simplicity (as their manner is) to offer 'em their service,
supposing themselves safe; but while they were sleeping without any
apprehension of danger, being faint and weary, a Spanish Captain commanded his
men to massacre 'em all, which was accordingly executed. This was done to
strike the whole Country with terror and consternation, and to fright the
Inhabitants out of their Gold by the horror of so tragical a Spectacle. The
General made his Soldiers swear how many Caciques and Indians each of 'em had
killed, and how many they had reserved alive for their Slaves; these he
immediately ordered 'em to bring out into the most public place of their City,
and made 'em there cut off the heads of 4 or 500 of these poor Creatures.
Diverse Witnesses have deposed that this Captain ordered the hands and noses of
many Indians both Men and Women to be cut off, and exercised other unheard of
Cruelties among 'em. He sent into Bogata's Province to enquire who had
succeeded that Prince, whom he had so inhumanly put to death: The Men he sent
to make this Discovery took as many Indians as they could; such of 'em as could
not tell the name of their late Prince's Successor, were barbarously abused,
some of 'em had their Arms and Legs cut off; others were exposed to the fury of
greedy Dogs, and soon torn in pieces by 'em.

They fell upon a great number of Caciques and Indian Noblemen by a treacherous
surprise in the middle of the Night, after they had assured 'em they need not
fear any affront or abuse from them. The innocent Indians confiding in these
fair promises, were come down out of the Mountains where they had hid
themselves, to lodge in the Cities, not suspecting the ill design the Spaniards
had against 'em: However these perfidious men surpised 'em, and cut off the
Hands and Arms of all they took, letting 'em know they were chastised after
this severe manner for not telling the name of their late King's Successor.
Another time the General sent a great party of Soldiers into a City to make war
with the Inhabitants, because they sent him not a basket of Gold which he had
demanded: they made these poor people suffer a thousand Outrages, and massacred
vast numbers of 'em. They inhumanly cut off the noses and hands both of Men and
Women, and gave others to be devoured by their Dogs, which were wont to be fed
with human flesh.

The people of one of these Provinces, seeing 5 or 6 of their Chiefs burnt to
death with a slow fire, were frighted by this horrible sight into the mountains
to shelter themselves from the Spaniards; they were about 5 or 6000: hereupon
the Spanish Commander sent a Company of Soldiers to pursue 'em, and treat 'em
as Rebels. It Is hard to imagine by what right they assumed an Authority to
punish people as rebels, that were freeborn, and did not in the least depend
on 'em. When the Spanish Soldiers were got into this Mountain, they fell on the
poor Indians, who were naked and disarmed, with a fury like that of Wolves and
Lions, when they set upon a flock of Sheep to devour 'em; till at length they
were so spent and fatigued merely with slaughtering these poor Creatures, that
they were forced to give over a while to take breath; after which they renewed
this Massacre with more vigor. And to cut short their bloody work, they threw
down the greatest part of these Indians headlong from the top of the Mountain,
which was very high. It has been deposed by those that were Eyewitnesses of
this Tragedy, that they forced above 700 of these poor Indians all together
down this Precipice, so that they looked like a Cloud as they fell; they were
all dashed in pieces by this dreadful fall, and died miserably.

The Spaniards pushed on this barbarous Expedition to the utmost; for they made
a diligent search in all the remote Corners of the Mountain, and gave no
quarter to any they found; those they could catch were either cut to pieces, or
after many wounds cast down from the top of the Mountain. Nor did these
Cruelties satisfy 'em, but they shut up diverse Indians both Men and Women, whom
they had reserved for Slaves, in a house covered with straw, which they set on
fire and so consumed 'em. They likewise went to the City of Cola, where they
took abundance of People, with about 15 or 20 of their Great Men; they exposed
these to the fury of their Dogs, which devoured 'em, having first cut off the
hands and feet both of Men and Women; and fixed these sad Spoils on Poles, that
they might be obvious to the view of all, and that the dreadful sight might
cast terror and amazement in the minds of all that survived.

The Ravage and Cruelties these bloody-minded Men exercised in this new Kingdom
of Grenada are so great, that if the King of Spain dos not apply a speedy
remedy, and set bounds to their excessive Avarice and insatiable thirst of
Gold, that whole Kingdom will soon be destroyed, and the Land lie uncultivated
and unimprov'd, for want of Inhabitants.

In the space of 2 or 3 years, since this Kingdom has been discovered, they
have without the fear of God or Man put the Inhabitants to death, without any
emotion or pity to see so much human blood poured out. There are now scarce any
People to be found there after all these Massacres. There are diverse fine large
Provinces near New Grenada; this Country is called Popoyan and Cali, and is
above 50 leagues in extent, which they also have ruined, and made as desolate
as the former. Here they have so slaughtered the people, that this once
populous Country is now quite destitute of Inhabitants. Those that come from
thence relate such terrible things of the Spaniards proceedings there, that one
cannot hear their sad Stories, without being pierced with trouble and compassion
in a very sensible manner. In these Provinces they have ruined many fine Cities
from one end to the other; so that they now lie buried in their own Ashes: there
are scarce any of the ruins of those Cities to be seen, which once contained
above 2000 Houses. In a word, this Country which was full of Villages, Towns,
and Cities for the space of 50 leagues, is now so bare, that there is scarce any
token remaining to signify there ever were any such buildings.

Some of the Spaniards came from Peru into New Grenada and Popoyan through the
Province of Quitonia; others of 'em came to Cali by the way of Carthagena and
Vraba, but all joined together to carry on the same design, spoiling a Country
of 600 leagues in extent of all its Riches, and extirpating all the Inhabitants
after they had plundered 'em. When this cruel War was ended, the Spaniards took
some of the Indians, whom they had reserved for Slaves, into their service, and
caused the heads of several of their Companions to be cut off in their sight to
terrify 'em; telling 'em they must all expect to undergo the same fate, if they
did not serve 'em faithfully. By the recital of such barbarous Actions as
these, the Reader may easily imagine how the Spaniards behave themselves toward
the Indians in the several parts of America. They feed their fierce Dogs with
human flesh, on purpose to accustom 'em to tear Men in pieces, and devour 'em.
They carry these Dogs with 'em wherever they go, and barbarously murder the
poor Indians, to feed these savage Curs with their flesh. They Will say one to
another, Give me a quarter of that Indian to make my Dog a feast; and when I
kill one, I Will pay you again. They commonly hunt in the morning with these
Dogs; and when asked by their fellows what luck they have had, they answer
according to their success. Sometimes one will say, I am content, my Dogs have
killed about a score of 'em; so that one would think they were speaking of
Wolves or wild Boars. Can any thing be imagined that exceeds such horrible
Cruelty as this? And all these Barbarities have been proved and averred by
strict Examinations made and produced before the Council of the Indies.

But I shall add no more, till I shall receive farther information of their
other Villainies, which may be expected to be yet greater than those I have
mentioned, if greater can possibly be committed. And that which is most
deplorable is, that the Spaniards take no care to speak to these people of the
Mysteries of our Religion; nor seem to regard 'em any more than Dogs or wild
Beasts. Nay they have forbidden the Monks and Missionaries to instruct 'em,
whom they have even persecuted, and laid a thousand Obstructions in their way,
to hinder 'em from preaching the Gospel to these poor Creatures who
passionately desired it; and all because they thought the Conversion of these
People would be an Obstacle to their covetous Designs, and hinder 'em from
getting all the Gold they desired. So that these miserable people have been
industriously kept in their former ignorance, and know no other God than those
of Wood, Stone or Copper; unless it be the People of New Spain (which is but a
small part of America) where the Monks have exercised their Function, and have
been suffered to display their Zeal with more freedom. In the other Provinces
the Indians perish without Baptism, or any other Sacrament; and no one gives
himself the trouble to instruct 'em; as will farther appear by an authentic
Letter from a Bishop of this Country, who expresses himself in these Terms:

I Friar Bartholomew de Las-Casas, Monk of the Order of St. Dominique, having
signified my desire to be recalled from the Indies, had leave to come over to
the Court of Spain, to give an account of the deplorable Condition of the
Indians. To this I have been moved by the Zeal with which God has inspired me
for Souls redeemed by his Blood. My earnest desire is, that they may know their
Creator, and embrace his Word, that they may be saved. And I cannot choose but
extremely pity Spain, my native Country, because I am greatly afraid God will
utterly destroy it, for the enormous Crimes committed by the Spaniards (who go
into the Indies) both against God, against the King, and against their
Neighbors. I don't doubt but diverse illustrious Persons of this Court, who are
truly zealous for the Salvation of Souls, are very sensibly touched with the
Calamities and Miseries those multitudes of poor Creatures suffer in the New
World, who are abandoned to the fury of the Spanish Soldiers. I resolved long
ago to draw up an exact relation of these matters, but have been still hindered
by the continual urgency of those affairs in which I have been engaged till
now. However I have at length accomplished this design at Valence, the 8 th of
December, Anno 1542. This Treatise gives a short account of the Violence,
Tyranny, Persecutions, Robberies, Massacres and Devastations committed by the
Spaniards in all the parts of America where they have dispersed themselves.
These Calamities and Disorders are advanced to a degree that surpasses all
belief, and is the more surprising in that the Spaniards are much less furious
and cruel every where else. Indeed the People of Mexico and of the places
adjacent, are now treated much better than others; insomuch that no body there
dares offer violence to any Indian openly: It Is true they exact immense Sums of
'em, but the forms of Justice are at least so observed, that the People are
protected from the Insults and Affronts of such as have more power than
themselves. I have great hope our Illustrious Lord, Charles the Fifth, Emperor
and King of Spain, who begins to take cognizance of the Tyranny and ill
behavior of the Spaniards toward the Indians, will undertake the protection of
these miserable People, who are persecuted against his will, as well as against
the will of God. All the miseries that have bin inflicted on these newly
discovered Nations have bin hitherto concealed from our Prince with no less
subtilty and address than malice. Yet now it is not to be doubted but this wise
Emperor, into whose hands God has cast the Government of those vast Regions,
and who bears so sincere an affection to Justice, will give effectual Orders to
put a stop to these Persecutions. May God preserve this Illustrious Emperor in
all the Glory and Prosperity that attends him, for the Salvation of his Soul,
and the Preservation of the Church. Amen.


A year after the writing of all of these matters above recited, there were
published in the City of Madera certain Laws and Constitutions made by his
Majesty at Barcelona, in the month of December in the year 1542. which were
calculated according to the urgent necessity of Affairs to rectify the
Disorders that were then committed with so much Insolence both against God and
Man, to the utter destruction and desolation of the New World. For the
constituting of these wise Laws his Majesty assembled a great many Persons,
illustrious both for their Quality and Learning, and moreover endued with great
Piety, who deliberated on these important Affairs in diverse Sessions at
Valladolid. At length by the unanimous Consent of the whole Assembly, diverse
Propositions were ratified and published; and which appear the more conformable
to the Rules of Christianity, in as much as the Persons who composed this
famous Assembly had never been any way concerned in the Outrages offered the
Indians; they were such as had neither washed their hands in their Blood, nor
reaped any advantage by the immense Treasures that had been taken from 'em with
so much Violence, after the murder of incredible numbers of innocent People.
For the Avarice and Cruelty of those Spaniards who first set foot in America
have been the fatal Causes of all the Miseries that new World has undergon.

After the publication of these new Orders for regulating the Affairs of the
Indies, the Protectors of those cruel Tyrants, who had still some Credit at
Court, procured several Precepts to constitute Officers to send into diverse
Provinces of the Indies, for they were much concerned to see the course of
their Violence likely to be stopped, and their wonted Robberies and Extortions
obstructed. And thus they to whom the care of suppressing these Disorders, and
preventing the farther Insults of these Tyrants was committed, made no
conscience of violating that Equity and Fidelity they owed both to God and
their Prince; for they knew very well what effect the Edicts that were made
must needs have, and therefore alarmed the People before the arrival of the
Judges who were sent to the Indies to publish the Laws of their Prince, and to
put 'em in execution: so that as soon as these Judges came into America, they
appeared to be of the same stamp with those that sent 'em, and neither regarded
God nor Man; they immediately forgot the King's Orders, and laid aside the
Reverence due to so great a Prince; and being willing to take part with those
Tyrants, that they might have a share of the Booty, behaved themselves with a
Cruelty beyond imagination, and justified those Villainies which they were sent
to punish.

So that since the year 1542, such Rapine and Violence has been committed in
Peru, that the like has not been heard of either in the Indies, or any other
part of the World: Nor do they exercise their Cruelty only on the Indians, whom
they have almost exterminated, but are suffered by the just Judgment of God to
turn their Arms one against another with great fury to their mutual
destruction. Some of the People of this new World under the protection of these
Rebels, were encouraged to refuse Obedience to the Emperor's Orders; others
pretending they were desirous to address Petitions to his Imperial Majesty,
have suffered themselves to be carried down the stream with the rest, and have
revolted too. For the Spaniards are not easily persuaded to surrender those
Treasures they have unjustly usurped, or to release those Indians whom they
have enslaved. If they don't so often massacre 'em, they increase the weight of
their Irons, and impose Laws on 'em more and more unjust and rigorous. And the
King with all his Authority has not yet been able to stop the course of these
Mischiefs, because they are generally linked together in a Confederacy, both
small and great; and all use the licentious trade of robbing and spoiling more
or less according to their power, some more publicly, and others after a
clandestine manner. But that which yet further discovers the Boldness and
Insolence of these Hypocrites is, that they still make pretenses that they
consult nothing but the King's Interest, and the Glory of God in all they do;
while it is most apparent, they are continually robbing the King, and that with
impunity, and are always dishonouring God and Religion by their criminal and
scandalous Practices.

That which next follows is a Fragment of a Letter of a certain Person who
accompanied the Spaniards in their Voyages and Journies, giving an account of
their Actions in the various places through which they passed: But this Letter
being designed to be sent with other Papers, he that made up the Packets lost
several Pages of it which contained very remarkable and extraordinary things
concerning the Actions of the Spaniards. This Fragment I send you is the Body
of the Letter, the beginning and end of which are both wanting. However, seeing
that which it contains deserves the notice of the Public, I thought meet to
print it, and hope the view of it will produce the same effect of moving you to
commiserate the Calamities of the poor Indians, as I presume the more ample
Relation I have given you above has done: And consequently that your wonted
Charity will excite in your Minds an ardent desire to oppose and rectify all
those Disorders as much as in you lies.

The Fragment.
-- The Captain ordered these Indians to be chained for Slaves, which was
presently done, and he carried away with him great numbers of Men and Women in
Chains; so that the whole Country was soon turned into a Desert. They took away
all the Crop of Corn these poor Creatures had, and whatever else they had laid
up for the subsistence of their Families, by which means they were soon reduced
to extreme want; so that many were found dead in the Highways merely with
Famine. There were also above ten thousand of those Indians the Spaniards took
to carry their Baggage, that died on the Coasts: for almost all that went any
distance from the Sea were killed with the excessive Heat they met with on the
Continent. This same Captain following the steps of John Ampudia, sent before
him two Indians whom he had taken in the Province of Quitonia, to discover the
Villages and Towns that were in their way, and where any Booty was to be got;
these Indians were either his own Slaves, or those of his Soldiers, some of
whom had two or three hundred Slaves a Man, and others more or less, as they
had more or less Baggage and Provisions to carry. These Indians returned to
their Master, together with such others as they could bring away with 'em. And
in these Expeditions all sorts of Cruelties were committed upon Women and
Children. They did the same in the Province of Quitonia, they fired their
Houses wherever they came, and burnt all the Stores of Corn the Indians had.
And to show their spite the more, as if all this Mischief had been too little,
they killed their Cattle only for the Suet and Marrow, having no occasion for
the Flesh; only the Indians who attended the Spaniards in these Expeditions ate
the Livers, that being one of their principal Dishes. It Is scarce to be
believed what numbers of Cattle they killed here; they destroyed above a
hundred thousand after this manner only for the Fat and Livers, and so made the
Country desolate by this needless slaughter, which brought such a Famine and
Misery upon the Inhabitants, that they died for want of Food: They besides
carried away out of this Province all the Corn they did not burn; so that tho
the Country produces abundance, there was so great a Scarcity, that a A Septier
is a measure of Corn containing about 240 pound weight.
Septier of Corn was worth ten Crowns, and a Lamb was sold for the same Price.

The Commander of these Troops being returned from the Seacoast, resolved to
leave the Province of Quitonia, and to join John Ampudia. To accomplish this
Design he raised above two hundred Men Horse and Foot, among which were diverse
Citizens of Quitonia. He gave 'em leave to bring with them the Caciques, and
all the other Indians which had formerly fallen to their share, and to add as
many others to 'em as they pleased, which they did. One Alphonso Sanchez
carried with him his Cacique, whose name was Nenuyta, with a hundred other
Indians and their Wives. Peter Cobo accompanied him with a hundred and fifty
Indians and their Wives, who were forced to drag their Children after 'em, for
fear they should perish with Hunger. One Moran, a Citizen of Popayan carried
above two hundred People with him; and all the rest of the Soldiers did the
same proportionably to their Stock and Occasions. They desired permission to
make all the Indian Men and Women that attended 'em their absolute Slaves,
which was granted; and this Privilege continued as long as they lived, tho
these Indians were the Subjects and Vassals of the King of Spain as well as the
Spaniards themselves.

With such an Equipage as this our General left the City of Quitonia, to go
take possession of that of Octaba, which fell to his lot. He demanded of the
Cacique five hundred Men to join his Forces, which were delivered to him, with
diverse other Persons of Note. Part of these Indians he distributed among his
Soldiers, and took the rest to himself, some of whom were loaded with Chains,
and others with his Baggage and Provisions. 'Twas a lamentable sight to see
these poor Wretches tied one to another with Cords. When these Spaniards parted
from the Province of Quitonia, they carried away no less than six thousand
Indians, of which scarce twenty came back to their own Country; for the extreme
Fatigues and scorching Heat they endured in those hot Countries soon cut 'em
off.

The General having made Alphonso Sanchez Captain of a Company, this Brute
meeting some Women and Children in his way, loaded with Provisions, and waiting
for him to present him with what they had brought, massacred 'em all without
pity. In this cruel Action, a Spaniard going about to kill an Indian Woman
broke his Sword in two the first blow he gave her; at the second stroke he
broke it again, so that he had nothing but the Hilt left in his hand: but that
which is more surprising is, that this poor Woman received no Wound by the
blows he gave her. Another Soldier striking an Indian Woman with a large
Dagger, had about three Inches of it broken off at the first stroke, and the
whole Blade quite to the Hilt at the second.

When this General, of whom we have been speaking, parted from Quitonia, he
cruelly separated Husbands and Wives one from another, giving the young Women
to the Indians that went with him, and leaving the old Women to those that
remained in the City. One of these Women followed him with loud Cries when he
went away, and begged of him with abundance of Tears, that he would not take
away her Husband from her, telling him she had the charge of three Children,
and 'twould be impossible for her to provide for 'em if she were bereaved of
her Husband; so that they must necessarily be starved. The General repulsed her
not without some Indignation, upon which she redoubled her Sighs and Cries,
telling him her Children were ready to die with Hunger: at length seeing her
Prayers and Tears made no Impression on him, she took a Stone and dashed out
the Brains of all her Children in his sight.

When this Commander arrived in the City of Palo, which is situate in the
Province of Lilia, he met with Captain John Ampudia, who went before him to
make a discovery of the Country, and to settle Peace in it: he was now Governor
of this City, which had a Garrison in the King of Spain's Name, and was under
the direction of the Marquess Francis de Piccaro, who had established a Council
there consisting of eight Counselors, that had the Inspection of the whole
Country, and kept it in Peace and Union by the good management of Peter Solano
de Quenon. Ampudia hearing our General was arrived in the Country, came to give
him a Visit, accompanied with many of the Inhabitants and Indians, who brought
him abundance of Fruit, and other Provisions. Many of the neighboring Indians
came afterward on the same Errand, and after them the Inhabitants of Xamundia,
Palonia, Solimania and Bolonia, did the like. But because they did not bring so
great a quantity of Corn as demanded, the General sent a Troop of Soldiers
with a great many Indians to seek some elsewhere, with Orders to take it where
ever they found it. With this Order they went into Palonia and Bolonia, where
they found the Indians dwelling very peaceably in their Houses; and without any
regard to the Laws of Nations or of Hospitality, took away all the Corn and
other Provisions, together with all the Gold and Silver they had, and put many
of the poor Indians in Chains to make Slaves of 'em. These unhappy People came
to make their Complaint to the General of the ill Treatment and Injustice they
had suffered, and to entreat him to cause Restitution to be made of what had
been so violently taken from 'em, but in vain, for he would do nothing in the
matter, only gave 'em his promise that his Men should do 'em no hurt for the
future, and that they should never come again into their Country: yet four or
five days after they went into another part of the Country for Corn, and
pillaged the poor Indians as they had done before; who were so provoked to see
themselves deluded by the General, who had broke his Promises almost as soon as
he had made 'em, that the whole Country betook themselves to their Arms in an
instant; which Tumult afterward occasioned many Disorders and great Offenses
to be committed both against the Majesty of God and the Dignity of the King of
Spain: At length these People fled, and left this whole Country desolate. They
that retreated into the Mountains came down from time to time to seek
Provision; the Indians likewise engaged in a cruel War one with another,
wherein the stronger party used to eat the weaker: For that Indian Nation that
inhabits the Mountains are a fierce and warlike People, and mortal Enemies to
their Neighbors. After this Insurrection the General went to the City of
Ampudia, where he received all the Honors due to his Character; he afterward
marched with two hundred Horse and Foot toward Lilia and Pelinia.

He sent his Captains all round the Country to make a cruel War upon the
Indians; they fired a great many Houses, robbed all that fell into their hands,
and killed abundance of 'em. This killing and pillaging continued many days
together. The Lord of the Country hoped to put a stop to these Miseries, and to
allay the bloody Rage of these Tigers by sending their Subjects to 'em with all
sorts of Provisions and other Presents. Soon after this they came to Lilia with
all the Indians they had taken, for they would not discharge one of 'em. They
passed through Ycea in their way, and were no sooner arrived there, but they
fell to pillaging and massacring all they met with; they exercised their usual
trade of firing their Houses, they consumed above a hundred of 'em in one
Village; nor did other Towns and Cities in the neighboring Country, which they
call Tulilicui, fare any better. When the Cacique at the head of a great
company of Indians came to meet 'em, the Spanish Commander demanded Gold of him
and his Subjects: they told him they had no great quantity, but would readily
give him all they had; and accordingly brought him that little they had got
together. Upon which he delivered a kind of Receipt signed with his own hand to
each of 'em, which was to serve for a token by which to distinguish those that
had given him Gold from the rest; adding, that whoever had not this Receipt
should be exposed to the Dogs to the devoured by 'em. The poor Creatures
terrified by these Menaces, brought him all the Gold they had in very great
haste, and those that had none were fain to retire into the Mountains, or into
other Cities to save their Lives; and thus the Country was deprived of the
greatest part of its Inhabitants. A little after he ordered the Cacique to send
two Indians to the City of Agua, to signify that he required the Inhabitants to
meet him, which they might do with safety, and to bring with them all the Gold
they could. After he had dispatched this Order, he went to another City, and
the same might sent a party of Spaniards to seize some of the People of
Tulilicui, who brought him a hundred Men and Women the day following, of which
he reserved the most robust and lusty, whom he thought fit to carry great
Burdens, for himself and his Soldiers, and put many of 'em in Chains, giving
the young Children to the Cacique of Tulilicui to eat, in whose House their
Skins filled with Ashes are still to be seen. After this Expedition he went
toward the Provinces of Calili, where he joined Captain John d' Ampudia, who
was gone another way to make a further discovery. These two Commanders left
great marks of their Cruelty in all the Provinces through which they passed.
Ampudia happened to come to a certain City, the Governor of which, whose name
was Bitacon, had made deep works under ground to hinder the approach of an
Enemy: Two of the Spaniards Horses, that of one Antony Redondon, and that of
Marc Marquis, fell into these Traps, and the latter of 'em died with the fall,
but the other escaped the danger. However this small loss by the Stratagem of
the Indians so provoked this Captain, that he ordered his Men to take all of
'em they could light on, which was about three hundred, and to cast 'em into
these Pits; besides this they fired a hundred Houses. From hence they came to a
very great and populous City, here they had no Interpreter by whom to converse
with these Indians; however they massacred abundance of 'em with their Swords
and Lances. As soon as these two Commanders met one another again after all
these Expeditions, Ampudia gave the other a relation of what he did at
Bitaconia, and told him how many Indians he had cast into the Pits that were
made at the entrance of the City, while the other applauded all he had done,
telling him he had reason to serve 'em after that manner: And added, that for
his part he had destroyed above two hundred Indians near the River Bamba, which
waters the Province of Quitonia. Thus these two Tyrants made War upon all this
Country at the same time. They both after this entered into the Provinces of
Birumia and Anzerma, where they left everlasting tokens of their Barbarity and
Fury. One Francis Garcia, whom they sent out to pillage the Country, treated
the People with abundance of Insolence, till he reduced 'em to extreme
Indigence and Misery. The Indians came to him by couples, making signs to
desire Peace for the whole Country, promising to give the Spaniards all they
should demand, and to deliver up their Gold, and their Wives too, provided they
would give 'em their Lives; but received no other Answer from this cruel
Garcia, but that they must be gone, for he had drank too much, and was now in
no condition to consider of what they said. He entered their Country full of
Fury, and running through the whole Province, put it all under Military
Execution, robbing, and spoiling, and massacring the Inhabitants without mercy:
he carried away two thousand of the People with him, who were put in Chains,
and died under the rigor of their cruel Bondage: And before he left this
Country he put fifty more to a violent Death.

After he had filled this Province with misery and horror, he passed into the
Province of Calili. When any of the Indians that carried his Baggage fainted
with weariness, and fell under their Burdens in the way, they killed 'em on the
spot, to terrify the rest by these bloody Actions, that none of 'em might dare
to pretend themselves sick to get rid of their Burdens and Labors. And thus
they were all destroyed by degrees; for partly because they were not
sufficiently looked after, and partly because unreasonable Labor was exacted
of 'em, there was not so much as one of all those Indians left alive, which
they brought from Quitonia, Pastonia, Quilla, Cangapatra, Popaya, Lilia,
Calicia, and Anzerma. As the Spaniards returned, they past through a great
City, where they put most of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and carried away 300
Prisoners, whom they enslaved according to their usual manner.

The General sent John Ampudia, when they were in the Province of Lilia, with a
considerable Party of Soldiers into those parts of the Country most inhabited,
to take as many Indians as he could to carry the Baggage; because not one of
that number they brought from Anzerma and Allia, which amounted to about 1000
Men, was able to endure the Fatigue, but all died in the way. They here took as
many as they had occasion for to carry their Baggage, and the rest were left to
the discretion of the Soldiers, who put 'em in Chains, and kept 'em till they
were starved; so that this Country was quite unpeopled, neither Spaniards nor
Indians being now to be found in it. After all these Ravages, they advanced
toward Popaya, leaving Martin d' Aquirra by the way, he being unable to follow
the rest. As soon as they arrived at Popaya; they formed a Garrison in the City,
and treated the Inhabitants with the same Insolence and Violence they had used
in all other parts of the Country where they had made their Progress. Here they
coined Money with the King's Image and Arms upon it; they stamped all the Gold
they had, as well as that which John d' Ampudia had got by his Robberies, after
this manner. All this Gold was melted by the General's Order, without keeping
any Account of it, or paying any of the Soldiers, unless it were such as had
lost their Horses; so that he kept almost all the Gold for his own private use.
He pretended indeed to take the 5 th part of it, which is the King's due, and
to go to Cuzco to give an Account of it to his Majesty's Intendent; but took
another way, and returned into the Province of Quitonia, taking up many Indians
as he went, who all died under the heavy Yoke of their slavery. He afterward
effaced the King's Image, which he had stamped upon this new Money. And it is
remarkable concerning this Man, that he could not but reflect on all the
mischief he had done, and on the Cruelties he had committed; for he was wont to
say of himself, Whoever shall come into these Provinces 50 years hence, and be
told what kind of life I led here, will say, Such a Tyrant went this way, and
here are everlasting marks of his Violence and Cruelty.

It is not to be concealed from Your Highness, that the rest of the Spaniard
who came into the Indies after him, have endeavored to tread in his steps, and
have exactly followed the Example he set 'em; for they have committed the same
Injustice and Villainy and so they still continue to do.


Among the other Remedies proposed by the Lord Bartholomew de Las-Casas in the
Assembly of Prelates and Learned Men whom the King called together at
Valladolid, to reform the Affairs of the Indies, in the year 1542, he advises,
That the King of Spain should take the Indians under his protection, and
consider 'em as his lawful Subjects, that by this means they may be sheltered
and guarded from the continual Tyranny and Insolence of their Enemies, and not
be utterly extirpated by Massacres, which have bin so often committed with
Impunity. For as fruitful and populous as this New World has been, it will soon
be laid entirely waste, and turned into a barren Desert, if the Spaniards be
still suffered to root out the Inhabitants, as they have hitherto done.

The Words of the Bishop on this Subject are as follows:
The most proper and best Expedient, and which is of great importance for your
Majesty's Interest, without which all others will be fruitless, is, that your
Majesty send express Orders to all your Courts and Tribunals in the Indies, to
receive all the Indians, both those that have been already subjugated, and
those that shall be conquered for time to come, into the number of your free
Subjects, that all the Provinces they inhabit be united to the Kingdoms of
Castile and Leon, and that all the Inhabitants be incorporated as your own
People, so that they shall not be capable of being inslaved by any Spaniard;
and that this Law and Order be inviolably observed: that for the future these
new Provinces may not be dismembered and alienated from the Crown of Spain,
under any pretext whatsoever, tho never so great necessity should be pretended;
and never so pressing intercession be made with your Majesty to obtain the
Title of a particular Sovereignty for any one: That all the world may know that
the Government of those Provinces that are subdued in the Indies, is
inseparably united to your Majesty's Crown, and a part of your Property. That
to confirm this Constitution the better, and to render it the more solemn and
inviolable, your Majesty would please to take an Oath upon the Holy Gospel, on
your Crown, and all that is most sacred, in the form and manner Princes are
wont to do on such Occasions, that you will never revoke this Edict; and that
your Successors be obliged to take the same Oath: And that your Majesty take
care to make it one express Article of your last Will and Testament to engage
your Successors to observe this Law, and to make others observe it, as much as
lies in their Power.

Diverse reasons are afterward produced to show that this Policy is of absolute
necessity for the Preservation of America, and to hinder the utter Extirpation
of the Indians.

The insatiable Covetousness of the Spaniards, who mind nothing but to amass
together heaps of Treasure, makes 'em unwilling to suffer any Priest or Monk to
come into those Cities where they are Masters, for fear their worldly Interest
should receive considerable damage by that sort of Men; because (they say) it
makes the Indians idle, to assemble 'em (as they do) to instruct 'em in the
matters of Religion; for all the time they take up to preach to 'em, they
detain 'em from the Work imposed on 'em. Sometimes when the poor Indians have
been assembled for their instruction in Christianity, the Spaniards have
insolently accosted 'em with Cudgels in their hands; taking such a number of
'em as they think fit, to carry their Baggage or any such like Service; and if
they are unwilling to obey, they force 'em to it with Blows in the sight of all
the rest, and in the presence of the Monks that instruct 'em; which is a great
Scandal to our Religion, and a mighty Obstacle to their Conversion, who are
strangely terrified and hindered in these pious Exercises as well as the Monks
that preach to 'em, by this ill usage.

Another Inconvenience the Spaniards pretend they receive from these
Instructions, is, that when the Indians are converted and placed in the number
of Christians, they grow proud and insolent, thinking better of themselves than
they are, and refuse to work so hard as they did before. For the Spaniards are
very ambitious to command the Indians as their absolute Slaves, and to be
obeyed, respected, and even adored by 'em; and therefore omit nothing that may
hinder them from becoming Christians.

Sometimes 3 or 4 Towns or Villages are given up to the disposal of a certain
number of Spaniards, and the Inhabitants distributed among 'em, to some more,
to others fewer; and it often happens that a Woman falls to one Man's share,
whose Husband falls to the Lot of another, and their Children to a third; so
that they divide these miserable Families like Flocks of Sheep. They employ 'em
in all sorts of service, as to manure the ground, to work in the Mines, and to
carry Burdens in Journeys of 50 or 60 Leagues. And their Masters so constantly
exact the hard Tasks of Work they set 'em, that the poor Wretches have not time
to attend the Instructions of the Divine Word, and to learn the Rules of
Christianity. These People, tho free, have been made Slaves, and the greatest
part of 'em destroyed. Parents and Children have been slaughtered together;
Villages and Cities entirely ruined, and not a House left standing. And the
Spaniards have no more regard to their Salvation, than if their Souls and
Bodies died together, and were incapable of eternal Rewards or Punishments.

The Spaniards undoubtedly have an Obligation of Duty upon 'em to instruct them
in the Doctrine of Christ; but they are so ignorant themselves, that it is not
much to be wondered at, if they take no care to inform others. I knew one John
Colmenero in the Isle of St. Martha, as dull, as ignorant and whimsical a
fellow as one should meet with, to whom the care of instructing the Indians in
a great City was committed, tho he scarce knew how to make the sign of the
Cross; and when he was examined about the course he took to instruct the
Indians, could make no other answer, but that he taught 'em to say, Per signin
sanctin Cruces. By which one may easily guess at the profound Understanding of
the Man. And how indeed is it possible for the Spaniards to teach the Indians
Christianity, and to inform 'em what is necessary to Salvation, when the most
noted Spanish Lords, and such as make the greatest figure in the Indies, scarce
know how many Commandments there are? For they go into America only to gratify
their insatiable Covetousness. They are generally given to all sorts of Vices;
and so immodest, voluptuous and effeminate, that if a just Comparison were made
between them and the Indians, these latter would be found to have much more
Virtue and Honesty: For as ignorant and barbarous as they be, they are content
with one Wife according to the Laws of Nature, as a necessary help to 'em;
whereas the Spaniards lay aside all respect to the will of their Maker, and
take 14 or 15 Women, or as many as they please, to satisfy their brutish
Passions, how opposite soever this Plurality of Wives is to the Law of God. The
Indians scarce know what it is to take away one another's Goods, and live
innocently by their Neighbors, without offering 'em any Violence or
Oppression. And what thoughts must such People as these have of those that call
themselves Christians, when they see 'em commit all manner of Crimes and
Villainies; when they see 'em guilty of so much Injustice and Treachery, and in
a word, of all the Abominations of which men that are left of God, and have no
principle of honor or conscience can be capable? This makes many Indians laugh
at the God we worship, and persist obstinately in their Incredulity. They
believe the God of the Christians to be the worst of Gods, because his
Worshippers are the worst of Men.

As for your Majesty, they think you are the most cruel and impious Prince in
the World, while they see the Cruelty and Impiety your Subjects so insolently
commit; and they verily believe your Majesty lives upon nothing but human flesh
and blood. Probably this account may very much surprise your Majesty, who
perhaps have not yet received sufficient information about these matters; but
this Opinion is of long standing, and become inveterate among 'em. I could
produce a great many Instances, of which I have been an Eyewitness, to
convince you of the Truth of it; but I am afraid of making your Majesty too
uneasy, and of filling the Reader's mind with too much horror, by reciting such
extraordinary and unparalled Stories, which may give a just occasion of
Wonder, that God has so long deferred to inflict some exemplary and terrible
Judgment upon Spain, to punish all the Abominations the Spaniards have
committed in the Indies. The Pretense of subjecting the Indians to the
Government of Spain, is only made to carry on the design of subjugating 'em to
the Dominion of private Men, who make 'em all their Slaves. One Spaniards who
has the Government of a Town or City, does more mischief by his vicious and
scandalous Example, than a hundred Priests and Monks can do good in
endeavoring to advance Christianity by all their Piety, and the exemplary
Sanctity of their Lives.

When the Spaniards have the Government of any place committed to 'em, or have
any personal concern, or special interest in it, they will be sure to oppress and
harass the poor Indians, and offer 'em all the Abuses that can be. And it is now
become almost impossible for your Majesty or your Ministers to stop the Course
of these Oppressions, and regulate these Disorders; for the Spaniards terrify
the Indians by their threatenings, and sometimes kill 'em to prevent their
complaints against 'em: and of this kind of Cruelty we have many Instances: So
that the poor Indians are continually molested and harassed, without any calm
Intervals in which to compose their Minds, and therefore are not capable of
applying their Thoughts to the consideration of Divine things. Their whole Life
is spent in Sorrow and Anguish under their Persecutions and Torments. This
makes 'em mortally hate your Majesty, and abhor the Christian Religion; for
they cannot but think you impose a severe Yoke on 'em with intolerable Tyranny,
that you are the most covetous Prince upon Earth, and that therefore they ought
to leave no stone unturned to get clear of your Government. The despair under
which they lie, occasions 'em to belch out a thousand Curses against our God,
attributing all the Miseries they suffer to him, whom they accuse of Blindness,
Injustice, and want of Compassion, for not punishing the Outrages committed
against 'em under the pretense of obliging 'em to embrace his Religion, and for
not chastising the Impiety of such as make a boast of being his Servants, while
they are guilty of the highest Abominations. This inflames their Zeal toward
their false Gods, which they say are much better than ours, who has brought all
manner of Miseries upon 'em, whereas their own were the Authors of all kinds of
Blessings.

We shall make it evidently appear to your Majesty, that the Spaniards in about
eight and thirty or forty years have unjustly put to death above twelve
Millions of your Subjects; and what an incredible damage must your Majesty have
farther sustained by these Massacres, as they have hindered all these People
from multiplying, who would have amounted to an infinite number, the People of
this new World being very fruitful, and the Climat generally very temperate and
pleasant, and consequently very proper for Generation? The Spaniards have
massacred and destroyed all these Nations, to possess themselves of their
Country, and to usurp the Government of it, so as to have it entirely at their
disposal. And how injust soever those Wars have been which they have made upon
the Indians, if the poor Creatures put themselves in a posture of Defense, they
cruelly cut their throats without any distinction of Quality, Sex or Age: Such
as escape their Fury they reserve for Slaves, many of whom they condemn to the
Gold or Silver Mines, others they yoke together like Beasts to make 'em carry
vast Burdens. They don't much concern themselves whether the Indians live or
die, provided they reap some advantage by their Labor, and heap up Gold at any
rate in the World. I pass over in silence a great many of the Torments these
poor People have been made to endure on all occasions. If any shall attempt to
persuade your Majesty of the contrary, we will undertake to prove what Violence
the Spaniards have used among the Indians by invincible and undoubted Evidence:
And shall not scruple to say, that whoever take upon 'em to deny the truth of
these matters, have in all appearance partaken of those Robberies, or at least
hope to have a share of 'em one time or other. For what show of probability is
there in saying the Contagion of the Air has so entirely destroyed the People
of a Country of 2500 Leagues extent, that there is scarce a Man to be found?

The Spaniards, who know no other God but their Interest, have sullied the
Reputation of the poor Indians with the most odious Stain that can be imagined,
in accusing 'em of being addicted to an infamous and abominable Sin against
Nature; a Calumny as ill contrived as it is unjust. For that Crime has never
been heard of in the Islands of Hispaniola, St. John, Cuba, and Jamaica, which
have been very populous. This I can speak with assurance, as knowing it to be
true, because I took care to inform my self of it as soon as I came ashore in
the new World. Nor is it so much as known what this Vice is in all Peru: not
one Man has ever been found guilty of it in the whole Kingdom of Yucatan; and
the like may be asserted in general of other Countries of America: Only it is
said, that in some very remote parts of it there are some People addicted to
this monstrous Crime: But is it reasonable for this to accuse the whole new
World, and to cast an everlasting Reproach on so many different Nations? We
must say the same of another Enormity charged upon the Indians, namely their
eating of Human Flesh. There are indeed in some particular places a sort of Men
so barbarous that they eat their own kind; but it is very injust to take
occasion from this to report the same of all America in general. Another
pretense the Spaniards use, by which to justify their ill Carriage toward the
Indians, is their Idolatry; as if it did not belong to God rather than to them,
to punish those that offend him by such abominable Worship when he sees meet.

Besides, the Lands and Territories they possess are not under the Jurisdiction
of the Spaniards, nor are the Indians obliged to own any other Governors than
their lawful and natural Sovereigns. Our Ancestors before they were instructed
in the Doctrine of Christianity, were buried in the gross darkness of Idolatry
as well as the Indians. And before the coming of Christ, all the Nations of the
World in general were guilty of that Crime. But that which evidently proves the
Minds of the Indians to be very susceptible of our Religion, is the Mildness,
Humility and Courtesy they at first expressed to the Spaniards, and the
patience wherewith they have since undergone their Cruelties.

It Is a most inexcusable piece of Wickedness in the Spaniards, that they have
made use of all the Obstructions they could, and that deliberately, to hinder
the Indians from embracing the Christian Faith; they have driven away all the
Monks that came into the Indies to preach the Gospel, from those places where
they had power enough to do it, because they did not care these Religious
Persons should be Witnesses of the Tyranny and Cruelty they exercised on the
poor People. They have even debauched the Indians by the ill Example they have
set 'em, and taught 'em a great many Vices they never heard of before they
conversed with the Spaniards, such as Oaths and Blasphemies against the Name of
Christ, the Practice of Extortion, Lying, and many other Sins that seemed
opposite to the sweet and peaceable Temper of these People: So that to leave
these poor Indians under their Government, is visibly to expose 'em to utter
Destruction, and to make 'em miserable both in Soul and Body.

King Ferdinando was so far imposed on by the Artifices of some self-interested
Men, as to give 'em leave to transport the Inhabitants of the Lucay-Islands
into Hispaniola: these People were forced out of their Houses, and out of their
Country, in pursuance of this Grant, which was subtily obtained, and occasioned
the destruction of above a hundred thousand People; so that there now remain
but eleven of 'em in fifty Islands, some of which are bigger than the Canaries,
that were well stored with People. And this I can affirm on my own knowledge, if
your Majesty could have seen the Ravages and Massacres that have been committed
in the Lucay Islands, you would have been pierced with the most lively
sentiments of Compassion; and then I should have been afraid to incommode your
Majesty by reviving the memory of that Tyranny, in giving an exact Recital of
it. We have taken notice above of the injust Wars the Spaniards formerly raised
against the Indians; we have shown how they massacred 'em against all Law and
Equity, how cruelly they deprived 'em of their Children, their Parents, and
Friends; how they have laid waste one of the finest Countries in the World, and
rendered it in a manner destitute of Inhabitants. This Barbarity makes the
Earth groan, the Angels lament these Miseries: And God himself has given us to
know by the Judgments he has inflicted on us, how much these injust and violent
Actions displease him.

The Spaniards have taken from the Indians all they had; they make 'em work
till they spit Blood, they expose 'em to all sorts of Hardships, and exact
intolerable Tasks of 'em; and, which is yet more horrible, after all they load
'em with heavy Blows, beating, whipping and tormenting 'em with the utmost
Cruelty. To give up the Indians to the Government and Tyranny of these Men, is
as great a madness, as to give Children into the hands of Men that are acted by
a raging Phrenzy, and have Knives and Daggers ready in their hands to cut their
Throats; or to sacrifice Men to the fury of their sworn Enemies, who have long
entertained the desire of Revenge, and formed a design to murder 'em; or to
expose a young beautiful Virgin to the Discretion of an impudent Ravisher. Who
in such a conjuncture, without the interposition of special Grace, would
abandon himself to the Conduct of his Passions? In a word, it would be the same
thing as to give 'em up to so many wild Bulls, Wolves, Lions and Tigers, when
enraged with pressing Hunger: for all the Prohibitions that should be given
these wild Beasts not to touch such as are exposed to their fury, would have
just the same effect to prevent 'em from being devoured, as any Charge that can
be given the Spaniards to hinder 'em from murdering the Indians to possess
themselves of their Gold and Silver. We dare assure your Majesty after the long
Observation we have made of these matters, that if your Majesty should order a
Gibbet to be set up at every Spaniard's door, and should swear upon your Crown,
that you would cause every Man to be hanged that should kill or offer any
considerable Injury to the Indians to get their Riches; this would not be an
effectual Remedy to these Disorders, if your Majesty gave 'em any Authority or
Power over 'em either directly or indirectly. The same occasions of doing
mischief would still present, and defeat all the Prohibitions that could be
made, and all the Punishments that could be used to terrify 'em.

Nor are the poor Indians exposed only to be made Slaves by the Spaniards, but
suffer abundance of Oppression from a cruel Tyrant, that has the Government of
each Town or City, who has a severe Eye over 'em, to see how they acquit
themselves of their Labors, and perform the Tasks imposed on 'em. His business
is to plague and torment 'em so many different ways, that their Sufferings are
almost beyond comparison; he beats 'em with Cudgels, tears their Flesh with
Whips, and causes burning drops of Fat to be distilled on their naked Bodies.
He is continually exercising his Invention in contriving new Tortures, he
violates their Wives, takes away their Turkeys, which they count one of their
greatest Treasures; these Fowls serve him to make Presents to the General, who
is superior to all these petty Tyrants. But it is impossible to give a
particular description of all the Punishments these poor Wretches endure; and
after all to stop their Complaints, they threaten to accuse 'em of Idolatry.
Thus the poor Indians are subject to the Authority of several different Powers,
to your Majesty, to their Cacique, and to the Spanish Governor, besides twenty
other little Tyrants, destitute of Reason, Honor and Conscience, who commit all
sorts of Outrages; and likewise the Moors whom the chief Tyrant employs to rob
and oppress the poor Indians.

It Is much to be feared that Almighty God will make Spain feel some
extraordinary marks of his Displeasure and Indignation for these enormous
Crimes: nay, there appear already some tokens of the Divine Anger against the
Spanish Nation, for the Disorders and Devastations made by some in the new
World: for tho God had laid up such quantities of Treasure there, that it may
be said neither Solomon nor any other Prince ever possessed a stock of Gold and
Silver comparable to that which the People of these vast Regions enjoyed; yet
they have bin so pillaged, that now there is little remaining among 'em: But
that which is more unaccountable is, that there is scarce any of that Silver now
to be found, that was so common in America when the Spaniards first discovered
it. This makes every thing extraordinary scarce there, so that the Spaniards
are reduced to extreme Poverty and Indigence.

All the while Lares governed the Indies, there was no more care taken to
instill the Principles of Christianity into the poor Indians, and to put 'em in
the way of Salvation, than if they had no Souls to save. This General applied
himself only to plunder the great Cities, and would give a hundred Indians to
one Spaniard, and fifty to another, as he had more or less respect for 'em. He
made no distinction of Age or Condition, but promiscuously distributed old Men,
and big bellied Women, as well as others, Persons of Eminency and Princes as
well as the common People, to oblige his Favorites; as if these Indians were
his absolute Property. Their new Masters made 'em work in the Gold Mines, or
employed 'em in any other Service they pleased; and without regard to their
Rank or Quality, obliged 'em to bear this slavish Yoke till they died.

This Governor suffered the Spaniards to confine eighty thousand of 'em in the
Mines, who were all married Men, while their desolate Wives were forced to
labor in the Villages, in digging the ground, making Ditches, and throwing up
Banks, a sort of work fit only for the strongest Men, and the rather because
they had neither Shovels nor other Instruments proper for their business. In
other places they put 'em upon spinning and other works of that kind, which
they found would turn to account; and would sometimes keep Husbands and Wives
from seeing one another a whole year together; and when they met after this
long separation, they were often so fatigued, and consumed with Hunger and
Labor, that they were incapable of Multiplication. Sometimes the Children died
for want of Sustenance, their Mothers Milk being exhausted with hard Labor and
Hunger; by this means there died seven thousand Infants in the space of three
months in the Isle of Cuba, of which I was an Eyewitness. Some of the Women
transported with despair strangled their own Children; others that were with
Child took poisonous Herbs to destroy their Fruit. Thus the Men died with
hardship in the Mines, and the Women in the Villages; so that the whole Country
became desert in a little time, because the Women ceased to bring forth
Children into the World.

This Governor delivered up all the Indians to the Discretion of the Spaniards,
and suffered 'em to treat 'em with all the Rigor and Severity they pleased, and
to oppress 'em with the hardest Labor they could. They employed Men to chastise
'em that were more savage and barbarous than Tigers, these scourged and beat
'em most unmercifully, and gave them all the ill Treatment they could devise;
they would never discover the least sign of Kindness or Pity, but always showed
themselves austere and barbarously cruel. It would be very inhuman to treat the
Moors themselves after this manner, tho they are so very cruel to the
Christians, and do 'em all the mischief they can, when they have the Ascendent
over 'em. But the Indians are naturally a good-humored, easy, peaceable,
submissive, and tractable sort of People. Some of 'em have by the many Miseries
they suffered, been driven to despair of any mitigation of 'em, and therefore
fled into the Mountains, where they expected Death every moment. The Spaniards
to hinder 'em from flying after this manner, appointed a bloody Fellow to make
it his whole business to hunt out these Indian Refugees upon the Mountains. The
Governor besides established a sort of Officers in the Spanish Cities of great
Consideration and Authority, whom he called Visitors; to each of these he gave
a hundred Indians to serve him, besides his ordinary Domestics, the better to
support his Dignity. He chose such to this Office as had signalized themselves
by their Cruelty. When the Alquazils presented the Indians they found on the
Mountains to these Visitors, there were Persons suborned and instructed to
accuse 'em after this manner; This Indian is a lazy Dog, that fled into the
Mountains to avoid Work, therefore I desire he may be chastised as he deserves.
After the giving of this Evidence, the Visitor used to cause the poor Indian to
be tied to a Stake, and beat with a tarr'd Rope, which the Seamen call a
Salt-Eel, and indeed is like a Rod of Iron, till the Blood would start out in I
know not how many parts of his Body, and the poor Creature would lie for dead
upon the place. God is witness of all the Cruelties these miserable Innocents
have endured: It Is not possible to recount the hundredth part of what I have
seen with my own Eyes. A man had need have a Body of Iron to undergo the Labor
they endure in getting Gold out of the Mines. They must delve and search a
thousand times over in the bowels of the Mountains, till they dig 'em down from
top to bottom; they must work the very Rocks hollow. After this the Gold must
be washed in some River, and the poor Creatures that do this work must be
perpetually in the Water, which gradually alters and spoils the Constitution of
their Bodies; and if the Mines happen to be full of Water, they are forced to
empty 'em. That your Majesty may the better judge of the Labor and Toil they
suffer in the Gold Mines, your Majesty may please to consider, that the Pagan
Emperors accounted this the worst and most intolerable Punishment to inflict on
the Martyrs, next to Death it self. The Indians are sometimes kept a whole year
in these Mines: but since the Spaniards have observed, that it killed most of
'em to keep 'em there so long together, because their Bodies were incapable of
sustaining the Fatigues of such a tedious and continual Labor, they resolved to
make 'em work only for the space of five months successively, and then to give
'em a respite of forty days, wherein they employed 'em in melting Gold. But
this pretended Rest did 'em no great good, for they were not much less
incommoded during this time than before, being employed in other very
troublesome kinds of Work. The Indians don't know what Holy Days are; for they
work as hard and as long on those days as at other times. Nor have they a
sufficiency of Bread allowed 'em; and what they have is a very ordinary sort,
that has not much strength in it, being made of Roots and Cassave; so that if
they don't eat Flesh or Fish with it, it yields very little Nourishment. They
likewise give 'em a sort of Pepper that grows in the Country, and looks much
like a dried Grape. Those Spaniards that pretend to keep their Slaves
extraordinary well, distribute a Porker every week among fifty Indians; but he
that presides over 'em at the Mine keeps one half of it for his share, and
gives them the other, which is but every one a bit. Some of the Spaniards are
so wretchedly covetous, that they send their Slaves into the Fields and
Mountains to feed upon what Fruit they can find, and then oblige 'em to work
two or three days without giving 'em any thing to eat. Your Majesty may easily
imagine, that such kind of Food cannot possibly sustain their weak and
languishing Bodies, that are continually enfeebled and exhausted with hard
Labor; or that these poor Creatures that are macerated with all manner of
Hardship and Fatigue, without any rest, or relaxation of their Misery, can live
long under the pressures of so cruel a Servitude.

The abovementioned Governor at last ordered they should have Wages distributed
among 'em, viz. that three A Blanc is about the value of a Halfpenny.
Blancs should be given each of 'em to spend every two days, as the Reward of
the hard Labors they exacted of 'em. This was only to mock the poor Wretches,
for this Money would scarce buy 'em the least Trifle. But for many years they
had nothing at all given 'em, yet this does not disturb 'em so much as want of
Victuals; for there is nothing in the world they so much desire as to eat well,
insomuch that if they could but satisfy themselves with one good Meal, they
would afterward be content to die. This Governor deprived 'em of all the
liberty they enjoyed, and suffered the Spaniards to inslave 'em, and treat 'em
as severely as they pleased; and indeed the ill usage they have met with is
beyond what the Mind of man can imagine. They have not the liberty to dispose
of any thing they have: The condition of Beasts is preferable to theirs, for
these are at least sometimes turned loose to fill their Bellies with Grass in
the fields, and have a little ease and liberty; whereas the poor Indians have
scarce any time of rest allowed 'em, but are constrained to do whatever the
covetous Spaniards command 'em. They lead 'em to work like Beasts of Burden
rather than Men. If at any time they give 'em leave to go home to take a little
Repose, they neither find their Wives nor Children there, nor any thing to eat,
and have no other relief than to lay themselves down and die. The incredible
Fatigue they undergo wears 'em out the sooner, because they are naturally of a
weak and tender Constitution; and when they are sick and faint, they are still
made to work without any Compassion: nay, the Spaniards are so cruel as to beat
and abuse 'em when they are just ready to die, calling 'em lazy Rascals, as if
they refused to work, and feigned themselves sick, merely out of Idleness. At
last when they see their Illness increase to that degree, that they can expect
no more Service of 'em, they send 'em home, giving 'em six or seven great
Roots, almost like Turnips, with a small quantity of Cassave, to carry 'em a
journey of fifty or sixty Leagues; so that they often miserably languish and
die before they have proceeded far on their way: we often found a great many of
'em dead on the Roads, others we found ready to expire, and others by their
Groans and Sighs gave us to understand their extreme Hunger. When the Governor
had not a sufficient number of Men for the Works in the Mines, he supplied the
places of them that were released by death, by casting Lots for others, which
method was observed once a year.

When he entered into the Continent, he came like a sweeping Judgment of God,
or as a Wolf among Sheep: He committed so many Robberies, Massacres and
Cruelties, depopulated and destroyed so many Towns and Cities, giving the
Spaniards liberty to do what they pleased, that no History can parallel his
Barbarity: He robbed both the King of Spain and his Subjects, without being
ever called to account for it; he left above forty Leagues of a very populous
and fertile Country to the discretion or rather fury of his Soldiers: All that
pleasant Tract of Ground from Daria where he landed to Nicaraqua was reduced to
the utmost Desolation; so that five or six Millions of Money will not repair the
Damage done there. This vile and cruel Man abandoned the Indians to the Tyranny
of the Spaniards, which was the source and original Cause of all the
Persecutions under which those poor People have since groaned, and of all the
Devastations that America has suffered wherever the Spaniards have set their
feet. This Contagion by degrees spread far and near; so that this General by
letting loose his Soldiers after this licentious manner, has occasioned the
ruin of many millions of Men, and the desolation of diverse great Kingdoms that
were subjected to your Majesty's Dominion. If we say the Spaniards have
destroyed seven Kingdoms bigger than that of Spain, we can speak it with
confidence, as knowing it to be true, and having known the time when they were
filled with multitudes of People, tho now there are scarce any to be found, the
Spaniards having extirpated the People of these large Kingdoms, and left the
Walls and Houses of the Towns and Cities without Inhabitants.

Your Majesty has no fixed and constant Revenue in the Indies; your Effects are
like Leaves, which when once they fall from the Trees appear no more till a
year after. That the Spaniards are possessed of the absolute Government of the
Indies is the true cause of this Disorder; for the number of the Indians every
day decreasing, your Majesty's Revenues must necessarily receive a
proportionable diminution.

The Kingdom of Spain is in great danger to be invaded by Foreign Nations,
especially by the Moors and Turks, who perhaps may one day be in a condition to
destroy it: For God is a just Judge, and cannot look upon the Villainies and
Oppressions, the Robberies and Murders of the Spaniards in the Indies, without
indignation. All the Nations of this new World, who were created (as well as
his others) after the likeness and image of God, and ransomed by the precious
Blood of Jesus Christ, have been unjustly and cruelly tormented and persecuted
by 'em; they have made horrible slaughters among 'em to requite the many
Kindnesses they heaped on 'em with all imaginable Freedom and Civility. And
that which still aggravates their Crimes the more, and must needs farther
provoke the Divine Displeasure, is, that God had made choice of Spain to carry
his blessed Gospel into the Indies, and to bring many populous Nations to the
knowledge of himself; for which if they had fallen in with his Designs, he
would, besides those eternal Rewards reserved for 'em, have given into their
hands many good and fruitful Countries, abounding with Mines of Gold and
Silver, Diamonds and other precious Stones and Pearls; in a word, with all
sorts of temporal Blessings, beyond what any one can imagine, unless such as
have seen it with their own eyes. And it is to be remarked that God usually
observes this Rule in the execution of his Judgments, to proportionate his
Penalties to the Crimes committed against him.

The Outrages and Cruelties these innocent People have felt are so horrid and
notorious, that their Tears and Groans and Blood, the cry of which has reached
the Throne of God, will undoubtedly draw down Vengeance on those that have
offered all this violence to their Persons, and plundered 'em of their Estates.
The Report of these Cruelties is spread through the whole World, and has been
carried even to the most barbarous Nations, and has made 'em abhor the
Spaniards, and conceive a mortal hatred against 'em: A hatred which extends to
the Person of our King, as well as Subjects, and is extremely prejudicial to
the whole Nation in general.

None can be so ignorant as not to foresee what Mischiefs the Desolations in
America are like to bring upon Spain; and succeeding Generations will be but
too much convinced of the truth of this Prophecy: And if the King of Spain
still suffers the Spaniards to domineer and tyrannize as they have hitherto
done in the Indies, and makes not effectual provision by proper Edicts to stop
the Course of the many Miseries the People of this New World undergo, those
Countries will in a little time be totally depopulated. And God will
undoubtedly make all Spain feel the Effects of his Wrath in punishing such
Crimes as these; since the whole Scripture is full of Threatenings, and plain
Instances of the Judgments of God on such as have been accessory to the Sins of
others by permitting them.

Most Illustrious and Mighty Prince; The Royal Council for the Indies, animated
with a sincere Zeal for the Glory of God, and your Majesty's Honor, desired me
a few days ago to write to your Majesty all that I had told you viva voce
before, and to explain to you what Right the Kings of Spain have to those
Kingdoms in the Indies: and the rather because some who are uneasy to see the
liberty your Majesty is pleased to give me in conversing with your Royal Person
about these Affairs, to engage you to regulate those Disorders committed in
America, have declared against my Sentiments with a great deal of heat and
animosity. They say the Zeal with which I oppose the Violence and Injustice of
the Spaniards (and these I Am resolved to oppose as long as it pleases God to
continue my life) prompts men to call in question the Title the King of Spain
pretends to have to the New World. However I have performed what the Council
demanded of me, and drawn up thirty Propositions, without giving my self the
trouble of proving them at large, partly because they are all certain and
evident, and partly because I was much urged to dispatch the business, and to
send them to your Majesty; which I have accomplished in the fear of God, and
according to the dictates of my Conscience, with a strict regard to Truth.

Since the desire I have of being serviceable to God daily increases, I thought
my self obliged to refute the Impostures and Calumnies of some ill-designing
Persons, who wilfully shut their eyes against the Truth, because it is directly
opposite to the Designs and Projects they have formed. They flatter themselves,
that under the false pretext of serving the Kings of Spain, who are ordinarily
of a sweet and benign temper, and ready to judge of others by the good
Sentiments they find in themselves; I say, they flatter themselves that they
shall still be able to impose on 'em, and bear a sufficient sway in their minds
to bring 'em into the snares they have laid for 'em. It was the complaint of
Ahasuerus in the History of Esther, that corrupt and vicious Subjects altered
the good disposition of Princes, and betrayed 'em into Excesses, that
occasioned the ruin of whole Kingdoms and their Kings together. It Is for this
reason, Great Sir, I have briefly drawn up these Propositions, to set this
matter before you in a clear light. This I have done to discharge my own
Conscience, and that I might the better answer the Obligations of that Ministry
wherewith God has entrusted me. I find my self growing old, being advanced to
the 50 th year of my age; and the great acquaintance I have had with the
Affairs of America, has furnished me with a very distinct knowledge of 'em; so
that my circumstances render me in some respects more capable than others of
giving proper Advice to those that are proposed for the Government of America,
that they may know how to put a period to its Miseries: for I have no other
intention or desire in this matter, than that of suppressing the Injustice and
Cruelty that has so long harassed the Inhabitants of the New World.

They that endeavor to cross my good Design with the greatest warmth, and deck
themselves with a false appearace of zeal and affection to your Majesty, tho at
the bottom they have no regard either to truth or justice, take care to hide
their Designs under the specious color of promoting your Majesty's Service and
Interest, and of establishing your Majestiy's Right and Title to America, while
indeed all they do is directly contrary to your Majesty's Service, whether in
respect of Spirituals or Temporals. And I believe all intelligent Christians,
that have a true zeal for their Religion, will be of this opinion, when I have
made the Errors and Extravagancies of those that oppose my Sentiments appear;
for these Gentlemen hand over head maintain that the Kings of Spain have a
Right to found and establish themselves a Title to the Government of America by
force of Arms, after the same manner that Nimrod, who was the first mighty
Hunter (as the Scripture expressly observes) and first began to tyrannize over
Men, laid the foundation of his Dominion; or as Alexander the Great, and the
ancient Romans extended the bounds of their Empire; or just as the Turks to
this day oppress the Christians, and invade their Territories. All the World
may easily perceive that they who reason thus, are ignorant of the true
Interest of the King of Spain, and shamefully violate all the Rules of Justice.
To prove what they advance, they add new Errors to their first Extravagancies,
till they show by the wretched Maxims they expose, that they have neither Honor
nor Christianity. For it often falls out, that while they who wander from the
Tract of Truth and Virtue, go about to excuse the Errors they have made, they
fall into other Mistakes that are still more gross and dangerous.

There are others of 'em who produce Titles that appear to be somewhat better
founded, and alledg Arguments that seem more probable and honest. These say we
may justly take possession of the Indies, and subdue the People, because we
have a greater stock of Prudence and Wisdom than other Nations, and because our
Country is nearer to the Indies than many others. But it is easy to see that
none of these Reasons are concluding, having no solid Foundation to support 'em.

That your Majesty may the better comprehend the force of the Reasons that have
been produced before you, and more easily distinguish what is agreeable to the
Rules of Equity from what is contrary to 'em, and discern your faithful
Servants from such as mind nothing but their own Interest, I shall come my
self, and viva voce explain to your Majesty the principal Points on which my
Judgment is founded. In the mean time I send your Majesty an Abstract of my
Propositions, which your Majesty may cause to be translated into Latin, if you
think meet, that they may be printed both in the Latin and Spanish Tongues: or
if your Majesty don't see good to make 'em public, 'twill be no great matter.

I Proposition.
The Pope of Rome Canonically elected to be the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the
Successor of St. Peter, has received his Authority and Power from Christ
himself; and this Power extends over all Men, whether Believers or Infidels, in
matters appertaining to Salvation, and the way of eternal Life. But it is to be
observed, that he ought to exercise this Power toward Infidels, that never
entered into the Church by Baptism, nor never heard of Jesus Christ and the
Catholic Faith, in a different manner from what he does toward those that
either are or have been Believers.

II Proposition.
St. Peter and his Successors contracted an indispensible Obligation, founded
on the Divine Precept, to procure the publication of the Gospel, and the
propagation of the Christian Faith in the whole World, that all Infidels may be
brought to the knowledge of the true God, when there is any hope that they will
not oppose the promulgation of the Faith, and the Doctrine of the Gospel.

III Proposition.
The Pope by the Authority of his Apostolic Ministry, may and ought to send
capable Ministers from all the States of Christendom, to preach the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ through the Universe: Nay, he may oblige 'em by virtue of his
power to accept this Mission and Employ; and they on the other hand are obliged
to undertake it, in obedience to the Pope, as to Jesus Christ.

IV Proposition.
Among all the Instruments that can be chosen for the publication of the
Catholic Faith, and the Conversion of Infidels, Christian Princes are capable
of contributing most to the carrying on of this Work; because their Authority,
their Forces and temporal Riches are a great help to preserve and defend
Ecclesiastical Ministers that may be sent, and to furnish 'em with proper means
to attain the end proposed.

V Proposition.
The Pope by the Authority which Jesus Christ has given him upon Earth, ought
to exhort Christian Princes to contribute all their Assistance to remove the
Obstructions that impede the publication of the Christian Faith; to employ
their Money in advancing this Work, and to send such of their Subjects as are
capable of instructing Infidels. The Pope may moreover in some sort oblige all
Christians in general, according to their ability, to bear the necessary
Charges of those Missionaries in so pious a Work, as occasion may require.

VI Proposition.
No Christian Kings or Princes ought to engage in this Work without the
participation of the Holy See, and of the Vicar of J. Christ. And if any Prince
should think himself obliged, for the advantage of his Kingdom, to send
Evangelic Ministers to instruct the Infidels, he ought to consult the Pope
about it, who will use such means as he thinks most proper to advance this
design.

VII Proposition.
To avoid confusion, the Vicar of Christ may distribute the Kingdoms and
Provinces of the Infidels, of what Sect soever they be, among the Princes of
Christendom; and may exhort 'em to be zealous for the propagation of the Faith,
and vigorously to apply themselves to the work of enlarging the Universal
Church, by the Conversion and Salvation of Souls, as the only end they ought to
have in view.

VIII Proposition.
In making this division the Pope ought not to regard the increase of the
Honors, Titles, Riches and Territories of Princes, but only to have respect to
the Conversion of the Infidels; since this alone is the Intention of Christ in
the trust he reposes in 'em, to take care of the Instruction of Souls, which is
a difficult and careful Charge, and of which they will be one day obliged to
render an account before the strict Tribunal of God. For this Employ respects
the advantages of Infidels more than the particular Interest of Christian
Princes.

IX Proposition.
Christian Princes ought to have no consideration for any thing but the Service
of God, and the Advancement of the universal Church, when they apply their
endeavors to propagate the Faith of Christ: In this affair they ought to have
no temporal Advantage in their eye, but to look upon all earthly things as
transitory and of small consequence: Yet it would not be just, if they can do
any thing for the advantage of their Dominions, while they are procuring the
Augmentation of the Kingdom of Christ, to oblige 'em to neglect so favorable
an occasion, provided it be done without any considerable prejudice to the
Infidels, or to the Princes that govern 'em.

X Proposition.
Those Infidels that live in Countries remote from Europe, and have never heard
of Jesus Christ, or the Christian Religion, have their own lawful Kings and
Princes, who are the natural Rulers of the particular Countries they govern,
and have right to make Laws, and to establish all things necessary for the good
Government of their respective Dominions; so that they cannot be expelled out of
'em, or deprived of what they possess, without doing violence to the Law of God
as well as to the Law of Nations.

XI Proposition.
That Opinion which contradicts the Principle just now laid down, is erroneous
and pernicious; and if any Persons set themselves obstinately to defend it,
they will become guilty of Heresy. For it opens a door to all Impieties and
Villainies, to Robbery and Cruelty; in a word, to many irreparable Mischiefs,
and heinous Sins which dishonor the name of Christ, hinder the progress of the
Catholic Faith, and bring the greatest Miseries on Mankind in this life,
together with the inevitable destruction of multitudes of Souls ransomed by the
Blood of Christ. So that this would be the way to stifle all the Sentiments of
Piety, Humility, and Evangelic Meekness, nay of all Christian Virtues in
general, to introduce Violence, Treachery, Revenge, and other vices that are
most contrary to the Maxims of the Gospel in their stead.

XII Proposition.
Infidel Princes ought not to be deprived of their States for their Idolatry,
nor any other of those great Sins they commit; nor may their Subjects be
deprived of their Estates or Honors for the like Crimes.

XIII Proposition.
Idolaters ought not to be punished for their Idolatry, or other Sins, how
enormous and great soever, during the time of their Infidelity, before they
have voluntarily received Baptism: There being no Tribunal or Judge in the world
that has a right to molest 'em on that account, unless they directly oppose the
publication of the Gospel, and after they have been admonished and warned of
it, obstinatly persist to obstruct it out of mere malice.

XIV Proposition.
Pope Alexander VI. under whose Popedom the West Indies were discovered, was
indispensibly obliged by the Divine Law to choose a Christian Prince, to whom he
might commit the care of making provision for the preaching of the Gospel in
this new World, for the advancement of the Universal Church, the Catholic
Faith, the Worship of God, the Conversion and Salvation of the Inhabitants of
America, and for all things necessary to attain this end.

XV Proposition.
King Ferdinando and Isabella his Queen had some special Advantages preferable
to those of all other Catholic Princes, to induce the Pope to choose them rather
than any other Potentates of Europe, to confer on 'em the Trust of publishing
the Catholic Faith in the Indies, and, without any other reason, by the
Authority which God has given him, to invest 'em with this Dignity, and
constitute 'em the Ministers of the Apostles in the Indies. Among other
Privileges peculiar to them, this is the principal, that they have taken a
world of pains to rescue those Kingdoms which they inherited from their
Ancestors out of the hands of Infidels and Mahometans, who are declared Enemies
of the Catholic Faith. For this they exposed their Royal Persons to imminent
danger, when they attempted to enter again into the Kingdom of Grenada, to
which they had a lawful Title, and which they at length reduced under the Yoke
of Christ, and the Catholic Church. Another Reason to their advantage is, that
they sent the famous Christopher Columbus to America at their own charge, and
honored him with the Title of Chief Admiral of the West Indies, when he had
discovered those rich and vast Countries.

XVI Proposition.
The Pope might well choose them as the most proper Persons to establish
Christianity in the new World, just as he made choice of the Emperor for his
Son to be the Defender of the Catholic Faith. But if this Choice should in the
issue become prejudicial to the establishment of the Faith, it is not to be
doubted that the Pope might revoke it by the Authority he has received from
God. And for the same reason he might forbid all other Christian Princes to
send Missionaries into the Indies without the consent of the holy See, on pain
of Excommunication. And whoever should act contrary to this Prohibition, would
grievously offend God.

XVII Proposition.
The Kings of Castille and Leon are the lawful Sovereigns of many Princes and
Kings of the new World; therefore this universal Jurisdiction over the Indies,
of which we have been speaking, belongs to them.

XVIII Proposition.
The Sovereign Empire which the Kings of Spain have over the Indies, obliges
the natural Kings of those subjected Nations to submit to the Jurisdiction of
the King of Spain.

XIX Proposition.
All the natural Kings and Princes, all the Nations, Cities and Communities of
the Indies, over whom the Kings of Spain have acquired a lawful Right, ought to
acknowledge them for their rightful Sovereigns in the manner we have said, since
they have freely and voluntarily received the Catholic Faith and Baptism. But
before they received it, or submitted to Christianity, and before the Kings of
Spain had acquired any right over 'em, they depended on no Tribunal, nor
Jurisdiction of any Judge in the World.

XX Proposition.
The Kings of Spain are obliged by the Law of God to choose out and send into
the Indies such Ministers as are capable of preaching the Gospel and the
Catholic Faith, to exhort all the People of the new World to embrace the
Doctrine of Christ, and to seek all just and necessary means to accomplish this
Work.

XXI Proposition.
The Kings of Spain have the same Power and Jurisdiction over these Infidels
before their Conversion, as the Pope has in quality of Christ's Vicar, because
the charge and care of spreading the Light of the Gospel amongst these
Idolaters, and of doing all that is possible for their Conversion, is committed
to them.

XXII Proposition.
The manner of establishing the Christian Faith in the Indies ought to be
conformable to that which our Savior used to introduce his Religion into the
World; that is, it ought to be a mild, peaceable, and charitable method.
Humility, and the good Examples of a holy and regular way of living, are to be
employed to gain upon all Infidels, especially the Indians, who are naturally
of a sweet and easy Temper, and ready to submit to the Yoke of Christ. They
ought moreover to be engaged by Presents, and we should with alacrity give 'em
a share of what we have, without regarding their Riches. By this means they
would be easily persuaded, that the God whom the Christians worship, is good,
just and gracious; they would more readily give ear to his Word, and would make
no difficulty to forsake the Worship of their false Gods.

XXIII Proposition.
To go about to subdue the Indians by force of Arms, is a course utterly
against the Law of God, who is full of Kindness, Grace and Love. It Is to follow
the method which Mahomet and the Romans before him used to spoil and conquer
the World: and the Turks and Moors to this day take the same course, but it is
unjust, tyrannical, infamous, and unworthy of Christians: It would be the
occasion of many blasphemous Reflections on the Name of Christ, and the
Christian Religion, as we have been taught by sad Experience, since the
Spaniards have exercised so many Cruelties on the Indians; for they believe
that the God we worship is the most unjust, unmerciful and cruel of all Gods:
Therefore the way of Violence and Severity would be an invincible Obstacle to
the Conversion of the Indians.

XXIV Proposition.
It Is to be expected that Infidels will always oppose such as attempt to invade
their Country, in order to take possession of it by the Title of Conquest; so
that to go about to subdue 'em as the proper way to convert 'em, is to lose
time, and ruin so holy an Enterprise.

XXV Proposition.
From the time when Christopher Columbus discovered the Indies, the Kings of
Spain have always expressly forbidden their Subjects to make War upon the
Indians: so that the Spaniards can show no Authority or Permission that was
ever given 'em by the King of Spain to commit any Act of Hostility in the new
World: or if they can show any such Commissions, they are forged, or have bin
surreptitiously obtained by false Informations, invented to obtain a power of
taking away the Riches of the Indians, or of making them Slaves with impunity.
On the contrary, the Kings of Spain have often on this account renewed their
Orders to obviate the Cruelties and Outrages that were committed on the Indians.

XXVI Proposition.
Seeing the Spaniards have not been supported either by the Authority of their
Prince, or any lawful reason to make War against the Indians, who lived
peaceably in their own Country, and had done the Spaniards no wrong: All such
Conquests that have been, or may hereafter be made in the Indies are to be
accounted unjust, tyrannical, and null, being condemned by all the Laws of God
and Men. For the proof of this Proposition one need only produce the
Proceedings against these Tyrants, which are yet to be seen in the Archives of
the Royal Council; or those Prosecutions that might still be made against 'em
every moment. For both Heaven and Earth cry aloud against the Violence they
have offered the poor Americans.

XXVII Proposition.
The Kings of Spain are by the Law of God obliged to establish so good a
Government in the Indies, by causing those Indian Laws and Customs that are
good to be observed, and by abolishing the bad, which are less numerous than
the other, that nothing contrary to good Manners and the Rules of civil Policy
may be tolerated. And the most likely way to succeed in such a design is to
publish the Gospel among those People, by which means both the King's Interest
and that of the Indians will be provided for effectually.

XXVIII Proposition.
The Devil could never have invented any thing more pernicious for the
extirpation of the People of this New World, and the desolation of so many
great and populous Kingdoms in a little time, than the distribution the
Spaniards have made of these Nations among themselves, taking possession of the
Inhabitants as their own Property, and then treating 'em as ravenous Wolves do
a flock of Sheep: For this is the most barbarous kind of Tyranny that can be
imagined, because it hinders all those Nations from embracing the Christian
Religion: For the Spaniards employ 'em night and day in the Mines, and all
other kinds of Labor; sometimes obliging 'em to carry heavy Burdens forty or
fifty Leagues, so that their condition is worse than that of Beasts. Besides,
they persecute those Indians with fresh Cruelty, who apply themselves to the
Monks to be instructed in the Gospel, because they are afraid (if these
Religious Men should be encouraged to come among the Indians) they would be
witnesses of their Robberies and Cruelties.

XXIX Proposition.
The distribution which the Spaniards make of these People among themselves, as
if they were so many head of Cattle, was never commanded nor allowed by the
Kings of Spain since the Spaniards entered the Indies. They never thought of
authorizing so injust and tyrannical a kind of Government, and which so much
tends to the destruction of the People of the new World. Queen Isabella of
immortal memory, under whose Reign the Indies were discovered, gave express
Orders to Christopher Columbus, who was the first Governor and chief Admiral of
the Indies, and to Francis Bobadilla, who succeeded him, and also to General De
Lares, who came after both the former, to preserve Peace and Liberty among the
Indians, and to do 'em Justice in every thing. Admiral Columbus gave only three
hundred Indians to such of the Spaniards as had done great Service to the
Crown; and for his own part, contented himself with having only one Indian to
serve him: The Court of Spain was then at Grenada, where the Queen issued out
an Order that these three hundred Indians should be released and sent home,
only she permitted Columbus to keep one Indian whom he had taken for his
Service. What then would this great Queen now say, to see how the Spaniards
have enslaved the People of America? The continual Avocations the King has had,
and the frequent Journys he has been obliged to make into Italy, having not
permitted him to inform himself exactly of the Miseries those People endure
from the hands of the Spaniards.

XXX Proposition.
From all that has been said it may well be concluded, that if the sovereign
Jurisdiction of the Indies belongs only to the Kings of Spain, the Conquests
that private Men appropriate to themselves are injust and tyrannical; that the
shares they have made among themselves are founded upon no lawful right: and
that those who usurp the Lands of the new World, without the Consent and
Authority of their Prince, are absolute Tyrants, in acting (as they do)
directly contrary to his Orders, and the Regulations of the Royal Council;
which is a matter so public and notorious, that there is no Spaniard in the
Indies can justly excuse himself by pretending ignorance.

A Dispute between Don Bartholomew de Las-Casas, Bishop of Chiapa, and Dr.
Sepulueda.
DR. Sepulueda, at the instigation of some Spaniards who had committed great
Ravages in the Indies, wrote a very elegant Book in Latin in the form of
Dialogues, which contained principally two Conclusions, namely, that the Wars
of the Spaniards in the Indies were very just, and that they might lawfully
subjugate the People of this new World; and that the Indians were obliged to
submit to the Spaniards, and acquiesce in their Government, because these are
more wise and prudent than the others. And in case they refuse to submit, this
Doctor asserts, that they may be constrained to it by force of Arms. These are
the two Points that have occasioned the ruin of incredible numbers of Indians;
so that the Country is almost entirely unpeopled for the space of two thousand
Leagues, where the Spaniards have left the marks of their boundless Cruelty.
This Doctor, to give some color and show of Truth to his Reasons, declared that
he had no other design in writing than that of justifying the King of Spain's
Title to the Indies. He presented his Book to the Royal Council, and was very
importunate to obtain leave to print it, which was several times refused; after
which he applied himself to some of his Friends, who were in the Emperor's
Court, to patronize this Work. The Bishop of Chiapa being well informed of the
steps this Doctor made, with all his might opposed the Impression of his Book,
plainly demonstrating what ill Consequences the publication of it might
produce. The Members of the King's Council perceiving this matter was purely
Theological, resolved to dismiss it to the Universities of Salamanca and
Alcala, desiring them to make a through Examination of this Treatise, to see if
it contained any thing that might justly obstruct the printing of it. These two
Universities after they had accuratly examined it, declared that it was not fit
to be printed, as containing unsound Doctrine. The Doctor now despairing of
seeing his Book obtain in Spain, sent it to Rome, earnestly recommending it to
the Bishop of Segovia, who was one of his particular Friends. When it was
printed, it was prohibited by the Emperor's express Order, who caused the
Copies to be seized, forbidding any of 'em to be sold in Spain: but because it
was impossible to prevent diverse Copies in the vulgar Language from being
spread among the People; the Bishop of Chiapa thought himself obliged to refute
this Book in defense of the Indians, and to let all the world know how
scandalous Doctrine it contained, being accommodated to open a door to all
manner of Disorders. Dr. Sepulueda was cited to give an account of his thoughts
on this Subject by word of mouth, and the Bishop of Chiapa was engaged to
answer him: The Dispute lasted five whole days, after which Dominic de Soto, a
great Divine, and Confessor to his Majesty, was desired to give a summary
account of this Dispute, which he did before the Assembly in these terms.

Most Illustrious, most Magnificent, and most Reverend Lords and Fathers.
YOU have bin pleased to order me to give a succinct and summary account of the
Dispute maintained between the famous Dr. Sepulueda, and the Bishop of Chiapa,
without adding any thing of my own, or troubling my self to seek other Reasons
to support the Sentiments of either of 'em. The Point about which you desire to
be informed, is in general what method ought to be used for the publication of
the Catholic Faith in the new World, which has bin lately discovered by the
permission of God, and how the Emperor may subject those Nations to his
Government without offending his Conscience, in conforming himself entirely to
the Bull of Pope Alexander. It Is first necessary to enquire whether the Emperor
may justly make War with the Indians before the Faith of the Gospel be preached
to 'em; and whether these People will be in any condition to receive the Light
of the Gospel, after they have bin subdued by force of Arms; whether they will
be more tractable and docil, and better disposed to receive the Impressions
designed to be given, so as to reject their Errors, and embrace the Doctrine of
the Gospel. Dr. Sepulueda maintains, that this War is not only allowable and
lawful, but necessary. The Bishop of Chiapa is of the contrary Opinion, and
pretends that this War is unjust, and an invincible Obstacle to the propagation
of the Faith in the Indies.

Sepulueda supports his Opinion by four principal Arguments: The first is
founded on the enormous Crimes of which the Indians have bin, and are every day
guilty, especially their Idolatry, and their Sins against Nature. His second
Reason is taken from their Barbarity and Ignorance, which may be reformed under
the Government of a People so intelligent and polite as the Spaniards. His
third Reason respects the facility he supposes of publishing the Christian
Faith to the Indians when they are once subdued. His fourth Argument is taken
from the cruel Treatment the Indians give one another, in that they offer human
Sacrifices to their false Gods. He confirms his first Reason three ways: 1 st.
By Examples and Authorities taken out of the holy Scripture. 2 dly. By the
Suffrage of Doctors and Canonists. 3 dly. By a particular account of the gross
Crimes which the Indians commit. He cites a Passage out of Deuteronomy. 20. to explain
after what manner War ought to be made on the Indians; the words are these:
When thou come nigh unto a City to fight against it, then proclaim Peace unto
it. And it shall be, if it make thee answer of Peace, and open unto thee, then
it shall be that all the People that is found therein, shall be Tributaries
unto thee, and they shall serve thee. And if it will make no Peace with thee,
but will make War against thee, then thou shall besiege it: And when the LORD
thy God has delivered it into thy hands, thou shall smite every Male thereof
with the Edg of the Sword: ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. and ver. 16. But of the Cities
of these People which the Lord thy God does give thee for an Inheritance, thou
shall save alive nothing that breaths. The Doctor adds, that this Passage is
not to be strictly taken, and enforced against the Indians with so much
severity: tho it is also said, Thus shall thou do unto all the Cities that are
very far from thee; by which Passage the Gloss understands those of different
Religions. From hence he concludes, that we may lawfully declare War against
those Nations that are of a Religion different from ours.

My Lord Bishop answers him four ways. First, he says, it was not to punish the
Sin of Idolatry, that God commanded the Israelites to make War with the
Gentiles and Infidels: That God was pleased to single out precisely seven
Nations, the Canaanites, the Jebusites, etc. mentioned in Deuteronomy. 7. who
possessed the Land of Promise bequeathed to Abraham and his Posterity. He
allows it to be true, that God designed to punish the Idolatry of those Heathen
Nations, in giving 'em up to the Israelites; but he says if God's intention had
bin only to chastise 'em for their Idolatry, he would also have punished all
the Nations of the whole World after the same manner, seeing they were all
polluted with the same Sin. Whereas God specified only these Nations to be
abandoned to the Sword of the Israelites, to show that it was rather to
accomplish the Promise he had made to Abraham, than to punish these Idolaters
that he delivered 'em into the hands of their Enemies. That God himself
expressly forbad the Israelites to offer any Violence to the Edomites, or to the
Egyptians who had entertained 'em when they were strangers in their Country.

Secondly, That the Passage of Luke 14. where it is said, Compel them to come
in, is not to be understood of an external Constraint by War and Arms, but
ought to be interpreted of internal Inspiration, and the Motions which God
produces in the Hearts of Men, either immediately, or by the Ministration of
Angels.

In the third place the Bishop maintains, that Christian Emperors have never
engaged in War with Heathen Nations to oblige 'em to renounce Idolatry, and to
induce 'em to embrace the Christian Faith; that the Wars of Constantine were
purely on a politic account, and that the Passage of the Ecclesiastical
Historian, lib. 10. cap. 6. is to be understood in that sense. That this Prince
who was so animated with Piety, when he subdued by his Arms the Goths,
Sarmatians, and other barbarous Nations, excepted those that sought his
Friendship, and desired Peace. That because he subjected himself to the Divine
Commands, God was pleased to recompense his Virtue in subjecting all the People
of the World to his Dominion. Besides, he says, Constantine made War with the
Goths and Sarmatians, because they made incredible Ravage and Spoil wherever
they came. But when these barbarous People were at peace with the Christians,
and offered 'em no Injury, they were suffered to live at quiet.

He adds in the 4 th place, That if we would do any good upon Pagans, it must
be by the power of good Examples, and not by Violence. He cites to this purpose
a passage of St. Augustine, who says it belongs only to men transported with
Rage, and to Assassins to use force against those that are inferior to 'em in
Power: that this Father also condemns such as were not able to do the Pagans
any hurt, and yet rashly offered themselves to death, to gain the reputation of
Martyrs. He also quotes a Passage out of Deuteronomy. 7. When the Lord thy God shall
bring thee into the Land whither thou go to possess it, etc. ver. 1. Ye
shall destroy their Altars, and break down their Images, and cut down their
Groves, and burn their graven Images with Fire, ver. 5. Upon which Passage he
says St. Augustine expresses himself after this manner: Many of the Pagans have
Idols in their Fields, must we take upon us to break these Idols in pieces?
It Is much better to endeavor to get 'em out of their Hearts. When they have
embraced Christianity, and exhort us themselves to break these Idols, we shall
do it with pleasure. We must in the mean time pray for their Conversion,
without appearing violent and passionate against 'em because of their Idolatry:
We are not ignorant where they hide their Idols, and yet we let 'em alone,
because God has not given us a Commission to take 'em away without their leave.
When then does God give us leave to take 'em from them? Not till the owners of
these Idols are become Christians.

He farther produces the examples of the Apostles and Martyrs, who took no
other course to overthrow Idols but by their Doctrine. He grants that indeed on
some accounts War may be made with Infidels; for instance, if they have
violently usurped the Lands of Christians, as they have the Holy Land; if they
profane our Churches, break down our Images, and offer any great outrages to
Christians, in hatred and contempt of their Faith: That when the Emperor
Constantine forbad the Heathens to keep their Idols, it was for fear the
Christians should be scandalized by 'em.

He says, If God severely punished the Crimes of the Sodomites, it does not
therefore follow that we may take upon us to punish all Infidels for their
unnatural Pollutions: That we are to admire the Judgments of God, but not
always to imitate every thing he does. He says, we may punish Infidels if they
blaspheme the Holy Name of God, or dishonor the Saints and the Church; if they
openly hinder the publication of the Faith, and if they massacre those that
preach it: but that it is not lawful to declare War against 'em merely on the
account of their Idolatry, their unnatural Sins, or any other Crimes they
commit among themselves.

And whereas Dr. Sepulueda says, The Indians are a barbarous People, and born
for Slavery: the Bishop of Chiapa answers this Objection, in saying, That we
ought not to make War upon Infidels to bring 'em to the true Religion, which is
only to be demonstrated by genuin Reasons, that the understanding may be
captivated according to the words of St. Paul, That it must be a pious
Affection to the Christian Faith that will dispose men to embrace it; and that
care ought to be taken that they may have no aversion against those that preach
it; who therefore ought by their good Examples to engage the Indians to relish
the Doctrine they endeavor to propagate among 'em: That War is visibly
contrary to this end, because it fills the minds of those Idolaters with horror
and indignation against the Christians, for bringing so many Miseries upon 'em;
and that they cannot choose but think the Law of Christ an execrable Doctrine,
since it authorizes (as they imagine) such terrible Disorders. The Bishop
concludes in saying, it is a mere delusion to assert, that the Wars made against
these Infidels are not designed to introduce Christianity among 'em by open
force, but only to subjugate those barbarous Nations the better to dispose 'em
to receive the Faith of Christ voluntarily. He pretends that this is ill
reasoning, because War spreads so much terror among those People, that if they
afterward embrace the true Faith, it is to be supposed they do it rather out of
fear than love: and that their Neighbors when they hear what Violence, Spoil,
and Massacres have attended this War, may probably, to avoid the like
Mischiefs, blindly embrace the Faith, without knowing what they do themselves.

Dr. Sepulueda urges for another reason of War, that the Indians massacre
innocent Persons, either to sacrifice, or to eat 'em. To which Argument the
Bishop returns this answer, That if the Church exhorts us to undertake the
defense of Innocents, it ought not in this case to be by the way of Arms.
First, because of two Evils we ought to choose the least. If the Indians
massacre some innocent Persons to eat 'em, it is indeed a great Evil; but War
would bring much greater slaughters with it: besides, that these Wars dishonor
our Religion, and render the Christians odious to the Infidels; who tho they
sacrifice men, are not altogether inexcusable, because of their great
Ignorance, and have reason not to put themselves into the hands of the Spanish
Soldiers, who come with their Swords in their hands to rob and kill 'em,
instead of instructing 'em in Religion; whereas they have no right to punish
'em for their Errors: That Plutarch says, when the Romans subdued diverse
barbarous Nations, who were wont to offer men in Sacrifice, they did not punish
'em for that Crime, but only forbad 'em to do the like for the future. That it
is not to be expected of the Indians, that they should renounce their Errors in
a moment; that the light of Nature which informs 'em there is a God, teaches
'em to show him respect, and to return him thanks for the Benefits they receive
of him, and likewise to endeavor to make atonement for the Sins they commit
against his Divine Majesty; and that they ought to devote the best they have to
him in Sacrifice: Consequently their evil Custom of sacrificing human Creatures
to the supposed Deities they worship, is the less to be wondered at, since they
have no knowledge of Divine Revelation, but only the glimmerings of natural
Light to direct 'em; which Light too is obscured with much thick darkness in
the minds of Pagans. That these People believe they perform a very acceptable
Service to God, when they offer him the Lives of Men; that this may be
confirmed in some sort by the Testimony of Holy Writ, seeing God, when he would
try the faithfulness of Abraham, commanded him to sacrifice his only Son, whom
he tenderly loved; which God might do, as he is the absolute Master of the
Lives of Men: that besides this Instance, the Scripture testifies that God
required the Israelites to redeem their own Lives by the sacrifice of Animals.
That the Word of God remarks, that it is impossible to give a greater Testimony
of Love, than to offer ones self for the Person beloved: that those Women in
the Indies that were most dear to their Husbands while they lived, chose to be
buried alive with 'em, to give the greater proof of their conjugal Fidelity and
Affection.

In answer to the other Argument alleged by Dr. Sepulueda, namely, that the
barbarity of the Indians which (he says) shows they were born for Slavery, is a
sufficient reason to declare War against 'em, in order to subject 'em to the
Government of the Europeans: the Bishop of Chiapa says, there are three
different sorts of Barbarians. First, that this Term is taken in general to
signify any Nation that differs from others by some strange Opinion, or
peculiar Customs, tho they want not Prudence or Policy to conduct their
Affairs. That the second kind of Barbarians is of those, who have no Language
proper by which to express themselves to other People; such as the English
formerly were, when they had no Letters or Characters whereby to explain their
Thoughts. The third sort of Barbarians are such as resemble savage Beasts, by
the dullness and stupidity of their Minds, by their brutish Inclinations, and by
the extravagance of their Customs; who wander up and down in the Fields, never
dwelling together in Towns or Cities; who are without Laws or Civil Government,
and take no care to observe the Law of Nations; who rove about to commit
Robberies, and use Violence on all that have not power enough to resist 'em;
such as the Goths and Alans were formerly, and such as the Arabs in Asia are to
this day: That it is as lawful to make War with this sort of People, as to hunt
wild Beasts, and would be a great piece of service to the World to reduce 'em
to any tolerable Discipline. But as for the Indians, that tho they have some
extravagant Customs, but not any good Policy, yet they ought not to be looked
upon as properly Barbarians; seeing they are of a quite contrary disposition,
being meek, civil, and tractable in their Manners; that they are a numerous
People, who have Cities and Laws, and understand diverse Arts; that they have
Princes over 'em, and live under a kind of regulated Government; that they not
only punish Sins against Nature, but have Laws that award capital Punishments
for some Crimes of lesser consequence: That their Policy has its particular
Rules; that upon all these Accounts their pretended Barbarity is not a
sufficient Reason for any to declare War against 'em, but would be a piece of
visible Tyranny and Injustice; and that this Course would be so far from
promoting the Gospel, that 'twould be the very way to cut off all hope of
establishing Christianity among them. That therefore the best expedient would
be to send Preachers into the Indies, to endeavor to convince some of the
principal Indians of the truth of our Religion; and to make Treaties of Peace
with 'em, to favor the entrance of the Europeans into the Indies by such a
gentle and peaceable Method as this: that if any danger should arise after
this, we might build some Forts upon the Frontiers, and so treat with 'em with
the greater Security, and make 'em gradually relish our Religion, by setting
'em good Examples.

The Royal Council for the Indies having heard this Dispute, between the Bishop
of Chiapa and Dr. Sepulueda, concerning the manner in which the Indians ought
to be treated, ordered the Bishop to draw up his Thoughts of this matter in
Writing, whereby they should be the better able to determine this question,
Whether they might lawfully inslave the Indians, or were obliged to set at
liberty all they had hitherto reduced to slavery. In answer to their desire,
the Bishop farther explained his Sentiments after the following manner.

All the Indians taken in the Indies since the discovery of the New World to
this day, have bin unjustly enslaved; and the Spaniards who retain 'em in
bondage against their wills, cannot do it with a good Conscience, because they
had no right to declare War against 'em; for it follows by consequence they
could not lawfully deprive 'em of their Liberty, nor were they ever authorized
by their Prince to make War upon 'em. Now there are but two Motives that can
render any War just, namely, some righteous Cause, or the Authority of one's
Prince. And what just motive then could the Spaniards have to declare War
against the Indians, who never did 'em any wrong, nor ever gave 'em any
disturbance? They were people they had never seen; they had never made any
descent into any Country that belonged to the Spaniards, to spoil and ravage
it; they had never professed Christianity as the Moors of Africa had done, who
were Christian in the time of St. Augustine; or as the Kingdom of Grenada, the
Empire of Constantinople, and the Kingdom of Jerusalem did formerly. Nor can we
justly reproach the Indians as declared enemies to our Religion, or that they
ever attempted to destroy it by open Persecutions, or secret Persuasions, by
Presents, or any other manner whatsoever, that can be used to engage Christians
to renounce their Faith, and turn Idolaters: For neither the Law of God, nor
that of Nations ever permitted War to be made against any People merely to
establish Christianity among 'em. Unless any one will pretend that the Gospel
of Christ, which abounds with Charity, Meekness, and Humanity, ought to be
introduced into the World by Force like the Religion of Mahomet.

The Spaniards cannot say, that they had no other end than that of protecting
the Innocent, seeing they have made it their whole business to rob, pillage,
and murder the poor Indians, taking upon 'em to usurp their Goods and Lands.
Besides, if the War they undertook had bin in defense of those poor Wretches
the Indians unjustly put to death for Sacrifices, it would not have bin carried
so generally through the Indies, but would have bin a sort of Civil War kept up
only in some particular Places: Nor would the Spaniards have had right even in
such Places, to have made Slaves of those whom they took in such a War.

They cannot so much as pretend that ever they had a Command or Order to this
day from their Prince, to declare War against the Indians: It Is easy to
evidence such a Fact as this; for the Governors and Generals have nothing to do
but to show their Commissions if they have any. There Is not one of 'em who has
any fear of God, or respect for his Prince, that will pretend to show any such
Commission, except the Viceroy Don Antonio, and Don Sebastian Ramire Bishop of
Cuenza; all the rest that have made War on the Indians, are Thieves, and
Robbers, Murderers, and declared Enemies of Mankind. Seeing then the Spaniards
have had no lawful reason to support their Declarations of War against the
People of America, nor have bin authorized in such Proceedings by their Prince,
it evidently follows that the War they have made is injust, and contrary to the
Laws of God and Men, and consequently that the Indians ought not to have bin
treated as Slaves.

All the ways the Spaniards have used to compass this end of inslaving these
People, have bin monstrously wicked, made up of nothing but Fraud and
Treachery, unlawful Tricks and Artifices, and such unheard of Villainies as
cannot but fill the Minds of all that hear 'em with astonishment and horror.
Some to ensnare the poor Indians that lived among 'em, have constrained 'em to
own themselves their Slaves in Courts of Justice: after which extorted
Confession, the Governors have ordered the King's Arms to be fixed upon their
Skin with a hot Iron; tho they were not ignorant what an unlawful Course had
been taken to abuse the poor Creatures. Others hired the Indians with a little
Wine, or a Shirt, or by giving 'em some other trifle of small value, to bring
'em fatherless and motherless Children, whom they put on Shipboard, and
transported into other Countries, where they were sold for Slaves, especially
into New-Spain, the Islands of St. John, and Cuba, or other neighboring
Islands. But at first the Spaniards used open Violence, attacking the Indians
that lived peaceably in their Houses, setting their Towns on fire, massacring
some, and after the exercise of all this Cruelty, carrying away those they
could take alive to sell 'em for Slaves. They used without any formal process,
to brand 'em with the King's Arms; which was enough to make 'em pass for
Slaves; and accordingly they were sold from one hand to another, till they were
transported into the Islands. These were all the forms of Justice the Spaniards
observed in carrying away the Indians from the Continent into the Islands of
New-Spain, the Isles of Cuba and St. John, the Coast of Pearls, Yucatan and
Panuco. And by these execrable Artifices they have since carried away vast
multitudes of People of every Age, Sex, and Condition, from the Kingdoms of
Vencuela, Guatimala, and Nicaraqua, to fell 'em in Panama, and in Peru. They
once put 4 or 500 of 'em in one Ship, the greatest part of whom died in their
passage for want of Food, the Allowance given 'em being so very small.

At a Town consisting of about 200 people, the Spaniards would require the
Cacyque to send 'em 300 Indians at such a certain day and hour, to carry their
Provisions, and work for 'em. The poor Cacyque was mightily concerned he could
not execute this Order, not having People enough in the whole Town; and not
knowing what to do in the case, desired to have a day or two more allowed him:
But these Brutes would interpret this delay as an express breach of their
Orders; and immediately asking leave of the Governor to go and fall upon 'em,
would attaque 'em in their houses, cutting the throats of many of 'em in a
barbarous manner, and carrying away the rest as Prisoners of War, whom they
enslaved contrary to all Law and Equity. Sometimes they would order a Cacyque
to send 'em half a hundred men to labor for 'em, and would set 'em to what
work they thought good, after which they would embark 'em in Ships and carry
'em away; and sometimes would mark 'em with the Letters of their own Names
without fixing the King's Arms on 'em. When they were angry with 'em, they
would load 'em with Chains, and make 'em carry heavy Burdens beside, for 100 or
200 Leagues. After they had used 'em in what Drudgery they pleased, they would
sell 'em, tho the Indians are as freeborn as any other Nation. By this means
the Spaniards have unpeopled the Province of St. Michael, which is situate
between Guatimala and Nicaraqua.

When they formerly advanced far into the Country to make further Discoveries
of the Indians that lived there, these good-natured People came to meet 'em
loaded with Turkeys, and other Provisions, which they freely offered 'em, but
for their kindness were either hewed in pieces, or lose made Slaves, on
pretense they were found in Arms in the Fields. Nor could the Governors be
ignorant of these Violences and Disorders or the Soldiers, since themselves had
the best share of the Spoil.

When they had divided those Countries among themselves, which they had so
unjustly usurped, and rendered themselves the absolute Masters of the Indians,
as if they had coquer'd 'em in a just and lawful War, they obliged the Caciques
and natural Princes of those People to bring 'em such a Sum of Gold as they
were pleased to command 'em. If they had not such a quantity, they told the
Spaniards, they would willingly give 'em all they had to appease 'em; but
received a severe reply from these cruel Men in such terms as these: If you
don't bring us all the Gold we demand within such a time, we'll set fire to all
your houses. The poor Cacyques would sometimes make such a return as this in a
lamentable Tone: Indeed our Country has no great store of Gold in it; and
besides, we have not bin curious to search for Mines. Upon such an Account as
this the Spaniards have fastened 200 Stakes at a time in the ground, and tied
the poor Wretches to 'em with terrible Menaces, and then let loose those
ravenous Dogs upon 'em, that used to be fed with human flesh. It may be the
Cacique would be so terrified with such a horrible Spectacle as this, that he would
go among his Subjects, and take Children out of every Family, and give 'em to
the Spaniards for Slaves to pacify 'em. If there were but 2 Children in a
house, one of 'em was taken away, and that must be the strongest and likeliest
to do service. When the Cacique had got together such a number of his People as
the Spaniards required, he would come to present 'em to them himself. And it
was a most lamentable thing to hear the Sighs and Cries of Parents, when their
dearest Children were ravished from 'em, to be transported into remote Countries
for Slaves. When these Children were brought to the Governor to be branded, the
Spaniards would order the Caciques to engage the Indians to testify that they
were Slaves, and the Children of Slaves, and that they were bought in the
Market; and would threaten to burn 'em, unless they would stand to such Lies as
these. And when the Person appointed to examine them, who was well acquainted
with all these Tricks, would ask the Children of what Country they were; they
made 'em answer, that they were Slaves, and that their Parents were so, and
that they were bought in such a Market. After this Examination they were marked
with the King's Stamp. His Majesty's Governors and Officers are very well
acquainted with all this Roguery of the Soldiers, and have had too great a hand
in the invention of these Artifices, as appears by their having the largest
share of the Booty.

When the Missionary Monks had got a great number of Indians together in their
Church to instruct 'em in the knowledge of the true God, the Spaniards would
suddenly come upon 'em with their Swords in their hands, and take what number
of 'em they thought meet; which could not but much scandalize the rest, and
extremely grieved the Missionaries, who were only told by the Spaniards, that
they wanted Men to carry their Baggage and Provisions, and so were forced to
take all patiently. When they had thus seized the poor Indians, they set their
mark upon 'em, and sold 'em for Slaves.

The Governors at first seldom refused any that asked leave to plunder the
Indians, and ruin and depolulate the Country. This was a kind of recompense
they gave 'em for the great Services they had rendered the King of Spain. But
afterward they took a Course that did not seem so dishonest and cruel, but was
equally pernicious to the People of the New World, which was to buy Slaves of
the Caciques, threatening 'em to burn 'em alive if they did not furnish 'em with
such a number as they demanded, for which they would only give 'em a Shirt or
some such Trifle; so that the poor Caciques became themselves the ruin of their
own Country for fear of being burnt, and made it their business to go among
their Subjects to gather great numbers of Slaves together, to sasisfy the
Avarice of the Spaniards. At last they would make the Caciques pay 'em this
tribute with other People; so that they were constrained to go to some of the
neighboring Caciques, and would make their Complaint to 'em after this manner:
These Tyrant threaten me (would one say) to cut my throat if I don't furnish
'em with such a number of Indians for Slaves, and they will not suffer me to choose
out some of my own Subjects for 'em; therefore I desire the liberty to take
some of yours, and you shall have as many of mine for 'em. I am content (would
the other say) and the rather because I my self am obliged to pay such a
Tribute as you are, and to seek for Slaves out of my own Country to satisfy the
Spaniards. The Caciques themselves were wont to bring these poor Slaves to be
marked, and were made to swear they were none of their Subjects, but that they
had taken 'em among their Neighbors; which was true, but the Spaniards were
never the less guilty in constraining 'em so to do. The Governors that knew
their injustice and roguery, winked at it, and would never accuse any of 'em of
these prevarications before the Judges of the Royal Council; for they made it
no part of their care to perform their Duty to God and the King faithfully; nor
did they seem to be touched with the least Compassion in observing all the
violence committed against those miserable People.

I could produce a multitude of proofs to confirm what I say, but one shall
suffice at present. There came an Order from the King to the Governor of the
Province of Nicaraqua, to forbid him to inslave any Indians, or to brand him
with the King's Arms: at the same time there was a Ship in the Road that was
designed to be filled with Slaves; which made the Governor forbear to publish
the Order he had received, till the Vessel was laden with Indians, and ready to
set sail; nay he privately gave notice to those that were concerned in the
Ship, to make what haste they could, and carry away as many Slaves as they
needed, because the King had sent an express Prohibition to hinder any from
being inslaved for the future.

It was once matter of Astonishment to see the fruitfulness, plenty and
multitude of Inhabitants, that filled the Province of Honduras; and it is now as
deplorable to behold the Misery, Desolation, and want to People there, which
resemble it to a melancholy Wilderness. The Governor of this Province made use
of a trick not much unlike that of which we have been speaking. He owed a great
Sum of Money to some Merchants for Wine and other Commodities he had bought of
'em; who had their Vessels in the Port, and expected this Governor to pay 'em
in Slaves. But the Emperor's Order forbidding him to make any Slaves in this
Province being very strict, he durst not take up Indians publicly to pay his
debts, for fear of provoking the Emperor by acting directly against his
Command: He therefore sent out two of his Captains, one to the Seacoast, and
the other farther up into the Continent, with Orders to take up such Indians as
were likely to make the least noise and disturbance by their Complaints; these
he ordered to be embarked, and to prevent to himself any danger from the
Court, he pretended these Indians were seditious Persons and Malefactors, whom
he was obliged to banish, because it would have been of ill consequence to have
let 'em remain in their Country: This was the Pretext under which he sold 'em
for Slaves to pay his Debts. And with this sort of Coin the Spaniards used to
buy all sorts of Commodities that came from Europe, and whatever else they
thought necessary. So that it is no wonder that those fine and rich Provinces
are become forlorn Deserts, since this Trade of buying and selling Slaves has
been allowed, which was first practiced in Hispaniola. Sometimes the Spaniards
to deceive the Indians would persuade 'em they should go with them into Spain,
when they designed only to carry 'em to the Isle of Cuba, and sell 'em there.
And there are many still at Havana, that were taken after this manner; for when
other Spaniards heard of the Stratagems their Countrymen used to impose on the
poor Indians, they would use the same Tricks, and brag of 'em instead of being
ashamed; so that the World has been sufficiently informed of these Artifices.
The Miseries and Desolations of the Provinces of Nicaraqua and Guatimala, of
the greatest part of Mexico, Tabesco, and Panuco, are incontestible Proofs of
the Cruelties and other Crimes of the Spaniards. The Archbishop of Mexico wrote
an Account of 'em by way of complaint to the Royal Council for the Indies,
wherein he informed 'em that the Governor had loaded twenty eight Ships with
Slaves. The Governor of the Province of Xalisco took for his own Share 4560
Slaves, Men, Women and Children, some of whom were but one, others two or three
years old; all was fish that came to net; besides an infinite number that other
Spaniards took in this Province, against the King's express Orders, who was
much displeased that those People should be enslaved, who ought to have bin
instructed in the knowledge of the true God, and of the Christian Religion, in
order to their Salvation. Those Flemish Merchants that got possession of the
Kingdom of Vencuela, to pillage and destroy it, made horrible Spoil there for
the space of twenty years. That all I say is the very Truth, may better appear
by consulting the Archives of the Royal Council, which are full of complaints
against the insidious Contrivances of the Spaniards, and the great Violences
they have committed to enslave the poor Indians.

These poor Wretches have no body to interceed for 'em, or to protect 'em; and
are always in great consternation, because continually exposed to the insults
of their Enemies, who oppress 'em without being called to account for it. So
that they despair of relief, not knowing to whom to address themselves for
justice.

Now seeing the Artifices that have bin used to inslave these poor Creatures,
are so unjust and tyrannical; and seeing these People as well as others are
born free, it follows that the Spaniards have acted contrary to the Law of
Nations, in inslaving all those Indians whom they have taken for that end ever
since the Discovery of the New World, and have by their Violences evidently
transgressed the Law of God and Nature.

To prove yet farther that the Spaniards are obliged to restore those Indians
their Liberty, whom they yet detain in bondage, there is only need of making one
reflection, namely, that the Law of God obliges us to make restitution of every
thing we have taken unjustly from our Neighbors, and to make reparation for
the injuries done 'em; and without doing thus it is impossible to be saved. Upon
this Principle it is evident, that the Spaniards ought to release their Indians
Slaves, and to do what in 'em lies to make 'em amends for the wrong they have
done 'em, against all Law and Equity; for it is not to be supposed the sin will
be forgiven, till what has bin unjustly taken away is restored; and
consequently the Spaniards who have treated the poor Indians after so ill a
manner, and yet don't go about to make 'em satisfaction, are under the guilt of
a mortal Sin.

To make this appear yet more evidently, two things must be supposed. First,
that there were no Slaves in New Spain, on the Borders of which there dwelt
diverse Nations, especially the Mexicans, that are more dexterous and politic
than other Indians: This every one knows who is acquainted with the new World.
Secondly, That the term Slave does not signify the same thing among the Indians
as among the Europeans, but only denotes a Servant with the former, or one that
has some particular obligation to assist us in our necessary Affairs; so that
to be the Slave of an Indian, is to be but one degree below his Son; it is to
dwell in his House, to take care of his Goods and Silver, to wait on his Wife
and Children, which is consistent with the enjoyment of his Liberty: He sets
the House in order, sows the Land, and does any necessary work, as occasion
requires. And his Master on his part treats him with a great deal of Kindness
and Humanity, as if he were not obliged to render him this Service. Those
Missionaries that have learned the Indian Language, and know the import of
their words, can testify the truth of what I say.

It is farther to be supposed, that in New Spain and Mexico many unlawful ways
have bin used by the Spaniards to inslave the Indians, in so much that one
would have thought they knew nothing of the true God, nor had ever heard of the
Precepts of the Gospel. When there was a Famine there, which seldom happens in
those rich and fertile Countries, those Indians that had a stock of Corn,
persuaded them that were poor to sell 'em their Children for some of their
Corn: with this proposal they complied very willingly, because their Servitude
is so easy, their Slaves not being obliged to any very hard Labor. And the
Indians are naturally obsequious and submissive to those on whom they depend;
they would give one of their Children for five Bushels of Corn, and this was
the ordinary Price they gave. It Is true, this was an unjust method of making
Slaves, because all things ought to be common in a time of extreme Necessity;
for the Law of Nature obliges us freely to give or lend to those that are under
pressing want.

Another occasion on which the Spaniards made the Indians their Slaves was
this; when any one had found an Indian with some Ears of Corn which he had
stolen, he had Authority to make him his Slave. The Missionaries have observed
that some of 'em would maliciously scatter Ears of Corn in the Highways, that
they might seize those for Slaves that had innocently gathered 'em up. Besides
this, the Parents and Relations of him that had the Corn found upon him were
made Slaves for this imaginary Theft, which is a very unjust and criminal
Artifice. They likewise had invented a sort of Play among 'em, in which he that
lost was made a Slave; the best Players would make as if they knew not how to
play, to ensnare those that were ignorant into their Service. If any one whom
they had thus caught, presumed to run away, his nearest Relations were forced
to supply his place. When a Freeman had lain with a Woman that was a Slave,
her Master had power to seize him, or his Wife, if he were married, and to
oblige him to serve him till she was brought to bed. Which Custom obtained
throughout the whole Country. He that had a young Maid to his Slave, would
inslave any one that lay with her, which was attended with great
Inconveniences; for the Masters of these young She-slaves would put 'em upon
enticing Men to lie with 'em, on purpose to catch 'em in this Trap. If a Slave
took any thing out of his Master's House to give it to his Relations, they all
immediately became his Master's Slaves. When several Merchants went into other
Countries for Slaves to sell in New Spain, where they had the best trade for
'em, they lent those that were poor their Goods and Corn upon Usury; and when
they were not in a condition to pay for what they had bought, they seized 'em
for Slaves. If he that owed the Sum, died before the Debt was discharged, and
his Wife and Children were not capable of paying the Creditor, they became his
Slaves. In time of Famine, Parents would sell one of their Children to serve a
Master for a certain number of years; but indeed there was no end of this
Servitude, for if the Master died, his Relations would take possession of his
Slave. But the Bishop of Mexico, who is a very pious and virtuous Prelat, has
written an account in Latin of all the Tricks the Spaniards have used to
inslave the Indians; by which it is easy to see with how much Injustice they
have abused the Simplicity and Necessity of these poor wretches to reduce 'em
to a miserable state of Bondage.

From what I have been relating it appears, that the Indians being Idolaters,
and destitute of the knowledge of the true God, and the Rules of Christianity,
don't regulate their Actions by such Motives as the fear of Hell, and the
desire of Heaven, and the hope of having their good Works rewarded hereafter:
Therefore they are vicious and corrupt in many respects; for instance, they
don't observe the Law of Nations in the Wars they make one upon another; by
which one may well guess there are many other injust things done among 'em.

But the Faith of Christ, and the Precepts of the Gospel are for preserving
only good Laws and Customs, and for abolishing those that are bad, especially
such as are opposite to the Law of Nature, and prejudicial to Human Society.
Therefore those Indians that are converted, who have bin guilty of Polygamy,
are obliged to put away all their Wives but one, according to the prescription
of the Law of God, as well as to restore all the Goods they have gotten by
unlawful ways of Robbery or Extortion. If Christians follow the evil Customs of
Infidels, or tolerate 'em when they can hinder 'em, they manifestly render
themselves Accomplices in the Crimes of those Idolaters, because we are obliged
by the Divine Law to abstain from such Actions as may occasion Scandal, or any
way injure the temporal or spiritual Welfare of our Neighbor. For this reason
St. Paul commanded Christians not to eat things offered to Idols, lest it
should be thought they approved of those damnable Sacrifices; tho they might
eat of those very meats, provided the Pagans did not see 'em, and so were not
scandalized by the Action.

All Christians are obliged by the Divine Word to do what in 'em lies for the
Abolition of sinful Customs, or at least to abstain from 'em, and disapprove
'em themselves. And when a man doubts whether any Action he is about to do is
just or injust, he cannot do it with a good Conscience: this is a general Rule
that admits of no exception, because Christians are obliged by the Doctrine of
the Gospel, rather to lose all they have than to commit the least Sin.
Therefore while the Mind hesitates and doubts, whether the Action on which one
thinks be sin or no, we ought necessarily to abstain from it. The very desire
of doing such an Action is contrary to right Reason, and to the Love of God;
because it would be to expose one's self to the hazard of transgressing the
Divine Will, to do that concerning which one labors under an uncertainty
whether it be lawful or forbidden. And the Doubt, when one thus ventures to
sin, is no longer a mere Doubt, but most certainly becomes an Offense against
God, because we are always obliged to take the safest course. When it falls out
that we meet with two ways, and are uncertain which is the right, we ought
always to choose that which is the least dangerous, according to that Maxim of
St. Augustine in his penitential Book, Take what is certain, and leave what is
uncertain.

The Rules of the Civil Law, which are confirmed by Reason, by the Law of
Nature, and that of Christian Charity, admit of a Dispensation in some cases,
when there is a prospect of some great Good, to which a greater strictness
would probably be prejudicial. But it is a general Rule, that when a Man
deliberates on two doubtful things, he is to determine his choice on that side
where he may avoid Sin, where there are the fewest Inconveniences, and where
his Neighbor's Interest runs the least hazard. Upon this Principle, Clergymen
ought not to be obliged to retire and live separatly from their Mothers,
Grandmothers or Sisters, or to forsake their Father's House; because such a
Separation may be very disadvantagious to 'em, tho there may possibly be some
Inconvenience likewise in their dwelling together.

That man retains a thing with an evil Conscience, about which he is in doubt
whether it be lawfully gotten, or which he has received of one who had no right
to it, or who had reason to doubt whether it belonged to him or no. Whatever is
possessed under such circumstances, is kept contrary to the Rules of Justice,
and against both the Law of God and Nature. Therefore the Spaniards who keep
those Indians in slavery, concerning whom they are in doubt whether they have
bin bought, or given to those of whom they had 'em, act contrary to Justice and
to the Law of God, in retaining 'em while under this doubt. Every one knows
that a man is obliged to restore whatever he does not lawfully possess, and
whatever he has received from one that had no just right to it, because a man
cannot communicate a right to another which he has not first himself. Thus when
any one buys or receives any thing from a Person who sells or gives it, and yet
has no right to it, he is unjust if he keeps it, and is obliged to make
restitution. The Reason is evident, because it is no less than the commission of
Theft, wilfully to retain any thing against the will of him to whom it
appertains. And tho this thing should have past through a thousand hands before
it came to you, you would have no right to withold it from the proper Owner,
because these were all unlawful Possessors, and consequently ought to have made
restitution. And tho some human Laws give permission to retain a thing which
one has bought with Money that is coined with the King's stamp, and is current
in the Commonwealth, yet this is no lawful Title to it, because human Laws must
not prescribe contrary to the Law of God and Nature, nor to good Morals, which
forbid Theft, and the witholding of another man's Goods against the consent of
the rightful Owner. Inferiors, and such are Kings themselves in respect of the
Divine Majesty, cannot justly establish any thing in prejudice to the Law of
God, which is superior to all other Laws.

He that buys stolen Goods knowingly, is an Accessory in the Robbery: and if he
does but suspect they are stolen, and has not bin so diligent as he might have
bin, to inform himself whether they were lawfully gotten, he cannot keep 'em
with a good Conscience; because no man can innocently do that which exposes him
to Sin. And if we will not take the pains to inform our selves whether that
which is sold or given to us be lawfully gotten, when we are in doubt about it,
we cannot be the lawful Possessors, because this is a culpable and wilful
Ignorance. Those who have in such cases consulted Men capable of giving
information, are excusable, unless themselves be of such a Character as obliges
'em to be acquainted with Law and Equity, as Civilians, Judges, and the like;
or when they ask advice, content themselves with consulting only one Person,
tho they have opportunity of advising with many; or ask counsel of interested
Persons, and such as will not answer according to the Dictates of their
Conscience, instead of consulting Men of Integrity who will give advice
according to the Rules of Law and Equity; or when they address themselves to
Persons whose Honesty is suspected upon good grounds. A Man is not excusable
under such Circumstances as these, tho he ask Counsel of the Learned in the
Law; and after having taken their Advice, acts contrary to Right and Equity.
These four Circumstances being regarded, may be of great use to ease scrupulous
persons of their doubts, and to give 'em peace of Conscience.

And by these Principles it may be easily known that the Spaniards unjustly
retain most of their Indian Slaves against the Law of God: and if they have a
right to any of 'em, the number is very small, and they have reason to doubt
whether these have been lawfully made Slaves; because those they have had from
the Indians have been brought to 'em as a Tribute extorted from 'em against
their will, by Fear, Menaces and Torments; so that they have no just Title to
'em: or if they have bought 'em of Indians, they have used unfair tricks to
procure 'em, having terrified the Caciques, and constrained 'em by Tortures to
deliver up their Subjects into their hands, threatening otherwise to acuse 'em
to the Judges for worshipping and offering Sacrifices to Idols; so that the
poor Caciques when they could not give the Spaniards as many Indians as they
demanded, used to steal 'em where they could* It Is true, when these Disorders
came to be known to his Majesty, he expressly forbad any such ways of inslaving
the People for the future.

As for those few Slaves which the Indians have voluntarily sold, tho the
Spaniards have hitherto made no question that they had a lawful right to 'em,
they have had however reason enough to doubt it, and they ought by no means to
have taken possession of 'em, till they had first used all necessary diligence
to get information whether they might do it with a good Conscience; and if
after all their inquiry the matter remained dubious, they ought not to have
bought 'em while under that scruple: So that all the ways they have taken to
procure themselves great numbers of Slaves are unlawful: And when the Indian
Princes saw how eagerly the Spaniards pursued this trade, they would tyrannize
over their Subjects, and force 'em to become Slaves, that they might be capable
of answering the Spaniards demands, and of buying the trifles they sold 'em.
The Judges of the Royal Council, who have sounded this matter to the bottom,
have declared, that scarce any of the Indians have been lawfully enslaved, and
on this account have set many of 'em at liberty.

The Missionary Monks who understood the Language of the Indians, and were
acquainted with their Secrets, have declared, that those who have kept 'em as
their Slaves, have done so without any just ground: and they had no interest to
speak after this manner, being only concerned about the Salvation of Souls.

And can it be thought that the Spaniards were ignorant of what themselves had
done, who made themselves formidable to the poor Indians, and forced 'em by
severe Punishment to procure 'em what Slaves they required? And these ignorant
Infidels, who have so little of the fear or love of God, might easily persuade
themselves that there was no Injustice in doing what they saw Christians do
before 'em; so that their ill Examples might well embolden 'em to steal away
fatherless Children, to trepan the ignorant, and even to make use of force and
violence to get Slaves to sell to the Spaniards. For after this manner have the
Indians been corrupted and induced to commit all kinds of Injustice against
their own Countrymen to procure Slaves, since they have had Conversation with
the Christians, who encouraged 'em in these Tricks, not only by their Words,
but likewise by their Example. And it is most certain, the Spaniards could not
be ignorant of these unrighteous Proceedings, since themselves were the
occasion and instruments of all this Mischief: and it must at least be granted,
that they were obliged to suspect whether the Slaves that were brought 'em were
taken as lawful Prisoners of War, and to inquire whether they might keep 'em
with a good Conscience or not.

They drove this trade with suspicious Persons, and therefore might well have
presumed that they offended the Rules of Justice; and that those that gave or
sold these Slaves to 'em, had no right so to do. Men ought to be very cautious
how they deal with the Indians, lest they approve of the Theft and other Crimes
of these Infidels. The Spaniards knew well enough what was commonly reported of
the Indians every where, that they used many unjust and tyrannical ways to get
Slaves on all sides; and therefore ought to have scrupled the buying of 'em
such as were naturally free, and who had bin enslaved against the Law of
Nations: So that they can never excuse themselves from possessing 'em unjustly,
and from participating of the Crimes of the Indians in stealing and captivating
great numbers of People. Among a hundred thousand Slaves whom the Indians have
sold to the Spaniards, or paid 'em by way of Tribute, perhaps not one of 'em
was properly a Slave, or taken in a just and lawful War. But allowing some of
'em to be so, how could they be distinguished from the rest in this vast
number? Besides, that there is a great difference, as we have already observed,
between the Slaves of the Indians and those of the Europeans: The former make
Slavery not very uneasy or troublesome, their Slaves being in a manner free, and
not much differing from their Children; whereas Slavery among the Spaniards is
a most terrible condition, and those that are subjected to it, enjoy no Favor,
Comfort or Rest, but are continually exposed to Hunger and Thirst, and other
severe Punishments: Nor are there any Laws or Statutes that can soften the
cruel Temper of the Spaniards, and hinder 'em from exacting of their Slaves
such Service as surpasses human Strength.

From all the Principles we have been establishing, it follows, First, that his
Majesty is obliged by the Law of God to set all those Indians at liberty, whom
the Spaniards have made their Slaves, and unjustly retain as such. First,
Because his Majesty is obliged to do Justice to all the World, to great and
small, without respect of Persons, without despising the Cause of the miserable
and afflicted, who are not in a condition to defend themselves, or redress
their own Grievances. It Is the principal duty of Kings to execute Justice, and
protect the weak against the oppression of the strong; and when they fail in
this, they sometimes draw down the Divine Vengeance on their own Persons and
Kingdoms; because the Cries of the poor, and such as labor under Misery,
incessantly go up to the Throne of God. And since the Spaniards unjustly
oppress the Indians, who have no way to secure themselves from the Violence and
Tyranny of their Persecutors; it is evident his Majesty is obliged to stop the
course of their Injustice, and to restore those poor People their Liberty who
groan under so cruel a Bondage. Nor ought this to be one moment deferred,
seeing these Vexations are public and notorious, and his Majesty cannot be
ignorant of 'em.

Those Kings that are willing to observe the strict Rules of Justice, whether
Pagans or Christians, ought to use their utmost Efforts to keep their Subjects
in peace, tho at the same time they should forget nothing that may conduce to
lead 'em in the way of Virtue; because the end that every Governor of a
Commonwealth ought to propose to himself is, to act so as to render all his
Subjects virtuous. How much more are Catholic Princes, who profess to follow
the Rules of Christ, obliged to govern their Subjects according to his
Precepts, and to remove all the Obstacles that are likely to turn 'em out of
the way of Truth? In which Enterprise they cannot succeed without giving 'em
good and equal Laws, and obliging 'em to an exact observance of 'em.

Christian Princes are moreover bound to exhort their Subjects to serve the
true God, and to yield obedience to the Doctrine of Christ, as much as possibly
they can. And seeing the Spaniards by unjustly retaining the Indians in
slavery, are continually in the habit of a mortal Sin, and consequently don't
live according to the Laws of Christ, our Kings ought to command 'em to release
all the Indians, that they may remove this great Obstacle which lies in the way
of their Subjects Salvation. The Royal Character of Princes obliges 'em to make
Laws and Regulations, that Justice may be maintained, and the People subject to
their Government preserved in the practice of Virtue; and are likewise required
by the Divine Law to employ their temporal Power for the augmentation of the
Catholic Church, and the maintenance of Ecclesiastical Discipline, that the
Professors of Christianity may not rebel against the Ministers of Christ. In
this they may lawfully employ the terror of their Arms, to keep all People to
their Duty; for otherwise Temporal Powers would not be necessary for the
administration of the Affairs of the Church. From hence it may fairly be
concluded, that the King of Spain ought to use his power to render Justice to
the poor Indians, who are so tyrannically oppressed, and to strengthen the
hands of the Ministers of the Church in the Indies by his Authority, who are
not able to make any progress by their Ministry among the Natives, nor to
reclaim the Spaniards from their Vices, while they are suffered to afflict and
persecute the poor Indians, because these continual Violences, and their fixed
resolution to persist in 'em, are habitual Sins. At present they regard not at
all the Remonstrances and Menaces of Prelates, or Ecclesiastical Censures, but
go on adding Sin to Sin, in so much that the Church in the Indies is in a
forlorn condition, and under great difficulties: so that the Indians ought to
be set free, that the Obstructions lying in the way of their Salvation may be
removed, and that they may the better be engaged to submit to the Doctrine that
is preached to 'em: For by this means Christian Pastors will have a full
liberty to exercise their Ministry, and to discharge their Apostolic Functions.

The Bishops of America are obliged by the Law of God continually to solicit
his Majesty and his Royal Council to deliver the Indians from the Oppression
under which they groan, and to give 'em their former Liberty, because these
Bishops are necessarily engaged by their Character to do the best they can for
the discharge of their Pastoral Office, which consists in governing and
teaching the People under their Conduct, and in providing for all their
spiritual necessities; as also in securing 'em as well as they can from any
temporal Injury, and in rescuing 'em from the hands of Oppressors, especially
when the Vexations they suffer are so many stumbling blocks in the way of their
Salvation. Nor ought they to be wanting in procuring 'em all the temporal
Advantages they can.

The Dominican and Franciscan Friars are very pious and prudent, and deserve to
be highly commended, in that they have agreed to refuse absolution to all the
Spaniards of New Spain, who keep Indian Slaves, and to oblige 'em to bring this
affair under examination before the Royal Council, in conformity to the Laws
newly made; tho they would have done better not to have had recourse to this
Tribunal. These Monks know very well by experience what unjust and deceitful
Methods have been used to inslave the Indians, and cannot doubt but God has been
highly offended by these Violences, and that those who have committed 'em are
obliged to repair the Injuries of which they have been guilty. A Confessor who
undertakes to hear Men's Confessions, one who officiates in quality of a Bishop
or Curat as a spiritual Judge, ought to understand the Obligations of his
Ministry, and to have that knowledge and prudence which is requisite to perform
it after a becoming manner, that he may pass a wise and just Judgment on all
matters proposed to him, and rightly discern what wrong is offered to any
oppressed Party. If his ignorance or negligence is the cause of his Mistake, so
that he obliges not his Penitent to restore any ill-gotten goods, he commits a
great Sin, and is himself bound to make restitution and amends for the
Injustice done the offended Party: Just as a Physician who has through
ignorance done some considerable Mischief to his Patient, or occasioned his
death, ought to make some special Reparation for his fault. The same may be
said of Judges that pass an unrighteous Sentence, while they are ignorant of
the Law, or take no care to inform themselves of the merit of the Cause before
'em, because such neglect and ignorance are criminal, and they ought to know
the matters on which they are entrusted to pass a Judgment.

It Is certain all the Ecclesiastical Persons in New Spain are well assured that
the Indians have been enslaved, and are still kept in bondage, contrary to all
Law and Equity; and therefore are not obliged to refer the Examination of this
Affair to the Royal Council: besides, there are all sorts of tricks and devices
used to divert the Council from taking cognizance of the matter, lest they
should suppress those vexatious Practices. His Majesty ought with all speed to
issue out his Orders for the release of these miserable People, and so much the
rather, because the oppression they are under is the occasion of the ruin of an
infinite number of Souls. And this is the only way to reclaim the Spaniards from
the habit of a mortal Sin, and to put the Prelates in a condition freely to
acquit themselves of their Ecclesiastical Functions.

Among all the Expedients Friar Don Bartholomew de Las-Casas, Bishop of the
Royal City of Chiapa, proposed for the reestablishment of Peace and
Tranquillity in America, the most effectual was that of directly subjecting all
the West Indies to the Crown of Spain, that so the Spanish Lords might be
incapable of making the Indians their own Subjects and Vassals. And he
supported this Proposal with many very cogent Reasons.

First he says, the Princes and People of the New World being Infidels, and
their Conversion to our holy Faith appearing necessary, it is very proper they
should be under the Protection of a Catholic and powerful King, who has a true
zeal for the honor and propagation of the Christian Religion, and might send
able Missionaries into the New World, to bring those Idolaters to the knowledge
of the true God, and to embrace our Divine Religion, and submit themselves to
the Holy See. And hence it appears that nothing can be more advantageous to the
Indians, than to put themselves under the protection of Catholic Princes, that
no particular Lords may be capable of taking possession of 'em as their
Property. This is what the Kings of Spain ought to regard, without sharing with
any others that Power and Authority they have acquired over the Indians; for
they ought to preserve this Jurisdiction immediately to themselves, and not
divide it to invest private Men with it. And this is an Affair of so great
consequence, that no less than both the temporal and eternal Welfare of those
Nations depend on it; for the Conversion of the New World would be a very
advantageous thing to the Commonwealth.

It Is neither just nor possible to abandon this Jurisdiction to private
Persons, since none but the King can be invested with it; because when the Pope
has once made choice of any Person or Power for this Affair, it ought not to be
delegated or entrusted to another. When he has in this matter declared himself
in favor of any Person illustrious by his Character and Merit, who has a
perfect knowledge of any Cause he may have to determine, it is to be presumed he will
pass such a Judgment as the Pope himself would have done. Now it is manifest
that in the Case in question we have a Person clothed with Grandeur and
Dignity, seeing he is King of Spain, a very good Christian, and zealous for the
Catholic Religion; and the matter is of great importance, because it concerns
the preaching and propagation of the true Faith and Worship of God, the
Conversion of numerous Nations, and the Government of 'em; which is to be
administered with Lenity and Prudence, that Justice may be maintained among 'em,
and the love of Virtue inspired into 'em: which is an Employ too great for any
but Sovereign Princes to perform.

It Is certain the Holy See has chosen the King of Spain to be entrusted with
the Government of the Indies; which may be proved by two considerable
Circumstances. The first of which is the Clause added in the Commission, We
rely upon your Fidelity, Prudence and Justice: which is inserted in the Bull of
Grant and Commission of the Indies to the most serene Kings of Spain, wherein
the Pope says in express Terms;

Knowing you to be Kings truly Catholic, as we have been assured by many
experiences, and that your Piety is every where regarded throughout the
Christian World, we doubt not but you will use all the care and diligence you
can for the Exaltation and Increase of the Catholic Faith; as you have spared
no charge or pains to rescue the Kingdom of Grenada from the hands of Sarazens
and Infidels, which has so much conduced to the Glory of the name of God.

The second Circumstance is, that when any express Order is added in the
Commission, the first Clause of it is expressed in these Words:

We exhort you by your Holy Baptism, which obliges you to submit to our
Apostolic Orders; and we conjure you by the Bowels of Compassion in Jesus
Christ, that you would generously undertake this Expedition, to engage the
People of the New World to embrace the Christian Religion: nor let any
Hardships or Perils discourage you, but put your trust in God, who will make
your Work succeed to his Glory.

The other Clause contains a kind of Command, and is thus expressed;

We command you in virtue of the holy Obedience you owe us; and we doubt not
but you will undertake this Affair with a great deal of zeal and fervor, and
send into the Islands and Continent Men fearing God, able, experienced, and
capable of instructing the Inhabitants of the New World in the Catholic Faith,
and of inspiring 'em with the love of Virtue.

These Circumstances make it sufficiently appear, that the Pope gave the charge
of causing the Indians to be instructed to the Kings of Spain, in consideration
of the signal Services rendered the Church by that Crown; nay, that he has
obliged them to undertake this good work by his express Command to apply
themselves to it, in virtue of the holy Obedience they owe him.

Pursuant to this these Princes solemnly engaged themselves to second the
Pope's designs with all their Power: Their Promise was turned into a Covenant,
and became a formal Obligation on 'em; and consequently it is the indispensible
Duty of the Kings of Spain to be the Ministers of the Holy See in carrying the
Word of God into the Indies, and contributing all their Power to continue the
work of converting the Indians: Their care should be extended to their temporal
as well as spiritual Concerns; and they ought to neglect nothing that may be
necessary for their preservation or conversion. Nor is it lawful for these
Princes to abdicate this Authority, and divest themselves of this Jurisdiction.

Let your Majesty therefore please to consider seriously how strict and
indispensible this Obligation is; be pleased to remember that in the year 1499,
when Christopher Columbus, the first Discoverer and Admiral of the West Indies,
had permitted each Spaniard that accompanied him to take one Indians in
recompense of the great Services done the Crown of Spain in that Voyage, when
those Indians arrived in Spain, your Majesty so much resented it, that 'twas
not easy to appease your Anger on that occasion. Your Majesty asked if the
Admiral had power to destroy your Subjects; and commanded the Spaniards to send
back to the Indies all the Indians they had brought from thence on pain of
Death. Accordingly they returned in the year 1500, when Francis Bobadilla went
to take the Government of the New World.

The second reason that proves your Majesty under an obligation to incorporate
the Indies into the Inheritance of your Crown, and not to suffer the Spaniards
in the least to usurp any thing in quality of Lords and Masters, is, that
otherwise it is impossible the People should ever be brought to espouse
Christianity. To comprehend the force of this Reason it must be remembered that
the Design of your Majesty's Title to possess these newly-discover'd Nations,
is no other than the publication of the Gospel, to spread the knowledge of Jesus
Christ among 'em; and consequently your Majesty is obliged to remove all
Impediments that oppose this end, by establishing good Laws and Orders, and
using all other just ways and means to render this design prosperous. The End
is always the great Spring that should give motion and direction to our
Actions; and it is this we ought to have principally in view, that we may the
better foresee what Obstructions are likely to lie in our way, and take the
most suitable measures to attain the end proposed. Now it is certain, that the
Power usurped by the Spaniards over the Indians is one of the greatest
hindrances to the preaching of the Gospel among 'em for their Conversion. All
the World knows their excessive Avarice makes 'em unwilling to suffer the
Missionary Monks to preach the Gospel to the Indians, whom those Tyrants look
upon as their Vassals; because the publication of the Gospel (they say)
occasions a considerable damage to 'em two ways. First, because these Monks
make the Indians lose too much time in hearing their Instructions; these People
(say they) are naturally lazy and negligent, so that when they are diverted
from their Work, it is hard to bring 'em to it again. It has often happened when
the Monks had got the Indians together in their Church to instruct 'em, the
Spaniards have come upon 'em, and taken away a hundred or two by force, beating
'em cruelly to the scandal of the rest, in spite of what the poor Monks could
say or do. And such Violences cannot but extremely impede the Salvation of the
Indians. Another Disadvantage the Spaniards pretend to receive from the
Conversion of the Indians, is, that when they are once instructed in the Maxims
of Christianity, they grow proud and untractable, and not so capable to serve
'em: and is not this an open Confession that their private Interest is dearer
to 'em than the Salvation of these Peoples Souls? The frame of their mind is an
habitual mortal Sin against Charity, the Order of which they pervert, not only
in not promoting their Salvation themselves, which they ought every day to do,
being obliged in Conscience either to instruct 'em, or procure others to do so;
but also in that they are so far from acquitting themselves of this duty, that
with all their might they hinder others from informing 'em, without being
afraid of the Judgments of that God, who will one day severely punish 'em for
want of Charity to their Neighbors, in witholding light from 'em, tho they
have so much need of Information. They hinder the pious Missionaries from
coming to preach to 'em, lest they should become acquainted with their
Vexations and Cruelties, which are so great and strange, that the Monks are
seized with horror when the Indians relate 'em. And when they see with their
own Eyes how miserably the Indians are treated, they make it their business (as
they are bound in duty to God) to oppose these Disorders. They sometimes
advertise the Judges of those Tribunals your Majesty has established there of
these things, to seek to redress 'em that way; tho the means hitherto used have
had very little effect; because the Governors and Judges having a great many
Indians themselves, to whom they are unmerciful and cruel, abuse their Power in
oppressing these poor Creatures, causing 'em to be punished rigorously for the
slightest faults. This is the true reason why the Monks are looked upon as so
many troublesome Spies, and the Enemies of their temporal Interest; so that they
cannot endure so much as to see 'em, nor would they willingly tolerate 'em in
the Country, but often curse 'em, and invent all sorts of Calumnies against
'em. The poor Indians almost despair to see any end of their Miseries; and
having nothing to trust to but the Zeal and Charity of the Monks, do love and
reverence 'em as their Deliverers and Protectors, still putting great
Confidence in them under all their troubles; they often come in Bodies out of
their Towns and Cities to meet 'em: But it is a great mortification to the
Spaniards to see the Indians pay these good Men so much respect; and they take
occasion from hence to reproach 'em, pretending the Monks design to make
themselves the Lords and Masters of these poor Wretches. But God only knows
what Labors and Hardships these Missionaries undergo, and to what Extremity
they are often reduced by poverty and hunger; when they undertake great
Journeys with inexpressible fatigue, in rough and troublesome ways, to assist
the Indians, and show 'em the way of Salvation; and to admonish the Spaniards
of their enormous Sins, in tormenting 'em so many ways, in robbing and
murdering 'em: all which Violences call for large restitution, if they expect
to be saved. Covetousness and Injustice reign more in the Indies, than in all
the World besides; tho the Spaniards have no just right nor power there, since
they don't derive it of your Majesty. The Indians are naturally timorous and
cowardly, or rather the ill Treatments and Cruelties of the Spaniards have
terrified 'em to that degree, that consternation and dread are become natural
to 'em, insomuch that they scarce remember they are Men.

It Is impossible for Men in their Condition to apply themselves to hear the
preaching of the Gospel, that so they might become Christians, since the
Spaniards so strenuously oppose it; who ought therefore to give up the Title
they have usurped over them, ever since they made a Conquest of 'em, as they
are wont to boast. They that have any Interest in a Governor's favor, dispose
of the Persons of the Indians as their proper Goods, and divide 'em among
themselves, as if they were born absolute Vassals. Two or three Spaniards will
sometimes appropriate to themselves a whole Nation of Indians. It may be the
Master of the Family falls to the Lot of one, his Wife to another, and their
Children to a third. They are sent to the Mines loaded like Horses, and forced
to carry heavy Burdens a hundred or two hundred Leagues; this is seen every
day. To obviate these Disorders, it will not be sufficient that your Majesty
demand your Tributes, and threaten those with severe Punishment who shall
presume to torment the Indians for the future, or exact such Tasks of 'em as
they are not justly obliged to perform; for they will still persist in the same
course.

As the severe Bondage of the Indians is a great obstacle to their Conversion
on the one hand, so on the other is the course taken to disperse 'em at a
distance one from another, whereby it is almost impossible to assemble a
considerable number of 'em. Both these ways prevent their being instructed in
our Religion, and put in the way of Salvation. It Is necessary in order to their
being fed with the Divine Word, that they live in Society, and be in a
condition to be easily assembled; and it is as necessary they should enjoy an
entire Liberty, that they might voluntarily embrace the Word of God. The
Learned say there was no System of written Laws given by God in the time of
Abraham, because the Church was his Family, and did not consist of any whole
Nation. Nor did God see good to give his Law to the Israelites while in Egypt,
tho they were then a numerous People, and computed to be no less than six
hundred thousand Men able to bear Arms, because they were not a free People,
being yet in Captivity. But the Almighty gave 'em his Law when these two
conditions were found in 'em together, namely, when they were both Numerous and
Free; which was not till he had employed his Power to deliver 'em from the Yoke
of Pharaoh. But of all Laws, that of the Gospel especially requires both these
Conditions, because it supposes Persons at liberty to seek to be instructed in
it, and to put the Precepts of it in practice. And it is very proper for those
that observe the Laws of Christ to incorporate themselves and live in
Societies, that they may perform the solemn Acts of Divine Worship by the
practice of the seven Sacraments and other Ceremonies of the Church. It Is
necessary for Christians to meet together from time to time in public to hear
the Word of God, and assist at other parts of his Worship, that so new Converts
may be confirmed in the manner of Life they have embraced; for without these
helps they would insensibly decline in their Zeal, and might come even to lose
their Faith. In short, if the Spaniards are permitted to keep the Indians
scattered up and down on the Mountains, and in the Valleys, and to employ 'em
perpetually in performing the unreasonable Tasks they exact of 'em, it will be
impossible to instruct 'em in our Religion to any purpose.

By what has been said, your Majesty may very well conceive what Disorders
reign in the Indies, and how necessary it is to hinder the Spaniards from
retaining the Natives under so severe a Yoke, and from proceeding to depopulate
the Country as they have hitherto done. And that which is yet more deplorable,
is, that they suffer 'em to die without taking care to have the Sacraments
administered to 'em, having no more regard for 'em than for Dogs or Horses. One
would think they believed these People to have no immortal Souls, but were
incapable of Rewards or Punishments in the other Life.

The Spaniards are no way qualified either to be Lords and Masters of the
Indians, or to teach 'em the Doctrine of the Gospel, or to induce 'em to embrace
it by their Examples. A considerable number of Indians were committed to the
care of John Colmenero to be instructed in our Religion, tho he was so ignorant
that he knew not well how to make the sign of the Cross, or give any tolerable
account of his own Faith; in so much that when he was asked what he taught
those Indians under his Conduct, he could make no other Answer than that he
taught 'em to make the sign of the Cross, but pronounced the words wrong that
are used in that Ceremony. When the Indians of one Province had brought all
their Idols to the Missionaries, with Protestations that they now detested that
impious Worship, and were resolved to serve the true God for time to come, the
Spaniards sold these very Idols to other Indians, or exchanged 'em for Slaves.
What concern of Mind can the Spaniards be supposed to have for the Salvation of
these People, when they only design to enrich themselves, and thereby to be
qualified for Employments above their Rank; and when they are so ignorant, that
they don't know the Creed, or ten Commandments? They are sordidly covetous, and
indeed give themselves up to all sorts of Vices; so that their Lives are
infamous and abominable. The Indians are comparatively more honest and virtuous
than they are: for tho they are Pagans and Idolaters, yet are content with one
Wife, as Nature teaches 'em, while they see Christians take fourteen or fifteen
Women, how expressly soever the Law they profess forbids it. Many of the Indians
scarce know what it is to rob one another, to offer Violence to any one, or to
commit Murder: Whereas they see the Christians guilty of all these, against all
Reasons and Justice, and that they violate all their Oaths, so that there is no
ground to put the least confidence in 'em. The poor Indians that are Witnesses
of the Crimes of such as call themselves Christians, think the God they worship
is the vilest and most unjust God in the world, because he does not immediately
inflict some signal Punishment on those that pretend to serve him, for their
flagitious Lives. They also think your Majesty the most cruel of all Princes,
because your Subjects are so abominably vicious; they fancy (as I have before
said) that your Majesty drinks human Blood, and eats the Flesh of Men. And tho
these things may appear strange and surprising to your Majesty, they are no
news to us who have been accustomed to 'em. And we cannot but wonder, that some
extraordinary marks of the Divine Anger and Indignation have not been inflicted
on Spain to make her smart for the Crimes committed by the Spaniards in America.

Your Majesty may by this time very well perceive the Character of those Men to
whom the charge and care of the Souls of the Indians is committed. And it is no
wonder that there is so little done either for their temporal or spiritual
Advantage, since the discovery of the Indies, under such Conduct. God is no
more known there now than he was before, unless it be in the Province of
Mexico. And that slight Instruction the People have had there has cost 'em very
dear: Tho the Son of God commanded his Disciples to give that freely which they
had freely received. The Indians were committed to the Spaniards, on condition
they would undertake to teach 'em the Christian Religion: therefore since they
have acquitted themselves so ill of that Commission, they ought to make
restitution of all they have taken from 'em under this pretext. However, God
will not be mocked, who sees all things, and is a witness of all the wicked
Actions of the Spaniards, who have made it their business only to torment and
inslave these poor People instead of taking care to inform 'em of the Truth.
And indeed these secular Men are not very proper to be made Preachers of the
Gospel. Your Majesty has been ill served in not having had good Information
given you of the ill deportment of your Subjects. For it is not to be doubted
but your Majesty would have provided a Remedy, if due care had been taken to
give you advice of it: Or if your Majesty had not done it, you would have very
much wronged your Conscience in sending such Men into the new World to preach
the Faith, and give testimony to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, who are
absolutely incapable of so honorable a Ministry, and even decry and debase it
by their scandalous Conversation. It Is therefore necessary that this Employment
be taken away from Secular, and committed to Religious Persons, as agreeing
better with their Character, which may be done without giving these
Ecclesiastical Ministers any occasion to claim a temporal Jurisdiction over the
Indians; for if that should be allowed, we should fall into the same
Inconveniences we are endeavoring to avoid. The corrupt Lives and evil
Examples of the Spaniards do more hurt than the preaching of an infinite number
of Priests and Monks can do good. Therefore your Majesty is obliged in
Conscience to deprive the Spaniards of the power they usurp over the Indians,
and never suffer 'em to make 'em their Vassals.

One principal Reason that proves this Proposition is, that People ought to
enjoy Peace and Tranquillity, that they may be in a condition to attend the
Worship of God, and the good Works prescribed by the Christian Religion, and
not to be diverted from the Sacraments by being condemned to continual Labor.
Which state of Peace and Rest cannot subsist without preserving to every Man his
Property, and guarding him from all the assaults of Injury and Injustice. The
Governors of Commonwealths are bound by the Law of God to remove out of the way
all Obstructions to so necessary a Peace, and speedily to allay those
Dissensions and Troubles that may continue Discord among such as profess
Christianity, because it is directly opposite to the end of God in creating Men;
for he sends 'em into the World to observe his Commands, and to apply
themselves to the exercise of Religion and good Works, that they may thereby
merit eternal Life. This good order is necessary in every Christian Republic,
but there especially where the Christian Faith has been but lately entertained.
The Spaniards are too covetous and self-interested to have any Jurisdiction
over the Indians granted 'em, because they will never give 'em any respit or
repose, but go on to rob and torment 'em all the ways they can invent. There is
no kind of Injustice but they commit it to spoil these poor People, and
therefore there is no way to shelter 'em from their Oppressions, but by
annexing the Indies to the proper Inheritance of your Majesty's Crown. The
Spaniards kill the Indians with impunity in the Fields, in the Highways, and
in the Mines, and do it more boldly, because many times there are no Witnesses
present to convict 'em of their Cruelties. So that nothing can be more evident,
than that the Indians are not in a condition to compose their Minds to attend
to the Divine Word, so as to be induced to obey the Divine Commands, while the
Spaniards are their absolute Lords, who will continually harass 'em with
endless Trouble and Persecution, which will fill their minds with Anguish and
Vexation, and all kinds of Misery, nay with an aversion to your Majesty, and a
great hatred to our God, and to his Law, which seems to 'em so severe, so heavy
and intolerable a Yoke. They cannot but think your Majesty's Government is
tyrannical, as well as that the God whom we adore is unjust and unmerciful;
supposing him the Author of all the Violence they suffer from the Spaniards;
because while they, on pretense of preaching the Catholic Faith, bring so many
terrible Calamities upon 'em, their God suffers this without punishing their
Injustice and Impiety after a very remarkable manner. These unfortunate People
have no other Relief than what they find in their Tears, which they pour forth
day and night, protesting their own Gods were more kind and favorable than the
God of the Europeans, and saying they enjoyed a settled Peace, and all the
Coveniences of Life while they served their own Gods, whereas ever since they
had been under the power of the Christians, they had been exposed to all manner
of Abuses. This makes 'em abhor the Catholic Faith, and by consequence puts
those that preach to 'em out of a condition to attain their end: So that your
Majesty is beyond all question obliged by the Law of God to rescue the Indians
from the Yoke of the Spaniards, and to take 'em under your own Protection.

I farther add, that the power your Majesty has over the People of the New
World, has been granted you by the Grace of God and the Suffrage of the Church,
both for the temporal and eternal Advantage of the Indians, which Privilege is
a kind of necessary means of their Salvation. So that the Government of 'em
belongs of right to none but your Majesty, with the exclusion of all other
Powers whatsoever, unless they desire to frustrate all the Advantages both
spiritual and temporal, which the Indians might hope to reap from the
Conversation of the Europeans. Your Majesty's Character and Jurisdiction over
'em engages you to remove all Obstacles that may hinder them from obtaining
these Advantages, and being saved through Faith by the preaching of the Gospel.
Your Majesty ought not to suffer your Authority to become infamous and odious,
nor your Subjects to usurp a tyrannical Power that will infallibly issue in the
destruction of the Indians, if they must be Vassals to the Spaniards, who treat
'em so cruelly and inhumanly. When we first arrived in the New World, we saw
innumerable multitudes of People inhabiting the Provinces of New-Spain, Cuba,
Jamaica, and the Isle of St. John, which are now all desolate. The Provinces
and Kingdoms of the Continent are in a yet more deplorable condition, tho once
as well peopled as Toledo and Seville. There Is scarce any place in the World
where Men and other Animals multiply so much as they do in the Indies, because
the Air of the Country being temperate, favors Generation. But the Spaniards
have found out the art of entirely depopulating large Countries filled with
infinite numbers of People, for they have unjustly massacred some to possess
themselves of their Gold and Silver, others they have destroyed by excessive
Labors, or by forcing them to carry unreasonable Burdens in long Journies; in a
word, they have sacrificed the poor Indians to enrich themselves. We advance
nothing but the very Truth, and all that we have said does not express half of
what we have seen; nor will it be a difficult task to convince them of falsehood
who dare maintain the contrary before your Majesty. None but such as have
shared in the fruit of this Rapine and Cruelty, will oppose the truth of such
Facts as are known to all the world. And 'twill be in vain to pretend that any
contagious Distemper has made a Country of 2500 leagues desolate, which before
was very populous.

The manner of governing Kingdoms ought to be conformable to the Law of God and
Man, for the good and profit of the People, who are to be defended and
preserved from the Violence and Injustice of those that are destitute of the
fear of God, and use a tyrannical Power, merely obtained by Usurpation, for the
ruin and destruction of those that are under 'em. Your Majesty may easily be
informed how the Spaniards have abused the Power you granted 'em for the
Conversion of the Indians, in turning it to afflict and destroy 'em with
unexampled Cruelty. And that which makes the case yet more lamentable is, that
none of those who have been employed in your Majesty's service have ever given
you advice of these great Disorders, tho so very prejudicial to your Interest,
besides the loss of an infinite number of Souls who have perished in the
darkness of Paganism, out of which they might have been easily reduced if the
Spaniards had in the least been governed by the fear of God.

Your Majesty may please to remember that one Article of the Will of the most
Serene Queen Isabella, is expressed after this manner:

Item, Since the time wherein the Apostolic See granted us the Isles and
Containent of the Ocean, it has always been our principal Intention to cause
the Light of the Gospel to shine on the People of the New World, and to send
Prelates and Monks thither to convert and instruct 'em in the truth of the
Catholic Faith. Therefore I beseech my Lord the King, and the Princess my
Daughter, to labor with all their might to render this Enterprise successful,
and to secure the Indians from receiving any damage either in their Estates or
Persons, but on the contrary to take care they be treated with all sorts of
kindness; and that strict and speedy Justice be executed upon any one that
shall offer 'em the least Injury, and to keep exactly to the terms of the
Apostolic Brief dispatched for this Grant. These are the express Words of that
Illustrious Princess: And yet no sooner was she expired, but the Spaniards
began to abuse the Indians, and to offer 'em all the Outrages of which we have
been speaking, and could give your Majesty a more ample Relation.

To all the foregoing Reasons it may be added, that the Spaniards are declared
Enemies to the Indians, and design nothing but their destruction, and to get
possession of their Country; which is so undoubted a truth, that it is
altogether needless to prove it. For he is properly a Man's declared Enemy, who
goes about to accuse him of some capital Crime, that deserves death; who
deprives him of his Liberty and the greatest part of his Goods; who makes a
cruel War upon him and inslaves him; who seeks all Occasions to kill him, and
takes away his Wife and Children to inslave 'em; who usurps all the Goods of
his Relations when they die, and unjustly ravishes from him all that is dear to
him. Certainly such Violences as these are against the Rights both of People
and Princes; and it is sufficient to demonstrate the Spaniards to be the
declared Enemies of the Indians, that they have done 'em all the mischief which
we have been relating. For they have calumniated and accused 'em of the most
horrible and infamous Crimes that can be imagined, merely to get possession of
their Estates, and strip 'em of all they had under this pretext; whereas the
practices they charge 'em with are purely imaginary, and such as have never
been so much as heard of in the great Islands of New Spain, Cuba, Jamaica, and
St. John, tho they have been all very populous; for after the most exact
Enquiries we were able to to make, we could never find the least appearance of
those abominable Sins, to which some few Persians are addicted. The Indians of
the Kingdom of Yucatan know not what this unnatural Vice is. Nor are there any
great number of 'em that eat human Flesh. They are farther accused of Idolatry;
but Men have no right to punish 'em for this Crime, which ought to be left to
the Judgment of God. Our Ancestors were formerly Idolaters, as the Indians are
now; and the whole Universe was polluted with this Sin before the coming of
Christ, and before the Apostles had preached the Christian Faith. For God
dispersed them up and down the World to dissipate the darkness that was spread
over the Earth: and they did not employ violence and force of Arms to punish
Idolatry, or other Sins that were the Consequences of Infidelity; they made use
of nothing but the good Examples of their Virtue and Holiness, together with
their Doctrine, which contained the Menaces and Promises of the Word of God; and
we ought to do that in the Indies, which they did in other parts of the World.
This was the Course which Christ himself first took, and then obliged his
Apostles to follow his Example. The Son of God came to seek and to save that
which was lost. Which of our Ancestors could have been saved if they had been
put to death for Crimes committed in the time of their unbelief? the express
Words of the Gospel are contrary to this Method; for Christ says to his
Disciples, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise
from the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of Sins should
be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem: And ye are
Witnesses of these things, Luke 24. 46, 47, 48. which evidently proves that the
Gospel ought to be at first preached to Infidels, by declaring of Peace, and
the remission of Sins that are past, since Christ has given no power or
permission to men to punish 'em.

The Spaniards have moreover presumed to maintain that the Indians were like
brute Beasts, utterly incapable of discipline, and unfit to receive the light of
Christianity. Your Majesty has good reason to punish those that declare such
notorious Falsehoods: For under this Color they have obtained of your Majesty a
power to possess themselves of the Indies as their absolute Property, and to do
the Indians what mischief they please. Thus have they imposed on the Conscience
of the most Catholic King; and obtained leave to carry away the Inhabitants of
the Islands and Countries that lie near Hispaniola, and have accordingly forced
'em out of their own Country against all Law and Equity; so that an innumerable
multitude both of Men and Women that inhabited above fifty Islands, some bigger
than the Canaries, have been destroyed, insomuch that there are but eleven
Persons left. I have been an Eyewitness of this desolation, as well as Peter
de Lisle, who is a man of honor and credit, and now a Monk of the Order of St.
Francis. He built a Brigantine, and manned it with Seamen to make a review of
those once populous Islands; and they found in all that vast Country but eleven
People (as has been said) tho they spent two years in making this Voyage. It Is
impossible for me to express to your Majesty, on the one hand, the great
meekness, goodness of temper, and sincerity of the People of the New World, and
on the other, what enormous Ravages and Cruelties the Christians have exercised
upon 'em. Your Bowels would be moved with Compassion, and your heart too much
affected, if an exact description of all this were made you.

Cruel Wars have been raised in diverse rich Provinces, without any fair
occasion, but only to gratify the covetous humor of the Spaniards: At the same
time they flatter themselves that they have Authority from your Majesty to
employ force and violence to inslave these People. And all the difference they
make between those Indians they look upon as their Subjects, and those whom
they treat as Slaves, is, that they sell the latter publicly, but use a little
more formality about selling the former, by seeking pretenses to hide their
Injustice. In the unjust Wars they have made with 'em, after having killed the
Masters of Families, they have also murdered their Wives and Children, and
possessed themselves of all they had. And God is now pleased every day to show
us by his severe Chastisements that he has been grievously offended by these
Robberies and Cruelties. The Welfare of the Indians both as to Body and Soul is
in the greatest danger; for if they must be subject to the absolute Power of
the Spaniards, they will utterly destroy 'em, without sparing any, so much as to
propagate their Race. If the Law of Nature forbids us to commit a Pupil to the
charge of one that is a mortal Enemy to him or his Parents, or has embezel'd
his Estate, or set him an ill Example; and yet he has been given up to the care
of a Person of this Character; the Judges would be obliged to rectify the
matter, by taking him from under his Conduct, whatever security he offers to
give for his fidelity. It Is much the same case with the Indians in respect of
the Spaniards, for these would have it believed that they are the Guardians,
Tutors, and Protectors of the other: tho it is only a fraudulent pretense to
ensnare 'em. The Indians know well enough how to govern themselves, without
being beholden to Guardians; and the Spaniards are no way capable of
instructing 'em in the things of Religion, which yet is the main thing the
Indians want, and the greatest kindness that can be done 'em. And it is easy to
see what disposition the Spaniards have toward 'em, as to their temporal
advantage. So that it is most certain they are their declared Enemies; since
they have stripped 'em of all their Goods, offered all sorts of abuses to their
Persons, and taken away their Wives and Children, whom they have condemned to
perpetual Slavery; which course, together with the cruel Wars made upon 'em,
has almost quite unpeopled the New World. How is it possible that men that lead
such kind of Lives, should inspire the Indians with the desire of embracing the
Law of God, and the love of Virtue, especially seeing they many ways persecute
the very Monks, who are so zealous for the Reformation of these Idolaters? On
the contrary, the Spaniards spare nothing that may debauch 'em, and expose 'em
to all sorts of Vice by the evil Patterns they set 'em: They teach 'em to swear
and blaspheme the holy Name of God, tho in reality the poor Indians don't do it
designedly, but only because they hear the Spaniards use such Expressions. It Is
therefore plain that the Spaniards ought not to have any Jurisdiction over the
Indians, if their advantage either as to this Life or that to come be
considered, seeing they are the mortal Enemies of this People, and think of
nothing but how to destroy 'em. It would therefore be a piece of great
Injustice to abandon 'em to such Men, when their Disposition toward 'em is so
well known; it being a mortal Sin to expose one's Neighbor to evident danger of
losing his Life: And we doubt not but your Majesty will be cautious of falling
under the guilt of such a Crime, and not give up the Indians to the fury of the
Spaniards.

All just and reasonable Laws, and those Philosophers that have written on
Morality are against placing any Government in the hands of necessitous and
covetous Men, whose greatest end is to get rid of their Poverty, and to deliver
themselves from that mean condition in which they live, and therefore are ready
to sacrifice all the obligations of Duty to the desire they have of becoming
rich. And because this greedy Passion is continually increasing, and their
Minds are wholly set on the ways of heaping up Wealth, and filling their
Chests, they find no rest but in satisfying their Avarice. They abhor Poverty
as Nature does a Vacuum, and therefore have no other thoughts night or day but
to contrive means of amassing together as much Treasure as they can. Upon this
account the Philosopher determins that it is a dangerous thing to put Nations or
Provinces under the Government of such as are covetous or needy, who are
resolved to be rich at any rate in the world. We are informed in History that
the Romans being about to send two Consuls to govern Spain, one of whom was
poor and the other covetous; when this Affair was proposed to the Senate, Scipio
Africanus gave his opinion that neither of 'em was proper to make a Governor,
there being reason to fear that both would abuse their Authority to feather
their Nests out of the public Stock; because such kind of Persons are like
Leeches in a Commonwealth, and make it their principal care to gather something
on every side, and to devour the Substance of the People, making themselves
rich at their charge, because their covetous Desires can never be satiated as
long as they remain in this World: Nay it must be added, that this Vice most
commonly proves incurable; so that if Men greedy of Lucre get Authority over
any People, they will not fail to spoil and ruin 'em, because the Passion that
animates 'em, keeps no bounds or measures. No Laws nor Penalties with which
they can be menaced, will be strong enough to restrain 'em, as long as they are
invested with Power; and the more successful any covetous Man finds his
Industry to be, the more earnestly does he desire and pursue Riches, which he
accounts the supreme Good. The desire of being rich produces much the same
effect in the mind of a poor covetous Man, as the hope of Celestial Happiness
would in that of a good Man; for as this perfectly fills up the Capacity of his
Mind that ardently wishes for it, so the Miser's Soul can desire nothing
besides hoards of Treasure, wherein his Happiness consists, because Money
answers all things: For this is that which capacitates Men to undertake the
greatest Enterprises, and to obtain whatever they desire in this World, the
highest Employments, Honors and Dignities, costly Habit, and the most delicious
Dainties; this facilitates their commission of all sorts of Crimes, gives 'em
opportunity to be revenged on their Enemies, to acquaint themselves with
Persons of great Quality, and to obtain their Favor and Esteem. It Is on these
accounts that the Men of the world seek it with all their might, and expose
themselves to so many Fatigues and Perils, as well as perpetrate the greatest
Villainies to procure it.

Now the possession of Riches can never satisfy the Soul, so as to give it
perfect content; for it is perpetually craving what it does not yet possess.
Therefore the Worldling, who has chosen Money for his chief Good and last End,
is indifferent as to other things, but devotes himself entirely to this,
employing all his care and diligence to increase his Bags; and his thirst of
Gold grows more and more violent, by how much the more his Estate swells,
according to the Philosopher's Maxim, that Motion is by so much the more
impetuous, by how much the nearer it approaches its end.

Avarice is a more incurable Evil than Concupiscence, because its Object, and
the things it promises attract the Hearts of Men with greater violence; and the
power of Money is of a larger extent, because it puts a Man in a condition to
gratify his Lust, whereas this on the other hand cannot procure him Riches. The
love of Money endures longer on the Mind than the Appetite of sensual Pleasures,
how violent and impetuous soever they may be for a time. Covetousness is always
on the advance, and seldom extinguished but with a Man's Life: For the more a
Man's natural Infirmites increase, the more the desire of heaping up Wealth
fortifies it self; as it is observable in old Men, that the nearer they approach
their end, the more covetous they usually grow; because as their Health and
Strength gradually diminish, they think they have the more need of the
assistance of the things of this World.

These Reasons make it evident, that if any Jurisdiction or Government be given
to covetous Men, they will not fail to oppress and vex those that are subjected
to them, that they may make themselves rich at their costs; and that nothing
will hinder 'em from gratifying their Avarice whenever they have a fair
occasion; for this Vice is the root and spring of all others, it is the source
of Treason, Fraud, Perjury, Violence, Rapine, and barbarous Cruelty. This
Passion is said to be blind, because it occasions blindness in the Mind, and
benights the Reason with the grossest Darkness, and hinders him that is
captivated with it from perceiving his danger. The sight of Gold, tho it causes
the commission of all manner of Crimes, and is the source of Calumnies, gives
him more Joy than the light of the Sun, because he finds his Account in the
ruin of others. It excludes Fidelity, and banishes Union and Concord out of the
World; it violates Charity, and produces all manner of Mischief; it knows no
Compassion, but induces Men to disclaim their very Parents, and break all the
ties of Faith and Amity; it never suffers a Man to sympathize with his
Neighbor's Miseries, but even makes him disregard his Relations as if utterly
unacquainted with them. The covetous Man never forgives himself his own
Expenses, and leads a miserable Life in the midst of Plenty and Wealth. This
greedy humor so darkens the Understandings of those that are bewitched by it,
that they know not how to make a right Judgment of any thing, but instead of
following the Dictates of reason, are on all occasions driven down the
impetuous Current of their beloved Vice, all their Thoughts and Desires are
directed this way, and yet they can never quench the insatiable Thirst that
preys upon their Souls.

But I must now apply all these Reasons to the subject in hand: and I beseech
your Majesty to give attention to the Consequences I draw from 'em. All the
Spaniards that leave their own Country to go into the Indies are poor, and it is
only Avarice that drives them thither; for they don't only pretend to raise
themselves a little above a condition of Poverty and Want, but to amass vast
Treasures together, without setting any Limits to their unmeasurable
Covetousness, that they may be able to buy honorable Offices and Emploiments,
and advance themselves far above their degree. We have been taught by
experience that in a few years, many Spaniards who were in the meanest and
basest condition, and always led a miserable Life, have considerably altered
their fortune by the Riches they have brought from the New World, and likewise
introduced great corruption of Manners throughout all Spain. The love of Money
is now grown to that height, that Gold and Silver seem the only Gods that are
worshipped. They that know not how to advance themselves by industry and labor,
do it by plundring and robbing without any fear of punishment. They take away
from the poor Indians all they find in their houses, and after all make 'em
work to get still more out of their sweat and labor; so that if any Authority
over the Indians be allowed 'em, they will certainly abuse it to enrich
themselves, while this detestable covetousness reigns in their minds. And what
can the poor Indians do to shake off their tyrannical Yoke, since they are
naturally meek, quiet and timorous, and dare not complain or murmur; or if they
should, have no body to hearken to 'em or defend 'em? The Spaniards who have an
absolute Power, are always chiding and domineering over 'em wherever they are,
in the Fields, on the Mountains, in the Mines, in the Deserts, or in the
Highways. They take all the furniture of their Houses from 'em, which is their
greatest Riches, as well as expose 'em to the greatest dangers, and most
intolerable Labors, beating and inflicting on 'em the severest Punishments for
the least Trifle, when they hope to get any thing by it. What a piece of
Injustice then must it be to abandon such meek and submissive Creatures to the
fury of such men as these, when they are in no capacity to resist the tyranny
of their Persecutors, but are made their mere tools?

What would one say of that Judge, who after he has received information of the
violent passion of a wild Spark in the heat of Youth, to a beautiful Virgin,
should notwithstanding order 'em to live together in the same house, and give
him an absolute power over her, but withal threatening to punish him severely if
he offered her any violence? Could any one safely confide in the Promises of
such a man as this, whatever Protestations he should make of moderating his
passion on so critical an occasion? It is not to be doubted but such a Judge
would commit a mortal Sin, in thus exposing his Neighbor to so dangerous a
Temptation, tho he should happen to abstain from the Sin to which he has so
great a propension. It almost amounts to the same thing to put the Indians
under the Jurisdiction of the Spaniards, who are their mortal Enemies; for if
they don't massacre 'em in cold blood merely out of the hatred they bear 'em,
they do it however to get their Goods, and rob 'em of their Treasure. And as in
the former Instance it would be next to a Miracle for that amorous Youth not to
abandon himself to the Conduct of his Passion, when the Object of it is
committed to his disposal; so it is not to be expected that the Spaniards should
abstain from committing all sorts of Outrages on the Indians, and sacrificing
both their Estates and Lives to their own Interest, since their Avarice
irritates 'em with greater violence (if possible) than Lust does the other in
the former case: so that Laws backed with Menaces and Punishments will make no
impressions on the minds of these men, but they will be sure still to exercise a
thousand Cruelties on the poor Indians, if no other course be taken to give
check to their Covetousness.

I entreat your Majesty to consider what befalls any Province to which you send
a Governor. If he be covetous, and regardless both of his Honor or Relion, what
Disorders and Mischiefs does he not bring with him? Tho he has not so absolute
a Power as the Spaniards have over the Indians whom they keep in their Houses;
tho the Royal Council of Spain think themselves concerned to oppose his
Prevarications; and tho the King's Presence one would think should be a strong
Bridle to restrain his Exactions: yet in two years time, such a Governor as we
have bin describing will become rich, by the Rapine and Extortion he commits in
the Province put under his care. What then is it likely the Spaniards will do,
in the remotest parts of the Indies, when they have an unlimited Power over the
Indians, and neither stand in awe of God nor the King; and when these poor
People are under so great apprehension of still more intolerable Cruelties,
that they dare not complain of the violence they suffer? And how shall they
report their Grievances? shall they go to the Royal Council, which is it may be
three or four hundred Leagues from 'em; or shall they address themselves to
your Royal Throne, which is distant above three thousand? What course shall
they take to prove the Insults, Vexations and Persecutions they endure from the
Spaniards in Countries so remote, where they can expect no relief?

The Spaniards are so hardn'd by their excessive Avarice, that they are not in
the least touched with the Groans and Complaints of these miserable People; for
nothing makes impression on their minds but Gold and Silver. The Condition to
which they advance themselves in the Indies is so far above their former state,
that it inspires 'em with intolerable Pride and Arrogance. They pass away their
time in pleasure and feasting, and clothe themselves after so sumptuous a
manner, that nothing in the World can be more magnificent. And withal it may
well be said that nothing can equal the corruption, licentiousness and
dissoluteness of their Manners; and to supply all these superfluous Expenses
and Excesses, they suck out the very Blood of the poor Indians. Now seeing
there is no hope of obliging the Spaniards to alter their Conduct, and both the
Laws of God, and right Reason, and all the Maxims of Policy and Prudence oppose
the giving of any Government into the hands of covetous and indigent Persons,
who are prejudiced with a violent desire of gain: Much less ought your Majesty
to suffer the Spaniards to usurp a Title to the Indians as their Freehold,
when they are so greedy and insatiable, that they will make no difficulty to
sacrifice all kinds of duty to the desire they have of raking sums of Money
together any way in the World. For all their Industry will be employed in
pillaging their Vassals; and which is yet more to be lamented, while they
cruelly deprive 'em of temporal Life, they likewise take a course to expose 'em
to eternal Death. Therefore your Majesty ought to incorporate the Indies with
the Inheritance of your Crown, that you may be the universal Father, Protector,
Governor and Lord of all the Indians.

I add to all the foregoing Reasons, that the Spaniards impose intolerable
Burdens on the Indians, and exact such Services of 'em as reduce 'em to the
extremity of misery and despair. It Is their first and principal duty to serve
and obey their own natural Princes; because this is founded on the Law of
Nature. In the second place, they owe your Majesty service and obedience, as
being their universal Sovereign; which is an obligation of Divine Right,
founded on the Engagement your Majesty has contracted to send 'em the Light of
the Gospel, and to take care for their Instruction in the orthodox Faith. The
third kind of Service is that which the Spaniards oblige 'em to render them
whether they will or no, which is a severe and tyrannical Yoke, nay more
intolerable than what the Heathen Tyrants imposed on the primitive Christians;
it may be liken'd to the torment the Devils inflict on the Damned in Hell. The
Violence of it is contrary to all the Laws of Nature and Reasons, nor can it be
justified by any human Laws. It must be remembered that the Indians are
naturally weak, going always naked, and continually exposed to the heat of the
Sun: it is therefore contrary to all Justice that they should be oppressed with
heavy Burdens far above their strength, as well as contrary to Charity, and the
Custom of all reasonable Men. All the service these poor Creatures do cannot
satisfy the Spaniards, who therefore set an Officer over 'em strictly to
inspect their Actions, and render their servitude still more terrible. This
Employ is usually bestowed on some cruel and inexorable Monster, who always
stands over 'em to make 'em work the harder, and punctually to obey all his
Commands. The Executioners of the divine Wrath in Hell cannot be more wicked and
hard-hearted than this sort of Men: They brand 'em with hot Irons, and are
continually beating and abusing 'em; they are not content to make 'em labor
without intermission, and to set 'em unreasonable Tasks, but always reproach
and chide 'em while they undergo this Toil, and besides all this, violate their
Wives and Daughters, or make Presents of many of 'em together to their Masters
on whom they depend, and who set 'em to work as so many principal Tyrants, who
also make it their business to invent cruel and unsufferable Torments. And to
hinder the Indians from complaining of their Miseries, they threaten to inform
against 'em, that they have seen 'em worship their Idols. This is the sad state
to which these People are reduced. They depend on no less than four several
Masters, on your Majesty, their Caciques, the Spaniard to whom they are
enslaved, and his Deputy, who is the greatest Plague to 'em that can be. Nay,
it is impossible to tell how many Masters they have, seeing all the Spaniards
domineer over 'em as so many Tyrants, robbing 'em by turns, and making no
scruple cruelly to abuse and murder 'em.

Seeing the preaching of the Orthodox Faith is the only thing that could
warrant the reduction of the Indians to a state of dependence on any foreign
Power, in order to their Conversion; and seeing none can pretend on this
account to be their lawful Sovereign but your Majesty; it follows that your
Majesty ought with all your might to oppose the Power which private Men assume
over 'em, and which cannot be looked upon as any better than Tyranny. Your
Majesty is obliged for the common good of all your Subjects to establish a
regular and stable form of Government among 'em, which may conduce to their
Conversion and Salvation: and seeing the sovereign and single Power you have
over 'em is sufficient for the end proposed, other Jurisdictions are not to be
tolerated, because they can only prove burdensome and incommodious, and contrary
to the common Maxims of Government received in the World, which will not allow
a People to be subject to several different Princes; much less should the
Indians be thus subjected, because of their Poverty, Meekness, Patience,
Humility, and the tenderness of their Constitution, partly occasioned by their
going naked, their unwholsom Food, and the Labor they undergo to get their
living. After all this 'twould be sufficiently tedious and uneasy to 'em if no
other Duties were exacted of 'em than those which your Majesty and their
Caciques, who are their immediate Princes, impose. How then can they be able to
endure those excessive Tasks, those heavy Blows, Vexations and Abuses of which
we have spoken above? If your Majesty has a mind to preserve the Indians from
utter Destruction, these new Burdens ought not to be imposed on 'em, nor should
they be condemned to this severe Slavery. This would be to violate the Laws of
Justice and Charity: For the Masters of Policy and Prudence usually say, that
tho a Prince require extraordinary assistance of his Subjects in some pressing
Exigencies of the Commonwealth; yet where these Subjects are under other
subordinate and immediate Lords, to whom they are obliged to pay the same
Duties, this cannot be done, because this would be to overcharge 'em with
endless Taxes: for it is contrary to all Justice to oppress 'em with a double
Burden, and all good Laws formally condemn it; for the Rules of Equity forbid
all Oppression and Injury. Therefore since the Indians are already bound to
serve their natural and immediate Princes, and to pay 'em all the homage and
duty of Subjects, it would be unjust to subject 'em to such new Masters as
pretend to a right of exacting new Services of 'em. The Taxes that are imposed
on any Estate should be proportionate to the Revenue that may be expected from
it; and there ought not to be more Homage and Service annexed to it than is
reasonable for the advantage of him that owns that Estate. If inanimate things
have this privilege, how much more ought it to be so with Men, who deserve to
be used a little better? Since therefore your Majesty's Government alone is
sufficient for the welfare and advantage of the Indians, to set other Lords
over 'em would be to act contrary to Justice. For who can deny it to be
contrary to all the Laws of Equity, to subject the Indians to the Spaniards,
who mind nothing but to raise Estates by making a Prey of 'em? An it is as
opposite to Charity to add new Burdens to them that can scarce bear such as are
already imposed upon 'em, and to increase the Calamities of such as are
sufficiently beset with Affliction, besides the pains they take for the
subsistence of their Wives and Children* Charity teaches to do to others as we
would have them do to us, to secure 'em from all the Evil we can, and to
relieve 'em in their Indigence when they address themselves to us, and show us
their Necessities, because we our selves are desirous of the Assistance of
others, when in distress. The Laws of Christ are founded on such Maxims as
these: Do to others what you would have others do to you; and, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self; in which one word, St. Paul says, the whole Law is
contained. He farther says, Bear ye one another's Burdens, and so fulfill the
Law of Christ.

It is to be considered, that all the Inhabitants of the New World are born
free: Nor do they lose this Liberty in recognizing your Majesty for their
Sovereign, and universal Emperor of the Indies. On the contrary, if there be
any defects in their Polity, your Majesty's Government may supply 'em, by which
their Liberty will be rendered the more complete. This was the design of that
most Christian Princess, Queen Isabella, as appears by all the Writings she
left about this Affair. A few days before her Death she commanded General d'
Alcantara, then Governor of Hispaniola, to treat all the Indians as a free
People. And in a general Assembly of Divines and Lawyers held at Burgos, his
Catholic Majesty declared in Council, that the Inhabitants of America were
free, and commanded they should be treated as such. The same was done by your
Majesty, after having consulted the most learned Divines and Canonists in the
year 1523.

Now if it be an incontestable Principle that all the Indians are free, and
that all of 'em that have been, or shall be discovered in time to come, cannot
be subjected to any other Jurisdiction but that of your Majesty, and that they
own to your Majesty alone that Homage and Obedience which free Cities and
Nations are obliged to pay their lawful Sovereign, it is most evident that no
private Men can pretend to the same. Nay, they are more free in respect of us
than other Nations, because the Kings of Spain have no Title to 'em as their
Subjects by right of Inheritance, or that of Purchase, or of Conquest, as they
might have had, if they had been conquered in a lawful War, that had bin
formally declared, for the revenge of some great Offense which the Indians
might have committed against the Spaniards, or against the universal Church, or
some very considerable Member of it, for which they had refused Satisfaction
when demanded: or if they had unjustly retained any Lands or Goods of which
they were unlawfully possessed. But on the contrary, they have frankly and
voluntarily submitted themselves to your Majesty. And yet they have bin
hitherto not only neglected, but treated by the Spaniards, as wild Beasts are
by Hunters, tho they never did any thing to deserve such ill usage. They have
yet seen nothing to convince 'em of your Majesty's Grandeur, Justice, Goodness,
and Magnificence, having found nothing but Tyranny, Violence, Injustice and
Cruelty from the Spaniards your Subjects, whose ill Actions and bad Examples
render 'em infamous; so that the Indians look upon 'em as the vilest of Men.
And this makes 'em think upon the Kings of Spain with horror, who yet never
gave 'em occasion to entertain such thoughts of 'em. But they fancy your
Majesty perfectly knows all the ill treatment they endure, and that it is by
your Consent and Approbation; they believe it is all done by your order, and
that you give your Protection and Favor to those that insult over 'em.

The Title your Majesty has to the Indians is founded only on the Obligation
you have taken upon your self to have 'em instructed into the true Faith, as
appears by the Apostolic Briefs granted on this account: which ought to engage
your Majesty to moderate your Government so much the more, and to treat 'em
with the greater tenderness and kindness. The Kings of Spain should signalize
the First Fruits of their Sovereignty over the Indies, by the tokens of Peace
and Love to these People, and by taking care to furnish 'em with good Examples:
In a word, they ought to treat 'em as their Neighbors and natural Subjects, for
fear the commission of any Injustice or Cruelty among 'em should prejudice 'em
against the Christian Faith, and indispose 'em to receive the Counsils and
Maxims of our Religion. There should not be the least occasion given 'em on any
account to blaspheme the Name of God, which would be an Obstacle to the great
end of their Conversion. Nothing should be left undone, that may make 'em love
your Majesty, and induce 'em to praise God on finding themselves under a
Government so easy and commodious. They deserve in some respect to be dealt
with after this manner, because of the freedom of their birth, which makes it
unjust for any to violate their Liberty. It Is necessary for the Honor of the
Christian Religion, that they embrace it voluntarily, because God himself will
have men make a free choice in matters of Religion; nor is any man whatsoever
to be treated with violence in this case, and forced to embrace a Religion
against his Will. And temporal Princes commit a great piece of injustice, if
they put a force on the minds of their Subjects in a business wherein they
ought to have an entire liberty of Conscience: they should rather observe the
Rules which God, the Universal Sovereign of all his Creatures, has constituted.
There is no Power or Authority on Earth that has a right to violate the Liberty
of any People, because it is the most valuable thing they possess, and
preferable to all other things in the World. Hence it is there are such
advantageous Constitutions in the Civil Law in favor of Liberty. And the
particular Customs of the Kingdom of Spain prescribe that nothing be determined
in prejudice of a Man's Liberty in doubtful things, nor the least force or
constraint put upon men that are free. And when their consent to any thing is
violently extorted, it ought not to be imputed to 'em, because it is an
infringement of the Law of Nature.

If it is unlawful to seize on the Goods of Men that are free without cause,
much more is it to offer violence to their Persons, and to inslave 'em, which
is the greatest Injury they can receive next to the loss of Life it self. If a
Father cannot choose himself another Heir without the consent of his Son, who
has a natural Title either to the whole, or at least a 4 th part of his
Father's Estate; much less may inferior Lords pretend to a right of
appropriating the Kings Subjects to themselves, unless his Majesty consent by
abandoning his own Right, which is founded on the voluntary Agreement of his
Subjects. If the current Money of the Kingdom cannot be altered without the
People's consent, because the alteration may be attended with great
Inconveniences; much less can the People themselves be taken from the Dominion
of the King against their Will, and subjected to the absolute Power of private
Masters; because this forced Change is a Violation of their Liberty. It must be
farther added, that such as are tributary to your Majesty, cannot pass under the
Jurisdiction of another Person, which would be more uneasy and disadvantageous
to 'em, and under which they would perhaps be condemned to a more servile and
laborious Course of life. How much more ought they who enjoy an entire liberty
under any Prince's Government, to be preserved in the possession of their
Privileges; and how injurious would it be to deliver 'em up as Vassals to
particular Lords, who would probably abuse their Authority, and treat their
Persons with violence, as well as greatly prejudice 'em in their Estates? It Is
most injurious both to the Lives and Liberties of Men, to depend on diverse
Lords and Masters, because their Service and Labors multiply according to the
number of those under whose jurisdiction they are: And it is to be presumed they
will not be all alike just and equitable.

It Is very much the Interest of Princes, not to suffer the number of their
Subjects to be diminished, because it will deprive 'em of much of the advantage
and service they may reasonably expect from 'em. And it is as much the Interest
of Subjects, not to suffer themselves to be transferred from the Dominion of the
Prince under which they have always lived, to that of an inferior Master. Those
that know the difference between the Government of Kings, and that of
particular Lords, which is usually hard and severe, will do any thing to be
secure from the latter; while they are well pleased with the former, and
readily dispose themselves to bear a Yoke that appears so much easier and
lighter than the other. And this is the reason why the generality of Men do all
they can to avoid falling under the dominion of private Men to the prejudice of
that Royal Jurisdiction to which they have been continually accustomed. And
this Sentiment is justified by the suffrage of all wise Men, and favored by all
just Laws.

It Is a general Rule, that a Prince can do nothing that may cause any
considerable damage to his Subjects, unless they freely give their own consent:
And this your Majesty every day observes, wherein you follow the steps of your
Ancestors, who to avoid doing any thing contrary to the rules of Justice and
Equity, frequently used to assemble their Council, and to take their advice who
were Persons of great Wisdom and Sense, and to make a due improvement of it. In
the present affair, it would be injurious to the Indians to give 'em up to the
Spaniards as their Vassals, because they use 'em so barbarously, and reduce 'em
to the utmost degree of Servitude. And such a matter as this is not to be
concluded, without proposing it to the Indians, and obtaining their consent.
For thus to change their condition without consulting 'em, were to put a
treacherous trick upon 'em against the Laws of Nature, Justice and Charity,
because this subjection would be to a severe and tyrannical Power; as is
evident by what the Indians have hitherto met with from the Spaniards. Beside,
such an alteration would be contrary to the Will and Law of God, because it
would hinder the progress of the Catholic Faith, and inspire the Indians with
hatred to the Gospel, and would tend to the general destruction of those People
whom your Majesty is bound to preserve and protect. This you owe 'em from a
motive of Charity and Zeal for the good of your Neighbor, as you are a
Christian Prince, and moreover by the Obligation of your Office, as the
Vicegerent of Jesus Christ.

From all the Reasons alleged, it may well be concluded, that if even the
Indians themselves would voluntarily consent to be enslaved, and utterly
renounce their Liberty; yet this consent of theirs would be void and null of it
self, because a thing every way so mischievous ought by no means to be
tolerated. Your Majesty would be obliged by the Law of God to hinder 'em from
ruining themselves in such a manner; because the Tyranny the Spaniards exercise
over 'em is so great, that many of the Indians have fallen into utter despair
under their unsufferable Impositions, and chosen rather to stab or poison
themselves than to pine away gradually under their miserable Bondage: Others
have fled into the Mountains, where they have become a Prey to Tigers and
Lions; others have died merely with Sorrow and Anguish, when they found they
were condemned to a Life so full of Misery and Toil, without any hope of respit
or mitigation. I knew a Spaniards who was so famous for his Cruelty, that above
two hundred People killed themselves, some one way and some another, to avoid
his Barbarities in Hispaniola: A like number underwent the same fate in the
Isle of Cuba, where this Tyrant exercised his Violence and Rapine.

But tho the common Interest of all Nations in the World ought to prevent their
Kings from alienating them from their own Dominion to make 'em the Vassals and
Subjects of private Men, and tho this is founded on natural Reason and Justice;
yet sometimes in pressing Exigencies Princes may alienate a part of their
Territories to extricate themselves out of some great and perplexing
difficulty, from which they cannot otherwise get free. For instance, if they
have no other course to take for the defense of the Commonwealth, it seems
lawful for 'em to exchange the Jurisdiction they have over their Subjects,
provided they some way indemnify 'em, or repair any damage this exchange may
occasion. But 'twould be impossible to indemnify the Indians if they should be
left to the Dominion of the Spaniards, who bring upon 'em inexpressible
Calamities and Mischiefs, that can never be repaired by any advantage they may
allow 'em; for they take a course to destroy both their Souls and Bodies.
Therefore seeing the Conversion of the Indians depends principally on your
Majesty's Title and Jurisdiction over 'em, you ought not to do any thing that
may blast the hope of this Design, and will infallibly hinder these People from
embracing Christianity. And it must be remembered they have freely and
willingly chose your Majesty for their Sovereign, which is a kind of Contract
they have made with your Majesty, that cannot be violated without their
Consent, unless it be to put 'em in a condition more easy, advantageous and
secure, than what they enjoy under your Majesty's Dominion. And your Majesty is
obliged to promise and swear to 'em, that you will always preserve their
Privileges, as they are ordinarily kept in the generality of Kingdoms, when a
free People submit themselves to the Government of a new King. This Practice is
almost as ancient as the World, for ever since Men began to spread themselves
upon the face of the Earth, it has always been the custom of Princes to promise
and swear to 'em to employ all their Power in preserving and defending 'em from
Oppression. Which evidently proves that your Majesty has not power to give up
the Indians to the absolute Dominion of the Spaniards, who have had the cruelty
to destroy such numerous Nations of 'em, without any legal Process, or leave to
make their Defense. For it would be to act contrary to the Law of God and
Nature to expose 'em to so many Miseries, which are as so many invincible
Obstructions to hinder 'em from turning Christians. Nor is there any Prince on
Earth, who can justly pretend to have such a Power: for Sovereign Princes have
no Authority to do any thing that may provoke the Justice of God, who has not
set 'em over their People for their ruin and destruction, or for the overthrow
of the Church; but on the contrary has set 'em in the World to defend the
Church, to bring their People to espouse the true Faith, and edify 'em in it.

Reason and the Law of Nature direct that those who have made an ill use of the
Privileges granted to 'em, should be deprived of 'em. Now the Jurisdiction
allowed the Spaniards over the Indians was only on condition they would
instruct 'em in Religion, and defend 'em from their Enemies; and they have not
only fallen short of this Engagement, but even barbarously abused those they
were obliged to protect. It Is remarkable in the Laws of Spain, that if a Master
treats any one of his Slaves inhumanly, he is obliged to sell him, because it is
but just that he who tyrannizes over his Subjects should lose his Jurisdiction
over 'em, which of right devolves on the Prince. He that abuses his Title is
not worthy to possess it: and a Man neither owes Homage nor Obedience to a
Tyrant. So that your Majesty ought in quality of Sovereign Lord of the People
of the New World, to defend 'em, and do 'em Justice, when they are wronged; and
consequently to rescue 'em from the power of the Spaniards, that they may enjoy
their Liberty.

It Is moreover a Custom established by the Laws of Spain, That if the King
grant any Privilege contrary to the Catholic Faith, it is null and void, as much
as if it were contrary to the civil Good and Welfare of the Kingdom, or to the
Rights of any particular Persons. And the same account is to be made of any
Privilege given contrary to the Law of Nature: as for example, if a King should
take away any private Man's Estate, to bestow it on another. Therefore your
Majesty cannot divest the natural Princes of the Indians of their Dominion over
'em, to invest the Spaniards with it, who not only are Foreigners to 'em, but
also treat 'em after a tyrannical manner. It Is therefore necessary for your
Majesty to revoke so unjust a Privilege, destructive to the People, and
directly opposite to the Catholic Faith, as well as to your Majesty's Service,
the advantage of your Kingdom in general, the good of many Members of the
Commonwealth in particular, and which is contrary to Reason, and the Law of
Nature.

It Is farther constituted by the Customs of Spain, in conformity to the
Imperial Laws of your Majesty, as well as those of the Church, that when a
Privilege in process of time proves injurious, and occasions more hurt than
good, it ought to be immediately abolished, without so much as consulting the
Prince that granted it; because from that very moment wherein this Privilege
began to be detrimental, it ought to be supposed the Prince designed to revoke
it: so that it can have no more force or authority, because not according to
the Prince's Intention, who always ought to have Equity and the Divine Will in
view. Now since the Privilege granted the Spaniards to subject the Indians as
Vassals is become so pernicious, and occasions an irreparable damage to the
Christian Religion, and to the Crown of Spain, and has bin the cause of the
ruin of such vast numbers of People, and of the desolation of some of the
finest Countries in the World; and seeing in all appearance it is the very
reason of those Calamities with which God is now afflicting Spain, it is
necessary to apply a speedy Remedy, and to go to the root of the Disease, in
revoking so pernicious and tyrannical a Grant.

Besides, the Dominion of the Spaniards over the Indians has never bin
judicially approved by the Kings of Spain. He that first shared these poor
People among 'em, as if they had been so many Sheep, had no order to make this
distribution, which absolutely desolated and unpeopled New Spain, but exceeded
the limits of his Power; so that no just Consequence can be drawn from what he
did. It was the great General d'Alcantara who began this irregular course in
America. In the year 1502, the most serene King Ferdinando and Queen Isabella
sent General De-Lares from Grenada to govern the new Conquests: At which time
there were but three hundred Christians in the Island of Hispaniola. This
Governor was expressly charged to treat the Indians as free Nations; to be very
kind, tender and charitable toward 'em, to do 'em exact Justice on all
occasions, and not to impose too severe a Yoke on 'em, or to inslave 'em; in a
word, to protect 'em from all Injuries, lest any Violence should prove a
Stumbling Block to divert 'em from entertaining the Christian Faith, and
inspire 'em with an aversion to the Professors of it. General De-Lares carried
with him three thousand Spaniards, who landed at St. Domingo, where they soon
found themselves reduced to great straits for want of Food. However, the strict
Orders he had received would not permit him to do any Violence to the Indians,
or to infringe their Liberty in the least; upon which he writes many things to
the Queen against the Indians, hoping to render 'em odious to her by his Lies
and Slanders, that he might have leave to abuse the poor Wretches at his
pleasure. Among other things he wrote, that it would be impossible to preach
the Christian Faith to 'em as long as they were suffered to enjoy an entire
Freedom, because they industriously avoided all manner of acquaintance with the
Christians; in so much that they refused to work for 'em, tho they offered 'em
Wages for their Labor, and chose rather to wander up and down as Vagabonds,
than to keep company with Christians to inform themselves of their Religion. As
if he thought the Indians were obliged to divine that there was a new Religion
to be preached to 'em, which they ought to embrace; or that they ought, as poor
as they are, to forsake their Houses, Wives and Children, and to leave their
Lands unmanur'd, to come to seek the Spaniards, and so expose themselves to die
with Hunger in a Journey it may be of two hundred Leagues or more; or as if
they were under any obligation to undergo the fatigue of bringing Provision to
the Spaniards such a tedious way as this.

His Majesty, who was sincerely zealous for the Salvation of these Idolaters,
and publishing the Name of Christ in the New World, answered the General after
this manner: We very ardently desire the Conversion of the Indians to our holy
Faith, and that they be taught the Mysteries of the Catholic Religion; and
think it necessary to the success of this Design, that the Indians and
Spaniards converse and live together. Therefore we by these Presents command
you to oblige the Indians to deal with the Spaniards of Hispaniola, and to have
Conversation with 'em, to assist 'em in building their Houses, and in getting
Gold and other Metals out of the Mines, and to pay 'em their Wages exactly,
according to their labor and desert. You shall likewise order every Cacique to
have a certain number of Indians always in a readiness to be employed in such
Work as shall be assigned 'em, provided that care be taken to preach to 'em,
and instruct 'em in the Word of God on all Holy Days, and that they be always
treated as Freemen, and not as Slaves; and besure let them meet with no ill
usage, nor have any occasion to complain: Yet let some distinction be still
made in favor of such as embrace the Faith. But let no Person be permitted to
wrong 'em, or give 'em the least disgust in any thing whatsoever. These are the
very words of the Letter which the King sent to the Governor of the Indies, by
which his Majesty sufficiently signified that his principal design in the
Indies was the Salvation of those Idolaters, and that for that end they should
converse with the Spaniards, which plainly proves he had no other regard to
this Commerce betwixt the Christians and these Infidels, but only as a
necessary means for their Conversion. And it must be farther observed, that
when the King gives order to oblige each Cacique to send the Spaniards a
certain number of Indians to work for 'em, on condition of being paid for their
Labor, he did not intend that all the Men in the Indies should be bound to
perform such Tasks, much less that the Women, Children, old Men, and Chiefs of
each Nation, whom the Indians look upon as their natural Princes, should be
thus treated. The King designed there should be due consideration had of their
Necessities, that they should have liberty to provide for their Wives and
Children, and go every night home to refresh themselves with their Families,
and sleep in their own Houses. And it may be farther remarked in the King's
Patent, that he did not in the least design the Indians should be made to work
every day and without intermission, seeing it provides they should be paid
daily after their Labor; his intention was that they should be engaged by fair
means to do what was required of 'em, and not forced to it whether they would
or no; in short, that they should be used in all respects as a free People.
Besides, the King commanded that all their Labors should be moderate, and
proportionate to their Strength, and that they should rest on Holy Days and
Sundays, that their Wages should be suitable to their Work, sufficient to
encourage 'em in taking pains, and to relieve their Families in all their
domestic Necessities.

If the King had a perfect account of the nature of the Land in the Indies, of
the Weakness, Poverty, Meekness and good humor of the Inhabitants, of the rigor
and severity of their Labors, and the great difficulty of getting Gold out of
the Mines; if he knew the desolate state in which they are often left, and the
little care taken to engage 'em to receive the Sacraments before they die, he
would without doubt employ some effectual means to put an end to these
Disorders. The first Admiral of the Indies, who made the discovery of this New
World, though the acted conformably to the King's Interest in rendering the
Indians of New Spain tributary, by obliging 'em to dig a certain quantity of
Gold out of the Mines, and condemning others that were remote from any Mines to
other kinds of Tribute. Some of the Spaniards he carried with him, shook off
the Obedience they owed the King, and set up for so many Tyrants, committing
Violence and Spoil beyond what can be easily imagined in the Province of
Xavagua, one of the finest and most populous Countries in the Indies. The King
being informed of these Ravages, wrote his mind to General De-Lares, and
ordered him to put a stop to the Cruelty and Violence of the Spaniards on the
Indians, and to govern 'em as a free People, which Orders were not well
executed: For the Spaniards shut up the Indians by force in the Mines, to
employ 'em in the toilsom work of digging for Gold, which requires a very
robust Constitution: And when they had got this Gold, they were forced to be
all day in the Water to wash it. At first the Indians were kept in the Mines
for a whole year, till the Spaniards found they were not able to endure such
hard and continual Labor, and therefore gave 'em some time of respite,
contenting themselves to keep 'em only for five Months in digging Gold, after
which they employed 'em forty days in melting it. This they pretended was a
time of rest for these poor Creatures, tho this latter sort of Work is more
toilsom than that of grubbing up of Roots, and clearing Ground that is overrun
with Wood: so that they don't know what a Holy Day or Sunday means throughout
the whole year. They are sometimes almost famished, having nothing given 'em
save a few dry Roots that yield but little Nutriment: Tho the most liberal of
the Spaniards distribute a Porker once a week among half a hundred Indians,
which is little more than every one a taste. Nay some of 'em have not been
willing to give the Indians that served 'em any thing at all to eat, but out of
mere Avarice sent 'em to feed like Beasts in the fields, or to gather fruit
upon the Mountains, after which they forced 'em to work two or three days
together without eating. One Man frankly confessed to me that he had got a
great Estate in a little time by this kind of frugality. What strength can
Bodies that are naturally of a tender Constitution be supposed to have when fed
after this manner, and oppressed besides with excessive Labor? It Is impossible
they should subsist long under this cruel Bondage; which makes 'em lead a
sorrowful, languishing and miserable Life, being destitute both of convenient
Food and Rest.

Tho the King ordered each Indian to be paid in proportion to his Work, that
they might have something to live on, and be capable of buying themselves
Necessaries; this Command has been ill observed, for they had nothing at all
for many years; so that they were put to the greatest Extremity, and suffered
Hunger to that degree that they desired nothing more than to die, that they
might find an end of their Miseries. These are the Calamities the poor Indians
have suffered in the Service of Christians, who have had no regard either to
their Souls or Bodies.

As for those Orders that have been given the Spaniards to treat the Indians as
a free People, not to over-charge 'em with Labor, not to do 'em any* Injustice,
and to let 'em mind their own Affairs, and order their business as they saw
good, they have bin no more heeded than the other. For they have been made mere
Slaves, and certainly have not so much liberty as Beasts. And the Spaniards, as
good Christians as they are, are not at all moved by all the Calamities these
poor Wretches undergo, but look upon them as the vilest of Slaves, and not fit
to have the liberty of doing any thing they have a mind to do. They are
constantly exposed to the Cruelty of these Tyrants, and not treated like human
Creatures, but wild Beasts, who are kept in Chains by their Owners, and
disposed of at their pleasure. If they sometimes let 'em go to their own
Country, they will not suffer 'em to carry their Wives and Children with 'em,
nor hardly any thing to eat; so that they are presently constrained to return,
while the Reflection they make on their deplorable Condition often makes 'em
desire death to relieve 'em. If the excessive Labors imposed on 'em make 'em
sick, as it often happens (because, as I have observed, the natural Temper of
their Bodies is none of the strongest) the Spaniards do not in the least pity
their Condition, but oppress 'em with intolerable Tasks, reproaching 'em as
lazy, and only feigning themselves ill to be excused from Labor. And when they
see their Sickness increase, so that they become unserviceable, they send 'em
to their own Country, which is sometimes forty or fifty Leagues distance,
giving 'em nothing but a few sapless Roots to eat by the way, so that they
often die miserably, not being able to accomplish such a Journey. Sometimes we
find some of 'em on the Road just ready to expire, others groaning hideously in
the Agonies of Death, and others quite dead. Those of 'em that are able to
speak, say nothing but Hunger, Hunger. Your Majesty by this account may see
that the Governor of the New World had little regard to the Orders that were
given him, to treat the Indians as a free People.

That Governor was expressly charged not to do any thing to the Indians that
might hinder 'em from receiving the Principles of the Christian Religion, or
prejudice their Lives or Health, because the King had no design to destroy 'em:
yet this Man saw infinite numbers of 'em perish that were employed in melting of
Gold. The Labors exacted of 'em were like a furious Pestilence, which cuts off
multitudes of People in a little time; and yet this sad Spectacle could not
engage him to revoke his cruel Orders, or so much as mitigate the severity of
'em. However he knew well enough that he was not able to excuse his Proceedings
either before God or the King, being expressly contrary to the Charge that had
been given him; and therefore used so much Subtilty and Artifice in the
management of this Affair, that none of his Cruelties on the Indians were known
in Spain for those seven years in which he tyrannized over the New World. They
that came after him, trod in his steps by destroying the Indians, tho his
Catholic Majesty recommended it to 'em to induce the Indians to receive the
Catholic Faith, by showing all kindness to 'em, and not to make War upon 'em on
the account of Religion, or to constrain 'em to embrace Christianity by force,
but rather to treat 'em as the King's Liege People, imposing a certain Tribute
on 'em, as on his other Subjects. All this was expressed in the Instructions
given to Pedrarias, when he was made Governor of the Indies; notwithstanding
which he entered America just as a hungry Wolf falls on a flock of Sheep, and
made horrible slaughters on all sides, using such unheard of Torments, and
making such waste and spoil, that nothing like it is to be found in any
History. He might have been looked upon as a heavy Plague, sent by God to
execute his Wrath in extirpating the Indians. This Man, and those that
accompanied him, cheated your Majesty of five or six Millions of Gold, and it is
impossible to compute the Spoil they made in the Indies. They depopulated a
Country of above four hundred Leagues, as rich, fertile and pleasant as any in
the World. All this Tyranny was used to make the Indians deliver up all their
Gold: But by the just Judgment of God they made no great advantage of their
Robberies; and it would have bin more for their interest to have kept the
Indians alive, and to have made a considerable Profit out of their hard Labors.
If a particular account should be given your Majesty of all the Disorders
committed by the Spaniards in the noble Province of Nicaraqua, your Majesty
would be astonished; and if they had not still continued their Tyranny over
these poor People, every day killing and destroying 'em, I should not have
exposed my self to the fatigue of so tedious and troublesome a Voyage, to give
your Majesty an account of it. When your Majesty is assured that the Spaniards
have depopulated so many vast and noble Kingdoms, and that they still continue
to destroy whatever escaped the fury of former Governors; when you are
convinced that they have carried Fire and Sword through seven Kingdoms that are
larger than Spain, your Majesty will easily be persuaded that what I have said
is no Exaggeration. I have seen these Kingdoms in a manner as full of People as
Hives are of Bees, where now there are none to be found, having been all
murdered by the Spaniards; so that there are only naked Walls and empty Houses
to be seen in many once populous Cities. The Orders given by the most Catholic
Queen Isabella to General De-Lares were very prudent and useful, but he did not
think fit to observe 'em; and the Relation he gave the King and Queen of
matters from time to time, were very far from Truth, tho supported by the
Testimony of diverse Indians. He acted quite contrary to the Instructions given
him, violating all the Rules of the Law of Nature and Reason; by which it is
evident he went beyond his Commission, and prevaricated in those Letters he
directed to the Council of Spain, by intermixing Falsehoods in his account, and
disguising what was true. And it is certain if your Majesty had been informed
how tyrannically this Governor treated the Indians, you would never have
entrusted your Authority in his hands; and by consequence your Majesty is
obliged to declare that you detest the Proceedings of this Governor as injust
and tyrannical, and to abrogate all he has done, and declare that the Indians
ought not to have been subjected to the Dominion of particular Men, and that
all the Injuries they have suffered are contrary to the Law of God and Nature,
as well as to the Imperial and Canon Laws; seeing they have been tormented in
their Persons, molested in their Liberty and Estates, and condemned to die.
Your Majesty is obliged, as you are a just Prince, and an Enemy to Violence, to
suppress these vexatious Practices, and to deliver the poor Indians from the
Tyranny of those that have oppressed and tormented 'em.

If your Majesty neglect to take this cruel Yoke from their Necks, they will
infallibly perish. And that lovely Country which is naturally fruitful and
populous will soon become a vast Desert; for the Spaniards that go thither,
don't go to people the Country, but to enrich themselves by pillaging it. Those
that have lately gone into Hispaniola, and other depopulated places, and carried
thither the Commodities of Europe, have not been able to dispose of 'em, there
not being People to buy 'em: So that these Disorders are directly opposite to
your Majesty's Interest; for what advantage can you receive from the ruin of
those People? And what will the World say of so just a Prince as your Majesty,
if when you are informed of the mischief don by your Subjects in those vast
Kingdoms, and among such multitudes of People, you should not apply suitable
Remedies to so dangerous a Disease? It cannot of Gold out of the Mines, and
condemning others that were remote from any Mines to other kinds of Tribute.
Some of the Spaniards he carried with him, shook off the Obedience they owed
the King, and set up for so many Tyrants, committing Violence and Spoil beyond
what can be easily imagined in the Province of Xavagua, one of the finest and
most populous Countries in the Indies. The King being informed of these
Ravages, wrote his mind to General De-Lares, and ordered him to put a stop to
the Cruelty and Violence of the Spaniards on the Indians, and to govern 'em as
a free People, which Orders were not well executed: For the Spaniards shut up
the Indians by force in the Mines, to employ 'em in the toilsom work of digging
for Gold, which requires a very robust Constitution: And when they had got this
Gold, they were forced to be all day in the Water to wash it. At first the
Indians were kept in the Mines for a whole year, till the Spaniards found they
were not able to endure such hard and continual Labor, and therefore gave 'em
some time of respite, contenting themselves to keep 'em only for five Months in
digging Gold, after which they employed 'em forty days in melting it. This they
pretended was a time of rest for these poor Creatures, tho this latter sort of
Work is more toilsom than that of grubbing up of Roots, and clearing Ground
that is overrun with Wood: so that they don't know what a Holy Day or Sunday
means throughout the whole year. They are sometimes almost famished, having
nothing given 'em save a few dry Roots that yield but little Nutriment: Tho the
most liberal of the Spaniards distribute a Porker once a week among half a
hundred Indians, which is little more than every one a taste. Nay some of 'em
have not been willing to give the Indians that served 'em any thing at all to
eat, but out of mere Avarice sent 'em to feed like Beasts in the fields, or to
gather fruit upon the Mountains, after which they forced 'em to work two or
three days together without eating. One Man frankly confessed to me that he had
got a great Estate in a little time by this kind of frugality. What strength
can Bodies that are naturally of a tender Constitution be supposed to have when
fed after this manner, and oppressed besides with excessive Labor? It Is
impossible they should subsist long under this cruel Bondage; which makes 'em
lead a sorrowful, languishing and miserable Life, being destitute both of
convenient Food and Rest.

Tho the King ordered each Indian to be paid in proportion to his Work, that
they might have something to live on, and be capable of buying themselves
Necessaries; this Command has been ill observed, for they had nothing at all
for many years; so that they were put to the greatest Extremity, and suffered
Hunger to that degree that they desired nothing more than to die, that they
might find an end of their Miseries. These are the Calamities the poor Indians
have suffered in the Service of Christians, who have had no regard either to
their Souls or Bodies.

As for those Orders that have been given the Spaniards to treat the Indians as
a free People, not to over-charge 'em with Labor, not to do 'em any* Injustice,
and to let 'em mind their own Affairs, and order their business as they saw
good, they have bin no more heeded than the other. For they have been made mere
Slaves, and certainly have not so much liberty as Beasts. And the Spaniards, as
good Christians as they are, are not at all moved by all the Calamities these
poor Wretches undergo, but look upon them as the vilest of Slaves, and not fit
to have the liberty of doing any thing they have a mind to do. They are
constantly exposed to the Cruelty of these Tyrants, and not treated like human
Creatures, but wild Beasts, who are kept in Chains by their Owners, and
disposed of at their pleasure. If they sometimes let 'em go to their own
Country, they will not suffer 'em to carry their Wives and Children with 'em,
nor hardly any thing to eat; so that they are presently constrained to return,
while the Reflection they make on their deplorable Condition often makes 'em
desire death to relieve 'em. If the excessive Labors imposed on 'em make 'em
sick, as it often happens (because, as I have observed, the natural Temper of
their Bodies is none of the strongest) the Spaniards do not in the least pity
their Condition, but oppress 'em with intolerable Tasks, reproaching 'em as
lazy, and only feigning themselves ill to be excused from Labor. And when they
see their Sickness increase, so that they become unserviceable, they send 'em
to their own Country, which is sometimes forty or fifty Leagues distance,
giving 'em nothing but a few sapless Roots to eat by the way, so that they
often die miserably, not being able to accomplish such a Journey. Sometimes we
find some of 'em on the Road just ready to expire, others groaning hideously in
the Agonies of Death, and others quite dead. Those of 'em that are able to
speak, say nothing but Hunger, Hunger. Your Majesty by this account may see
that the Governor of the New World had little regard to the Orders that were
given him, to treat the Indians as a free People.

That Governor was expressly charged not to do any thing to the Indians that
might hinder 'em from receiving the Principles of the Christian Religion, or
prejudice their Lives or Health, because the King had no design to destroy 'em:
yet this Man saw infinite numbers of 'em perish that were employed in melting of
Gold. The Labors exacted of 'em were like a furious Pestilence, which cuts off
multitudes of People in a little time; and yet this sad Spectacle could not
engage him to revoke his cruel Orders, or so much as mitigate the severity of
'em. However he knew well enough that he was not able to excuse his Proceedings
either before God or the King, being expressly contrary to the Charge that had
been given him; and therefore used so much Subtilty and Artifice in the
management of this Affair, that none of his Cruelties on the Indians were known
in Spain for those seven years in which he tyrannized over the New World. They
that came after him, trod in his steps by destroying the Indians, tho his
Catholic Majesty recommended it to 'em to induce the Indians to receive the
Catholic Faith, by showing all kindness to 'em, and not to make War upon 'em on
the account of Religion, or to constrain 'em to embrace Christianity by force,
but rather to treat 'em as the Kings's Liege People, imposing a certain Tribute
on 'em, as on his other Subjects. All this was expressed in the Instructions
given to Pedrarias, when he was made Governor of the Indies; notwithstanding
which he entered America just as a hungry Wolf falls on a flock of Sheep, and
made horrible slaughters on all sides, using such unheard of Torments, and
making such waste and spoil, that nothing like it is to be found in any
History. He might have been looked upon as a heavy Plague, sent by God to
execute his Wrath in extirpating the Indians. This Man, and those that
accompanied him, cheated your Majesty of five or six Millions of Gold, and it is
impossible to compute the Spoil they made in the Indies. They depopulated a
Country of above four hundred Leagues, as rich, fertile and pleasant as any in
the World. All this Tyranny was used to make the Indians deliver up all their
Gold: But by the just Judgment of God they made no great advantage of their
Robberies: and it would have bin more for their interest to have kept the
Indians alive, and to have made a considerable Profit out of their hard Labors.
If a particular account should be given your Majesty of all the Disorders
committed by the Spaniards in the noble Province of Nicaraqua, your Majesty
would be astonished; and if they had not still continued their Tyranny over
these poor People, every day killing and destroying 'em, I should not have
exposed my self to the fatigue of so tedious and troublesome a Voyage, to give
your Majesty an account of it. When your Majesty is assured that the Spaniards
have depopulated so many vast and noble Kingdoms, and that they still continue
to destroy whatever escaped the fury of former Governors; when you are
convinced that they have carried Fire and Sword through seven Kingdoms that are
larger than Spain, your Majesty will easily be persuaded that what I have said
is no Exaggeration. I have seen these Kingdoms in a manner as full of People as
Hives are of Bees, where now there are none to be found, having been all
murdered by the Spaniards; so that there are only naked Walls and empty Houses
to be seen in many once populous Cities. The Orders given by the most Catholic
Queen Isabella to General De-Lares were very prudent and useful, but he did not
think fit to observe 'em; and the Relation he gave the King and Queen of
matters from time to time, were very far from Truth, tho supported by the
Testimony of diverse Indians. He acted quite contrary to the Instructions given
him, violating all the Rules of the Law of Nature and Reason; by which it is
evident he went beyond his Commission, and prevaricated in those Letters he
directed to the Council of Spain, by intermixing Falsehoods in his account, and
disguising what was true. And it is certain if your Majesty had been informed
how tyrannically this Governor treated the Indians, you would never have
entrusted your Authority in his hands; and by consequence your Majesty is
obliged to declare that you detest the Proceedings of this Governor as injust
and tyrannical, and to abrogate all he has done, and declare that the Indians
ought not to have been subjected to the Dominion of particular Men, and that
all the Injuries they have suffered are contrary to the Law of God and Nature,
as well as to the Imperial and Canon Laws; seeing they have been tormented in
their Persons, molested in their Liberty and Estates, and condemned to die.
Your Majesty is obliged, as you are a just Prince, and an Enemy to Violence, to
suppress these vexatious Practices, and to deliver the poor Indians from the
Tyranny of those that have oppressed and tormented 'em.

If your Majesty neglect to take this cruel Yoke from their Necks, they will
infallibly perish. And that lovely Country which is naturally fruitful and
populous will soon become a vast Desert; for the Spaniards that go thither,
don't go to people the Country, but to enrich themselves by pillaging it. Those
that have lately gone into Hispaniola, and other depopulated places, and carried
thither the Commodities of Europe, have not been able to dispose of 'em, there
not being People to buy 'em: So that these Disorders are directly opposite to
your Majesty's Interest; for what advantage can you receive from the ruin of
those People? And what will the World say of so just a Prince as your Majesty,
if when you are informed of the mischief don by your Subjects in those vast
Kingdoms, and among such multitudes of People, you should not apply suitable
Remedies to so dangerous a Disease? it cannot be thought that your Majesty,
whose Mind abounds with so much Goodness, and so great a Zeal for Equity and
Justice, can tolerate such cruel Oppressions as these.

To what has been said, it may be added, to demonstrate that the power the
Spaniards have over the Indians is prejudicial to the Crown of Spain, that by
this means your Majesty loses an infinite number of Subjects, who are every day
cut off without any lawful occasion; whereas if suffered to live, they would
cheerfully submit to your Majesty's Government when they saw the difference
between your Majesty's Yoke, and that Slavery in which they are held by their
private Masters. If your Majesty had once received 'em into the number of your
Subjects, so that they might be secured from the inhuman Severities they now
daily endure, they would love and serve your Majesty with incredible Zeal,
being naturally inclined to be very submissive to their Princes.

Your Majesty may farther consider, that you lose immense Riches by the cruel
depopulation of the Indies, which otherwise you might justly acquire; for it is
impossible for the Spaniards to subsist long in the Indies, if the Natives be
exterminated. And those Treasures sufficient to enrich all Spain, would be no
small advantage to promote your Designs, and enable you to resist your Enemies.
If there come no Money from the Indies, but that Spring of Treasure be suffered
to dry up, Spain must necessarily sustain great Inconveniences for want of it.
Experience already shows that the Indies don't furnish us with so great a
quantity as in time past, and it is likely to diminish more and more for time to
come. Besides, the manner of extorting it from the Indians cannot possibly last
long, because it is too violent a course. The Isle of Hispaniola is an
unexceptionable Instance of what I say; for whereas above three Millions of
very fine Gold were drawn out of it at first, it cannot now afford the tenth
part of that Sum. The least Reflection your Majesty can make will easily
convince you how your Revenues every day diminish. Your Majesty has nothing
certain and stable in the Indies, if the Land be not cultivated, and the
Inhabitants preserved for those Labors that are so advantageous. You have now
but a small number of Indians in all New Spain, from whence your Majesty might
annually have drawn a Million of Ducats, if the Indians had been preserved, and
your Majesty's Interest at first regarded. There have been yet greater
Confusions and Disorders in Peru, and the Mischief daily increases; from which
Kingdom your Majesty might yearly receive two or three Millions of Gold if the
Indians were not treated with so much Injustice and Inhumanity, many of 'em
having been murdered, togther with their great King Atabalipa. All the Gold the
Christians have taken by force in Peru would of right have belonged to your
Majesty, because that Indian Prince would have voluntarily presented himself to
your Majesty with all his Treasures. The Church has likewise received great
damage by these Cruelties; for as your Majesty has been frustrated of those
immense Riches, so the Church has lost an infinite number of Souls who have
perished in their Ignorance, when they might have been taught the Mysteries of
our Faith: so that the Losses sustained both by Church and State are
irreparable.

The Kingdom of Spain, which your Majesty rules with so much Equity, is
surrounded with Enemies, and in danger of being wasted and ruined by the Turks
and Moors, those declared Enemies of the Catholic Faith: Because God, who is
the just Judge and Sovereign Lord of the Universe, is grievously offended with
the Violence and Massacres which the Spaniards have committed in the Indies,
where they have oppressed and slaughtered innumerable multitudes of People. These
Indians have rational Souls formed after the image and likeness of God, and
ransomed by the Blood of his Son, who keeps an account of 'em, and will not
think 'em of no value, how ignorant and barbarous soever they seem to be. He
was pleased to choose Spain to the Service of carrying the Light of the Gospel
into the New World, and to engage those Nations to entertain the Christian
Faith. And it seemed as if the Almighty had discovered all these Temporal
Riches to the Spaniards, as a recompense for those Spiritual Pleasures with
which they were to enrich the Indies. But tho he opened a way for 'em into
those vast Regions, so wealthy, fertile and pleasant, so full of Mines of Gold,
Silver and precious Stones; instead of being thankful for all these Favors,
they have committed the most heinous Crimes to provoke him. Now it is usual for
God to distribute his Punishments by a rule of proportion, adjusting them to
the nature of the Offense. If Men sin by Pride, he covers 'em with Confusion
and Shame; if they get any thing unjustly through Avarice, he often suffers 'em
to lose their own Goods; and they that have stolen, are in turn robbed
themselves. Those that oppress and murder others, he permits to fall into the
hands of such as treat 'em with the like Cruelty: They that take away their
Neighbors Wives and violate 'em, have sometimes the same Outrages committed on
their own. And such as usurp Kingdoms that don't belong to 'em, by God's
Judgment come to see their own Kingdoms invaded by their Enemies; and thus it
is with other Judgments which frequently answer the different kinds of Sin. The
Holy Scripture and other Histories are full of Instances to this purpose; and
Experience every day furnishes us with such marks of the Divine Displeasure as
these. The Moors once overrun Spain, and this was interpreted as a Judgment
from God to punish the Crime of King Roderick, who ravished the Daughter of
Count Don Julian, tho it is more probable it was to punish the Crimes of the
People of Spain, and the Injuries they offered their Neighbors, and that the
Crime of this King only filled up the measure of those Vices.

It Is convenient to inform your Majesty what is thought by Persons of the best
sense, who are governed by no Prejudice, but only compassionate the Sufferings
of the poor Indians. I have heard many such Persons say, I pray God these
extravagant Cruelties don't one day fall heavy upon Spain! It may be such words
as these that drop from many wise Men, are so many Advertisements and Menaces
from God, who has been highly incensed against this Nation by the Crimes of the
Spaniards. And we already see that Spain is reduced to great Necessities, and
Money is very scarce among us; tho more Treasures have bin brought hither than
Solomon possessed in all his Glory: Most of those that have brought these
Riches from the Indies have made a miserable end, and their Children are
reduced to extreme Poverty, which justifies the old Maxim, Vix gaudet tertius
Haeres, the third Heir seldom enjoys an ill-gotten Estate; and that Passage of
holy Scripture, He that oppresses the poor to increase his Riches -- shall
surely come to want, Prove. 22. 16. Because, as has bin said, the Divine
Judgments bear some proportion to the Crimes that Men commit. If your Majesty
have the curiosity to inform your self of the detail of all these matters, we
can show you a List of the principal Tyrants that have committed the greatest
Disorders in the Indies, by pillaging and massacring those poor People, and
have themselves all died in a dreadful and despairing manner. It seems their
Violence and Cruelty, the great quantity of Blood shed in the Massacres they
have committed, and their other vicious Actions, the effects of which are yet to
be seen, cry aloud to Heaven for Vengeance; while the Tears, and Sighs, and
Entreaties of so many poor Innocents have filled Heaven and Earth, and put all
the World into a Consternation, to the utter shame and reproach of all the
Spanish Nation, and of the Kings of Spain too. Since then it depends only on
your Majesty to lay the Ax to the Root of all these Disorders, and to do
Justice to these afflicted People, it will be an Argument of your Prudence and
Equity to employ your Power to deliver the Indians from the terrible
Oppressions and Calamities under which they yet groan.

Your Majesty may be pleased farther to observe, that if the Spaniards have an
Authority given 'em over the Indians, however it may be qualified, they will
infallibly abuse it; for being naturally proud, they will become still less
obedient to your Majesty's Commands: Nay the immense Sums which they will get in
the Indies will enable 'em to confederate with other Nations, to withdraw their
Allegiance entirely from your Majesty at long-run, and to support one another
in their Rebellion. We already see that the richest of 'em, that flatter
themselves with the Title of Conquerors, are so intolerably presumptuous, as to
set themselves above the Rules of common Justice. Your Majesty's Viceroy said
not long since in one of his Letters, that the Indians ought to acknowledge no
other God nor King than himself. Your Majesty therefore should take it for
granted that it is not consistent with the Security of your Government, that
there should be any great Lord in the Continent of the West Indies, invested
with an absolute Jurisdiction over the Indians; this Power ought to be
inseparable from your Royal Person: It Is not convenient for the future to give
any one the Title of Count, Marquess, or Duke over either the Indians or
Spaniards that are settled there; because 'twill prompt 'em to think too highly
of themselves, and to advance themselves above their Condition, which may have
very mischievous Consequences: In a word, this may probably open 'em a way to
make themselves Kings of the Indies, and thereby divest your Majesty of the
Right you have to those Countries.

Nor will it be more safe to trust this Power in the hands of those Gentlemen
that compose your Majesty's Council in the Indies, which may also be attended
with Inconveniences; for it is impossible for the Affairs of America to be well
administered if the Members of that Council be absolute Lords of the Indians: To
be sure then the King of Spain shall never know the truth of what passes there;
this would produce nothing but Fraud and Imposture, and be an infallible means
to complete the Ruin of the Indies. They that govern in the Indies,
industriously endeavor to prevent the Court of Spain from receiving any true
Information how matters stand there, that they may securely pillage the
Country, and live at their own Discretion. They have opposed those Friars whose
Zeal carried 'em to America to preach, and have hindered 'em from reaping the
fruit they might have expected from their Labors. The Judges and other Officers
were afraid the Conversion of the Indians would be prejudicial to their
Temporal Interest; and Avarice bore sway in their Minds instead of that Zeal
they ought to have had for the Salvation of those Infidels. God is witness that
this is true, and it is not difficult to prove it. They continued to persecute
the Monks, till one of 'em, pitying them iserable case of these Idolaters, came
on purpose to inform the King of Spain of the Violence of his Officers, and of
the Obstructions they raised against the publication of the Gospel there.
Cardinal Ximenes at that time managed the Affairs of Spain, who being well
informed of the Affairs in the Indies, immediately resolved to divest the
Council there of the Jurisdiction they pretended to have over the Indians, as
being very pernicious. But the Kings of Spain are at so vast a distance from
those Countries, that they have not been able speedily to redress all the
pressing Grievances that incessantly afflict those miserable People. Their Laws
and Orders given at so great a distance have no great Efficacy: and it is next
to impossible for 'em to have a true account what Persecutions the Indians
suffer: Or if a true Information should be had, they can only give some general
Orders, without descending to make special provision against all those
Mischiefs that cannot be well known unless they were upon the place where they
are acted. Besides, the Persons to whom these Orders are directed, commonly
conceal 'em, or defer the execution of 'em; so that when they go about to
fulfill 'em, it is too late, and the Remedies applied prove unseasonable and
useless. Nay, they are often so wicked as to act in direct contradiction to
what is commanded 'em; and flatter themselves with hopes of never being called
to account, because they are so remote from Spain.

If your Majesty would reserve to your self alone the Jurisdiction of the
Indies, without sharing it among the Spaniards, it would be the greatest
happiness imaginable to the Indians, and nothing could more rejoice 'em,
because then they would be convinced they should be no more exposed to the
Insults and Persecutions of their Enemies; and would have so great a respect
for your Majesty, obey you so universally, and love you so sincerely, that they
would be always ready to sacrifice their Lives for your Service. You could then
require nothing of 'em, but they would do it cheerfully, because they seem to
have a great propension to submit to your Royal Crown; whereas if the Spaniards
are their absolute Masters, as their Obedience will be forced, so it will be of
no long continuance, and they will do all they can to get free of so severe a Yoke.

Moreover, when the Indians are once persuaded they are under your Protection,
that they may live safely in their own Houses, and need fear no injury either
in their Persons or Goods; all that are retired to the Mountains will soon come
down to dwell in the Plains, as they were wont heretofore. For abundance of 'em
have retreated to avoid the Cruelties of the Spaniards; and choose rather to be
devoured by wild Beasts in the Mountains, than to fall into the hands of their
Persecutors, tho Christians. The poor Wretches suffer a world of Inconveniences
in those places whither they have retired, wanting almost all the Necessaries
of Life: And it is impossible to find 'em out to instruct 'em in the Christian
Faith: whereas if they lived together in Towns and Cities, they might easily be
taught Religion, and a regular sort of Government established among 'em,
whereby they would be brought to the Service of the True God, which would
become familiar to 'em: By this means the Ground would be cultivated, the Roads
frequented and rendered more safe, and the Country no longer be desert and
forlorn: The Spaniards would be supplied with Provisions, and convenient places
to lodge in on their Journeys, and have a thousand other Advantages of which
they are now deprived by the Indians deserting their Habitations.

Your Majesty may remember that after a mature examination of this Affair by
many learned Men and able Divines, they unanimously declared, that the Dominion
of the Indies could not be justly given to private Men, nor dismembered from
your Majesty's Crown. This Determination was signified to Ferdinando Cortez,
with orders to put it in execution. Your Majesty was pleased on the same
account again to call together an Assembly of Persons of great Learning and
Virtue, who after a long debate, declared that the Spaniards could not lawfully
be made Lords of the Indies. After which your Majesty gave most express Orders
to prohibit it, revoking all Grants to the contrary procured on those false
Accounts and Misrepresentations that had been given you. Your Majesty commanded
the Governor of Florida to put these Edicts in execution, as may be still seen
by his Instructions. Among the principal Articles of these Constitutions, one
is, That the Indians ought to be accounted free, and not obliged to any other
Services than the rest of your Majesty's Subjects who enjoy their Liberty under
your Government: That they ought to pay Tithes to God, unless excused for some
time, and likewise such Tribute to your Majesty as is imposed lawfully, and in
proportion to the Goods they possess, and the quality of their Land, according
to the reasonable Estimate of those that govern 'em.

If it be desired that the Indians should be taught the Catholic Faith, and
brought to embrace our Customs, while they keep up a sort of Government among
themselves, your Majesty ought not to give them as Slaves to any one
whatsoever, either for ever, or for a limited time; for this would be to expose
'em to the same Miseries they have hitherto endured, and perhaps to increase
them: for after this there will be no dependence to be had on the Orders and
Prohibitions made in favor of the Indians, whatever Penalties shall be annexed
to facilitate their Execution; for those that have bin already made are very
wise Edicts, and might be very useful if put in practice. And one chief Reason
against giving the Indians for Vassals to the Spaniards, is the small account
these latter make of the Lives of those poor Creatures; for it is not to be
imagined with what Contempt they look upon 'em, unless by those that have seen
it: Their excessive Covetousness induces 'em to make 'em labor beyond their
Strength, not caring what becomes of 'em so they get any thing by 'em. If any
Persons give your Majesty a contrary account of these matters, you ought to
look upon 'em as Enemies to the State, and disaffected to your Majesty's
Service.

If your Majesty be convinced by the Arguments produced, you will prevent the
Spaniards from committing a great many Violences and Murders, of which they are
every day guilty. You will secure Spain from this Contagion, in preventing your
People at home from partaking of the Sins of their Fellow Subjects, and sharing
the Plunder with them which they have so unjustly gotten. For all Men of sense
acknowledge that the Crimes of the Spaniards in America render all Spain
obnoxious to the Curse of God; that the course they take to become rich is
unjust; that the Gold and Silver they bring from the Indies is stolen, and that
they are obliged to restore it to the right Owners whom they have unjustly
plundered: which likewise evidences that those that partake of these usurped
Riches have no good Title to 'em; for they ought to have no Commerce with those
public Robbers, nor to sell 'em any Commodities for their stolen Gold; they
should not so much as receive Presents from 'em, or consent to be their Heirs:
And if so, it follows that all Spain is become guilty of the Crimes of those
Men; so that there are few but have reason to be under trouble of Conscience,
and are in danger of Damnation, because there are scarce any who have not
participated of the Rapine of those that have come from the New World.

It has bin objected by the Spaniards, that if they have not a Jurisdiction
over the Indians as their Vassals, it will be impossible for 'em to live in the
Indies, and consequently that your Majesty will not be able to keep those
Kingdoms that have bin conquered in your Name, nor to publish the Catholic
Faith there. For they say, if the Spaniards cannot subsist there, the King of
Spain cannot preserve his Dominion over the Indians, nor maintain Monks among
'em to preach to 'em, so that they must be destitute of the Light of the
Gospel; and those of 'em that have already received it, will gradually lose it
for want of fresh Instruction, and so return to their former Idolatry, and
other Sins.

They that reason after this manner, do it not so much from a Principle of true
Zeal and Compassion, lest so many Souls should perish, as from a desire of
oppressing these People, and that they may grow rich by the Spoil they get from
'em. It Is only their private Interest makes 'em talk at this rate; for they are
not at all concerned about your Majesty's Interest, or the Salvation of the
poor Indians. It Is not the Good of the Public, or the Glory of God that moves
'em; for their Conduct sufficiently shows what little respect they have to the
Law of God, which forbids 'em to do the least hurt to any one, how great an
advantage soever it might procure 'em. They ought to know, if they have the
true Sentiments of Christianity, that tho your Majesty should run the risk of
losing all your Conquests in the Indies, and be rendered incapable of causing
the Christian Faith to be preached among the Indians; it were better to forgo
all such great Advantages, than to obtain 'em by ruining the Inhabitants after
the manner hitherto practiced. It had bin no great Misfortune to your Majesty,
if your Empire had not extended so far as the Indies; and it is an ill way of
going to work, to endeavor to establish Christianity there by such criminal
Methods. The reason of which is evident, because we are forbidden to do evil
that good may come, Romans 3. 8. God is not pleased with the greatest Sacrifices
if polluted with any Sin, but abhors all such Offerings. It Is a most heinous
Sin, and worthy of eternal Damnation, to massacre Infidels on pretense of
introducing the Christian Faith among 'em, and of extirpating a part of 'em to
save the rest. God dos not require Men to receive his Word on such hard terms,
and absolutely forbids such a kind of Zeal for the Salvation of Souls as this.
He would not have us pretend to be more concerned about the Salvation of Souls
than himself. That which he requires of us is to keep within the compass of his
Laws, and not to exceed the Limits he has prescribed. For 'twould be an
Argument of much Stupidity, and a great sin for any one to throw a Child into a
Well to baptize it, and so to drown it on pretense of saving its Soul. And is
it not a greater Crime, and more odious and abominable in the sight of God, to
scandalize, destroy and massacre so many thousand People, under the pretext of
putting the rest in the way of Salvation? It Is our business to do all the Good
we can in conforming our selves to God's Commandments, and keeping within the
bounds he has set us, leaving the rest to himself. But this is a false Gloss
which the Spaniards use to cover their Avarice; for the Salvation of the
Indians is no part of their Care; all they mind is rather to ruin and inslave
'em, than to make Christians of 'em. Therefore in opposition to all their false
Pretenses, we assure your Majesty, that if you please to reserve to your self
alone the Dominion of the Indies without admitting the Spaniards to assume the
quality of Lords and Masters over the Indians, it will be an infallible means
to establish the Catholic Faith among them. The Spaniards will be able to live
commodiously among 'em in greater numbers than they have hitherto done; and all
other Inconveniences will be removed, which will mightly conduce to the Glory
of God, the Advantage of the Indians, the Aggrandizement of your Empire, and
the general Good of all Spain.

FINIS.
THE ART OF Traveling to Advantage.
IT IS commonly thought that the Advantages of Traveling are always
out-balanc'd by the Inconveniences that attend it; that tho a Man is at never
so much Charge in his Voyages, he must still undergo a great deal of Hardship;
and when all is done, the Profit he reaps is not to be compared with the
Fatigues he endures. But nothing can be more false than this Opinion; for in
truth, the advantage of Traveling infinitely surmounts the trouble of it: and
as the Experiment of a Chemist, whatever it costs him, is very well rewarded
when he makes some considerable discovery of Nature; so that Traveller that
knows how to improve his Mind as he ought by his Voyages, is always well
requited for the Inconveniences he has sustained.

The Prejudice that some entertain, that the want of that Experience which is
to be gained in Voyages and actual Discoveries, may be supplied by reading
Books that treat of such matters, or by the force of the Imagination, which
gives its own shape to all things it represents, and never makes 'em appear as
they are in themselves, is a mere Illusion: For whatever ever forestals and
prepossesses the Judgment is so little capable of forming the Mind, that it is
the very thing which corrupts it, and deprives it of its natural relish for
Truth, and that disposition to receive it, which serves as a foundation for
Reason to build upon. That which is found in Books is not always true; for
besides that Decency will not permit Men to write but within the compass of
certain Rules, Flattery, the humor of the Time and Nation wherein a Man lives,
the public Interest, or the management of private Affairs, always make some
difference between what a Man writes, and what may be thought by those among
whom he lives: Which forms an almost invincible Obstacle in the way of Truth,
and hinders her from showing her self in her proper shape.

But in Traveling we find all imaginable help and assistance to furnish our
Minds with Experience and Knowledge; for what is concealed in Books is by this
means openly discovered to us; and we judge of things with more safety, because
we see 'em with greater perspicuity when the Curtain is drawn aside. When we go
to the very Principles of things, and draw Water at the Fountain, the taste and
quality of it must needs be most agreeable. This is the way to know Men as they
really are, and not only as the Interest of some Persons makes 'em appear to
be; and to judge of their Actions, Manners, and Politics in themselves, and not
on the Credit of foreign Relations; so that the Mind receiving thence a pure
and vivid light, that sets it above the danger of Prejudice, is at the same
time confirmed and improved on solid grounds, and at length raised to the upper
Region of Policy where its great Phenomena appear.

We are taught in the Book of Ecclesiastes, that to become wise a Man must go
into strange Countries, Sapiens in terram alienigenarum Gentium pertransiet;
and it follows afterward, in absconditis suis conciliabitur, by that means he
shall be acquainted with the most profound Notions of Wisdom, that is, of
RELIGION; Occulta Proverbiorum exquiret, he will make a scrutiny into their
Maxims, Manners and Customs, that is, into MORALITY: bona enim and mala in
hominibus tentabit; he will have the advantage by conversing with the Living
(which is much better than to consult the Dead) to know the sources of that
Good and Evil which Men do either to themselves, or one another, that is, in
one word, POLICY. These are the three fundamental Principles by which a wise
Man ought to regulate his Conduct, and in these he ought to accomplish himself
by Traveling: For a Man is confirmed in his Religion by the knowledge he
acquires of the importance and certainty of it; he forms a solid Scheme of
Morality from the different Practices he observes in the World, and informs
himself in the true Rules of Policy by the use he finds other People make of
'em. From which it follows, that if a Man would be wise, he ought to travel;
and it is hardly to be expected that any one who neglects this method, will
prove eminent for Prudence and Politics.

This Art of Traveling to advantage requires four Conditions that are all
absolutely necessary in every one that would succeed in it. The first is, That
his Mind be already formed and fixed, and yet this in such a manner as not to
be strictly determined. The second is, That he be not prepossessed with
Prejudices. The third is, That his Capacity bear a proportion to the Science or
Business to which he is devoted, and in which he desires to be accomplished.
And the fourth is, That he want no assistance necessary to bring him into
acquaintance with the best Masters, and that he know their Sentiments at the
first hand.

I say, the first Condition is to have the Mind formed, but not determined;
that is, it should not be so crude as eagerly to receive all sorts of
Impressions, and yet sufficiently disposed to give a free admission to Truth,
which will perhaps be understood better by an Example. One that travels too
young is immediately dissatisfied in the exercis of the Religion he professes,
by the different manners of Worship he discovers abroad; therefore the
greenness of his Age makes him run a greater risk than is commonly thought in
the discussion of matters of Religion, tho it renders him very fit to endure
Fatigues, the difference of Climats, of Food, and of the various Seasons of the
Year. Nor is a Man any more fit to improve by Traveling when too much advanced
in Years, because his Mind is too much determined, and in no very good
disposition to learn what he thinks he knows well enough already. So that that
part of a Man's Age from twenty five to thirty five is the most proper time for
Traveling, because his Mind is neither wholly crude, nor entirely formed; that
which he has already learned only disposes him to judge the better, while he
seeks to be informed after another manner; and thus he makes so fair a decision
of what he learns, that all the Sophisms in the World will never shake him. By
this it is easy to see whence it is that so few are the better for Traveling,
and can only give an account of such Circumstances as Soldiers and Postilions
might easily relate; it is to be attributed either to their too great Youth or
too great Age.

The second Qualification of a Traveller is, That he be void of Prejudice in
every thing, about which he desires to receive Information; because Prejudice
produces such an Effect upon our Reason, as a Film does upon the Eye; it casts
such a Mist upon it, and renders it so incapable to make a fair Judgment of
what is proposed to it, that nothing can be more opposite to the discovery of
Truth than Prepossession, which if it bear sway in the Mind, will give little
hope of improvement by Traveling.

The third Quality requisite is, To have a Capacity of Mind proportionate to
the business to which a man applies himself, and in which he seeks to be
accomplished: For seeing the Rudiments of Painting and other Arts are not to be
learned by Traveling, and observing the finest Strokes of the best Masters;
but a Man must be cut out for a business before he presumes to seek Improvement
in it by going abroad: They that suppose to turn a Blockhead into a Man of
Parts by sending him into foreign Countries, will find themselves mistaken. He
that has but a small Natural Capacity will never have a large one, whatever
course be taken to improve it: It Is true, he may learn by Traveling to fill up
what Capacity he has, but he will never be able to go beyond it; for the Minds of
Men have their several degrees of height and strength, as well as their Bodies;
and as it is impossible by all the Art in the World to add one inch to a Man's
Stature when at his full growth, so it is utterly impracticable to enlarge the
Capacity of his Mind beyond the Bounds which Nature has prescribed.

The fourth Qualification is, To be furnished with all necessary Assistance to
facilitate his Access to the Masters of those Arts and Sciences he has a mind
to learn; in which respect every Country has a different Genius; so that it is
often seen, that what may contribute to a man's assistance in one place, will
by no means do him any good in another. For instance, In Germany a man shall
never get inward with Great Men by being profuse in his Expenses, but will by
this means be the more likely to fall under suspicion, and become much less
welcome than one of another Character. To gain Esteem there, a Man must bring
with him a good Reputation, a distiguish'd Birth, or an extraordinary Merit. In
Italy the quite contrary Humor obtains. And in the Levant neither one nor
the other takes place, but an Air of Simplicity, Sincerity and Honesty will
introduce a Man into any Company. An eloquent and voluble Tongue does well in
Poland, but very ill in Spain, and still worse at Constantinople: A great show
of Devotion will naturalize a Man in Portugal, but render him ridiculous in the
Northern Kingdoms. A pleasant and merry Humor will spoil a Man's business in
Austria and Italy, but give him easy access in England.

As for the knowledge of Tongues, besides that it is impossible to acquire all a
Man wants if he travel any thing far, and that it will not do him all the
Service that is commonly imagined, if he has only a mind to run through Europe,
it is a great occasion of the Corruption of Manners, by easily introducing Men
into places of Debauchery; and on the other hand it has been observed, that it
contributes very little to the forming of the Mind: for besides that it is not
the common People that a Man ought to be curious in consulting; and among Men
of figure the knowledge of their Language renders a Man obnoxious to suspicion,
it is sufficient that a Man can speak any one Language that is know: As the
Italian Tongue is very common in Greece and the Lesser Asia, besides the help
one may have from Interpreters, of whom there are great numbers for all the
living Tongues in Europe. And if you speak a dead Language with any Native of a
foreign Country, he has no advantage above you; and if you are better versed in
it than he, he will be sure to supply what he wants in Expression by the degree
of Knowledge, wherein he excels you in respect of the matter about which you
converse, and will give you a greater insight into it in half an hour's
Discourse, than you should have obtained it may be in twenty Visits, if you had
made use of his Native Language. It Is sufficient if you have Language enough to
make your self understood about your necessary Affairs; and there are always
People to be found, who will make use of your Native Language, to discourse
with you so as not to be understood by others, that they may learn something of
you that others don't know; and that they may give you occasion to learn
something of them which you don't yet understand. But Curiosity ought to be
kept within the bounds of Patience and Discretion, and that being supposed,
there is scarce any thing but a Man may be capable of it in Traveling; if one
can but add to the Conditions I have been mentioning a lively and yet
obsequious Fancy, and easy and faithful Memory, a sweet and insinuating Humor,
a Curiosity that is not impatient, and an impartial way of judging. These are
the Qualities that give a Man an easy and agreeable reception into all
Companies, and prepossess the People of any Nation with favorable thoughts of
a Traveller who is endowed with 'em. These cut his Work short, remove all
Obstacles in the way of his acquaintance with them, and bring them into such a
familiarity with him, as will be sure to engage their Confidence, if he be but
careful to observe himself, as well as study the Temper of others. These are
the Vehicles of Policy, which by discovering the Humor, Inclinations and Genius
of every Nation, insensibly bring us to the knowledge of their Maxims, their
Reasons of State, their Designs, their Conduct and various Sentiments. In a
word, it is by the help of these Qualifications, that a Man becomes a Proteus in
foreign Countries, and knows how to transform himself into the shape of others,
and so to conceal his own. And by consequence must needs reap advantage by all
the good he sees or hears, which is agreeable to his Character, and the
Capacity of his Mind.

I say, he should have a lively, but obsequious Imagination, which may pass for
a Paradox among such as judge hastily, just as they feel their Fancies touched;
and supposing a lively Imagination can never be obsequious without losing its
Vivacity at the same time, will tell me I require an impossibility: it is
therefore convenient to undeceive 'em by a sensible Comparison. When one that
seeks for Game sees something move in a Bush, his first motion is to put
himself in a posture to shoot; but if he discharges immediately without any
further Observation, he may well be counted rash, and his precipitancy will
spoil his Design: whereas if he has prudence and patience, he will observe what
it is that stirs, and endeavor to discover what Game may be in the Bush, which
way it came, and whither it goes, which gives him the greater advantage to
direct his Aim, so that his shot can hardly miss. There Is no Comparison can be
more just and applicable to the case in hand. A Traveller that has a mind to
make some Discoveries in the Mysteries of State Policy, is prying and observing
with an Activity like that of one who is seeking after Game; every thing that
appears more than ordinary ought to strike his Mind so as to excite his
Attention: but nothing ought to determine him but his Reason, and a due
application of the Principles of Policy; he should see and hear, and take a
measure of every thing, without imagining he has got any thing till he has
measured it with that profound Discussion I have been commending. Statesmen are
extremely crafty, and know how to dodg with a Stranger, especially when they
see in him a great Vivacity and Eagerness to receive what they tell him.

These Artifices are used in all Nations more or less according to the degree
of their Refinement and Subtilty: Therefore the intelligent Traveller must
imitate the cunning Hunter, who sometimes makes as if he did not see his Game,
merely to surprise it the more easily: He must make as if he did not hear some
things, and as if he understood much less, and discovered nothing at all; from
whence one of these two things must necessarily follow, either that he will be
supposed to be ignorant and stupid, which will render him less suspected, and
occasion a new Explication of the matter discoursed of in more open and
intelligible terms; or else that the Person he converses with, will immediately
give another turn to the Subject in hand by different Expressions, and the
variety of Terms cannot choose but give some light into what he would conceal
or disguise.

He may also learn somewhat from the common report of a Province or City, to
inform him what is the predominant Genius of a Nation, or of the Court that
governs it, only with this difference, that what he is told of the Spirit of
any Nation, is generally and almost infallibly true; whereas the Idea that is
given of a Court is almost always false; so that 'twould be a kind of Miracle
if ever it should happen to be true. There is in the Voice of the Public a
certain tract of Truth, Simplicity, Ingenuity and Sincerity, which keeps the
Multitude either from being easily deceived themselves, or from deceiving
others; and so much the more, because (as Origin says) God, the first Cause of
all things, has reserved only this way to make an impression of Truth on the
Minds of the Populace, who are not capable of any other discussion of things,
much less of refined Politics; which gave occasion to that wise saying, The
Voice of the People is the Voice of God. But the Court is another World, where
all things are compounded, and from whence Simplicity, Candor, Sincerity, and
oftentimes even Justice and Truth are exiled. And seeing the Men of this World
are different from others, it is not to be wondered at if one is deceived by
their Disguises, and if the warm Fancy of a young Man is every day imposed on
by them: For every thing they do is with design, and therefore it is no wonder
that there is double dealing in all Affairs, so that one knows not where to have
'em. Hence it is that those Authors that write Relations of the State of
Princes-Courts, are carried away with so many Illusions: For the more account
they make of that certain knowledge they pretend to have of 'em, and the more
the Ministry see they depend upon it, the more they vary in their discourse
with such an Author, to deprive him of the sight of what he aims at, by
embarassing his Mind with diversity of Mediums.

There Is no Rock more dangerous to an intelligent Traveller, than the popular
Reports which a Prince's Council either purposely spreads abroad, or suffers to
be divulged: There Is no stress to be laid on such Stories, and a Man ought to
be careful not to suffer himself to be surpised by 'em. A wise Roman on such
an occasion one day said to me, Se questo fosse vero, non to saprebbe il
popolo. The Credit the People give this Report may be enough to convince you
that there is no such matter at the Palace, but that the business is either
already finished, or else it is a stroke that is not resolved, and it may be not
thought on, for if it was either the one or the other, you may be sure the
People would have known nothing of it.

However it is true, that common Reports as they precaution the Fancy instead of
instructing it, do not fail to furnish a Traveller with such Notices, as must
needs turn to his account. These Reports Salust very wisely calls, Experimenta
Nationum, The Trials of the People; for there is at least so much probability
in 'em, that they have some Principle that gives rise to 'em, and that they
have given some color to an End which a Court is willing to hide by some
specious means.

I confess the Italians excel all Christian Nations in this method of
Traveling; but the People of the East infinitely outdo the Italians
themselves: and it is from the long Conversation I have had with both, that I
have received what Light I have in this matter, especially the way of abating
the heat of Fancy, and preventing it from being transported beyond due bounds
by its Vivacity, in which the Eastern People are inimitable; and it is a Quality
one cannot behold in 'em without Astonishment.

But seeing a Fancy that is tractable and obedient determines nothing, and what
it discovers may as well deceive it as inform it; it ought to commit the
discussion of all to the Judgment that so it may come to a result: For this
purpose the Judgment ought to be sublime and clear, tho these two Qualities are
not so compatible as at the first glance they seem to be: for the elevation of
the Mind exposes it to Mists and Clouds, tho clearness of thought is common to
an extensive Soul. The former is like the tops of Mountains which reach to the
Clouds, and almost always seem covered with a Mist to them that stand in the
Plain. That is, to explain the Similitude; That Genius which is naturally
sublime, being less capable than others of stooping down to the many frivolous
Circumstances which concur to the discovery of the politic Spirit of a Court,
often happens to pass such a Judgment as is not free from all Objections, or
else his way of expression is less clear and intelligible than that of others.
On the contrary, they that affect clearness of Judgment creep on the ground as
it were, still following the natural extent of their Minds which serves for a
Line to direct their steps; and as without this they could never go directly to
the end they have in view, so by the help of it they do every thing with a
becoming Justness and Deliberation.

Happy are they whose Genius is both sublime and extensive, for the elevation
of their Minds shows 'em what Souls of an inferior Rank could never have
discovered; and their extension serves to help to render every thing present to
'em without confusion, because the elevation of their Minds gives 'em a
prospect of every thing; so that they see both distinctly, and as it were at
one view, whatever is necessary to direct 'em to make a right Judgment.

To inculcate this matter the better, it may not be amiss to make use of a
Comparison. Suppose three Men walking in the field together discover an Object
at a distance: one of 'em having observed it, says it is a Cart going on the top
of a Hill; another supposes it to be a Bush waved up and down by the Wind; and
the third is confident it is a Man on horseback riding against the Wind. Now it
being naturally impossible for the same Object to be at once a Cart, a Bush,
and a Man on horseback, it is most certain that at least two of the three are
mistaken in their Judgments; and if one of them judges right, it must be he
that considers with the greatest force of thought all possible Motions of that
Object about which he has thought fit to make a Judgment. This discovery is not
to be ascribed precisely to the sense of seeing, since this is supposed to be
alike in all three; therefore the truth of this Judgment must be attributed to
the quality of his Mind who has the best notices of the matter.

The application of this Comparison is easy: Travelers often think they have
discovered every thing that passes in a Court, those Enterprises that are yet
only to be seen at a distance, and those Designs that are still more remote;
yet it is not possible that all that make these Observations should have the
same elevation of Mind, and none but such as have a very sublime and clear
Judgment are capable of speaking accuratly of what they have observed. Hence it
is that we see so many different accounts of foreign Countries, and yet all of
'em published for truth by their respective Authors; and indeed they may be so,
but this in proportion to the Character of the Minds of those who composed 'em
in their Travels, according to the Judgment they made of things.

If I had not read in the account of the Voyage to Athens the History of one
Hieros Damaskinos of Caloyero, with whom I had just such another interview as
the Author of that Relation says happened to him, I would here give an account
of it at large; but shall now only add something which that Traveller seems not
to have met withal. There were three Gentlemen of different Countries and my
self one day discoursing with this illustrious Caloyer about the Policy of the
Turks, which each of us pretended to look upon as barbarous and uncultivated,
on purpose to give him an occasion to speak of it after such a manner as might
give us light into it. He told us he had no skill in Policy either in general,
or in the use of it among the Turks; and that he made it his business only to
understand and explain the holy Scripture to his Disciples of Athens: but he
said if we would address our selves to the Turks, as to the Vaivode of Athens,
or any other Person of Note, they would be sure to give us satisfaction in
those matters.

I remember I was the only Person in the company that could not be persuaded
that this Caloyer was unacquainted with Politics. A very ingenious Polander
thought he was too much devoted to the study of the Scripture to have any great
matter of skill in other things. A German that was of our company took him for
a Person only versed in the Notions of the Schoolmen, and capable of
criticizing on the holy Scripture: an Italian that was with us maintained that
as he was one of that remnant of Greeks who seem to be the Posterity of the
Peasants of former times; he had not subtilty of mind enough to penetrate into
such Politics as were as burdensome to 'em as they appeared violent and
unreasonable.

We pushed our Curiosity yet further, and by good luck a Sangiac who was upon
his return from Candie to the Port, and passed through Athens, was so kind as
to inform us of many things we had a mind to know; and among other things told
us there was no Man in the World knew more of those matters than this Grecian.
It may easily be imagined I hugged my self for judging differently of this Man
from the rest of the company. And at last, after many earnest Solicitations,
we engaged this learned Caloyer to take off the Mask, and show us that he was
under such a serious disguise of Simplicity as would have deceived a thousand
People.

To return from this Digression; I say, to judge well of all that presents and
strikes the Imagination of a man in traveling into foreign Parts, whether it
concern Religion, Morals or Politics, there is need of both elevation and
clearness in the Judgment; that is to say, such a measure of both, as may
dispose things in so much order that they don't perplex and confound the Minds
of other Men, nor produce any thing in 'em but Light. And this Qualification is
not to be acquired if a Man is not born with a suitable disposition. It cannot be
well explained but by Practice; however, to give some Idea of it, it seems to
me to consist in three things: First, In laying the stress of one's Judgment on
that which makes the least appearance in an Intrigue or Negotiation; for Policy
being the Academy of Disguise, and an exercise of Craft and Subtilty, generally
that which appears least in a politic Observation may pass for the most real
and true part of it. Secondly, In never counting any thing sufficiently
explained to determine one's mind about it, that so the unexpected sounding of
some Circumstance or other, that does not seem to be thought of, may give one a
discovery of somewhat of which the Ministry of a Court perhaps is not aware.
And so much the more in as much as speculative Policy being supposed
impenetrable, and not beginning to appear till it is going to be put in
execution, it is in the Circumstances of the Execution that you are to seek the
certain discovery of the Design. Thirdly, In the opposition of one thing to
another; for although the means employed in any particular politic Design may be
absolutely altered from one day to another, because there is no Medium always
essential to and inseparable from Policy, yet it is certain, considering how Men
are made, that it is probable the Council of a Prince don't alter their common
Notions, nor take up Resolutions as contradictory one to another as Black to
White: and therefore the Opposition an intelligent Traveller discovers in the
Affairs on which he is making observation, ought to suspend his Judgment, and
to oblige him to forbear determining his Opinion, till time give him further
light. The first of these Rules forms the Judgment, and renders it solid; the
second cultivates and refines it; and the third advances it to Perfection. The
first is owing more to Nature than Experience; the second depends as much on
Experience as on a Genius: and the third raises the Mind to a consummate
Prudence, which is the highest pitch of politic Wisdom.

That Traveller who has not an elevation of Mind capable of such Inventions as
may out-wit another, may make use of the second Character of a prudent Mind,
namely, to enquire much into things, and determine but little about 'em; but if
a Man wants both the one and the other of these Qualities, we'll venture to
prophesy that he will never become a Politician.

The Memory in the judgment of many passes for one of the most excellent
Faculties of the Soul: But few consider, that seeing it brings out nothing but
what has been committed to it before, when there is Confusion in the Mind,
there must also necessarily be the like disorder in the Memory. It Is a great
advantage to a Traveller to have a Memory easily impressible, provided it be
faithful; for if a Man because he has seen much, goes about to utter a great
deal without giving an intelligible account of matters, by reason of that
Confusion which the amazing diversity of Things, Names and Circumstances
ordinarily occasions, his Memory appears to be a mere Labyrinth of Perplexity.

I have always looked upon an easy Memory to be like a handsome Face, which
hides a great many Infirmities in a crazy Body, and strikes the Fancy more than
all these Imperfections, tho they really much out-balance it. For besides that
such a Memory serves for a Rock for the Imagination to split on, and this
becomes as dangerous to the Reason and Judgment, supposing it not to be
incompatible with the regular exercise of either of these; yet it is most
certain a great multiplicity of Facts require either abundance of time to range
'em in good order, or a prodigious heat of Fancy to melt 'em down (as it were)
altogether, without making any alteration in 'em. So that it seems an
impossible supposition, that an easy Memory can be strong and true, so as not
to divert from that steady Application which the Judgment requires.

And yet both are necessary for a Traveller, so that one of these Qualities
without the other would be of no use to get the knowledge of the
State-Resolutions of any foreign Politicians: For if what he learns to day is
not supported with all those Circumstances that may render it more than
probable to his discussion, and is not produced afresh in all its Circumstances
when any Affair that bears a proportion to it presents, it is easy to conceive
that all the Circumstances that helped him at first to decide the matter in
hand being represented to him but by halves, and in the room of those that are
omitted others substituted which alter the state of the case; it is not
difficult, I say, to conceive that such an easy Memory must cast him into
confusion, because it does not faithfully revive all those Circumstances. This
Conclusion may be set in a clearerlight by an Example.

The Vizier Kara Mustapha who besieged Vienna remembered the Advice, and a
great many of the Projects Count Tekely had given him in his Tent at their
enterview beyond Buda before this great Enterprise: And his Memory reproduc'd
that in his extremity, which his Pride had made him despise. The Count
persuaded him to possess himself of the Bridges of Vienna on the North-side
before he made a formal Siege, presuming that by this means he would either
block up the late Duke of Lorrain with his Troops in Leopalstat, or oblige him
to quit it with the more speed, and a greater number of his Men, which would
make the Circumvallation more easy, and the Garrison probably less numerous, or
else the Duke would expose himself to be first routed in the field* and never
was any Advice more wisely given, or more rashly contemned.

When this Vizier was mortified by the Resistance of the Besieged, and resolved
to attempt any thing to repair the damage he had sustained, and the time he had
lost in this Siege, he was willing to have recourse to Count Tekely's Counsel,
and would needs endeavor to be master of those Bridges, without considering
the difference of Time and other Circumstances; he gave his Orders for the
execution of this Design, but instead of depriving Vienna of good part of its
Garrison, or of weakening those Succors which the Prince of Lorrain managed so
long, and to so good purpose against him, as he might certainly have done in
the former Juncture, he diminished his own Force, and sent his Troops to be cut
in pieces without being able to execute the Orders they had received.

By this one may judge that an easy Memory is always dangerous when it is
unfaithful; tho I confess it is less so in the speculation of a Traveller than
in the conduct of a Statesman, who ought from the very first step he takes to
distrust it more than depend on it. Memory is a great help at the Bar, and in
the Pulpit, but it is the least Qualification of a Statesman. It Is by reading
(which is a kind of Traveling) and by Traveling (which is a living sort of
reading) that a Man is to be convinced of this Truth, that an easy Memory being
usually treacherous when it is over-charg'd with many things that have no mutual
connection, nothing is to be omitted that may render it less easy and more
faithful.

I think I have observed by Experience three Rules that contribute much to
reduce the Memory to this state, which is certainly no easy matter to
accomplish. The first is, for a Man to learn well the chief foreign things
about which he has a mind to employ his Memory, without troubling himself to
retain the proper Names of Places, Persons and Times, of which Gazetteers
seldom fail to give a very particular account for the information of the
Curious, because it is their province to know things of this kind. The second
is, To join that which one desires to know, to what one knows already by some
Epoch of Facts, Times, or Conjunctures, which resemble and refer one to
another; as, for instance, to join to the raising the Siege of Vienna the
politic Proposition made by the King of Poland for his eldest Son to be
married to the Archdutchess as his Reward for relieving that City. The third
is, to unite and accommodate both the one and the other to the Circumstances
and actual Conduct of the Country where a Man is at present, or whither he is
to return; because what passes there cannot easily escape the Mind, being often
revived by the Memory, and therefore that which has been linked to it will also
be retained, and the Memory rendered faithful to such a degree, that all things
will be easily recollected.

I say a Man ought in the first place thoroughly to possess his Mind with the
first discoveries he makes in his Travels; that is to say, after he has made a
deep search into the Precepts of Policy (without which nothing is to be
expected of him) to look on every side upon that which first strikes his Mind
in a manner different from the Prejudices he has brought out of his own
Country, that so he may object against his own Prepossession all those Reasons
that he imputes to the Prejudices of others, which is fit to be demonstrated by
an Example.

A French Man that goes to Rome furnished with many Advantages and
Recommendations that give him access to Persons of Quality, is presently loaded
with Civilities, without being taken into that kind of Familiarity with them,
which is so agreeable to his Humor: This makes him impatient, and it seems no
small Punishment to him to continue six weeks at Rome, to live all the while in
an Inn: But at length the Reasons of this kind of Treatment are opened to him,
and he comes to understand that the Italian loving Splendour tho he is not rich,
and affecting to be liberal without incommoding himself, waits to regale him
after a magnificent manner and in good company, when he finds a proper time for
it, and then his Splendour, Profusion and Magnificence will appear at once. He
must therefore examine all the Reasons of this kind of Conduct; and by opposing
this liberty the Italians reserve to themselves, to the ordinary profuseness of
that Nation, he will be convinced that they do well at Rome not to live in that
familiarity he so much desired. These Discoveries will be serviceable to him at
Constantinople, and he will appear a knowing Man in other places in proportion to
the faithfulness of his Memory in reviving the Reasons, and different respects
that have determined him at Rome. This is what I call a through possessing of
the Mind with that which one desires to commit to Memory.

The second method is, to join things together by some Epoch that is
remarkable, and not easy to be changed. This Connection is like a Guide always
going before the Judgment with a light in his hand, so that he seldom mistakes
his way who is conducted by it. The Epoch contributes much to the fidelity of
the Memory, and the things being allied together by a proper reference and
proportion, it is almost impossible that the revival of 'em in the Memory should
not be exact and true.

The reason of which is not from the nature of those Incidents which
accidentally happen to be linked together, but from the immediate application
of the Mind, which because it omits nothing that may give it a deep impression
of a thing, cannot see two different Circumstances which concur to the same
Fact, without making a certain fixed Point, as well for the Time, as other
Conjunctures: It Is this that has occasioned so many Digressions in ancient
Historians, who have not been able to resist that natural Inclination of
showing in the same Treatise, what they had observed at the same time, and by
the same discoveries.

In fine, the third method of rendering the Memory faithful is, to reunite the
Notices one receives, and the Conjunctures that present, to what actually
passes in one's own Country; because the revival of what is acted there must
needs be frequent and of long duration, and a Man's mind will necessarily be
concerned about it; and seeing this obliges a Man to join to his present
Observations, that which passed in his own Country when he was there, he is as
it were tied fast to the Circumstances of things so that he cannot easily
mistake 'em, but is necessarily obliged to revive 'em in his mind. It Is true,
there must be strength of Thought, Labor and Time to reunite these things after
long Voyages, especially if our Traveller has not had much correspondence with
his own Country: But Experience every day shows that it is no impossible thing.

This is, in my opinion, the innocent Art of rendering an easy Memory faithful;
let us now pass to the other Qualifications of a Traveller.

It has been said that he ought to have a sweet and insinuating Humor, not by a
studied composing of himself, which will soon betray him when he tarries long
in a place, but by a docility of Mind, which makes a Man as it were naturally
comply with things that one would think must needs shock him, to judge of him by
the gust of his Country. It Is this sweetness of temper which becomes Affability
in those who are in public Posts, but in Travelers it should always be
Condescension, without degenerating into a servile weakness of Mind: And they
ought to have the art of using this Condescension after an advantageous manner,
so as to engage those with whom they converse, either to confide in 'em, or to
inform 'em. Suppose, for instance, that one happens to be with an Englishman
who boasts of his own Nation, in respect of its Strength, Courage, Trade,
Plenty and Independence; and scarce ever speaks of a Frenchman, an Italian, or
a German, without contempt; a Traveller who has docility, and yet firmness of
Mind, will in sincere terms give his Suffrage to applaud what is good in the
English Nation, and in their Polities, without undertaking to make comparisons
between Nation and Nation, or so much as between Man and Man, which ought to be
industriously avoided; because there are always in foreign Countries some
Persons that go under a disguise, whose Genius, Country, Interest and Designs,
can scarce ever be discovered, but yet by this means may be won upon. In
observing this Conduct, our Traveller would not fail to attract the Confidence
of such an Englishman, and so might get out of him why the English Nation is
so fickle and unsteady in the midst of all its Prosperity, why they are so
eager after Gain amidst so great Riches, and why they are so unfit for long
Enterprises and tedious Conquests, tho they have such good Armies and Fleets.
In a word, he would learn more of this Englishman in three days, than he could
perhaps in reading all the Historians that have written of that Country.

But to give the Demonstration of this, when ever any thing flatters and
pleases a Man to such a degree as to make him despise what does not seem to
bear a proportion to it, either he is a Fool, or under a disguise, or an
intelligent Man set upon his own Interest, and over-zealous for it. If the
first, a wise Traveller will easily discover him, and contemn him, without
troubling himself to talk with him. If the second, he will make trial of him by
the Rules I have been laying down; so that this Man under a Mask shall not be
able to proceed far without being either reduced to silence, or else betraying
himself. If the last, he cannot be a man of Knowledge but by the universal
Principles of Policy, in which he has no advantage above our Traveller, or else
by such particular Decisions he has made as are proper to his Country; and in
this point he excites all the Curiosity of our Traveller, who for his own
satisfaction must apply himself to receive Instruction with all that nice
Complaisance which we have been already supposing; he must hearken, applaud,
and enquire: for Attention and Applause always procure the Esteem and
Confidence of him that speaks; and a sweet, ingenuous and modest way of
inquiring always returns with some discoveries; Experience shows that it never
fails to get some degrees of knowledge out of those upon whom it is duly tried.
The Information I have received even from a Servant as it were by accident, of
a Visit made by a certain Person to his Master, has furnished me with the first
occasion of diving into an Affair, of which I had not the least thought, and
the discovery very of which gave me that satisfaction which is agreeable to one
that travels for his Information.

But to re^^^^ this Effect the more certain; to this quality one ought to add a
Curiosity that is not impatient. Curiosity is needful in traveling, but then
it ought not to be too brisk and lively, that one may the better dissemble the
Motives of it, and cover 'em with the usual pretexts of such a vain Curiosity
as only applies it self to the description of Churches, Palaces, Gardens,
Fortifications, and the detail of such Counsels and Circumstances as the
meanest Servants of a Court always understand, as well as those that compose
Historical Relations. There must be Curiosity to mitigate the uneasiness and
difficulty a man must be sure to meet with in accommodating one's way of
Living, Habit and Manners, to the Custom of Countries so unlike one's own: for
seeing Self-love has more pressing Reasons when it deprives it self of what is
pleasing to it, to expose it self to that to which it has an aversion; it is
necessary that it be requited for quitting what it so naturally likes, by some
other satisfaction which the Fancy has the art to represent as greater, more
rare, and more durable; without which there is no probable ground to expect a
Man should travel with delight, and 'twould be an unadvised thing to attempt
it. For to suppose that all those advantages a Man may make use of in
Traveling will excuse him from all kind of uneasiness, is to please one's self
with a mere Delusion, especially when a Man goes out of the Christian part of
Europe. Curiosity therefore must serve instead of all other Pleasure to make
amends for the Expense and Uneasiness to which our Traveller is exposed.

This Curiosity deprives it self of what it designs to obtain, when it once
appears to be impatient, and it really is impatient when ever it appears to be
so. Men of all Countries in the World are framed after such a manner, that no
Man is willing to oblige another to his own disadvantage; and the most grateful
and officious Person that can be will never give an occasion of getting an
advantage over him by what he discovers. All that observe a Traveller have in
this respect the same impression; every body suspects that Man to have some
special design, who leaves his Family and his Country to expose himself to
Sickness and other Dangers and Inconveniences, which are inevitable. They that
suppose he has only a sensual Curiosity are always indulgent enough to satisfy
him in that respect, because self-love obliges a Man to discover whatever is
curious in his own Country to a Stranger: but it being another sort of
Traveller that I have been supposing, namely, one who seeks to get an insight
into State Policy; the chief Advice I would give him, is not to divest himself
of Curiosity (for that would be unreasonable) but not to be impatient in
seeking to give it satisfaction.

Impatience is the daughter of Desire, and this if it be reasonable, must be
the production of the Judgment, which will fully convince a Man that whatever
sets him at a greater distance from the end he has in view, cannot be proper to
lead him to it. Now Impatience will infallibly set our Traveller at a greater
distance from the End he proposes, and consequently cannot be fit to promote
the Pleasure he expects from it. But to make it the better understood how and
why Impatience retards the satisfaction of the Curiosity, one need only observe
that it produces such precaution in the Minds of those with whom a Traveller
converses, as becomes a kind of Partition Wall, that he must either pierce
through or break down before he can discover what is acted on the other side of
it. The more importunate a Man of understanding perceives a Stranger to be to
get information, the less willing he is to satisfy him, and keeps the greater
guard on himself not to gratify his desire till he is as it were necessitated
to do it, and has learned something of this Traveller that may oblige him to
it. This Obstacle is so great that one must not think either of slighting it,
or of overcoming it without a considerable space of time, and a great deal of
management. If a Man presumes to do the former, he will find every body
prejudiced against him, when the Person he has slighted comes to explain
himself after a manner that is disadvantageous to him: and if he depends on the
latter course, he engages himself in a great Charge with more than a moral
uncertainty of succeeding in his Design.

Would it not therefore be much better for our Traveller to appear free and
easy in the presence of such Persons, that they may not become so cautious, but
may attribute that only to his Curiosity which by his Impatience he will give 'em
occasion to impute to a desire of knowing the present state of the Government
in which they are concerned? And on this head it will not be improper to alledg
an Example of which I have been a witness my self. I happened to be in a
certain foreign Court, where there was a Dutchman who had a great deal of Wit,
and made too great an appearance not to be suspected; this Person desired
Audience of one of the principal Ministers of State, who in conversation making
use of that right which his Rank and Authority gave him, asked him, What was
the Motive of his Travels? The Dutchman thinking to make his Court to him,
answered, that it was to learn of him as well as by the Example of other
Persons of his figure, to understand the Government of a State. The Minister
coldly replied, You had need of a great deal of time, and a ripeness of Age to
succeed in a business of this nature. To which this Stranger made this foolish
return, My Curiosity (says he) and impatience after Knowledge may abridg both
the one and the other. At this Answer the Statesman rose up and left him, with
these words, For my part, Sir, I perceive I shall contribute nothing to either.
And the Dutchman was driven to despair to find himself suspected by a Minister
of State, who had received him with affability, and now looked upon him as a
Man of no sense.

Needs any more to be said to show that Curiosity, which is supposed necessary
to a Traveller, ought not to be impatient? But for this end there is need of a
great deal of judgment, and a good faculty of discerning the Humor of Nations,
and the Temper of particular Men's Minds, which is a Talent that one cannot
communicate to any Man.

After all it is not impossible not to be impatient to learn what one goes so
far to seek: for as our Traveller has not assigned his Voyages a precise space
of time, much less does he pretend to prescribe Laws to foreign Nations; it is
his business to accommodate the extent of his Curiosity to the measure of his
Capacity, and to proportion the effects of it to the good success he has had in
foreign Discoveries: All Occasions, Seasons and Conjunctures are not equally
proper for this purpose. There are some States in which nothing at all is to be
learned during the time of War, and others wherein one can get no information
but in such a time. In one place Peace is an Obstacle to politic Discoveries,
in another War shuts up all the Avenues to the confidence of particular
Persons. There are some Ministers under whose Conduct Men dare not speak, and
others under whose Government people say any thing. Hence it is that some
Travelers learn more than others, tho perhaps they are Persons of like Ability
and Curiosity. And if I may be permitted to add my Opinion, I shall not scruple
to say, that a Man ought to travel at several times and occasions to the same
Court, to be well assured of Improvement, and that he has penetrated into the
Maxims and Conduct of it.

Let any one judge after this, whether Impatience is not an invincible Obstacle
to Curiosity, and how great a disadvantage they must be under, whose too great
Vivacity precipitates 'em, and whose warm Temper exposes 'em rather to the
Censure than procures 'em the Confidence of foreign Nations.

It Is still much worse when a Man has not such a politic undetermined posture
of Mind as to act with impartiality, and not to show any prejudice or a strong
inclination to the Maxims of his own Country on the one hand, and on the other
hand an indifference for those of others. And this being the great and indeed
the original fault that Men carry into other Countries, one cannot too much
argue against it, and show the danger of it.

Universal Reason, which is the foundation of Policy, directs that a Man of
Honor part from his own Country undetermined in his Mind, that is, so disposed
to learn of all Men according to the forementioned Passage of the wise Man;
Bona enim and mala ex hominibus tentabit; He shall try what is good and evil
among Men: That he may appear docile to every Man, and receive any one
courteously who is willing to give him any Information. It Is not only useless
but dangerous to travel without this disposition; for the diversity of Minds
one meets with being the only remedy against Prejudice, an inconsiderate and
heady Traveller often ruins his Health, as well as corrupts his Reason, by
every thing which might otherwise improve the one and restore the other. 'Twas
this that made the late Elector Palatine say, That Man is a fool that goes out
of his own Country without hopes of returning with more Honor, Wisdom and
Knowledge than what he carried abroad.

This disposition being supposed will be followed by another, and that is, that
a wise Traveller will never return undetermined in his Mind, as he was when he
went out: But fully convinced what is the greatest and most solid Advantage,
with which he has had the address to form his Mind in proportion to the
Capacity he has had of casting abundance of differing matters together, only to
extract out of 'em what might contribute to his improvement in Knowledge.

This temper of Mind is more easily spoken of than found; for the Mind must be
molded after an extraordinary manner to be capable of that docility which
places a Man at the feet of others to learn their Instructions; and it is next
to a Miracle to find a Genius of this Character, which is fixed and solid
enough to come to a determination in the midst of such a prodigious number of
Maxims which all result from Reason as their Principle, tho the Effects they
produce appear so opposite one to another. And again there is danger lest this
docility with which a Man prepares himself in going abroad, should degenerate
into Irresolution, Easiness, and servile Complaisance at his return. That which
is to be seen in the greatest part of those who are willing to make too deep
and prying a search into matters of Religion in prejudice to the established
Systems, who often by their too curious Enquiries are brought at last to sit
loose from all Religion, and die in this irresolution of Mind, often happens to
those middle-witted Persons whose Minds are tractable in appearance, but weak
in reality, so that by the very prospect of the many different Maxims of
Government, they become incapable of governing; because their Minds are not
endowed with a vigor and heat sufficient to melt down all such matters
together, and to extract out of 'em only what precisely suits with the
Government of the Country in which they live.

One may every day see not only a great many Travelers, but even Ministers of
State and Ambassadors, whose Minds are so framed, that their Heads turn round
instead of becoming firm and stable at the appearance of so many different
Circumstances and Measures. On which account the old Prince Lubomirski was wont
to say, that such sort of Men are sent abroad to learn the art of being regular
Fools. Indeed such Persons appear so little furnished with the general Ideas of
Policy, and so deeply preposses'd with the particular Maxims of their own
Country, that their Weakness is discovered almost as soon as they begin to talk.

To speak yet more plainly for the good of the public, it is Ignorance that
determines the Judgments of some Travelers; even before the Maxims of foreign
Countries are known to 'em, they go from home so full of Prejudice, that they
are resolved to return possessed with greater Opiniatrety than when they went
out: whence it comes to pass either that they can learn nothing because of
their prevention, or else they see and observe so much that they can come to no
decisive Judgment, like those who have more Victuals in their Stomachs than
they have natural heat to digest. To this purpose the late Prince Charles of
Lorrain used to say; If these Travelers would learn with a design of improving
in Knowledge, they would act becomingly; but to presume they know every thing,
before they are capable of learning, is the way to become a distinguished Fop.

And Ignorance in this matter contains in it three respects, which the greatest
part of the World does not sufficiently consider, at least they seldom or never
unite 'em all together. The first regards the Principles of universal Policy;
which Persons of ordinary Parts almost perpetually confound with the actual
Determinations of the Government of their Country. It Is true, there are every
where some Minds more sublime and judicious, who go to the bottom of things,
and seek out means of repairing the Defects of the Politics of their Country:
but it generally so happens that Persons of this Genius are seldom advanced
into favor, and meet with very little Respect in a State; whether it be that
they want Docility to accommodate themselves to the Humors of others, or
Submission to procure them Patrons, or Ambition to push 'em forward. It was of
this sort of Men that the Duke of Parma once said, They were of the same use to
States, as Props to old Houses to hinder their fall.

The second sort of Ignorance respects Persons of another Genius, who
surpassing the former as well in Number as Authority, are in possession of the
privilege of setting a value upon things, and giving weight to Decisions that
are made: and hence it almost necessarily comes to pass, that that is supposed
to be best and truest, which appears to be most authorized, and most generally
received. And this Mistake is almost irreparable, if we take the matter in
general, in as much as the number of just and sublime Minds being every where
very small, and that of narrow Capacities almost immense in proportion to the
other; there is between both a sort of middle-siz'd Understandings, to whose
Decision those of a subordinate Rank pay a blind deference, which produces that
public Impression which obtains on the generality of People, that such as fill
the first places in any Government, are ordinarily the wisest and ablest Men.
This popular Opinion is often heard without contradiction, and this silence
increases the number of the Suffrages that are given 'em, by which means People
are confirmed and rivetted in their Ignorance.

The Dutch with some appearance of Reason value themselves upon their
scrupulous care of avoiding the first of these Instances of National Ignorance;
because they indeed apply themselves more than any other Nation to dive into
the Principles and special Uses of universal Policy: And we design hereafter to
show what is their Motive, and how it is supported, in a Treatise of the
Politic Genius of the United Provinces. But they have too little firmness to
keep 'em from falling into the second Error, which will always mightily check
the Projects they lay in particular Determinations.

On the contrary, the Spaniards very stupidly fall into all the faults of the
first Mistake by their negligence and contempt of the Principles of Universal
Policy, which they seem not to know, but only so as to appropriate them to
themselves without any distinction of Actions, Persons, Interests and
Obstacles, which foils 'em at every turn, and defeats 'em in all Treaties. But
they preserve among 'em the liberty of speaking with firmness of Mind about
public Affairs against the second Instance of National Ignorance: and therefore
the Duke of Holstein Ploen said one day at Vienna with a great deal of
solidity; By the first course the Dutch will support themselves a great while,
but never advance very far: Whereas the Spaniards have enough to do to sustain
themselves by reason of the actual weakness of their present Situation; but if
ever they come to recover themselves, they cannot fail of making a very great
advance.

The third respect of this National Ignorance proceeds from the Indisposition
Men are in to know others, by reason of the little sincerity and application
they use to get the knowledge of themselves, which betrays 'em into frequent
Mistakes, and occasions 'em to take the Faults of a Nation for the Genius of
it, and the Art of augmenting those Faults (instead of mending 'em) for Motives
of governing it. Nay more than this, Men are willing to misunderstand their own
Properties which might be cultivated, and by that means neglect the Remedies by
which they might continually rectify them.

Perhaps these Metaphysical Abstractions will not suit every body's Palate; but
I have already declared that I speak in general without making a particular
application of things, and am unwilling to offend any one. However it is certain
that every Nation has its faults, its singular qualities, its bright and dark
sides; and if an Instance of this be desired, the love of Riches will one time
or other ruin the Dutch, but the indefatigable Industry they are capable of to
acquire Wealth, will be their support a long time. Ambition is a fault in the
French, which may run to dangerous Extremes; but their Valor and Activity will
serve a great while to sustain 'em.

To avoid being ignorant of any thing that relates to this, both these are to
be thoroughly considered, and exactly balanced one against the other; and a Man
ought to be convinced by himself which side has the greatest weight, either to
do the most Mischief, or procure the most Good. But in good earnest do Men
usually begin their Voyages with such a preliminary Knowledge as this? And yet
less than this will not suffice to travel to any purpose; and for want of this
Discussion, Men carry nothing but Ignorance with them into Foreign Courts.

I could advance a great deal on this Head, but shall produce only two
Examples, which may serve to instruct others, and it is in what I have been a
Witness my self.

A certain Gentleman that made a good Appearance, and had very great
Recommendations (a fatal help in a Foreign Court when a Man has not the art of
supporting them well by his own Conduct) was asked by a Minister of State, What
was the occasion of his Travels, because he seemed to be of a weak
Constitution, and considerably advanced in Years, and therefore probably had
some particular design in view. The Gentleman ingenuously answered: Sir, I
travel to acquaint my self with Europe, and to take occasion hereafter to make
my own Country acquainted with it. The Minister replied; If the Pencil that is
to draw your Picture of Europe is like that with which you describe your own
Country, there will be more Fancy than Truth in your Originals. Sir, I can
scarce believe (returned the Gentleman) that there are any more perfect ones
than those I have left in my own Country. Upon which the Minister rose up and
said, Sir, you seem to me to be rather struck with one certain Impression than
to have a true knowledge of things; you will judge of us by that in which you most
excel: Have a care that you be not judged of here by that in which you are most
deficient.

This Stranger was cast into so great a perplexity, when he compared this
Answer with the first Compliments of Esteem for his Country, and for the
Recommendations he brought from thence, that he was quite nonplus'd. And tho he
would several times fain have recovered himself, and endeavored by great
Expense, Industry and Conversation with ingenious Men to inform himself better
than he had done; all signified nothing but to give occasion to have it said to
him at the end of eighteen Months, Sir, you had need to come and consult us;
you see a Man learns much if he knows but little when he leaves his own
Country; and that he has made no small advantage, who has acquired by his
Travels the art of Learning.

The second Instance is of one who was sent with the Charge of a Negotiation to
a Court, where he had Orders to tarry only so long as was necessary to perform
his Duty, and to wait for an Answer. He came and lodged in a Public House,
where he was complimented on the part of the Chief Minister by an Abbot, who
found him ready to sit down at Table, very much displeased at the way of
dressing the Victuals which was prepared according to the gust of the Country:
After the first Compliments were past, this Envoy could not help saying, What
sort of a Country have you here, Sir? Here is not so good eating as in other
places where I have been, and nothing near so good as at my own Table. Sir,
(said the Abbot) Men reason here as they ought to do, but do not much trouble
their heads about the art of Cookery; that they leave to other Nations to carry
to the highest pitch of Perfection they please. What (replied the Envoy) can
there be just reasoning in a Country where every thing seems out of order At
which the Abbot rose up and said, You shall judge of our Country (if you please)
by your selves; and we'll refer our selves in this matter to your Opinion,
provided you don't pretend to subject ours to your pleasure.

By the recital of this foolish Discourse of the Envoy, the Minister of State
had a sufficient discovery of his Character: the day following he came to his
Audience, where nothing was discoursed but State Affairs; and as he was going
out, says the Minister in a tone of Railery: Be sure to get a good Dinner, Sir,
and pray order your matters so as to dine with me to morrow. The Envoy did not
fail to come, and opposite to him was placed one of those secret Censors, who
penetrate a Man as soon as he begins to open his Mouth, without regard to his
Office, of which they never speak directly or indirectly. He was magnificently
regaled, and at the time when the Table allows a liberty of free Discourse;
Well Sir, says this Censor, how do you like this Country? There Is nothing but
Magnificence (says the Envoy) every where, but yet here is one thing wanting: to
which the other wittily replied; If it be nothing but your Approbation, we can
do well enough without it.

Indeed this Envoy was not long enough at this Court to improve himself by it:
for when he left it he was so entirely displeased with it, that by signifying
his Disgust, he gave occasion to 'em to let him know a thousand ways, that they
were every jot as much disgusted with him. At his return he made a ridiculous
Description of this Court: but Men had need take care what they say, for there
happened to be a Stranger in the company who made this disdainful Reply: If
your own Country (said he) could not furnish you with common Sense, how could
you expect that a Court which you did but just pass through should teach you
what you had no disposition to learn? This Repartee was carried to that Court
of which this Envoy had given so unsuitable a Character, and it is certain he a
long time passed there for the greatest Fool that ever was honored with a
public Employ: These are the Effects of Ignorance, and a sottish Prejudice.

That is never to be learned in Traveling which it is supposed a well-bred Man
ought to know before he engages in Travels. For the Principles of Society and
Policy are so linked together, that he that transgresses the former, renders
himself ridiculous when he speaks, to signify some unjust Preference that he
makes in it.

The confounding of a personal Determination of a Minister of State, together
with a National Determination, is a second Stumbling Block, against which the
greatest part of inconsiderate and raw Travelers break their Shins: Who when
they are spoken to about the actual Symptoms of the Government of their
Country, on purpose to put 'em upon discoursing, if instead of intimating by a
wise Reply, that they know how to distinguish the Interests and Designs of
their Country from the personal Motives of those who govern it, which on that
account determine them otherwise, they confound them both together, they pass
for Fools, and mere Butterflies, that always flutter about that which casts the
greatest Light. And after a Man has once made such a false step, let him try as
long as he pleases, he will find it impossible to set himself right again in the
Esteem of Men of sense, Railery will take its turn after serious Discourse; and
the greater Expense he shall be at to introduce himself into good Company, the
more ridiculous will he appear to 'em. And if you tell these stupid Creatures,
or (if you please) these pretended Politicians, that they err in the first
Principles of Policy, they will treat you as a ridiculous and whimsical Person;
nay some of 'em have been so ill-temper'd as to endeavor to render a Man
suspected, for having had respect and kindness enough for his Country to
advertise 'em of their Mistake.

The Faults of every Nation are known in all foreign Countries: Nay they
compose diverse Axioms of 'em, which are not altogether false; for after all, if
they are not all of 'em absolutely true, there is something in 'em infallibly
so. And whether it be Prejudice or Time that has given Authority to this sort
of Proverbs, it is certain whoever shocks 'em, goes for an extravagant Man.

The Art of Traveling teaches a Man to keep his equal distance from the
Extremities of wholly denying, or wholly confessing such National Faults. For
it is equally dangerous to err on either hand, which very few Persons consider:
He that denies a Fault that is imputed to his Country, pulls an old House upon
his head in irritating the People among whom he resides at present, which must
needs be a great piece of Imprudence. Nor is that Traveller much wiser who
falls into the other Extreme, that is, coldly and tamely to grant every Story
that is imposed on his Country; for tho he should captivate some vulgar Minds
by this Air of Sincerity, he will be sure to get the Reputation of a Fop among
Persons of Note. It Is still worse when a Traveller grants that with which his
Country is reproached, only to take his turn immediately to twit that Nation
where he is thus attacked with that Fault which is imputed to it in our
Traveller's Country; for this is to insult over People at their own home, and
therefore cannot choose but irritate 'em. And the wisest Men will disapprove of
any man's coming into a Country to reproach it with a Fault, which it is always
ashamed to be thought to have, and perfectly hates to hear laid to its charge.
What then must a Man do in this case? Why that which no body will ever teach
you, if you neglect to learn it before you leave your own Country; And that is,
to study well the Defects and Virtues of your Country by setting 'em in
opposition one to the other, that so you may oppose 'em when occasion requires
to what is imputed to you, and may speak of the one, without signifying any
thing for or against the others, by entering into a particular Examination and
Confutation of 'em. By this Conduct you will pass in Foreign Nations for a wise
Man, by this means your Capacity will be known, and you will be considered and
esteemed in proportion to the Knowledge you appear to have, and to the Advantage
others may have of learning by you to become acquainted with a Nation which
perhaps they never design to see. And since one Story draws out another, that
which you give concerning your Country will infallibly procure you the knowledge
of the Nation where you are; and by this Address you will easily get a solid
understanding of what you came to seek, namely, the discovery of the Genius,
Policy, and Manners of a whole Nation. This is the Product of Skill in the Art
of Traveling. I Will give one Instance which formerly touched me very sensibly.
A certain Italian being in Lithuania, one of the principal Lords of the Country
said to him in Conversation: Whence is it, Sir, that the Italians never forgive
an Injury? My Lord, replied the Italian, it is because they are never easily
offended. Now this being the great fault of the Polish and Lithuanian Nobility,
the Repartee was very witty, and as it seemed to me, the most subtle and
ingenious Censure that a Man could pass on 'em. The Lithuanian Nobleman
received the Impression of it so prudently, that he even affected to expose the
fault of his Country yet farther, in making this return: Sir, (said he) we
should be as easily offended as you have been made to believe of us in your
Country, if we could be capable of being displeased to hear the Truth told us
with so good a Grace. He afterward presented him with a Horse, and ordered
that he should be conducted at his Charge from his Estate, which lies within
two days Journey of Grodnaw, as far as Dantzick, whither this Italian had a mind
to go.

And now let any one put in the room of what he has been reading, such a
disposition of Mind as the greatest part travel with, and he will easily perceive
what is produced by that busy Preference which determines on the first
Prejudices, which are almost always false, and may easily judge by this whether
it was not necessary to give the Public a method of Traveling. I intend
hereafter to treat of the Politic Genius of all the Courts of Europe, and hope
the manner in which I shall discourse of 'em will suit the relish of the World;
because I am to treat of the Facts and Maxims of common Use and Conversation,
without which it is impossible to penetrate into the true Spirit of those
Courts: And I shall begin with the Port, or Ottoman Court.

FINIS.

