Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
TRICESIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth of May, Anno Dom. 1661. In
the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of
God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

And by several Prorogations and Adjournments there continued to the 30th day
of November in the 30th Year of His Majesty's Reign, on which day the following
Act passed the Royal Assent.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1678.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XXX Caroli II. Regis.
An Act for the more effectual Preserving the Kings Person and Government, by
Disabling Papists from Sitting in either House of Parliament.

FOrasmuch as diverse good Laws have been made for Preventing the Increase and
Danger of Popery in this Kingdom, which have not had the desired Effects, by
reason of the free access which Popish Recusants have had to His Majesty's
Court, and by reason of the Liberty which of late some of the Recusants have
had and taken to Sit and Vote in Parliament:

Wherefore, and for the Safety of His Majesty's Royal Person and Government, Be
it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the
First day of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand
six hundred seventy and eight, no Person that now is, or hereafter shall be a
Peer of this Realm, or Member of the House of Peers, shall Vote, or make his
Proxy in the House of Peers, or Sit there during any Debate in the said House
of Peers; Nor any person that now is, or hereafter shall be a Member of the
House of Commons, shall Vote in the House of Commons, or Sit there during any
Debate in the said House of Commons, after their Speaker is chosen, until such
Peer or Member shall from time to time respectively, and in manner following,
first take the several Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and make, subscribe,
and audibly repeat this Declaration following;

I A. B. do Solemnly and Sincerely in the presence of God, Profess, Testify,
and Declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there
is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Body
and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever: And that the Invocation, or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any
other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church
of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do Solemnly in the presence of
God, Profess, Testify, and Declare, That I do make this Declaration, and every
part thereof, in the plain and ordinary sense of the Words read unto me, as
they are commonly understood by English Protestants, without any Evasion,
Equivocation, or Mental Reservation whatsoever, and without any Dispensation
already granted me for this purpose by the Pope, or any other Authority or
Person whatsoever, or without any hope of any such Dispensation from any Person
or Authority whatsoever, or without thinking that I am, or can be Acquitted
before God or Man, or Absolved of this Declaration, or any part thereof,
although the Pope, or any other Person or Persons, or Power whatsoever, should
Dispense with, or Annul the same, or Declare that it was Null and Void from the
beginning.

Which said Oaths and Declaration shall be in this and every succeeding
Parliament solemnly and publicly Made and Subscribed betwixt the hours of Nine
in the Morning and Four in the Afternoon, by every such Peer and Member of the
house of Peers, at the Table in the middle of the said House, before he take
his Place in the said House of Peers, and whilst a full House of Peers is there
with their Speaker in his Place; and by every such Member of the House of
Commons, at the Table in the middle of the said House, and whilst a full House
of Commons is there duly Sitting with their Speaker in his Chair; and that the
same be done in either House in such like order or method, as each House is
called over by respectively.

And be it further Enacted, That from and after the said First day of December,
every Peer of this Realm, and Member of the House of Peers, and every Peer of
the Kingdom of Scotland, or of the Kingdom of Ireland, being of the Age of One
and twenty years or upwards, not having Taken the said Oaths, and Made and
Subscribed the said Declaration; and every Member of the said House of Commons,
not having as aforesaid Taken the said Oaths, and Made and Subscribed the said
Declaration; and every Person now, or hereafter Convicted of Popish Recusancy,
who hereafter shall at any time after the said First day of December, come
advisedly into, or remain in the presence of the Kings Majesty, or Queens
Majesty, or shall come into the Court or House where they or any of them
reside, as well during the Reign of His present Majesty (whose Life God long
preserve) as during the Reigns of any His Royal Successors Kings or Queens of
England, shall incur and suffer all the pains, penalties, forfeitures and
disabilities in this Act mentioned or contained, unless such Peer, Member, or
Person so Convicted, do respectively in the next Term after such his coming or
remaining, Take the said Oaths, and Make and Subscribe the said Declaration in
His Majesty's High Court of Chancery, between the hours of Nine and Twelve in
the Forenoon.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person that
now is, or hereafter shall be a Peer of this Realm, or Member of the House of
Peers, or Member of the House of Commons, shall presume to do any thing
contrary to this Act, or shall offend in any of the Cases aforesaid, That then
every such Peer and Member so offending, shall from thenceforth be deemed and
adjudged a Popish Recusant Convict to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and
shall forfeit and suffer as a Popish Recusant Convict, and shall be disabled to
hold or execute any Office or Place of Profit or Trust, Civil or Military, in
any of His Majesty's Realms of England or Ireland, Dominion of Wales, or Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, or in any of His Majesty's Islands or Foreign
Plantations to the said Realms belonging; and shall be disabled from
thenceforth to Sit, or Vote in either House of Parliament, or make a Proxy in
the House of Peers, or to Sue or Use any Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in
course of Law, or to prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, or to be
Guardian of any Child, or Executor, or Administrator of any person, or capable
of any Legacy or Deed of Gift; and shall forfeit for every wilful Offense
against this Act, the sum of Five hundred pounds, to be recovered and received
by him or them that shall Sue for the same; and to be prosecuted by any Accion
of Debt, Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, where no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall lie.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from the said First
day of December, it shall and may be lawful to and for the House of Peers, and
House of Commons, or either of them respectively, as often as they or either of
them shall see occasion, either in this present Parliament, or any other
hereafter to be holden, to Order and Cause all, or any of the Members of their
respective Houses of Parliament, openly in their respective Houses of
Parliament, to Take the said Oaths, and to Make and Subscribe the said
Declaration at such times, and in such manner as they shall appoint. And if any
Peer shall contrary to such Order made by their said House, wilfully presume to
Sit therein, without Taking the said Oaths, and Subscribing the said
Declaration, according to the said Order, Every such Peer or Member of the
House of Peers, so presuming to Sit, shall be adjudged, and is hereby declared
to be incapable and disabled in Law to all intents and purposes whatsoever, to
Sit in the said House of Peers, and give any Voice therein, either by Proxy, or
otherwise howsoever, during that Parliament. And if any Member or Members of
the House of Commons, shall contrary to such Order made by their House,
wilfully presume to Sit therein, without Taking the said Oaths, and Making and
Subscribing the said Declaration, Every such Member or Members of the House of
Commons, so presuming to Sit, shall be adjudged, and is hereby declared to be
incapable, and disabled in Law, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, to Sit
in the said House of Commons, or give any Voice therein during that Parliament.

And be it Enacted, That in every case where any Member or Members of the House
of Commons shall by virtue of this Act be disabled to Sit or Vote in the House
of Commons, Then, and in every such case, without any further Conviction, or
other Proceeding against such Member or Members, the Place or Places for which
they or any of them were Elected, is hereby declared Void, and a new Writ or
Writs shall Issue out of the High Court of Chancery, by Warrant or Warrants
from the Speaker of the House of Commons for the time being, and by Order of
the said House, for the Election of a new Member or Members, to Serve in the
House of Commons, in the Place or Places of such Member or Members so disabled,
to all intents and purposes, as if such Member or Members were naturally dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
First day of December, One thousand six hundred seventy and eight, every Person
then being, and who after that time shall be a Sworn Servant to the Kings or
Queens Majesty, not having before that time duly Taken the Oaths, and Made and
Subscribed the Declaration contained in an Act Entitled, An Act for Preventing
Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants, shall Take the said Oaths, and
Make and Subscribe the Declaration before expressed, in His Majesty's High
Court of Chancery, in the manner aforesaid, either in the next Term after the
said First day of December, or in the next Term after any such Person shall be
so Sworn a Servant, or in case of Lawful Impediment by Sickness, proved upon
Oath, and allowed to be such, under the Hand of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper for the time being, then in the next Term after such Impediment removed;
And if any such Person shall refuse or neglect to do the same, and yet after
such refusal or neglect, shall advisedly come into, or remain in the presence
of the Kings or Queens Majesty, or shall come into the Court or House where
they or any of them reside, as well during the Reign of His present Majesty, as
during the Reigns of His and their Royal Successors, Kings or Queens of
England, and every of them, Every such Person shall be disabled to hold any
Place as such Sworn Servant, and shall incur and suffer all the Pains,
Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities in this Act mentioned or contained.

Provided, That nothing in this Act shall relate to, or have any effect upon
any person being a Natural born Subject of the King of Portugal, who now is, or
hereafter shall be a Sworn Servant to the Queens Majesty, not exceeding Nine in
number at any one time; nor to such Women-Servants as Her Majesty shall under
Her Hand and Seal from time to time for that purpose be pleased to nominate,
the said Women-Servants so nominated, not exceeding the number of Nine at any
one time.

And be it Enacted, That during the time of Taking of the said Oaths, and
Making and Subscribing the said Declaration, All other Matters and Proceedings,
as well in the said Houses of Parliament, as in the said Court, shall cease;
And the said Oaths, Declaration, and Subscription, together with a Schedule of
the Names of the persons who shall by virtue of this Act Take and Subscribe the
same, shall be Made, Entered, and Filed in Parchment Rolls from time to time,
duly provided for that purpose by the Clerk of the House of Lords, and the
Clerk of the House of Commons, and by the Clerk of the Petty-bag in Chancery,
for the several and respective uses as aforesaid; and none of the Peers or
Members shall give or pay any Fee or Reward to any such Clerk, above the sum of
Twelve pence for the Entry of his Taking the said Oaths, and Making and
Subscribing the said Declaration: All which Rolls respectively the said Clerks
are hereby required from time to time, without any Fee or Reward, to show to
any person desiring to look upon the same; And the said House of Peers, and
House of Commons, and Court of Chancery, are hereby sovtrally empowered and
required in the first place, all other Business laid aside, to Administer the
said Oaths, Declaration, and Subscription respectively, as occasion shall be
from time to time, to all and every the person and persons aforesaid, duly
demanding the same, according to the directions, purport, and meaning of this
present Act.

Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall extend
to the prejudice of any person for coming into, or remaining in the presence of
the King or Queens Majesty, who shall first have License so to do, by any
Warrant under the Hands and Seals of Six or more Privy Counselors, by Order of
His Majesty's Privy Council, upon some urgent occasion therein to be expressed,
so as such License exceed not the space of Ten days, and that the said License
be first Filed and put upon Record in the Office of the Petty-bag in Chancery,
for any body to view without Fee or Reward, and no person be Licensed for above
the number of Thirty days in any one year.

Provided nevertheless, That if any Offender contrary to this Act, shall at any
time after such Offense Take the said Oaths, and Make and Subscribe the said
Declaration in His Majesty's High Court of Chancery, and in the manner
aforesaid, Every such person shall be from thenceforth Freed and Discharged of
and from all Seizures, Penalties, and Losses which he might otherwise sustain
or bear for or by reason of being a Popish Recusant Convict by virtue of this
Act; and shall be Freed and Discharged from all Disabilities and Incapacities
incurred thereby, so as such Freedom and Discharge extend not to restore any
such person to any Office or Place filled and supplied upon voidance by this
Act, nor to any other Office, till after the expiration of One year, from the
Taking the said Oath and Making the Declaration aforesaid, nor to make Void, or
at any time Discharge the said Forfeiture of Five hundred pounds, incurred as
aforesaid.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained, shall extend to His Royal
Highness the Duke of York.

FINIS.

