Some THOUGHTS on the CHARACTER OF Solomon's Virtuous Woman, Preached in a
SERMON AT THE Parish Church of Croydon, On the occasion of Q. Mary's Death,
January the 6th. 1694/5.

Printed at the Request of those that heard it.

By JOHN EVANS M. A.

London: Printed for Sam. Crouch at the corner of Popes-Head-Alley,
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1695.

To the Honorable the Lady Coningsby, Wife of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord
Coningsby.
MADAM,
THis Discourse, how unpolished soever its Dress is, presumes to prostrate it
self at your Ladiship's feet, begging your kind Acceptance and Sanctuary, upon
this Recommendation, that to this Address, 'twas not the vanity of gracing the
Title Page by prefixing so great a Name to it, which moved me, but my deep
Veneration of your Worth, and the Sense of my Gratitude for the more than
ordinary share your Honorable Family have ever vouchsafed me in their Favor.

I am conscious, that the vast Disproportion the meanness of this Performance
carries to the transcendent Majesty of its noble Theme, can no other way be
secured from blame and censure, then under the protection of so great a
Patroness: a Patroness, whose Greatness consists not in mere Cumulation of
swelling Titles, or glittering Outside, but in personal Dignity and real
Goodness; the Description whereof should I essay to draw, the Draught would
fall so far below the Excellence of so high, so complete an Original, as by the
very attempt I should incur the same Guilt, I stand self-arraigned for, in the
subsequent Presumption, I mean that of sullying the illustrious Characters of
those Divine Accomplishments, which an Apelles's Pencil, the most skilful
Artist cannot sufficiently delineate or represent; and may therefore more
prudently be passed by in silent Admiration and Esteem.

Let it herein suffice, and that with great truth, to say, if a Commutation
could have been accepted for this Royal Death, your Ladyship would with the
First have expressed your Loyal Affection in the Oblation of the Substitute, as
evidently appears by that ample Proportion of Grief which your self voluntarily
bears on this mournful Occasion. And would the World but prove so just and
grateful to our common Benefactrix, as your Ladyship does, in writing after so
fair a Copy; her late Majesty's Memory on that stock might grow immortal, and
(what is the general Ambition of Mankind) reflect as fragrant odor on the Dead,
as on the Living, and those that are yet unborn.

Such an excellent Person indeed had merited an Apotheosis among the Ancient or
Modern Romans: had she died in their Communion, they would have enrolled her
Name in the Registers of their Polytheism, preserved her Sacred Relics for
Divine Homage and Adoration: Altars had been erected and Sacrifice offered to
Her. But that Work of Supererogation is too much, as well as bare Remembrance
is too little: there is a safe Medium between these Extremes, and that is
Thankfulness to God for, and Imitation of her matchless Piety and Virtue: This
is all the Honor, and the highest Respect, either she is capable of receiving,
or we of paying to her Merits; which Debt is so religiously discharged by your
Ladiship's ingenuous Deportment; to whose genuine Candor I humbly submit these
Papers, to overlook those Faults, which are too palpable to bear the
examination of exact, impartial Judgment. May my Lord and your Ladyship, after
having been many years, the one an Ornament to the Church, the other an useful
Pillar of the State, like ripe Fruit, in the Vintage of old Age, drop into
Abraham's Bosom; and may those tender Branches, which Heaven has blessed you
with, commence as early and grow up as perfectly in Religion, as our most
Christian Princess did, is the constant sincere Prayer of,

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble and obedient Servant JOHN EVANS.

PROVERBS XXXI.31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works
praise her in the gates.
THOUGH some unthinking Heads may be willingly apt, and would fain persuade
themselves to forget that the Divine economy is as extensive as the utmost
limits of the Universe: and by that means are become possessed with the
groundless prejudice and fancy, that this World is nothing else but a mere
Lottery; as if all the affairs thereof were wholly in the disposal, and waited
on the uncertain contingencies of a blind Chance, or the worse determination of
a fatal Necessity.

Yet I am sure there are such remarkable Occurrances, as are far above the
capacity of natural Causes to produce; which therefore plainly discover and
point out the Al-wise counsel and uncontrollable proceedings of an Almighty
Agent, that manages and overrules all events. Which are sufficient Indications
of his Being, and such demonstrative Evidences, as abundantly convince and lead
all considerate men to the knowledge of the Supreme Governor of Heaven and
Earth; without whose immediate order, or permission, Mat. 10.29
even a Sparrow cannot fall to the ground. And if so mean a part of the
Creation, so inconsiderable an action, (which seems most fortuitous and
trifling) be not below his cognizance and appointment, it is much more rational
to suppose, that the Life of Man, and all Human Affairs, are things wherein his
Providence is more especially concerned. For these are worthier Subjects for
him to exert and employ his Divine Powers upon, and capable of reflecting the
most Glory on his Majesty.

And among Human Affairs, what are so noble, so momentany, so deserving his
Power and Wisdom, as those of Kings and Commonwealths; upon the manegery
whereof, the temporal welfare or adversity of his People does chiefly depend?

If we then study the Divine Providence with the same application of mind as
others do the Terrestrial Globe, and diligently observe its various, though
mysterious Dispensations, it will soon satisfy us in this great Truth, Dan.
4.17.
That the most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever
he will. Which is a Prerogative, when he first laid the Foundation of his
Government, he reserved to himself: and those Laws, which he has since given to
Mankind for their instruction, and the measures of their comportment under it,
seem no way to abridge him in the exercise of this Prerogative. By virtue of
which, he still removes Kings, and sets up Kings, as he pleases, or as he
sees sometimes necessary, for the preservation of his Church, or for the
punishment of either King or People. For the proof of both, your own
observation, if you impartially recollect and reflect on those notices you have
reposited in your minds, can easily furnish you with so many instances, that
it is needless to recount or insist on particulars.

I will only remind of those things which have happened in these Kingdoms, and
in these late Years. When the Spirits of these Nations flag'd, and our Hearts
failed us for fear, and for looking after those things which were coming on the
Earth, Divine Providence was pleased to disperse that Cloud of melancholy
Apprehensions, by removing the Cause of it; and amidst our Danger and
Despondence, surprise us with Safety and Deliverance, by the opportune Arrival
of his present Majesty and late Consort. Who out of a compassionate resentment
and tender regard of the just Interest of Christendom, after much importunity,
were prevailed with to accept the Crown of England; not as a Prize of Ambition
or Covetousness; not as a Reward of their Merits only; but as an opportunity of
doing Good, of saving a sinking State: that in this Sphere they might move more
vigorously in defense of the Protestant Religion, and vindication of the
Oppressed against the growing Greatness of Arbitrary Power, and the usurpation
of Popery.

The commencement of whose auspicious Reign, having no other design to serve
than that of our Common Good, gave sufficient encouragement to make us flatter
our selves with fair promises of many Halcyon days, and most flourishing
Condition. Which began to bloom about this little World, and make all our
Frost-nipt hopes sprout out in joy.

But alas! such a Blessing was too great for so sinful a People to expect the
long enjoyment of; whose base ingratitude and continued impenitence under the
influence of so much Favor, could not but provoke Heaven, in some measure, to
shift the Scene, and speak to us by the Messenger of Mortality. For it is usual
for God Almighty, by a Deprivation, to teach unthankful men the value of those
things which they would not learn by the enjoyment.

O Death! Thou King of Terror, how terrible and fatal is thy sting! how cruel
and inevitable thy stroke! which neither Crowns nor Dominions, neither Mitres
nor any Majesty whatsoever, can escape, or secure their Owners from, for one
moment. But the Rich, as well as the Poor, the greatest Potentates, as well as
the meanest Peasants, must stoop to Death, and pay their Lives as Tribute to
this Conqueror, who insults over the Frailty of Human Nature. From whence we
see, that the Life of Man is but of little value, and all his Honor but
contemptible; because that Worm of Corruption lies at the root of this Gourd,
and defaces the grace and splendor of all earthly things. For no sooner Man
draws the Breath of Life, be his Birth and Condition what it will, than he is
enrolled in the Register of Death; and from the Womb makes swift and direct
advances to the Grave. So that in reference to his abode on earth, I may, with
the Royal Prophet, call him a vain Shadow; and his life, Jam. 4.14.
with St. James, even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away. A Life, full of the snares of Death; which, the more it
increases, the more decreases; whilst it flourishes, it grows infirm; and the
farther it goes, the nearer its approaches are unto Death; from whose Arrest no
Claims of Honor, no Distinctions of Quality, no Practice of Piety and Virtue,
can grant any Privilege or Protection. For that inexorable Sergeant in the
execution of his Office, observes no such Marks of difference, as can in the
least sway with him to respect the Persons or Conditions of Men.

If either Majesty, or Goodness, or the vigor of youthful Constitution,
whetted by gentle Exercise, and the strict observance of the Rules of
Temperance and Moderation, could have stayed its violent hand, we should now
have had no occasion given us to condole the Funeral Obsequies and Mournful
Solemnity of the Best of Women, and of Queens: which bids adieu to all present
entertainments of Joy and Pleasure, and clothes the Nation with Sables and
Blacks of Sadness; which hangs our Walls, not only with Mourning, but deep
Sighs and Groans; and fills these three Kingdoms with melting Eyes, and sighing
Accents, for our irrepairable loss.

But oh! what Floods of Tears, what Tide of Ejulations, can swell so high as to
bear a proportion equal to the Merits of so great, so good a Personage? Give
her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates.

In this Chapter the Wise man, (upon whose vast knowledge and experienced
judgment we may safely depend for the best determination of the Case) after he
had inquired, who could find a virtuous Woman, and subjoined the reason of his
enquiry, because her price is far above Rubies; gives us a plain, but an exact
description of such an excellent Person, as a Rule and Standard, whereby she
might be the more easily discovered and proved. He tells us, she is
accomplished with all the Perfections, both Human and Divine, Natural and
Acquired, that her Sex can be capable of. She is tender and loyal to her
Husband; indefatigably diligent and industrious in Business; prudent and
discreet in the government of her Family; charitable to the Poor, bountifully
dispensing of her store, to supply the indigencies of all wanting People;
affable and courteous to every Person; pious and devout toward God; in each of
these respects, and in every instance of a virtuous Woman, acquitting her self
with popular applause, and the highest commendation.

In the close of this Discourse, I doubt not, but you will all unanimously
agree with me, in answering Solomon's question in the affirmative, That we of
this Nation had once sound, but, alas! are now deprived of such a virtuous
Lady, in the Person of our most gracious Queen; as will evidently appear, when
we have tried her Character by these Marks. In treating of which, I shall, with
all humble deference and veneration that is due to a Sovereign Power, endeavor
to represent to your view some of her extraordinary Virtues and Perfections.

Here I shall not entertain you, and my self, with a Panegyric on the lively
Features, the beautiful Symmetry or well-proportion'd Parts of her Royal
Person; though that should not be passed by without a particular admiration of
it; which graced the English Throne, and adorned her Majestic Presence with so
lovely a mien, as could not but charm the Eyes of all Spectators. Since
Mortality, with grief I speak it, I say, since unhappy Mortality has drawn a
dark Veil over these Relics, I shall only recommend to your pious imitation
those incomparable, immortal Beauties, and Ennoblements of her Mind, the
Ornaments of a meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4.
which is in the sight of God of great price.

Neiter shall I presume to trace, or attend this singular Lady through every
Scene and Condition of her Life, as a single Person, or married Woman, as
Princess of Orange, or Queen of England; that were a Task enough for a more
learned Pen near her Majesty to perform. Though in all these Conditions, it may
be truly said, She always managed herself with that honorable Reputation and
wise Conduct, that she appeared to have all the Virtue and Goodness, but none
indeed, I think none, of the Vanities and Imperfections of her Sex.

In discoursing therefore of her noble Character, I shall a little invert the
order which the Wise man has here observed, and digest my Matter into this
Method. I shall consider, First, Her Piety, with some useful Reflections upon
it. Secondly, Her admirable Condescension. Thirdly, Her extraordinary Charity.


These I take to be the chief Characteristicks of a Virtuous Woman.

I shall also in the last place, just mention some of her other Virtues, and
then apply the whole to our present purpose.

First, I begin with her Piety; because this is the necessary Foundation of all
the other Virtues and Graces of a virtuous Woman; and on that score, has the
precedence in the nature and order of things. For Piety in the most
comprehensive notion of the word, containing all the Dimensions and Boundaries
of the Divine Scheme, is that pregnant Principle which works the Mind into an
universal regard of all God's commands; and, like the animal spirit, diffuses
it self through the whole Man, producing acts suitable to it self, and in no way
repugnant to those commands. Therefore, as the natural motions of a Man are the
immediate effects of the animal Spirit, so all his good, moral Actions, proceed
from this Fountain of Piety, and are the proper Emanations of this vital
Principle.

But without this internal sense of Religion, all our religious Performances
can be esteemed no better than mere Form and Pageantry, the Profession of
Hypocrites.

Now this genuine sensation of true Piety was admirable in her Majesty, and
above the flights of Rhetoric, which discovered it self through the whole course
and method of her Life; and that chiefly distinguished, and raised her above
the rank and condition of ordinary Mortals.

Some indeed are blown up to the high Pinnacle of Honor, by the auspicious Gale
of Fortune, and owe their height more to the benevolence of others, than to any
merit of their own. But then all their towering Height and glittering Show,
without true, solid Goodness to give it life, is but a golden, senseless
Effigies, or an airy Meteor, which only dazles the eyes in its transit, and
then vanishes into its first Matter.

Whereas Piety is a substantial Good, which intrinsic worth does infinitely
excel all the goods and pomp of Greatness. The one is Human, Earthly, and
Temporal; the other Divine, Heavenly, and of Eternal Duration; this raises a
Person to an higher step of Advancement then Secular Greatness can possibly
arrive unto. For Religion, being truly Divine, both in its original, and in its
end, as it came down from Heaven, so tends thither again, and thither it exalts
its Votaries. In order whereunto it spiritualizes Humanity, and never leaves
off refining it from its Terrene Imperfections, till it be in some measure
assimulated, and united to the Divine Nature, till our Minds are transformed
into the very Image of the Deity, and in the Apostle's phrase, Christ is formed
in us. Gal. 4.19.


By this time, and not before, it is that we have something of true value, and
solid Greatness in us. For God Almighty being the Fountain and the Measure of
all Perfections, the nearer any Person approaches him, by the practice of
Sanctity and Goodness, (the only way and means to become like God) the
worthier, and the more to be valued he is; and the more hereby he participates
of God's Nature, by so much the more excellent and honorable he must needs be;
and consequently the greater praise and esteem should attend him, in respect of
that Divine resemblance he bears.

If so, how admirably good, and great, and honorary will this most Religious
Princess appear, if we measure her Character by that Rule, and from thence make
an estimate of her Worth? in whom the Divine Idea did so eminently manifest it
self, in all the Instances of holy Living, that her whole Life was a Pattern
not unworthy of our imitation.

As Piety, in its limited sense, signifies Devotion; how constant, how regular,
and how seraphick was she in this? like pious Anna, Luke 2.37.
serving God night and day in the Temple; so strictly observing the stated
times of Public Prayers, that neither the necessary refreshments of Nature,
nor all the hurry and succession of State Affairs, which perpetually crowded in
for her adjustment and dispatch, could scarce ever extort from her any
intermission of them. From hence we may with good reason conclude, That our
Lord's direction for praying, Matt. 6.6.
in our retirements to the Father, who sees in secret, could be no less
practiced in her private Devotion.

At the Celebration of every part of Divine Worship, how fixed and intent her
mind? how fervent and enflamed her Affections, which were so warm and
devotional, as could not but enkindle the cold indifference of all wandering
adjacent Minds? How constant and uniform was her whole Practice in the several
Duties of the Christian Institution? and that without the least tincture of
vanity or ostentation.

And all these pious Performances were the result, not of constraint, like that
of a melancholy Recluse, but of free and generous Resolution, of an unaffected,
well grounded Zeal; so neither were they cloistered or confined within the
narrow limits of her Closet, but mostly acted on the Stage of the World; and by
a general, and no less true report, proclaimed on the Housetop; the sound
whereof has long since pierced through, and ecchoed in every corner of the Land,
even from Dan to Beersheba. Whereby this shining Model of Christian Virtues
must needs prove the most persuasive Oratory, the most effectual means to
recommend to, and engage all her Subjects in the Practice of Religion. For
Example is of much more force and efficacy than Precept, or the best
Discourses: It has a secret power and influence upon those whom we govern or
converse with, to mould and form them into the same manners and disposition.
And by consequence, nothing in the World can contribute so much to promote the
Honor of God, and the Propagation of the Gospel, as the Exemplary Lives of
those who make profession of it. Hence it is we are enjoined to let our light
so shine before men, Matt. 5.16.
that they may see our good works, and be induced thereby to glorify our
heavenly Father.

For this great End, her Majesty was one of the fittest, best accomplished
Instruments that ever weilded the English Scepter. To attempt the Reformation
of our Manners, and establish Holiness and Virtue in the Hearts and Lives of
these Kingdoms, suitable to the Principles of our Reformed Religion; and to
carry on so great a work with success, none was so proper, so well qualified in
every respect. To which end, among other qualifications, these three are
essentially necessary.


1. The first Requisite is good Example. Whoever goes

But for that Objection here was no room; the most inveterate Adversaries could
never yet charge this Royal Reformatrix with any of those Vices which she has
been laboring to rectify in the Nation: nay, they could not but be satisfied
in the sincerity of her good Intention, when they saw her Life to be nothing
else but the Transcript of our Savior's Doctrine: this prevented their
prejudice, this stopped the mouths of Gainsayers. Hence it plainly appears,
that no Impediment in her Practice could obstruct the accomplishing of this
intended Reformation. Had we corrected and framed our Lives by hers, we might
have been the most religious and happiest People in the World, that ever lived
since the planting of the Gospel in this Island, which has not these many
hundred years (if ever) seen such a bright Example of Piety and Goodness
sitting upon the Throne. Which put Religion into the possibility of attracting
others, when they perceived it so illustriously visible in such a Noble Person;
whose Example had the highest Authority and Majesty on its side. That Is another
qualification necessary to render any Example more prevalent.

2. To reform Mankind, or to produce any remarkable change in their Manners,
the utmost endeavors of private Men, nay the most vigorous attempts of
subordinate Officers, are too weak and ineffective; their Actions being as
inconsiderable, as their Persons are regardless, can have no power on their
Superiors, it being against the grain and the established course of Nature,
whereby the higher Bodies are supposed to influence those below; the inferior
Orbs are whirled round by the motion of the Primum mobile, and not vice versa,
there is no re-action in this case.

And therefore all Attempts and Endeavors for Reformation are but like beating
the Air, vain and fruitless, so long as wickedness reigns in High places, is
countenanced by the Pattern of the Higher Powers: as it was some years since;
when Idolatry was bearing down before it all bounds of true Piety and Virtue,
and ready to establish its Empire by a Statute Law; for the accomplishing
which, there was nothing wanting but the Concurrence and Votes of the two
honorable Houses at Westminster.

But that Point being now weathered and past, Religion has once again lifted up
its Head above the Waters. And Piety, that rare, but necessary qualification of
Princes, being returned to Court, has, from thence, looked down Vice with a
Majestic Countenance; and by the advantage of the Supreme Authority on its
side, was (and I hope still is) in a very fair way of recovering its pristin
Reputation and Esteem, together with its former Ground. For when Religion comes
commissioned and armed with the mighty Power of the Prince's Example, who is so
disloyal, or strong enough to resist its force? When nothing is herein imposed
on every Subject, but what is frankly performed by the Magistrate himself; what
should hinder but that Virtue must become fashionable, and that natural
Ambition which most Men have of being in the fashion, and like their
Governors, make them Religious too?

It Is a general Observation that Wealth and Honor have these two advantageous
Appendages, as they render any Person more considerable, and his actions no
less noted; so they create in others an honest Emulation, an aptness to embrace
his Dictates, and transcribe his Copies. If those therefore, whose Superiority
above others, have vast Authority over them, whose Sphere is large, and
Influence great, who have many Dependents or Subjects who court their Favor,
and whose interest it is to observe and please them; if those, I say, would
faithfully discharge that great Obligation which lies upon them, of giving good
Example, what plentiful Harvest of Souls might Heaven reap by them? For the
Multitude, like the lesser Lines in the Circle, generally tend to the same
Center, either of Virtue or Vice, by a kind of a natural Instinct act, more
upon the Principle of Imitation, than upon those of Reason and Religion. Upon
this it was that Isocrates grounds his Advice to Nicocles; Isocrates Oration ad
Nicocl.
the Advice indeed was worthy of so great an Orator to give, and not below the
Dignity of the Magistrate to observe in the Administration of the Government,
(...); i. e. But set your self a Pattern of Temperance and Moderation, or
Religion and Virtue to others, as knowing that is the usual Mode of the People
to conform to, and write after the Copy set them by their Magistrates.

3. Another Requisite in a Person that would Reform others, is Zeal. Zeal is
the very Soul and Life of Christianity; an Affection, of all others, the most
active and vigilant, and which is wont to inspire Men with the most passionate
care and concernment for Religion, without which all our pretenses to it are
but formal and superficial.

And this Zeal seems to have had a deep Foundation in the Natural Forwardness
of their Majesty's Tempers; which, as we have sufficiently experienced, put
them upon the most dangerous Undertakings, for the Rescue and necessary Defense
of the best Religion and Constitution in the World.

When an over-spreading Degeneracy had seized the Vitals of this Nation; when
the whole Body was well nigh sick, and overrun by strange Looseness of Manners,
and Profaneness of Spirit, and had, for many years, labored and groaned under
the inevitable pressures of these Epidemical Distempers; to undertake the
difficult Cure thereof, no competent Physician was to be found, no, not in our
Israel; till Divine Providence, in compassionate regard of our languishing
Condition, was pleased to inflame and stir up the Zeal of their Majesty's to
step in to our Help and Assistance. Since their Arrival, and being happily set
over us, toward the purging and removing away these Maladies, how diligent,
how active, and how zealous have they been, not only by their own excellent
Examples, but also by injoyning all their subordinate Magistrates to put the
Laws in execution against the Contagious Evils of the Age; and so with all
their might, and by all prudent ways and means, endeavoring to recover Men out
of the Snares of the Devil, whereby too many were taken captive; and to
vindicate and secure the Honor and the Worship of the most High God, against
the daring Insolence of bold Impiety and Atheism? How dutifully some of the
Magistracy obeyed their Injunction, or how far this Reformation has been
advanced, is a Reflection beside my present Intention.

However, had the Queen lived to give the finishing stroke to her pious Design
and Resolution, in joint Concurrence with our gracious King, (on whom alone,
next under Heaven, our Hope is now devolved and united, for the vigorous
Prosecution of so glorious a Cause) we might have seen the persecuted Woman in
the Apolypse, victoriously triumphing over the old Dragon. But that Victory is
yet incompleated, although this Royal Conqueress has already fought her good
Fight, kept the Faith, and obtained the Crown of Righteousness. I proceed,

Secondly, To consider her wonderful Condescension and

However to vulgar and carnal Eyes this may appear but abject, mean, and a
despicable quality, yet really the Soul of Man is not capable of an higher and
more noble Endowment. It is silly ignorance of one's own Imperfections, and
foreign Dependence, I mean upon God, begets Pride, that destructive Elevation
of Mind, which transforms the Saint into a Fiend, and which hurled down the
prime Angels from the Throne of Glory to the Abyss of infernal Misery. For God
has ever resisted the proud. But Humility results from a better Judgment, and
more intimate Acquaintance with excellent things, which keeps Men from doting
on Trifles, or admiring themselves upon some petty Seize. Besides, this
abasing Temper imports a peculiar Eminence, beyond all natural and moral
Perfections, as being the peculiar Grace of the Gospel; and also the Root and
Preserver of all other Graces and Virtues.

Humility is the peculiar Grace of the Gospel. Before the Christian
Institution, the World were much strangers to it. Among the ancient Heathens,
their Masters of Morality, in their Philosophical Discourses of Fortitude,
Temperance, Wisdom, Justice, and other Virtues, take no notice of that of
Humility. And they were so far from practicing it themselves, that we find as
deep silence in their Lives as in their Institutions; nay in their Works they
affected Popular Esteem, and the Eternizing of their Names. And though some of
the most rigid Sects of them, pretended by an austere Course of Life, to
contemn the World, and mortify their Passion; yet even in this they were
extremely proud; whilst other Men were despised by them, themselves desired to
be observed and esteemed.

So that Lowliness of Mind is the appropriate Law of our Blessed Savior, from
whose Life and Doctrine we learn it. 'Twas with this he began his Divine Sermon
on the Mount, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit, i. e. the humble. And he
continues and ends it with this. Whereby we may understand, both the great
excellence of this Virtue, and the great need we have of it; since the Son of
God came down from Heaven to teach us the practice of, and make himself our
Pattern therein.

As this was the first Cornerstone in the Foundation of our Lord's Building,
so it is still the Foundation and Preserver of all Christian Superstructures. As
the Flower imbibes its nutriment, and receives its support from the Root, which
being eradicated, the Flower instantly fades and withers; so every Virtue
whatsoever, if it do not grow and continue in this Root or Ground of Humility,
degenerates into its contrary. All virtuous Actions therefore must be
commenced, accompanied, and consummated by Humility. If vain Complacence and
Self-pleasing thrust in, that mars and spoils the grace and beauty of the best
Performances. So necessary then is this humbleness of Spirit for the acquiring
and conserving all other Virtues, that even Faith, that first Principle of
Christianity, supposes a submiss and humble Understanding, a Disposition
requisite for its Reception and final Improvement.

Whereas Pride is a dangerous Rock, upon which the Faith of many has been
split; who have afterward grown so stiff and tenacious of their Errors, that
even Miracles were not demonstration sufficient to restore or convince them.

But this Wind, this Vanity which puffs up, was so far from taking root, or
finding any entertainment in her Highness's Breast, that notwithstanding all
the Temptations which surrounded her Royal Person, and might have carried up
her Mind to the highest Pyramid of Pride, (had not her Temper been very correct
and stayed) she was humble, in a manner, to the lowest step of Abasure; and yet
without any debasement of Majesty, or making her self cheap.

There are two things apt to swell Men's minds, and tempt them to form a fond
Opinion of their own Worth, (which often creates an unjust Contempt of others)
namely some internal Endowments, or some external Possessions.

As to the first, Nature, Birth, and Education conspired to greaten this Noble
Soul with the most exquisite Ornaments of an accomplished Lady. From hence she
derived a quick and piercing Apprehension, prompt and retentive Memory,
sprightly and active Fancy, clear and solid Judgment overruling them all.
These being all so much improved by frequent Meditation and Experience, that no
station inferior to that wherein she was placed, no dignity subordinate to
what she sustained, were worthy enough of so much intellectual Nobility and
Goodness; which in very few years are grown ripe for a Crown of immarcessible
Glory.

As for External Advantages or Possessions, Fortune, or rather Providence could
not, on this side Heaven, have set her upon an higher Pinnacle of Honor and
Greatness: For Princes are in Scripture styled Gods. Psalm. 81.6.
They are the Almighty's Vicegerents on Earth.

Now amidst all these high Accomplishments and Altitudes of Honor, she still
kept her self within the Region of Humility, like the Sun in this lower
Firmament, emitting her benign Influences on all her People, and treating them
with all expressions of Humanity and Condescension: which were no ordinary
Virtue, no ordinary degree of Abasement: For, though Men, who are endowed with
Parts and Excellencies above others, should, not unlike the full Ears of Corn,
bend the lower; and those, whom God has raised in Fortune, paramount as Stars,
should, in some sense, seem the lesser for their Height. But that looks like
Paradox to the greatest part of Mankind. Human Nature being so prone to swell
upon a conceit of its own Perfections, that few Heads are strong enough to
endure Heights, and walk upon Spires and Pinacles, without growing vertiginous;
so indeed Wealth and Honor may be, not unjustly, termed; which, like the
loftiest Piles, are always assaulted by the highest winds. And the sublimer any
Person is advanced in Honor and Greatness, the more temptations and hazards
attend him, and by so much sharper will be the Combat of Vanity and
Self-esteem. But then the greater the difficulty and danger are, the more
honorable the Victory wherever it is achieved. According to which Rule, how
ineffably excellent was the condescending Virtue of our Great Deceased? which
exerted it self to all Men's admiration, in her most obliging Carriage and
indefatigable Diligence.

First, In the Obligingness and Affability of her Carriage, expressed to all
Mankind. Who, upon any Emergency, was ever debarred the favor of her Presence,
or denied access to her sacred Person; or sent away without a smooth, easy,
and satisfactory Answer to his Request? Her Majesty did not disdain to
vouchsafe a candid Audience to the humble Petitions of all Addressers, and to
the utmost of her power, a ready Redress to those aggrieved; contrary to the
humor of those days, when the Higher Power were to be, not petitioned, but
obeyed without reserve; when nothing, but fulsom Compliments were received,
without a Frown.

But the Temper of this gracious Soul was more serene and free from sullen
State and Imperiousness, the ordinary Infirmity of Princes. Her whole
Deportment was so easy and pleasing, that it gave a lovely Pattern of cheerful
Air, admirable Sweetness and Familiarity, which at once gained Affections and
preserved Respect in all about her. Thus Humility and Greatness were safe in
its own worth; not maintaining it self by a morose distance, but comporting
with the most condescending Majesty.

Some Men's Veins swell with their Fortune; and their Pulse keeping time with
that, beat so high and quick, as if they fancied Greatness consisted in looking
stern and big, or that supercilious Gravity and disdainful Look, could extort a
Reverence from all Mankind. Which is so far from being a Mark of true Nobility,
that, if I be not mistaken, it is no more than mere Pageantry and Vapor. And
also, in its Aims and Hopes, it generally meets with disappointment. For Pride
defeateth its own design, and deprives a Man of that Honor it makes him
pretend to, whilst true, genuine Humility begets both a Veneration and Love
amongst all wise and discerning people. 'Twas this, in particular, that
rendered her Majesty so amiable, and such a mighty Sovereign, in the hearts and
affections of all men, as far as known. If any thought otherwise of her, 'twas
their ignorance of her Worth, or bigoted Prejudice, that blinded their Reason,
and biased their Judgment, and made them think so.

Another Instance of her extraordinary Condescension was her indefatigable
diligence and industriousness, beyond the Custom of any of her quality, and the
Example of former Ages.

Though Nature and Religion have provided and carve'd out for every Person his
proper Calling, wherein he may exercise himself, and employ his Talents, that
his time may not lie upon his hands, nor his other Appendages prove Snares unto
him. Yet those, whom Providence has preferred to a condition of most ease and
vacancy, are strongly tempted to pervert that condition into a Life of
Sensuality and Idleness. Hence it was, that our Prince's Court, and many of the
Nobility counted themselves, manumitted from business and industry, as things
beneath the Dignity of their Stations, so that working was out of fashion, that
Virtue had almost taken its final leave of them, till it was introduced and
encouraged by our Queen; whose noble Pattern, as well as Prescription had now,
not only created an Imitation in most, but made the Apostle's Canon, in a
manner, the standing Law of her Court, 2 Coloss. 3.10.
That if any would not work, neither should he eat. This disciplined the Court
it self into a Royal Factory; from which, if any could claim exemption, surely
they, that sit at the Helm might; who, humanly speaking, might be supposed to
be sent into the World, as the Leviathan into the Deep, to take their Pastime
therein. And consequently to prescribe Princes and Persons of Quality any
Manual Tasks, might well be deemed, not only absurd, and adjudged ridiculous,
but malicious, a levelling Project of robbing them of their Birthright, of
degrading them from those Privileges which belongs to their States and
Conditions, and of molding them again into that Vulgar Mass, from which Divine
Providence, and Human Laws, have distinguished them.

But this Distinction, and this Consideration were superseded by a Diviner
Principle in this excellent Christian, who thought Working no indecent Virtue
in the highest Potentate, but a Duty indiscriminately entailed upon every
Person; By the Obligation whereof, there being none privileged with immunity
from improving, in industrious negotiation, those Talents, of which God has
made them, not Proprietors, but Stewards. How officiously therefore did this
mighty Princess condescend to set her own Hands to work, as well as those of
her whole Court: not unlike the Heavenly Courtiers, among whom there is not one
President of Pride and Sloathfulness, but all incessantly busy themselves, not
only in singing Praises to their Lord, but in the more servile and laborious
Offices of being Ministering Spirits to Men, to whom, in respect of Nature and
Innocence, they are infinitely superior; and this they do with perfect
alacrity and complacence, thinking it their greatest Honor and Dignity to be
thus employed. In imitation of which Angelick Pattern, how constantly and
indefatigably busied were our Feminine Court, not only in the great Concern of
the Sanctuary, but also in Affairs (as one might think) inferior to the
Greatness of their Quality; and that not for any Secular Profit and Advantage
accruing to themselves, but hereby to cut off and obviate all opportunity and
incitement to Vice and Folly, of which Ease and Idleness are the greatest
Incendiaries; and also by their Example to excite the Nation to the like Virtue
of Industry.

Here we must observe, That their Employments were not vicious or impertinent,
but always worthy, useful, and ingenuous. Now was not all this, like the
Angels, to do good, purely for the good and benefit of others; others, who were
far subordinate in Rank and Circumstance?

In this particular, how agreeable is the Character of Solomon's Woman to my
present Theme? How did her Practice suit to that? She seeks wool and flax,
Verse. 13.
and works willingly with her hands. 15.
She rises also while it is yet night, and gives meat to her household, and a
portion to her maidens. She girdeth her loins with strength, 17.
and strengthens her arms. She lays her hands to the spindle, 19.
and her hands hold the distaff. She is not afraid of the snow for her
household, 21.
for all her household are clothed with double garments. She makes herself
tapestry, 22.
her clothing is silk and purple. These are the Acts of the Virtuous Woman in
my Text; and also of our deceased Queen. How exactly do they agree? how well do
they hang together? only the latter has outdone the former in her Religious
Care and Zeal for the House of God, which she has adorned with goodly Gifts and
rich Ornaments of her own Manufacture.

Thus her Majesty was pleased to stoop to some of the meanest Offices of Life.
To whom nothing could be more odious, than to see hands folded up in the bosom
of Sloth and Emptiness. Hence it was that she would admit no Person to be idle
or unimploy'd in her Royal Presence. Nothing is so irksome, so tedious to a
diligent and industrious Soul, than vacation from Business; and nothing more
desirable, and more grateful to its Temper, than innocent Exercise and
Employment.

Thirdly, Another Mark of a Virtuous Woman is Charity. Charity, in its largest
acceptance, comprizes the us, amounts to no more but this, That we heartily
and effectually Love him, and one another. Therefore Love, says the Apostle,
Romans 13.10.
is the fulfilling of the Law. And I may add, It Is the Soul of the Universe,
and that which brought down God (who is Love) to Man, as well as that by which
Man must ascend to God again.

But in that extent Charity is foreign, and beyond the limits of our present
purpose. Only that Branch of it, which we call Mercy and Compassion, falls
under our consideration. In this sense the Wise man reckons it among the
Properties of his Virtuous Woman. After he had described her Industry and
Diligence for acquiring of Wealth, he sets this Virtue in the front of her
Disbursement, (as the principal use she makes of her Acquest) She stretches
forth her hand to the poor, Verse. 20.
and reaches her hands to the needy.

So essentially necessary indeed is this Virtue to any Person's being truly
Virtuous and Religious, that I need not cast about for Arguments to prove it,
or to urge the Practice of it. For Kindness and Compassion is one of the prime
and essential Inclinations of Mankind. By the impulse of Natural Instinct we
are prompted to it. And to put off the Bowels of Mercy, what is it, but in
effect to be divested of Humanity, to un-man and brutalize one's self? Be sure
we do hereby disrobe our selves of Christianity, whereof doing good, and Acts
of Mercy are the main and most substantial Part; the most acceptable Sacrifice
we can offer, the most pleasing I had almost said meritorious Service we can
perform to Almighty God: For it is that which derives to us all the Divine Gifts
we are capable of receiving.

Now this Charity consists in giving, and in forgiving. For both which our
gracious Sovereign of blessed Memory, was highly Eminent and Exemplary.

First, In Giving. You have already heard what extraordinary

This was the only Motive which, in that Critical Juncture, swayed her, to the
acceptance of the English Crown. And whilst she wore it, she had no other
Affection to gratify, no Interest to serve by it, but the Good of this Church
and State, and her own most vehement Zeal for the doing of it.

For my part, I know no Instance of Charity compararable to that of rescuing
whole Nations from the Snare laid for them, from the brink of Despair and Ruin;
and to succor those who are persecuted for Righteousness sake. Herein, who
has ever expressed greater Readiness, Warmth, and Activity, than King William
and Queen Mary.

To hazard one's Life to preserve another Man's is no common Act of Charity.
But for Princes to venture their Lives for the good of any People, is yet a
greater matter: this renders the Kindness more precious and valuable, according
to the Worth and Dignity of the Undertakers. For such to expose themselves, and
all that is dear to them in this World, to save Kingdoms, is to imitate the
unparallel Love of our Blessed Savior, who spent a whole Life of Three and
thirty years, in doing good to all the Kingdoms and Nations of the Earth, and
to every Member thereof; and then to consummate their Happiness, laid down that
Life, and spilt his Divine Soul, for the purchase of it. Though All that be such
a mysterious Instance of Divine Love, as no expression of Human Affection can
possibly, by many degrees, come up near to: yet how like to that, though it falls
infinitely short of it, is this, when Persons of the highest State, (who being
seated on such a Rock, as the waves of Fortune could not probably shake) reach
down their helping hands to relieve a People tossed in a tempestuous Sea of
Dangers; when they, who might have set in a Calm, squandring their time in ease
and luxury, free from corroding Cares, assume the Rolling of the restless Stone
of State-Imployment, and toil at it with singular Address and Integrity; and
undergo the tedious Fatigues of Camps, the thousand hazards and difficulties of
Battles, besides the dangerous passings of a boisterous Sea, and the dangers of
secret Conspiracies; and all with undaunted Courage and unwearied Patience, for
the Defense of Religion, and the Liberty of Christendom, even while Death every
moment stares them in the face; herein, I say, they bear the nearest
resemblance that can be to our Great Redeemer.

This alone (if there were no other Instances of Charity) might sufficiently
serve to compensate the omission of all other. But in them, this generous
Princess, was not wanting neither. The natural greatness and Generosity of her
Mind, being much enlarged by the additional Improvement of a pious Institution,
were every whit equal, I should have said superior, to the Eminence and Plenty
of that Condition wherein Providence had placed her. And consequently, as her
extraordinary Ability, the easy access to her Person, and the wonderful
Affability of her Temper, were no little Motives and Encouragements to all
sorts of Persons to repair to her Majesty for favor and relief, (that she
could never be to seek Objects and pressing Occasions to dilate her bountiful
Heart, and disperse her benign Influences) so she would, not only courteously
entertain, but, to the utmost stretch of her Capacity, grant them what they had
requested; and that, in such a manner, as mightily enhanc'd the value of every
Kindness she bestowed, the Frankness of her doing it doubled the benefit and
obligation. Men spoil a good Turn, when it is extorted from them. It loses its
Grace and Acceptableness, when it is done grudgingly, and as of necessity.

But so full of Goodness was this Royal Heart, that like the extended full
Breasts of a nursing Mother, it could not be at ease without continual venting
it self, till it sometimes caused in her one of the deepest Resentments, to
find her Treasury exhausted, before the streams of her Bounty had filled every
Chanel, satisfied every Supplicant.

That she has not left as fair and lasting Monuments of her Charity, as any of
her Royal Predecessors, must be imputed to the brevity of her Life, and the
expensive circumstances of our present Affairs. For doubtless such a generous
Soul could not want for mighty Projects of erecting them, and of doing much
more good.

Secondly, As to the other Office of Charity, which consists in Forgiving, and
is peculiarly styled Clemency, her her Compassion had been worthy enough of our
Remark and Admiration. For the Nature of that Sex, consisting of softer Mold,
is generally more pliant and yielding to the impression of Pity; and by the
strength of Imagination redoubles the horror of any sad Object. But as Grace
outgoes Nature, so her compassionate Temper, and Readiness to Forgive, was
heightened to a pitch more than ordinarily remarkable; which often transported
her to such Acts of Mercy and Oblivion, as made some apt to tax the present
Establishment with excess therein; there being not any thing more to be feared
in it, than its too much Mildness and Clemency. But thereby she showed her
better Skill and singular Talent in the prudent Managery of this Nation, in a
way corresponding with their Genius, which may be led by such a gentle Method,
but cannot be driven by an harsher Treatment. This, I am persuaded, made more
Friends, the other might have procured more Enemies to the present Government.

For that Government which is founded in Blood and Violence, can be neither
safe nor lasting. But Gentleness and Moderation are a firmer Foundation, as
being most agreeable to the Evangelical Dispensation; and consequently most
capable of Divine Benediction, and also to the People, an easier Yoke, and a
lighter Burden.

What strong Cathartic do often endanger, Conserves and Electuaries seldom fail
to preserve. These cooperate gently with the Faculties of Nature; but those by
their rapid Convulsions tear the Bowels, and are apt to put the whole Frame
into disorder.

Their Majesty's therefore, being no such rough and resolute Physicians, had
learnt the Art of Curing the Diseases of the Body Politic, from a more skilful
Master, even from him who has taught us, That as Wine is to be poured into the
wound to search, so Oil is also necessary to supple; both sometimes expedient
to effect the Cure. Thus the Affections of Malcontents and Delinquents have
been courted over to a better mind, by methods of Mildness and Pardon, rather
than by the force of the Secular Arms, or rigorous Execution of Laws.

When Antoninus Pius was once by Aurelius charged for the like remisness and
lenity, he replied, Opus de temporibus mundi, in vita Ant. Pii.
That he had rather save one Citizen of Rome, than kill a thousand enemies. We
know who has done the latter, many times over, with greatest Courage and
Bravery, whilst he made Acts of Indemnity the Vehicle of Grace and Obligation
to all his Domestic Foes.

It is a Mark of no ordinary Goodness, when hurt, to be able to forgive; nor
any little Glory to put up Injuries, to pardon Provocations, that deserve the
severest Penalty. Such Clemency, such Tenderness in Princes makes them look the
most like to the Most High, most resemble Him, whom they represent, and whose
most glorious Attribute is, To have Mercy and to Forgive: and not only cast a
glorious Luster round about, attracting the Eyes and Hearts of other Men, but
it reflects cheerful and solacing Gleams of Glory on Majesty it self. In a
word; This Grace, being the most excellent and perfect Act of Charity, inspires
Kings and Queens with a Greatness and Goodness of Mind, equal to their high
Stations, and fit for God's Vicegerents; in whom certainly nothing is more
admirable than a generous Goodness and Clemency, even toward great Enemies and
Offenders, so far as is consistent with the Public Safety.

Against what has been said under this Head, there may perhaps be one
Objection, made in favor of some Persons, unhappily fallen under hard
measures, since this great Revolution.

In Answer to that, let the Necessities of Government, the indispensable
Obligation of executing Laws (the Dispensing Power being at this time of day
out of doors) be duly and impartially weighed; and Reasons enough will appear
to vindicate their Majesty's Proceeding, and to convince any unprejudiced Mind
concerning their great unwillingness therein. The truth is, the Queen had such
a quick sense of Men's Sufferings of any kind, that in giving them ease, she
took a special Complacence; but to find herself sometimes straightned, or
disabled of that, by some unfortunate Impediment in the Object, she accounted
one of her greatest Infelicities. The Malice and Ingratitude of Men were not
able to obstruct the flowings of her Love; she overlooked Injuries, pitied
Folly, and overcame Evil with Good. Is it any wonder then, that such a Person
as this was reverenced and admired, and counted the Darling of Mankind? This
inward Goodness, this compassionate Benignity of Spirit reflected a graceful
Air upon all she said and did; and now renders her Memory precious and grateful
to Posterity, making it lovely, and continue like the Perfumes in their Ashes,
uncorrupted in the midst of Corruption.

Having thus gone through my three first Propositions, should I here enter upon
the Consideration of her other Virtues and Accomplishments, Time would fail me
before I could arrive to a full Period. I shall therefore only crave your
patience would give me leave, just to touch her Loyalty to the King, and her
admirable Resignation at Death.

To complete the Parallel between the virtuous Woman in the Proverbs, and this
Royal Princess, (who rather excelled the other in all the Perfections of an
accomplished, good Christian; Verse. 11,
) It Is said, The heart of her husband does safely trust in her; so that he
shall have no need of spoil. She will do him good, 12.
and not evil all the days of her life. The Application of all which was not
impertinent to this, Royal Person; who, to a Punctilio, discharged the Duty of
a most Loyal Wife. So tender was she of the King's Person, so just to his
Interest, so faithful to his Secrets committed to her Breast, and so sensibly
concerned for all his Affairs, that it may be truly said of Her, Many Women
have done virtuously, but Thou excellest them all.

Her Patience and Resignation in Death, was of the same Stamp with her other
Graces and Virtues. Crowns and Dominions are such tempting things, as make Men
aspire after with greatest vigor and intensness of Mind; and which, when got,
are retained and grasped with that obstinacy and tenaciousness, that Men
generally express as great reluctance and regret at parting with them; and will
not let lose their hold, even at the Summons of Death, without the sharpest
Conflict and Violence. But here was a Crown laid down with the same
Indifference it had, at first, been taken up. The Commutation for an immortal
One, was the chief Aim of her Care and Ambition. Her Conversation having been
so long in Heaven, that her lively Hopes and constant Expectance, I had almost
said Fruition, of those ravishing Joys and Glories above, had long since
unlac'd and weaned her Mind from the Pleasures and Embraces of Sensual
Enjoyments. Her Thoughts were fixed there, her Desires always ascending
thither, where full and endless satisfaction is to be found. So that neither
the Charms of this World could arrest her Affections, nor its Frowns disturb
her Fears: She was not taken with its Applause, nor grieved at the leaving of
it. She was morally dead before she died, and paid that Debt to Nature. To die
well is the Result of a well-spent Life; but to die without being sick is the
special Favor of God, which he vouchsafed to this his peculiar Favorite,
whose precious Soul, in a single Sigh, stepped over into the other World.

All that now remains, is to improve and apply what has been delivered, to our
Present purpose. The Design of this Discourse is, First, To possess you with
due Sense of our present Loss: Secondly, To excite you to a vigorous Imitation
of this excellent Example.

First, The main Design of this Discourse is, to possess you with due Sense of
our Loss in the Person of this excellent Princess. The true Standard, whereby
we are to measure the Loss of any thing, must be taken from, either the Benefit
we might have reaped by it, or the Detriment consequential to the Deprivation
of it. By both these Ways, we shall come, to understand the Nature of our
present Loss.

As to the Benefits, we might have reaped by this excellent Princess, we can
easily conjecture at them, partly by those which we have already received by
her; to whose, and his Majesty's wise Providence, under God, we owe the free
Enjoyment of our Religion and Civil Properties. And partly, by those
incomparable Qualifications for the doing of Good, she was endued with, and
which I have been describing to you. What glorious Advantages should we have
enjoyed under her Government, if she had lived to the utmost Period of Nature,
and done all the Good we could have hoped from her? How much Good might a
Person, so qualified as she was, so disposed, so resolved, so indefatigable in
Business, we can, not uneasily, judge, by what she has done? How much more Good
might, and would she have done, had she lived to the full Age of a Man? But to
be taken off, at Two or Three and Thirty, in the Flower of her Age, in the
beginning of her doing Good to these Nations, when she might have lived at
least as long again, (if it had pleased God to have spared her to us) to go on
in doing as she did; the Thought of this has much pain, much uneasiness in it:
who is able to bear the weight of it?

As for the other way of discovering the Nature of our Loss, the Detriment that
may follow the Death of so excellent a Magistrate, (I pray God we incur none)
is yet an Embryo in the Womb of Time: we are much at a loss in our Guesses of
what that may be.

This I am sure of, that though the good God, who never does any thing ill,
intended this immature Fall for her gain, whom he has taken to himself; and
whom he has taken at that time, which doubtless suited best to her
Circumstances, though some cannot discern it, who consider not, That the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come: Isai. 57.1.
yet our Loss is great and irrepairable; and therefore we have just Cause to
grieve for our selves, and for the Church, who are deprived of the Benefits of
such a Queen: how much more, since for ought we know, she is taken away for our
sins? since for ought we know, it is because the Age was not worthy of such a
Blessing? Since for ought we know, it is in order to some Judgment, which will
come the sooner, seeing she, who stood in the Gap, is gone, when we have filled
up the measure of our Iniquities, which God Almighty never fails to punish.

This Consideration must needs affect us with deep sense of our Loss. O! how
shall the English World, this Motherless Land, weep Elegies enough to condole
the untimely Fall of This Royal Cedar, This Light of our Eyes, This Breath of
our Nostrils, This Anointed of the Lord; of whom, we said, under her wings we
shall be safe! If, as St. Paul speaks, for a good man, Rom.. 5 7.
some would even dare to die; who would not have died for her, who was worth
ten thousands of the People? O! that our Sighs and Tears could reverse the
irreversible Sentence, and reprieve her to Life again! but, alas! that were an
impossible thing, and unlawful for us even to attempt. All that we can do, in
this case, is, to pay our just Tribute of Sorrow to her Sacred Memory, and take
up David's Lamentation over Saul, and over Jonathan his Son: The Beauty of
Israel is gone; 2 Samuel 1.
how is the mighty fallen? Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets
of Askelon, the Enemies Cities and Countries; lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice; lest the Daughters of uncircumsised Papists triumph. Ye
daughters of Israel weep over your Nursing Mother, who clothed you in Scarlet,
with other delights: who put on Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel.

Methinks I hear the valiant Joshua, that Heroic Prince, who has so often
faced the King of Terror, without a frightful Thought, as if he knew no such
Passion as Fear. Methinks I hear him mourning in secret, sighing out his tender
Affections in such sorrowful Expressions, as those of the Royal Prophet; I am
distressed for Thee, my dear Consort; very pleasant have Thou been unto me: Thy
Love to me was wonderful, passing the Love of Women, etc. May the God of all
Consolation buoy up his drooping Spirit, under the weight and load of so much
grief: and continue him many and many years, to be be the Folstern Father of
this Church, the Defender of the Faith, and the Bulwark of this Nation; and
together with him, those Royal Branches in whom we have a farther Prospect of a
Protestant Succession, and an Happiness to come. Which Consideration serves
particularly to set here bounds and shores to our Grief and Lamentation.

Secondly, Another Design of this Discourse is, to excite you, and my self to a
vigorous Imitation of this excellent Example. A good Example is of very great
advantage to Religion; and no less useful and beneficial to all Men that would
be Religious.

Example is of so great Advantage to Religion, that it is the very Life of it;
wherein Religion appears in its native Complexion, and real Features: whereas
the most Learned Discourses do but varnish it over with dead Colors.

Example also is no less useful and beneficial to all that would be Religious:
It points out the visible way, how they may become so; gives us the best
assurance, that either the Nature of the thing is capable of, or our selves can
rationally desire, of the Reality and Excellence of Religion: walks before us
in all the Ways of Wisdom, showing us, that there are no Difficulties therein,
but what may be conquered by Diligence and sincere Endeavor: and so persuades
and encourages us to tread in its Steps, and follow its Tract.

From hence its evident, that a good Example is the most convincing,
instructive Argument in the World; and of far more efficacy than any Precept or
Counsel, as has been proved above. These are made up only of Words and Notions,
which are but aireal and intelluctual; and therefore often prove flat and
fruitless: whereas That is a substantial, demonstrative Guide, that convinces
Mankind that Virtue is both practicable and truly delightsome: These are but
artificial Descriptions of it, resembling the dark Shade and languid Colors of
the Picture: But That is the very Picture or Image of God animated, and most
advantageously exposed to Public view, or the Original, breathing in the Life
of Man, and walking upon the Stage in its lovely Charms and Attractions.

To assist us then in our Christian Race, we would do well to set always before
us the best and most excellent Examples, which are thus useful and
advantageous. Among all the Modern Examples, what can be proposed so adequate
to the Christian Life, so attractive and cogent to us, as the Life of this most
Christian Queen? which seems to be entirely composed of those Celestial Virtues
that are the proper Graces and Ornaments of a Godlike Soul. Surely we cannot
resist its force, and the mighty sway of its Authority, or undervalue and
forget it, without the greatest difficulty and prodigy of Ingratitude:
especically if we reflect on all that Good which was in her, and all that Good
which we have received by her means. Unless we are resolved to prove forgetful
and ungrateful, we cannot but acknowledge it with profound Respect of Praise and
Esteem. Now the best Respect of Praise and Esteem, and the highest Veneration
we can possibly express to her sacred Worth, is this, to transcribe the fair
Copy she has left with us; and by That, rule our Lives: It Is left with us, yea,
it is recommended to us by all the Endearments imaginable. Our Imitation of it
is both safe and warrantable from Scripture. The Author to the Hebrews tells
us, Heb. 6.12.
That we should be followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promise. And again, we must remember them, Chapter 13.7.
which have the Rule over us, and their Faith follow, considering the end of
their Conversation; i. e. when they are dead, and gone, we are still to
remember them, their Works and Conversations, so as to endeavor the Imitation
of them, to follow their Christian Profession, their Sanctity and Goodness.

If we chance to discern any little Blemishes in them, (for who is free from
Faults and Imperfections in this imperfect state?) them we must pass by;
Charity obliges us to cover and forget them. We are to be followers of all good
Men, only so far, as they were of Christ, that perfect and complete Pattern of
Holiness, Justice, and Temperance, who did no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22.
neither was guile found in his mouth.

To shut up all:

Let us, as many of us as love Religion, our Souls, and this late Patroness of
Virtue, follow her singular Piety, and unaffected Goodness. Let Us follow her
constant and regular Devotions toward God. Let Us follow her exact and uniform
Self-government, according to all the Rules of Temperance and Sobriety. Let Us
follow her innocent and candid, her free and ingenuous Conversation amongst
Men; which was neither vain nor morose, neither haughty nor sordid, but equally
poised between all extremes. Let Us imitate her impartial Distribution of
Justice. Let Us imitate her humble and meek Temper, which abhorred Affectation
and Vainglory. Let Us imitate her charitable and compassionate Disposition,
which was without Noise and Respect of Persons. Lastly, and to crown all our
imitations, let us endeavor to imitate the admirable Patience of this calm and
serene Soul, under all the Terrors and Agonies of Death, which a Conscience
void of Offense will obtain.

This will lead us through the Ways of Pleasantness, and all the Paths of Peace;
and at last waft us over to a more delightsome Country. Where we shall again
see and enjoy the sweet Society of all Holy Men and Women that are departed
this Life in the true Faith and Fear of God's Holy Name, and gone before us
into the Mansions of Eternal Bliss: we shall enjoy them without the
apprehension or danger of ever parting; and we shall be unspeakably happy in
each other's Embraces. Where we shall behold our Blessed Savior, the Founder
of our Faith, and the Author of our Eternal Redemption: we shall, not only
behold him in all his Glory, but enjoy the utmost Effects of his infinite Love,
and live with him for ever, in his heavenly Habitation: where dwells an
undisturbed Peace, and overflowing Plenty: where neither Diseases approach the
Body, nor Vices have access to the Mind, nor Guilt does stain the Soul: where
shall be Life without fear of Death, and Joys without mixture of Sorrow,
without Allay, and without End. To which happy Mansion God of his Infinite
Mercy and Goodness bring us all in his good Time, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

