ENGLAND'S INDEPENDENCY Upon the Papal Power Historically and Judicially
Stated, By Sr. JOHN DAVIS, Attorney General in Ireland, And by Sr. EDWARD
COKE; Lord Chief Justice in England, In Two REPORTS, Selected from their
greater Volumes; For the Convincing of our English Romanists, and Confirming of
those who are yet unperverted to the Court or Church of ROME.

With a Preface written by Sir JOHN PETTUS, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, I. Streater, and H. Twyford, Assigns of Richard
Atkins and Edward Atkins, Esquires: And are to be sold by several Booksellers
in Fleetstreet and Holborn. MDCLXXIV.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES Earl of SUFFOLK, Lord Lieutenant of that
County, etc.
MY LORD,
I Have the honor of being one of your Deputies in the County of Suffolk,
which I hope will admit me to the freedom of placing your Lordship in the
Front of Two Reports culled out from the many other Reports of two as Learned
persons in our Laws as that Age did afford.

I have persuaded the Stationer to reprint them, as fit at this time to be
generally perused. For Sr. John Davis, in his Report of Lalor's Case, gives an
Historical Account of the Pope's Invasions upon us from Edward the Confessor's
time in matters Civil; and the Lord Chief Justice Coke gives also a full and
clear Account of the Pope's Intrusions upon us in matters Ecclesiastical.
Neither of them do meddle with the Cavills of Religion between us and the Papal
Power, but what concerns their State and ours, and that deduced from Antiquity;
how we ought to pay our single Obedience both to Church and State, (as our
Predecessors have done, or endeavored to do, for many Ages, to their
respective Kings.) And though there have been many Invasions or Intrusions upon
us by the Power and Policy of the Pope and his Agents, yet we were always
struggling to get out: Sometimes we mastered them, and sometimes we were
mastered by them; according to the Resolution or Weakness of those our former
Kings who were to maintain their inherent Interests. And however some Papal
Pretenses seem to be, yet we may clearly see (when they got the upper hand)
what Subjection they intended to impose upon us, as they did on King John; and
they nicked the time when he was imbroyl'd and even totally immerged in the
Distempers of his untruly Subjects, and enraged Forreiners: and then, by the
opportunity of those Factions and Forreiners they did subjugate this Kingdom
to his Principality in Italy, and made it its Vassal more then ever any
Emperor of Rome did pretend to, or could accomplish. And though after King
John, there were various Contests by our successive Kings, yet none did so
effectually rout the Papal Interest here as Henry the VIII. for which the
Romanists do rip up all his Vices, to make him as odious to the world as
possible: and among other things they affirm, that He was the man that rebelled
from their Church. (Whenas their History and ours tell us, and them, that he
lived and died a Roman Catholic.) And they farther say, that it was He that
brought in our Religion; which they now call Heresy, and is but a Reformation
of theirs: and even, that Reformation was begun and prosecuted (though but in
parcells) by former Ages, but not established till Henry the VIII. had first
broke their Civil Interest here, and then it went on with ease by King Henry's
Successors.

But by their Railings on Henry the VIII. Luther, Calvin, and I know not whom,
(whose Doctrines we do not altogether follow) the Papal Agents do most
wonderfully deceive the unfixt and wavering minds of men, who do not know the
true Foundation of our Church and State here in England, clearly and through
all Antiquity independent upon any Church or State but its own, or on any
person but the Monarch thereof; as is most fully set forth in these excellent
Reports, wherein your Lordship and others by an hour's reading may see what is
our Right, and how it has been maintained, and lost, and regained by that most
resolute Prince, then owning the whole Body of the Papal Doctrine, but not the
Pope's Superiority or power to establish any thing in these Kingdoms.

It is true, this Prince had Discontents, and was crossed in his Designs, which
it may be did either provoke him, or upon this it is likely he did take
occasion to pick a quarrel, that he might the more speciously accomplish what
his Predecessors could not effect. However, God does often produce good Events
by such as we call evil Mediums: as the Beams of the Sun make their way
through Darkness and Vapors; which now again begin to spread over our heads
like thick Clouds contracted by long Exhalations, ready to break and send forth
Lightning, Thunder and Storms upon this Nation. And thus I apprehend their
contraction.

When Henry the VIII. had thus restored us to our Liberties and ancient Rights,
and disbanded the Papal Power and Interest here, it was time for the Pope to
contrive some other Stratagems; and therefore what he could not do by the
power of Bulls, etc. he tries to effect by a long and continued Art. And first,
he infuseth into his Catholic King of Spain, how fit a person he was to be
Universal Monarch of Christendom: which the King of Spain's Ambition readily
embraced, (the whole Design whereof may be read in Campanella the Jesuit, in
his Discourse of the Spanish Monarchy.) About the same time the Pope also
inveigles his most Christian King, Henry the IV. of France; telling him also
how fit a person he was to be Universal Moderator of Christendom: which Bait
this King's Ambition did also readily embrace, (the whole Model and Platform
where^f is also set down by the Bishop of Rhodes in his History of the said
Henry the IV.) And in all this time, while both these Kings were driving on
these Designs, it is observable (by the Confession of those Historians) that
neither of them were privy to each other's Intentions, the business was so
cunningly managed by the Pope, whose great Art it was to keep their Designs
secret, and put both their Wheels in motion at once; yet to keep his Spoak in
that Wheel which turned most to his advantage.

In both these cited Books (of Rhodes and Campanella) your Lordship will find
that their chief aims and directions were to weaken the English: and therein
they say in these words, That there was no better way then by causing Divisions
and Dissensions among the English, and by continual keeping up the same; and
that as for their Religion, it could not be easily rooted out unless there were
some certain Schools erected in Flanders, etc. by the Scholars whereof there
should be scattered abroad the seeds for Divisions in the Natural and
Theological Sciences, which would distract and discompose their opinions and
judgments: and that the English, being of a nature still desirous of Novelties
and Changes, are easily wrought over to any thing.

Now that this has been put in practice I think is obvious to every man; and
as clear, that whilst all Christendom are in Arms and Confusions, only the
Pope sits quiet, and smiles to see what work he makes among us, resolving (if
not prevented) to tire every man out of his Religion that shall withdraw, not
only a total, but even the least part of Obedience to his Chair.

And thus many poor souls are captivated, (especially those of our Nation, for
whom this is intended) some being persuaded to acknowledge the Doctrines of the
Church of Rome, but not the Power of the Court of Rome; and when they are
plausibly got into the first, they do not consider how insensibly and
inevitably they are ensnared into the other. For certainly the distinction of
the Church and Court of Rome is so ridiculous, that it is a mere Irap for weak,
unknowing and unresolved persons: for surely the Pope will never be persuaded
to resign his Temporalties to those Princes from whom his Predecessors usurpt
them, to take upon him merely the duty of the Church. So that when one of them
persuades you to turn to the Church of Rome, it is but to make you to turn or
be subject to the Court of Rome, (and its Cardinals, who are but a Combination
of Temporal Princes) and to all its temporal Impositions, to maintain such
Princes under the title of the Pope, and shrouded under the Canopy of
Ecclesiastics and Piety. The truth is, the Questions about Religion are
purposely raised and infused to intoxicate other men's brains: for the Court of
Rome do but laugh at the things called Merit, Idolatry, Supererogation, etc.
whilst many of their zealous Agents here (I persuade my self out of pure Piety)
are ready to die upon the spot in the defense of those Tenants; whereas, poor
souls, they might see (if they would) that that Court is only to employ them
under the shrowds of Piety to bring in Grist to the Mill by money and usurping
other men's territories; so as the ancient and important question, why we should
not give unto the King the things that are the King's, is quite laid aside, and
the question is almost now, why we should not give to the Pope the things that
are the King's, and subjugate this Kingdom to their Principalities. And thus
by deceiving even their own Agents with a pretense of driving on Piety, (which
is only Sovereignty) even many of the Papists themselves are innocently
betrayed, and so are become betrayers of others.

But to return to the Historical part. After Henry the VIII. had cast off the
Dominion of the Papal Court, Edward the VI. succeeded, in whose Minority his
Council were so wise, (though many of them of the Roman Church) that the
resolution of Henry the VIII. was re-assum'd in casting off the Pope's Power,
and a Foundation laid for establishing a Church here, by a Form of Discipline
and Doctrine free from the Power and Errors of the Papal Court and Church: and
(though some Interruption was given by Queen Mary, yet) what was wanting by
King Edward's short Reign, was completed by Queen Elizabeth, who in her very
first year, by the full Consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, by
example of many of her Predecessors, did enact, That no foreign Potentate or
person should exercise any power within any of her Dominions; and all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction should be annexed to the Crown. And in the 5. year
of her Reign in particular it was enacted, That whoever shall acknowledge any
Jurisdiction of the Bishop or See of Rome within any of her Dominions should be
guilty of a Praemunire, they, and their accessaries.

And that the Principles of the Doctrine and Discipline of our Reformed Church
might the better be known, the frame of it made in Edward the VI. his time, was
confirmed with some few alterations, and 39 Articles established as a
Foundation and Standard of our Doctrine and Discipline, distinct from that of
the Court, as also reformed from that of the Church, of Rome.

But since her time even to this, whilst we have thought our selves secure from
the Papal Authority, their Religion has slily crept in and incroacht among us:
and besides their many known ways, they have a particular art of encouraging
and fomenting all public and private Differences and Discontents, pursuant to
their secret Instructions for the advancement of the Papal Dominion.

Now, as it is impossible for the art of Physic to reduce the 4 Humors of a
man's Body into one; so no arts of Policy can reduce the temper of men into one
Persuasion of Religion.

So that herein the wisdom of our Counselors is discerned, in contriving that
their number may not come near the balance of the staple or established interest
of this Kingdom, both as to Church and State, wherein we are to show our selves
(like our predecessors) true Englishmen, and not to Italianate our selves to
the Dependency of any other State.

And that this may be the more charitably performed, they may be distinguished
into Actives, and Passives. By Actives I mean such as make it their whole
business to pervert and captivate our Subjects to be subject to the Pope, under
the notion of Religion; and by Passives I mean such as live innocently among
us: and there is less caution and strictness requisite to those who are
passive in respect barely of their Religion, then to those who are active in
promoting it.

And therefore many ancient Laws have been made long before Henry the VIII.
entitled Statutes of Praemunire; which word in English is, to fortify a place
before enemies come, or to provide against any onset by them. And all those
Laws are intended against the Pope's Spiritual or Temporal Invasions upon us:
and those Laws do impose Penalties on such as shall any ways endeavor to
assist him in such Invasions; so that being forewarned, (as some would have the
word from praemonere,) we may the better be fore-armed for prevention of all
their future attempts upon us, which is heartily wished by,

MY LORD,

February 18.1673/4. Your Lordship's most humble Servant, John Pettus.

Hill. 4. Jacobi. The Case of Praemunire; OR, The Conviction and Attainder of
Robert Lalor Priest, being endited upon the Statute of 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5.
THIS Robert Lalor, Of what quality and credit Robert Lalor was.
being a Native of this Kingdom, received his Orders of Priesthood above
thirty years since at the hands of one Richard Brady, to whom the Pope had
given the title of Bishop of Kilmore in Vlster; and for the space of twenty
years together his authority and credit was not mean within the Province of
Leimster. He had also made his name known in the Court of Rome, and held
intelligence with the Cardinal who was Protector of this Nation, by means
whereof he obtained the title and jurisdiction of Vicar General of the Sea
Apostolic within the Archbishopric of Dublin, and the Bishoprics of Kildare
and Fernes. This pretended jurisdiction, extending wel-nigh over all the
Province of Leimster, he exercised boldly and securely many years together,
until the Proclamation was published, whereby all Jesuits and Priests
ordained by foreign authority were commanded to depart out of this kingdom by
a certain time prefixed. After which time he began to lurk and to change his
name, howbeit at last he was apprehended in Dublin, His apprehension and first
examination.
and committed to prison in the Castle there. Upon his first Examination taken
by the Lord Deputy himself, he acknowledged that he was a Priest, and ordained
by a Popish Titulary Bishop; that he had accepted the title and Office of the
Pope's Vicar-generall in the three Dioceses before named, and had exercised
spiritual jurisdiction in foro conscientiae; and in sundry other points he
maintained and justified the Pope's authority: only he said, he was of opinion
that the Pope had no power to excommunicate or depose his Majesty, because the
King is not of the Pope's Religion.

His first indictment and conviction.
The next Term after, he was indicted upon the Statute of 2 Eliz. enacted in
this Realm against such as should wilfully and advisedly maintain and uphold
the jurisdiction of any foreign Prince or Prelate in any causes Ecclesiastical
or Civil within this Realm. By which Statute the first offense of that kind is
punished with loss of goods, and one year's imprisonment; the second offense
incurreth the penalty of the Praemunire; and the third offense is made high
Treason. Upon this Indictment he was arraigned, convicted, and condemned, and
so rested in prison during the next two Terms without any farther question. He
then made petition unto the Lord Deputy to be set at liberty: whereupon his
Lordship caused him to be examined by Sir Oliver Saint John, His second
examination.
Sir James Fullerton, Sir Jefferie Fenton, the Attorney and Solicitor general.
At first he made some evasive and indirect answers; but at last voluntarily and
freely he made this ensuing acknowledgement or confession, which being set down
in writing word for word as he made it, was advisedly read by him, and
subscribed with his own hand, and with the hands of those who took his
examination; and afterward he confirmed it by his oath before the Lord Deputy
and Counsel.

The Confession or Acknowledgement of Robert Lalor Priest, made the 22. of
December 1606.
FIrst, His confession or acknowledgement.
he does acknowledge that he is not a lawful Vicar-generall in the Dioceses of
Dublin, Kildare and Fernes, and thinks in his conscience that he cannot
lawfully take upon him the said Office.

Item, he does acknowledge our Sovereign Lord King James that now is to be his
lawful, chief and Supreme Governor in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, and that he is bound in conscience to obey him in all the said causes;
and that neither the Pope, nor any other foreign Prelate, Prince or Potentate
has any power to control the King in any cause Ecclesiastical or Civil
within this Kingdom, or any of his Majesty's Dominions.

Item, he does in his conscience believe, that all Bishops ordained and made by
the King's authority within any of his Dominions are lawful Bishops, and that
no Bishop made by the Pope, or by any authority derived from the Pope, within
the King's Dominions, has any power or authority to impugn, disannull or
control any Act done by any Bishop made by his Majesty's authority as
aforesaid.

Item, he professes himself willing and ready to obey the King, as a good and
obedient Subject ought to do, in all his lawful commandments, either
concerning his function of Priesthood, or any other duty belonging to a good
Subject.

After this Confession made, the State here had no purpose to proceed against
him severely, either for his contempt of the Proclamation, or offense against
the Law: So as he had more liberty then before, and many of his friends had
access unto him; who telling him what they heard of his Confession, he
protested unto them, that he had only acknowledged the King's Civil and
Temporal power, without any confession or admittance of his authority in
Spiritual causes. This being reported unto the Lord Deputy by sundry
Gentlemen, who gave faith unto what he said, his Lordship thought sit, that
since he had incurred the pain of Praemunire by exercising Episcopal
jurisdiction as Vicar-generall to the Pope, that he should be attainted of that
offense, as well to make him an example to others of his profession, (for
almost in every Diocese of this Kingdom there is a Titulary Bishop ordained by
the Pope;) as also that at the time of his Trial a just occasion might be taken
to publish the Confession and acknowledgement which he had voluntarily made,
signed, and confirmed by oath before the Lord Deputy and Council, who have
likewise subscribed their names as witnesses thereof.

Hereupon, in Hillarie Term 4 Jacobi, an Indictment was framed against him in
the King's Bench upon the Statute of 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5. containing these
several points.

The Indictment of Lalor upon the stat. of 16 Ric. 2.
1. That he had received a Bull or Brief purchased or procured in the Court of
Rome, which Bull or Brief did touch or concern the King's Crown and dignity
Royal, containing a Commission of Authority from the Pope of Rome unto
Richard Brady and David Magragh to constitute a Vicar-generall for the Sea of
Rome, by the name of the Sea Apostolic, in the several Dioceses of Dublin,
Kildare and Fernes, within this Kingdom of Ireland.

2. That by pretext or color of that Bull or Brief he was constituted
Vicar-generall of the Sea of Rome, and took upon him the style and title of
Vicar-generall in the said several Dioceses.

3. That he did exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as Vicar-generall of the Sea of Rome, by instituting diverse persons to Benefices with cure of souls, by
granting dispensations in causes Matrimonial, by pronouncing sentences of
divorce between diverse married persons, and by doing all other acts and things
pertaining to Episcopal Jurisdiction, within the said several Dioceses, against
our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and dignity Royal, and in contempt of
his Majesty, and disherison of his Crown, and contrary to the form and effect
of the Statute, etc.

To this Indictment Lalor pleaded Not guilty; and when the issue was to be
tried, the name and reputation of the man, and the nature of the cause, drew
all the principal Gentlemen both of the Pale and Provinces that were in town to
the hearing of the matter. At what time a substantial Jury of the City of
Dublin being sworn for the trial, and the points of the Indictment being opened
and set forth by the King's Sergeant; the Attorney general thought it not
impertinent, but very necessary, before he descended to the particular evidence
against the prisoner, to inform and satisfy the hearers in two Points.

1. What reason moved us to ground this Indictment upon the old Statute of 16
Rich. 2. rather then upon some other later Law made since the time of King
Henr. 8.

2. What were the true causes of the making of this Law of 16 Rich. and other
former Laws against Provisors and such as did appeal to the Court of Rome in
those times, when both the Prince and people of England did for the most part
acknowledge the Pope to be the thirteenth Apostle, and only oracle in matters
of Religion, and did follow his doctrine in most of those points wherein we now
dissent from him.

1. For the first Point, we did purposely forbear to proceed against him upon
any later Law, to the end that such as were ignorant might be informed, that
long before King Henr. 8. was born, diverse Laws were made against the
Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome upon the rights of the Crown of England,
well-nigh as sharp and as severe as any Statutes which have been made in later
times; and that therefore we made choice to proceed upon a Law made more then
200 years past, when the King, the Lords and Commons, which made the Laws, and
the Judges, which did interpret the Laws, did for the most part follow the same
opinions in Religion which were taught and held in the Court of Rome.

The true cause of making the Statute of 16 R. 2. and other Statutes against
Provisors.
2. For the second Point, the causes that moved and almost enforced the English
Nation to make this, and other Statutes of the same nature, were of the
greatest importance that could possibly arise in any State. For these Laws were
made to uphold and maintain the Sovereignty of the King, the Liberty of the
people, the Common Law, and the Commonweal, which otherwise had been undermined
and utterly ruined by the Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome.

For albeit the Kings of England were absolute Emperors within their
Dominions, and had under them as learned a Prelacy and Clergy, as valiant and
prudent a Nobility, as free and wealthy a Commonalty, as any was then in
Christendom: yet if we look into the stories and records of these two Imperial
Kingdoms, we shall find, that if these Laws of Provision and Praemunire had not
been made, they had lost the name of Imperial, and of Kingdoms too, and had
been long since made Tributary Provinces to the Bishop of Rome, or rather part
of S. Peter's Patrimony in demesne. Our Kings had had their Scepters wrested
out of their hands, their Crowns spurned off from their heads, their necks trod
upon, they had been made Lacquays or Footmen to the Bishop of Rome, as some of
the Emperors and French Kings were; our Prelates had been made his Chaplains
and Clerks, our Nobility his Vassals and Servants, our Commons his Slaves and
Villains, if these Acts of manumission had not freed them. In a word, before
the making of these Laws, the flourishing Crown and Commonwealth of England was
in extreme danger to have been brought into most miserable servitude and
slavery, under color of Religion and devotion to the Sea of Rome. And this was
not only seen and felt by the King, and much repined at and protested against
by the Nobility, but the Commons, the general multitude of the Subjects, did
exclaim and cry out upon it. For the Commons of England may be an example unto
all other Subjects in the world in this, that they have ever been tender and
sensible of the wrongs and dishonours offered unto their Kings, and have ever
contended to uphold and maintain their honor and Sovereignty. And their faith
and loyalty has been generally such, (though every Age has brought forth
some particular monsters of disloyalty) as no pretense of zeal or religion
could ever withdraw the greater part of the Subjects to submit themselves to a
foreign yoke, no not when Popery was in her height and exaltation; The Statute
of Praemunire made at the prayer of the Commons.
whereof this Act and diverse others of the same kind are clear and manifest
testimonies. For this Act of 16 Rich. 2. was made at the prayer of the Commons:
which prayer they make not for themselves, neither show they their own self
love therein, (as in other Bills which contain their Grievances) but their love
and zeal to the King and his Crown. When after the Norman Conquest they
importuned their Kings for the Great Charter, they sought their own Liberties;
and in other Bills preferred commonly by the Commons against Shriefs,
Escheators, Purveyors, or the like, they seek their own profit and ease: but
here their Petition is to the King, to make a Law for the defense and
maintenance of his own honor. The effect of the Statute of 16 R. 2. c. 5.
They complain, That by Bulls and Processes from Rome the King is deprived of
that Jurisdiction which belongs of right to his Imperial Crown: That the King
does lose the service and counsel of his Prelates and learned men by
translations made by the Bishop of Rome: That the King's Laws are defeated at
his will, the Treasure of the Realm is exhausted and exported to enrich his
Court: And that by those means the Crown of England, which has ever been free
and subject unto none, but immediately unto God, should be submitted unto the
Bishop of Rome, to the utter destruction of the King and the whole Realm; which
God defend, say they: and thereupon, out of their exceeding zeal and fervency,
they offer to live and die with the King in defense of the liberties of the
Crown. And lastly, they pray and require the King by way of justice, to examine
all the Lords in Parliament, what they thought of these manifest wrongs and
usurpations, and whether they would stand with the King in defense of his
Royal liberties, or no. Which the King did according to their Petition: and
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal did all answer, that these Usurpations of the
Bishop of Rome were against the liberties of the Crown, and that they were all
bound by their allegiance to stand with the King, and to maintain his honor
and Prerogative. And thereupon it was enacted with a full consent of the three
Estates, That such as should purchase in the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any
Bulls or Processes, or other things which might touch the King in his Crown and
dignity Royal, and such as should bring them into the Realm, and such as
should receive them, publish them, or execute them, they, their Notaries,
Proctors, Maintainors and Counselors, should be all out of the King's
protection, their lands and goods forfeited to the King, their bodies attached
if they might be found, or else process of Pramunire facias to be awarded
against them. Upon these motives, and with this affection and zeal of the
people, was the Statute of 16 Rich. 2. made, whereupon we have framed our
Indictment.

Now let us look higher, and see whether the former Laws made by King Edw. 1.
and King Edw. 3. against the Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome were not grounded
upon the like cause and reason. The Statute of 38 Edw. 3. cap. 1. expressing
the mischiefs that did arise by Breves of Citation, The effect of the Statute
of 38 Edw. 3. cap. 1.
which drew the bodies of the people, and by Bulls of Provision and Reservation
of Ecclesiastical Benefices, which drew the wealth of the Realm, to the Court
of Rome, does declare, that by these means the ancient Laws, Customs and
Franchises of the Realm were confounded, the Crown of our Sovereign Lord the
King diminished, and his person falsely defamed, the Treasure and riches of the
land carried away, the Subjects of the Realm molested and impoverished, the
Benefices of Holy Church wasted and destroyed, Divine service, Hospitality,
Almsdeeds, and other works of charity neglected.

Again, The Statute of 27 Ed. 3. cap. 1.
27 Edw. 3. cap. 1. upon the grievous and clamorous complaint (for that phrase
is there used) of the great men and Commons touching Citations and Provisions,
it is enacted, That the offenders shall forfeit their lands, goods and
chattels, and their bodies be imprisoned and ransomed at the King's will. But
in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. The Statute of 25 Edw. 3. reciting the Statute of
25 Ed. 1.
wherein the first Law against Provisors made 25 Edw. 1. is recited, there is a
larger declaration of these inconveniences then in the two last Acts before
mentioned. For there all the Commons of the Realm do grievously complain, That
whereas the Holy Church of England was first founded in estate of Prelacie by
the Kings and Nobility of that Realm, and by them endowed with great
possessions and revenues in lands, rents and Advowsons, to the end the people
might be informed in Religion, Hospitality might be kept, and other works of
Charity might be exercised within the Realm; And whereas the King and other
founders of the said Prelacies were the rightful Patrons and Adowees thereof,
and upon avoidance of such Ecclesiastical promotions had power to advance
thereunto their kinsmen, friends, and other learned men of the birth of that
Realm, which being so advanced became able and worthy persons to serve the King
in Counsel, and other places in the Commonweal: The Bishop of Rome, usurping
the Seigniory of such possessions and Benefices, did give and grant the same to
Aliens, which did never dwell in England, and to Cardinals, which might not
dwell there, as if he were rightful Patron of those Benefices; whereas by the
Law of England he never had right to the Patronage thereof; whereby in short
time all the Spiritual promotions in the Realm would be engrossed into the
hands of Strangers, Canonical elections of Prelates would be abolished, works
of Charity would cease, the founders and true patrons of Churches would be
disinherited, the King's Counsel would be weakened, the whole Kingdom
impoverished* and the Laws and rights of the Realm destroyed. Upon this
complaint it was resolved in Parliament, That these oppressions and grievances
should not be suffered in any manner: and therefore it was enacted, That the
King and his Subjects should thenceforth enjoy the rights of patronage; That
free elections of Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates elective, should be
made according to the ancient grants of the King's Progenitors and their
founders; That no Bulls of Provision should be put in execution, but that the
Provisors should be attached, fined, and ransomed at the King's will, and
withal imprisoned till they had renounced the benefits of their Bulls,
satisfied the party grieved, and given sureties not to commit the like offense
again.

Now, Master Lalor, what think you of these things? Did you believe that such
Laws as these had been made against the Pope 200, 250, 300 years since? Was
King Hen. 8. the first Prince that opposed the Pope's usurped Authority? Were
our Protestants the first Subjects that ever complained of the Court of Rome?
Of what Religion, think you, were the propounders and enacters of these Laws?
These Laws made by such as did profess the Romish Religion.
Were they good Catholics? or good Subjects? or what were they? You will not
say they were Protestants, for you will not admit the Reformed Religion to be
so ancient as those times: neither can you say they were undutifull, for they
strove to uphold their liege Lord's Sovereignty. Doubtless the people in those
days did generally embrace the vulgar errors and superstitions of the Romish
Church, and in that respect were Papists as well as you: but they had not
learned the new doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy, and transcendent authority
over Kings; they did not believe he had power to depose Princes, and discharge
Subjects of their allegiance, to abrogate the fundamental Laws of Kingdoms,
and to impose his Canons as binding laws upon all nations, without their
consents: they thought it a good point of Religion to be good Subjects, to
honor their King, to love their country, and to maintain the laws and
liberties thereof, howsoever in other points they did err and were miss-led
with the Church of Rome.

So as now (Master Lalor) you have no excuse, no evasion, but your conscience
must condemn you as well as the Law; since the Lawmakers in all Ages, and all
religious Papists and Protestants, do condemn you: unless you think your self
wiser then all the Bishops that were then in England, or all the Judges who in
those days were learned in the Civil and Canon Laws as well as in the Common
Laws of England. But you, being an Irish man, will say, perhaps, Laws against
Provisors made in Ireland.
these Laws were made in England, and that the Irish Nation gave no particular
consent thereunto, only there was an implicit consent wrapped and folded up in
general terms given in the Statute of 10 Hen. 7. cap. 22. whereby all Statutes
made in England are established and made of force in Ireland. Assuredly, though
the first Parliament held in Ireland was after the first Law against Provisors
made in England, yet have there been as many particular Laws made in Ireland
against Provisions, Citations, Bulls and Breves of the Court of Rome* as are to
be found in all the Parliament-Rolls in England. What will you say if in the
self-same Parliament of 10 Hen. 7. cap. 5. a special Law were made, enacting,
authorizing and confirming in this Realm all the Statutes of England made
against Provisors? if before this the like Law were made 32 Hen. 6. cap. 4. and
again 28 Hen. 6. cap. 30. the like? and before that, the like Law were made 40
Edw. 3. cap. 13. in the famous Parliament of Kilkenny? if a Statute of the same
nature were made 7 Edw. 4. cap. 2. and a severer Law then all these 16 Edw. 4.
cap. 4. That such as purchase any Bulls of Provision in the Court of Rome, as
soon as they have published or executed the same to the hurt of any incumbent,
should be adjudged traitors? Which Act, if it be not repealed by the Statute of
Queen Mary, may terrify Master Lalor more then all the Acts which are before
remembered.

But let us ascend yet higher, When the Pope began first to usurp upon the
liberties of the Cr^wn of England.
to see when the Pope's Usurpation, which caused all these complaints, began in
England, with what success it was continued, and by what degrees it rose to
that height, that it well-nigh over-topp'd the Crown: whereby it will appear
whether he had gained a circle by prescription, by a long and quiet possession
before the making of these Laws.

The first encroachment of the Bishop of Rome upon the liberties of the Crown
of England was made in the time of King William the Conqueror. For before that
time the Pope's Writ did not run in England, his Bulls of Excommunication and
Provision came not thither, no Citation, no Appeals were made from thence to
the Court of Rome. Our Archbishops did not purchase their Palls there, A
comparison of the spiritual Monarchy of the Church with the temporal Monarchies
of the world.
neither had the Pope the Investiture of any of our Bishoprics. For it is to
be observed, that as under the Temporal Monarchy of Rome Britany was one of the
last Provinces that was wone, and one of the first that was lost again: so
under the Spiritual Monarchy of the Pope of Rome England was one of the last
Countries of Christendom that received his yoke, and was again one of the first
that did reject and cast it off. And truly, as in this, so in diverse other
points, the course of this Spiritual Monarchy of the Pope may be aptly compared
with the course of the Temporal Monarchies of the world. For as the Temporal
Monarchies were first raised by intrusion upon other Princes and Commonweals;
so did this Spiritual Prince (as they now style him) grow to his greatness by
usurping upon other States and Churches. As the Temporal Monarchies, following
the course of the Sun, did rise in the East, and settle in the West; so did the
Hierarchy or government of the Church. Of the four Temporal Monarchies the
first two were in Asia, the latter two in Europe; but the Roman Monarchy did
surpass and suppress them all: So were there four great Patriarchs, or
Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, two in the East, and two in the West; but the Roman
Patriarch exalted himself, and usurped a Supremacy above them all. And as the
rising of the Roman Empire was most opposed by the State of Carthage in Africa,
(aemula Romae Carthago;) so the Council of Carthage and the African Bishops did
first forbid Appeals to Rome, and opposed the Supremacy of the Pope. And does
not Daniel's Image, whose head was of gold, and legs and feet of iron and clay,
represent this Spiritual Monarchy as well as the Temporal, whereas the first
Bishops of Rome were golden Priests, though they had but wooden Chalices, and
that the Popes of later times have been for the most part worldly and
earthly-minded? And as the Northern Nations* first revolted from the Roman
Monarchy, and at last brake it in pieces; have not the North and North-west
Nations first fallen away from the Papacy? and are they not like in the end to
bring it to ruin?

But to return to our purpose; The Pope had no jurisdiction in England in the
time of the Britans.
The Bishop of Rome before the first Norman Conquest had no jurisdiction in the
Realm of England, neither in the time of the Britans, nor in the time of the
Saxons. Eleutherius the Pope within less then 200 years after Christ writes to
Lucius the British King, and calls him God's Vicar within his Kingdom: which
title he would not have given to that King, if himself, under pretense of being
God's Vicar-generall in earth, had claimed jurisdiction overall Christian
Kingdoms.

Pelagius the Monk of Bangor, about the year 400, being cited to Rome, refused
to appear upon the Pope's citation, affirming that Britain was neither within
his Diocese nor his Province.

After that, about the year 600, Augustine the Monk was sent by Gregory the
Great into England to convert the Saxons to Christian Religion; the British
Bishops then remaining in Wales regarded not his Commission nor his doctrine,
as not owing any duty* nor having any dependency on the Court of Rome, but
still retained their ceremonies and traditions which they received from the
East Church upon the first plantation of the Faith in that Island, being diverse
and contrary to those of the Church of Rome, which Augustine did endeavor to
impose upon them.

The like does Beda write of the Irish Priests and Bishops. For in the year
660. he reports, that a Convocation of the Clergy being called by King Oswif,
there rose a disputation between Colman one of our Irish Saints, then present
in that Synod, and Wilfrid a Saxon Priest, touching the observation of Easter,
wherein the British and Irish Churches did then differ from the Church of Rome.
Colman, for the celebration of Easter used in Ireland, affirmed it was the same
quod beatus Evangel^st^ Joannes, discipulus specialiter a Domino dilectus, in
omnibus quibus praeerat Ecclesiis eelebrasse legitur. On the other part Wilfrid
alleged, that all the Churches of Christendom did then celebrate Easter after
the Roman manner, except the Churches of the Britans and Picts, qui contra
totum orbem (said he) stulto labor pugnant. Whereunto Colman replied, Miror
quare stultum laborem appellas, in quo tanti Apostoli qui super pectus Domini
recumbere dignus fuit exempla sectamur. Numquid reverendissimum patrem nostrum
Columbam and ejus successores, viros a Deo dilectos, divinis paginis contraria
sapuisse aut egisse credendum est? In this disputation or dialogue two things
may be observed: first, that at this time the authority of the Bishop of Rome
was of no estimation in these Islands: next, that the Primitive Churches of
Britany and Ireland were instituted according to the form and discipline of the
East Churches, and not of the West, and planted by the Disciples of John, and
not of Peter. Thus much for the time of the Britans. For the Saxons, though
King Ina gave the Peter Pence to the Pope, partly as Alms, and partly in
recompense of a house erected in Rome for entertainment of English pilgrims;
yet it is certain that Alfred and Athelstane, Edgar and Edmund* Canutus and
Edward the Confessor, and diverse other Kings of the Saxon race, did give all
the Bishoprics in England per annulum and baculum, without any other ceremony,
as the Emperor and the French King and other Christian Princes were wont to
do. They made also several Laws for the government of the Church: Among others
Saint Edward begins his Laws with this protestation, that it is his Princely
charge, ut populum Domini, and super omnia sanctam* Ecclesiam, regat and
gubernet. And King Edgar, in his Oration to his English Clergy, Ego (says he)
Constantinis vos Petri gladium habetis: jungamus dextras, and gladium, gladio
copulemus, ut ejiciantur extra castra leprosi, and purgetur sanctuarium Domini.
So as the Kings of England with their own Clergy did govern the Church, and
therein sought no aid of the Court of Rome. And the troth is, that though the
Pope had then long hands, yet he did not extend them so far as England, because
they were full of business nearer home in drawing the Emperor and the French
King under his yoke. But upon the Conquest made by the Norman, he apprehended
the first occasion to usurp upon the Liberties of the Crown of England. The
first usurpation of the Pope upon the Crown began in the time of King William
the Conqueror.
For the Conqueror came in with the Pope's Banner, and under it wone the
battle which got him the garland: and therefore the Pope presumed he might
boldly pluck some flowers from it, being partly gained by his countenance and
blessing. Hereupon he sent two Legates into England, which were admitted and
received by the Conqueror. By sending Legates into England.
With them he called a Synod of the Clergy, and deposed old Stigand Archbishop
of Canterbury, because he had not purchased his Pall in the Court of Rome; he
displaced many Bishops and Abbots to place his Normans in their rooms. And
amongst the rest it is to be noted, that the King having earnestly moved
Wolstan Bishop of Worcester, being then very aged, to give up his Staff, his
answer was, that he would give up his Staff only to him of whom he first
received the same. And so the old man went to Saint Edward's Tomb, and there
offered up his Staff and Ring, with these words, Of thee, O holy Edward, I
received my Staff and my Ring, and to thee I do now surrender the same again.
Which proves, that before the Norman Conquest the King did invest his Bishops
per annulum and baculum, as I said before.

Thus we see, by the admission of the Pope's Legates, the first step or entry
made into his usurped jurisdiction in England. Albeit the King still retained
the absolute power of investing Bishops, and seemed only to use the advice and
assistance of the Legates in Ecclesiastical matters; for that no Decree passed
or was put in execution without his Royal assent thereunto. Besides, how far
forth he submitted himself to the Pope, it appears by a short Epistle which
he wrote to Gregory the 7. in this form. Excellentissimo Sanctae. Ecclesiae
Pastori, Gregorio, gratia Dei Anglorum Rex and Dux Normannorum Willielmus
salutem cum amicitia. Hubertus Legatus tuus, Religiose Pater, ad me veniens ex
tua part me admonuit, ut tibi and successoribus tuis fidelitatem facerem, and
de pecunia quam antecessores mei ad Romanam Ecclesiam mittere solebant melius
cogitarem. Vnum admisi, alterum non admisi: fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo,
quia nec ego promisi, nec antecessores meos antecessoribus tuis id fecisse
comperio. Pecunia tribus fere annis, in Galliis me agente, negligenter collecta
est: nunc vero divina misericordia me in Regnum meum reverso, quod collectum
est per praefatum Legatum mittetur; and quod reliquum est, per Legatos
Lanfranci Archiepiscopi fidelis nostri, cum opportunum fuerit, transmittetur,
etc.

In the time of William Rufus the Pope attempted to draw Appeals to Rome, but
prevailed not.
But in the time of his next Successor King William Rufus they attempted to
pass one degree farther, that is, to draw Appeals to the Court of Rome. For
Anselme being made Archbishop of Canterbury, and being at some difference with
the King, besought his leave to go to Rome, under pretense of fetching his
Pall. The King, knowing he would appeal to the Pope, denied him leave to go,
and withal told him, That none of his Bishops ought to be subject to the Pope,
but the Pope himself ought to be subject to the Emperor; and that the King of
England had the same absolute liberties in his Dominions as the Emperor had in
the Empire; and that it was an ancient custom and law in England, used time
out of mind before the Conquest, that none might appeal to the Pope without the
King's leave; and that he that breaks this law or custom does violate the
Crown and dignity Royal, and he that violates my Crown (says he) is mine
enemy, and a traitor. How answer you this, quoth the King? Christ himself
answers you, says the Archbishop, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram, etc.
Wherewith the King was nothing satisfied. And thereupon Anselme departing out
of the Realm without license, the King seized his Temporalties, and became so
exasperate and implacable toward the Bishop, as he kept him in perpetual exile
during his Reign, albeit great intercession were made for his return, as well
by the Pope as the King of France.

In the time of K. Henry the first the Pope usurpeth the donation of
Bishoprikks, etc.
In the time of the next King Hen. 1. though he were a learned and a prudent
Prince, yet they sought to gain a farther point upon him, and to pluck a flower
from his Crown of greater value, namely the Patronage and Donation of
Bishoprics, and all other Benefices Ecclesiastical. For Anselme being revoked
and re-established in the Sea of Canterbury the Bishoprics of Salisbury and
Hereford fell void, which the King bestowed on two of his Chaplains. But
Anselme their Metropolitan did refuse to consecrate them, so as the Archbishop
of York was fain to perform that Office, who with the chief of the English
Clergy stood with the King, and withstood Anselme. Hereupon the King requires
him to do his homage: the Bishop denies it. The King demands of him whether
the patronage and investiture of all Bishoprics were not his rightful
inheritance: the Bishop said it was not his right, because Pope Urban had
lately made a Decree that no Lay person should give any Ecclesiastical
Benefice. This was the first question that ever was made touching the King of
England's right of patronage and donation of Bishoprics within his dominions.
Histor. Jornalensis M S. in Archiv. Rob. Cotton Eq. Aur.
This new question caused many messages and embassages to Rome. At last the
King writes plainly to the Pope, Notum habeat Sanctitas vestra, quod me vivente
(Deo auxiliante) dignitates and usus regni nostri non minuentur, and si ego
(quod absit) in tanta me directione ponerem, magnates mei, imo totius Angliae
populus id nullo modo pateretur. Besides, William de Warrenast, the King's
procurator in the Court of Rome, told the Pope that the King would rather lose
his Kingdom then he would lose the donation of Bishoprics. The Pope answered,
Know you precisely, Sir, I speak it before God, that for the redemption of my
head I would not suffer him to enjoy it.

After this Anselme being received into the King's favor, in a Synod of the
English Clergy holden at London in the year 1107. a Decree was made, Cui
annuit Rex Henricus, says Matthew. Paris, that from thenceforth nunquam per
donationem Baculi Pastoralis vel Annuli quisquam de Episcopatu vel Abbathia per
Regem vel quamlibet laicam manum, inv^stiretur in Anglia. In recompense whereof
the Pope yielded this favor to the King, that thenceforth no Legate should be
sent from the Pope's side into England, unless the King required it; and that
the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being should be for ever Legatus
natus: and Anselme, for the honor of his See, obtained, that the Archbishop of
Canterbury should in all general Councils sit at the Pope's foot tanquam
alterius orbis Papa. Notwithstanding, as the succeeding Popes kept not their
promise touching the sending of Legates, so this self-same King, after the
death of Anselme, broke the Decree touching the investiture of the Bishops. For
he gave the Archbishopric of Canterbury to Rodolph Bishop of London, says
Matthew. Paris, Et illum per Annulum and Pastoralem Baculum investivit; as before
he had invested Willielmum Gifford in the B^shoprick of Winchester, contra novi
Concilii statuta, as the same Author reports.

In the time of King Stephen the Pope gained Appeals to the Court of Rome.
The times of the next succeeding King Stephen were full of Civil dissensions,
which made the land well-nigh waste, so as Saint Peter's Successor could not
take any fish in such troubled waters. Yet during this King's reign they wone
that point of jurisdiction which they attempted to get, but failed thereof, in
the time of King William Rufus; namely, That Appeals might be made to the Court
of Rome. For in a Synod at London summoned by Henr. Bishop of Winchester, the
Pope's Legate, it was decreed, That Appeals should be made from Provincial
Councils to the Pope. Before that time Appellationes in usu non erant, says a
Monk of that time, donec Henricus Winton. Episcopus malo suo, dum Legatus
esset, crudeliter intrusit. Thus did the Pope usurp three main points of
Jurisdiction upon three several Kings after the Conquest, (for of William
Rufus he could win nothing:) namely* upon the Conqueror, the sending of
Legates or Commissioners* to hear and determine Ecclesiastical causes; upon
Hen. 1. the Donation and Investiture of Bishoprics and other Benefices; upon
King Stephen, the Appeals to the Court of Rome.

In the time of K. Henry 2. the Pope claimed exemption of Clerks from the
Secular power.
Now are we come to King Hen. 2. in whose time they made a farther encroachment
upon the Crown, whereby they endeavored to make him but half a King, and to
take away half his Subjects, by exempting all Clerks from Secular power,
Hereupon rose that long and great contention between King Hen. 2. and Thomas
Becket, which on Becket's behalf may be rightly termed rebellion and treason:
the just cause and ground whereof was the same that made the late difference
between the Pope and the Venetians. For a Priest had committed a foul murder,
A brief of Th. Becket's troubles, or rather treasons.
and being thereof indicted and convicted, prayed the benefit of his Clergy;
which being allowed unto him, he was delivered to the Bishop of Salisbury,
being his Ordinary, to make his purgation: which the murderer failing to do,
should by the Law have been degraded, and delivered back to the Secular power.
But the Bishop contemning the Law of the land, to enlarge the liberties of the
Church, sent his prisoner to Thomas Becket then Archbishop of Canterbury, who
shifted him into an Abbey, and so rescued him from the capital punishment he
had justly deserved.

This gap of impunitie being once opened, the Clergy grew so outrageous, as
the King was informed of a hundred murders committed by Clerks, and yet not
one of them executed for the same; for that the Archbishop had protected them
all after the same manner. The Constitutions of Claringdon.
For this the King was justly incensed against the Archbishop, who justified
his doing herein. Whereupon a common Council as well of the Bishops as of the
Nobility was called, wherein they did revive and re-establish the ancient laws
and customs of the Kingdom for the government of the Clergy, and ordering of
causes Ecclesiastical, whereof these were the principal Heads or Articles.

1. That no Bishop nor Clerk should depart the Realm without the King's
license; and that such as obtained license should give sureties that they
should procure no hurt or damage to the King or Realm during their absence in
foreign parts.

2. That all Bishoprics and Abbeys being void should remain in the King's
hands as his own demesnes, until he had chosen and appointed a Prelate
thereunto; and that every such Prelate should do his homage to the King before
he were admitted unto the place.

3. That Appeals should be made in causes Ecclesiastical in this manner: from
the Archdeacon to the Ordinary, from the Ordinary to the Metropolitan, from the
Metropolitan to the King, and no farther.

4. That Peter Pence should be paid no more to the Pope, but to the King.

5. That if any Clerk should commit Felony, he should be hanged; if Treason, he
should be drawn and quartered.

6. That it should be adjudged high Treason to bring in Bulls of
Excommunication whereby the Realm should be cursed.

7. That no Decree should be brought from the Pope to be executed in England,
upon pain of imprisonment and confiscation of goods.

To these and other Constitutions of the like nature made at Claringdon all the
rest of the Bishops* and great men did subscribe, and bound themselves by oath
to observe the same absolutely; only the Archbishop would not subscribe, and
swear, but with a Saving, salvo suo ordine and honor sanctae Ecclesiae: yet at
last he was content to make the like absolute Subscription and Oath as the rest
had done, but presently he repented; and to show his repentance suspended
himself from celebrating Mass, till he had received absolution from the Pope.
Then he began to maintain and justify the exemption of Clerks again; whereat
the King's displeasure was kindled anew: and then the Archbishop once again
promised absolute obedience to the King's Laws. (See the fickleness and
mutability of your constant Martyr.) The King, to bind fast this slippery
Proteus, called a Parliament of the Bishops and Barons, and sending for the
Roll of those Laws, required all the Bishops to set their Seals thereunto. They
all assented but the Archbishop, who protested he would not set his Seal, nor
give allowance to those Laws. The King, being highly offended with his
rebellious demeanor, required the Barons in Parliament to give Judgment of
him, who being his Subject would not be ruled by his Laws: Cito facite mihi
justitiam de illo, qui homo meus ligeus est* and stare Juri in Curia mea
recusat. Whereupon the Barons proceeding against him, and being ready to
condemn him; I prohibit you (quoth the Archbishop) in the name of Almighty God
to proceed against me, for I have appealed to the Pope; and so departed in
contempt of that high Court, Omnibus clamantibus, says Hoveden, Quo
progrederis, proditor? exspecta and audi judicium tuum. After this he lurked
secretly near the Seashore, and changing his apparel and name (like a Jesuit
of these times,) he took shipping with a purpose to fly to Rome: but his
passage being hindered by contrary winds, he was summoned to a Parliament at
Northampton, where he made default wilfully; for which contempt his
Temporalties were seized, and his body being attached, he was charged with so
great an account to the King, as that he was found in arrear thirty thousand
marks, and committed to prison; whence he found means to escape shortly after,
and to pass out of the Realm to Rome. He was no sooner gone, but the King
sends Writs to all the Sherifs in England to attach the bodies of all such as
made any Appeals to the Court of Rome. Hereupon many messages and letters
passing to and fro, all the Suffragans of Canterbury join in a letter to the
Pope, wherein they condemn the fugitive Archbishop, and justify the King's
proceedings. Upon this the Pope sends two Legates to the King being then in
Normandy, to mediate for the Archbishop. They, with the mediation of the French
King, prevailed so far with King Henry, as that he was pleased to accept his
submission once again, and promised the King of France, that if he would be
obedient to his Laws, he should enjoy as ample liberties as any Archbishop of
Canterbury ever had: and so sent him into England with recommendation unto the
young King his Son,, then lately crowned; who, hearing of his coming, commanded
him to forbear to come to his presence, until he had absolved the Archbishop
of York and others, whom he had excommunicated for performing their duties at
his Coronation. The Archbishop returned answer, that they had done him wrong in
usurping his office; yet if they would take a solemn oath to become obedient to
the Pope's commandment in all things concerning the Church, he would absolve
them. The Bishops understanding this, protested they would never take that oath
unless the King willed them so to do. King Henry the Father being hereof
advertised into France, did rise into great passion and choler, and in the
hearing of some of his servants uttered words to this effect; Will no man
revenge me of mine enemies? Whereupon the 4 Gentlemen named in the Stories of
that time passed into England, and first moving the Archbishop to absolve the
Bishops whom he had excommunicated for performing their Duties at the young
King's Coronation, and receiving a peremptory answer of denial from the
Archbishop, they laid violent hands upon him, and slew him: for which the King
was fain not only to suffer corporal penance, but in token of his humiliation
to kiss the knee of the Pope's Legate. And this is the abridgement of Becket's
Troubles, or rather Treasons, for which he was celebrated for so famous a
Martyr. Four points of jurisdiction usurped upon the crown of England by the
Pope before the reign of K. John.
And thus you see by what degrees the Court of Rome did within the space of one
hundred and odd years usurp upon the Crown of England, four points of
Jurisdiction. Viz. First, sending out of Legates into England. Secondly,
drawing of Appeals to the Court of Rome. Thirdly, donation of Bishoprics and
other Ecclesiastical Benefices. And fourthly, exemption of Clerks from the
Secular power. And you see withal how our Kings and Parliaments have from time
to time opposed and withstood this unjust Usurpation.

Now then the Bishop of Rome having claimed and welnigh recovered full and sole
jurisdiction in all causes Ecclesiastical, and over all persons
Ecclesiastical, with power to dispose of all Ecclesiastical Benefices in
England, whereby he had upon the matter made an absolute conquest of more then
half the Kingdom, (for every one that could read the Psalm of Miserere was a
Clerk, and the Clergy possessed the moietie of all temporal possessions,)
there remained now nothing to make him owner and proprietor of all, but to get
a surrender of the Crown, and to make the King his Farmer, and the people his
Villains, which he fully accomplished and brought to pass in the times of King
John and of Hen. 3.

The cause of the quarrel between K. John and the Pope.
The quarrel between the Pope and King John, which wrested the Scepter out of
his hand, and in the end brake his heart, began about the Election of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. I call it Election, and not Donation or Investiture:
for the manner of investing of Bishops by the Staff and Ring after the time of
King Hen. 1. was not any more used, but by the King's license they were
Canonically elected, and being elected, the King gave his Royal assent to
their election, and by restitution of their Temporalties did fully invest them.
And though this course of election began to be in use in the time of Rich. 1.
and Hen. 2. yet I find it not confirmed by any Constitution or Charter before
the time of King John, who by his Charter dated the fifteenth of January, in
the sixteenth year of his Reign, When Canonical election began first in England.
granted this privilege to the Church of England in these words, viz. Quod
qualiscunque consuetudo temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum hactenus in
Ecclesia Anglicana fuerit observata, and quidquid juris nobis hactenus
vindicaverimus, de caetero in universis and singulis Ecclesiis and M^nasteriis,
Cathedralibus and Conventualibus, totius regni Angliae liberae sint in
perpetuum electiones quorumcumque Praelatorum, majorum and minorum. Salva nobis
and haeredibus nostris custodia Ecclesiarum and Monasteriorum vacantium quae ad
nos pertinent. Promittimus etiam quod nec impediemus nec impediri permittemus
per ministros nostros, nec procurabimus, quin in universis and singulis
Monasteriis and Ecclesiis, postquam vacuerint praelaturae, quemcunque voluerint
libere sibi praeficiant electores Pastorum, petita tamen a nobis prius and
haeredibus nostris licentia eligendis quam non denegabimus nec differemus. Et
similiter, post celebratam electionem, noster requiratur assensus, quem non
denegabimus, nisi adversus eandem rationale proposuerimus, and legitime
probaverimus propter quod non debemus consentire, etc.

But to return to the cause of his great quarrel with the Pope. The Sea of
Canterbury being void, the Monks of Canterbury suddenly and secretly without
the King's license elected one Reignold their Subprior to be Archbishop, who
immediately posted away to be confirmed by the Pope. But when he came there,
the Pope rejected him, because he came not recommended from the King. Hereupon
the Monks made suit to the King to nominate some fit person to whose election
they might proceed. The King commends, John Gray Bishop of Norwich, his
principal Counselor, who was afterward Lord Justice of this Kingdom, who
with a full consent was elected by them, and afterward admitted and fully
invested by the King. These two elections bred such a controversy as none
might determine but the Pope, who gave a short rule in the case, for he
pronounced both elections void, and caused some of the Monks of Canterbury, who
were then present in the Court of Rome, to proceed to the election of Stephen
Langton, lately made Cardinal at the motion and suit of the French King: who
being so elected was forthwith confirmed and consecrated by the Pope, and
recommended to the King of England with a flattering Letter, and a present of
four Rings set with precious stones, King John's round and Kingly Letter to the
Pope.
which were of great value and estimation in those days. Howbeit the King more
esteeming this Jewel of the Crown, namely, the Patronage of Bishoprics,
returned a round and Kingly answer to the Pope, That inconsiderately and rashly
he had cassed and made void the election of the Bishop of Norwich, and had
caused one Langton, a man to him unknown, and bred up and nourished amongst his
mortal enemies, to be consecrated Archbishop, without any due form of election,
and without his Royal assent, which was most of all requisite by the ancient
laws and customs of his Realm. That he marvelled much, that the Pope himself
and the whole Court of Rome did not consider what a precious account they ought
to make of the King of England's friendship, in regard that his one Kingdom
did yield them more profit and revenue then all the other countries on this
side the Alps. To conclude, he would maintain the liberties of his Crown to
the death, he would restrain all his subjects from going to Rome. And since the
Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates within his dominions were as learned
and religious as any other in Christendom, his subjects should be judged by
them in Ecclesiastical matters, and should not need to run out of their own
country to beg Justice at the hands of strangers.

But what followed upon this? The Pope, after a sharp reply, sends forth a
Bull of Malediction against the King, and of Interdiction against the Realm,
The Pope curses the King, and interdicteth the Realm.
whereby all the Churches in England were shut up, the Priests and Religious
persons were forbidden to use any Liturgies or Divine service, to marry, to
bury, or to perform any Christian duty among the people. This put the King into
such a rage, that he on the other part seized the Temporalties of all Bishops
and Abbots, and confiscated the goods of all the Clergy. Then does the Pope by
a solemn sentence at Rome depose the King, and by a Bull sent into England
discharges his subjects of their allegiance, and by a Legate sent to the King
of France gave the Kingdom of England to him and his successors for ever.

These things brought such confusion and misery to all estates and degrees of
people in England, as the King became odious to all his subjects, as well to
the Laietie as to the Clergy. For as the Bishops and religious people cursed
him abroad, so the Barons took arms against him at home, till with much
bloodshed they forced him, by granting the Great Charter, to restore King
Edward's Laws containing the ancient Liberties of the subjects of England. The
Pope being a spectator of this Tragedy, and seeing the King in so weak and
desperate estate, sent a Legate to comfort him, and to make a reasonable motion
unto him; to wit, that he should surrender and give up his Crown and Kingdom
to the Pope, which should be re-granted unto him again to hold in Fee-farm and
Vassalage of the Church of Rome: And that thereupon the Pope would bless him
and his Realm again, and curse his rebels and enemies in such sort, as he
should be better established in his Kingdom then he was before. In a word, this
motion was presently embraced by that miserable King, so as with his own hands
he gave up the Crown to the Pope's Legate, and by an Instrument or Charter
sealed with a Bull or Seal of gold he granted to God and the Church of Rome,
the Apostles Peter and Paul, and to Pope Innocent the third and his
successors, the whole Kingdom of England, and the whole Kingdom of Ireland;
and took back an estate thereof by an Instrument sealed with Lead, yielding
yearly to the Church of Rome over and above the Peter Pence a thousand marks
sterling, viz. seven hundred marks for England, and three hundred marks for
Ireland, with a flattering saving of all his Liberties and Royalties. The Pope
had no sooner gotten this conveiance, though it were void in law, but he
excommunicateth the Barons, and repeals the Great Charter, affirming that it
contained liberties too great for his subjects; calls the King his Vassal, and
these Kingdoms Saint Peter's Patrimony; grants a general Bull of Provision for
the bestowing of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, and takes upon him to be
absolute and immediate Lord of all. And thus, under color of exercising
Jurisdiction within these Kingdoms, the Pope by degrees got the very Kingdoms
themselves. And so would he do at this day, if the King would give way to his
Jurisdiction.

But what use did the Pope make of this grant and surrender of the Crown unto
him? what did he gain by it, if our Kings retained the profits of their
Kingdoms to their own use? Indeed we do not find that the Fee-farm of a
thousand marks was ever paid, but that it is all run in arrear till this
present day. For the troth is, the Court of Rome did scorn to accept so poor a
revenue as a thousand marks per annum out of two Kingdoms. But after the death
of King John, during all the reign of Hen. 3. his son, the Pope did not claim a
Seignioury or a Rent out of England and Ireland, but did endeavor to convert
all the profits of both Lands to his own use, as if he had been seized of all
in demesne. For whosoever will read Matthew. Paris his story of the time of King
Hen. 3. will say these things spoken of before were but the beginnings of
evils. For the exactions and oppressions of the Court of Rome were so
continual and intolerable, as that poor Monk, who lived in those times, though
otherwise he adored the Pope, does call England Baalam's Ass laden, beaten,
and enforced to speak; does call the Court of Rome Charybdis and barathrum
avaritiae, the Pope's Collectors Harpyes, and the Pope himself a Stepfather,
and the Church of Rome a Stepmother. He shows that two third parts of the
Land being then in the hands of Churchmen, the entire profits thereof were
exported to enrich the Pope and the Court of Rome: which was done for the most
part by these two ways and means. First, by conferring the best Ecclesiastical
Benefices upon Italians, and other Strangers resident in that Court, whose
farmers and factors in England took the profits, turned them into money, and
returned the money to Rome. Secondly, by imposing continual taxes and
tallages, (worse then Irish cuttings) being sometimes the tenth, sometimes the
fifteenth, sometimes the third, sometimes the moietie of all the goods both of
the Clergy and Laietie, under color of maintaining the Pope's holy wars
against the Emperor and the Greek Church, who were then said to be in
rebellion against their Lady and mistress the Church of Rome. Besides, for the
speedy levying and safe return of these moneys, the Pope had his Lombards and
other Italian Bankers and Usurers resident in London and other parts of the
Realm, who offered to lend and disburse the moneys taxed, and return the same
by exchange to Rome, taking such penal Bands, the form whereof is set down in
Matthew. Paris, and such excessive Usury, as the poor Religious houses ware fain
to sell their Chalices and Copes, and the rest of the Clergy and Laiety had
their backs bowed and their estates broken under the burden. Besides, the Pope
took for perquisites and casualties the goods of all Clerks that died
intestate, the goods of all Usurers, and all goods given to charitable uses.
Moreover he had a swarm of Friars, (the first corrupters of Religion in
England) who persuaded the Nobility and Gentry to put on the sign of the
Cross, and to vow themselves to the Holy wars, which they had no sooner done,
but they were again persuaded to receive dispensations of their vows, and to
give money for the same to the Church of Rome. I omit diverse other policies then
used by the Pope's Collectors to exhaust the wealth of the Realm, which they
affirmed they might take with as good a conscience as the Hebrews took the
Jewels of the Egyptians. Briefly, whereas the King had scarce means to
maintain his Royal family, they received out of England seventy thousand
pounds sterling at least yearly, which amounts to two hundred and ten
thousand pounds sterling of the moneys current at this day. Besides, they
exported six thousand marks out of Ireland at one time, which the Emperor
Frederick intercepted. Lastly, the King himself was so much dejected, as at a
Royal Feast be placed the Pope's Legate in his own Chair of State, himself
sitting on his right hand, and the Bishop of York on his left, non sine
multorum obliquantibus oculis, says Matthew. Paris.

Thus we see the effect of the Pope's pretended Jurisdiction within the
dominions of the King of England. We see to what calamity and servitude it then
reduced both the Prince and people. Was it not therefore high time to meet and
oppose those inconveniences? Assuredly if King Edw. 1. who was the Son and heir
of Hen. 3. had inherited the weakness of his Father, and had not resisted this
Usurpation and insolency of the Court of Rome, the Pope had been proprietor of
both these Islands, and there had been no King of England at this day. King Edw.
1. opp^seth the Pope's Usurpation.


But King Edward 1. may well be styled vindex Anglicae libertatis, the Moses
that delivered his people from slavery and oppression: and as he was a brave
and victorious Prince, so was he the best Pater patriae that ever reigned in
England since the Norman Conquest, till the Coronation of our gracious
Sovereign. At the time of the death of his father he was absent in the war of
the Holy land, being a principal Commander of the Christian Army there, so as
he returned not before the second year of his reign. But he was no sooner
returned and crowned, but the first work he did was to shake off the yoke of
the Bishop of Rome. For the Pope having then summoned a general Council,
before he would license his Bishops to repair unto it, he took of them a solemn
oath, that they should not receive the Pope's blessing. Again, the Pope forbids
the King to war against Scotland; the King regards not his prohibition: he
demands the First Fruits of Ecclesiastical Livings; the King forbids the
payment thereof unto him. The Pope sends forth a general Bull prohibiting the
Clergy to pay subsidies or tributes to Temporal Princes. A Tenth was granted
to the King in Parliament, the Clergy refused to pay it: the King seizes
their Temporalties for their contempt, and got payment notwithstanding the
Pope's Bull. After this he made the Statute of Mortmain, whereby he brake the
Pope's chief net, which within an Age or two more would have drawn to the
Church all the temporal possessions of the Kingdom, etc. Again, one of the
King's subjects brought a Bull of Excommunication against another; the King
commands he should be executed as a traitor, according to the ancient Law.
But because that Law had not of long time been put in execution, the
Chancellor and Treasurer kneeled before the King, and obtained grace for him,
so as he was only banished out of the Realm. And as he judged it treason to
bring in Bulls of Excommunication; so he held it a high contempt against the
Crown to bring in Bulls of Provision, or Briefs of Citation, and accordingly
the Law was so declared in Parliament 25 Edw. 1. which was the first Statute
made against Provisors: the execution of which Law, during the life of King
Edw. 1. did well-nigh abolish the usurped Jurisdiction of the Court of Rome,
and did revive and restore again the ancient and absolute Sovereignty of the
King and Crown of England.

His Successor K. Edw. 2. being but a weak Prince, E. 2. suffers the Pope to
usurp again.
the Pope attempted to usurp upon him again: but the Peers and people withstood
his Usurpation. And when that unhappy King was to be deposed, amongst many
Articles framed against him by his enemies, this was one of the most heinous,
that he had given allowance to the Bope's Bulls.

Again, during the minority of King Edw. 3. and after that in the heat of the
wars in France, the Pope sent many Briefs and Bulls into England; and at last
presumed so far, as that he gave an Italian the title of a Cardinal in
England, and withal by his Bull gave him power to bestow all Ecclesiastical
promotions as they should fall void from time to time. This moved the King and
the Nobility to write to the Pope to this effect: We and our ancestors have
richly endowed the Church of England, and have founded Abbeys and other
Religious houses for the jurisdiction of our people, E. 3. resists the
Usurpation of the Pope.
for maintenance of hospitality, and for the advancement of our countrymen and
kinsmen. Now you provide and place strangers in our Benefices, that come not to
keep residence thereupon; and if they come, understand not our language; and
some of them are subjects to our mortal enemies: by reason whereof our people
are not instructed, hospitality is not kept, our Scholars are unpreferred, and
the Treasure of the Realm is exported. The Pope returns answer, That the
Emperor had lately submitted himself to the Church of Rome in all points, and
was become the Pope's great friend; and in menacing manner advised the King of
England to do the like. The King replies, That if the Emperor and French King
both should take his part, he was ready to give battle to both in defense of
the liberties of his Crown. Hereupon the several Statutes against Provisors
before recited were put in execution so severely, as the King and his subjects
enjoyed their right of patronage clearly: and their exemption of Clerks took no
place at all; for that the Abbot of Waltham and Bishop of Winchester were both
attainted of high contempts, and the Bishop of Ely of a capital offense, as
appears in the Records of this King's reign. King Rich. 2.
Yet during the nonage of Richard 2. they began once again to encroach upon the
Crown, by sending Legates and Bulls and Briefs into England; whereof the people
were so sensible and impatient, as that at their special prayer this Law of 16
Rich. 2. (whereupon our Indictment is framed) was enacted, being more sharp and
penal then all the former Statutes against Provisors. And yet against this
King, as against Edw. 2. it was objected at the time of his Deprivation, that
he had allowed the Pope's Bulls to the enthralling of the Crown.

After this in the weak time of King Hen. 6. they made one attempt more to
revive their usurped Jurisdiction by this policy: The Commons had denied the
King a Subsidy when he stood in great want of moneys. The Archbishop of
Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops* offered the King a large supply of his
wants if he would consent that all the Laws against Provisors, and specially
this Law of 16 Rich. 2. might be repealed. But Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, who
had lately before cast the Pope's Bull into the fire, did likewise cause this
motion to be rejected. So as by special providence these Laws have stood in
force even till this day in both these Kingdoms.

Then the Attorney general descended to the evidence, The Evidence against
Lalor.
whereby he proved fully all the parts of the Indictment. First, it was proved
by Lalor's own Confession, upon several Examinations taken before the Lord
Deputy and Lord Chancellor and others, that he had accepted the Office and
title of Vicar General in the Dioceses of Dublin, Kildare and Fernes, by virtue
of the Pope's Bull. Secondly, it appeared by the copies of sundry Letters found
among his papers at his apprehension, that he styled himself the Pope's Vicar,
in this form, Robertus Dublinien. and Kildaren. and Fernen. Dioeces. Vicarius
Apostolicus. Thirdly, there were produced the copies of diverse Acts and
Instruments, written for the most part with Lalor's own hand, some of
Institutions of Popish Priests to Benefices, others of Dispensations with
Marriage within the degrees, others of Divorces, others of Dispensations for
non-payment of Tithes. Whereby it was manifestly proved that he did execute the
Pope's Bull, in usurping and exercising Episcopal jurisdiction as
Vicar-generall of the Sea Apostolic within the Dioceses before named.

To this evidence he made a threefold answer. First, That he was no suitor for
the office of Vicar-generall, but it was imposed on him, and he accepted
virtute obedientiae, only to obey his Superiors. Next, That he did exercise
the office of Vicar-generall in foro conscientiae tantum, and not in foro
judicii. And lastly, that those copies of Institutions, Dispensations and
Divorces were many of them written with his man's hand, as precedents of such
Acts and Instruments, without his privity or direction. Hereupon Sir James Ley
Chief Justice told him, that -- he could not well say that he accepted that
unlawful office virtute obedientiae, for there was no virtue in that
obedience: That he owed an obedience to the Law, and to the King, who is the
true Superior and Sovereign over all his subjects, and has no Peer within his
dominions; and that the Superiors whom he meant and intended were but Usurpers
upon the King's Jurisdiction, and therefore this excuse did aggravate his
contempt, in that it appeared he had vowed obedience to those who were apparent
enemies to the King and his Crown. And though it were manifest that he
exercised jurisdiction in foro judicii, (for every Institution is a Judgment,
and so is every Sentence of divorce:) yet were his offense nothing diminished
if he had executed his office of Vicar-generall in foro conscientiae tantum;
for the court of man's conscience is the highest tribunal, and wherein the
power of the Keys is exercised in the highest degree.

Hereunto the Attorney general took occasion to add thus much, That Lalor had
committed these high offenses, not only against the Law, but against his own
Conscience, and that he was already condemned in foro conscientiae. For that he
upon his second Examination had voluntarily acknowledged himself not to be a
lawful Vicar-generall, and that he thought in his conscience he could not
lawfully take upon him the said office. He has also acknowledged our Sovereign
Lord K. James to be his lawful, Chief and Supreme Governor, in all causes, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil; and that he is in conscience bound to obey him
in all the said causes, etc. as it is contained in his Acknowledgement or
Confession before set down. Which being showed forth by the Attorney general,
Lalor's Confession publicly read.
the Court caused it to be publicly read; and thereupon demanded of Lalor, if
that were not his free and voluntary confession signed with his own hand, and
confirmed by his oath before the Lord Deputy and Council. He was not a little
abashed at the publishing of this Acknowledgement and Confession in the hearing
of so many principal Gentlemen, to whom he had preached a contrary doctrine:
therefore, said he, the showing forth of this Confession is altogether
impertinent and besides the matter. Howsoever he could not deny but that he
made it, and signed it, and swore it, as it was testified by the Lord Deputy
and the rest.

Then was it demanded of him, whether since the making of this Confession he
had not protest^ ^o diverse of his friends, that he had not acknowledged the
King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes. His answer was, That indeed he had
said to some of his friends who visited him in the Castle of Dublin, that he
had not confessed or acknowledged that the King was his Supreme Governor in
Spiritual causes, for that the truth is, in the Confession there is no mention
made of Spiritual causes, but of Ecclesiastical.

This is a subtle evasion indeed, said the Attorney general: I pray you what
difference do you make between Ecclesiastical causes and Spiritual causes?
This question, said Lalor, is sudden and unexpected at this time, and therefore
you shall do well to take another day to dispute this point. Nay, said the
Attorney general, we can never speak of it in a better time or fitter place:
and therefore though you, that bear so reverend a title, and hold the
reputation of so great a Clerk, require a farther time; yet shall you hear that
we Laymen that serve his Majesty, and by the duty of our places are to
maintain the Jurisdiction of the Crown, are never so unprovided but that we can
say somewhat touching the nature and difference of these Causes.

First then, When the distinction of Ecclesiastical and Spiritual causes from
Civil and Temporal causes began in the world.
let us see when this distinction of Ecclesiastical or Spiritual causes from
Civil and Temporal causes did first begin in point of jurisdiction. Assuredly
for the space of three hundred years after Christ this distinction was not
known or heard of in the Christian world. For the causes of Testaments, of
Matrimony, of Bastardy and Adultery, and the rest which are called
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual c^uses, were merely Civil, and determined by the
rules of the Civil Law, and subject only to the jurisdiction of the Civil
Magistrate, as all Civilians will testify with me.

But after that the Emperors had received the Christian Faith, out of a zeal
and desire they had to grace and honor the learned and godly Bishops of that
time, they were pleased to single out certain special Causes wherein they
granted jurisdiction unto the Bishops: namely, in causes of Tithes, because
they were paid to men of the Church; in causes of Matrimony, because Marriages
were for the most part solemnized in the Church; in causes Testamentary,
because Testaments were many times made in extremis, when Churchmen were
present, giving spiritual comfort to the Testator, and therefore they were
thought the fittest persons to take the probates of such Testaments. Howbeit
these Bishops did not proceed in these causes according to the Canons and
Decrees of the Church, (for the Canon Law was not then hatched or dreamed of)
but according to the rules of the Imperial Law, as the Civil Magistrate did
proceed in other causes: neither did the Emperors, in giving this Jurisdiction
unto them, give away their own Supreme and absolute power, to correct and
punish these Judges as well as others, if they performed not their several
duties. This then is most certain, that the primitive Jurisdiction in all these
causes was in the Civil Magistrate, and so in right it remains at this day;
and though it be derived from him, it remains in him as in the fountain. For
every Christian Monarch (as well as the godly Kings of Juda) is custos
utriusque Tabulae; and consequently has power to punish not only Treason,
Murder, Theft, and all manner of Force and Fraud; but Incest, Adultery, Usury,
Perjury, Simony, Sorcery, Idolatry, Blasphemy. Neither are these Causes in
respect of their own quality and nature to be distinguished one from another by
the names of Spiritual or Temporal* For why is Adultery a Spiritual cause
rather then Murder, when they are both offenses alike against the Second
Table? or Idolatry rather then Perjury, being both offenses likewise against
the First Table? And indeed if we consider the natures of these Causes, it will
seem somewhat absurd that they are distinguished by the name of Spiritual and
Temporal: for, to speak properly, that which is opposed to Spiritual should
be termed Carnal; and that which is opposed to Temporal should be called
Eternal. And therefore if things were called by their proper names, Adultery
should not be called a spiritual offense, but a carnal. But shall I express
plainly and briefly why these Causes were first denominated, some Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, and others Temporal and Civil.

Truly they were so called, not from the nature of the Causes, as I said
before, but from the quality of the persons whom the Prince had made Judges in
those Causes. The Clergy did study spiritual things, and did profess to live
secundum spiritum, and were called spiritual men; and therefore they called
the Causes wherein Princes had given them jurisdiction spiritual causes, after
their own name and quality. But because the Lay-magistrates were said to intend
the things of this world, which are temporal and transitory, the Clergy
called them secular or temporal men, and the Causes wherein they were Judges
temporal causes. This distinction began first in the Court of Rome, where the
Clergy having by this Jurisdiction gotten great wealth, their wealth begot
pride, their pride begot ingratitude toward Princes, who first gave them their
Jurisdiction, and then, according to the nature of all ungrateful persons,
they went about to extinguish the memory of the benefit: for whereas their
Jurisdiction was first derived from Caesar, in the execution whereof they were
Caesar's Judges, so as both their Courts and Causes ought still to have born
Caesar's image and superscription, as belonging unto Caesar; they blotted
Caesar's name out of the style of their Courts, and called them Courts
Christian, as if the Courts holden by other Magistrates had been in comparison
but Courts of Ethnicks; and the Causes which in their nature were merely Civil,
they called Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. So as if the Emperor should
challenge his Courts and Causes again, and say, Reddite Caesariquae sunt
Caesaris, they would all cry out on the contrary part and say, Date Deo quae
sunt Dei; our Courts bear the name and title of Christ, the superscription of
Caesar is quite worn out, and not to be found upon them. And this point of
their policy is worth the observing, that when they found their jurisdiction in
Matrimonial causes to be the most sweet and gainful of all other, (for of
Matrimony they made matter of money indeed) to the end that Caesar might never
resume so rich a perquisite of their Spiritual jurisdiction, they reduced
Matrimony into the number of the 7 Sacraments: after which time it had been
Sacrilege, if the Civil Magistrate had intermeddled with the least matter that
had relation to Matrimony, or any dependencie thereupon. So then it appears,
that all Causes whereof Ecclesiastical or Spiritual persons have cognizance
or jurisdiction by the grants or permission of Princes are called
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual causes. And as all their Courts are called
Spiritual Courts, so all Causes determinable in those Courts are called
Spiritual Causes. And therefore where Mr. Lalor has acknowledged the King's
Majesty to be Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical causes, he has therein
acknowledged the King's Supremacy in all Spiritual causes; wherein he has
but rendered to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and has given unto his Majesty
no more then all the Bishops of England have yielded to his Predecessors, not
only in this latter Age, but also in former times both before and since the
Conquest, as has been before at large expressed.

Here the day being far spent, the Court demanded of the prisoner if he had any
more to say for himself. His answer was, That he did willingly renounce his
office of Vicar-generall, and did humbly crave his Majesty's grace and pardon.
And to that end, he desired the Court to move the L. Deputy to be favorable
unto him. Then the Jury departed from the Bar, and returning within half an
hour, found the prisoner guilty of the Contempts whereof he was indicted.
Whereupon the Solicitor general moved the Court to proceed to Judgment. And
Sir Dominick Sarsfield, Knight, one of the Justices of his Majesty's chief
place, gave Judgment according to the form of the Statute whereupon the
Indictment was framed.

OF THE KING'S Ecclesiastical Law.
IN the Term of S. Hillary, Caudrey's Case.
in the 33. year of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, Rotulo 340. Robert Caudrey Clerk
brought an action of Trespass against George Atton, for breaking of his Close
at North-Luffenham in the County of Rutland, the 7. day of August in the 31.
year of the Reign of the said Queen. The Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the
Jury returned and sworn for trial of this issue gave a special Verdict; that
is, they found the truth of the Case at large, referring the same for the Law
to the judgment of the Court, to this effect: They found that the Plaintiff
before the Trespass supposed to be done was Parson of the Rectory of
South-Luffenham, in the County aforesaid, whereof the place wherein the
Trespass is alleged was parcel; and found the Statute made in the first year
of the said Queen's Reign, by which in effect it is enacted, That such
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power has
heretofore been, or may lawfully be, exercised for the Visitation of the
Ecclesiastical estate and persons, and for reformation, order and correction
of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses,
Contempts and Enormities within this Realm, should for ever be united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: And that her Highness, her Heirs
and Successors, should have full power and authority by virtue of that Act, by
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England to assign, nominate and
authorize such persons, being natural-born Subjects, as her Highness, her Heirs
or Successors should think meet, to exercise and execute under her Highness,
her Heirs and Successors, all and all manner of Jurisdiction, Privileges and
Preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm of England and Ireland; and to
visit, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such Errors, Heresies,
Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever, which by any
manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, authority or jurisdiction, can or
may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended,
to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and the conservation
of the peace and unity of this Realm: And that such persons, so to be named,
assigned and authorized, should have full power and authority by virtue of that
Act, and of such Letters Patents, under her Highness, her Heirs and
Successors, to exercise, use and execute all the premises, according to the
tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents, any matter or cause to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And afterward the said Queen by her Letters Patents under the great Seal of
England, bearing date the ninth day of December, in the six and twentieth year
of her Reign, according to the tenor of the said Act, did authorize the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and diverse others, or any three
or more of them, to enquire, amongst others, of the Statute of the first year
of her Reign concerning the Book of Common Prayer; with this Clause also
contained in the said Letters Patents, videlicet, Also we give and grant full
power and authority to reform, redress, order, correct and amend in all places
of this Realm all Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Contempts and Enormities
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical whatsoever, which by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power, authority or jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be
reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended by Censure;
Ecclesiastical, Deprivation, or otherwise, etc. And upon proof thereof had,
and the offenses aforesaid, or any of them, sufficiently proved against any
person or persons, by Confession, lawful witness, or by any due manner, etc.
That then you or three of you shall have full power and authority to order and
award such punishment to every such offender, by Fine, Imprisonment, Censure of
the Church, or otherwise, or by all or any of the said ways, and to take such
order for the redress of the same, as by your wisdoms and discretions shall
be thought mere and convenient, as by the said Letters Patents more at large
appears.

And further, they found the Statute of the first year of the Reign of the said
Queen, by which it is enacted, That the offender against that Act concerning
the Uniformity of Common Prayer, being thereof lawfully convicted, according to
the Laws of the Realm, by Verdict of twelve men, or by his Confession, or by
the notorious Evidence of the fact, should forfeit for the first offense the
value of his Spiritual living for one whole year, and should suffer six months
Imprisonment: for the second offense, to be committed after such Conviction, he
should be deprived ipso facto of all his Spiritual livings: and for the third
offense, to be committed after two Convictions as is aforesaid, he should be
deprived of all his Ecclesiastical livings, and be imprisoned during his life.
And that the said Robert Caudrey before the time of the trespass supposed was
deprived of his said Benefice before the said High Commissioners, as well for
that he had preached against the said Book of Common Prayer, as also for that
he refused to celebrate Divine Service according to the said Book, and showed
particularly wherein: Which said Sentence of Deprivation was given by the
Bishop of London, cum assensu A. B. C. D. etc. collegarum suorum. And the Jury
concluded their Verdict, That if the said Deprivation were not warranted by
Law, but void, then they found the Defendant guilty of the trespass: And if the
Deprivation were not void in Law, then they found the Defendant not guilty.

And this Case was solemnly and oftentimes debated at Bar by the Counsel of
either party, and at the Bench by the Judges; and after great and long
deliberation and consultation had with the rest of the Judges, was in the Term
of S. Hillary, in the 37. year of the said Queen adjudged. And it was argued by
the Counsel of the Plaintiff, The objections of the Counsel of the Plaintiff.
that the said Deprivation was void for 4 causes.

First, 1.
The said Book of Common Prayer being authorized and commanded to be observed
by the said Act of the first year of the Queen, upon the forfeitures and
punishments therein comprised, the offense of the Plaintiff is against that Act;
for that Act only does command the observation of the said Book, and
inflicteth punishments in several degrees for depraving or not observing of
the same: and consequently, if the offense be against that Act, the Plaintiff
ought to have been proceeded withal and punished according to the same. And it
was said, that the said Act was an Act of great moderation and equity, for the
offender for his first offense should not be ipso facto deprived, but should
only lose the profits of his Ecclesiastical livings for one year, and suffer
Imprisonment for six months, to the end that such as were froward might have a
time to repent, and the wellminded a time to consent. And such care had the Act
of the offenders in this behalf, as if they committed one offense, and then
another, and after the second many more; yet should not the offender be
deprived for any of the latter offenses, unless he had been first judicially
convicted of record by verdict of 12 men, or by confession, or notorious
evidence of the fact: So as the second offense, for which he must be deprived
by the said Act, must be done and committed after such a judicial and solemn
Conviction and punishment, according to the said Act: And then if such an open
punishment and infliction should not give him understanding, and open his heart
to repent, then, upon a like Conviction, for a second offense, to be committed
after such a Conviction, Deprivation should follow. But in the case now in
question, Caudrey the Plaintiff was deprived from his said Parsonage of
South-Luffenham for his said first offense, being never convented or convicted
for any such offense before. And therefore it was concluded for this first
point, That the said High Commissioners had not pursued the form and order
prescribed by the said Act; and non observata forma, infertur adnullatio Actus;
and consequently the Deprivation of the Plaintiff is void, and therefore
Judgment ought to be given for him. And it was said by the Plaintif's
Counsel, by way of anticipation, That albeit there was a Proviso in the same
Act for Archbishops, Bishops, and their Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons,
and other Ordinaries, having peculiar Jurisdiction; yet that did not give any
strength to the said Deprivation, for two causes. First, that the Commissioners
by force of the said Act of 1 Eliz. and of the said Letters Patents, are not
within the said Proviso, but only Archbishops and Bishops, their Chancellors,
Commissaries, etc. in respect of their ordinary Jurisdiction. 2. Admitting it
should extend to the said High Commissioners, yet ought they to proceed
according to the form and order of the said Act, for an offense done against
that Act.

Secondly, it was objected by the Counsel of the Plaintiff, 2.
That Caudrey the Plaintiff was not deprived either by the verdict of 12 men, or
by confession, or by the notorious evidence of the fact, but by default in
respect he appeared not, being duly precognizated or warned; which case, as it
was objected, was Casus omissus, and oblivioni datus, and not within the said
Act.

3.
Thirdly, it was objected on the behalf of the Plaintiff, That the said Sentence
given by the said High Commissioners was utterly void, for that they or any 3
or more of them having authority by force of the said Act, and of the said
Letters Patents under the great Seal, ought to join in the Sentence, and that
one alone with the consent of 2 or more of the other Commissioners cannot give
a Sentence; for that every Commissioner has equal authority, and by the said
Letters Patents three or more must give the Sentence with consent of others:
and such a Judgment given by any Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or other
Commissioners or Judges of the Common Law, were utterly void and of none effect.

4.
Fourthly, and lastly, it was objected, That the said Commissioners were not
nominated and appointed according to the said Act; for the Jurisdiction and
power given by the said Act to the Crown, is, to name such Commissioners as be
natural-born Subjects, and it does not appear by the said special verdict that
the said Commissioners were natural-born subjects: And albeit the Judges as
private men in their particular knowledge did know them to be natural-born
subjects; yet they being Judges of record, ought only to see with Judicial
eyes, and to take knowledge of no more then does appear to them within the
Record; for upon that, and not upon private knowledge out of the Record, they
only must give their Judgment, and upon that Record enter their Judgment
also of record. And seeing that the said Queen had, as it was said by the
Plaintif's Counsel, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the said Act of Parliament,
and by the same, power was given unto her to name Ecclesiastical Commissioners;
she of necessity must make her nomination according to the said Act, having no
other power, as was objected, but by the said Act. And seeing it was not
specially found that they were natural-born subjects, and de non apparentibus
and non existentibus eadem est ratio; for this cause also the said Sentence of
Deprivation was void, as given by Commissioners not warranted by the said Act.

Asto the first and second Objections, both being grounded upon the said Act of
Parliament, The resolutions of the Court to the 1. and 2.
it was resolved by the whole Court, that notwithstanding these two Objections,
the Sentence was not to be impeached for either of them, and that for three
causes. First, for that the said Act concerning the Uniformity of Common Prayer
being in the affirmative, does not abrogate or take away the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, unless words in the negative had been added, as, and not
otherwise, or in no other manner or form, or to the like effect. And this
appears by the general rule of all our Books, as it appears in 46 E. 3.4.
47 E. 3.10. 20 H. 6.11. 36 H. 6.3. 3 E. 4.27. 3 H. 7.1. 14 H. 7.10 15 H. 7.16.
33 H. 8. Dyer 50. 4 Mar. Dyer 135. Stradlings case. Pl. Com. 207. etc. 2. The
Ecclesiastical Law and the Temporal Law have several proceedings, and to
several ends: the one being Temporal, to inflict punishment upon the body,
lands, or goods; the other being Spiritual, pro salute Animae: the one to
punish the outward man, the other to reform the inward. And this appears in
12 H. 7.22. and 10 E. 4.10. etc. Then both these distinct and several
Jurisdictions consist and stand well together, and do join in this, to have the
whole man inwardly and outwardly reformed. 3. The Proviso in the said Act does
make this question without question, for by it is provided, ordained and
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular Archbishops and
Bishops, and every of their Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other
Ordinaries, having any peculiar Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, should have full
power and authority by virtue of that Act, as well to enquire in their
Visitations, Synods, and elsewhere within their Jurisdiction, as at any other
time and place to take informations of all and every the things above
mentioned, done, committed or perpetrated within the limits of their
Jurisdictions and authority, and punish the same by Admonition,
Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation, and other Censures and
Process, in like form as heretofore had been used in like cases by the Queen's
Ecclesiastical Laws, as by the said Act appears. So as seeing, if that Act
had never inflicted any punishment for depraving or not observing the Book of
Common Prayer, yet the same being allowed and commanded to be observed for
uniformity of Common Prayer, and the unity and peace of the Church; the
Ecclesiastical Judge may deprive such Parson, Vicar, etc. as shall deprave or
not observe the said Book, as well for the first offense, as he might have done
by the Censures of the Church and the Ecclesiastical Laws, if no form of
punishment had been inflicted by that Act. And this does evidently appear by
the said Proviso: For thereby, notwithstanding any thing in that Act contained,
they may punish such offenders by Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestration,
or Deprivation, and other Censures and Process, in like form as heretofore
has been used in like cases by the Queen's Ecclesiastical Laws, and are not
bound to pursue the form prescribed by the said Act, which is to punish the
offender according to the Temporal Law. And it was re^olved, That if the
Jurisdiction of the Archbishops and Bishops, and their Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, were provided for by the said Act, a fortiori the
High Commissioners, authorized by another Act in the same Parliament, were
tacit provided for: Ouia cui licet quod majus est, non debet quod minus est
non licere.

To the 3.
As to the third Objection, it was also resolved by the whole Court, that the
Sentence given by the Bishop, by the consent of his Colleagues, was such as the
Judges of the Common Law ought to allow to be given according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws: For seeing their authority is to proceed and give
sentence in Ecclesiastical causes according to the Ecclesiastical Law, and
they have given a Sentence in a cause Ecclesiastical upon their proceedings by
force of that Law; the Judges of the Common Law ought to give faith and credit
to their Sentence, and to allow it to be done according to the Ecclesiastical
Law: For cuilibet in sua art perito est credendam. And this is the common
received opinion of all our Books, as appears 11 H. 7.9. 34 H. 6.14. etc. And
in Bunting and Leppingwells Case, in the part of my Reports. And this is the
usual form of all the Sentences in their Ecclesiastical Courts. And this very
Point, Tr. 23 Reginae Eliz. in this Court, between Cheyney and Frankwell, all
the matter being found, as this Case is, by special verdict, was adjudged.

As to the fourth Objection, videlicet, To the 4.
That the said Queen had only power by force of the said Act to nominate
Commissioners for Ecclesiastical causes, and therefore the foresaid Nomination
not pursuing the authority given unto her by that Act should be void: Hereunto
a threefold Answer was given, and resolved by the whole Court. 1. That they
which were Commissioners, and had places of Judicature over the King's
subjects, should be intended to be Subjects born, and not Aliens: But if in
verity they were Aliens, yet in respect of the general intendment to the
contrary, it ought to be alleged and proved by the other party. For Stabilitur
praesumptum donec probetur in contrarium. 2. The Jurors have found that the
Queen by her said Letters Patents did authorize them secundum formam Statuti
praedicti; and therefore it does by necessary consequence amount to as much as
if they had found they had been Subjects born: For if they were not Subjects
born, they could not be authorized secundum formam Statuti praedicti. Vide 11
H. 4.4. 13 Eliz. Dyer fol. And the rather, for that this is found by special
verdict. 3. It was resolved, That the said Act of the first year of the said
Queen concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not a Statute introductory of
a new Law, but declaratory of the old, which appears as well by the Title of
the said Act, videlicet, An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction
over the State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, etc. as also by the body of the
Act in diverse parts thereof. For that Act does not annex any Jurisdiction to
the Crown, but that which in truth was, or of right ought to be, by the ancient
Laws of the Realm parcel of the King's Jurisdiction, and united to his
Imperial Crown, and which lawfully had been, or might be, exercised within the
Realm. The end of which Jurisdiction, and of all the proceeding thereupon, was,
that all things might be done in causes Ecclesiastical to the pleasure of
almighty God, the increase of virtue, and the conservation of the peace and
unity of this Realm, as by diverse parts of the said Act appears. And
therefore as by that Act no pretended Jurisdiction exercised within this Realm,
being either ungodly or repugnant to the Prerogative or the ancient Law of the
Crown of this Realm, was or could be restored to the same Crown, according to
the ancient right and Law of the same: So if that Act of the first year of the
said Queen had never been made, it was resolved by all the Judges, that the
King or Queen of England for the time being may make such an Ecclesiastical
Commission as is before mentioned by the ancient Prerogative and Law of
England. And therefore by the ancient Laws of this Realm, this Kingdom of
England is an absolute Empire and Monarchy, consisting of one Head, which is
the King, and of a Body politic, compact and compounded of many and almost
infinite several, and yet well-agreeing, members: All which the Law divides
into two several parts, that is to say, the Clergy, and the Laietie, both of
them next and immediately under God subject and obedient to the Head. Also the
Kingly Head of this politic Body is instituted and furnished with plenary and
entire power, Prerogative and Jurisdiction, to render Justice and right to
every part and member of this Body, of what estate, degree or calling soever,
in all Causes, Ecclesiastical or Temporal; otherwise he should not be a Head
of the whole Body. What causes belong to the Ecclesiastical Court. see
Circumspecte agatis, 13 E. 1. W. 2. 13 E. 1. cap. 5. versus finem. Artic. cleri
9 E. 2. 15 E. 3. c. 6.31 E. 3. cap. 11.2 H. 5. c. 7.1 H. 7. cap. 4.23 H. 8.
cap. 9.24 H. 8. c. 12.27 H. 8. c. 20.32 H. 8. c. 7.1 E. 6. ca. 2.2 E. 6. ca.
13.1 Ma. cap. 3.1 Eliz. ca. 1.5 Eliz ca. 23.13 Eliz. ca. 10. Litt. lib. 2. ca.
Frankalm. fol. 30. F. Na. Br. fol. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. Regist. fol. 33,
34, 44. etc.
And as in Temporal causes, the King by the mouth of the Judges in his Courts
of Justice does judge and determine the same by the temporal Laws of England:
so in causes Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, as namely, Blasphemy, Apostasy
from Christianity, Heresies, Schisms, Ordering, Admissions, Institutions of
Clerks, Celebration of Divine service. Rights of Matrimony, Divorces, general
Bastardy, subtraction and right of Tithes, Oblations, Obventions,
Dilapidations, Reparation of Churches, Probate of Testaments, Administrations,
and accounts upon the same, Simony, Incests, Fornications, Adulteries,
Solicitation of Chastity, Pentions, Procurations, Appeals in Ecclesiastical
causes, Commutation of penance, and others, (the conusance whereof belong not
to the Common Laws of England) the same are to be determined and decided by
Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the King's Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Realm. For as the Romans, fetching diverse Laws from Athens, yet being approved
and allowed by the State there, called them notwithstanding Jus Civil
Romanorum; and as the Normans, borrowing all or most of their Laws from
England, yet baptized them by the name of the Laws or Customs of Normandy: So
albeit the Kings of England derived their Ecclesiastical Laws from others, yet
so many as were proved, approved and allowed here, by and with a general
consent, are aptly and rightly called The King's Ecclesiastical Laws of
England; which whosoever shall deny, he denies that the King has full and
plenary power to deliver Justice in all causes to all his subjects, or to
punish all crimes and offenses within his Kingdom; for that, as before it
appears, the deciding of matters so many, and of so great importance, are not
within the conusance of the Common Laws: and consequently, that the King is no
complete Monarch, nor Head of the whole and entire Body of the Realm. But to
confirm those that hold the truth, to satisfy such as being not instructed know
not the ancient and modern Laws and Customs of England, every man being
persuaded as he is taught; these few demonstrative proofs out of the Laws of
England, in stead of many, in order, and serie temporum, are here added.

KEnulphus Rex, etc. per Literas suas patentes, This King reigned an. Dom. 755.
Stanford lib. 3. cap. 38. fol. 111. This charter was pleaded 1 H. 7.23.25.
consilio and consensu Episcoporum and Senatorum gentis suae, largitus fuit
Monasterio de Abnidon in Comitatu Bark* ac cuidam Ruchnio tune Abbati
Monasterii, etc. quandam ruris sui portionem, id est, quindecim Mansias, in
loco qui a Ruricelis tunc nuncupabatur Culnam, cum omnibus utilitatibus ad
eandem pertinentibus, tam in magnis quam in modicis rebus, in aeternam
haereditatem. Et quod praedictus Ruchnius, etc. ab omni Episcopali Jure in
sempiternum esse quietus, Note.
ut inhabitatores ejus nullius Episcopi aut suorum officialium jugo inde
deprimantur, sed in cunctis rerum eventibus and discussionibus causarum Abbatis
Monasterii praedicti decreto subjiciantur. Ita quod, etc. As by the said
Charter pleaded in 1 Henr. 7. and vouched by Stamford, at large appears:
which Charter, Rex Edwin. regnavit anno Dom. 955.
granted above 850 years fithence, was after confirmed per Edwinum Britanniae
Anglorum Regem and Monarcham. By which it appears that the King by his
Charter made in Parliament (for it appears to be made by the counsel and
consent of his Bishops and Senators of his Kingdom which were assembled in
Parliament) did discharge and exempt the said Abbot from the Jurisdiction of
the Bishop, etc. and by the same Charter did grant to the said Abbot
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within his said Abbey: which Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction being derived from the Crown, continued until the Dissolution of
the said Abbey in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

In the Reign of King Edward the Confessor.
THe King, St. K. Edw. laws, ca. 19.
who is the Vicar of the Highest King, is ordained to this end, that he should
govern and rule the Kingdom and people of the Land, and above all things the
Holy Church, and that he defend the same from wrongdoers, and destroy and root
out workers of mischief. And this shall suffice for many before the Conquest.

In the Reign of King William the First.
7 E. 3. tit. Quare Impedi^ 19.
IT is agreed that no man can make any Appropriation of any Church having Cure
of Souls, being a thing Ecclesiastical, and to be made to some person
Ecclesiastical, but he that has Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: But William the
First, of himself, without any other, (as King of England,) made Appropriation
of Churches with Cure to Ecclesiastical persons: Wherefore it follows that he
had Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

In the Reign of King Henry the First.
HEnry by the Grace of God King of England, The Charter of H. 1. Founder of the
Abbey of Reading, in the 26. year of his reign, and in the year of our Lord
1125.
Duke of Normans, To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, and to
all Christians as well present as to come, etc. We do ordain, as well in regard
of Ecclesiastical as Royal power, that whenever the Abbot of Reading shall
die, that all the possession of the Monastery, wheresoever it is, do remain
entire and free, with all the rights and customs thereof, in the hands and
disposition of the Prior and Monks of the Chapter of Reading. We do therefore
ordain and establish this Ordinance to be observed for ever: because the Abbot
of Reading has no Revenues proper and peculiar to himself, but common with his
brethren; whosoever by God's will shall be appointed Abbot in this place by
Canonical election, may not dispend the Alms of the Abbey by ill usage with
his secular kinsmen, or any other, but in entertaining the poor Pilgrims and
Strangers, and that he have a care not to give out the Rent-lands in fee,
neither that he make any Servitors or Soldiers but in the Sacred garment of
Christ; wherein let him be advisedly provident he entertain not young ones, but
that he entertain men of ripe age or discreet, as well Clerks as Laymen.

In the Reign of King Henry the Third.
IN all the time of H. 3. and his Progenitors Kings of England, and ever
fithence, 2 H. 3. Tit. Prohibition.13. 4 H. 3. ibidem 15. 15 H. 3. Tit. Prohib.
22. Register fol.
if any man did sue before any Judge Ecclesiastical within the Realm for any
thing whereof that Court by allowance and custom had not lawful conusance, the
King did ever by his Writ under his great Seal prohibit them to proceed: And if
the suggestion made to the King, whereupon the Prohibition was grounded, were
after found untrue, then the King by his Writ of Consultation under his great
Seal did allow and permit them to proceed. Also, in all the Reign of H. 3. and
his Progenitors King of England, and ever fithence, if any issue were joined
upon the loyalty of Marriage, general Bastardy, or such like, the King did ever
write to the Bishop of that Diocese, as mediate Officer and Minister to his
Court, to certify the loyalty of Marriage, Bastardy, or such like: all which
do apparently prove, that those Ecclesiastical Courts were under the King's
Jurisdiction and commandment; and that one of the Courts wure so necessarily
incident to the other, as the one without the other could not deliver Justice
to the parties, as well in these particular cases, as in a number of cases
before specified, whereof the King's Ecclesiastical Court has Jurisdiction.
Now to command and to be obeyed belong to Sovereign and Supreme Government.

By the ancient Canons and Decrees of the Church of Rome, the issue born before
solemnization of marriage is as lawfully inheritable (marriage following) as
the issue born after marriage: But this was never allowed or appointed in
England, and therefore was never of any force here. And this appears by the
Statute of Merton, The Statute of Merton an. 20 H. 3.
made in the 20. year of King Henry the 3.

To the King's Writ of Bastardy, whether one being born before matrimony may
inherit in like manner as he that is born after matrimony, all the Bishops
answered, that they would not nor could not answer to it, because it was
directly against the common order of the Church. And all the Bishops instanted
the Lords, that they would consent, that all such as were born before matrimony
should be legitimate, as well as they that be born within matrimony, as to the
succession of inheritance, for so much as the Church accepts such to be
legitimate. And all the Earls and Barons with one voice answered, We will not
change the Laws of England which hitherto have been used and approved.

In the Reign of King Edward the First.
IN the Reign of King Edward the First, Vide 30 E. 3. Li. ss. pl. 19. Brook
tit. Praemunire pl. 10.

Note, this was by the common Law of England before any Statute made.

19 E. 3. tit. Quare non admisit 7. Vide 39 E. 3.20.


a Subject brought in a Bull of Excommunication against another Subject of this
Realm, and published it to the Lord Treasurer of England: and this was by the
ancient Common Law of England adjudged Treason against the King, his Crown and
Dignity; for the which the offender should have been drawn and hanged, but at
the great instance of the Chancellor and Treasurer he was only abjured the
Realm for ever.

The said King Edward the 1. presented his Clerk to a Benefice within the
Province of York, who was refused by the Archbishop, for that the Pope by way
of Provision had conferred it on another. The King thereupon brought a Quare
non admisit. The Archbishop pleaded that the Bishop of Rome had long time
before provided to the said Church, as one having supreme Authority in that
case, and that he durst not nor had power to put him out, which was by the
Pope's Bull in possession. For which his high Contempt against the King, his
Crown and Dignity, in refusing to execute his Sovereign's Commandment, fearing
to do it against the Pope's Provision, by judgment of the Common Law the
Lands of his whole Bishopric were seized into the King's hands, and lost
during his life. Note.
Which Judgment was before any Statute or Act of Parliament was made in that
case. And there it is said, that for the like offense the Archbishop of
Canterbury had been in worse case by the judgment of the Sages of the Law,
then to be punished for a Contempt, if the King had not extended grace and
favor to him. The Statute of Bigamie, (...) 4 E. 1. Observe how the King by
advice of his Council (that is, by authority of Parliament) expounded how the
said Council should be understood, and in what sense it should be received and
allowed here.


Concerning men twice married, (called Bigamy) whom the Bishop of Rome by a
Constitution made at the Council of Lions has excluded from all privilege of
Clergy, whereupon certain Prelates (when such persons have been attainted for
Felons) have prayed for to have them delivered as Clerks which were made Bigamy
before the same Constitution; It is agreed and declared before the King and his
Council, that the same Constitution shall be understood in this wise, That
whether they were Bigamy before the same Constitution or after, they shall not
from henceforth be delivered to the Prelates, but Justice shall be executed
upon them as upon other Lay people.

In an Act made at a Parliament holden at Carlisle in the 25. year of the said
King Ed. the First, Statutum de anno 25 E. 1. Carlisle. Vide 20 E. 3. tit.
Essoin 24.
it is declared, That the Holy Church of England was founded in the state of
Prelacy within this Realm of England by the King and his Progenitors, etc. for
them to inform the people in the Law of God, and to keep Hospitality, give
Alms, and do other works of Charity, etc. And the said Kings in times past
were wont to have the Advice and Counsel, for the safeguard of the Realm, when
they had need, of such Prelates The and Clerks so advanced. Nota: The first
attempt was to usurp upon such Ecclesiastical things as pertained to the
Clergy of England, who at that time stood in great awe of the Church of Rome.
The Bishop of Rome, usurping the Seigniories of such Benefices, did give and
grant the same Benefices to Aliens which did never dwell in England, and to
Cardinals which might not dwell here, etc. in adnullation of the state of the
Holy Church of England, disherison of the King, Earls, Barons and other Nobles
of the Realm, and in offense and destruction of the Laws and Rites of this
Realm, and against the good disposition and will of the first Founders. It was
enacted by the King, by assent of all the Lords and Comminalty in full
Parliament, That the said Oppressions, Grievances and Damages in this Realm
from thenceforth should not be suffered, as more at large appears by that Act.

In the Reign of King Edward the Second.
The Statute of 9 E. 2. Artic. Cleri cap. 16.

See the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis an.


ALbeit by the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis, made in the 13. year of Edw.
1. and by general allowance and usage, the Ecclesiastical Court held plea of
Tithes, Obventions, Oblations, Mortuaries, Redemptions of penance, Laying of
violent hands upon a Clerk, Defamations, etc. yet did not the Clergy think
themselves, assured nor quiet from Prohibitions purchased by Subjects, 13 E. 1.
to this effect. By this Statute of 9 Ed. 2. and the Statutes of 15 E. 3. cap.
6. 31 E. 3. cap. 11. and by other Statutes heretofore mentioned, the
Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Court is allowed and warranted by consent
of Parliament in all cases wherein they now have Jurisdiction, so as these Laws
may be justly called the King's Ecclesiastical Laws, or the Ecclesiastical
Laws of England.
until that King Edw. the 2. by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, in
and by consent of Parliament, upon the Petitions of the Clergy, had granted
unto them to have Jurisdiction in those cases. The King in a Parliament holden
in the 9. year of his Reign, after particular Answers made to their Petitions
concerning the matters abovesaid, does grant and give his Royal Assent in
these words.

We desiring as much as of right we may to provide for the state of the Church
of England, and the tranquillity and quiet of the Prelates of the said Clergy,
to the honor of God, and the amendment of the state of the said Church, and of
the Prelates and Clergy, ratifying and approving all and singular the said
Answers which appear in the said Act, and all and singular things in the said
Answers contained, We do for us and our Heirs, grant and command that the same
be inviolably kept for ever: Willing and granting for us and our Heirs, That
the said Prelates and Clergy, and their Successors for ever, do exercise
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the premises according to the tenor of the
said Answer.

In the Reign of King Edward the Third.
AN Excommunication by the Archbishop, albeit it be disannulled by the Pope or
his Legates, 16 E. 3. Tit, Excom. 4.
is to be allowed; neither ought the Judges to give any allowance of any such
Sentence of the Pope or his Legate. In the Reign of E. 3.


It is often resolved that all the Bishoprics within England were founded by
the King's Progenitors, and therefore the Advowsons of them all belong to the
King, and at the first they were donative. And that if an Incumbent of any
Church with Cure die, if the Patron present not within 6 months, the Bishop of
that Diocese ought to collate, to the end the Cure may not be destitute of a
Pastor: If he be negligent by the space of 6 months, the Metropolitan of that
Diocese shall confer one to that Church: And if he also leave the Church
destitute by the space of 6 months, then the Common Law gives to the King, as
to the Supreme within his own Kingdom, and not to the Bishop of Rome, power to
provide a competent Pastor for that Church.

17 E. 3.23.
The King may not only exempt any Ecclesiastical person from the Jurisdiction
of the Ordinary, but may grant unto him Episcopal Jurisdiction. As thus it
appears there the King had done of ancient time to the Archdeacon of Richmond.

20 E. 3. Excom. 9. 16 E. 3. tit. Bre. 660. 21 E. 3.60. 6 H. 7.14. Fit. Na. Br.

20 E. 3. Tit. Excom. 6. 21 E. 3. fol. 40.


All Religious or Ecclesiastical Houses whereof the King was Founder are by
the King exempt from ordinary Jurisdiction, and only visitable and corrigible
by the King's Ecclesiastical Commission.

The Abbot of Bury in Suffolk was exempted fron Episcopal Jurisdiction by the
King's Charter.

The King presented to a Benefice, and his Presentee was disturbed by one that
had obtained Bulls from Rome; for which offense he was condemned to perpetual
imprisonment, etc.

22 E. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 75.
Tithes arising in places out of any Parish the King shall have, for that he,
having the Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is bound to provide a
sufficient Pastor that shall have the Cure of souls of that place which is not
within any Parish. And by the Common Laws of England it is evident that no man,
unless he be Ecclesiastical, or have Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, can have
inheritance of Tithes.

27 E. 3. fol. 84. Fit. Na. Br. fol. 34.
The King shall present to his free Chapels (in default of the Dean) by Lapse
in respect of his Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And Fitzherbert says,
that the King in that case does present by Lapse as Ordinary.

30. E. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 19. 12 H. 4.16. 14 H. 4.14. 8 H. 6. fol. 3. 35 H.
6.42. 28 H. 6.1. 7 E. 4.14. 12 E. 4.16.
An Excommunication under the Pope's Bull is of no force to disable any man
within England: And the Judges said, that he that pleads such Bulls, though
they concern the Excommunication of a Subject, were in a hard case, if the King
would extend his justice against him. If Excommunication, being, the extreme
and final end of any Suit in the Court at Rome, be not to be allowed within
England, it consequently follows, Fit. Na. Br. fol. 64. F. Vide 9. E. 4. fol.
3. Hereafter fol. 11. It ought to be determined in the^^cclesiasticall Courts
in England.
that by the ancient Common Laws of England, no Suit for any Cause, though it
be spiritual, rising within this Realm, ought to be determined in the Court of
Rome, Quia frustra expectatur eventus, cujus effectus nullus sequitur: And that
the Bishops of England are the immediate Officers and Ministers to the King's
Courts.

In an Attachment upon a Prohibition, the Defendant pleaded the Pope's Bull of
Excommunication of the Plaintiff. The Judges demanded of the Defendant, 31 E. 3.
Tit. Excom. 6.
if he had not the Certificate of some Bishop within the Realm testifying this
Excommunication. To whom the Counsel of the Defendant answered, that he had
not, neither was it as they supposed necessary; for that the Bulls of the Pope
under Lead were notorious enough. But it was adjudged that they were not
sufficient, for that the Court ought not to ave regard to any Excommunication
out of he Realm: And therefore by the rule of the Court the Plaintiff was not
thereby disabled. 33 E. 3. tit. ^yde de Roy 103.38. Ass. pl. 20.


Reges sacro oleo uncti sunt Spiritualis Jurisdictionis capaces. Where a Prior
is the King's debtor, and ought to have Tithes of another Spiritual person, he
may choose either to sue for subtraction of his Tithes in the Ecclesiastical
Court, or in the Exchequer, and yet the persons and matter also were
Ecclesiastical. For seeing the matter by a mean concerns the King, he may sue
for them in the Exchequer as well as in the Ecclesiastical Court, and there
shall the right of Tithes be determined. And Fitzherbert in his Nabre. fol. 30.
holds, that before the Statute of 18 E. 3. cap. 7. right of Tithes were
determinable at the Temporal Courts at the election of the party; and by that
Statute assigned to be determined in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Temporal
Court excluded thereof. And the Courts of diverse Manors of the King's, See the
Statute of 15 E. 3. cap. 6. 31 E. 3. cap. 11.
and of other Lords, in ancient times had the Probates of last Wills and
Testaments. And it appears by 11 H. 7. fol. 12. that Probate of Testaments
did not appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court, but that of late time they were
determinable there. So as of such Causes, and in such manner as the Kings of
the Realm by general consent and allowance have assigned to their
Ecclesiastical Courts, they have Jurisdiction by force of such allowance.

38 Lib. Ass. pl. 22.
The King did by his Charter translate Canons Secular into Regular and
Religious persons, which he did by his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and could
not do it unless he had Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.

The Abbot of Waltham died in the 45. year of E. 3. and one Nicholas Morris was
elected Abbot, 46 E. 3. Tit. Premun. 6.
who, for that the Abbey was exempt from ordinary Jurisdiction, sent to Rome to
be confirmed by the Pope: And because the Pope by his Constitutions had
reserved all such Collations to himself, he did recite by his Bull, that he,
having no regard to the Election of the said Nicholas, gave to him the said
Abbey, and the Spiritualties and Temporalties belonging to the same, of his
spiritual grace, and at the request (as he feigned) of the King of England.
This Bull was read and considered of in Council, that is, before all the
Judges of England: and it was resolved by them all, that this Bull was against
the Laws of England, and that the Abbot for obtaining the same was fallen into
the King's mercy: whereupon all his possessions were seized into the King's
hands, as more at large by the said Case appears.

49 E. 3. Lib. Ass. pl. 8.
Where the Abbot of Westminster had a Prior and Convent who were Regular and
mort in law, yet the King by his Charter did divide that Corporation, and made
the Prior and Convent a distinct and capable Body to sue and be sued by
themselves.

Statut. de 25 E. 3. de Provisoribus.
At a Parliament holden in the 25. year of King Edward the Third, it was enacted
by consent of the whole Parliament, That as well they that obtained Provisions
from Rome, as they that put them in execution, should be out of the King's
protection; and that a man might do with them as with the enemies of the King;
And he that offends against such Provisors in body, goods, or other
possessions, should be excused against all people, and should never be
impeached or grieved for the same. By which Law every man might lawfully kill
such an Offender, as a common enemy against the King and his Country, so
heinous were such offenses then holden.

Afterward, Statut. de 25 E. 3.
in the same 25. year of King Edward the Third, it was in open Parliament by
the grievous complaints of all the Commons of this Realm showed, that the
Grievances and Mischiefs aforesaid did daily abound, to the great damage and
destruction of all this Realm, more then ever before, viz. That of late the
Bishop of Rome, by procurement of Clerks and otherwise, had reserved and did
daily reserve to his Collation, generally and specially, as well
Archbishopricks, Abbeys and Priories, as all other Dignities and other
Benefices of England, which were of the Advowrie of people of Holy Church, and
gave the same as well to Aliens as to Natives, and did take of all such
Benefices the First Fruits, and many other Profits; and a great part of the
Treasure of the Realm was carried away and dispended out of the Realm by the
purchasors of such graces: and also by such privy Reservations, many Clerks,
advanced in the Realm by their true Patrons, which peaceably had holden their
Advancements by long time, were suddenly put out. Whereupon the said Commons
did pray their said Sovereign Lord the King, Note.
that fithence the right of the Crown of England and the Law of the said Realm
was such, that upon the mischiefs and damages which happened to his Realm, he
ought and was bound of the accord of his said people thereof to provide remedy
and law, for the avoiding the mischiefs and damage which thereof came, That it
might please him thereupon to ordain remedy. The said King Ed. the 3. seeing
the mischiefs and damage before named, and having regard to the Statute made
in the time of his Grandfather King Ed. 1. and to the causes contained in the
same, which Statute holds always his force, Note.
and was never defeated nor adnulled in any point; and forasmuch as he was
bound by his Oath to see the same to be kept as a Law of this Realm, though
that by sufferance and negligence it had been fithence attempted to the
contrary; also having regard to the grievous complaints made to him by his
people in diverse his Parliaments holden heretofore, willing to ordain remedy
for the great damage and mischiefs which had happened, and daily did happen,
to the Church of England by the said cause; by the assent of all the Great men
and the Commonalty of the said Realm, to the honor of God, and profit of the
said Church of England, and of all his Realm, did order and establish, That the
free Election of Archbishops, Vide 10 E. 3. fol. 1. and 2.
Bishops, and all other Dignities and Benefices electory in England, should
hold from thenceforth in the manner as they were granted by the King's
Progenitors, and founded by the Ancestors of other Lords: And that all
Prelates, and other people of Holy Church, which had Advowsons of any Benefices
of the King's gift, or of any of his Progenitors, or of other Lords and Donors,
to do Divine Service and other charges thereto pertaining, should have their
Collations and Presentiments freely, in the manner as they were infeoffed by
their Donors: And in case that Reservation, Collation or Provision be made by
the Court of Rome of any Archbishopric, Bishopric, Dignity, or other
Benefice, in disturbance of the Elections, Collations or Presentations before
named, That at the time of the Avoidance, that such Reservations, Collations
and Provisions ought to take effect, the said King Edward the Third and his
Heirs should have and enjoy the same Collations to the Archbishopricks and
other Dignities elective, which be of his Avowry, as his Progenitors did before
that free Election was granted, fithence that the Elections were first granted
by the King's Progenitors upon a certain form and condition, as to demand
license of the King to choose, and after the Election to have his Royal Assent,
and not in other manner: which conditions not kept, the King ought by reason to
resort to the first nature, as by the said Act more at large appears.

Statutum de 27 E. 3.
In the 27. year of the Reign of the same King it was grievously complained to
the King in a Parliament then holden, by the Great men and Commons of the
Realm, how that diverse of the people were and had been drawn out of the Realm
to answer to things whereof the conusance pertained to the King's Court, and
also that the Judgments given in the same Court were impeached in other Courts,
in prejudice and disherison of the King and of his Crown, and of all the people
of his said Realm, and to the undoing and destruction of the Common Law of the
same Realm at all times used. Whereupon good deliberation being had with the
Great men and others of his said Council, it was assented and accorded by the
King and the Great men and Commons aforesaid, That all the people of the King's
allegiance, of what condition that they be, which should draw any out of the
Realm, for plea whereof the conusance pertained to the King's Court, or for
things whereof Judgments were given in the King's Court, or which did sue in
any other Court, to defeat or impeach the Judgments given in the King's Courts,
should incur the danger of Praemunire, as by the said Act appears.

To nourish love, Statut. de 28 E. 3. cap. 1. and 2.
peace and concord between Holy Church and the Realm, and to appease and cease
the great hurt and perils and importable losses and grievances that had been
done and happened in times past, and that should happen hereafter, if the thing
from thenceforth be suffered to pass, because of personal Citations, and other
that be passed before this time, and commonly did pass from day to day out of
the Court of Rome, by feigned and false Suggestions and Propositions against
all manner of persons of the Realm, upon Causes whose cognizance and final
discussing pertained unto the King and his Royal Court; and also of
Impetrations and Provisions of Benefices and Offices of Holy Church pertaining
to the gift, presentation, donation and disposition of the King, and other Lay
Patrons of this Realm, as of Churches, Chapels, and other Benefices
appropriated to Cathedral Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Chauntries, Hospitalls,
and other poor Houses, and of other Dignities, Offices and Benefices occupied
in times past, and presented by diverse and notable persons of the said Realm:
for which causes, and dispensing whereof, the good ancient L^ws, Usages,
Customs and Franchises of the said Realm had been and were greatly appaired,
blemished and confounded, the Crown of their Sovereign Lord the King minished,
and his Person falsely defamed, his Treasury and Riches of the Realm carried
away, the inhabitants and subjects of the Realm impoverished and troubled, the
Benefices of Holy Church wasted and destroyed, Divine Service, Hospitalities,
Alms-deeds and works of charity withdrawn and set apart, the Commons and
Subjects of the Realm in body and goods consumed: The King at his Parliament
holden at Westminster in the Vtas of S. Hillary, Statut. de 38 E. 3. ca 3.
the 38. year of his Reign, having regard to the quietness of his people, which
he chiefly desired to sustain in tranquillity and peace, to govern according to
the Laws, Usages and Franchises of his Land, as he was bound by his Oath made
at his Coronation, following the ways of his Progenitors, which for their time
made certain good Ordinances and Provisions against the said Grievances and
Perils; which Ordinances and Provisions, and all the other made in his time,
and especially in the 25. and 27. years of his Reign, the King by the assent
and express will and concord of the Dukes, Earls, Barons, and the Commons of
this Realm, and of all other whom these things touched, by good and meet
deliberation and advisement, did approve, accept, and confirm, as by the said
Act appears.

But those which should execute the said good Laws against such capital
Offenders were cursed, reproved and defamed, by such as maintained the usurped
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome: Against which an especial Act of Parliament
was made by the King and his whole Realm, prohibiting thereby such Defamations
and Reproofs.

In the Reign of King Richard the Second.
12 R. 2. tit. Jurisdiction 18.
AGainst an Incumbent of a Church in England another sueth a Provision in the
Court of Rome, and there pursues until he recovereth the Church against the
Incumbent, and after brought an Action of Account against him, as receiver of
diverse sums of money, (which in troth were the Oblations and Offerings which
the Incumbent had received.) And the whole Court was of opinion against the
Plaintiff, and thereupon he became nonsuit.

It is declared by that Parliament, Statutum de 16 R. 2. cap. 5.
that the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in
subjection to no Realm, but immediately subject to God, and none other; Note.
and that the same ought not in any thing touching the Regalty of the same
Crown be submitted to the Bishop of Rome, nor the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm by him frustrated or defeated at his will, to the perpetual destruction
of the King, his Sovereignty, Crown and Regalty, and of all his Realm. And the
Commons in that Parliament affirmed, that the things attempted by the Bishop of
Rome be clearly against the King's Crown and his Regalty, used and approved in
the time of all his Progenitors. Wherefore they and all the liege Commons of
the same Realm would stand with the King and his said Crown, and his Regalty,
in the cases aforesaid, and in all other cases attempted against him, his Crown
and his Regalty, in all points to live and to die. And moreover they did pray
the King, and him required by way of justice, that he would examine all the
Lords in the Parliament, as well Spiritual as Temporal, severally, and all the
States of the Parliament, how they thought of the cases aforesaid, which were
so openly against the King's Crown, and in derogation of his Regalty, and how
they would stand in the same cases with the King, in upholding the Rights of
the said Crown and Regalty. Whereupon the Lords Temporal so demanded did answer
every one by himself, That the cases aforesaid were clearly in derogation of
the King's Crown and of his Regalty, as it was well known, and had been of long
time known; and that they would stand with the same Crown and Regalty in those
cases especially, and in all other cases which should be attempted against the
said Crown and Regalty, in all points, with all their power. And moreover then
was demanded of the Lords Spiritual there being, and the Procurators of others
being absent, their advice and will in all those cases: which Lords, that is to
say, the Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates, being in the Parliament
severally examined, making protestations that it was not their mind to deny or
affirm that the Bishop of Rome might not excommunicate Bishops, nor that he
might make Translation of Prelates after the Law of Holy Church, answered and
said, That if any Executions or Processes in the King's Court, as before, were
made by any, and censures of Excommunications be made against any Bishop of
England, or any other of the King's liege people, for that they had made
execution of such commandments; and that if any executions of such Translations
be made of any Prelates of the same Realm, which Prelates were very profitable
and necessary to the King and to his said Realm; or that his sage men of his
Council without his assent and against his will be withdrawn and eloigned out
of the Realm, so that the substance and Treasury of the Realm might be
destroyed; that the same was against the King and his Crown, as it was
contained in the Petition before named. And likewise the same Procurators,
every one by himself examined upon the said matters, did answer and say in the
name and for their Lords as the said Bishops had said and answered: And that
the said Lords Spiritual would and ought to stand with the King in these cases,
lawfully in maintaining of his Crown, and in all other cases touching his Crown
and his Regalty, as they were bound by their Allegiance. Whereupon the King by
the assent aforesaid, and at the prayer of his said Commons, did ordain and
establish, That if any purchase or pursue, or cause to be purchased or pursued,
in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, any such Translations, Processes and
Sentences of Excommunication, Bulls, Instruments, or any other things which
touched the King their Lord, against him, his Crown and his Regalty, or his
Realm, as is aforesaid, and they which bring them within the Realm, or them
receive, or make thereof notification, or any other execution, within the same
Realm or without, that they, their notorious procurators, maintainers, fautors
and counselors, should be put out of the King's protection, and their lands
and tenements, goods and chattels forfeit to the King, and they be attached by
their bodies, if they may be found, and brought before the King and his
Council, there to answer to the cases aforesaid; or that process be made
against them by Praemunire facias, as it is ordained in other Statutes of
Provisors, and others which do sue in any other Court in derogation of the
Regalty of the King, as by the said Act also appears.

In the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.
IT is resolved that the Pope's Collector, 1 H. 4. fol. 9.
though he have the Pope's Bulls for that purpose, has no Jurisdiction within
this Realm: and there the Archbishops and Bishops, etc. of this Realm are
called the King's Spiritual Judges.

By the ancient Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm, Fitz. Na. ^r. 269.
no man could be convicted of Heresy, being high Treason against the Almighty,
but by the Archbishop and all the Clergy of that Province, and after abjured
thereupon, and after that newly convicted and condemned by the Clergy of that
Province, in their general Council of Convocation: This had a resemblance to an
Attainder of Treason, wherein there must be first an Indictment by one Jury,
and a Conviction by another.
But the Statute 2 H. 4. cap. 15. does give the Bishop in his Diocese power to
condemn an Heretic. And before that Statute he could not be committed to the
Secular power to be burnt, until he had once abjured, and was again relapsed
to that or some other Heresy. Whereby it appears that the King by consent of
Parliament directed the proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court in case of
Heresy, and other matters more spiritual.

The Pope cannot alter the Laws of England. 11 H. 4.37.


The Judges say, 11 H. 4. fol. 69.76.
that the Statutes which restrain the Pope's Provisions to the Benefices of the
advowsons of Spiritual men were made, for that the Spiritualty durst not in
their just cause say against the Pope's Provisions: So as those Statutes were
made but in affirmance of the Common Laws. 14 H. 4. fol. 14. Vide 30 E. 3. lib.
Ass.


Excommunication made by the Pope is of no fore in England, and the same being
certified by the Pope into any Court in England ought not to be allowed; pl.
19. before. Vide 13 E. 3. Certificate 6. Vide 20 H. 6.1. 37 H. 6.42. 7 E. 4.14.
Fitz. Na. Br. 64. F.
neither is any Certificate of any Excommunication available in law, but what
is made by some Bishop of England: for the Bishops are by the Common Laws the
immediate Officers and Ministers of justice to the King's Courts in Causes
Ecclesiastical.

14 H. 4.14.
If any Bishop do excommunicate any person for a Cause that belongs not unto
him, the King may write unto the Bishop, and command him to assoil and absolve
the party.

Statut. de 2 H. 4. cap. 3.
If any person of Religion obtain of the Bishop of Rome to be exempt from
obedience Regular or ordinary, he is in case of Praemunire, which is an offense,
as has been said, contra Regem, Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Statut. de 6 H. 4 cap. 1.
The Commons did grievously complain to the King, at the Parliament holden in
the 6. year of H. 4. of the horrible mischiefs and damnable customs which then
were introduct of new in the Court of Rome, that no person, Abbot or other,
should have provision of any Archbishopric or Bishopric which should be void,
till he had compounded with the Pope's Chamber, to pay great and excessive sums
of money, as well for the First Fruits of the same Archbishopric or
Bishopric, as for the other less Services in the same Court; and that the
same sums, or the greater part thereof, be paid before hand; which sums passed
the treble or the double at the least of that that was accustomed of old time
to be paid in the said Chamber and otherwise by the occasions of such
Provisions: whereby a great part of the Treasury of this Realm had been brought
and carried to the said Court, and also should be in time to come, to the great
impoverishing of the Archbishops and Bishops within the same Realm, and
elsewhere within the King's dominions, if convenient remedy were not for the
same provided. The King, to the honor of God, as well to eschew the damage of
this Realm, as the perils of their souls which owen to be advanced to any
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics within the Realm of England, and elsewhere
within the King's dominions out of the same Realm, by the advice and assent of
the Great men of his Realm in the Parliament, did ordain and establish, That
they and every of them that should pay to the said Chamber or otherwise, for
such Fruits and Services, greater sums of money then had been accustomed to be
paid in old time past, they and every of them should incur the forfeiture of as
much as they may forfeit toward the King, as by the said Act appears.

No person, Religious or Secular, Statut. de 7 H. 4., cap. 6.
of what estate or condition that he were, by color of any Bulls containing
privileges to be discharged of Tithes pertaining to Parishchurches, Prebends,
Hospitals, Vicarages, purchased before the first year of King Richard the 2. or
after, and not executed, should put in execution any such Bulls so purchased,
or any such Balls to be purchased in time to come, upon the pain of a
Praemunire, as by the said Act appears.

In the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.
IN an Act of Parliament made in the third year of King H. 5. it is declared,
Statut. de 3 H. 5 cap. 4.
That whereas in the time of King H. 4. Father to the said King, in the 7. year
of his Reign, to eschew many discords and debates, and diverse other mischiefs,
which were likely to arise and happen because of many Provisions then made, or
to be made, by the Pope, and also of License thereupon granted by the said late
King, amongst other things, it was ordained and established, That no such
License or Pardon so granted before the same Ordinance, or afterward to be
granted, should be available to any Benefice full of any Incumbent at the day
of the date of such License or Pardon granted; Nevertheless diverse persons,
having Provisions of the Pope of diverse Benefices in England and elsewhere, and
Licenses Royal to execute the same Provisions, have, by color of the same
Provisions, Licenses and Acceptations of the said Benefices, subtly excluded
diverse persons of their Benefices, in which they had been Incumbents by a long
season of the collation of the very Patrons Spiritual, to them duly made to
their intent, to the final destruction and enervation of the states of the same
Incumbents: The King, willing to void such mischiefs, has ordained and
established, That all the Incumbents of every Benefice of Holy Church, of the
Patronage, Collation or Presentation of Spiritual Patrons, might quietly and
peaceably enjoy their said Benefices, without being inquieted, molested, or any
ways grieved, by any color of such Provisions, Licenses abd Acceptations; And
that all the Licenses and Pardons upon and by such Provisions made in any
manner should be void, and of no value; And if any feel himself grieved,
molested, or inquieted, in any wise from thenceforth by any, by color of such
Provisions, Licenses, Pardons, or Acceptations, that the same molestors,
grievors or inquietors, and every of them, have and incur the pains and
punishments contained in the Statutes of Provisors before that time made, as by
the said Act appears.

Stat. de 2 H. 5. cap. 7. Lollardry a lolio: For as Cockle is the destruction
of the Corn, so is Heresy the destruction of true Religion.
A Statute was made for extirpation of Heresy and Lollardry, whereby full
power and authority was given to the Justices of Peace, and Justices of Assise,
to inquire of those that hold Errors, Heresies or Lollardry, and of their
maintainers, Infelix lolium and steriles dominantur avenae. Virgilius.
etc. And that the Sheriff or other Officer, Et careant loliis oculos
vitiantibus agri. Ovidius.
etc. may arrest and apprehend them.

Statutum de 2 H. 5. cap. 1.
The King, by consent of Parliament, gives power to Ordinaries to enquire of
the foundation, erection and governance of Hospitals, other then such as be of
the King's foundation, and thereupon to make correction and reformation
according to the Ecclesiastical Law.

In the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
8 H. 6. fol. 3.
EXcommunication made and certified by the Pope is of no force to disable any
man within England: And this is by the ancient Common Laws, before any Statute
was made concerning foreign Jurisdiction.

The King only may grant or license to found a Spiritual Incorporation. 9 H.
6. fol. 16.
1 H. 7. fol. 10.


In the Reign of King Henry the 6. the Pope writ Letters in derogation of the
King and his Regalty, and the Churchmen durst not speak against them: But
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, for their safe keeping, put them into the fire.

In the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
IN the Reign of King Edward the Fourth the Pope granted to the Prior of Saint
John's to have Sanctuary within his Priory; 1 H. 7. fol. 20.
and this was pleaded and claimed by the Prior: But it was resolved by the
Judges, that the Pope had no power to grant any Sanctuary within this Realm,
and therefore by judgment of the Law the same was disallowed.

There it appears, 9 E. 4.3. Fitz. Na. Br. fol. 44. H. agrees herewith.
that the opinion of the King's Bench had been oftentimes, that if one
Spiritual person sue another Spiritual man in the Court of Rome for a matter
spiritual, where he might have remedy before his Ordinary, that is the Bishop
of that Diocese within the Realm, quia trahit ipsum in placitum extra regnum,
incurreth the danger of a Praemunire, a heinous offense it being, Note.
contra legiantiae suae debitum, in contemptum Domini Regis, and contra Coronam
and dignitatem suas. By which it appears how grievous an offense it was
against the King, his Crown and Dignity, if any subject, although both the
persons and cause were Spiritual, did seek for justice out of the Realm, as
though either there wanted Jurisdiction, or Justice was not executed in the
Ecclesiastical Courts within the same; which (as it has been said) was an high
offense, contra Regem, Coronam and dignitatem suas.

In the King's Courts of Record, 9 E. 4.28.
where Felonies are determined, the Bishop or his Deputy ought to give his
attendance, to the end that if any that is indicted and arraigned for Felony do
demand the benefit of his Clergy, that the Ordinary may inform the Court of his
sufficiency or insufficiency, that is, whether he can read as a Clerk or not;
whereof notwithstanding the Ordinary is not to judge, but is a minister to the
King's Court; and the Judges of that Court are to judge of the sufficiency or
insufficiency of the party, whatsoever the Ordinary does inform them, and upon
due examination of the party, may give judgment against the Ordinarie's
information: for the King's Judges are Judges of the cause.

12 E. 4. fo. 16.
The Pope's Excommunication is of no force within the Realm of England.

In the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, a Legate from the Pope came to Calice,
to have come into England; but the King and his Council would not suffer him to
come within England, until he had taken an oath that he should attempt nothing
against the King or his Crown: and so the like was done in his Reign to another
of the Pope's Legates. And this is so reported in 1 Henrici 7. fol. 10.

In the Reign of King Richard the Third.
IT is resolved by the Judges, 2 R. 3. fo. 22.
That a Judgment or Excommunication in the Court of Rome should not bind or
prejudice any man within England at the Common Law.

In the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.
1 H. 7.10.
IN the Reign of King Henry the 7. the Pope had excommunicated all such persons
whatsoever as had bought Alum of the Florentines: And it was resolved by all
the Judges of England, that the Pope's Excommunication ought not to be obeyed
or to be put in execution within the Realm of England.

Statut. de 1 H. 7. cap. 4.
In a Parliament holden in the first year of King Henry the Seventh, for the
more sure and likely reformation of Priests, Clerks and Religious men, culpable
or by their demerits openly noised of incontinent living in their bodies,
contrary to their Order, it was enacted, ordained and established, by the
advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in the
said Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, That it be lawful to
all Archbishops and Bishops, and other Ordinaries, having Episcopal
Jurisdiction, to punish and chastise Priests, Clerks and Religious men, being
within the bounds of their Jurisdiction, as shall be convicted before them by
examination, and lawful proof requisite by the law of the Church, of
Advoutrie, Fornication, Incest, or any other fleshly Incontinency, by
committing them to ward and prison, there to abide for such time as shall be
thought to their discretions convenient for the quality and quantity of their
trespass: And that none of the said Archbishops, Bishops or Ordinaries
aforesaid, be thereof chargeable, of, to, or upon any action of false or
wrongful imprisonment, but that they be utterly thereof discharged in any of
the cases aforesaid, by virtue of this Act. 10 H. 7.18.


Rex est persona mixta, because he has both Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Jurisdiction.

By the Ecclesiastical Laws allowed within this Realm, 11 H. 7.12.
a Priest cannot have two Benefices, nor can a Bastard be a Priest; but the
King may, by his Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction, dispense with both of
these, because they be mala prohibita, and not mala per se.

In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Statut. de 24 H. 8. cap. 12. This
Statute is declaratorie of the ancient laws of England, as manifestly appears
by that which has been said.

BY an Act of Parliament made in the 24. year of King Henry the 8. that is to
say, by the King, 24 Bishops, 29 Abbots and Priors, for so many were then Lords
of Parliament, by all the Lords Temporal and the Commons in that Parliament
assembled, it is declared, That where by diverse sundry old authentic Histories
and Chronicles it was manifestly declared and expressed, that this Realm of
England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the world, See Br.
Abridgment, tit. Presentment al Esglise pl. 12. The Pope was permitted to do
certain things within this realm by usurpation, and not of right, until the
reign of H. 8.
governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal estate of
the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body politic compact of all sorts
and degrees of people, divided in terms and by names of Spiritualty and
Temporalty, been bound, and ought to bear, next to God, a natural and humble
obedience; he being also institute and furnished by the goodness and
furtherance of Almighty God with plenary, whole and entire Power, Pre-eminence,
Authority, Prerogative and Jurisdiction, to render and yield Justice and final
determination to all manner of folk resiants or subjects within this his Realm,
in all causes, matters, debates and contentions happening to occur, insurge or
begin within the limits thereof, without restraint or provocation to any
foreign Princes or Potentates of the world: The Body Spiritual whereof having
power, when any cause of the Law Divine happened to come in question, or of
Spiritual learning, that it was declared, interpreted and showed by that part
of the said Body politic, called the Spiritualty, then being usually called
the English Church, which always had been reputed and also found of that sort,
that both for knowledge, integrity, and sufficiency of number, it had been
always thought, and was also at that hour sufficient and meet of it self,
without the intermeddling of any exterior person or persons, to declare and
determine all such doubts, and to administer all such offices and duties as to
the rank spiritual did appertain. For the due administration whereof, and to
keep them from corruption and sinister affection, the King's most noble
Progenitors, and the antecessors of the Nobles of this Realm, did sufficiently
indow the said Church both with honor and possessions. And the Laws Temporal,
for trial of property of lands and goods, and for the conservation of the
people of this Realm in unity and peace, without ravine or spoil was
administered, adjudged and executed by sundry Judges and Ministers of the other
part of the said Body politic, called the Temporaltie. And both their
Authorities and Jurisdictions did conjoyn together in the due administration of
Justice, the one to help the other. And whereas the King, his most noble
Progenitors, and the Nobility and Commons of the said Realm, at diverse and
sundry Parliaments, as well in the time King Edward the 1. Edward the 3.
Richard the 2. Henry the 4. and other noble Kings of this Realm, made sundry
Ordinances, Laws, Statutes and Provisions, for the entire and sure conservation
of the Prerogatives, Liberties and Preheminences of the said Imperial Crown of
this Realm, and of the Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal of the same, to keep
it from the annoiance as well of the Sea of Rome, as from the authority of
other foreign Potentates, attempting the diminution or violation thereof, as
often and from time to time as any such annoiance or attempt might be known or
espied: And notwithstanding the said good Statutes and Ordinances, made in the
time of the King's most noble Progenitors, in preservation of the Authority and
Prerogative of the said Imperial Crown, as is aforesaid; yet nevertheless
fithence the making of the said good Statutes and Ordinances, diverse and sundry
inconveniences and dangers, not provided for plainly by the said former Acts,
Statutes and Ordinances, have risen and sprung by reason of Appeals sued out of
this Realm to the Sea of Rome, in causes Testamentary, causes of Matrimony and
Divorces, right of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions, not only to the great
inquietation, vexation, trouble, costs and charges of the King's Highness and
many of his subjects and resiants in this his Realm, but also to the great
delay and let to the true and speedy determination of the said causes,
forasmuch as the parties appealing to the said Court of Rome most commonly did
the same for delay of Justice, and forasmuch as the great distance of way was
so far out of this Realm, that neither the necessary proofs nor the true
knowledge of the cause could be so well known, or the witnesses there so well
examined, as within this Realm, so that the parties grieved by means of the
said Appeals were most times without remedy: In consideration thereof, the
King, his Nobles and Commons, considering the great enormities, damages, long
delays and hurts, that as well to his Highness, as to his said Noble subjects,
Commons and resiants of this his Realm, in the said causes Testamentary, causes
of Matrimony and Divorces, Tithes, Oblations and Obventions, did daily ensue,
did therefore by his Royal assent, and by the assent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament assembled, and by Authority of
the same, enact, establish and ordain, That all causes Testamentary, causes of
Matrimony and Divorces, rights of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions, the
knowledge whereof by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws and
Customs of the same, appertained to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of this Realm,
then already commenced, moved, depending, being, happening, or hereafter coming
in contention, debate or question within this Realm, or within any of the
King's dominions, or Marches of the same, or elsewhere, whether they concern
the King, his Heirs or Successors, or any other subjects or resiants within
this Realm, of what degree soever they be, This also is declaratory of the
ancient Law, as it appears both by 9 E. 4.3. Fitz. Na. B. 44. and many other
cases and statutes abovesaid.
should be from thenceforth heard, examined, discussed, clearly, finally and
definitively adjudged and determined, within the King's Jurisdiction and
Authority, and not elsewhere, in such Courts Spiritual and Temporal of the same
as the natures, conditions and qualities of the Cases and matters aforesaid in
contention, or thereafter happening in contention, should require, without
having any respect to any custom, use or sufferance in hinderance, let or
prejudice of the same, or to any other thing used or suffered to the contrary
thereof, by any other manner person or persons in any manner of wise; any
foreign Inhibitions, Appeals, Sentences, Summons, Citations, Suspensions,
Interdictions, Excommunications, Restraints, Judgments, or any other Process
or Impediment, of what natures, names, qualities or conditions soever they be,
from the Sea of Rome, or any other foreign Courts or Potentates of the world,
or from and out of this Realm, or any other the King's dominions, or Marches of
the same, to the Sea of Rome, or to any other foreign Courts or Potentates, to
the let tor impediment thereof, in any wise notwithstanding, as by the said Act
appears.

By an Act of Parliament in 25 H. 8. it is declared by the King, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Statut. de 25 H. 8. cap. 21. This was also declaratory
of the ancient Law, as by that which has been said appears.
and the Commons in that Parliament assembled, That neither the King, his Heirs
nor Successors, Kings of this Realm, nor any his subjects of this Realm, nor of
any other his dominions, should from thenceforth sue to the said Bishop of
Rome, called the Pope, or to the Sea of Rome, or to any person or persons
having or pretending any Authority by the same, for Licenses, Dispensations,
Impositions, Faculties, Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies, or any other Instruments
or Writings, of what kind, name, nature or quality soever they be, for any
cause or matter for the which any License, Dispensation, Composition, Faculty,
Grant, Rescript, Delegacy, Instrument or other Writing, theretofore had been
used and accustomed to be had and obtained at the Sea of Rome, or by authority
thereof, or of any Prelat of this Realm; nor for any manner of other Licenses,
Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies, or any
other Instruments or Writings, that in cases of necessity might lawfully be
granted without offending of the Holy Scriptures and Laws of God: But that from
thenceforth every such License, Dispensation, Composition, Faculty, Grant,
Rescript, Delegacy, Instrument, and other Writing before named and mentioned,
necessary for the King, his Heirs and Successors, and his and their people and
subjects, upon the due examination of the causes and qualities of the persons
procuring such Dispensations, Licenses, Compositions, Faculties, Grants,
Rescripts, Delegacies, Instruments, or other Writings, should be granted, had
and obtained from time to time within this his Realm, and other his dominions,
and not elsewhere, in manner and form following, and not otherwise. That is to
say, The Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, and his Successors,
should have power and authority from time to time by their discretions to give,
grant and dispose by an Instrument under the Seal of the said Archbishop unto
the King, and unto his Heirs and Successors Kings of this Realm, as well all
manner of such Licenses, Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, Grants,
Rescripts, Delegacies, Instruments, and all other Writings, for causes not
being contrary or repugnant to the Holy Scriptures and Laws of God, as
theretofore had been used and accustomed to be had and obtained by the King, or
any his most noble Progenitors, or any of his or their subjects, from the Sea
of Rome, or any person or persons by authority of the same; and all other
Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties, Compositions, Grants, Rescripts,
Delegacies, Instruments, and other Writings, in, for and upon all such causes
and matters, as should be convenient and necessary to be had for the honor and
surety of the King, his Heirs and Successors, and the wealth and profit of this
his Realm: so that the said Archbishop, or any his Successors, in no manner
wise should grant any Dispensation, License, Rescript, or any other Writing
before rehearsed, for any cause or matter repugnant to the Law of Almighty
God, as by the said Act also appears. If it be demanded what Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances and Synodals provincial, are* still in force within
this Realm; I answer, that it is resolved and enacted by Authority of
Parliament, That such as have been allowed by general consent and custom
within the Realm, and are not contrariant or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes
and Customs of this Realm, nor are to the damage or hurt of the King's
Prerogative royal, are still in force within this Realm, as the King's
Ecclesiastical Laws of the same. Now, as consent and custom has allowed those
Canons; This appears by resolution of all the Judges in 7 H. 8. Lib. Keylw.
fo. 181. And this was long before any Act of Parliament was made against
foreign Jurisdiction by King Henry the 8.
so, no doubt, by general consent of the whole Realm any of the same may be
corrected, enlarged, explained or abrogated. For example; There is a Decree
that all Clerks that have received any manner of Orders, greater or smaller,
should be exempt pro causis criminalibus before the Temporal Judges: This
Decree had never any force within England. First, for that it was never
approved and allowed of by general consent within the Realm. Secondly, it was
against the Laws of the Realm, as it does appear by infinite precedents.
Thirdly, it was against the Prerogative and Sovereignty of the King, that any
subject within this Realm should not be subject to the Laws of this Realm.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
BY the said Act of Parliament (whereupon the principal case then in question
partly depends) made in the first year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, The
Statute of 1 Q. Eliz.
it is declared, That where in the time of the Reign of King Henry the 8.
diverse good Laws and Statutes were made and established, as well for the utter
extinguishment and putting away of all usurped and foreign powers and
authorities out of this Realm, and other her dominions and countries, as also
for the restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this Realm the ancient
Jurisdiction, Authorities, Superiorities and Preheminences to the same of right
belonging and appertaining by reason whereof her most humble subjects, from the
25. year of the said King Henry the 8. were continually kept in good order, and
were disburthened of diverse great and intolerable charges and vexations, before
that time unlawfully taken and exacted by such foreign power and authority as
before that was usurped; And to the intent that all usurped and foreign power
and authority, Spiritual and Temporal, might for ever be clearly extinguished,
and never be used or obeyed within this Realm, or any other her dominions or
countries: It was by the Authority of that Parliament enacted, That no foreign
Prince, person, Prelate, State or Potentate, Spiritual or Temporal, should at
any time after the last day of that Session of Parliament use, enjoy or
exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority,
Pre-eminence or Privilege, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or
within any other the Queen's dominions or countries, that then were or
hereafter should be, but from thenceforth the same should be clearly abolished
out of this Realm, and all other her dominions for ever, any Statute,
Ordinance, Customs, Constitutions, or any other matter or cause whatsoever, to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And it was then also established and
enacted by the Authority of that Parliament, That such Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Superiorities and Preheminences Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as
by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority had heretofore been, or
might lawfully be, exercised or used for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical
state and persons, and for reformation, order and correction of the same, and
of all manner Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities, should for ever by Authority of that Parliament be united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: And that the Queen, her Heirs and
Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, should have full power and authority
by virtue of that Act, by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England to
assign, name and authorize, when and as often as the Queen, her Heirs or
Successors, should think meet and convenient, and for such and so long time as
should please the Queen, her Heirs or Successors, such person or persons, being
natural-born Subjects to the Queen, her Heirs or Successors, as the said Queen,
her Heirs or Successors, should think meet, to exercise, use, occupy and
execute, under the said Queen, her Heirs or Successors, all manner of
Jurisdictions, Privileges and Preheminences, in any wise touching or
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within these Realms of
England and Ireland, or any other her dominions and countries; and to visit,
reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, authority or jurisdiction, could or might
lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended, to
the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and the conservation of
the peace and the unity of this Realm: And that such person or persons so to be
named, assigned, authorized and appointed by the said Queen, her Heirs or
Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered as
is aforesaid, should have full power and authority, by virtue of that Act, and
of the said Letters Patents, under the said Queen, her Heirs or Successors, to
exercise, use and execute all the premises, according to the tenor and effect
of the said Letters Patents, any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding., as by the said Act also appears.

It was adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas by Sir James Dyer, 12 Eliz. Reg.
Dyer.
Weston, and the whole Court, that a Dean or any other Ecclesiastical person
may resign to the Crown, as diverse did to King Edward the 6. for that he had
the Authority of the supreme Ordinary.

From the 1. until the 11. year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, no person, of what
perswation of Christian Religion soever, at any time refused to come to the
public Divine Service celebrated in the Church of England, being evidently
grounded upon the Sacred and infallible Word of Almighty God, and established
by public Authority within this Realm. But after the Bull of Pius Quintus was
published against her Majesty, in the 11. year of her Reign, containing
(amongst other things too long to be repeated for this purpose) these words,
Pius Bishop, Servant of God's servants, Psalm. 109.28.

Though they curse, yet bless thou, O Lord, and let them be confounded that
rise against me: but let thy servant rejoice. Which was the prayer her Majesty
made when this Bull was published against her.


etc, She (Queen Elizabeth, has clean put away the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Prayers, Fastings, Choice or difference of meats, and Single life; She,
possessing the Kingdom, and by usurping the place of the Supreme Head of the
Church in all England, and the chief Authority and Jurisdiction of the same,
has again brought the said Realm into miserable destruction; Unto her all such
as are the worst of the people resort, and are by her received into safe
protection, etc. We make it known, that the said Elizabeth, and as many as
stand on her side in the matter above named, have run into the danger of our
Curse: We make it also known, that we have deprived her from that right she
pretended to have in the Kingdom aforesaid, and also from all and every her
Authority, Dignity and Privilege: We charge and forbid all and every the
Nobles, Subjects and people, and others aforesaid, that they be not so hardy as
to obey her, or her Admonitions, Commandments or Laws, upon pain of the like
accurse upon them: We pronounce that all whosoever by any occasion have taken
their Oath unto her, are for ever discharged of such their Oath, and also from
all Fealty and Service which was due to her by reason of her Government, etc.
(as by the said Bull more at large appears) After this Bull, all they that
depended on the Pope obeyed the Bull, disobeyed their gracious and natural
Sovereign, and upon this occasion refused to come to the Church. The publishing
of this Bull by a subject against his Sovereign (as appears by that which
has been oftentimes said) was Treason in the highest degree by the ancient
Common Laws of England. For if it were Treason to publish a Bull of
Excommunication within this Realm against a Subject thereof, as it was adjudged
in the Reign of King Edward the 1. a fortiori it is Treason in the highest
degree to publish such a Bull against the Sovereign and Monarch her self. After
this Bull many Bulls of Absolution and Reconciliation to the Church of Rome
were published and dispersed amongst her Majesty's subjects, to withdraw them
from their natural Loyalty and Allegiance to their Sovereign; whereupon no
small inconveniences (as hereafter appears) followed. The Statute of 13 Eliz.
And therefore at a Parliament holden in The 13. year of her Reign it was
declared by the whole Body of the Realm, That diverse seditious and very
ill-disposed people, minding very seditiously and unnaturally, not only to
bring this Realm and the Imperial Crown thereof (being in very deed of it self
most free) again into the thraldom and subjection of the foreign usurped and
unlawful Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence and Authority, claimed by the said See of
Rome, but also to estrange and alienate the minds and hearts of sundry the
Queen's subjects from their dutiful Obedience, and to raise and stir Sedition
and Rebellion within this Realm, did then lately procure and obtain to
themselves, from the said Bishop of Rome and his said See, diverse Bulls and
Writings, the effect whereof had been, and then was, to absolve and reconcile
all those that would be contented to forsake their due Obedience to the Queen,
and to yield and subject themselves to the said feigned, unlawful and usurped
Authority; and by color of the said Bulls and Writings, the said persons very
secretly and most seditiously, in such parts of this Realm where the people for
want of good instruction were most weak, simple and ignorant, and thereby
farthest from the good understanding of their duties toward God and the Queen,
did by their lewd and subtle practices and persuasions so far forth work, that
sundry simple and ignorant persons had been contented to be reconciled to the
said usurped Authority of the Sea of Rome, and to take Absolution at the hands
of the said naughty and subtle practisers: Note the fruits of the Bull.
whereby did grow great disobedience and boldness in many, not only to
withdraw and absent themselves from all Divine Service, 1.
then most godly set forth and used within this Realm, 2.
but also to think themselves discharged of and from all Obedience, Duty and
Allegiance to her Majesty; 3.
whereby most wicked and unnatural Rebellion did ensue, and, to the farther
danger of this Realm, 4.
was thereafter very like to be renewed, if the ungodly and wicked attempts in
that behalf were not by severity of Laws in time restrained and bridled. For
remedy and redress whereof, and to prevent the great mischiefs and
inconveniences that thereby might ensue, it was enacted by the Queen, The parts
of the Act.
with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person or
persons, 1.
after the first day of July then next coming, should use or put in ure in any
place within this Realm, or in any the Queen's dominions, any such Bull,
Writing or Instrument, written or printed, of Absolution or Reconciliation, at
any time theretofore obtained and gotten, or at any time thereafter to be
obtained or gotten, from the said Bishop of Rome, or any his Successors, or
from any other person or persons authorized or claiming authority by or from
the said Bishop of Rome, his Predecessors or Successors, or the Sea of Rome; Or
if any person or persons, 2.
after the said first day of July, should take upon him or them, by color of
any such Bull, Writing, Instrument or Authority, to absolve or reconcile any
person or persons, or to grant or promise to any person or persons within this
Realm, or any other the Queen's dominions, any such Absolution or
Reconciliation, by any speech, preaching, teaching, writing, or any other open
deed; 3.
Or if any other person or persons within this Realm, or any the Queen's
dominions, after the said first day of July, should willingly receive and take
any such Absolution or Reconciliation; 4.
Or else if any person or persons had obtained or gotten sithence the last day
of the Parliament holden in the first year of her Reign, or after the said
first day of July should obtain or get, from the said Bishop of Rome, or any
his Successors, or the Sea of Rome, any manner of Bull, Writing or Instrument,
written or printed, containing any thing, 5.
matter or cause whatsoever; Or should publish, or by any ways or means put in
ure, any such Bull, Writing or Instrument: That then all and every such act or
acts, offense and offenses, should be deemed and adjudged by the Authority of
the said Act to be high Treason, and the Offender and Offenders therein, their
Procurors, Abettors and Counselors to the fact, and committing of the said
offense or offenses, should be deemed and adjudged high Traitors to the Queen
and the Realm; and being thereof lawfully indicted and attainted, according to
the course of the Laws of this Realm, should suffer pains of death, also lose
and forfeit all their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, as
in cases of high Treason by the Laws of this Realm ought to be lost and
forfeited, as by the said Act appears.

And albeit many of her subjects, after the said Bull of Pius Quintus, adhering
to the Pope, did renounce their former Obedience to the Queen in respect of
that Bull; yet all this time no Law was either made or attempted against them
for their Recusancy, though it were grounded upon so disloyal a Cause. Now that
these speechless Bulls were declared by Act of Parliament to be so dangerous,
then in place of them Jesuits and Romish Priests were sent over, who in secret
corners whispered and infused into the hearts of many of the unlearned subjects
of this Realm, that the Pope had power to excommunicate and depose Kings and
Princes; that he had excommunicated the Queen, deprived her of her Kingdom,
and discharged all her subjects of their Oath, Duties, and Allegiance to her;
and therefore they ought not to obey her, or any of her Commandments or Laws,
under pain of the Pope's Curse. This was high Treason by the ancient Laws of
England: And thereupon Campion, Sherwin, and many other Romish Priests, being
apprehended, and confessing that they came into England to make a party for the
Catholic cause when need should require, were in the 21. year of the said
Queen's Reign, by the ancient Common Laws of England, indicted, arraigned,
tried, adjudged and executed for high Treason against their natural Allegiance
which they ought their liege Sovereign. But all this time there was no Act of
Parliament made either against Recusants, or Jesuits, or Priests, her Majesty
still desiring and expecting their conversion, and that by clemency and
mildness they might be reclaimed to their former obedience and conformity
before the said Bull. After Priests and Jesuits were punished by sentence of
Law according to their demerits: then great numbers of slanderous and seditious
Books ( libri falsidici) against her Majesty and the State were dispersed and
scattered within this Realm, tending to the inciting and stirring of the
Subjects to Insurrection and Rebellion.

Her Majesty in open Parliament, having with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons, mature consideration of so weighty and important causes, The
Statute of an. 23 Reginae Eliz.
in the 23. year of her Reign made two several Laws. One against the makers and
publishers of Seditious Books, ordaining that offense to be Felony: another
against Recusants, inflicting the penalty of twenty pounds the month for their
Recusancie: and yet upon their submission according to the Act, to be thereof
freely and absolutely discharged, (a mild and merciful Law, considering their
former Conformity, and the cause of their Revolt.) But after these Jesuits and
Romish Priests coming daily into and swarming within the Realm, instilling
still this poison into the Subjects hearts, that by reason of the said Bull of
Pius Quintus her Majesty was excommunicated, deprived of her Kingdom, and that
her Subjects were discharged of all Obedience to her, and by all means
endeavoring to withdraw them from their Duty and Allegiance to her Majesty,
and to reconcile them to the Church of Rome; The Statute of an. 27 Eliz.
Reginae.
in the 27. year of her Reign, by Authority of Parliament, her Majesty made it
Treason for any Jesuit or Romish Priest, being her natural-born Subject, and
made a Romish Priest or Jesuit sithence the beginning of her Reign, to come
into any of her dominions; intending thereby to keep them out of the same, to
the end that they should not infect any other Subjects with such treasonable
and damnable persuasions and practices as are aforesaid, which without
controversy were high Treason by the ancient Common Laws of England. Neither
would ever magnanimous King of England, fithence the first establishment of
this Monarchy, have suffered any (especially being his own natural-born
Subjects) to live, that persuaded his Subjects that he was no lawful King, and
practiced with them (within the heart of this Realm) to withdraw them from
their Allegiance and Loyalty to their Sovereign, the same being crimen laesae
Majestatis by the ancient Laws of this Realm.

BY this and by all the Records of the Indictments it appears that these
Jesuits and Priests are not condemned and executed for their Priesthood and
Profession, but for their treasonable and damnable Persuasions, and Practices
against the Crowns and Dignities of Monarchs and absolute Princes, who hold
their Kingdoms and Dominions by lawful Succession, and by inherent Birthright
and descent of inheritance, (according to the fundamental Laws of this Realm)
immediately of Almighty God, and are not Tenants of their Kingdoms (as they
would have it) at the will and pleasure of any foreign Potentate whatsoever.

Now albeit the proceedings and process in the Ecclesiastical Courts be in the
name of the Bishops, etc. it follows not therefore, that either the Court is
not the King's, or the Law whereby they proceed is not the King's Law. For,
taking one example for many, every Leet or View of Frankpledge holden by a
Subject is kept in the Lord's name, and yet it is the King's Court, and all the
proceedings therein are directed by the King's Laws: and many subjects in
England have and hold Courts of Record and other Courts, and yet all their
proceedings be according to the King's Laws and the Customs of the Realm.

Observe, (good Reader) seeing that the determination of Heresies, Schisms, and
Errors in Religion, Ordering, Examination, Admission, Institution and
Deprivation of men of the Church, (which do concern God's true Religion and
Service) of right of Matrimony, Divorces, and general Bastardy, (whereupon
depend the strength of men's Discents and Inheritances) of probate of
Testaments, and letters of Administration, (without which no debt or duty due
to any dead man can be recovered by the Common Law) Mortuaries, Pensions,
Procurations, Reparations of Churches, Simony, Incest, Adultery, Fornication
and Incontinency, and some others, does not belong to the Common Law, how
necessary it was, for administration of Justice, that his Majesty's
Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, did by public authority authorize
Ecclesiastical Courts under them, to determine those great and important
Causes Ecclesiastical (exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Common Law) by the
King's Laws Ecclesiastical. Which was done originally for two causes, 1. That
Justice should be administered under the Kings of this Realm within their own
Kingdom, to all their Subjects, and in all Causes. 2. That the Kings of
England should be furnished upon all occasions, either foreign or domestical,
with learned Professors as well of the Ecclesiastical as Temporal Laws.

THus has it appeared, as well by the ancient Common Laws of this Realm, by
the Resolutions and Judgments of the Judges and Sages of the Laws of England
in all succession of ages, as by Authority of many Acts of Parliament, ancient
and of latter times, That the Kingdom of England is an absolute Monarchy, and
that the King is the only Supreme Governor, as well over Ecclesiastical
persons and in Ecclesiastical causes, as Temporal, within this Realm; to the
due observation of which Laws both the King and the Subject are sworn. I have
herein cited the very words and texts of the Laws, Resolutions, Judgments, and
Acts of Parliament, all public and in print, without any inference, argument,
or amplification; and have particularly quoted the books, years, leaves,
chapters, and such like certain references, as every man may at his pleasure
see and read the Authorities herein cited. This Case is reported in the
English and Latin tongues, (as some other Writers of the Law have done,) to
the end that my dear Countrymen may be acquainted with the Laws of this Realm,
their own Birthright and inheritance, and with such evidences as of right
belong to the same; assuring my self that no wise or true-hearted Englishman,
that has been persuaded before he was instructed, will refuse to be instructed
in the truth, (which he may see with his own eyes) lest he should be dissuaded
from error, wherewith blindfold he has been deceived. For miserable is his
case, and worthy of pity, that has been persuaded before he was instructed,
and now will refuse to be instructed, because he will not be persuaded.

FINIS.

