A DECLARATION OF The Committee for the Militia: CONCERNING The Penalties that
are to be inflicted upon those of the TRAINED-BANDS that exempt themselves in
this present Expedition.

Together with a Declaration of the COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, for the
raising of Money, Plate, and Horse, to be employed for the Aid and Assistance
of the Lord FAIRFAX.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this be forthwith printed and
published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edward Husbands, October 18. 1643.

ALl Gentlemen Soldiers, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel John Hopson,
repair to your Colors at your Rendevouze in this present Wednesday morning,
being the Eighteenth day of October, 1643. completely Armed, fit for service,
by Seven of the clock there to receive further command from the Earl of Essex
his Excellency, or other Officers under him: And if any shall fail to be ready
to march away at the hour of Eight of the clock, he shall forfeit Five
shillings; And if they shall not appear by Nine of the clock, Ten shillings;
And if they shall not appear by Twelve of the clock in Saint James field, to
march as they shall be directed; Then their shops are to be shut up, and they
deprived of Trade, and liable to the Expulsion out of the Lines of
Communication.

And the Committee for the Militia sitting at Worcester-house do further
declare, that it is ordered, that every Parish from whence the Regiment is
drawn, shall speedily prepare a large Table to be fixed within the respective
Churches, wherein shall be inscribed the Names of all such Soldiers that shall
voluntarily in person express their alacrity and courage in so commendable a
service, as a testimony of their good affections, and a perpetual memorial to
the honor of them and their posterity.

A Declaration of the Commons in Parliament, etc.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Aid
and assistance of the Lord Fairfax shall be especially and respectively
reco^mended to the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Lincoln, and to the
city and county of the city of Norwich; And the House does declare, That it is
and shall be held an acceptable service in any man that will give any
assistahce in Men, Money, Plate, Horse, or Ammunition, to the said Lord
Fairfax; And this House does engage the Publique-Faith for repayment; And this
House does further Declare, That it shall be held an acceptable service in all
such as have, or shall encourage others to a cheerful assistance of the said
Lord Fairfax. And it is further ordered, That Sir William Constable Baronet,
and such as he shall depute and appoint, shall have power to receive the
several sums of Money, Plate, Horse, and Ammunition subscribed, or to be
hereafter subscribed as abovesaid, within the several and respective counties
of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Lincoln, and the city and county of the city of
Norwich, and to apprize the said Horses, and to give Acquittances and Receipts
for the same; which Receipts shall be presented to the Treasurers at Guild Hall,
London, to be by the said Treasurers received and entered in as full and
beneficial a manner, as if the several Subscribers had actually paid in the
several sums subscribed unto the said Treasurers at Guild Hall, London,
whereby the several contributers may have the security of the Publique-Faith
for their repayment, as was upon the former Propositions for the Subscriptions
of Money, Horse and Plate, etc. The which Money, Plate and Horse, the said Sir
William Constable or his Deputies, shall discharge themselves of by order of
the Lord Fairfax, according to the several Subscriptions, and the intent of
the Subscribers therein.

FINIS.

