HISTORY of Chalcography by J.E.



SCULPTURA: OR THE HISTORY, and ART OF CHALCOGRAPHY AND Engraving in Copper.
WITH An ample enumeration of the most renowned Masters, and their Works. To
which is annexed A new manner of Engraving, or Mezzo Tinto, communicated by his
Highness Prince Rupert to the Author of this Treatise.



XXXI. EXODUS XXXV. Implevi cum Spiritu Dei, Sapientia, and Intelligentia, and
Scientia in omni Opere, etc.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for G. Beedle, and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple
Gate, and J. Crook in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

TO THE HONORABLE, AND LEARNED GENTLEMAN, ROBERT BOIL Esquire;
SIR,
HAving upon your reiterated instances (which are ever commands with me)
prepared this Treatise concerning the History of Chalcography etc. I thought my
self engaged, to signify to the rest, that may possibly receive or
Satisfaction, or Benefit from it, to whom they are obliged for the Publication
of it. The truth is, as it respects the pains which I have taken, it bears not
the least proportion with my ambition of serving you; but as you are pleased to
judge it useful for the encouragement of the Gentlemen of our Nation, who
sometimes please themselves with these innocent diversions (Collections worthy
of them for diverse respects) and, especially, that such as are addicted to the
more Noble Mathematical Sciences, may draw, and engrave their Schemes with
delight and assurance, I have been induced to think it more worthy your
Patronage, and of my small Adventure, who profess to have nothing so much in
my desires, and which I more avow the pursuit of, then to employ the whole
remainder of the life, which God shall assign me, and that I can redeem from
its impertinencies, in contributing to that great and august design, which
your illustrious, and happy Genius does prompt you to, of cultivating the
Sciences, and advancing of useful knowledge, emancipated from the strong
contentions, and little fruit of the former; Envy, and imposture of the latter
Ages.

Sir, This is not in the least to flatter you, nor can I have other aim in it,
then that by your great Example, I might excite such as (like you) have Parts
and Faculties, to things that are glorious, and wortby of them. Your studies
are so mature and universal, your travels so highly improved, and your
Experience so well established; that, after I have celebrated the Conversation
which results from all these perfections, it is from You alone, that I might
describe the Character of an accomplished Genius, great, and worthy our
Emulation. But though your modesty does not permit me to run through all those
Transcendencies; yet, the World is sufficiently instructed by what you cannot
conceal, that I say nothing of servile, and which will not abide the Test; so
as I have been often heard to exult in the felicity of this Conjuncture of
ours, which (since those prodigies of Virtue, the illustrious Ticho, Bacon,
Gilbert, Harvey, Digby, Galileo, Peiresky, De Carts, Gassendi, Bernier [his
Disciple now in Persia] and the late incomparable Jacomo Maria Favi etc.) has
produced us nothing, which will support the comparison with you, when I shall
pronounce you (and as indeed your merits do challenge it) the Phaenix of this
latter Age.

And now that I mentioned Signor Favi, I will not conceal with what ecstasy,
and joy I lately found his memory (which I have so much, and so often heard
mentioned abroad, by such as had the happiness to know him intimately)
consecrated by the eloquent pen of Monsieur Sorbiere, in a discourse of his to
Monsieur Vitre, concerning the utility of great Travel and Foreign Voyages;
because it approches so near to the Idea which I have proposed, and may serve
as an encouragement and example to the Gentlemen of our Nation, who, for the
most part wander, and spend their time abroad, in the pursuit of those vain
and lower pleasures, fruitless, and altogether intolerable. But Sir, I will
crowd no more into this Epistle (already too prolixe) which was only designed
to accompany this piece, and some other useful, and more liberal diversions of
this nature, which I cannot yet produce: But every thing has its time, and when
I would redeem it to the best Advantage, it is by entertaining it with
something that may best declare to all the World, how greatly I account the
honor of being esteemed

Sir, Your most humble, and Most obedient Servant J. EVELYN.
Sayes-Court 5. April 1662.
An Account of Signor Giacomo Favi by Monsieur Sorbiere.
GIacomo Maria Favi of the House of the Marescotti of Boulonia, died above
thirty five years of age, near fifteen years since, in the City of Paris. It is
a History worthy of Record, and that all the World should take notice of this
incomparable Person, as that great Wit and polite Philosopher Monsieur Sorbiere
does describe him: For as much ( says he) as it seems to be a very great
reproach, that neither Prince, nor State have hitherto had the consideration, or
the courage to undertake, what one particular person alone did resolve upon for
the universal benefit, and good of the public: For it was upon this design,
that he engaged himself expressly, making the most exact observations, and
collecting the Crayons, Prints, Designs, Models and faithful Copies of
whatsoever could be encountered through the whole Circle of the Arts and
Sciences; the Laws, and the Customs practiced wherever he arived. He had
already acquired by study a thousand worthy and curious particulars; He
Designed excellently well, understood the Mathematics; had penetrated into the
most curious parts of Medecin, and was yet so far from the least pedantry;
that he would (when so disposed) play the Gallant as handsomely as any man, and
which he was indeed able to do, enjoying a plentiful Revenue of near three
thousand pounds sterling a year, which he ordered to be paid him by Bills of
Exchange, wheresoever his Curiosity should invite him. But otherwise, truly his
Equipage was very simple, and his train reduced to one only servant, which he
was wont to take in every town where he made any stay. He had already visited
Italy, Germany, Poland, Swethen, Denmark, Holland and England, from whence he
came into France, to go into Spain. Finally, he arrived at Paris in Anno 1645.
with one Bourdoni a Sculpto^, dwelling near the Thuyleries, where he no sooner
appeared, but he was immediately found out, and known by all the Virtuosi, and
as soon enform'd himself of all that were extraordinary, and conspicuous for
all sorts of curiosities, whereof he carefully took notice; but especially he
made an intimate acquaintance with one Monsieur Petit, a very rare and curious
person, and indeed greatly resembling the Genius of this noble Gentleman, as
being one, who for these fifty years past, discovered a wonderful ardor for the
Sciences, and a diligence so indefatigable in the research of all estimable,
and worthy Inventions, as that it is a thousand pitties (and a thing not to be
conceived indeed without infinite regrette) that this Age of ours could never
yet approach him. So laudable and worthy of praise, has his expenses been upon
diverse Machines and Experiments, beyond the forces of a Private Person; that
had he but been supported (as at first he was by the French King, and the great
Cardinal de Richlieu, under whom he enjoyed diverse honorable and handsome
Employments) he had perhaps, amongst all the Arts through which he run, found
out some Abridgements and Perfections, new, and altogether stupendous; and as
indeed, he has already done to admiration, so far at least, as his discretion,
and his Affairs would give him leave.

But to return to our new Democritus, Signor Favi; He had made provision of
sundry huge Volumes, which were no other then the Designs of all sorts of
Instruments and Machines that he had seen and perused; besides a world more
which he had sent away into Italy: For this curious person neglected nothing,
but went on collecting with a most insuperable d^lligence, all that the
Mechanics had invented for Agriculture, Architecture, and the Fabric of all
sorts of Works, belonging to Sp^rts, and to Clothes, for Use and for
Magnificence. There was nothing so small, and to appearance, trifling, which he
did not cast his eyes upon, and which he had not some hand in, or improved,
even to the least minutiae; whither it were a divice of some ^aspe, the Latch
of a door, a simple Lock, (...) the Reader despise this condescension o^ so
great a person, for -- inest sua gratia parvis.
the Cover or Patin of a Cup, a Dress, etc. even to a very Tooth-picker: so as
he showed no less rhen two hundred Toys for Children to play withal: forty
seve^al ways of Plowing the ground, a world of Forges and Mills for various
uses. He visited all the excellent Workmen and Artisans, and took Samples, and
Patterns of all their rare inventions, and something of their making. Then for
Receipts and Secrets, he possessed an infinite number of all kinds the most rare
and excellent; some whereof he purchased at great prises, and others he
procured by Exchange. He learned the Tongues wherever he came with
extraordinary felicity, and sometimes would frequent the Recreations, and
Exercises of the places where he sojourned, which he used to perform with a
sacillity, and address so gentile, and natural, as if he had yet been but a
very Youth: For by this means he found, that he gained the easier, and more
free access into the best Companies, so extremely noble, dissintress'd and
agreeable was his fashion and manner of conversation: And though in sundry
Encounters, and Courts of Princes he had been frequently regaled with very
considerable presents; yet would he never receive any from great Persons; as
Chains of Gold, and Medailles, Diamonds and Jewels that were offered him,
unless happly, it were some Title of Honor and Prerogative; a^ the permission
to bear an Eagle, o^ a Fleur de lis in his Coat of Arms, or the like: And when
he had thus exhausted a Kingdom, or a Place of all that was Curious, and made
Acquaintance with all the Persons of merit in a State, he traveled presently
into another; so as there was hardly a Court to be found, where he had not
finished his harvest in three or four months, till he arrived at Paris, where
indeed, he was infinitely surpised, and busied among such an innumerable many
of able, and curious Persons of all kinds. He had four Lodgings in several
parts of Paris, that so he might be near a retreat in whatsoever quarter he
should happen to be in pursuit of Curosities; for he used to go much on foot,
and alone; because he would not be troubled, nor observed by impertinent
Servants: But in sine, purposing from hence to travel shortly for China by
means of the Portugal, he took so much pains about describing, and observing
the magnifi^ent preparations which were made for the Marriage of the Queen of
Poland, that he sell sick of a Fever and dyed, to the universal regret and
sorrow of all that had ever so much as heard of him. And no sooner d^d this sad
accident come to the ears of the King; but he sent diligently to search out all
his four Lodgings, to see, if by any means, ought of his Collection could be
retriv'd; but they were all immediately dispersed and it was never found what
became of them.

The Count Marescotti his Kinsman, then at Paris, recovered only that single
Volume, wherein was contained the Names, Arms, and Devises of the hands of all
the Princes of Europe, whom he had had the honor to approach: But his intention
was, as I have been credibly informed by one that did often converse with him
(though Monsieur Sorbiere is silent of it) after he had traveld over all the
World (for his design was no less ample) at Return into his Native Country,
to compile, and publish a Complete Cycle and Hystory of Trades, with whatsoever
else he should judge of Use and Benefit to mankind: But this had been a
Charity, and a Blessing too great for the World; because it does not depart
from its Vices, and impertinencies, and cherish such Persons, and the Virtues
which should render it worthy of them.

A TABLE of the Titles, of the CHAPTERS and their several CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of Sculpture, how derived, and distinguished, with the Styles, and
Instruments belonging to it. Page 1
The CONTENTS.
SCulptura and Caelatura how they differ. p. 1 T^micae, Defectores what. 2
Plaisti^e, 2. The Mother of Sculpture. 22 Pa^ adigmatice, what 2, 7 Gypsochi,
Colaptice, Li^hoxoi, Glyphice, what. 2 Anagogice, what 2, 7 Anaglyphice, 2 its
antiqnity. 22 Diagl^yphice, Encolaptice, what. 2, 4 Tore^tice. 1 Encausti^ Art,
2. how it occasioned the invention of Brais^Prints. 36 Proplastic Art,
Protypus, Modulus, Diatretice, and Calices diatreti, what 2 Argentum asperum
and pustulatum. 3 Ebur pingue* 3 Dim^ diae en inentiae the same with Basso
Relievo, and Mezzo Relievo. 3 Sca^ptus, S^aptus, Scalpturatus. 4 Scalpo, Scul^^
derived. Caelum (...) what, and whence derived. 4, 5 Tori, (...) 5 Vliss^s
^hield, Ancaesa Vasa, what. 5 Cavatores what, Graphatores, whence our English
Gravers, Sculpture def^n'd. 6 Iustruments of Graving* Style what. Why sometimes
made of bone Scalprum. Coelum, Coeles, Coeltes. Allusions in Job 10. to all the
kinds of ancient Writing and Graving. 7, 8 Graphium, (...) etc. (...),
Punction, Polisher, Point. 8, 9, 30 Graving I^struments sometimes fatal
weapons. 8 Cassianus martyred, and Erixion slain with a Gaving Style. 8 Arare
campum cereum, Cerei pugillares, and stylum vertere, what. 9 Ta^lle douce,
Burin, Intaglia, B^lino, and the difference 'twixt Graving and Etching. 9 (...)
a conjecture of the modern name of a seal, (...) the same with Charath. 10
CHAP. II. Of the Original of Sculpture in general. p. 11
The CONTENTS.
ADam the first inventor of Sculpture. p. 11 Books written by Adam. 11, 12 The
fall of Adam did not impair his infused habits. 12 Sculpture long before the
universal Flood. 12 Of the Antediluvian Patriarchs. 13 Sculpture in stone and
brick at Joppa. ib The Celestial Sciences first engraven, where, and how long
continuing. ib The books of Seth and Enoch. ib Of Cham. ib Zoroaster, when he
flourished, his learning, curiosity and engraving of the Liberal Arts 13, 14
Pi^us Mi^andula's pretense of the books of Zoroaster, the Magi, etc. 14
Sculpture after the Flood. ib Sculpt^re propagated by Noah. Sculpture before
Moses. ib Objections answered. 15, 20 Mercurius Trismegistus engraved in stone
many Mysterious things. 15 Obelisks erected by Misra 400 years before Moses ib
How many transported to Rome. 17 The Tables of stone Engraven by the Finger of
GOD. Sculpture honored by God. 15 Sulpture abused to Idolatry no rational
prejudice. ib Sculpture elder then Idolatry. 16 Teraphin, and Penates, what. ib
Sculpture preserved the memory of the dead. ib Bezaleel, and Aholiab Sculptors.
ib The sacerdotal pectoral. ib Graving used by the Egyptians before they
invented Letters. ib Hyer^glyphics, what 16, 17 By whom interpreted. 17 Amongst
the Danes. 24 And Acadiae. 34 Horapollinis n^tae. 17 Letters by whom invented,
and the contest about it. ib How they were derived to the several Nations. 18
Typographical art mistaken by Peter Calaber. 17 Sculpture and Letters Coaebous.
18 Colomns erected by Seth. ib Writing with ink in paper a novelty in respect
of Parchment. 18, 19 Sculpture on Marbles, Slates, writing on Bark, ^eavs,
Tabletts of wood, Paper, Linen, Wax, Ivory and Silk. 18, 19 Book, our English
name for Liber whence derived. 19 Laws, divine and humane how consigned of old.
id Hieronicae, and where preserved, 19 Writings before Homers not known to the
Greeks 20 Tatian when he flourished. ib A pa^age cited out of him proving the
Antiquity of Recording by Sculpture. 20 Hesiods poems engraven in Lead. ib
G^aetians when they had sculpture first, and where it was in its highest
perfection. 21 Achiles and Her^ules shields engraven. ib The chariot of the
Sun, and Vehicula Caelata. ib Enochs prophecy. 22 Rings engraven, their use and
dignity. ib Intaglias in iron, gold, stones, etc. ib Talismans and Constellated
seulptures. ib
CHAP. III. Of the Reputation, and Progress of Sculpture amongst the Greeks and
Romans down to the middle Ages; with some prete^sions to the Invention of
Copper-Cuts, and their Impressions. p. 23
The CONTENTS.
SCulpture where, and when in it^s ascendent. 23, 24. 28. Statues to what head
reducible. 24 Sculp^o^es Ma^^^oris, Metal. in Gypsum, etc. ib Signa at Rhodes,
Athens and other places in what prodigious numbers ib Statues, as many as of
men. ib The contest betwixt Art and Nature in point of fertility. ib. Statues,
improveable to a policiq, as well as expenceful magnificency. ib (...) 15
^yrgoteles only permitted to engrave the Effigies of Alexander the great. 25
The Pictures of Queen Elizabeth and other Princes how prophan^d and abused. 25,
26 Augustus would have his figure cut only by Dioscorides, and why. 26
Sculpture in what materials most eminent. 26 Dipenus, Prometheus, Ideocus,
Eu^i^apus, Lysistratus, Demophilus, Dedalus, Leochares, Policarmus, Myrme^ides
all famous Sculptors. ib Figulina vasa Caelata, why broaken by Cotys. 27
Hydriae engraven, and Bread. ib Gold seldom engraven, and why. ib Mentor his
curious works. ib Acragus his works. ib Boethus's Masterpieces. 28 The works of
Calamis, Antipater, Stratonicus, Tauriseus, Aristeus, Eunicus, Hecates,
Praxiteles, Posidonius, Ledus, Zopirus, Pytheus. 28 Medalists, who most
excellent, and in what Empp. times the best were cut, when they degenerated.
28, 60 Sculpture, when it degenerated in Greece, and Rome. 29 And whence its
decay proceeded. 30, 31 Sculpture, when it arrived at Rome. 29 Sc^lpture and
Writing when first among the Danes and Norvegians. ib Runic Characters. ib
Graef sex, what. 30 Vice, and Avarice, the occasion why sculpture degenerated,
and is not since arrived to the perfection of the Ancients. 31 By what means it
may recover. 32 Alexander Magnus, Augustus, Francis 1. Cesimo di Medices, and
Charles the V. celebrated for their affection to Arts. 31 Time and leisure
required to bring a work to perfection. 32 Sulpture and Chal^ography ancient in
China, on what aterials, and how wrought. 33 Letters in Europe first cut in
wood. ib The In^k-maker for the press dignified amongst the Chinezes with a
liberal ^alary, and priviledge^, and not accounted a Mechanic. ib Sculpture
found in Mexi^o, and other parts of Ameri^a. 34 Typ^g^aphy not found out by the
Greeks^ and Romans to be much wondered at, and why. ib
CHAP. IV. Of the Invention, and Progress of Chalcography in particular;
together with an ample enumeration of the most renowned Masters and their
works. p. 35
The CONTENTS.
ENgraving on Plates of Brass for Prints when first appearing. 35 Typography
when first produced in Europe. ib P^ints in the infancy of this Art. ib The
Devil a Moro^hrom. ib M. Z. M. C. what they import. ib What Sculptors added the
year of our Lord to their works. 3^ Who were the first Gravers of Prints. ib
Martin S^hon The Todes^o of the first Print-gravers. ib The Italia^ gravers and
their works. 36, etc. ad 63 Maso Finiguerra, the first Print-graver in Italy.
36 Enameling gave the first hint for the Engraving of Prints. 37 The graving of
Prints, from how mean a commencement, arrived to this perfection. ib Ba^cio
Baldini his works, and countersign. ib Albert Durer, when he flourished, his
incomparable works; con^est with Lucas, and Mark Antonio, and how precious his
works. 37, 38, 39, 40, 63 Lucas Van Leyden, his works, emulation of Durer. 39,
40, 63 Mark Antonio, when he flourished, his works, contestation with Albert,
etc. 39, 42 For what vile prints reproved. 45 Raphael Vrbin how he honored the
gravings of M. Antonio. 37 Martine of Antwerp his works, how esteemed by
M^chael Ang^lo. ib R. S. what it signifies. 42 Marco di Ravena his works. 43 A.
VI. what it imports 44 Gi^ anni Battista Mantuano his works. 46 IBM whose name
it s^gnifies. ib Sc^astiano da Regio' s works. ib Georgio Mantuano' s works. ib
E^ching in Aqua Fortis when first produced. 47 Damascus Symeters. ib Vago de
ca^pi, his new manner of cutting for diverse colors, and his works. ib The
works of Baldassare Peruzzi, Francisco Parmegiano, Beccafumi, Baptista
Vincentin^, Del Moro, Gir^l^mo Cocu. 48 Giacamo del Cavaglio his works both in
copper and stones. 48, 49 Enea Vico de Parma his Medails and other gravings. 49
The works of Lamberto Suave, Gio Battista de* Cavaglieri. ib The works of
Antonio La^ferri, T^maso Barlachi, Antonio Labbaco, Titian, Giulio Buoras^ni,
Battista Franco, Renato, Luca Penni, Francisco Marcol^ni. 50, 51 The works of
Gabriel Giolit^ 52 The works of Christo^horo Coriolano, Antonio Salamanca,
Andrea Mar^egna, Properti a^de R^ssi ( a sculpteress) 52, 53 Martin Ruota,
Ja^omo Palma, Augustino and Anibal Carracci. 53, 54 The works of Francisco
Vilamena. 55 Giov^nni Maggi, Leonardo, Isabella and Bernardino Parasoli. 56
Cutting, and Engraving in Wood how difficult, and different from Chalcography.
ib The works of Antonio Tempesta, Cherubin Alberti. 57 Horatto Borgiani,
Raphael Guido, Jovanri Batt. della Mar^a, Camillo Graffico, Cavalier Salimbene,
An-Vaiara 58 Ste^^ano dolla Bella. 59, 90 Cha^t, and Map-gravers 60 Medaile*
Gravers, and Gravers in metal and precious stones, etc. 60, 61, 62 The Diamond
by whom first engraven. 62 Medails, the knowledge of them how noble and
profitable, and by what means to attain it effectually, Gentlemen of note
skillfull Medailists. 62 The German and Flemish Chalcographers, and their
works. 63 ad 85 The works of Albert Durer. 37, ad 41, 63, 85 Aldegrave and his
cipher, Hans Sibald Beheeme his mark, Jerome Coch. 64, 84, 85. Francis Floris.
65 Cornelius Cort, 66. Justus, Jo. Agid, and Raphael Sadelers, 67, ^8. Herman
Muller, 68. Sim. Frisius, Matthew. Miriam, Hans Holbein, Justus Ammanus 69, 84,
85. Holtzhusen, Hans Brossehaemer, Virgilius Solis, his eyes put out for his
l^wd gravings; Hen. Golzius 70, 86. Geor. Nouuolstelle, 70. Matt. and Fred.
Greuter, Sanredamus, Cor. Galle, 71. Count Claudt, Swanevelts, Pandern,
B^oncho^st, Mattham P. Bril, Nieulant, Boethius, Londerselius, Van Velde, N. de
Bruyn, 72. Aeg Coninxlogensis, Stradanus, Mallery, Bolsuerd, 73. P. Pontius,
Suannebourgh, Nesse, Vosterman, Vorst.. 74, 75. Chr. Jeghere, 75 Van. Vorst,
Sir Anthony Van Dyke 36 Sir. P. P. Rubens celebrated. 74 The works of P. de
Jode, Colaert in steel; Sniiderhoef, Jo. Baurs, Vander Thulden, 77. Abr. and
Char. ^lomaert, Nantalis, 78, 79. Ferdinand, Verdin, Vriese, Winegard, W.
Hondius, Vankessell, Clovet, Caukern, 79. Luc. Kilianus, Cor. Visher,
Vovillemont, Nolph, Lombart, 80. Hertoc, Reinbrand, Wincest. Hollar, 81, 82.
Hevelius celebrated, 82. Anna M a Schurman celebrated, Breugle, Ostade, Corn,
Clock, Queborn, Custos, Le Delf, Dors, Falck, Gerard, Bens, Moefleu, Grebber,
Geldorp, Hopfer, Gerard, Bens, Chein, Ach' d' Egmon^, De Vinghe, Heins, Ditmer,
Cronis, Lindoven, Mirevel, Kager, Coccien, Maubease, Venius, Firens, Pierets,
Quelinus, Stachade, Schut, Soutman, Vanulch, Broom, Valdet, M^n Her Biscop: 83.
Deufken, P. Van Aelst, Swart Jan Van Groennighen, L. Cranach, Jos. Ammanus,
Hub. Golzius. 85 The French Chalcographers and their works, 86, ad 98. When
they began to be in reputation, 86 The works of P. Bernard, Nic. Beatrice, 86.
Phil. Thomasinus, Crisp. Magdal, and Simon de pas. 87. Cl. Melan, Mauperch, La
Poutre, Morin, N. Chaperon, Fra. Perier, Adrans, Covuay, Peril, 89 Chavueau,
Poilly, Heince, Beg^on, Huret, Bernard, Rognesson, Rouslet,, Bellange, Richet,
L' Alman, Quesuel, Soulet, Bunel, Boucher, Bri^t, Boulange, Bois, Champagne,
Charpignon, Corneille, Char^n, Cl. de Lorain, Andran, Moutier, Rabel, Den^sot,
L' Aune, Dela Rame, Hayes, Herbin, David de Bie, Villemont, Maret, Toutin, 90.
Grand-homme, Cereau, Trochel, Langot du Loi^, L' Enfant, Gaultier, D' Origni,
Pr^vost, D^ Son, Pere, Nacret, Perret, Daret, Scalberge, Vibert, Ragot,
Boissart, Terelin, Deleu, Mauperch, L' Asne, Huret. 91 Calligraphers. ib The
works of La Hyre, Goyrand, ib. Golignon, Cochin, Isr. Sylvester, Rob. Nanteuil,
91, 92, 93. Jaq. Callot, 93, 94, 95, 96. Abr. Bosse 96, 97 Chart Gravers,
Cordiers, Riviers, Peroni, Hondius, etc. 97. Gomboust. 98 The English
Chalcographers and their works, 98, ad 100. Pain, Caecil, Wright, Mr.
Fatthorne, Mr. Barlow, Mr. Gaywood, Lightfoot, Glover, J Fellian, 99. Swizzer,
100. Medaile Gravers, and for Intaglia' s, Mr. Symonds, Rawlins, R^strick,
Johnson. 99 Calligraphers, Mr Cooker, Gray, Gething, Billingly, etc. ib An
Invitation to the English Chalcographers to publish his Majesty's collection;
the benefit and honor of it. 100 The Landskips, Viewes, Palaces, of England,
Levantine parts, Indies, etc. together with the Cities, Isles, Trees, Plants,
Flowers, and Animals, to be cut in Copper and reformed, were a most acceptable,
and useful work. 101 Painters encouraged to set sheir hands to the Graver. 102
The use of this Collection. ib
CHAP. V Of Drawing, and Design praevious to the Art of Chalcography; and of
the use of Pictures in Order to the Education of Children. p. 103.
The CONTENTS.
MEasure and proportion have Influence on all our Actions, p. 103 A saying of
Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey. ib Drawing of what consequence to the Art
of Graving, ib Design the Basis of Sculpture, and of many other free and noble
Siences, 104, 105 Original Drawings esteemed, and for what, ib Antiquity of
what effe^, 105 Design and Drawing defined, and distinguished, its antiquity,
and invention. 106 Accident and chance fruitful mothers. ib Drawing with
crayon, pen, anda. the method, and how to be performed with success, 107
Hatching, what, and how attained by imitating good (...), and by what method.
108, 109, 110 (...) exact^ess and finishing a fault in Drawing, and why, P
^y^l^^us's Canon, 109 Accurate D^s^gnes with the pen not esteemed, and why, 110
Who yet excelled in them to admiration. 110, 111 Mr Vander D^use, Francis and
John Cleyn, Mr. Francis Carter, etc. celebrated, 111 Col^u^s, the production of
a Middle color wrought on two extremes, 112 R^ben^, and Van Dykes first
studies in Italy, 113 Drawing, how necessary, ib Academies erec^ed for the
Vi^iu^si by whom, ib For what purpose and how furnished, 116, 117 Greeks, and
Romans, how they cherished and enobled men of Art, 114 S^ulp^ors and Painters
chief of the court and retinue to the Emperor of Japan. ib Courts of great
Princes how formerly composed, ib How the ancient and most renowned Sculptors
were some encouraged, and others obscured. 116 Painters should sometimes draw
with the pen, 117 What Painters made use of prints, 117, 118 And caused their
works to be published. 118 How to expres^ the sensa^ion of the Relievo or
Extan^i^ of objects, by the Hatches in Graving, 119 What shadows are most
graceful, 126 And what Artists works best to imitate, ib Of Counter-Hatches, ib
One color, the use, and effect of it, ib Zeu^is used but one color. ib What
other Painters were M^nochromists, and who introduced the rest of the colors,
127 Lights and shades their stupendous effects, ib Coloree that it means, ib
The invention of Ch^alier Woolson to Blazon bearing in coate-armour by hatches
without letters, ib To^us what it imports in Graving, ib Of copyng after
Des^gnes and painting, 128 What ^rints are to be called excellent, ib How to
detect the copy of a Print, from an Original print, 129 Aqua Fortis, for what
Gravings most proper, 13^ His Higness Prince Rupert celebrated, and the
Gravings by him published. 130, 13 The French King an Engraver, 13^ Earl of
Sandwich dextrous at Graving, ib What Emperors, Philosophers, Poets, and other
of the noble Greeks, and Romans excelled in painting and Graving, 131, 133,
142, 143, 144 Never any of the Ancients excelled in these Arts, but what were
Gentlemen, 132 A Slave might not be taught to Grave or Paint, and why, 133
Graving accounted one of the Liberal Arts, by Pliny and Galen. 132 Children
instructed in the Graphical arts for what Oeconomick consideration, ib Martia
the daughter of Varro, the Princess Louse, and Anna a Schurman celebrated, ib
Great scholars of late skillfull in the art of Graving, etc 133 How far the art
of Drawing conduces to the Sciences Mathematical. ib Dr. Chr. Wren, Blagrave,
Hevelius, etc. celebrated, ib An Orator ought io be skilled in these Arts, and
why 134 Of what great use, and benefit the art of Gravi^g may be to the
Education of Children superior to all other inventions: 135, and how, 138,
140, 141 142, 143 The Abbot de Maroles his singular affection to, and
prodigious collections of Prints, 135, 136 Prints more estimable then painting,
and why, 137 What Gentlemen of quality are the greatest collectors of prints in
France, ib At how high rates the Prints of the most famous Masters are now
sold, ib Collections of Prints recommended to Princes and great persons, and
why, ib An Hieroglyphical Grammar, 139 By whom draughts and Prints are
celebrated for the Institution of Youth. ib La Martelay taught all the Sciences
by cuts alone, ib Commen^us his Orbis sensualium pictus celebrated, ib The
Universal Language how to be most probably contrived, 140 Passi^ns expressible
by the art of Design. 142 An useful caution for the Lovers of these Arts, 143,
144
CHAP. VI. Of the new way of engraving, or Mezzo Tinto, Invented, and
communicated by his Highness Prince Rupert. etc. p. 145
The CONTENTS.
AN advantageous Commutation for omitting the description of the Mechanical
part of the vulgar Graving, 145 A paradoxical Graving without Burin, Points or
Aqua Fortis, 146 The new Mezzo Tinto invented by his Highness P. Rupert
Aenigmatically described, and why. 147
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 9. read Paradigmatice, 8. l. 7. (...), 19. l. 15. Scarrifying, 20
l. 11. (...), 13 (...), 32. l. 11. (...), 33 l 7 ill Pictures, 35. l. 9.
Typography 50 l. 28. Dallila, 51. l. 1. Laocoon, 54. 28. fore, 64. l. 18.
stories, 78 21. r. those things of dele which, 82 13. Rob. Stapleton, 117. l.
Cornices, 119. ult. ply.

Note that in p. 99. l. 4. Loggan should have been placed among the Dutch
Gravers: The rest are only litteral mistakes, as Copy for Copy, etc. which do
not at all impeach the sense; and are therefore the more pardonable.

Authors, and Books which have been consul^ed for this Treatise.
Aelianus. Angelus Roccha. Aquinas. Arist^tiles. S Augustinus. Ausonius.
Baptista Alberti. Biblia Sacra. Bibliander. Bosse A. Caniparius. Cassianus.
Cael. Rhodoginus. Cedrenus. Cicero. Commenius. Crinitus. Curtius. Cyprianus.
Diodo^us. Diomedes. Donatellus. Durer. Epiphanius. Eusebius. Gaffarell.
Galenus. Gorleus. Guaricus Pompo. Greuter. Herodotus. Hesiodus. Homerus.
Horatius. Josephus. Junius F. Juvenalis. Kerkerus. La^t. Lae^us Pompon. Leon
Alber^i. Libavius. Licetas. Littleton Adam. Livius. Lubinus. Lucanus.
Luithprandius. M^imonides. Manutius. Marolles. Martialis. Nazianzen Greg.
O^igines. Ovid^us. Pancirolla. Petronius. Philo. Philostratus. Picus Mirand.
Pietro Santo. Plato. Plinius. Plutarchus. Du Pois. Pollux Jul. Prudentius.
Quintilianus. Rueus. Sabinus. Sal^asius. Scal^ger Jos. Semedo. S^neca. Soli^us.
Statius. Suetonius. Suidas. Taci^us. Tatianus. Tertullianus. Theocritus.
Trallianus. Trismeg^stus. Thucydides. Varenius. Varro. Vassari. Vatablus.
Vermander Car. Verulamius. Virgil^us. Vitruvius. Vopiscus. Vosius. Woolson.
Wormius. Sir H. W^tto^.
SCVLPTVRA, Or the HISTORY and ART OF Chalcography.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I Of Sculpture, how derived, and distinguished, with the Styles, and
Instruments belonging to it.
THose who have most refined, and criticiz'd upon Technical notions, seem to
distinguish what we commonly name Sculpture into three several Arts; and, to
attribute specifical defferences to them all: For there is, besides Sculptura
(as it relates to Chalcography) Scalptura (so Diomedes) and Caelatura; Lib. 1.
L. 3. c. 21.
both which, according to Quintilian, differ from the first ratione materiae.
For to make but a brief enumeration only: It was applied to several things; as
to working in Wood, or Ivory, Tomice, the Artists, Desectores: in Clay,
Plastice, Plastae: in Plaster Paradigramatice, the Workmen Gypsochi. In Stone
cutting Colaptice, the Artists Lithoxoi; and lastly, in Metals Glyphice; which
again is Twofold; for if Wax be used, Agogice; If the Figure be of Cast-work,
Chemice; Anaglyphice when the Image was prominent, Diaglyphice when hollow, as
in Seals and Intaglia's; Encolaptice when less deep, as in plates of Brass
for Laws and Monumental Inscriptions; Then the Toreutice; Cael. Rodig. Antiq.
Lect l. 29. c. 24.
and the Encaustic for a kind of Enamel; Proplastice forming the future work ex
creta, or some such matter, as the Protypus was of Wax for Efformation, and the
Modulus of wood; not to omit the ancient Diatretice, which seems to have been a
work upon Crystal, and the Calices Diatreti (of which somewhere the Poet
Martial) whether embossed or engraven, as now with the point of a Diamond, etc.
for I can only name them briefly, the field would be too luxurious to
discourse upon them severally, and as they rather concern the Statu^ry Art,
Fusile and Plastic head, which would serve better to adorn some design of
Architecture, or merit an express Treatise, then become the present, which
does only touch the Metalls, and such other materials as had not the Figure
finished through all its dimensions; though we mght yet safely I think admit
some of the Greek Anaglyptic's: Argentum asperum and pustulatum, and, as the
Latins term it, Ebur^pingue: for so the Poet, Ep^st ad Mocenium
Expositumque alte pingue poposcit ebur, etc. Manutius calls them Dimidiae
eminentiae, and the Italians do well interpret by Basso and Mezzo Relievo;
hence the Figure is said stare, or exstare: for so Mart. Stat Caper, and
Juvenal, stantem extra pocula caprum. As from the similitude, and perfection of
the work, Vivere, Spirare, calere, it seemed to breath, and be living, as
Virgil expresses it, Excudent alii spirantia mollius era.
And Horace, -- Et ungues
Exprimet, and molles imitabitur aere capillos.
Ludit Acidalio sed non manus aspera nodo
Candida non tacita respondet imagine Lygdos. as Martial.


For in this manner they used to celebrate those rare pieces of Art, distinct
from the Diagliphice, and Encolaptic more properly according with our purpose;
and which may happly be as well expressed by Caelatura, and from the
signification made a derivative (...) to dig, or make incision. I think Varro
may have Scaptus ^or Caelatus; as Cicero Scalptus, and Pliny, Scalpturatus;
yet we rather follow them who derive Scalpo, Sculpo, from (...) and (...);
because the best Origination is to preserve the foundation in the antienter
Languages, if the mutation of Letters be warranted, as here in (...) Scribo.
The word in the Holy tongue (...) which imports an opening (because the Plate,
Stone or whatever else materal they used aperitur aliqua sui part, was
somewhere opened when any thing is engraven upon it) attests rather to the
former Etymon, and signification, then to any other material affinity; besides
that it is also transferrable to those who carve with the cheezil, or work in
Bosse with the Puntion, as our Statuaries, Goldsmiths and Repairers do. In the
Gloss we meet with Caelum (...) etc. which though some admit not, so freely in
this sense; Lib. 8.
yet Martial, speaking of Embossed Cups more then once calls them Toreumata.

Miratus fueris cum prisca Toreumata multum.

And why may not the Tori, Brawn, or Collops of fat be expressed by these
raised Figures, and they Torosae plump, and (as the French has it) en bon
point, as well as Fusil and Fictile ones? Some round Cheezil or Lathe perhaps
it was; but we dare only conjecture: Others Coelum a Coedo which is to beat,
strike, cut or dig; but by what parallel authority of such a derivative we know
not: Varro l. 4 de L. L.
Varro yet e Coelo Heaven it self, reaching its Original from the very stars.
(...) is another more consonant and harmonius with the ancient (...) Kalangh,
which imports to excavate and make hollow as it is frequently interpreted,
particularly, 1 Reg. 6. 32, 35. where, what the Vulgar Latin renders Sculpsit;
Vatablus makes Caelavit, and Junius Incidit, best of all corresponding with our
purpose; and so in the famous wrought shield which Ulysses purchased by his
Eloquence, Quintilian applies the word, Lib. 2. c. 18
In Caelatura clipei Achillis, and lites sunt and actiones: For so it seems to
have been much used on their Harness; Livy reports of two famous Armies so
represented: Liu. hist. l. 9.
Or as more allusive yet to our plate, where it is said, Caelatura rumpit tenuem
Laminam, if the question be not rather, whither these works, like the Ancaesa
Vasa, were not raised and embossed, those expressions of Pliny so much
favoring their Eminency, where he tells us, speaking of this very Art, ita
exole^it, ut sola jam vetustate censeatur usque adeo attritis caelaturis, ne
figura discerni possit, time and age had so greatly defaced them.

But, may this suffice for the Division, and Denomination of the Art in
general; since the Title which we have made choice of, is Universally
applicable: for so loquendi consuetudine in ordinary discourse Sculptura, and
Scalptura import but one, and the same thing, as Salmasius has well noted on
Solinus; and therefore those who wrought any of these hollow cut-works, were by
some called Cavatores, and Graphatores, says that Learned Person, whence
doubtless, our Gravers may have derived their Appellation.

By this then it will not be difficult for any to define what the Art it self
is; whither considered in the most general and comprehensive acceptance; or,
as it concerns that of Chalcography chiefly, and such as have most Affinity
with it; since (as well as the rest) it may be described to be an Art which
takes away all that is superfluous of the Subject matter, reducing it to that
Form or Body, which was designed in the Idea of the Artist. And this, as
sufficiently Universal; unless in favor of the Plastic (which yet does not
come under our Cognizance) we will rather receive the distinction which Michael
Angelo was used to observe between them, That this last was made by Apposition,
which is the quite contrary. But indeed, neither the Paradigmatic, Agogic, or
any of the Plastic, can Genuinely, and in Propriety of speech be called
Sculpture, without a Catachresis and some Violence; since, nullum simile est id
em, whither applied to the Matter, or the Tools. And now we speak of
Instruments, we shall find that there has been little less controversy amongst
the Grammarians, touching them also, then concerning the very Art it self: As
whither the (...) Style, or Scalprum is to be called Caelum, Caeles, or
Caeltes; noted by the Critics from that Text in 19. Job. Quis mihi det, ut
exarentur in Libro Stylo ferreo, aut plumbi Lamina, vel Caelte sculpantur in
Silice? (where by the way, it is observed, that this verse comprehends, and
alludes to, almost all the sorts of ancient Writing and Engraving: Books,
Plates, Stone, and Style) and from an old Inscription out of Aldus, and
Greuter, Martial, Ausonius, and the Poet Statius use Coelum frequently. Epist.
^6^ Laboriferi Sta^. l. ^.


-- Laboriferi vivant quae marmora Caelo,
Praxitelis, Sylv l. 4.
etc. --
but we will be sparing. (...) as ^unius: Theocr. Thucyd.
Also (...) as much as (...); so is (...) and (...) in Pollux. Scalprum, is
(...) with the same Junius Graphium; Lastly, Stylus (...), in Suidas, (...) the
same Pollux; call them Point, Style, Graver, Punction, Polisher, or what else
you please, we will contend no farther about it; For these Instruments (as
despicable as they appear) have sometimes proved fatal and dangerous Weapons;
as the blessed Cassianus found by sad experience, whose cruel Martyrdom with
these Styles is gloriously celebrated by Prudentius, (...) Hymn. IX. And thus
was also Erixion slain, for his unnatural affection, by the enraged People,
with other examples to be produced out of Seneca, Plutarch, Sueton, and others:
For, when upon several of those disorders, (...) (or the carrying about them
any Weapons of Iron) was made Capital; they did mischief with these
Instruments, till like Childrens knives, they were converted into Bone, which
did only serve them to write withal, and Arare campum cereum, to plough up
their Superinduced Tables, and ^erei Pugillares; not much unlike to our Etching
with points, and Needles on the Vernish, in Shape, and use resembling them,
save where the obtuser end was made more deletive, apt to put out, and
obliterate, when they would Stylum vertere, which our Burnisher (another Tool
used by Chalcographers) and Polisher performs. But to descend to the modern
names both of the Art and Instrument: the French call it in particular Taille
douce, Sweet, or tender cut; whither wrought with the Burin (for so they term
the Instrument which we the Graver) or, with Aqua Fortis. The Italians, (...),
or stamp, without Adjunct, and (...) which is doubtless the more ancient (...),
as prompting the use both of the Point, Needle, and Etching in A. Fortis, by
some so happily executed, as hardly to be discerned from the Bolio, or Graver
it self: But the main difference is this, That with the Burine one cuts the
piece all at once out of the plate, immediately; whereas, with the point, or
style, we only cut the Vernish, razing, and Scalping as it were, the
Superficies of the Plate a little, which afterward the A. F. corrodes and
finishes: A rare Invention, new, expeditious, and wholly unknown to the past
Antiquity. Burine then from Bolino; and why not? yea doubtless, this from (...)
the Modern name of a Seal, and Instrument of making Seals. To this we might
also add (...), Cheret: And we find Charasch, and Charath of the same import
with (...) and (...) in the Greek, as Mr. Adam Littleton has acutely observed
in his Complexion of Roots: But least too much of this Stuff should (as
Theocritus on another occasion) styles it, (...) smell of the Burine; we will
here make an end with hard names, the Pedantrie and various acceptions of the
words; and in the Chapters following endeavor to investigate the Original of
the Art it self, and discourse somewhat of the Progress it has made, to arrive
at this perfection: For it is not to show how diligently we have weeded the
Calepines, and Lexicons (amongst all which there is none over fertile upon
these Arts, or so well furnished as we could have wish^d) but the result of
much diligent collecti^on, produced out of sundry Authors to meet in this
Chapter, for the ease, and instruction of such as may possibly encounter with
difficulties in the Course of their reading such books as treat of the
Mechanical or more Liberal Subjects; And, that there might be nothing of
deficient as to our Institution, seeing it behoov'd him that would deduce an
History ab origin, to let nothing escape that was in the least or useful, or
instructive.

CHAP. II. Of the Original of sculpture in general.
WE shall not with Epigenes in Pliny, L: 7. c. 6.
depose that this Art had its being from Eternity; because it is not sense, and
would contradict its invention; but, if that may pass which St. Augustine
affirms, that the Protoplast our Father Adam, L. 18. de Civit. Dei. c. 38.
or (as others) his good Genius the Angel Raziel, were the first inventor of
Letters, Sculpture may derive its Pedigree from the infancy of the World, and
contend for its Pre-eminence with most of the Antiquities which it so much
celebrates. For, that there went several books about (some whereof had been
long since read in the Primitive Church) bearing his venerable Name; as that
which Epiphanius and others cite, ex libro Behu, de Poenitentia Adae, Adae
R^velatio, etc. we have no reason to contradict: And Tho. Aquinas in his
Treatise De ente and essentia, speaks of a Volume of Plants described by Adam;
and there are Traditions of a whole Natural History, with several other works
of this most Learned of all Men living, as Suidas doubts not to call him; nor
do we think that his unhappy Fall did so much concern his rare and infused
Habits, as not to leave him the most accomplished, and perfectly instructed in
all those Arts, which were so highly necessary, and therefore thus early
invented; though whither these Books of his were so miraculously found out, and
preserved by the renouned Trismegistus, we leave to the more credulous: But
that Letters, and consequently Sculpture, was long before the Flood, we make no
scruple of: Suidas, whom but now we mention^d, is peremptory, ascribing (as was
affirmed) both Letters, and all the rest of the sciences to Adam (...) etc. We
shall not add hereunto, what the Rabbis assert he composed of the praecepts
given him in Paradise, with the like trash; but pass from these conjectures to
others of the Antediluvian Patriarchs mentioned by Josephus, Cedrenus and some
other Authors, concerning the Sculptures in ^tone, and Brick, erected at Joppa,
containing (as some depose) the Sideral, and Celestial Sciences, proof against
the two most devouring and subverting Elements, and lasting some thousands of
years after the Universal Cataclysm. The Aethiopians are said at this day to
glory much in possessing the Books of Seth and Enoch, as those who have lately
written of the Abyssines relate. Origin, St. Augustine, and Hierom have
likewise made honorable mention of them; and Tertullian plainly reproves those
who (in his time) thought they could not be preserved; Tertul. de habit. mulier.
Noah, being himself one of the great Nephews of Seth; and the probability that
these Ancient Men of renoun, would transmit to Posterity the glorious Actions
and Achievements which they had performed; especially Cham (that is Zoroaster)
a Spirit so Universally curious, and flourishing above an hundred years before
this public Calamity. But to apply this to the honor now of Chalcography, and
justify our design; The Author of the Schol^^^i^al History upon Genesis speaks
of this Z^roasters ingraving the Liberal Arts on fourt^^en Colomns, seven
whereof he affirms to have been of Brass, and the rest of Brick* The same is
also reported by Serenus, Apud Cassianum.
where he adds diversorum Metallorum Laminis, together with some other
Inscriptions thus preserved, and which the noble and learned Earl of Mirandula
in a certain Epistle of his to Marsilius Ficinus boasts to have the possession
of: His words are these, Chaldaici hi Libri sunt, si Libri sunt, and non
Thesauri: Audi inscriptiones: Patris Ezrae, Zoroastris, and Melchior Magorum
oracula. In quibus, and illa quoque, quae apud Guaecos mendosa, and mutila
circumferuntur, leguntur integra and absoluta, etc. The Books (says Picus) if
books it be lawful to call them, and not rather most inestimable Treasures, are
all in the Chaldy tongue: Observe their Titles: The Oracles of those famous
Magi, Ezra, Zoroaster and Melchior; in which those particulars also which have
been carried about by the Greeks, maimed and miserably corrupted, are here to
be read perfect and entire.

Concerning the Art of Sculpture immediately after the Flood, there are few we
suppose make any considerable question, as that it might not be propagated by
Noah to his posterity; though some there be, that indeed admit of none before
Moses; but what then shall we think of that Book of the Wars ^f the Lord,
which this sacred Author mentions Number. 21? not to insist upon the 88. and 109.
Psalms, by many ascribed to some of the Patriarchs his Predecessors. The
above mentioned Mercurius Trismegistus, three hundred years after the Flood,
and long before Moses, engraved his secret, and Mysterious things in Stone, as
himself reports; reforming what had been depraved by the wicked Cham; some in
Letters, some in Figures and Enigmatical Characters; such happly, as were those
contained in the magnificent, and stupendous Obelisks erected by Misra the
first Egyptian Pharaoh, which being at least four hundred years before Moses
(as the most indefatigable Kirker has computed) does greatly presage their
Antiquity to have been before that holy Prophet. Obelis, Phamphil:
But not to put too much stresse upon superannuated Tradition, this we are sure
is of Faith, and without controversy; That in Moses we have the Tables of
stone, engraven by the Finger of GOD himself; where the commandment is
express, even against the abuse of this very Art, as well as an instance of
the Antiquity of Idolatry attesting that of Sculpture: THOU SHALL NOT MAKE TO
THY SELF ANY GRAVEN IMAGE. Exodus (...).
But this which is indeed the first writing that we have Scripture to vouch
for, does yet presuppose Engraving to have been of much greater Antiquity: What
else were the Teraphim? What the Penates of Laban stolen by Rachel? The Idols
of Terah? or the Egyptian? etc. But we forbear to expatiate, only that which
is by Ben. Syrac somewhere in Ecclesiasticus delivered, that the Original of
Idolatry was from images to preserve the memory of the Dead; as in process of
time by the Flatterers of great men it was turned to be an object of Adoration,
Se Sap. c. 14.
plainly inferrs, Graving to have been Elder then Idolatry.

But now to recover its esteem again beyond all prejudice (how ever by others
abused as indeed many of the best things have been) it was (we know) imputed
for a spiritual talent in Bezaleel and Aholiab, ^1. Exodus
who made Intaglias to adorn the High Priests Pectoral. And we have said how
the Aegytians reverenced it, as seeming to have used it before Letters; or
rather their Hieroglypics (importing sacred Sculpture) were those Elements by
which they transmitted to posterity what they esteemed most worthy of Record;
and not (as some have imagined) wrapped up in those Enigmatical Figures, the
secrets of their Arts both Divine and Secular: For Nondum Flumineas Memphis
contexere biblos
Noverat; Lucanus lib. 3.
and Saxis tantum volucrisque feraeque,
Sculptaque serva^ant magicas animalia Linguas.
whence Tacitus calls them Antiquissima monumenta memoriae humanae impressa
Saxis. Such as were also the Horapollinis ^otae, and all those other venerable
Antiquities of this nature transported to Rome out of Egypt, in no less then
two and forty prodigious O^elisc's, of late interpreted by the industrious
Kirker before cited. Suidas attributes the invention to the Father of the
^aithful; others to Theut or Hermes, some to Cadmus and the Phoenicians.
Bibliander will have Letters and Sculpture from Adam; Josephus from Henoch;
Philo from Abraham; Eusebius from Moses; Cyprian from Saturn, where, by the
way; because it is said he did Litteras imprimere, Peter Calaber (who much
affects to call himself Pomponius Laetus) foolishly deduces, Vossius in Art
Hist.
that even the Typographical Art was known in the Age of this Hero; but thence
(as we said) it descended to the Egyptians by Misraim, and so was communicated
to the Persians, Medes and Assyrians, thence to the Greeks, and finally, to the
Romans from whom it was derived to us, as Pe^er Crinitus in his 17th. book de
Honesta Disciplina, Cap. 1.
out of a very ancient MSS. Bibliothecae Septimianae seems to deduce, and thus
sum them up together.

Moses primus Hebraic as exaravit Literas.
Mente Phoenices Sagaci condiderunt Atticas.
Quas Latini scriptitamus, edidit Nicostrata.
Abraham Syras, and idem repperit Chaldaicas.
Isis art non minore, protulit Aegyptiacas.
Gulsila promsit Getarum, quas videmus Literas.
Now, should all this but relate to the several Characters only, it shall yet
serve ou^ purpose; since whoever was the inventor of Letters, was also
doubtless the Father of Sculpture, as is apparent, if not by the former colomns
erected by Seth (one whereof Angelus Roccha in his Bibliotheca Vatican^
presumes to have been of Brass) by several other instances; the writing with
Ink, in Paper or Parchment, being altogether a novelty in comparrison to the
more ancient forms and materials such as were the Slitstones, or Slates which
succeeded the stately ^arbles, and preceeded the thinner leaves of Bark, and
Tablets of Wood, which from the German Bucher, signifying the Fagus or
Beech-tree, (whose Fruit does still with us retain the name of Buch-mast) were
called Books, to whatever voluble or folding matter applied: For before the
invention of Paper, they used the leaves of Palms, as Varro de Sibylla: then
the Rinds of Trees; afterward sheets of Lead, Linen, Wax, and Ivory, as
Pliny and Vopiscus tell us; They writ in Silk amongst the Persians and
Chinese; and lastly, were invented Parchment and Paper. But whether in all
these, or whatever the Subject were (some few latter excepted) it was still by
Insculping, Scarrifying, and making a kind of Incision into it; especially
intending to consign to posterity their Laws, divine and humane, Roman,
Egyptian, or Hebrew: For so of Old -- verba minantia fixo
Aere ligabantur. Metam. 1.

according to the Poet. Thus were the Hieronicae preserved in the Temple of
Olympian Jove, and the Roman Consuls in the Capitol; and as by those
innumerable Inscriptions of irrefragable, and undeniable Antiquity does appear.

We have already computed how probable it is, that Sculpture was in use in
Egypt somewhat before, or at least as soon as the Patriarch Abraham set his
foot there: But the less discerning Greeks who receiv^d it from the
Egyptians, could tell us of no writings of t^eirs extant before Homer, if we
will give ear to Josephus, before that of Iatian (a learned Assyrian, and
contemporary with Just in Martyr) where he affirms (...), etc. Where we have
no less then seventeen Graecians named elder then Homer. There are also
enumerated the names of twenty Argive Kings from Inachus to Agamem^on, which
strongly infers the means of Recording by Sculpture and Writing to have been
very ancient. For so we read that the Poems of Hesiod were engraven in Lead.
Aristotle mentions Daphne a certain Devotresse of Apollo; Sabinus, and Diodorus
many others. But when, or whoever it were, thence (as we said) it traveled
into Greece, that Theater of the Arts, where it soon arrived to the supreamest
height of perfection, when being applied to the forming of Figures, it was
celebrated by all the Witty men of Those, and the succeeding Ages. Homer tells
us of the engraving in the Shield of Achilles; Iliad 3. Metam l. 3. l. 3. c. 3.
Hesiod that of Hercules; not to mention the Sculptures upon the Chariot of
the Sun, described by the Poet, because it is altogether fictitious, though
extremely ingenious, and whence happly they might have their Vehicula Caelata
mentioned by Q. Curtiu^. But whither now these ancient and famous pieces were
hollow, like those of our Burine, or the work of our Cheezil and repaired
Embossements, might seem a difficulty to resolve from the frequent
interpretations we attributed to the Verb in the former chapter; if what we
have here attested concerning the Antiquity of Letters, and consequently of
flat incisions, pronounce not for its pre-eminence, however this may appear to
the more judicious. Add to it, that both Plastica (whatever others may fancy)
unless we will ascend to the divine figulation of the first breathing Statue
that was ever formed (and with Pliny, derive it to be before, an^ the Mother of
Sculpture) and the Anaglyptic Art, (not produced in the World 'till about the
time of Belus, and the beginning of Gentilisme) were not 'till long after the
use of Letters, if Enochs Prophesy were not preserved by unwritten tradition,
and the former Apocryphal Monuments have other foundation then the Wit of the
Rabbis, which we can by no means assent to in the general. Besides, if we
apply it to Intaglia's in Stone, seals, and the like, for having been almost
coevous with Rings (what was else the Signet which Judah left with his Daughter
Tamar?) 38. Genesis ^8.
it questionless derives its Original before any History at present extant in
the World, Divine or Humane, was committed to writing* Of which he who has a
thirst to satisfy his Curiosity farther, may consult Gorlaeus, or Fortun.
Licetus de Annulis Antiquorum; Where also concerning their Sculpture, first in
Iron, then in Gold, other Metals and Stones; and of which might very much be
added, both touching their dignity, signification, and how they came at length
to be worn so universally. Something we might here likewise insert of their
Constellated Figures, or Talisman's, long since engraven upon certain Instants
and Periods of the Suns ingresse into such, and such particular signs of the
Zodiac, treated of by Francis Rueus the Physician, Tralianus, and instar
omnium, by the learned Gaffarel at large; but we hasten to that which follows.

CHAP. III. Of the Reputatton and Progress of Sculpture amongst the Greeks,
and Romans down to the middle-ages; with some pretensions to the Invention of
Copper-cuts, and their Impressions,
WE have now done with the Original, and will next endeavor to investigate
what progress it has made amongst those glorious and universal Monarchs, when
Sculpture and all other noble Arts were in their Ascendent and highest
reputation; I mean the Greeks and the Romans; For to the first does Herodotus
appropriate the perfection of this art, not admitting it to have arrived at the
latter till about the time of Spurius Cassius, when Baptist Alberti ascribes it
to his country men the Tuscans.

Those who have well survei'd the Natural History of Pliny will easily commute
for the Omission, if out of pure indulgence to their eyes only, we forbear the
transcribing of at least three or four entire Chapters, industriously bau^king
those ample and luxurious Fields of Statues, as under the Fusile and Plaistic
head; l. 33. c. 8. l. 34 c. 12 l. 30. c. ^
because it suites not wit^ ou^ present design and institution: For to pass
over the Figures in Metal, those of Gyps^^ and other materials; The Sculptores
Marmoris were so many, and the Greeks so extravagantly fond of their works,
that at Rhodes alone, that small Island, were no less then 73000 Signa; nor
were there fewer at Athens, Olympia, Delphi and several other Cities, whereof
whole Armies of them were transferred to Rome, after Achaia had been conquered
by L. Mummius, at which period the Greek Arts began to Rise, and be in such
reputation amongst them; and This to so high an excess, as Pliny records of
his Age, that there were almost as many Statues as Men, by a kind of noble
contention (says Sr. H. Wott^n) in point of f^rtility 'twixt Art and Nature,
Element. Architect Instaurat. Scient.
and which He, and my Lord Bacon improves to a politic, as well as altogether
an expenceful magnificency. It shall then suffi^e that we be sparing in these
Instances, and keep our selves to those works and Intaglia's only, which do
nearest approach our design; of which sort may be esteemed those (...)
mentioned by Pliny, in which Art that famous Pyrgoteles did so excel, as made
Alexander the great ordain, that none should presume to carve his Effigies save
him only; to paint or cast him, besides Apelles and Lysippus, Edicto vetuit, ne
quis se, praeter Apellem,
Pingeret, Ho^. Epist. 2.
aut alius Lysippo duceret era
Fortis Alexandri vultum simulantia. --
Had Queen Elizabeth been thus circumspect, there had not been so many vile
copies multiplied from an ill Painting; as being called in, and brought to
Essex-house, Where my L. of (...) then lived.
did for several years, furnish the Pastry-men with Peels for the use of their
Ovens.

We wish the same might please his Majesty, and that none save such as for
their excellent tallent had particular indulgence, might any more dare to
represent his sacred person in painting, or Carving, then in his Coy^e and
Royal Signature: For it is seriously a reproachful thing only, to behold how it
is profaned by the ^and of so many vile, and wretched Bunglers (they deserve
not the name of Workmen) as blush not daily to expose their own shame, in so
precious and reve^'d a Subject: And that the Heads of Kings and Heroes should be
permitted to hang for Signs, among Cats, and Owls, Dogs and Asses, at the
pleasure of every Tavern and Tippling-house, we have frequently stood in
admiraion of: But so did not that of Alexander as we noted; nor would Augustus
make himself cheaper, then that great Master of his time, Dioscorides pleased,
whom he particularly chose to preserve, and derive his Divine Effigies to the
after Ages, and to the honor of his memory, by what he left in those Signets,
and other Stones which he cut for that renowned Emperor. Thus Sculpture began
to be most eminent in Stones and Gemms, Auro, Argento, Aere, ^erro, Ligno,
Ebore, Marmore, Vitro, etc. As this Author affirms; where discoursing of the
famous Works were left by the Masters of note upon record in his time, he seems
to ascribe the Invention to one Dipoenus, and Scyllis; For we shall not here
ascend so high as Promotheus, or speak much of Ideocus, Eucirapus, Lysistratus,
Demophilus, Dedalus, Leochares, Policarmus, Myrmecides, and innumerable others:
It would be tedious (as we said) to transcribe the names but of the Pieces
only, of all those renowned Men whom he there celebrates for their engravings
on Armor, Cups, Rings, Glass, even to the very ^igulina Vasa caelata, such as
Cotys brake of purpose, least some other unexpected accident or mischance might
put him into passion, Plut. in Apotheg.
as Plutarch tells the Story: Hydriae, and water pots were thus wrought, and
Pliny speaks of the Engraving even of Bread: It Is yet observable, that very few
were found who took any pleasure to engrave in Gold (as we conceive) being too
soft a Metal; but multitudes that wrought in Silver; especially, the famous
Mentor of whose Work Varro affirms he had a piece in his possession, which he
infinitely valued; for, it seems, he had never finished above eight, which were
most of them lost. Two more of his Cups had L. Crassus the Orator, prized at C.
HS. Confessus est tamen se nunq^am his uti, propter verecundiam ausum; so rich
it seems, and magnificent they were, that even this great person professed he
never durst make use of them out of pure modesty, and to avoid the censure of
being thought too Luxurious: Martial describes another, where a Lizard was so
lively represented, Men were afraid it would bite.

Inserta Phialae Mentoris manu ducta
Lacerta vivit, and timetur argentum.
Next to Mentor, was Acragus, Boethus, and Mys, whose Masterpiece was expos^
at Rhodes; especially those glorious Vas^s, and Goblets of the Bacchanalia,
engrave^ by the forementioned Acragus, and of Bescage, Chases, and Hunting:
Famous also were Calamis, Antipa^er, and Stratonicus, who engraved the Satyr
Sleeping, a stupendous piece of Art; Then there flourished Tauriseus of
Cizi^um, Aristus, Eunicus both of them Mi^le^^ans: Likewise Hecates, and the
renowned Praxiteles about the time of Pompy: Posidonius of Ephesus, and Ledus
famous for representing of Battails, etc. To be brief (for their Works are
endless) Zopirus, who engraved the Court of the Areopagi in a Cup, and the
trial of Orestes: After him lived Pytheus and several others too long here to
recite. Nor were all these Gravers in flat; but, as we said, in Relievo some of
them, and more approaching to the Statuary; Besides such as were excellent
Medaillists from Augustus, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, etc. down to the
Reigns of Commodus, and Pertinax; for from Severus it greatly decayed, and the
most tolerable engravings of the former, lasted but to Nerva, the best being
those which were cut, and stamped in the time of Caligula, Claudius, and Nero,
about which period Sculpture beginning to degenerate in Greece, it traveled
and came to Rome now opulent and victorious. But after the^e, and the forme^y
recorded by Pliny, there were not many who left either Name, or Work famous to
Posterity: For, besides that the Monarchy was soon broken and disordered; the
later Empp* became less Curious, Rich and Magnificent; so as even in the time
of the Great Constantine it self, Ar^s began manifestly to degenerate: But,
when afterward the Goths and Saracens had broken in upon the Roman Empire, and
made those horrid devastations, they were in a manner utterly lost; as the
Relics which they left in Statuary, Sculpture, Architecture, Letters, and all
other good Arts do yet testify. It is true, that the ruder Danes, and
Norvegians had in th^se times their Runic writings, or engraven Letters, as in
their Rimstoc or Primstaf; some square or long piece of board, or Staff, having
an Almanac carved on it: So they engraved their Letters on Bones, either whole,
or Sliced, and bound up together, like our Tallies; also upon Jaw-bones of the
greater Fishes, taken on their Coasts: And Wormi^s in Fast. Dan. L. 1. chap.
18. mentions Danish Hieroglyphics, on the Tombs of their old H^r^'s; Lions,
Bears, Horses, Dogs, Dragons Snakes, etc. wrought on the hardest Rock^ together
with Runic Characters; so as these Nations seldom traveled without their
Graef, or Graef-Saex, a kind of point or stiletto, with which they used to
carve out Letters and other Figures upon occasion; but it was yet so rude, and
their Gusto so depravd, that they demolished, and ruined all those goodly
fabrics, and excellent Works, wherever they became Masters, introducing their
lame, and wretched manner, in all those Arts which they pretended to restore,
even when now they became a little more civilized by the conversation of the
more polished and flourishing Countries: For it was not any general, and
imaginary decay, which some have conceited to be diffused upon the universal
face of Nature, that the succeeding periods did not emerge, or attain to the
excellency of the former Ages, ancient Masters, and renowned works; but to the
universal decay of noble, and heroic Genius's to encourage them. Priscis enim
temporibus (says Petronius) cum adhuc nuda placeret virtus, Satyr.
Vigebant Arts ingenuae, summumque certamen inter homines erat, ne quid
profuturum saeculis diu lateret; Itaque omnium Herbarum succos Democritus
expressit; and ^^lapidum Virgultorumque vis lateret, aetatem ^iter experimenta
consumpsit: Eudoxus quidem (...) cacumine excelsissimi montis consenuit, ut
Astrorum Caelique motus deprehenderet: and C^ry^^ppus ut ad inventionem
sufficeret, ter Helleboro animum detersit: Verum, ut ad plastas converta^
(which comes nearest our instance) Lysippum statuae unius lineamentis
inhaerentem inopia exstinxit; and Myron, qui paene hominum Animas, Ferarumque
Aere comprehenderat, non invenit heredem. At nos Vino, scortisque demersi, ne
paratas quidem arts audemus cogn s^ere, sed accusatores antiquitatis, Vitia
tantum docemus and discimus, etc. He concludes; N^lito ergo mirari, si pictura
defecit, cum omnibus Diis Hominibusque formosior videatur massa Auri, quam
quicquid Apelles, Phidiasve, Graeculi delirantes fecerunt.

And if thus even in the greatest height and perfection of the Sciences, the
eloquent Satyrist could find just reason to deplore their decadence, and
censure the vices of that age; what shall we say of ours, so miserably
declining, and prodigiously degenerate? We want Alexanders, Augustus's, such as
Francis the I. Cosimo di Medice^, Charles the V. those Fathers, and Mecaenas's
of the arts, who by their liberality and affection to Virtue, may stimulate,
and provoke men to gallant exploits; and that being thereby once at their ease
from the penury, and necessities which depresse the noblest minds, they might
work for glory, and not for those trifling and illiberal rewards, which hardly
would find them bread, should they employ but half that time upon their
studies, which were requisite to bring their labors to the supremest
perfection; since according to that saying, (...) (...) Nothing which is great
can be done without leisure: If a quarte^ of that which is thrown away upon
Cards, Dice, Dogs, Mistresses, base and viti^us Gallanteries, and impertinent
follies, were employed to the encouragement of arts, and promotion of science,
how illustrious and magnificent would that age be; how glorious and infinitely
happy? We complain of the times present, it is We that make them bad; We admire
the former, it is the effect of our Ignorance only; and which is yet more
criminal, in that we have had their examples to instruct, and have made them to
reproach us: Pardon this indignation of Ours, O ye that love virtue and
cultivate the sciences!

To return to our Institution again: Sculpture and Chalcography seem to have
been of much antienter date in China then with us; whereall their writings and
printed Records were engraven either on Copper plates or cut in Tablets of
Wood, of which some we possess, and have seen more, representing (in all
pictures) Landskips, Stories, and the like. Josephus Scaliger affirms that our
first Letters in Europe were thus cut upon Wood, before they invented the Typos
aeneos; instancing in a certain Horologium B. Mariae, Hist Chin part* 1. cap 7
which he says he had seen Printed upon Parchment a great while since: But
Semedo would make the World believe that the forementioned Chinezes have been
possessed of this invention about sixteen hundred years, some others a^^irme
3700. However, that they were really Masters of it long before us, is
^universally ageed upon; and is yet in such esteem amongst them, that the very
Artizan who compounds the Ink for the Press, is not accounted amongst the
Mechanic professors; but is dignified with a liberal Salary, and particular
privileges. They also engrave upon stone, and imprint with it; but with this
difference in the working-off; that the paper being black, the Sculpture
remains white. More admirable is that which they attest was found in Mexico,
and other place^ of the new world, where they Hieroglyphiz'd both their
Thoughts, Histories and inventions to posterity, not much unlike to the
Aegytians, though in less durable, and permanent matter: The same likewise Jo.
Laet affirms of the Sculpture among the Acadiae, and those of Nova Francia; so
natural (it seems) and useful was this art, even to the least civilized amongst
the Heathens: And there is indeed nothing at which we more admire, and deplore,
then that this facile, and obvious invention; and which would have transmitted
to us so many rare and admirable things, was never hit upon among the Greeks
and inventive Romans, who engraved so many Inscriptions both in Brass and
Marble; impressed and published so many thousands of medails, and coins as are
in the hands and collections of the Virtuosi, and the bowels of the Earth,
wherever their conquests extended themselves, or Eagles displayed their wings.

CHAP. IV. Of the invention and progress of Chalcography in particular;
together with an ample enumeration of the most renowned Masters, and their
Works.
THe Art of Engraving and working off, from Plates of Copper, which we call
Prints, was not yet appearing, or born with us, till about the year 1490. which
was near upon 50 years after Topography had been found out by John Guittemberg;
or who ever that lucky person were (for it is exceedingly controverted) that
first produced the Invention. There is a collection of ancient Offices adorned
with several Scultures (if so we may term those wretched Gravings in the
infancy of this art) where the Devil is but one great blot (as indeed he is the
Foulest of the Creation) and the rest of the Figures Monochroms as ridiculous
and extravagant; though still as the invention grew older, refining and
improving upon it. One of the antientest Gravings which we have seen, to which
any mark is appos'd has M. 3. and M. C. in one of the corners of the plates
and it was long that they used the initia letters of their names, only, and
sometimes but one; as in those of Lucas. Albert D^rer did frequently add the
year of the Lord, and his own age from ten to fourteen, etc. performing such
things as might shame most of the best Masters, for the true and steady design,
the incomparable proportion, and stroke of his Graver: But Israel, Martin
Schon, and the Todesco (wh^ is by some surnamed The Master of the Candlestick,
because of the foulness of his Ink) were of the very first, as far as we can
collect, who published any works of this kind under their names, wrought off by
the Rolling-Presse, and whose slender attempts gave encouragement to those who
have succeeded.

George Vasari, who has been exceedingly curious in this enquiry, attributes
the first invention of this Art to one Maso Finiguerra a Florentine, about anno
1460, which exceeds our former computation by 30. years; but then we are to
consider by what progress and degrees; for it was first only in Silver, to
fill with a certain Encaus^ic or black Enamel, which it seems gave him the
first hint how to improve it in plates of bras^, which having engraved, he did
only fume, taking off the impression with a moist paper and a Rolling pin. This
mean commencement was yet afterward pursued by Baccio Baldini a Goldsmith, his
Country man, whose works coming to the sight of Andrea Mantegna in Rome,
invited that great Painter to give him some designs of his own for his
encouragement; and from thence it traveled into Flanders to one Martine of
Antwerp, whose works (as we observed) were usually countersign'd with M. the
first whereof were the five wise and five foolish Virgins, and a Crucifix,
which was so well cut, that Gerardo a Florentine Painter would needs copy it:
After this he published his four Evangelists, our Savior, and the twelve
Apostles, a Veronica, S. George, Christ before Pilate, an assumption of the B.
Virgin, one of the rarest that ever he did; besides that St. Anthonies
temptation, which was so well performed, that Michael Angelo (exceedingly
ravished with it) would needs wash it over with his own hands.

The next that appeared of note was the formerly mentioned and renowned Albert
Durer, who flourished about the years 1503. and who had performed wonders both
in Copper and Wood, had he once fortuned upon the least notion of that
excellent manner, which came afterward to be in vogue, of giving things their
natural distances, and agreeable sweetness, the defect of which Sir H. Wotton
does worthily perstringe both in him, Element of Architect.
and some others. But to proceed, Albert being very young set forth our Lady,
some designs of Horses after the life; the Prodigal, S. Sebastian in little, a
Nymph ravished by a Monster; a Woman o^ Horseback, Diana chastising a Nymph who
flies to a Satyr for protection, in which he discovered his admirable talent
and skill in expressing Nudities: A Country man and Woman playing on Bagpipes,
with Poultry, etc. about them. Venus, or the temptation of the Stove; his two
St. Christophers, rare cuts. After that, he engraved several Stamps in Wood,
proof whereof he gave in the decollation of St. Jo. Bapt. with Herodias, Pope
Sixtus, St. Stephen, Lazarus, S. George, a passion in great, the last supper,
Christ's apprehension in the Garden, descent into Limbo, and Resurrection, with
eight more Prints of this subject, which are held to be spurious: All these be
published anno 1510. The year following, he set forth the life of our Lady in
twenty sheets rarely conducted. The Apocalypse in fifteen sheets, of which the
Painters have made sufficient use; Christ bemoaning our sins; Then applying
himself to grave in Copper again, he published his Melancholia, three different
Madonas, with thirty pieces besides concerning the passion, and which being
afterward imitated by that rare Artist Marco Antonio (who had procured them at
Venice) and published for Originals (so exactly it seems they were performed)
did so insense Albert, that he made a journey to Venice expressly to complain of
the injury to the Senate, and obtained at last, that M. Antonio should no more
be permitted to set his mark or Plagia, which was all he could procure of them.
Another emulator of Alberts was Lucas van Leyden, whom at his return into
Germany he found had well near overtaken him for the sweetness of his Burine,
though something inferior of design: Such were a Christ bearing the Cross,
and another of his Crucifixion, Sampson, David on a horse, the Martyrdom of S.
Peter, Saul, and David, the slaughter of Goliath, the famous Piper, Virgil's,
and some other heads, all which works did so inflame his Antogonist Albert,
that in a laudable revenge, he published his armed Cavalier or Dream, in which
the brightness and luster of the Armor and Horse is rarely conducted: Then in
the year 1512 he set forth six other small stories of the passion, which Lucas
also imitated, though hardly reached: Then a S. George, Solomon's Idolatry; the
Baptism of our Lord, Pyramus and Thisbie, Ahasuerus and Hester, etc. These
again incited Albert to publish that Temperantia, whom he elevates above the
clouds, S. Eustathius and the Heart, a most incomparable cut; his Deaths head in
a Scutcheon, and several German Coats full of rare Mantlings and invention.
Also S. Hierom, a Christ and twelve Apostles in small: anno 1523. many heads,
as that of Erasmus, Cardinal Albert, the Imperal Electors, and his own, with
diverse other.

Lucas again in emulation of these, set forth his Joseph and four Evangelists,
the Angels appearing to Abraham; Susanna, David praying, Mordecay triumphing;
Lot, the Creation of Adam and Eve; the story of Cain and Abel, viz. anno 1529.
But what procured him immortal glory was his great Cruci^ix; Ecce Homo, and
Conversion of St. Paul; in which he exceeded himself both for the work and
ordinance; the distances being better conducted then Alberts, and indeed so
well observed, as gave light even to some of the best Painters that succeeded
him; so much are they obliged to this Art, and to this rare Workman: He graved
also several Madona's, our blessed Savior and Apostles; together with diverse
Saints, Arms and Mantlings, a Mountebanc and many more.

But to return now into Italy from whence we first sallied; in the time of
Raphael Urbine flourished the renouned Marco Antonio, who graved after those
incomparible pieces of that famous Painter, to whom he was so dear, that the
honor he has done him to posterity will appear, as long as that School of
Raphael remains in the Popes Chamber at the Vatican, or any memorial of it
lasts; though to speak truth, even of this rare Graver, the Pieces which he
has published seem to be more estimable yet for the choice and imitation, then
for any other perfection of the Burine; as forming most of his figures and
touches of too equal force, and by no means well observing the distances,
according to the rules of Perspective, that tenderness, and as the Italians
term it, Morbidezza, in the hatchings, which is absolutely requisite to render
a piece accomplished and without reproach.

We have recited above, what he Coppied after Albert Durer; But being at Rome,
and applying himself to Raphael, he cut that rare Lucretia of his, which he
performed so much to satisfaction, that diverse excellent painters desired him
to Publish many of their Works: This produced Urbines Judgment of Paris, at
which the City was so ravished, that they decreed the Golden apple to Antonio,
before the fair Goddess: Then he set forth the Slaughter of the Innocents,
Neptune, the Rape of Helena, all of them of Raphael^ designing: Also the
Martyrdom of St. Felix in the boiling Oil, which purchased him so much Fame
and Credit; but this Excellent Painter would always from that time forewards,
have one of his Servants to attend only M. Antonio's Rolling-press, and to work
off his Plates, which then began to be marked with R. S. for Raphael Sancio,
which was the name of Urbine, and with M. F. for Marco Fecit. Of these there is
a Venus designed by Raphael, Abraham and his Handmaid: After this he graved all
those round designs painted in the Vatican by the same hand; Likewise the
Caliope, Providentia, Justitia, the Muses, Apollo, Par^assus, the Poets; Aeneas
and Anchises, the famous Galatea all of them after Raphael: Also the three
Theological Virtues, and four Moral, Pax, Christ, and the Twelve: Several
Madonas, St. Hierome, Tobit, St. Jo. Baptist, and diverse other Saints; besides
many prints after the Cartoons of Raphael which had been designed to be wrought
in Tapestry and Arras; as the story of St. Peter, Paul, Stephen, John, St.
Catharine, and sundry heads to the life, etc. especially that incomparable one
of Pietro Aretino the Poet: somethings likewise being sent by Albert Durer out
of Germany to Raphael, were upon his recommendation, afterward cut by M.
Antonio, together with the Innocents, a Coenaculum, and St. Cecilia's Martyrdom
of Raphaels invention: Then he published his twelve Apostles in little, and
diverse Saints for the help of painters, as St. Hierome, the naked Woman, and
the Lion, after Raphael, Aurora, and from the Antique, the three Graces.

Marco di Ravenna was one of Antonio's Scholars, who had also together with
Augustino Venetiano, the honor to dignifie his gravings with Raphels Cipher;
though the latter often used A. VI. his own initia letters; of both their
cutting are a Madona, with a Christus mortuus, and in a large sheet the B.
Virgin praying, and a Nativity in great also: The Metamorpheses of Lycaon, a
Perfumer, Alexander magnus, and Roxana, a Caena Domini, the Annuntiation, all
designed by Raphael, besides these were set forth two Stories of the Marriage
of Psyche,; and indeed there was hardly any thing which ever Raphael either
painted or designed, but what were graven by one, or both of these Workmen;
besides diverse other things after Julio Romano, viz. all that he painted in
Raphaels Lodge, or Gallery in the Vatican; some whereof are signed with M. R.
and others with A. V. to show they had been imitated by others, as was the
Creation; the Sacrifice of Cain and Abel, Noah, Abraham; the Passage over the
red sea; The Promulgation of the Law; the fall of Manna, David and Goliath,
which also M. Antonio had published before; as likewise the Temple of Solomon,
his Judgment on the Harlots, the Queen of Saba's visit, and many other
Histories collected out of the Old Testament, all which were published before
Raphaels decease: For after that, Augustino wrought with Bac^io Bandinelli, a
sculpter of Florence, who caused him to grave his Antonius and ^lcopatra, very
rare things, with diverse other designs; as the slaughter of the Innocents,
diverse Nudities, and Clad Figures; not to omit those excellent and incomparable
Drawings and Paintings of Andrea del Sarto after which he graved; though in the
Christo mortuo not altogether succeeding so well as had been wished.

But to come again to Marco Antonio (because there is not a paper of his to be
lost) after Raphaels death, did Julio Romano publish some of his own designs
in print: I say, after his Death; for before, though he were an excellent
painter; yet durst he never take the boldness upon him. Such were the Duel of
Horses, a Venus which he had formerly painted: The penance of Mary Magdalen,
the four Evangelists and some Bassi ^elievi, with many things that Raphael had
designed for the Corridor of the Vatican, and which were afterward retouched by
Tomaso Barlacchi: We will not contaminate this discourse with those twenty
vile designs of Julio cut by M. Antonio, and celebrated with the impure verses
of Peter Aretino, by which he so dishonored this excellent Art, as well as
himself; because it deserved a severer Animadversion and Chastisement then was
inflicted upon him for it; though to commute for this Extravagancy, he
published the Martyrdom of S. Laurence, in which he also reformed those
designs of Baccio Bandinelli to the great reputation of the Art of
Chalcography.

About the same time flourished Giouanni Battista Mantuano Disciple of Giuleo
Romano, who published a Madona, his armed Mars and Venus, the burning of Troy,
an extraordinary piece; his prints are usually signed I.B.M. Also his three
Sheets of Battails (cut by some other hand) a Physician applying of Cupping
Glasses to a Woman; Christ's Journey into Egypt, Romulus and Rhemus, the
Stories of Pluto, Jupiter and Neptune; the miseries of Imprisonment, Interview
of the Armies of Scipio and Hanibal; St. John Baptists Nativity, cut by
Sebastiano de Reggio, all, after Julio Romano.

Giorgio Mantuano set forth the Facciata of the Popes Chapel, M. Angelos
Judgment, St. Peter's Martyrdom, the Conversion of St. Paul, etc. And some
plates were sent abroad about the year 1530. eaten with Aqua Fortis after
Parmesano; For, as ab aere, deventum ad Tabulas ceratas in writing, the use of
the Palimpsestus, Ta^^e books, Plumbae lamellae and the like; ^o happened it also
in this Art of Chalcography; and Etching with Corrosive waters began by some to
be attempted with laudable success, as in this Recital we shall frequently have
occasion to remember: But, whither those Symeters and Blades brought us from
Damascus, and out of Syria, and wrought with these strong waters, might give
any light to this expeditious and useful invention, we are not yet informed;
and the effect was sufficiently obvious, after that of the Burine had been well
considered.

Vago de Carpi did things in stamp, which appeared as tender as any Drawings,
and in a new way of Charo Scuro, or Mezzo Tinto by the help of two plates,
exactly conter-calked, one serving for the shadow; the other for the
heightning; and of this he published a Syb^lla after Raphael, which succeeded
so rarely well, that he improved the curiosity to three Colors; as his Aeneas
and Anchises, descent from the Cross, story of Simon Magus, a David after the
same Urbin, and a Venus do testify: This occasioned many others to imitate
him, as in particular,

Baldassare Peruzzi (who graved the Hercules, Parnassus, the Muses) and
Francisco Parmegiano, who having set out Diogenes in this guise, a very rare
print, instructed Antonio di Trento in the Art, who published his Peter and
Paul in Charo oscuro, the Tyburtine Sybill and a Madona; but none was there who
exceeded those of Beccafumi; especially, his two Apostles in wood, and the
Alchimist in Aqua Fortis.

Fran. Parmegiano (whom we already mentioned) may be esteemed for one of the
first that brought the use of A. Fortis into reputation; so tender and
graceful were some of his Etchings, as appears in that rare Descent of the
Cross, Nativity and several other pieces.

Baptista Vicentino, and Del Moro set forth many curious Landships,

Girolamo Cocu the Liberal Sciences, etc.

Giacomo del Cavaglio cut many things after Rosso Fiorentino, as the
Metamorphosis of Saturn into a Horse, the Rape of Porserpine, Antoninus and the
Swan; some of the Herculean Labors; a book of the Gods and their
transformations, whereof part are after Perino del Vaga; also the Rape of the
Sabines, an incomparable print, had it been perfect; but the City of Rome
happening at that time to be in some disor^er, the plates were lost: He graved
likewise for Parmegiano the Espousals of our Lady, and a rare Nativity after
Titian; not to conceal his admirable talent in cutting of Onixes, Christals,
and other estimable stones.

Enea vico de Parma engraved the Rape of Helena after old Rosso, a Vulcan with
some Cupids about him: Leda after Mich. Angelo: The Annuntiation designed by
Titian; the story of Judith, the Portrait of Cosimo di Medices, etc. Also the
contest 'twixt Cupid and Apollo before the Gods; the Conversion of St. Paul in
great, a very rare stamp: The head of Jovanni de Medici, Charles the V. and
some rare Medails which are extant in the hands of the Curious: He also
published St. George; several habits of Countries; The Stemmata or Trees of the
Emperors and diverse other Famous Pedegrees.

Lamberto Suave set forth 13 prints of Christ and his Disciples far better
graved then designed, also the Resurrection of Lazarus, and a St. Paul, which
are skilfully, and very laudably handled.

G^o. Battista de Cavaglieri has cut the descent from the Cross, a Madona and
many others.

Antonio Lanferri, and Tomaso Barlacchi graved diverse things after Michael
Angelo, and procured so many as were almost numberless: But what they
published of better use were diverse Grotescos, Antiquities and pieces serving
to Architecture, taken out of the old buildings and Ruins yet extant, which
afterward Sebastiam Serli. refining upon, composed the better part of that
excellent book of his: And of this nature are the things publish^d by Antonio
Labbaco, and Barozzo da Vignol^.

The Famous Titian himself left some rare things graven with his own hand in
wood, besides his Pharo in the great Cartoons, diverse Landskips, a Nativity,
St. Hierom, S. Francis; and in Copper a Tantalus, Adonis, also in Box the
Triumph of Faith, Patriarchs, Sybills, Innocents, Apostles, Martyrs, with our
Savior borne up in a Chariot by the four Evangelists, Doctor^, and Confessors;
Also the B. Virgin, a St. Anna, which he first painted in charo oscuro on the
Sepulcher of Luigi Trivisano in St. Giovanni e paola at Venice; Samson and
Daillia, some Shepherds and Animals; Three Bertuccie sitting, and encompassed
with Serpents like the Laocon; not to mention what were published by Giulio
Buorasoni, and those which were cut after Raphael, Giulio Romano, Parmegiano
and several others.

Baptista Franco a Venetian Painter, has showed both his dexterity in the
Graver, and Aqua Fortis also; by the Nativity, Adoration of the Magi,
Predication of St. Peter, Some Acts of the Apostles, Histories of the Old
Testament after several excellent Masters:

Renato did diverse rare things after Rosso, as in that of Francis the First his
passing to the Temple of Jupiter; The Salutation of the B. Virgin, and a dance
of ten women, with several others.

Luca Penni published his two Satyrs whipping of Bacchus; a Leda, Susanna and
some things after Primaticcio: also the Judgment of Paris, Isaac upon the
Altar; a Christ, a Madona Espousing of S. Catharine; the Metamorphosis of
Calista, Concilium Deorum, Penelope and some others in Wood. Who does not with
admiration and even ex^asie behold the works of Francesco Marcolini?
Especially, his Garden of thoughts; Fate, Envy, Calamity, Fear, Praise, so
incomparably ^ut in Wood.

Nor less Worthy of Commendation are the Gravings of Gabrielle Giolito, in the
Orlando of Ariosto; as also those eleven pieces of Anatomy made for Andrea
Vessalius designed by Calcare the Flemming, an Excellent Painter, and which
were afterward engraven in Copper by Valverde in little.

Christophero Coriolano graved the heads in Vasaris lives of the Painters,
being after the designs of the same Vasari; they are in wood, and rarely done.

Antonio Salamanca did put forth some very good things.

Andrea Mantegna that admirable Painter, engraved his Triumphs of Caesar with
great Art; as likewise Baccanalias, and sea-Gods, a Christ taken from the
Cross, his Burial, and Resurrection; which being done both in Brass and Wood,
were conducted with that skill, as for the softness and tenderness of the
lights, they appeared as if they had been Painted in Miniature.

Nor may we here omit to celebrate for the glory of the Sex, Propertia de Rossi
a Florentine Sculptress; who having cut stupendous things in Marble, put forth
also some rare things in Stampi to be encountered amongst the Collections of the
Curious.

And about this age, or a little after, flourished Martin Ruota, famous for his
Judgment after Michael Angelo in a small volume, much to be preferred to that
which is commonly sold at Rome in so many sheets; likewise his St. Anthony and
diverse more. Jacomo Palma has (besides his excellent book of Drawing) set forth
many rare pieces, very much esteemed.

Andrea Mantuan graved both in Wood and Copper; of his were the Triumph of our
Savior after Titian, and some things in Charo oscuro after Gio: di Bologna and
Domenico Beccafumi, whom but now we mentioned; also the Roman Triumphs in
imitation of Mantegna, a Christus mortuus after Alexand. Casolini, etc.

Finally, toward the end of this Century, appeared Augustino, and Annibal
Carracci most rare Painters and exquisite Engravers; for indeed when these to
Arts go together, then it is, and then only, that we may expect to see the
utmost efforts and excellency of the Bolino: amongst the famous pieces
communicated to us by these Masters, we may esteem the Monelli, Aeneas of
Barrochio's invention, and S. Hierom. After Tintoret the large and famous
Crucifix of three sheets in S. Roccos school which so ravished the Painter:
Mercury and the Graces, Sapientia, Pax, Abundantia chasing Mars away; The Ecce
homo of Correggio, S. Francis of Cavalier Vanni: a Venus in little with a
Satyr, and some other nudities with something a too luxurious Graver: S.
Giustina's Martyrdom of Paulo Veronezes, S. Catherine, and that renowned S.
Hierom of Correggio; Also in Aqua fortis his brother Hannibal etched another
Venus; the Woman of Samaria at the well, a Christ in little, and a Madona with
the Bambino, and S. John; The famous S. Roch and the spiteful coronation with
thorns: The Christus mortuus bewailed by the devout sex, the original painting
whereof hangs in the D. of Parmas Palace at Caprarvola, and is in the Cut one
of the tenderst and rarest things that can be imagined, abating the vileness of
the Plate, which was most unfortunately chosen, though through that accident,
rendered inimitable, and never to be counterfeited: There is likewise his
Magdalen and a Landscape touched with the Graver a little; likewise a Sylenus,
all of them incomparably designed, nor indeed, did any of the four celebrated
Artists exceed the Carracci, especially Hannibal, for the nobleness and
freedom of his postures, bodies and limbs, which he expressed in greatest
perfection; We may not omit the Purification which he engraved, and Villamena
made in large, nor the S. Anthony, the Original whereof is in the Palace of
Signior Francisco della Vigna at Venice, nor lastly the Resurection and the two
Caenaculas.

In the time of Sixtus Quintus and since, lived Francisco Villamena a rare
workman, whether considered for the equality of his hatches, which he conducted
with a liberty and agreeableness suitable to the perperfection of his design
(as is sufficiently apparent in that famous Plate, which he engraved after
Paulo Veroneze, representing Christ in the Temple) or in those things after the
Vatican paintings by Raphael, some whereof being never finished, came into a
private hand. The Triumphant Venus on the sea; Moses, some cuts after Fredrick
Barroccio in Aqua fortis, diverse Catafalco's of excellent Architecture,
Ignatius Lyola; the story of Psysche containing many sheets; a combat of men
casting stones at one another; and lastly, that laborious and useful book,
comprehending the Historical Column of Trajan, designed by Julio Romano, and
Girolan^o Mutiano, which at my being at Rome (then quite out of print) I
procured of his Widow who was then living, but would not part with the Plates
out of her sight.

Giovanni Maggi was an excellent Painter and Etcher, as he has sufficiently
discovered in his rare Perspectives, Landskips, and his Roma in the Larger
Chartoon; likewise in the nine priviledg'd and stationary Churches, with the
three Magi who offer presents to our Savior in allusion to his name.

Leonardo, Isabella, and Bernardino Parasol, that we may furnish all the sorts
of Art in this kind, cut exquisitively in wood, which is a graving much more
difficult; because all the work is to be abated and cut hallow, which is to
appear white; so that (by a seeming paradox) as the Matter diminishes the Form
increases, as one wastes, the other grows perfect. These all flourished about
the year 1560, and left us three little histories of the Salutation,
Visitation, and St. John Baptist: Also Christ's washing his Disciples feet, and
the cuts to Castor Durantes Herbal: Isabella, who was his wife, published a
book of all the sorts of Points, Laces, and Embroderies, with other curious
works for the Ladies, being all of her own invention (except the Frontispiece
only, which is Vilamenas) and the Plants in the Herbal of the Prince Cesi d'
Aquasporte, a learned person of that Age. Lastly, the son did also put forth
some few things of his work; but was a far better Painter in Fresco.

Antonio Tempesta was a most exact and rare designer, for which his works are
much more estimable, then for the excellency of his Points and Needles: he has
left us of his essays in A. F. the Histories of the Fathers, the twelve
Months of the year, Roma in a very large volumne; an incomparable Book of
Horses, another of Hunting, the plates now worn out, and retouch'd with the
Bolino: St. Hierom, and a Judgment: the wars of Charles the Fifth rarely
performed: the Metomorphosis of Ovid; the Battails of the Je^es, especially
that of the Amalakites in great, the Creation and Old Testament, Torquato
Tasso's Jerusalemma Liberata, the Birds and Faulconry in Pietro Olinas Book,
with diverse others well known, and much esteemed by the Virtuosi.

Cherubin Alberti has celebrated h^s incomparable Graver in that presentation
of our Lord in the Temple* the Adam expulsed out of Paradise: In the Puti,
diverse Vasa's, and other pieces which he wrought after Polydoro de Caravaggio
and Michael Angelo, commonly sold at Rome, and universally collected.

Horatio Borgiani cut the History of the Bible in the Peristyle of Raphael at
the Vatican, so often made mention of, and out of which, as from a School of
the noblest Science, most of the great Painters of the World have since taken
forth their Lessons: He likewise published some things in Char' Oscuro, which
were rarely heightened.

Raphael Guido a Tuscane, engraved many pieces after Cavalier Arpino, as the
Flagellation, Romulus, Icarus, The Angelus Custos, Ceres, Bacchus, a Christus
mortuus and St. Andrew the Apostle after Barroccio.

Jovanni Baptista della Marca put forth many divices of Shields, Armor, Busts,
and Trophies cut in wood.

To these we might add those excellent things of Camillo Graffico, and Cavalier
Salimbene, Anna Vaiana, with innumerable more; But we have yet other fruitful
Countries to visit, to whose praises we must be just; only we may not forget
the incomparable Stephano Della Bella a Florentine Painter now, or lately
living, whose entire collection in A. fortis is deservedly admired, and here in
particular to be celebrated by me, in acknowledgment of some obligation I have
for his civilities abroad: And of this Artist's works, flowing, and most
luxurious for invention, are those things which in imitation of Callot he did
in little, being yet very young: As the Scaenes and dances of the Horses at the
Marriage of the Duke of Tuscany; Compartimenti, Cartells, Ornaments and
Capricios for Carvers and Embroderers: A book of Gobbi, and diverse Vasa's,
Landskips in Rounds and others: A book of Beasts done exceedingly to the
natural: The principles of Design, Heads, and other touches very rare and full
of spirit, several pieces of our Lady, Christ, St. Joseph. etc. Jacobs descent
into Egypt: The Procession and Exposure of the Sacrament, where there is an
Altar of curious Architecture enriched with festival Ornaments: The Cavalcado
of the Polonian Ambassador into Rome, with diverse other proceedings, Pieces of
Polonians, Persians, and Moors on Horseback breathing a rich and noble fanc^:
Also Seiges, Engines for War, with Skirmishes, Land and Sea Fights: The
Metamorphosis of Ovid: The Sultana and her son taken by the Knights of Malta,
and to conclude, (for there is no end of his Industry) the Prospect of the Pont
Neuf at Paris, then which there is not certainly extant a more lively
representation of the busy Genius of that Mercurial Nation; nor a piece of
greater variety as to all encounters and accidents, which one can imagine may
happen amongst so numerous a people and concourse of Mankind.

Lastly (for they were likewise some of them Gravers in Copper and very rare
Chalcographers) we must not omit to make honorable mention here of those
incomparable Sculptors and Cutters of Medails, whither in Gemms or Metals; such
as were (besides those we touched in the former chapter) Vittor, Gambello,
Giovanni dal Cavino the Padouan, and a Son of his; Benevento Gellini, Leone
Aretino, Jacopo da Tresso, Fred. Bonzagna; and above all Gio. Jacopo who have
almost exceeded, at least approached the Ancients: To these may we add Giovanni
da Castle Bolognese, Matteo dal Nasaro, Giovanni dal Cornivole, Domenica
Milaneze, Pietro Maria de Pescia, Marmita, and Ludovico his Son, Valerio
Vincentino who had been in England in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and left a
Sardonix which he cut, representing the head of that famous Heroine, inferior
to none of the Ancients: There was likewise Michelino, who with the above named
Ludovico, and Vincentino, had so accurarely counterfeited the ancient Medails,
that the most knowing Antiquaries were often at a loss to distinguish them:
Such were also Luigi Arichini, Alessandro Caesari called the Greek, so much
celebrated for that stupendous Medalion of Paul the Third, and the head of
Photius the Athenian which he cut in an Onix, comparable, by the Universal
Suffrages, to any of the Ancients: We could reckon up the works also of many of
the rest, but it is not requisite, after we have given this taste, and would
merit an express Treatise. Likewise those of Antonio de Rossi, Cosimoda
Trezzo, Philippo Negarolo, Gaspar and Girolamo Mis^roni, Pietro Paulo Galcotto,
Pastorino di Sienna, not omitting that famous Pharodoxus of Milan, Fran.
Furnius, and Severus of Ravenna, etc. whose works were in Gold, Silver, Copper,
Steel, Achates, Cornelians, Onixes, Crystal, Jasper, Heliotrope, Lazuli,
Ametheistis, etc. yea, and to show how much some of those Modern Masters
exceeded the Ancients, even the Diamond, that hitherto insuperable gemme, was
subdued by the famous Treccia of Milan, who with stupendous success cutting
the King of Spains Arms in a Noble Table, was the first that ever engraved, or
made impression into that Obdurat stone. It will become such to be well
acquainted with these Masters Labors, and their manner, who aspire to be
knowing, and to improve their Judgment in Medaills and Intaglias, that
necessary, Ornamental and Noble piece of Learning; and not only to be well
skilled in their way of design; but to be able also to perform something in the
Art themselves: For such were those ingenious and Illustrious Spirits, Geo.
Battista Sozini of Sienna, and Rosso de Giugni of Florence, Gentlemen of note;
and such, with us, is our Noble and worthy Friend, Elias Ashmole Esquire; whose
Learning, and other excellent qualities deserve a more glorious inscription.

Finally, that excellent Medalist Mounsieur Roti, now entertained by his
Majesty for the Mint, and a rare Workman as well for Intaglias in stone, as
Metal, is not to be here omitted.

We shall speak in the next of those Germans and Flemmings who excelled in the
Art of Chalcography, not that they have exceeded some of the French; but,
because they were before them, and Universally admired: of these, the
Antesignani were the forementioned Albert Durer; that Prodigy of science,
Master Bleau of Amsterdam.
whose works we have already recounted upon occasion of Marco Antonio, and
therefore shall here forbear the repetition; as also those of Lucas, whose
works (consisting in all of about Lxx. sheets, and which I have known sold for
near an hundred pounds sterling, to one that as well understood the value of
money, as of that rare Collection; he being one of the greatest Merchants of
Books in Europe) are to be taken blind fold as they say; provided the
impressions be black, well conserved, of equal force, and not counterfeit, as
there are several of them which be; discernable only by the curious, and
accurately skillful: For such (amongst others of Durers) are the Creation of
Adam, the story of Lot, Susanna, The Crucifix which he cut in a small round
plate of Gold for the Emperors sword, and is fixed on the pummel, not before
mentioned: his armed Cavalier and Satyr, and indeed, almost all that ever He,
or Lucas graved and set forth.

The Works of Aldegrave, who came very near Albert, and flourished about the
same Age, are worthy the Collection: His pieces are distinguished by the Cipher
of his initial Letters * in imitation of Durer, as likewise the Author of the
septem opera misericordiae; stories of the book of the Kings, Artemisia, etc.
whose gravings are countersign'd with G.P.I.B. published the four Evangelists,
Adam, a Country fellow, a Bishop, a Cardinal, Satyrs, etc. M. the Prodigal son,
the Evangelists, etc. some whereof are Copies after Albert, and most of their
works done in small plates.

Hans Sibald ^eme has done wonders in those small figures, stones, and nakeds
which he published; it shall not be requisite to recite here the Catalogue;
because his mark I-S-B is fixed to most of his works, though now and then
profaned by the hands of others.

Jerome Coach a Flemming cut a Moses, 32 sheets of the story of Psyche,
designed by one Michael a Painter of the same Country very rarely conducted:
Also Dalila and Samson; The destruction of the Philistims, the Creation of
Adam, etc. 27 Stories of the Old- Testament nobly designed by Martino, and as
well graved: Also the History of Susanna: Another book of the Old, and New
Testament: The Triumph of Patience, a rare Cut: the Heart on the Anvile, and
diverse Emblems full of curious Figures; many sacred Triumphs; Fraud, Avarice; a
Bacchanalia, and a Moses after Bronzini, in emulation whereof, Gio. Mantuano
published his Nativity, an incomparable print; after which Jerome graved for
the Inventor, twelve great sheets of Sorceresses, the Battails of Charolus the
V. and for Verese a painter, the Perspectives which pass under his name, with
20 leaves of several Buildings; besides the St. Martine in a book full of
Devils; For Girol. Bos, the Alchimist, the seven deadly Sins, the last
Judgment, a Carnoval; and, after Francis Floris ten pieces of Hercules Labors,
the Duel of the Horatii and Curatii, the Combat of the Pigmies and Hercules,
Cain and Abel, Abraham; the Decission of Solomon between the two Harlots, and
in sum, all the actions of humane life.

And now that we mentioned Francis Floris of Antwerp, the rare things which he
published in stamp, purchased ^im (...) name of the Flemmish Michael Angelo.

Of the same Country was that incomparable Cornelius Cort; we will commence
with the Judgment of Michael Angelo which he cut in little: Most of his things
were after Frederic Zucchari, and some few of Raphaels; besides his Landskips
and other Gravings, after Girolam Mutiano, which are very excellent: Also John
Baptist, St. Hierom, St. Francis, Mary Magdalen, St. Eustachius, the Lapidation
of S. Stephen designed by Marco Venusto the M^^^uan. A Nativity after Thadeo
Zuccharo, St. Anne, etc. Also a Nativity in great after P^lydore: The
Transfiguration; The school at Athens; The Battle of Elephants; some Gravings
after Don Julio Clovio, and Titian, which had they been accompanied with that
tenderness, and due observation of the distances, that accomplished the
succeeding Gravers, had rendered him immortal, so sweet, even and bold was his
work and design in all other considerations. We mentioned Titian; for about
1570. Cor. Cort did use to work in that famous Painters house, and Graved for
him that Paradise he made for the Emperor; St. Lazarus Martyrdom, Calis^e and
the Nymphs, Prometheus, Andromeda, the fore-nam'd Magdalen in the desert, and
St. Hierom, all of them of Titians invention,

We come now to Justus, John, Aegidius, and Ralph Sadelers, who lived in the
time of the Emperor Rodulphus, and published their almost numberless labors;
we can therefore instance but in some of the most rare; such as were that Book
divided into three parts. 1. Imago bonitatis, 2. Boni and mali scientia, 3.
Bonorum and malorum Consensio, designed by Martin de Vos: The Vestigia of Rome
tenderly and finely touched in 50 sheets: The 12 Roman Emperors and Emperesses
after Titian, rarely graved by Giles, a Madona with our Savior, and St. Joseph
after Raphael, Christus Flagellatus, and the head of Rodulphus II. with various
capriccios, and inventions about it, as also that of the Emperor Mathias,
adorned with the chaplet of Medails; the calling of S. Andrew, by John and
Giles in brotherly emulation: Four books of Eremites admirably conducted by
Raphael, a caena Domini after Tintoret, and another Flagellation of Arpino's:
Diverse Landskips, The 12 Months; the great Hall at Prague, the Effigies of
Martin de Vos by Aegidius; The Emperor and Empress in their Robes of State;
an Adoration of the Magi after Zuchari: Adonis and Venus after Titian: a
Crucifix after Jac. Palma, a Resurection in great: the rich Epulo, St. Stephens
Lapidation, the Original whereof is at Friuli: a S. Sebastian; These by Giles:
John engraved after M. de Vos a scholar of Tintortes already mentioned, the
Creation and many histories out of Genesis: Ralph cut also the Life of Christ;
the Credo by way of Emblem: In sum (for their whole collection is not to be
crowded into this Catalogue) they have all of them published such incomparable
gravings; that it is the greatest pity in the world, they had not flourished in
the time of the great Raphael, and the good Masters, for they were not only
accurate and punctual imitators; but gave to their works that softness, life,
and Color (as Artists term it) which accomplishes all the rest; Especially,
John and Raphael in what they graved after Mich. de V^s, Bassano and others
whose Rusticities they set forth: those of Aegidius in great, being a descent
from the Cross of Barrecci^s invention, the other a Flagellation designed by
J^sepho Pin, can never be sufficiently celebrated.

After the Sadelers appeared He man Muller with a very bold Bulino, and
likewise Janus who graved many things after Sprangers, worse chosen (for the
convulsive and even Demo^^^^ postures) (...) ^xecuted.

But the imitations of the Graver by Simon Frisius the Hollander, who wrought
with the Aqua fortis of the Refiners, are altogether admirable and inimitable,
the stroke and conduct considered, had the design (excepting those of his Birds
which are indeed without reproach) contributed in any proportion to his
dexterity.

After him came the Swisse Matthew Miriam, who had he performed his heightnings
with more tenderness, and come sweetly off with the extremities of his
hatchings, had proved an excellent Master: His works are useful and innumerable
in Towns, Landskips, Battails (those especially fought by the great Gustavus)
etc. the Sost Vernish and separating A. F. was the instrument he used.

We have seen some few things cut in Wood by the incomparable Hans Holbein the
Dane, but they are rare, and exceeding difficult to come by; as his
licentiousness of the Friars and Nuns, Erasmus, the Dance Macchabree, the
Mortis imago which he painted in great, in the Church at Basil, and afterward
graved with no less art, and some few others: But there is extant a book of
several Figures done in the same material by one Justus Ammannus Tigur,
MDLXXVIII. which are incomparably designed and cut: In the Epistle whereof, one
Holtzhusen a Gentleman of Frankfort is commended for his universal knowledge,
and particularly his rare talent in this Art, which it is there said he showed,
by wonderful contrivances at the celebration of Martin Luthers Nuptials, and
therefore worthy to be taken notice of.

Hans Brossehaemer besides several other things, has cut in wood a triumph of
the Emperor Maximilian into Neuremberge.

Vergilius Solis graved also in wood the story of the Bible, and the Mechanic
Arts in little, but for imitating those vile postures of Aretine, had his eyes
put out by the sentence of the Magistrate.

Henry Golzius was a Hollander, and wanted only a good, and judicious choice to
have rendered him comparable to the profoundest Masters that ever handled the
Burin, for never did any exceed this rare workman; witness, those things of
his after Gasparo Celio, the Gallatea of Raphael Santio, and diverse other
pieces after Polydor da Carravaggio, a Hierom, Nativity, and what he did of the
Acts of the Apostles, with Ph. Galle, etc. but he was likewise an excellent
painter.

George Nouvolstell was of Mentz in Germany, an admirable Graver in Wood: he
published that Aeneas in little, and some Historical parts of the Bible very
well performed; also diverse of the Fathers after Tempesta, besides the
Jerusalemma liberata of Bernardino Castelli in Quarto, with many Cartels of
Arms and Harnesses, and some Pictures to a Breviary, etc.

Matthew Greuter published a curious book of Letters, the City of Rome in an
ample form, and a large Map of Italy; the Old and New Testament, the Church of
Strasburge, an harmony 'twixt the Decalogue and the Lords prayer very
ingeniously represented in Picture, with several other things laudably
performed; But his son.

Frederic did infinitely exceed the Father, as may be seen by those many curious
Gravings which he has cut after Pietro Beretin Corton, and the famous Andrew
Saccus egregious Painters.

Sanredamus did publish many excellent cuts, especially those which he coppied
after Lucas van Leiden, of which we have formerly given a hint for their sakes,
who are collectors of these curiosities, and may not happly be yet arrived to
the judgment of being able to discern them from the Originals; Also some
things after Goltzius.

Cornelius Galle in his St. Priscas Baptism, Papenheim's and other heads after
V. Dyke, has showed what he was able to perform, not to mention abundance of
Frontispeices and other less considerable of his works. But the

Count Cloud^ a Knight of the Palatinat has published, though very few, yet
some stupendous things, especially that of our B. Saviors flight into Egypt
by night, the story of Tobit, and about three or four more worthy of all
admiration.

Swanevelts History of St. John, with diverse Landskips.

Pandern's descent from the Cross, Mattham's Christ and St. Jo^n, a Venus
after Rotenhamer, Pope Innocent X. etc.

Branchorsts rare Etchings, especially those Ruins and Anticalias of Rome: and
superior to all, the incomparable Landskips set forth by Paul Brill (some of
which have been Etched in Aqua fortis by Nieulant) do extremely well merit to
be placed in this our Theater: For to be brief, because we can only recite the
most remarkable and worthy the collection. Mattham is famous for Fruits;
Boethius, or Adam Bols^erd for his Rusticks after Blomaert, Londerselius has
taken excessive pains in his Landskips; and so has Van Velde in some few: but
above all, Nicholas de Bruyn (after Aegidius Coninxlogensis) is wonderful for
Boscage, and the industry of his undertaking works of that large Volume, which
Theodore de Bry (resembling him in name) has been as famous for contracting;
though both of them of a Dutch heavy spirit, and perfectly suting with the
times and places: notwithstanding has this latter performd some things in
little very laudably: Nor with less ingratitude, amongst others may we forget
the Nova reperta of Stradanus by Theodor Galle, who also published the whole
process of making silk of the worm, and certain other works in Manufacture,
all of them represented in Sculpture.

Mallery in his Peccati fomes after Mic. de Vos, has perf^rm'd wonders as to
the subtilty and imperceptible ductus of the Graver.

Bols^ert set forth the Sacra Eremus Asceticarum, after Blomart and others, but
above all is he to be celebrated for those rare heads, and other stories graved
after the Paintings of Rubens and Van Dyke, which for their sakes, who are
dilligent collectors of the renouned persons of the late Age, we shall not
think amiss to mention. Such were the Duchess of Orleans, Arch Duke Albert,
Justus Lypsius, and others after Van Dyke, Lessius and Bellarmine, Jesuits
after Dipenbec: after the same hands did Paulus Pontius grave the head of
Sigismund Kind of Poland, Count Pimentelo, etc. after Rubens, Don phil: de
Gusman, Don Alvar: Buzan an incomparable cut; Don Car. de Colunna, Rubens
picture bare headed, for there is another in a hat: Gasp de Grayer, Simon de
Vos; Maria de Medices, Caesar Alexand, Scaglia, Constable. Hugens the learned
Father of our most ingenious Friend Monsieur Soylecom, so worthily celebrated
for his discoveries of the Annulus about Saturn, the Pendule clocks, and
universal Mathematical Genius. Gasper Garartius the Lawyer; Gasp. Revestyn;
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, Jacobas de Breuch, the Princess of
Brabonson, that rare head of Frederic Henric Prince of Orange, and his own,
with many more after Van Dyke; besides the Jesuit Canisius, R. Urbin Painter,
and others whom he engraved after Diepenbec, etc. And since we mentioned Sir P.
Paul Rubens we may not pretermit those many excellent things of that great
Politician, a learned and extraordinary person, set forth in so many
incomparable Gravings by the admirable works of Suannebourg, the above named
Pontius and Bolswert, Nesse, Vosterman, Vorst, and other rare Masters in this
Art: Such are (to instance in some only) his battle of the Amazons, St. Roch,
our B. Savior composs'd to Burial, the Fight of Lions, his great Crucifix,
Conversion of S. Paul, St. Peter in the ship, a Nativity, the Magi; The bloody
Catastrophe of Cyrus; Solomon's first Sentence; St. Catharines espousals, the
tribute demanded of our Lord; Susanna and the Elders, St. Laurence Martyred;
the Palaces of Genoa; with diverse others to be encountr'd amongst the Merchants
of Prints, whosrequently vend the copies for the originals to the less wary
Chapmen: Chr. Jeghre has cut the Temptation of our Savior in wood very rarely
performed after this great Master: And besides the former mentioned,

Lucas Vosterman, and Vorst are never to be forgotten so long as the memory of
his Scholar Sir Ant Van Dyke is famous, for the heads of Marquess Spinola;
Char. de Mallery, Horatius Gentilescus; Jo. Count of Nasaw, Van Milder; P.
Stevens, and Cor. Sachtleven, which he engraved after a new way, of Etching it
first, and then pointing it (as it were) with the Burine afterward, which
renders those latter works of his as tender as Miniature; and such are the
heads of Van Dyke himself, Jo. Livens, Cor. Schut, Corn. de Vos, Deodat del
Mont, Luca^ van Uden, Jodocus de Momper, Wencest. Coeberger, Painters; Count de
Ossono, Duke of Bavaria, the Arch-Dutchesse Clara, the last Duke of Orleans,
Anton. Connebison, P. Stevens, and many others, together with those other
pieces of History, viz. the Sepulture of Christ, and S. George after Raphael,
Magdalene under the Cross, our B. Savior in his Agony after Carraccio, the
Susanna, St. Laurence, and what but now we mentioned after Rubens, diverse heads
after Holbein, as that of Erasmus, the D of Norfolk, and others of the
Arundelian collection.

Van Vorst, Competitor with Vosterman, has likewise graven a number of Heads
after Vandyke; I shall only name the learned Sr. Kenelme Digby in a
Philosophical habit: our famous Architect Inego Jones, and those two
incomparable figures of Charles the Martyr and his Royal Consort the Q Mother
now living: And to show what honor was done this Art by the best of Painters,

Sr. Ant. Vandyke did himself etch diverse things in A. Fortis: especially a
Mad^na, Ecce Homo, Titian and his Mistress, Erasmus Roterodamus, and touched
several of the heads before mentioned to have been engraved by Vosterman.

After this great Masters paintings, did Peter de Jode grave the Effigies of
Genovefa Widow to Car. Alex. Duke of Croi, Paulus Helma^ius; the Learned
Puteanus; the Bishop of Gendt; the face whereof is thought to be Etched by V.
Dyke himself; he graved Jo. Snellinx a Painter: besides a book of designing
very rare; and the many other prints after his Master Goltzius (whose Disciple
he was) which both Peter, and his Son of the same name, have engraved for
Monsieur Bon Enfant of Paris, etc.

Colaert graved some things rarely in steel.

S^iiderhoef has engraven the heads of most of the Learned Dutch, after several
painters with good success: as those of Heinsius, Grotius, Barleus, etc. not
forgeting that stupendous Lady Anna Maria a Scureman, etc.

Jo. Baurs has designed his Battails with a fine Spirit, but without care in
the etching.

Vander Thulden published the whole History of Ulysses, being the work of the
Famous Primaticco at Fontain Bleau Etched also in A. F. and so designed, as few
pretenders to this Art did ever exceed him: And so, as we but lately mentioned,
are the papers of the inimitable Suanebourge which strike a ravishing effect in
^ll that beheld them, for the admirable tenderness, and rare conduct of the
hatches; especially those which he cut after the drawings of Abraham Blomaert,
and Rubens.

But now that we mention Blomaert, whose works we have celebrated in general,
because they smell something of a Dutch spirit, though otherwise well engraven;
There is at Rome (if we mistake not) a Son of his named Cornelius, who in that
S. Francis after Guedo Reni, and those other pieces after the design of those
great Masters Mounsieur Poussine, Pietro Cortone, etc. to be seen in the books
set forth by the Jesuit Ferrarius, his Hesperides, Flora, Aedes Barberini, etc.
has given ample Testimony how great his abilities are; for, certainly, he has
in some of these stamps arrived to the utmost perfection of the Bolino, though
some Workmen will hardly allow him this Elogie. But those things which the
incomparable Natalis a Ligeois, (and therefore reckoned here amongst the
Germans) pass without the least contradiction for the utmost effort of that
instrument. Such are that St. Catharines Espousalls after Bourdon, which seems
to be a very piece of Painting: The two Madonas in contest with Poilly: The
Thesis; and the chapter of the Carthusians, all after the Life and his own
design, a stupendous work: also the heads of Jacob Catz one of ^^e States of
Holl. painted by Dubordieu; and some few things more, as the exactness and
Curiosity of what he undertakes requires, sufficient to discover the admirable
perfection of this great Artist: For we do not mention several Frontispieces
which he has likewise engraven, with equal Industry.

Ferdinand has besides many others, graved after the same Bourdon, the story of
Ulysses and Andromache:

Uriese* and Verden are famous for their perspectives.

Winegard his Roman Vestigia, etc.

William Hondius, besides those things which adorn his Mapps, which are the
largest Planispheres, has very rarely engraven his own Head, after a painting
of Vandyke: nor with less Art has Va^kessel done that of Charles the fifth
after Titian: Clovet Car. Scribonius the Jesuits.

Caukern has graven the story of that pious Daughter, who gave suck to her
imprisoned Father; a fight of Bo^res, with diverse others after Rubens and
Vandyke, etc. besides those which are extant in Mr. Oglebyes Homer, Bible, my
Lord of New-Castles Cavalerizzo, etc. designed by Deipenbec, whose rare Talent,
that Theater, or Temple o^ the Muses published by that Curiously Learned, and
Universal Collector of prints, the Abbot of Villoin, (of whom we shall have
occasion to discourse in the next Chapter) does sufficiently illustrate.

Lucas Kilianus has rarely graved the Murder of the Innocents; the Miracles of
the fish; Annuntiation, Circumcision, and some Plates in the Hortus
Eystettensis, etc.

Vischer, viz. Cornelius (for there is another who has published diverse
Landskips) has most rarely Etched a certain Dutch Kitchen, where there is an
old Man taking Iobacco, whilst his Wife is a frying of pancakes: also a Fiddler
accompanied with boys and girls, painted by Ostade: but above all, admirable
is the descent, or Christus Mortuus after Tintoret, both engraved and Etch'd, as
indeed, I should have said of the rest.

Vovillemont has Etched our Saviors chasing the sacrilegious Merchants out of
the Temple after the same Tintoret; which is very rare.

Nolp the twelve months, especially the boystrous March.

Lombart, many plates for Mr. Oglebyes Virgil; as likewise that industrious
Interpreters Picture after our famous Mr. Lilly, in which he has performed
laudably: Nor must I here forget Mr. Hertoc who has engraved the Frontispiece for
(...), in fol. and that of this Treatise, with many other.

To these we may add the incomparable Reinbrand, whose Etchings and gravings
are of a particular spirit; especially the old Woman in the furr: The good
Samaritane, the Angels appearing to the Shepherds; diverse Landskips and heads
to the life; St. Hierom, of which there is one very rarely graven with the
Burine; but above all, his Eece Homo; descent from the Cross in large; Philp,
and the Eunuch, etc.

Winceslaus Hollar a Gentleman of Bohemia, comes in the next place, not that he
is not before most of the rest for his choice and great industry (for we rank
them very promiscuously both as to time and pre-eminence) but to bring up the
Rear of the Germans with a deserving person; whose indefatigable works in Aqua
Fortis do infinitely recommend themselves by the excellent choice which he has
made of the rare things furnished out of the Arundelian collection; and from
most of the best hands, and designs; for such were those of Leonardo da Vinci;
(...). Parmensis, Titian, Jul. Romano, A. Mantenio, Corregio, Peri^o del Vago,
A. Urbin, Seb. del Piombo, Palma, Alb. Darer, Hans Holbein, Vandike, Rubens,
Bereugle, Bassan, Aelsheimer, Brower, Ar^ois, and diverse other Masters of prime
note, whose Drawings and Paintings he has faithfully copied; besides several
books of Landskips, Towns, Solemnities, Histories, Heads, Beasts, Fouls,
I^sects, Vessels, and other signal pieces, not omiting what he has Etched
after De Clyne, Mr. Streter, and Dankert, for Sr. Phil. Stapletons Juvenal, Mr.
Ross his Silius, Polyglotta Biblia, the Monasticon, first and second part, Mr.
Dugdales Paul's, and Survey of Warwickshire, with other innumerable
Frontispieces, and things by him published and done after the life; and to be (
e^ nom^ne) more valued and esteemed, then where there has been more curiosity
about Chimaeras, and things which are not in Nature: so that of Mr. Hollars
works we may justly pronounce, there is not a more useful, and instructive
Collection to bemade.

The learned Hevelius has showed his admirable dexterity in this Art, by the
several Phases and other Ichonisms which adorn his Selenographi, and is
therefore one of the noblest instances of the extraordinary use of this Talent,
for men of Letters, and that would be accurate in the Diagramms which they
publish in their works.

The no less knowing Anna Maria a Schurman is likewise skilled in this Art,
with innumerable others even to a Prodigy of her Sex. For the rest, we shall
only call over their names, after we have celebrated the extravagant fancies of
both the Breugles, as those of the seven deadly sins, Satirical pieces against
the Nuns and Friars; with diverse Histories, Drolleries, Landskips, fantastic
Grylles and Grotesqus of these two rare Rhyparographs; not farther to tire our
Reader with the particulars and several works of Ostade, Corn, Clock, Queborne,
Custos, le Delfe, (who has put forth the Pourtraicts of many learned persons)
Dors, Falck, Gerard, Bens, Moestuer, Grebber, Geldorp, Hopfer, Gerard, Bens,
Chein, Ach: d' Egmont, de Vinghe, Heins, Ditmer, Cronis, Lindoven, Mirevel,
Kager, Coccien, Maubease, Venius, Firens, Pierets, Quelinus, Stachade, Sehut,
Soutman, Vanulch, Broon, Valdet, whom we expressly omit; because we have
introduced a sufficient number, and that this chapter is already too prolix.

Only we would not omit Min Here Biscop a learned advocate now of Holland, who
for his story of Joseph and Benjamin, where the cup is found in his sack, and
those other few cuts among the hands of the curious, must not be passed over in
oblivion; as we had like to have done some of the old, and best Masters by
having hitherto omitted.

Druefken his King of the Boors in Hungaria, eaten alive by the Rebels whom he
seduced; with some other cuts in wood known by his mark, which was commonly a
cluster of Grapes:

Pieter Van Aelst, his Cavalcad of the Grand Signior to Sancta Sophia, and
several Turkish habits, on which subject also

Swart Jan Van Groennighen has set forth many remarkable things, Caravanns,
Pilgrimages to Mecha, etc.

Lucas Cranach, Tiltings, Huntings, German Habits, and the portraicts of all
the Dukes of Saxony to his time:

Joos Ammanus (whom we already mentioned) diverse of the Mechanic Arts; not
omitting all those excellent Wood Cuts of Hans Schin^lyn and Adam Altorf,
especially this last, known by the two Capital AA of the Gotick form included
one within the other, as the D is in that of Albert Durers.

^^bert Goltzius has cut in wood a book of the Roman Emperors in two Colors;
this name recals to mind an omission of ours in some of those excellent
Chalcographers already recorded, and in particular, the incomparable imitations
of Henry Goltzius after Lucas Van Leyden in the Passion, the Christus mortuus
or Pieta; and those other six pieces, in each of which he so accurately pursues
Durer, Lucas, and some others of the old Masters, as makes it almost imposble
to discern the ingenious fraud.

We did not speak of the heads of the famous men in the Court of the Emp. set
forth by Aegid. Sadeler; as Raphael (his Brother) had the Bavaria Sancta,
representing all the Saints of that pious Country.

Albert Durer's Tenerdack or Romantic description of the Amors of Maximilian
and Maria de Burgundy: the book is in High Dutch: He has likewise cut Petrachs
Utriusque Fortunae Remedia, which admirable treatise being translated into the
German Language, is adorned with the Gravings of Hans Sibald Bheem, Ammanus,
Aldegrave, and most of the rare Masters of that age: Finally, he has cut the
stories of Apuleius his golden Ass: and sprinkled diverse pretty inventions and
Capriccios in an old impression of Cicero's Epistles: And with this
recollection of what we had omitted in the foregoing Paragraphs (to which they
are reducible) we will take leave of the Dutch Sculptors, and pass on to

The French who challenge the next place in this Recension, for their gravings
in Taille Douce, which began to be in reputation after Rosso the Florentine
painter had been invited and Caressed by that Worthy and illustrious Mecaenas
of the Arts, Francis the first: about which time Petit Bernard of Lions
published the stories for the Bible of St. Hierom, performing such things in
little, for the Design and Ordinance as are worthy of imitation: so greatly he
approch'd the Antique in the garb of his Figures, Distances, Architecture, and
other accessories of the Story: We have some of these engraven by this Artist,
and printed long since at Lions, with the Argument under each cut, in the
English verse of those times, which appears to have been done about the
beginning of the Reformation, when, it seems, men were not so much scandalized
at holy representations.

Nicholas Beatricius a Loraneze graved his Horse conflicts, and several books
of Animals, and Wildbeasts. The Widows son raised to life, the Annuntiation
after M. Angelo, the Ark of the Catholic Church after that rare Table of
M^saic in S. Peter's of Giotto, etc.

Phillippus Thomasinus labors are worthy of eternity, so excellent was his
choice, so accurate his graver; witness the fall of Lucifer, the universal
judgment, the ship we but now mentioned; the seven works of mercy; B. Felix,
the Miracles of the Capucines, the Statues of Rome in little; the labors of
many famous persons; the baptism of our Savior, after Salviati; St. John the
Evangelist in the boiling Oil; St. Stevens Lapidation after Ant. Pomarancio;
the Magi of Zuccharo; Mary presented in the Temple, of Barroccio; the life of
St. Catharine; Fama, diverse sea Monsters after Bernardino Passero; and some
things of Vanni; not to omit his Camea collected from several curious Achates
and other precious stones, besides Shields, Trophies, Gordian Knots, with
variety of instruments and other works too long here to recite minutely.

Chrispinus de Pas and his sister Magdalen (whither French or Dutch) have
engraven many excellent things after Breugle; especially Landskips; the
persecution of the Prophets and Apostles, with several more: But that Liberum
Belgium by Simon de Pas his Father, or Brother (I know not whither) dedicated
to Prince Maurice of Naussaw is a very rare cut.

Who has not beheld with admiration the incomparable Burine of Claudius Melan,
celebrated by the great Gassendus, and employ^d by the most noble and learned
Perieskius? The Sudarium of St. Veronica, where he has formed a head as big as
the life it self with one only line, beginning at the point of the Nose, and so
by a spiral turning of the Graver finishing at the utmost hair, is a prodigy of
his rare Art and invention; because it is wholly new, and performed with
admirable dexterity: Nor has he less merited for his St. Francis, St. Bruno;
the pointed Magdalen, Pope Urbane the VIII. and diverse others to the life,
especially those of the Illustrious Justiniani, Perieskius, and the several
frontispieces to those truly Royal works, Poets, and other Authors printed at
the Loure.

Mauperch has published some pretty Landskips; La Poutre many most useful
varieties and Ornaments for Architects, and other Workmen; Florid, and full of
Fancy; especially the ceremonies at the Coronation of the present French King.

Morine, has left us a St. Bernard, a S^ul, his great Crucifix; some rare
Heads; especially that representing our B. Savior and other things in A.
Fortis, performed with singular Art, and tenderness; as also some rare
Landskips and Ruins after P^lemburch and others.

N. Chaperon has etched the Xystus or Gallery of Raphael in the Vatican, with
incomparable success, as to the true draught: and so has that excellent
painter the late

Francis Perier those Statues and Bass-relievos of Rome, preferrable to any
that are yet extant.

Adrans St. Catharine after Titian who is not ravished with?

Couvay has engraven the three devout Captive Knights, and what may appear very
extraordinary, ut quae celant nomina caelatura aperiat, the first part of
Despauterius's Grammar in picture, or Hieroglyphic for the Duke of Anjou the
now Monsieur.

Perel has discovered a particular talent for Landskips, if not a little
exceeded in the darkness of his shades: but his ruins of Rome are very rare:
he has likewise a son that graves.

The excellency of invention in the Romances, and Histories adorned by the hand
of Chauveau is not to be passed by; especially those things which he has done
in the Entretienne de Beaux Esprits of Monsieur De Marests, and in several
others.

But the pieces which Poilly has set forth, may be ranked (as they truly merit)
amongst the greatest Masters we have hitherto celebrated: such as (for instance
in a few) That admirable Theses with the Portraict of Cardinal Richlieu; and in
emulation with the formerly named Natalis, (besides the St. Catharine of
Bourdon) those things which he has graved after Migniar, which are really
incomparable, also diverse Histories after le Brun, etc.

But we should never have done with the Artists of this fruitful and inventive
Country as Heince, Begnon, Huret, Bernard, Rognesson, Rouslet, a rare workman,
witness his Frontispiece to the French Polyglotta Bible designed by Bourdon
and lately put forth; Bellange, Richet,l' Alman, Quesuel, Soulet, Bunel, the
laudable Boucher, Briot, Boulauge, Bois, Champagne, Charpignon, Corneille,
Caron, Claud de Lorain, Andran, Moutier, Rabel, Denisot, L'aune, Dela Rame^
Hayes, Herbin, David de Bie, Villemont, Marot excellent for his buildings and
Architecture; Toutin, Grand-homme, Cereau, Trochel, Langot du Loir, L' Enfant
Disciple of Melan; Gaultier, D' Origni, Prevost, De Son, Perei, Nacret, Perret,
Daret, Scalberge, Vibert; Ragot who has graved some things well after Rubens,
Boissart, Terelin, De leu; Besides Mauperche for Histories, L' Asne who has
engraved above 300 Portraicts to the life, and is a rare Artist: Huret, full of
rich invention; not omitting the famous Gravers of Letters and Calligraphers,
such as are Le Gagneur, Lucas Materot, Frisius, Duret, Pauce, Le Beaugran,
Beaulieu, Gougenot, Moulin, Raveneau, Jea, Jaques de His, Moreau, Limosin, La
Be, Vignon, Barbe'd Or and a world of others whose works we have not had the
fortune to see: For as heretofore; so especially at present, there is no
country of Europe which may contend with France for the numbers of such as it
daily produces, that excel in the art of Chalcography, and triumph with the
Burine.

La Hyre has Etched many things after the Antique, as Bacchanalia's and several
other.

Goyrand is second to none for those Towns and Ruins, which he has published,
especially what he has performed in Aedibus Barberini.

Colignon no less excellent in his gravings after Lincler.

And Cochin in those large Charts and sieges of Towns after the Ingeneer
Beaulieu: But

Israel Sylvester is the Hollar of France: For there is hardly a Town, Castle,
Noblemans house, Garden or Prospect in all that vast and goodly Kingdom which
he has not set forth in AF. besides diverse parts and views of Italy: above all
in those which are etched after the designs of Monsieur Lincler (whilst he
lived my worthy Friend) as the City of Rome in Profile; a morcel of St. Peter's
by it self; and that prospect of the Loure, which last does far transcend the
rest of his works, and may be esteemed one of the best of that kind which the
World has extant, for the many perfections that assemble in it.

There is at present Robert Nanteuil an ingenious person, and my particular
friend, whose Burine renders him famous through the World: I have had the
happiness to have my Portraict engraven by his rare Burine; and it is
therefore estimable, though unworthy of the honor of being placed amongst the
rest of those Illustrious persons, whom his hand has rendered immortal. For
such are the French King, the Queens of Poland and Sweden; Cardinal Mazerin,
whose Effigies he has graven no less then nine times to the life: The Duke of
Longueville; D. of Boullion, Mantoa, Marishal, Thurene; President Jeannin,
Molle, Telier, Ormesson, the Archbishop of Tours, Bishop of S. Malo: L'Abbe
Fouquet, and diverse others of the long Robe: Also Monsieur Hesselin, Menage,
Scuderi, Chaplain, Marolles, and the rest of the wits; in sum, almost all the
great persons of note in France.

But that we may conclude this Recension with such as have most excelled in
this Art, and give the utmost Reputation it is capable of. Jaques Callot, a
Gentleman of Lorrain, (if ever any) a^tain'd to its sublimity, and beyond which
it seems not possible for humane industry to reach; especially, for Figures in
little; though he have likewise published some in great as boldly, and masterly
performed as can possibly be imagined: what a loss it has been to the
Virtuosi, that he did not more delight in those of a greater Volume; such as
once he graved at Florence, do sufficiently testify, and which likewise have
exalted his incomparable Talent to the supreamest point: It might not seem
requisite to minute the works which he has published; because they are so
universally excellent, that a curious Person should have the whole Collection,
(and be careful that he be not imposed upon by the copies which are frequently
vended under his name; especially those which Monsieur Bosse has published, and
which nearest approach him) were it not highly injurious to his merit, not to
mention some of the Principal; Such are his St. Paul, Ecce homo; the Demoniac
cured, after Andrea Boscoli; a Madon^ after Andrea del Sarto; the four
Comaedians, all these of the larger Volumne, and some of them with the Burine.
Also the passage of the Israelites: St. Lukes Fair dedicated to Cosmo di
Medices, a most stupendous work considered in all its Circumstances, and
encounters: so full of spirit and invention, that upon several attempts to do
the like, it is said, he could never approach it; so much (it seems) he did in
that piece exceed even himself.

This is also well Copied: the History of the B. Virgin in 14 leaves, the
Apostles in great, the murder of the holy Innocents, an incomparable work, and
almost exceeding our description, as to the smalness, life, per^ection and
multitude of Figures expressed in it. The story of the Prodigal: the life and
death of our Savior in 20 small Ovals very rarely performed. The Martyrdom of
the Apostles in 16 leaves worthy of admiration: The passion of our Savior in 7
larger cuts: St. Anthonies temptation, prodigious for the fancy and invention:
St. Mansuetus raising a dead Prince, a Bishop preaching in a wood: Diverse books
of Landskips and sea pieces: Especially those admirable cuts of his in a book
entitled Trattato di terra Santa, wherein most of the Religious Places of
Jerusalem, Temples, Prospects etc. about the Holy Land are graved to the life
by the hand of this excellent Master; The Book is very rare and never to be
encountr'd amongst the collection of his Prints. The Duke of Lorrains Palace
and Garden at Nancy: also another paper of a Tournament there, both of them
most rare things: Military exercises; The miseries of war in 18 leaves very
choice: The battle of Theseus, Combat at the Barriere, entrance of the great
Duke with all the Scenes and representations at the Duke of Florences nuptials:
the Catafalco errected at the Emp. Matthias's death: the famous Seige at Rochel
a very large print: also the night piece of the Cheats and Wenches at play:
Mascarades, Gobbi, Beggars, Gypsyes, Balli and Dances, Fantasies, Capriccios,
Jubilatio Triumphi B. Virginis, which was it seems engraved for a Thesis; and
finally the Cabaret; or meeting of Debauchees, which (being the last plate that
ever he engraved) had not the Aqua ^ortis given it 'till after his decease: And
thus we have in brief posted over the stupendous works of this inimitable
Master, whose point and manner of etching was nothing inferior, nay sometimes
even exceeded the most skilful Burine. But at length Sit pudor and finis, I
desist, and shall here conclude the recital of the French Chalcographers so
many for their numbers, laborious in their works, and luxurious of their
inventions, after we have done reason to Monsieur Bosse, who has made him self
so well known by his most accurate imitation of Callot, besides the many rare
things he has himself published. It were altogether unpardonable, that such as
would accomplish themselves in Etching, should be destitute of his entire work;
especially those of his latter manner performed in single and masterly strokes,
without decussations and cross hatchings, in emulation of the Graver. Those
Vignets, Fleurons, capital letters, Puti, and Compartiments made to adorn the
Royal impressions at the Loure are worthy of celebration; because it is
impossible for the nea^est Burine to excel his points and Eschoppes; and for
that it is to him that we have been chiefly obliged for a Treatise which we had
prepared of the practical, and Mechanical part of this Art of Chalcography,
whereof I have already given account elsewhere: it is to the same Monsieur du
Bosse that the world is beholden for his ingenuity in publishing many other
rare and useful Arts assistant to Architecture, Dyalling, squaring of stones,
and encountering the difficulties of the Free-Mason, besides, those excellent
Treatis^s of perspeocti^e, which from the dictates of Monsieur des Argues, he
has so laudably communicated: This, and much more we owe to this honest Man's
^ame and particular friendship.

And lastly, the excellent Chart-Gra^ers may not be totally excluded of this
Catalogue; because it is a particular address, and, of late, infinitely
improved by the care of l'avernier, Sa^son, the Jes^it Briets, de la Rue, d^
Val, graven by Co^dier, Ri^iers Peroni and others; not forgetting the most
industrious Bleau of Amsterdam, who have published the Atlas's, and other
pieces which celebrate their names to posterity, and such an undertaking has
the Ingeneere Gomboust performed in his Ichnographical plan of Paris lately set
forth, being the result of near a five years continual labor of measuring,
plotting, and observing, to render it the most accomplished, and testify to
what use, and perfection this noble Art is arrived: This we the more readily
mention, that thereby we may stimulate and encourage the lovers of their
Country, freely to contribute to the like attempt of the above mentioned Mr.
Hollar, and enable him to proceed with what is now under his hand, for the
honor of our imperial City.

And now it is certainly time that we should think of home a little, and
celebrate likewise some of our own Countrymen, who have worthily merited with
their Graver. And although we may not yet boast of such multitudes by reason of
the late unhappy differences, which have disturbed the whole Nation,
endeavoring to level Princes, and lay the Mecaenas's of This, and all other
Arts in the dust; yet had we a Pain for his Ship, some heads to the life,
especially that of Dr. Alabaster, Sir Ben. Rudyard, and several other things, A
Caecil, and a Wright little inferior to any we have enumerated for the
excellency of their Burines and happy design; as at present we have Mr.
Faithorne, Mr. Barlow, Gaywood, Loggan and others who have done excellently
both with the Graver, and in Aqua fortis, especially in those birds and beasts
which adorn the Apologues of Aesope published by Mr. Oglebie; and of Mr.
Faithorne, we have that Christ after Raphael from some excellent Master, as big
as the life: a Madona, Chr. Joseph and a Lamb after La Hyre a very good
painter; The Effigies of my Lord Viscount Mordaunt, Sir W. Paston, and his
Lady, with several others after Van dyke, Honiman, etc.

Lightfoot ^ath a very curious Graver, and special talent for the neatness of
his stroke, little inferior to Wrex; and has published two or three Madonas
with much applause: Also Glover diverse heads; as at present J. Fellian Disciple
of Mr. Faithorne, who is a hopeful young man: Lastly, for Medails and Intaglias
we have Mr. Symonds, Rawlius, Restrick, Johns^n and some others, whose works in
that kind have hardly been exceeded in these later times; not omitting the
industrious Mr. Coker, Gery, Gething, Billingly, etc. who in what they have
published for Letters and Flourishes are comparable to any of those Masters
whom we have so much celebrated amongst the Italians and French for Calligraphy
and fair writting: We have likewise Switzer for cutting in Wood, the son of a
Father who sufficiently discovered his dexterity in the He^bals set forth by
Mr. Parkinson, Lobel, and diverse other works with due commendation, not to
mention the rest, as yet unknown to us by their names, from whose industry we
are yet to hope for excellent progress.

We do therefore here make it our suite to them, as what would extremely
gratify the curious, and Virtuosi universally, that they would endeavor to
publish such ex^^^ent things as both his Majesty and diverse of the Noblesse of
this Nation have in their possession; and to which there is no ingenious person
that will be denied access; since if there Collections were well engr^ven and
dispersed about the World, it would not only exceedingly advance their profit,
and reputation; but bring them likewise into a good manner of Designing, which
is the very life of this Art, and rend^r our Nation famous abroad, for the many
excellent things which it has once again (by the blessing of God, and the
Ge^ius of our most Illustrious Prince) recovered; Especially, if joined to
this, such as exceed in the talent, would ent^rtain us with more Land^kips, and
views of the Environs, Approches and Prospects of our nobly situated
Metropolis, Gree^rich, (...) and other Parts upon the goodly T^ames; and in
which (as we said) Mr. Hollar has so worthily m^rited, and other Countries
abound with, to the immense refreshment of the Curious, and Honor of the
industrious Artist: and such we farther wish, might now and then be encouraged
to travail into the Levantine parts; Indies East and West; from whose hands we
might hope to receive innumerable, and true Designs drawn after the life, of
those surprising Landskips, memorable Places, Cities, Isles, Trees, Plants,
Flowers, and Animals, etc. which are now so lamely, and so wretchedly
presented, and obt^uded upon us by the Ignorant, and for want of abilities to
reform them.

And thus we have (as briefly as the subject would admit) finish^d what we had
to offer concerning the original and Progress of this noble Art: Not, but that
there may have been many excellent Masters omitted by us, whose names were
worthy of Record; But because they did not occur, at the writing hereof, and
that we have already introduced a competent, and sufficient number to give
reputation to the Art, and verify our Institution. For the rest, if we have
somewhat exceeded the limits of a Chapter (comparing it with those which did
pr^ceed) it has not been without Prospect had to the benefit of such as will be
glad of instruction how to direct their choice in collecting of what is
curious, worthy their procuring, and as the Italian calls them, di buon gusto:
For we are far from opining with those, who fly at all without judgment or
election. In sum, it were to be wished, that all our good painters would
enrich our collections with more of their Studies and Ordonances, and not
despise the putting of their hands now and then to the Graver: We have given
instances of great Masters who excelled in both; and the Draught, if it be
good, does sufficiently commute for the other defects, or what it may seem to
want in the neatness, and accurate conducting of the Hatches; since by this
means, we should be stored with many rare Designs, Touches, and Inventions,
which for being only in Crayone, are casual, and more obnoxious to accidents;
and can be communicated but to those few, who have the good fortune to obtain
their Papers; and (which is yet more rare) the happiness to understand, as
well as to talk of them.

CHAP. V. Of Drawing, and Design praevious to the Art of Chalcography; and of
the use of Pictures in Order to the Education of Children.
AS the Rules of Measure and Proportion have an universal influence upon all
the Actions of our lives; it was a memorable, and noble saying of a great
Person of our Nation, discoursing to us once concerning the dignity of
Painting, and the arts which attend it: Thomas Earl of (...) l. Matthew. of
England.
That one who co^ld not Design a little, would never make an honest man: How
that observation succeeds in the general, we have not made it much our
observation; but this we are bold to pronounce. That he shall never attain to
the excellency of a good Chalcographer, who is not more then ordinarily skilled
in the faculty and art of Drawing; a thing so highly necessary, that Donatellus
was wont to tell his Disciples (discoursing sometimes concerning the
accomplishment of this Art) that to de^^ver it in a single word, he would say,
DESIGN; because it was the very Bans and Foundation, not only of this, but
even of all those free and noble Sciences of Fortification, Architecture,
Perspe^^ive, and whatsoever also pretended to any affinity with the
Mathematics, as really leading the Van, and perfective of them all.

But to treat Methodically of this, or as we have already enlarged in the
History and Progress of Chalcography, and the surviving labors of the most
renowned Masters, would require no less time and pains: It were indeed a
noble, curious, and useful work, but almost impossible to accomplish; because
the Original Drawings of the great Masters, being dispersed amongst the hands
of the greatest Princes, and men of Science only, are preserved with jealousy,
and est^em'd, as so many Jewels of greater value, then those of Pearls and
Diamonds. For some of them being the very last works, though but imperfect
draughts of so Excellent Artists; they have for the most part been in greater
esteem, then even those of larger bulk and more finished; as Pliny instances
in the Iris of Aris^ides, the Medea of Timomachus, and some others; because (as
he there speaks) such touches did even express the very thoughts and prime
conception of the Workman, as well as the Lineaments which he presents us; and
that there is a certain compassion in our Natures, which indears them to us, so
as we cannot but love, and desire the hands which perished in the midst of such
famous pieces: Add to this, their inimitable Antiquity, then which (according
to Q^intilian) nothing does more recommend things to us, from a certain
Authority which it universally carries with it; (...)
so as we seem to review what they did of old in this kind; as if (with
Liba^ius) the Gods had imparted something of extraordinary to the Masters of
the Ages past, which the nature of man is not now capable of attaining.

These difficulties therefore considered, it will not be required of us in this
Chapter, which pretends to celebrate and promote the Art of Drawing, and
Design, only as it has relation, and is an absolute requisite to that of
Chalcography, and to prescribe some directions and encouragements, which may
prepare and fit the hand with a competent address^ therein.

Whether Design, and Drawing, were the production of Chance or Excogitation, we
determine not; certain it is that practice and experience was its Nurse and
perficient; by some thus defined to be A visible expression of the Hand
resembling the conception of the mind: By which Definition there are who
distinguish it from Drawing both as to its Original, and Formality; For Design
(say they) is of things not yet appearing; being but the picture of Ideas only;
whereas Drawing, relates more to Copies, and things already extant: In sum, as
the Historian differs from the Poet, and Horace has well expressed it, --
Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Art Poet.



We could easily admit this Art to have been the most ancient, and with
Philostratus, (...), of kin even to Nature her self: But to take it some what
lower, there goes a tradition, that some ingenious Shepherd was the inventor
of it, who espying the shadow of one of his sheep on the Ground (interposed
between him and the culminating, or declining sun) did with the end of his
crook, trace out the Profile upon the dust: and truly some such vulgar accident
(for chance has been a fruitful Mother) might first probably introduce it;
however afterward subtiliz'd upon and cultivated, till it at length arrived to
that degree of excellency and esteem, which it has happily gained, and so long
continued.

But to quit these nicer investigations, and proceed to some thing of use, as
it concerns the Title of this chapter: The first and principal manner of
Drawing is that with the pen; the next with Crayon, whither black, white, red
or any of the intermedial colors, upon paper either white or colored: We will
not say much concerning washing with the pencil, or ^ubbing in the shades with
(...) and dry Compositions, because it is not t^^l our Disciple be a consummat
Artist, that he can be edified with designs of this nature, and, after which,
they are of excellent use and effect.

The pen is theref^re both the first, and best instructive, and has then (as
all the other kinds) attained its desired end, when it so deceives the eye by
the Magic, and innocent Witchcraft of lights and shades, that elevated, and
solid bodies in Nature, may seem swelling, and to be embossed in Plano, by Art.

To arrive at this, you must first draw the exact lineaments, and proportion of
the subject you would express in prosile, Contours and single lines only; and
afterward, by more frequent, and tender hatches in the lighter places, strong,
bold, or cross in the deeper.

By Hatching is understood a continual Series, or succession of many lines,
shorter, or longer; close, or more separate; oblique, or direct, according as
the work requires, to render it more, or less enlightened; and is attained by
practice with a swift, even and dextrous hand; though sometimes also, by the
help of the rule and compass; every man being not an A^elles or Pyrgoteles to
work without them. Now the best expedient to gain a mastery in this Address,
will be to imitate such prints, and cuts, as are most celebrated for this
perfection: Such (amongst plenty of others) are those of Henry Goltzius: The
Sadelers, Harman, Sanredam, Vosterman, and above all, that rare book of Jacomo
Palma graven by Odoardo Fialetti: Of the more Modern, the incomparable Natalis,
Nanteuil, Poilly, Cornel. Blomaert; These for the Burin: For Etching, Callot,
Morine and Bosse; especially in those his latter pieces, which have so nearly
approached the Graver. After these, let our Learner design the several members
of bodies a part, and then united, with entire Figures and Stories, till he be
able to compose something of his own, which may support the examination of
qualified Judges. But the (...) or first draughts of these; would not be with
too great curiosity, and the several minutiae that appear in many Coppies; but
with a certain free and judicious negligence, rather aiming at the Original,
then paining of your self with overmuch exactness: for nocere saepe nimiam
diligentiam, was an old observation; and therefore the ancient Painters (says
Philostratus) more esteemed a certain true and liberal Draught, then the
neatness of the Figure, as he expresses it in Amphiaraus's Horse, sweating
after the conflict; since Drawings and Designs are not to be like Polycletus's
Canon, which took its several parts, from as many perfect bodies, by a studied,
and most accurate Symmetrie: It shall suffiice that the prime conceptions of
our Artist be performed with less constraint; a coal or pensil of black-lead
will serve the turn, reserving the stronger, and deeper touches for a second
pass of the hand over your work; and last of all, penning the Contours, and out
lines with a more even and acute touch, neatly finishing the hatches with a
resolute, constant and slowing hand; especially, as it approaches to the
fainter shadows, terminating them in lost and misty extremes, and thwarted (if
you will counter-hatch) at equal, and uniform intervals (but not till the first
be dry) or, if with single strokes (which to us renders the most natural, and
agreeable effects) with full, deep hatches, and their due diminishings.

But it would happily be objected, that these accurate Designs of the pen, were
never esteemed among the nobler parts of Drawing, as for the most part
appearing to finnicall, stiff and constrained: To this, we reply; that the
remark is not impertinent, as commonly we find by experience: But it has not
proceeded from the least defect in the Instr^ment, but from that of the Artist,
whose aptitude is not yet arrived to that perfection which is requisite, and
does infallibly confirm, and dispose the hand to whatever it addresses;
affording so great a delight and satisfaction to some excellent Workmen, as
that they never desired to advance further, then this Triumph of the pen, which
has celebrated their names, and equaliz'd their renown with that of the most
famous Painters: For such were (in this nature) the incomdarable Drawings of
Don Giulio Clov^o, Albert Durer, Passarotto, yea Titian himself, when the
fancy took him: The forementioned Goltzius, especially, for his Diana
sleeping, drawn with a pen on a cloth prim'd in oil, which was sometimes sold
at Amsterdam for 200 pounds; and that laborious, and most stupendous work of
his, now part of his Majesty's collection, where he has drawn with the pen upon
an heightning of Oil, a Venus Cupid, Satyr, and some other figures, as big as
the life it self, with a boldness, and dexterity incomparable: and such are
some things which we have seen done by Signior Thomaso a Florentine; our
ingenious friend Mr. Vander Douse (descended of that noble Janus Dousa, whose
learning, and courage the great Scaliger, and Grotius have so worthily
celebrated) now in the Court of England. To these we add Rob. Nanteuil at
Paris, and of our own Countrymen, those eight, or ten Drawings by the pen of
Francis, and John Cleyn, two hopeful, (but now desceased) Brothers, after
those great Cartoons of Raphael, containing the stories of the Acts of the
Apostles, where in a fraternal emulation, they have done such work, as was
never yet exceeded by mortal men, either of the former, or present Age; and
worthy they are of the honor, which his Majest^ has done their memories, by
having purchased these excellent things out of Germany, whither they had been
transported, or, at least intended: There is likewise one Mr. Francis Carter
(now in Italy) not to be forgotten amongst those whose pens deserve to be
celebrated: But it is not here that we are to expa^iate far on this particular,
as designing a Chapter only, much less shall we have leisure to proceed to
black, and white Chalk (as they call it) upon coulour'd paper, in which those
many incomparable, and Original Drawings of the old and great Masters are yet
extant, wherein a middle Color wrought upon two extremes, produces (on an
instant) that wonderful, and stupendous roundness, and exstancy, which the
Pen is so long in doing, though, so infallible a guide to its well doing; that
having once attained the command of that instrument, all other Drawings
whatsoever, will seem most easy and delightful: Neither shall it then be
requisite to continue that exactness, since all Drawing is but as an Handmaid
and Attendant to what you would either Grave or paint.

But by this perfection and dexterity at first, did even those renouned
Masters, Julio, Parmegian, and sometimes Polyder, himself (not to insist on
Rubens and Vandyke) proceed, whose Drawings in this kind, when first they made
their studies in Italy, were exceedingly curious, and finished; though in all
their more recent, and ma^urer Designs, rather judicious then exact, because
of that time which such minute finishings did usually take up; and, that when
all is done, it is still but a Drawing, which indeed conduces to the making of
profitable things, but is it self none.

Yet so highly neceslary is this of Drawing to all who pretend to these noble,
and refined Arts; that for the securing of this Foundation, and the promotion
and encouragement of it, the greatest Princes of Europe, have erected
Academies, furnished with all conveniences, for the exercise, and improvement
of the Virtuosi: Such illustrious and noble Genius's were Cosimo di Medices,
Francis the First, Carlo Borr^meo, and others, who built, or appointed for
them, Stately Appartiments even in their own Palaces, and under the same Roof:
procuring Models, and endowing them with Charters, Enfranchisements, and ample
Honoraries; by which they attracted to their Courts, and Countries most of the
resin'd, and extraordinary spirits in all the Arts and Sciences that were then
celebrated throughout the World.

Nor it seems has it been the sole glory of those illustrious Princes to
cherish and enoble men of Art: the Greek and Roman of old had them in special
veneration; but in none of their Courts, were men of Science carressed to that
degree, as in that we have read of the Emperors of Japons at present, who does
not only entertain, and nobly accommodate them, but never stirs abroad without
their company. These great men says my * Author (meaning Physicians,
Painters, Descrip. Reg. (...).
Sculptors, Musicians, etc. quos proprio nomine appellant Contubernium
Caesaris) march before the King whither he go forth in Litter or on Horseback;
and being elected of Persons of the greatest birth in his Dominions, they
always continue at his Court, richly appointed with sallaries; but otherwise,
to bear no office whatsoever which may in the least importune them, eo solum
electi, ut Imperatori ad voluptatem and delecta^ionem consortium praestent, as
being therefore only chosen, to recreate and divert the Prince with their
excellent conversation: These being men of the rarest parts, and endowments in
his Empire, have pre-eminence in all places next the King; then come the Guards
in the reere, which consist of a more inferior Nobility: Thus far the
Historian: We know not how this Instance may in these days be interpreted; but
certainly the Courts of Princes were in former Ages, composed of men of the
greatest virtue and talents above the rest, and such as possessed something of
extraordinary (besides the wearing of fine clothes, and making the bone mine)
to recommend them. We insist not on Sculptors, and painters only, especially,
as such men are now for the most part Vicious, or else of poor and mechanic
spirits; but as those Ancient and Noble Genius's were heretofore accomplished;
and such as of late were Raphael, Durer, Leon Alberti, Da Vinci, Rubens, and at
present, Cavalier Bernini, etc. persons of most excellent endowments, and
universally learned, which rendered their Fautors and Protectors famous, by
leaving such marks of their admired Virtue, as did eternize their merits to
after Ages.

Thus it was, that Myron, Polycletus* Phydias, Lysippus and others of the
Ancient, procured such lasting names by their divine labors: They wrought for
Kings, great Cities and Noble Citizens: whereas others, on the contrary, (Men
happily of no less industry and science) had little or no notice taken of them;
because they received no such encouragements, were poor and neglected, which
did utterly eclipse and suppress their fame; such as those whereof Vitruvius
does in the Preface to his third book make mention, where he speaks of Chiron
the Corinthian, Hellas of Athens, Myagrus of Phocia, Pharax the Ephesian,
besides Aristomenes, Polycles, Nichomachus, and several others, who being
excellent Masters and rarely endowed, perished in obscurity, and without any
regard, from the unequal hand and distribution of fortune, and for want of
being cherished by Princes and great men: But to return;

In these places had they books of Drawings of all the old, and Renowned
Masters, Rounds, Busts, Relievos and entire Figures, cast off from the best of
the Antique Statues and Monuments, Greek and Roman; There was to be seen, the
Laocon, Cleopatra, Antinous, Flora, Hercules, Commodus, Venus, Meleager, Niobe,
etc. whereof the Originals are still extant at Rome: There were likewise diverse
rare and excellent Statues, both of brass and marble; Modells and diverse
fragments of Bases, Colomns, Capitals, Freezes, Cornishes and other pieces
molded from the most authentic remains of the ancient famous buildings,
besides a universal collection of Medaills, things Artificial and natural.

But to recover our Drawing again, as it concerns the Art of Chalcography, we
have already mentioned such of the most accomplished Gravers, whose labors and
works were proposed for exemplars and imitation: Nor let the most supercilious
painter despise what we have here alleged; or imagine it any diminution to his
Art, that he now and then put his hand to the pen, and draw even after some of
those Masters we have so much celebrated: wha^ Andrea del Sarto has taken out
of the prints of Albert Durer, improving, and reducing them to his manner (not
for want of invention, and plagiary like, as all that have any knowledge of his
works can justify) has no way eclipsed, but rather augmented his glory; as on
the other side, that divine piece of his, the Christus mortuus, which he gave
to be cut by Augustino Venetiano; The Triumphs, Vas^s, and Anatomies of old
Rosso, by whomsoever engraven, and those other things of his after Domenico
Barbieri: Paulo Veroneze did much study the prints of Durer, and that
incomparable painter Antonio Vassalacci, (called otherwise Aliense) made
notable use of that his prodigious collection of Stamps of the most rare hands:
not to recapitulate what were published by Raphael himself, and infinite
others; by which they have sufficiently made appear, the value they attributed
to this Art; by desiring (as much as in them lay) to render their works famous
to posterity, by thus communicating them to the World, though many times,
through the hands, but of very vulgar, and ordinary Gravers.

And here we should have put a period to this Essay, and the present chapter,
as having abundantly vindicated the necessity and worthiness of Design and
Drawing, as it is praevious, and introductory to the Art of Chalcography; had
not one curiosity more prevented us; which because it so much concerns the
conducting of Hatches and strokes, whither with pen, point, or Graver;
pretending (at least very ingeniously hinting) to a method, how by a constant,
and regular certitude, one may express to the eye, the Sensation of the
Relievo, or extancie of objects, be it by one, or more hatches, cross and
counter, we think not impertinent here to recite, as briefly as the
demonstration will permit.

The principal end of a Graver that would copy a Design, or piece composed of
one, or more Objects, is, to render it correct both in relation to the Draught,
Contours and other particularities, as to the Lights and shades on the Front,
flying or turning, in bold, or faint touches; so as may best express the
Relief; in which Gravers have hitherto, for the most part, rather imitated one
another, then improved, or refined upon Nature; some with more, some with fewer
strokes: having never yet found out a certain and uniforme guide to follow in
this work; so as to carry their strokes with assurance, as knowing where they
are to determine, without manifestly offending the due rules of perspective.

If in truth Nakeds, and other polite Bodies were so formed, as that we might
detect the course, and inclination of the Threads, Fibers, and Grain, so as we
perceive it in Stuffs, Cloth, Linen and other Draperies; nothing would appear
more facile; for let them assume wh^^ phy they will, it does not at all concern
the tissue, Tenor or range of the Threads and Wales (as they call them) which
is easily imitated, both as to their inclinations, and distances from the point
of sight.

But since we are much at a loss, and can perceive no such direction or clue in
Nudities, and other smooth surfaces, it were happily worth the while, to find out
some expedient which should assist the imagination in this affair, and that
might encounter the difficulty upon other terse and even objects, by forming
such strokes, and directors upon them in our Imagination; observing, that there
are some parts in them commonly to be distinguished from the Mass in gross; for
example, the hairs in men, eyes, teeth, nails, etc. that as one would conceive
such lines, or hatches on those Masses, others may likewise be as well fancied
upon those lesser, and more delicate members:

To effect this, the following Ichonisme is thus explained.



Suppose, in the upmost Figure of this plate, the object ( O) to be the
representation in perspective of the portion of a Bowl, exposed to the beams
of the Sun; and the letters e. s. r. t. a Frame, or square of Wood barred and
strung in even and straight lines, parallel inter se.

Then another Thread, viz. m. n. crossing them in perpendicular. The frame in
the mean time supposed to incline toward the Bowl, O. 'twixt it, and the Sun,
which represents to you all these threads projecting their shadows upon the
Bowl, and the surface where it is situate.

Suppose now the same upon the Relievo or Mass it self; it is evident, that
these Threads, in whatever manner you interpose the said Frame 'twixt the Bowl
and the Sun, that they will perpetually cast their shadows parallel inter se,
cutting it as it were, into several plains, uniforme, and parallel also.

You see likewise in this very Figure, that the oblique, and direct shades o u
x y are caused by the cathetus m t n, and the pointed curved lines upon the
Bowl O, viz. o z n 12. etc. are formed by the parallels which intersect the
perpendicular.

But the same frame posited between the Sun and a Head in Relievo of white
marble, or the like (as in the inferior example) will not render the shadow of
the threads alike upon all the parts parallel inter se (as in the former)
though the same were supposed to be cut by like plain, and mutual Parallels as
was the Bowl O. However, so shall they appear, as to hint the tracing of
parallels on the Relievo, or assist the imagination of them there, and
consequently, how to design them upon objects made after the same Ordonance in
perspective pa^allel, as one may conceive them upon the Relievo of an Ordonance
in Geometrical paral^el, viz. as in the Figure O. or to speak more distinctly,
supposing them the same on the irregular, as one the regular.

Consider then upon the Head, the concourse of those imaginary parallels in
perspective, shaded with the pointed lines; and how the intercurrent hatches,
which they comprehend, pursue the same course and tenor, or perspective
parallelisine.

From these instances now, it will not be difficult how to apply the same upon
all the sorts of bodies representable by Graving, and to comprehend in one's
imagination, the concurrency and uniforme tenor of the particles, as we may so
call them; Only, there is this particular to be observed, tha^ the projecture
of the threads will not appear alike perspicuous in the deep, an^ shady parts
of Relievos, as upon the illuminated, being lost in the dark: But thi^ is
easily supplied by the imagination, (...) by holding a loose thread parallel to
the shaded, near to the body of the Figure by which the course of the rest may
be wel^ conceived. And this may serve to giv^ great light to him that shall
either grave i^ Copper, or draw with the pen, for the Symmetrically conducting
of his hatches^ determinatively, and with certitude, b^ thus imagining them to
be Geometricall^ marked upon the Relievo, or embossemen^ of the Natural,
wherever he encounter i^ and after this conception, to trace them out upon his
Plate, or Draught in perspective.

And indeed, that which is chiefly considerable and ingenious in this, is, that
of their Perspective; since the shades of the lines (in the forementioned
example) which were upon the parts more, or less turned, appear to our eye
accordingly, with more or less force, which renders clear a different effect,
as to the swelling and extancies of the parts, then we find it in works where
this method has not been observed; so as truly, this may ^eem to be the most
certain expedient of expressing by hatches, the Relievo of objects, whether
with the Pen, or Burine. And this ^s the sense of a much larger discourse,
which Monsieur du Bosse has proposed, treating of the practice of Perspective
upon irregular Surfaces, and we have thought fit to insert into this Chapter;
not only because it is new and pretty; but, for that (to us) it appears to be
of good use, and as may be seen in some of the late heads graven by the
incomparable Nanteuille, who had been the sole occasion of this ingenious
consideration, about the time of our last being at Paris.

But if this (like the diligence of Mechopanes, which Pliny affirms, none was
able to understand but an Artist only) seem to be a disquisition more refined
then useful; for that few of our Gravers work off from the Round, upon
whichalone the observation is practicable; yet shall it be necessary to
admonish, that shadows over dark, too deep and sudden, are not commendable in
these works, as seldom so appearing in the life; and therefore hatchings
expressed by single strokes, are ever the most graceful and natural; though of
greater difficulty to execute; especialy, being any ways oblique; because they
will ^^quire to be made broader, and fuller (...) the middle, then either at
their entranc^ or exit; an address much more easy wit^ the Burin, and the
Pen, then with the point* Though Monsieur Bosse's invention of the Eschoppe,
does render the making of thi^ Sulcus, much more facile: But to attain this
Masterly, and with assurance of hand, our Workmen may do well to imitate the
Gravings of the Sadelers, Villamena, Sauanneburg, Gaultier; but especially
Claudius Mellan, Natalis, Poisly, Nanteuill, Cornelius Blomar, H. Gaultzius*
And for the Etchers in Aqua Fortis, Callot, and Du Bosse in some of their last
cuts, especially; Though even the counter hatchings also, coming tenderly off,
and well conducted, (so as it is to be seen in some of the prints of M.
Antonio's, C. Cort. Aug. Carracio and other Masters) render both an admirable
and stupendous effect: For it is in this well placing of White and black,
wherein all this Art, and even that of painting does consist: Thus Aglaphontes
us^d but one Color, no more did Nitia the Athenian Painter; and it was this
Relievo also for which the famous Zeuxis became so renoun'd: not to insist on
Heredices the Corinthian, and Thelophanes the Sicyonian, who were both of them
but Monochromists; and, 'till Cleophanes came amongst them, no dissemblers, as
owning no other Colors but those eminent Contraries; that is, the lights and
the shades, in the true managing whereof, so many wonders are to be produced by
this Art, and even a certain splendour, and beauty in the touches of the Burin,
so as the very Union and coloring it self may be conceived without any force
upon the imagination, as we have before observed in these excellent Gravings of
Natalis, Rouslet, and Poisly, after Bourdon, and in what Greuter, Blomart, and
some others have done after Monsieur Poussin, Guido Rhene, Cortoon, etc.

But here by the way, let no man think we mean by this Coloree (as they term
it) in Drawing and Graving, such a position of the Hatches as the Chevalier
Wolson has invented, Theater d' honeur. Testes a Gentil.
and Pietro Santo the Jesuit has followed, to distinguish their Blazons by:
But a certain admirable effect, emerging from the former union of Lights, and
shadows; such as the Ancients would express by Tonus, or the Pythagoreans in
their Proportions, and imitated in this Art, where the shades of the Hatches
intend, and remit to the best resemblance of painting, the Commissures of the
light and dark parts, imperceptably united, or at least so sweetly conducted,
as that the alteration could no more certainly be defined, then the Semitons,
or Harmoge in music, which though indeed differing; yet it is so gentle, and
so agreeable, as even ravishes our senses, by a secret kind of charm not to be
expressed in words, or discerned by the ignorant. And this it is, which has
rendered it so difficult to copy after Designs and Painting; and to give the
true heightnings, where there are no hatchings to express them, unless he, that
Copies, Design perfectly himself, and possess more then the ordinary talent and
judgment of Gravers, or can himself manage the Pencil. But to return to Prints
again, we are to understand, that what the Artists do many times call
excellent, does not always signify to the advantage of the Graver; but more
frequently, the Design, consisting in the lineaments, proportion and ordonance,
if these be well, and masterly performed, and for which we have so recommended
the practice of this Art to our English Painters in chap. IV. Though, to speak
of an accomplished piece indeed, it is the result of integrall causes only, and
where they universally encounter.

We do farther add, that for this reason, copies are in Prints much more easily
detected, then in paintings, and by consequence, more facile also to imitate,
as using all one kind of Instrument, and fewer ways of expression: But if
there be a difficulty in it, those which are Etched in A. F. make it most
conspicuous; both because the nature of the plates, and quality of the Waters,
and their operations, may sometimes fall out to be so very unlike: But, to
discern an Original prtnt from a Copy print (not to speak of such plates as
have been retouch'd, and therefore of little value) is a knack very easily
attained; because it is almost impossible to imitate every hatch, and to make
the strokes of exact and equal dimensions, where every the least defect, or
flaw in the Copper it self, is sufficient to detect and betray the Imposture,
as in that little Desce^^ from the cross of Hanibal Carraccio (already
mentioned) is perspicuous, and which it were absolutely impossible to
conterfeit. In the mean time, such as are profound, and well knowing, do
establish their Judgments upon other particulars of the Art, and the very
handling it self.

Lastly, that A. F. gives a tenderness to Landskips, Trees and Buildings
superior to that of the Burine (though that exceed infinitely in Figures) may
be seen in that of Isreal's view of the Louvre before recited, and in some other
works where there is an industrious and studied mixture, as in that second
manner of Vosterman's which did so much please Rubens and Vandyke, even in the
Portraicts which that excellent Graver published after those great men's
paintings.

It was in the former Chapter that we made rehearsal of the most renowned
Gravers and their works; not that we had no more to add to that number; but
because we would not mingle these illustrious names and qualities there, which
we purposely reserved for the crown of this discourse; we did therefore forbear
to mention what his Highness Prince Ruperts own hands have contributed to the
dignity of that Art; performing things in Graving (of which some enrich our
collection) comparable to the greatest Masters; such a spirit and address there
appears in all that he touches, and especially in that of the Mezzo Tinto, of
which we shall speak hereafter more at large, having first enumerated those
incomparable gravings of that his new, and inimitable S^ile, in both the great,
and little decollations of St. John Baptist, the Soldier holding a Spear and
lean^ng his hand on a Shield, the two Mary Magdalens, the Old-mans head, that
of Titian, etc. after the same Titian, Georgioon and others. We have also seen
a plate Etched by the present French King, and other great persons; the Right
Honorable the Earl of Sandwich sometimes (as we are told) diverting himself
with the Burine, and herein imitating those Ancient and renowned Heroes, whose
names are loud in the Trumpet of Fame, for their skill, and particular
affection to these Arts: For such of old, were Lucius Manilius, and Fabius,
Noble Romans: Pacuvius the Tragic Poet nephew to Ennius; Socrates the wisest
of men, and Plato himself. Metrodorus, and Pyrrhus the Philosopher did both
design and paint; and so did Valentinian, Adrian and Severus, Emp^: so as the
great Paulus Aemilius, esteemed it of such high importance, that he would needs
have his son to be instructed in it, as in one of the most worthy and excellent
accomplishments belonging to a Prince. For the Art of graving Quintilian
likewise celebrates Euphranor, a Polite and rarely endowed person; and Pliny in
that Chapter where he treats of the same Art, observes, that there was never
any one famous in it; but who was by birth or education a Gentleman: therefore
He, and Galen in their recension of the Liberal Arts, mention that of Graving
in particular amongst the most permanent; and in the same Catal^gue numbers it
with Rhetoric, Geometry, Logic, Astronomy, yea Grammar it self; because there
is in these Arts say they, more of fancy, and invention, then strength of hand;
more of the Spirit, then of the Body. Hence Aristotle informs us that the
Grecians did universally institute their Children in the Art of painting and
Drawing, Polit. l. 8. ^. 3.
for an Oeconomique reason, there signified, as well as to produce proportions
in the Mind: Varro makes it part of the Ladies Education that they might the
better skill in the works of Embrodery, etc. and for this cause is his Daughter
Martia celebrated amongst those of her fair Sex: We have already mentioned the
Learned Anna Schurman; but the Princess Louise has done wonders of this kind,
and is famous throughout Europe for the many pieces which enrich our Cabinets,
examples sufficient to vindicate its dignity, and the value that has been set
upon it; since both Emperors, Kings and Phil^sophers, the great and the wise,
have not disdained to cultivate, and cherish this honorable quality; of old so
nobly reputed, that amongst the Greeks, a Slave might not be taught it: How
passionately does Pereskius, that admirable and universal Genius deplore his
want of dexterity in this Art! Baptista Alberti, Aldus, Pomponius Guaricus,
Durer, and Rubens were politely learned and knowing men; and it is hardly to be
imagined of how great use, and conducible, a competent address in this Art of
Drawing and Designing is to the several advantages which occur; and especially,
to the more Noble Mathematical Sciences, as we have already instanced in the
Lunary works of Hevelius, and are no less obliged to celebrate some of our own
Countrymen famous for their dexterity in this incomparable Art; such was that
Blagrave, who himself cut those Diagramms in his Mathematical Jewel; and such
at present, is that rare and early prodigy of universal science, Dr. Chr. Wren,
our worthy and accomplished friend. For, if the study of Eloquence and
Rhetoric were cultivated by the greatest Genius's and Heroic persons which the
World has produced; and that by the suffrage of the most knowing, to be a
perfect Orator, a man ought to be universally instructed; a quality so becoming
and useful, should never be neglected. Quin^il. inst. l. 2.
Omnium enim Artium peritus erit Orator, si de Omnibus ei dicendum est: He that
would speak well upon all subjects, should be ignorant of none: It was Cicero
that taught Quintilian the importance of it, where he tells us, that in his
opinion, no man could pretend to be Omni laud cumulatus Orator, De Orat. 1.
a perfect and accomplished Orator indeed, nisi erit omnium reram magnarum
atque Artium scientiam consecutus. It is the sentence of that great Man, and
therefore to be embraced by us, especially on this occasion; because it was
immediately after he had expressly instanced in Caelatura and Sculptura, that of
cutting and Engraving: for it is worth the observation, that the Ages which did
most excel in Eloquence, did also flourish most in these Arts, as in the time
of Demosthenes and the same Cicero; and as they appeared, so they commonly
vanished together; and this remark is universal.

But now for close of all, and to verify the admirable use which may be
derived from this incomparable Art above the rest, let us hear what the learned
Abbot of Villeloin, Monsieur de Marolles has le^t upon Record in the Memoires
of his own life, Anno 1644. after he had made a very handsome discourse (which
we recommend to all good Roman Catholics) concerning Images, upon occasion of
a superstitious frequenting of a certain renowned Shrine, pretended to have
done Miracles at Paris, but was detected to be an imposture: The passage is
thus,

Dieu m' a fait la grace, etc.
I am (says he) greatly obliged to God, that though I have ever had a singular
affection to Images, I was never in my life superstitious; I have yet made a
collection so prodigious, that they amount to no less then seventy thousand (he
adds afterward ten thousand more) but they are all Copper-cuts and engravings
of all sorts of Subjects imaginable. I began to be addicted to this kind of
Curiosity but since the year 1641; but have so cherished the humor, that I may
truly affirm, without the least exaggeration, that I have some prints of all
the Masters that are any where to be found, as well Gravers, as Designers and
Inventors, to the number of above four hundred; And these are ranged in books
of Charts, and Mapps, Calligraphy, Architecture, Fortification, Tacticks,
Sieges, Circumvallations, Battails, Single-Combats, Naval Fights, Maritime
Pieces, Landskips, Towns, Castles, Seas, Rivers, Fountains, Vasas, Gardning,
Flowers, Ruins, Perspective, Clocks, Watches, Machines, Goldsmiths Works, for
Joyners, and Workers in Iron, Copper, Embroydering, Laces, Grotesque, Animals,
Habits of several Countries, Anatomies, Portraictures, Cartouches and
Compartiments, Antiques, Bas-reliev's, Statues, Cataphalcos, Tombs, Epitaphs,
Funeral pomps, Entries, Cavalcados, Devises, Medaills, Emblems, Ships, Cabinet
pieces, Trees, Fruits, Stones, Dances, Comedies, Bacchanalias, Huntings,
Armories, Tournaments, Massacres, Executions, Torments, Sports, Heroic and
Moral Fables, Histories, Lives of Saints, and Martyrs, pieces of the Bible,
Religious Orders, Theses, and above ten thousand Portraicts of renowned
Persons, without counting (amongst these) above sixscore Volums of Masters
whose names he there enumerates Alphabetically. This Curiosity (says he) I
affected from my youth; but did not much cultivate till of late years,
preferring it even before paintings themselves (for which yet I have infinite
esteem) not only for that they are more proportionable to my purse; but because
they better become our Libraries: so that had we a dosen only, that were
curious of these Collections in France; especially amongst persons of condition
(such as Monsieur de l' Orme, the late Monsieur de la Mechinier, etc.)
Taille-Douces would come to be extraordinary rarities; and the Works of Lucas,
Durer, Mark Antony, and the Polite Masters which are now sold at four, or five
hundred Crowns a piece, would be then valued at three times as much; a thing
incredible, did not experience convince us of it; those who are touched with
this kind of affection, hardly ever abandoning it, so full of charms, variety
and instruction it is. Truly, me thinks, that all Princes especially, and great
Men should be stored with these works, preferrable to a World of other trifling
Collections, and less fruitful; as comprehending so many considerable,
remarkable things, and notices of almost all sorts of subjects imaginable. Thus
far the Learned Abbot.

But it leads us yet farther, when we seriously reflect, how capable this Art
is above all other whatsoever, to insinuate all sorts of Notions and things
into Children, and be made an Instrument of Education superior to all those
Abstracted terms, and secondary intentions where with Masters commonly torment
and weary their tender and weak Capacities: And this we have discovered by much
experience, and could here produce examples beyond belief in a Child at
present not six years old, who does both know, and perfectly comprehend, such
things and Actions as hardly any at sixteen, some at twenty have yet attained,
who pursue the common Method of our Grammar Schools, without these aids, and
advantages: For, since Nihil est in Intellectu, quod non prius fuit in sensu;
Aristot.
and, that as the Poet had well observed.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per Aurem
Quam quae sunt Oculis subjecta fidelibus --. Horat.

What can there be more likely to inform and delight them, dum animus majora
non capit, then the pictures and representations of those things, which they
are to learn? We did mention before the Hieroglyp^ical Grammar published by Dr.
Couvay; and it is well known, how Eilhardus Lubinus in an Epistle to the Duke
of Stetin, has celebrated and contrived an Institution of youth by this Art:
Such as was also the Design of that Prodigy of a Man, La Martelay, who had
already collected and digested such a choice number of cuts, and so universal,
as by which he more then pretended (for he really effected it) to reach all the
sciences by them alone, and that with as much certitude, and infinite more
expedition, then by the most accurate method that was ever yet produced: What a
specimen of this Jo. Amos Commenius in his Orbis sensualium pictus gives us in
a Nomenclator of all the Fundamental things and Actions of Men in the whole
World, is public, and I do boldly affirm it to be a piece of such excellent
us^, as that the like was never extant; however it comes not yet to be
perceived: A thousand pitties it is, that in the Edition published by Mr.
Hoole, the cuts were so wretchedly engraven: I do therefore heartily wish that
this might excite some gallant and public minded person, to augment and
proceed farther upon that most useful design, which yet comes greatly short of
the perfection it is capable of, were some additions made, and the prints
reformed and improved to the utmost, by the skillfull hand of some rare Artist.
In the mean time, what a Treasury of excellent things might by this expedient
be conveyed, and impressed into the waxen Tables and Imaginations of children;
seeing, there is nothing more preposterous, then to force those things into the
Ear, which are visible, and the proper objects of the eye, For picture, is a
kind of Universal Language, how diverse soever the tongues and vocal
expressions of the several Nations which speak them may appear; Solet enim
pictura tacens loqui, maximeque prodesse, as Nazianzen has it.

So as if ever, by this is that long sought for Art most likely to be
accomplished: Nor can any words whatever hope to reach those descriptions,
which in a numberless sort of things, Picture does immediately, and as it were
at one glance, interpret to the meanest of capacities: For instance, in our
Herbals, books of Insects, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Buildings, Monuments, and the
rest which make up the Cycle of the Learned Abbot; some of them happily never
seen before, or so much as heard of, as Aelian does upon occasion ingenuously
acknowledge. And what do we find more in request amongst the Ancient, then the
Images of their Heroes and Illustrious predecessors? such as Atticus, and Marcus
Varro collected; all which considered, we do not doubt to affirm, that by the
application of this Art alone, not only Children; but even Stripplings well
advanced in Age, might receive incredible advantages, preparatory to their
entrance into the School Intellectual, by an Universal, and choice Collection
of prints and cuts well designed, engraven and disposed, much after the manner
and method of the above named Villeloin, which should contain, as it were, a
kind of Encyclopaedia of all intelligible, and memorable things that either
are, or have ever been in rerum Natura. It is not to be conceived of what
advantage this would prove for the Institution of Princes and Noble Persons,
who are not to be treated with the ruder difficulties of the vulgar Grammar
Schools only, and abstruser Notions of things in the rest of the sciences,
without these Auxiliaries; but to be allured, and courted into knowledge, and
the love of it by all such subsidiaries and helps as may best represent it to
them in Picture, Nomenclator, and the most pleasing descriptions of sensual
Objects, which naturally slide into their fluid, and tender apprehensions,
speedily possessing their memories, and with infinite delight, preparing them
for the more profound and solid studies.

Seneca indeed seems to refuse the Graphica^ sciences those advantages which
others of the Philos^phers have given to them amongst the most Liberal, as
reckoning them somewhat too voluptua^y for his Stoical humor: yet did Socrates
learn this very Art of Carving of his Father; Diogens drew the picture of
Pla^o; and the Orator Messalla commends it most highly: But what more concerns
out present instance, is, that it was by the approbation of the great Augustus
himself, that Q. Podius the Mute should be diligently taught it: We could tell
you of a person of good Birth in England, who (laboring under the same
imperfection) does express many of his conceptions by this Art of Drawing and
Designing: And if (as it is observed) it furnish us with Maxims to discern of
general Defects and Vices, especially, in what relates to the proportions of
humane bodies, it is certainly not to be esteemed so inconsiderable as by many
it is. Polygnotus could express the Passions, and Aristides the very interior
motions of the soul, if we will believe what is recorded: But whither it
advance to that prerogative; this we read of for certain, (as to our pretense
for the Education of Children) that when L. Paulus demanded of the Con^ur'd
Athenians a Philosopher to instruct his little ones, they preferred one
Metrodorus an excellent Painter before any of the rest: What Quintilian says
of Euphranor is sufficiently known; and if some great Princes have not
disdained to take the Pincil in the same hand in which they swayed the Scepter
and the Sword; and that the knowledge of this divine Art was useful even to
the preservation of the lise of an Emperor (for such was that Constantinus
P^r^hyrogenitus) it is not without examples sufficient to support the dignity
of these Arts, Luitprand* Hist.
that we have with so much zeal, recommended them to Princes and Illustrious
Persons.

And now we have but one thing more to add before we conclude this Chapter, and
it is for caution to those who shall make these Collections for curio^ity and
ornament only; That where we have said all that we can of This, or any other
particular Art, which may recommend it to the favor, and endearment of great
persons; our intention is not, that it should so far engage them in its
pursuit, as to take from the ^obler parts of life, for which there are more
sublime and worthy objects; but, that with this (as wit^ the rest which are
commendable, innocen^^ and excellent Company) they would fill up all such
spaces, and opportunities, as too often lie open, expose and betray them to
mean complyances, and less significant diversions: For these was Aratus a
great Collector, nor less knowing in the judgment o^ Pictures; so was Vindex
and many others*

-- Namque haec quoties Chelyn exuit ille
Desidia est, hic Aoniis amor avocat antris. Statius Vind. H^rc. Epitrapez.

He allows himself these relaxations only when he is tired with the more
weighty affairs and concernments: Finally, that they would universally contend
to do some great thing, as who should most merit of the Sciences, by setting
their hands to the promotement of experimental, and useful knowledge* for the
universal benefit, and good of Mankind.

This, this alone, would render them deservedly honorable indeed; and add a
luster to their Memories, beyond that of their Painted Titles, which (without
some solid Virtue) render but their defects the more conspicuous to those who
know how to make a right estimate of things, and, by whose Tongues, and Pens
only, their Trophies and Elogies can ever hope to surmount, and out-last the
vicissitudes of fortune.

CHAP. VI. Of the new way of Engraving, or Mezzo Tinto, Invented, and
communicated by his Highness Prince RUPERT, Count Palatine of Rhyne, etc.
WE have already advertised the Reader in one of our Praeliminaries, why we did
omit what had been by us prepared for the Accomplishment of the more Mechanical
part of the Chalcographical Art: But it was not out of the least Design to
abuse him in the Title at the Frontispiece of this History; since we believed
he would most readily commute for the defect of a Mystery so vulgar, to be
gratified with another altogether Rare, Extraordinary, Universally approved of,
admired by all which have considered the effects of it, and, which (as yet) has
by none been ever publishd.

Nor may I without extraordinary ingratitude, conceal that Illustrious Name
which did communicate it to me; nor the obligation which the Curious have to
that heroic Person who was pleased to impart it to the World, though by so
incompetent, and unworthy an instrument.

It would appear a Parad^x to discourse to you of a Graving without a Graver,
Burin, Point, or Aqua Fortis; and yet is This performed without the assistance
of either: That what gives our most perite and dextrous Artists the greatest
trouble, and is longest finishing (for such are the hatches, and deepest
shadows in plates) should be here the least considerable, and the most
expeditious; That, on the contrary, the Lights should be in this the most
Laborious, and yet perform^d with the greatest facility: That what appears to
be effected with so little Curiosity, should yet so accurately resemble what is
generally esteemed the very greatest; viz. that a print should emulate even the
best of Drawings, Chiaro e Scuro, or (as the Italians term it) pieces of the
Mezzo Tinto, so as nothing either of Vago da Carpi, or any of those other
Masters who pursued his attempt, and whose works we have already celebrated,
have exceeded, or indeed approch'd; especially, for that of Portraits, Figures,
tender Landskips, and History, etc. to which it seems most appropriate, and
applicable.

This Obligation then we have to his Highness PRINCE RUPERT, Count Palatine of
Rhyne, etc. who has been pleased to cause the Instruments to be expressly
fitted, to show me with his own hands, how to manage, and conduct them on the
plate, that it might produce the effects I have so much magnified, and am here
ready to show the World, in a piece of his own Illustrious touching, which he
was pleased to honor this Work withal, not as a Venal addition to the price
of the Book (though for which alone it is most valuable) but a particular
grace, as a Specimen of what we have alleged, and to adorn this present
Chapter.

It is likewise to be acknowledged, that his Highness did indulge me the
Liberty of publishing the whole manner, and address of this new way of
Engraving with a freedom perfectly generous, and obliging: But, when I had
well considered it (so much having been already expressed, which may suffice to
give the hint to all ingenious Persons how it is to be performed) I did not
think it necessary that an Art so curious, and (as yet) so little vulgar (and
which indeed does not succeed where the Workman is not an accomplished
Designer, and has a competent talent in painting likewise) was to be
prostituted at so cheap a rate, as the more naked describing of it here, would
too soon have exposed it to.

Upon these considerations then it is, that we leave it thus Aenigmatical; and
yet that this may appear no dissingenuous Rodomontade in me, or invidious
excuse, I profess my self to be always most ready ( sub sigillo, and by his
Highnesse's permission) to gratify any curious, and worthy Person, with as
full, and perfect a Demonstration of the entire Art, as my talent, and address
will reach to; if what I am now praeparing to be reserved in the Archives of
the ROYAL SOCIETY concerning it, be not sufficiently instructive.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT
THere is a Treatise of Monsieur du Bosses in French, concerning Etching in
Aqua Fortis, Construction of the Rolling Press, etc. which (with some
improvement of the Method) I did long since interpret, and deliver to the Royal
Society, in obedience to their Commands: It was my intention to have added it
to this History of mine, as what would have rendered it a more accomplished
Piece; but, understanding it to be also the design of Mr. Faithorn, who had (it
seems) translated the first part of it, and is himself by Profession a Graver,
and an excellent Artist; that I might neither anticipate the Worlds
exspectation, nor the Workmans pains, to their prejudice, I desisted from
printing my Copy, and subjoyning it to this discourse. In the mean time, it is
to be acknowledged, that the Author thereof, has discovered his skill so
honestly, and entirely, that there seems nothing more desirable, as to that
particular: And I could wish with all my heart, that more of our Workmen, would
(in imitation of his laudable example) impart to us what they know of their
several Trades, and Manufactures, with as much Candor and integrity as Monsieur
Boss has done. For what could so much conduce to their profit and Emolument?
when their several Mysteries being subjected to the most accurate Inspection
and Examen of the more polite, and enquiring Spirits, they should return to
their Authors again so greatly refined and improved, and when (through this
means also) PHILOSOPHY her self, might hope to attain so considerable a
progress toward her ultimate Perfection.


