A DEFENSE OF THE Duke of Buckingham, Against the Answer to his Book, And the
Reply to his Letter.
By the Author of the late Considerations.
I Remember at the time when Chancellor Hyde was at his height at Court, a Poor
Woman who got her Living by a piece of Ground which her Old Husband used to
Digg, carrying her Garden-stuff one day to Market, and not Selling it, comes
Home exclaiming, that she could not Sell her Beans and Cabbages; and should
never have any good Market any more, so long as that filthy Hyde was Chancellor.

I know not the AUTHOR (whosoever he be) of the Discourse which came out for an
ANSWER to His Grace the DUKE of (...); but the Argumentation of the Gentleman
has really, as to the main point of his answer to the design of that Generous
DUKE (when the rest is Impertinence) the force only (and prejudice) of what was
said by this Woman.

There are some in the Nation that have been, and that are for Liberty of
Conscience; some that have been, and that are of the Wisest of the Nation (such
as my Lord Bacon, and my Lord Chief Justice Hales) who have shown their Minds
still against the Stiffness of these Churchmen, who never would be got, when
time was, to condescend in lesser things for the sake of greater. And there
comes this Gentleman now, and he Argues, That therefore all the Plots, all the
Rebellions, all the Evils that have befallen the Kingdom, must be Imputed to
such Men, and such Principles.

The Argument really is the Reasoning of this Woman: Socrate ambulante
fulguravit. Socrates going abroad, it Lightened; This Lightning did a great
deal of hurt; Therefore Socrates must be sent to Newgate: Therefore Liberty of
Conscience must be put to Death. I deny the Argument.

These Fanatics (say these Disputers) are unquiet; Therefore they must be
Prosecuted. I say, No; but therefore give them Liberty of Conscience, and they
will be unquiet no more. A Carrier had two Horses, one of them being Galled
through the negligence of his Man, the Man unknown to his Master gets the
Saddle fitted to his back, and all is well: One day a New Hostler, perceiving
nothing, puts on the false Saddle; The Horse going out, Winches, and casts off
his Pack. The Master being enraged, falls a beating the Horse; but the Man that
understood the matter, does but change only the Saddles, and both the Horses go
quietly along.

I will appeal to any Man of Sense, though of never so little Reason, whether
Ease, Happiness, and Plenty are likeliest to make People Turbulent, or
Oppression? Take off the thing that pinches, take off Prosecution, do but
change the Saddles, and set them both aright, and see then whether the
Churchmen or the Fanatics, and Catholics will be most Governable. Let this
King give that Liberty which his Predecessors refused, and you shall see
whether this King will not be beloved above all that went before Him. I pray go
over to Holland, go any where else, where Liberty is granted, and see, if
People Rebel in such Places. I am ashamed, that Men should have need of
Spectacles to see the Sun!

There are some, I know, upon the Duke of Buckingham's sending out these
Papers, have aspersed him for another Shaftsbury, as if he would make himself
Head of the Fanatics: There are others apt to cry out, He is undermining the
Protestant Religion, and designs Popery: But as I know that my own self do
design nothing but the Public Benefit, so do I judge of his Graces
undertaking: That is, as the undertaking of a Person over whom a great Reason,
and the Love of his Country does predominate, with Indifferency to the
Churchmen, the Fanatics, and also those of the Romish Persuasion.

The Truth is, The attempt of the Duke at this time for Liberty of Conscience,
looks to me to proceed from such a Spirit as the Enterprises of Dion,
Epaminondas, Timoleon, and such like, who were Liberators of their Country: In
comparison of whom, the Conquests of Caesar, Alexander, and Pyrrbus, who sought
themselves and their own Greatness, were but Spoil and Latrociny. The Papers
Writ against him, the Duke himself has thought fit to take Notice of in a
Letter, which Letter having one thing in it that is enough to make him Print
it, [to wit, The Explanation of the Kings Promise] the rest of it I count comes
to this Signification, That the Author is by no means to be made his Grace's
Match, but to be left to others: Unto whom also, one of them being come out
already, I Will leave him.

Neither, indeed, is the Field here proper for his Grace to Descend into; it
being the Parliament House only, which is the fit place; where this cause is to
be Fought, where he will meet with his Equals, and where we shall know who
shall carry it.

As for the Replyer to the Dukes Letter, who Insists only upon the same thing,
which the Answerer does, the Distractions, Miseries, Regicide, in the late
Times, and therefore the Government must Fence against them by denial of
Toleration, I must add (this being nothing still but the Fallacy non causae pro
causa before) that, As the Answer is not worthy the pains of the Duke, so the
Reply does require no Body's. Although indeed, in the Paper of Considerations
moving to a Toleration, come out since both, there is one little Parenthesis,
viz. [Stated Rightly, that is, of All, so far as they are Tolerable, whereof
the Wisdom of a Parliament is the fittest Judge] does Preoccupate all
Objections, and stops the Throat of this Flap-Mouth Argument.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for W. C. 1685.


