AN AFFLICTED MAN's TESTIMONY CONCERNING His Troubles.
LOng Afflictions exposing me to many Obloquies and Dangers, I think meet for
the Gospel's sake to leave some Account of my Ways by this present Writing,
that Truth may appear whatever become of me.

In my Youth while I studied at Oxford, very piercing inward Troubles pressed
my Mind for several Months together; which made me spend many an hour in secret
pensiveness, and by supplication to importune the Lord for his Mercy and favor
through Christ, in a more earnest manner than I had been acquainted with
before. And being heartily convinced of the goodness of God, I took a
Resolution to serve him more carefully than I had done, and soon found much
sweetness in Duties both public and private. About that time I was visited
with a violent Fever, and that danger being past, another surprised me upon
the Occasion following: One that seemed a Genteel person took acquaintance with
me, who selling a Horse in the Town, entered my Name in the Toll-book as a
Voucher for him. The Buyer informing me that he was gone, and that my Name was
in the Book in his behalf, I was much vexed at it, because I suspected him to
be extravagant. And when he came to Oxford again I urged him to find another
Voucher, and to take out my Name, which with much indignation he did, and then
swore he would kill me; and I think he came to my Chamber Door for that
pu^pose. Some time after he was taken in a Ro^bery and put to death, so God
delivered me from his hands. About the end of the Civil Wars, Visitors being
sent into the University, I was among others questioned to be removed from a
Place I had in a College, and another voted in: My Crime was an Answer I had
given to the said Visitors, to submit to them as far as lawfully I might; and
that was construed to be a Contempt, though I intended Modesty and Wariness by
it. Upon the solicitation of some Friends, the matter was deferred, and a
Fellowship in another College promised me. In June, 1649 I was appointed to
make a Latin Declamation in Praise of Clemency. The Theme being mitigating, and
grateful to my Disposition, and several considerable persons being to hear the
managing of it, I did it as effectually as I could: And the Meditation thereof
being always seasonable, take a true Copy of it as follows.

Novum inchoantibus Imperium utilis Clementiae Fama.
Academici,
AD arenam hanc literariam audacior accedo, cum non sim Lugdunensem rhetor
dicturus ad aram, nec tale scando rostrum ubi severa increpat justitia, sed ubi
candida allicit clementia, propter vestram impositionem mihi dicenda, and
propter nostram imbecillitatem a vobis exhibenda: and sciatis obsecro non magis
necessariam esse clementiam nova inchoantibsu imperia, quam vetera renovantibus
exercitia. Eam igitur exigua saltem insequamur laud, quae suos magna
insequitur utilitate. Hic referam Metellum Celtibericum bellum in Hispania
gerentem, qui cum partem urbis Centobricae, quam obsidebat, machina dirueret,
humanitatem propinquae victoriae praetulit. Nam cum Centobricenses diruptionem
muri filiis suis replerem, miserescens ab expugnatione discessit. Quo quidem
tam clementi facto etsi a cruentis unius urbis moenibus recessit, omnium tamen
celtiberarum urbium animos attraxit, sibi benevolos, adeo ut victoriam
obtinuerit quod expugnare noluit: eaque provincia in ditionem ejus accessit
sponte, quam repudiavit cogere: permittitur amice regnare, quia noluit
hostiliter saevire. Rusticus ferocem juvencum citius subjiciet jugo titillando
quam luctando; sin flagellis verberet, and stimulis lacescat, furibundum faciet
non domitum; nec accipiet collo jugum, sed rejiciet cornu dominum. Ita and
insoliti imperii jugum reipublicae facilius imponatur, eam mulcendo quam aspere
tractando. Si vero securis dissecet, and ensis perforet, non tam vulnerant quam
pungunt, excitantque populum, semper compertum belluam esse muliorum capitum,
and plurium cornuum; quam si obtusum Majestatis Sceptrum instigabat, acutus
militis gladius in rabiem irritet. Sola severitatis lima magis acuit quam
polit. Acida poma dentes acuminant: ita and austerae tyrannorum actiones
subditos exasperant. Quanto intentior est regnantis severitas, tanto remissior
est regnati fidelitas, nec ullum violentum Imperium erit perpetuum. Quinimo qui
terrore sui tremere facit subditos, discutit suum ex little cordibus regnum, and
languescit imperium quod quotidiana metus febre, prae tyranni rigore,
pallescit. Motus trepidationis non terris convenit, licet astra conservat,
civitates destruit. Novam introducentibus gubernationem periculosum est vi
obtrudere; coepti legitimatio verbis non verberibus probanda est: Dilemma non
biceps gladius sit argumentum; opponentes confutentur syllogismis, non
consternantur tormenti globulis: reconciliandi sunt mansuetudine, non perdendi
rigiditate. Dominatus qui cruoris diluvio superstruitur, difficulter
stabilietur, sed irae minimae exhalatione perpetuo jactabilis, fluetuabit. Quod
super cadaverum cumulum erigitur, dicatur sepulchrum potius quam imperium; nec
firmum erit potestatis aedificium, quod super aliorum ruinas fabricatur, sed
firmissimum erit cujus structura humanitatis coemento conglutinatur. Quorum
corpora captivitatis ligabantur catenis, illorum corda nobis strictius
vinciemus remissione, and alacriter eis praestabunt obedientiam, quibus debent
vitam. Regnum erit tranquillum ubi sereni regis mores; si vero torvi supercilii
nubibus nigrescat facies, crepent insurrectionum tonitrua, erumpent
candescentis irae fulgura, and ferient potestatis arcem ictuum fulmina.
Victoria minimum habebit invidiae, ubi plurimum clementiae. Imperator qui habet
in animo mansuetudinem, gerit in sinu Magnetem, nec ulli sunt tam ferreae
pertinaciae quin ad se trahet. Quicunque autem castigantes exercent
truculentiam, populum perterrent magis quam emendant; stupidum iis injiciunt
horrorem, non vividam probitatem: imo Gorgonis ora gerunt, and subditos si non
in lapides, saltem in truncos vertunt mutilando. Ad clementem Imperatorem
confestim ac alacriter accelerant qui suis peccatis veniam sperent, statuentes
aeque tutum esse ad pedes ejus se projicere, ac ad aram confugere. Recentem
Romuli urbem populus confluxu sui cito replevit, cum noverat asylum esse:
civitatula coespititia peccantibus mansuetum praebendo patrocinium, grande
tandem evasit Imperium. Nec exprobretur clementem negligere justitiam, suam
enim debitam honestatem cuique restituit, dum quosque ingeniose pravos
efficacius ad bonos mores reducit mitius castigando: plures enim poenitet
deliquisse erga benignam patris patriae bonitatem, quam tyranni saevitiam.
Itemque sufficiens, licet humanior poena est, ut delinquentes propter culpas
rubescant pudore potius quam sanguine. Quinimo quis propius accedit ad Deorum,
ignoscere gaudentium, naturam, quam qui exhibet clementiam? Et divinis indito
moribus populus religiosius obtemperabit. Hinc provida Natura regi apum negavit
aculeum, cogens esse mansuetum tollendo saeviendi instrumentum. Sapientissima
matter clementiam fecit illi necessariam quia novit utilem. Herba Ocimum si
tractetur leviter spirat suaviter, sin durius affricetur, foetido odore nares
infestat: non aliter si subditi molliter tract^ntur gratum emittent obedientiae
anhelitum, sin graviter comprimantur, contumaciae graveolentiam exhalabunt.
Interim auditores, vereor si aeque prolixe ac imperite dicerem clementiam, ne
vestram suscitarem iracundiam. Malim itaque reliquum hujus virtutis encomium
facundiori silentio admirari, quam extenuare exilitate dicendi. Hactenus tantum
venia digni sunt orationis nostrae soloecismi, quod clementiae vestrae materiam
suppeditaturi, ut incipiat praxis, ubi desinit speculatio.

Whether my discourse of Clemency procured me severity, I cannot tell, but sure
I am that soon after it was used toward me; for I was accused as disaffected
to the things then in being, and denied the Profits of the Fellowship promised
me: the Head of the House, and the new Fellows there, with the Visitors
connivance, combining to make me Socius Honorarius only, though I was Senior to
them all but the Head. Being thus left destitute of any encouragement in the
University, after a while I went into the Country to see my Friends, who
persuaded me to be there employed, and the Sine Cura of Llanrhaiad in the
Counties of Denbigh and Montgomery being vacant by death, was conferred on me;
where being freed from the Parish charge, I exercised my Talent in Preaching
there, and elsewhere, and sometimes Catechizing, and with such as were willing
I monthly fasted and prayed on a Weekday, either in private or in public, and
invited others to assist me therein also. And commonly when I spent time in
such Exercises, I should have abundant Consolations in my spirit. But some of
the richer sort and others in that Country, that did not relish such things,
but delighted more in natural Recreations, Company, Complements, and other
Businesses, and were addicted to be litigious, wrought me many troubles: who
hearing that the Regius Professor in Cambridge had a Promise of some Sine Cure,
invited him to make for mine, and to exhibit Articles against me into the
Protector's hand, alleging me to be disaffected to his Government, and
insufficient for the Living I held. Thereupon an Order was made, requiring me
to appear before the Council, and it was sent down unto my Accusers, who
endeavored to conceal it from me, that I might be outed upon Contempt. They
sent a Fellow to my House, that left word with my Servant, that I should be at
London within three days, and said no more, neither left any order. Yet they
drew an Affidavit, and got him to swear before a Master of Chancery, that he
left the Order at my House. Suspecting the matter, I sent up with speed, and
had a Copy of my Accusation, and time to answer it: And when it came to a
hearing, their Allegation of the first branch of the Accusation was discredited
by their collusion in the matter of my Summons to appear, and the other was
confuted by the Approvers of public Preachers and others; thereupon I was
discharged, as being wrongfully molested. Three Years after as I was riding
homewards from preaching in a Winter Night, I observed a Man sit on Horseback
at the end of a dark Woody lane, who affronted me as I rid by him, and
attempted to assault me, but my Horse outwent him. Soon after one came down
with the great Seal to claim my Benefice, and by the Date of his Pattent it
appeared that it was had out about the time that Lurcher set upon me; but Times
then altering, that pretense also became ineffectual. In the Year 1660 about
the end of Winter, the Bishop of the Diocese newly enstalled, sends word that
he had my Benefice granted him in Comendam by the King, and demanded of my
Farmers the Rents due for the Summer foregoing, while I took pains there and
thereabout. For a while it seemed very harsh to me to be deprived of my
Livelihood and Employment, and the more, in regard I had obtained it fairly
without misplacing any Man, and paid yearly about forty pounds out of it to
Widows and Fatherless, and had seven Years possession of it, and his Majesty's
Proclamation to continue all in their possessions, unless ejected by due course
of Law; neither was any thing demanded of me by Authority, that I refused to
do: For nothing was then requisite to be tendered to Incumbents that I heard of,
but the Oath of Allegiance, which I took: also for the rich man that had many
Flocks, to take away an only Lamb, might grieve a Prophet: Notwithstanding
deeming a suit at Law would be as bootless as vexatious, I did quietly sit down
by the loss.

Afterward I lived very ^rivately, and as inoffensively as I could. For pe^ce
sake I often went to hear the Conformists in public, and seldom joined in
private Worship with any greater number than the Law allows of, and never
meddled with any designs to disturb the Government; yet I could not avoid the
frequent molestations of evil Men. In the Year 1666 several armed men, and one
of them with his Sword drawn, uttering terrible words, rushed into my House in
the Night, and abused my Family, c^lled me a Traitor, thrust into my Cellar,
and made themselves drunk with my Beer, and taking me Prisoner, barbarously
guarded me to the County Gaol, in several Passions drawing upon me by the way,
though I was conscious to my self of no Crime, neither did they prove any against
me that I heard of. It cost me Time and Money to be released, and upon my
return home one of my Children dyed, that took a Fright by that Riot, and a
fret in my absence. Within few Months after my Wife and some of the surviving
Children being discouraged in their Obedience to me, by the many Injuries they
saw inflicted upon me, became undutiful by the Collusiou of my Persecutors,
which did imbitter my Afflictions far more than any Prison or Danger I had been
in, or feared to come into: For several Years I had Comfort in them, while I
had sorrow from others: when it was tempestuous without doors, I had a calm
within; before the blows lighted on my Clothes, but since on my Bowels. But the
worse my Domest^^k Troubles were for me, the more vigorously they were ^omented
and increased by those that hated me Some were employed to persuade my Children
that it was better for them to be without me; and my Wife was so far alienated
from me, that she impourtuned me to part with her and live asunder, though for
sixteen Years before we had lived together as lovingly as any couple in that
Country. Then by mutual Consent I was induced to go to Oxford, and afterward
to London, where in the Year 1675 as I was busy about the Printing of Welsh
Books, my Life was endangered by most violent Poison, causing vehement burning
and tearing pains in my Body, and a sensible conflict in my Chest and Bowels,
like the beating of Pulses. The fourth Night I lay so, being brought to the
sorest plight, upon a sudden the pores of my Body opened, and poured out such
abundance of sweat as wet my Shirt in few Minutes, blisters brake out upon my
Lips, and I purged somewhat like blood. And a few years after, as I was
laboriously employed about correcting an Impression of the Welsh Bible, I was
again brought to Death's Door by deadly poison, and while I lay ill, had a
great loss by being robbed. And many times before and since have found
dangerous baits in my Food, and perilous traps and snares laid for me in my way.

Having been in London a long while, I had a desire to see my Country, and
therefore took a Farm there, intending thereby to be helpful to the remainder
of my Children these last Years: and though I thought to live below the
Weather, yet Malice wrought against me strangely there, by killing or stealing
my Cattle in the Night, and throwing open my Corn and Grass to be eaten up, and
sometimes turning my Cattle to other grounds, that they might be killed or
pounded; yea stigmatized Felons were brought to a Court, there to swear falsely
against me, and the best of my Beasts were presently driven away by a Levari,
though I owed nothing to the Party that procured it, neither should I be
permitted to make my defense to evidence the Truth; and being so many ways, and
so greatly damnified, I was forced to remove thence.

In searching Old Authors for Advice in my Straits, and finding good
satisfaction therein, I was induced to translate and print some of their
Writings, calling them Fatherly Instructions: And being extremely aggrieved
with the wrongs done me and others, some openly, but the most secretly,
Iniquity working in a Mystery, and that like it is Author invisibly; so that
when I felt the smart, I must prophecy who smote me, as the Crucifiers of our
Savior bid him do: I added to it that Appendix, called Gildas Minimus, which I
wrote to dissuade from Apostasy, and those other Abominations that are like to
be very pernicious to these Nations, if not timely repented of. And expecting
Calamity to come on the Land, I wrote in it these few Verses, which then I was
loath to print: Ah Nations proud, he that with many tears
Bewailed your Sins, some causes of his fears
Has written here, amend e're with great smart
A Pensil keen engrave them in your Heart.


Poisons and secret Murders seemed most horrible to me, and the Curses
pronounced against them very formidable, as appears in the case of the Men of
Anathoth, for seeking to destroy the Prophet Jeremy thereby. What we read in
Chapter 11. v. 19. of his Prophecy, Let us destroy the Tree with the Fruit,
the Septuagint render, (...), the vulgar Latin, Mittamus lignum in panem ejus,
another, Corrumpamus lignum in pane ejus, the Chald. Paraphr. Mittamus venenum
mortiferum in cibo ejus ut disperdamus eum, which is in English, Let Us put
deadly poison in his meat, that we may destroy him. In 22, 23 Verses, the Lord
shows how he would recompense them for it; Their young men should die by the
Sword, their Sons and Daughters by Famine, and there should be no remnant of
them.

Having diligently sought Direction of God by Study and Prayer, I got my Mind
fully satisfied, that to follow the Precepts and Examples of Christ, and his
inspired Servants, Prophets, Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, is the
only safe way for living and dying, for doing and suffering, which is the cause
I do not run with the stream of the World, nor take the same course as most do,
because it is so much differing from that pattern; which instructed me what to
do in my case in reference to God and Man. My Soul was earnestly stirred up to
examine the Evidence of my Interest in God, and to look to my self, that I live
in Obedience to his Gospel, and by seeking of him with a contrite Heart, he
enabled me to fear him more than those that can kill my Body, and to be willing
to suffer rather than wilfully to sin against him, and to partake of the
Afflictions of the Gospel, rather than of the pleasures of Sin. I carefully
looked to my deporument toward Men both high and low, yielding Obedience,
tribute and tax to whom they were due, praying for Superiors as earnestly as
for my self; and when I had opportunity to be serviceable to the public, in
correcting Welsh Books, or any thing else, I discharged my Duty with diligence
and Faithfulness. And though I have been deprived of my Preferment, which might
have raised me a little out of harms reach, that I should not be trodden under
all vulgar feet, yet I can be content, when I consider how stormy, tossing and
sinful the World has been, ever since I was concerned to manage any thing in
it, making it difficult or impossible for Scholars to obtain preferment, and
keep it during Life, without doing and saying, if not swearing contradictories,
using of Flatteries, and many questionable practices. Sometimes in my Dangers
and Losses I made lawful application to Magistrates for protection, where I had
any hopes to be heard, and never meddled with any Plots to molest them, being
observant of the Oath of Allegiance; and in case I had not sworn, I thought it
inconsistent with my Christianity to live in Fraud or Treachery, and speaking
peace to lie in wait for Blood or Spoil. And should I by the wrongfulness of my
Sufferings by persuaded of the lawfulness of my defense by resisting any of my
Oppressors, my destitute Condition for many Years warns me sufficiently not to
expect any to assist me therein: And if it would be imprudence in a Hercules to
engage against two Persons, surely it would be so for me alone to assault
Legions. Since my Troubles grew extreme, I could have but few to join with me
in Prayer, and other Gospel Duties; and if they would not shed tears with me,
it is not likely they would shed Blood for me; Vanae sine viribus irae.

As I am not Conscious to my self of any Crime against Superiors, I am
ignorant also what others think of me in that respect, for no Body tells me
what my Affliction is for. When Joab's Corn was consumed, he knew of whom to
enquire the cause of it, and how to prevent such another loss. But no body is
found to deal so well with me, as an ill Man did with him. So that I must say
to every Instrument of my Affliction, as our Savior to him that buffeted him
most wrongfully: If I have spoken or done evil, bear witness of the evil, but
if well, why smitest thou me?

And as I kept innocence toward those above me, I did so also toward those
about me, not seeking to wrong, hurt, or defile any in Soul or Body, Name, or
Goods, either secretly or openly, traudulently or violently; yea, sometimes I
had opportunity, and took it to show benevolence not only to my Friends, but to
my Foes also, by praying, admonishing, and helping them in outward needs, and
if I can I will do so again. I acknowledge that under great pressures I have
complained of my wrongs, and the doers thereof, to such as might dissuade them
from their evil; but that I did any thing publicly or privately, with
intention to bring any of them to punishment, I utterly deny; and if any
mischief befell any of them, it has been without my Design, Contrivance, or
Consent. Yea, I am not without fears, lest some of my dear Relations, and
loving Acquaintance, have been prejudiced by my Persecutors, upon occasion of
my Friendly Converse with them, or Communication of them* And if it be so, I
hope God will not impute to me what was done against my Will, any more than the
Death of those innocent Children to the Wise Men that came to worship Christ at
his Birth, who though wise, yet contrary to their expectation, by their devout
Enquiry stirred up Herod's Cruelty, tidings of a meek Savior making him a
Bloody Destroyer beyond all suspicion. My Disposition was Moderate also toward
the established Ecclesiastical Government, acknowledging it is usefulness in
exhibiting the Scriptures and Prayers to these Nations in their vulgar Tongues,
upholding Learning, and a deal of smooth and grave Praying and Preaching, and
melodious Singing, which I hope by some are devoutly improved: And the
generality it keeps in a Customary Profession of the Christian Religion,
hitherto keeping out Popery, Mahometanism, and Paganism, which are embraced by
other Nations.

Yet forasmuch as the greatest part of our Countries are void of true Grace,
and Christian Godliness, or the likeness of it, as we may well conclude by
Scripture and Experience, and therefore unfit to communicate at Christ's Table,
and to do many other Duties demanded in the Gospel, I think it dangerous that
Christ should be deprived of a Spiritual, Zealous, Holy Worship, and
Church Government, according to the pattern given us in the New Testament. And
therefore am glad for the liberty given to such as God enlightens and sanctifies
with his good Spirit, and makes able to live according to the Gospel, to meet
together in Christ's Name, to worship him with their Spirits, and to participate
of his Supper, being the seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4. and to exercise
Spiritual Instruction and Discipline, as he has ordained, and which the carnal
multitudes in all Nations are unqualified for. As praying in the Spirit,
pouring out their Souls with groans and tears, and elevated affections in
thanksgivings, without external Monitors, as Christ and his Servants did in
Primitive times, John 17. Acts 4. 24. Romans 8. 26, 27. preaching with warmth and
earnestness, Comforting others with the same comforts that themselves are
comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 4. Spiritually admonishing and restoring a lapsed
Brother, and casting out the impenitent, that God may have a clean though
little Temple to dwell in, and not a Den of Thieves. And though of a long time
my Afflictions have bereaved me of the help of such Gospel Society, and
forcibly hindered me to exercise my Talent, as I would, for the promoting
thereof, yet I congratulate that others may have it.

Envy need not counterwork this matter, the success thereof in this sinful Age
not being like to be exceeding great. Providence in Judgment for our
Provocations, threatening to remove our Candlesticks, rather than promising to
increase our Lights. And the way that leads to Heaven being narrow, and not
paved with Pearls, nor strewed with Temporal alluring Flowers, but Thorns
rather, will be frequented but by few. If there be no pieces of Silver given to
the Judases, but that they be left as destitute as the Nathaniels, if the
setting Dogs and Wolves in Sheepsclothing fare no better than the innocent
Lambs, 'twill be apparent that Christ's true Disciples be but a little Flo^k;
Virtue being poor, seldom has many Suitors. Though the Apostles and their
immediate Successors in outward poverty drew many followers after them by the
sweet Ointment poured forth upon them, and the power of miraculous Healing; yet
now the Case is altered in the following circumstances. Then the Gentile
Churches were in their fruitful Youth and teeming Season, and brought forth
many Sons and Daughters by the Gospel seed; but now they are grown old,
withered and barren; both the Eastern and Western Nations having neglected to
walk according to the Gospel for many Generations, the Lord in anger permits
them to obey unrighteousness; and because they received not the love of the
Truth that they might be saved, they are left to continue in strong delusion.
In the last days times are predicted to be very perilous, and little Gracious,
2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. The Spirit of God also being so generally mocked, becomes more
reserved; Christ refusing to work because of Unbelief, and other heinous sins,
which makes religious Duties in most places less vigorous than they have been
formerly.

Furthermore, The World needs not fear hurt by godly Ones, whether they be many
or few, together or asunder; Hypocrites I do not plead for. As our Saviors
Kingdom is not of this World, so his Childrens main part of it is not here, but
elsewhere laid up with him, and therefore have the less need to fight in its
defense with carnal Weapons. Their Armor is spiritual, Faith their
Breast Plate, Zeal their Fire, Tears their Bullets, and these are used for
their Enemies protection and salvation. So that the World may expect benefit by
having good men in it: I mean not that benefit which some Politics write of,
That the Prince is safer by having Subjects at Variance, as Cato would keep
Servants that were at odds with one another, that if one imbezled any thing,
the other might betray him. If differences among men be of use to their
Governor, there are enough about worldly matters. But I mean such a benefit as
Joseph brought upon the House of Potiphar. All Mankind at present is more
beholding to eight such Persons in Noah's Family, than to all the multitudes in
that Age, though mighty and of Renown, Genesis 6. and well it had been for Sodom
and Gomorrah, if ten righteous ones had been tolerated among them.

And though the World need not fear hurt by the preservation of Gods Servants,
yet it should greatly fear it for their destruction. Saul and all Israel with
him paid dear for slaying the Priests of the Lord, and so did Jerusalem for
slaying his Son, and stoning his Prophets: And probably wrath for Persecuting
is one deadly Ingredient in the Cup of Trembling now put into the hands of most
Nations, to cause in them such a Bloody Flux. It were well for these Nations in
the present dangers, if all Parties ceasing from Spite, and calling one another
to their several Devotions, as the Mariners did in Jonah's Tempest, could with
their joint endeavor pacify God. It Is to be much doubted whether the Melody
of our Organs and Temples can drown the Cries of our Sins, and the wailings of
the Fatherless and Widows; or that the Halls of our Corporations be so well
furnished with Civil or Spiritual Righteousness, or our Country Barns with
such good Wheat, as will keep off the Fire of Gods wrath from consuming us as
Stubble and Tares, without more general amendment. It would prove a beneficial
Indulgence, if the languid spirits of the several Forms of our Religion should
be so well revived, as to be able to divert, or overcome those strong
Judgments, that our Irreligion is like to bring upon us.

In my Case I have had many Experiences of Gods goodness; I have seen much of
his Power and Faithfulness in all my Troubles: I put my trust in him, though I
saw for certain that most of the World about me was against me: Great and
Small, Friends and Foes, Professors and Profane, Relations and Strangers, some
reproaching me to the World, and accusing me to men in Power, some robbing and
defrauding me of my Estate, some tempting me to Uncleanness, others poisoning
my Body; some writing, others Preaching against me, and such Ordinances were
mounted in many Pulpits as were levelled at me, not to edify, but to batter
down my spiritual Comforts, and I should hear terrifying Voices not from black
Clouds only, but from bright ones also; insomuch that such as knew my Integrity
durst not own me, but were afraid to consort with me; and seeing me set up as a
Mark for all to shoot at which venomed Arrows, they were cautious of coming
near me, lest they should be hit also; yet when all forsook me, the Lord stood
with me, and has hitherto delivered my Life from the innumerable Dangers
assaulting it. And though he permitted most of my Estate to be gone from me,
yet he gives me content and necessary Supplies to this day, and good Hopes of
having in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance, and more comfortable
Mansions, and Relations, than those I am deprived of. Divine Providence in my
behalf gives evidence, that the Foolishness of God is wiser than subtle
Devils, and his Weakness stronger than mighty malicious men; and that such as
put their trust in him shall not be confounded, whatever they suffer for his
sake; and when this frail Life is offered up, he will give me that of whose
Duration and Felicity I shall never be deprived.

The Lord has been often pleased to let me have Experiment also of his
readiness to hear my Cries in all my straits: When in sorrows for Losses, or
apprehensions of Dangers, my Soul is cast down or disquieted within me, by
making my Application to God in earnest Prayer, I usually obtain Comfort, and
shall be as secure and peaceable in my Mind, as if nothing ailed me. In my
Distresses I have had my Heart enlarged to pour out supplications to the Author
of Life, and found them sure Antidotes against the Infection of Temptations
that seek the destruction of my Soul, and against the painful Operations of
poison in my Body, and have sometimes obtained ease before I arose from off my
Knees. When I had a swelling on the side of my Neck, which could not be abated
by taking Physic, soliciting God for help, I had notice by Dream to cut an
Issue, which dispersed the Humor in few weeks. Once a Carpenter working at my
House slit his Finger with his Hatchet, and though the Blood at that time was
soon stanched, yet the man being gone to his Lodging, and opening the wound to
one that was skilful in Cures, thereat it fell a Bleeding again so violently,
that no means could stop the Blood till several quarts of it were lost, and the
man brought to the point of Death. Being called out of my Bed, I went to him,
and being grieved to see him in that Condition, and the more, because he was
hurt at my House, I called upon God in his behalf, and immediately after it
came into my Mind that putting his Arm in cold Water might be a means to help
him: And thereupon I held his Arm from his Elbow to his Wrist in Water, and
plied it with a wet Cloth, and presently the Blood recoyled and stopped; and
though the wounded Man fell into a Swoon that Morning, yet in due time he
recovered his perfect Health. It pleased God in that great need to put me upon
that Remedy, which before I had never thought of. Long ago I had a sensible
attack by some Spirit, and deliverance from him while I called on God. Having
sat up late at my Study, and none being with me in the room, I thought I heard
the rusling of one behind me, when I turned I could see no body. As soon as I
was in bed, something near me made a snarling noise like that of Cats fighting,
but somewhat louder, and several times blew at my throat very violently: I
thought the wind of it stronger than that which comes from Black smiths
Bellows. In my Fright I fell to Prayer, and before I had uttered many words in
it, the storm ceased.

Lastly, I observe that the Lord exerted his righteousness many times in my
Concerns. I have often seen his hand pleading my Cause with those that injured
me, and dealing severely with them, and that without my contrivance; for I
addicted not my self to seek revenge upon them, when I seemed to have some
advantage for it. Some that unanimously molested me while I was Beneficed,
afterward fell out among themselves, and ruined one another. Some that were
active in depriving me, died suddenly thereupon. And the Officer that commanded
the rude Soldiers to carry me to Prison, soon after fell out with his own
Kinsfolk, which caused great disturbance in Markets by tumultuous fightings,
and in open Sessions by mutual Suits at Law. And near the same time Twelvemonth
as he sent me to Denbigh Gaol, he went into the great Sessions held in the said
Town, to wage Law against his Adversaries, and there in the heat of Anger was
suddenly dispatched by a violent Fever. Others besides me, took notice how his
Judgment in the sight of the County pointed at his late Oppressing injury. And
within two or three years after most of his rude men died also in the prime of
their Age. I might give many Instances more of this kind. I wish the rest of my
Persecutors may take Example, and not be made such.

Though I have not laid down here one wrong of a hundred inflicted on me, nor
one Mercy of a Thousand God showed me, yet it may be sufficient (if the Lord
please) that Iniquity may stop her mouth, and the considerate understand the
Loving Kindness of the Lord: And I fear here is more than some will either
improve or bear at present: But that in Gods time they may receive Repentance
and Mercy upon Examination of their ways, shall be the Prayer of

London, July 1. 1691. Charles Edwards.

FINIS.
The Writer hereof has many British and English Books by him to sell.


