THE Protestant Conformist: OR, A PLEA FOR MODERATION, Contained in a LETTER
FROM One Conforming MINISTER to another: and His ANSWER to it.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chappel. M.DC.LXXIX.

Dear and Reverend Sir,
IF you knew how severely I charge my self with my remisness in answering your
last, you would more readily pardon me; and when I consider your candor and
moderation, I cannot (upon my involuntary transgressions) despair of your
Clemency: for amongst all those worthy Qualities that adorn you, and whereby
you adorn the Gospel, and our Function, That virtue or rather grace of
Moderation has graven the most deep and indelible characters of endearedness
upon me; and though your worth has placed you above contempt, and not left so
bright a Taper under a Bushel, yet I could even wish for the sakes of others,
that you were posted in a more conspicuous Eminency, that (in this sense also)
your Moderation might be known unto all men.

And now that I have so grateful a Theme, I cannot so easily take leave of it,
but that I must beg your pardon if (waving till the next opportunity some other
things I should have mentioned to you) I go on to bemoan the too evident and
epidemick want of this Christian virtue amongst those of us that justly pretend
to the best form of Christianity, as most suitable to the revealed will of God,
and the Pattern of the most pure and Primitive times: For as to our adversaries
objecting of Novelty upon us, it has been so fully and clearly redargued, that
I need not meddle with it. That I would be at, is, To convince my Brethren, the
Sons of my Mother, of the absolute necessity and seasonableness of this Grace
of Moderation, as the Causa sine qua non of the supporting and continuance of
our Reformed Religion. I tell you no news, because you have sometimes observed
it to me, That our Roman Adversaries (who like their Pagan Predecessors will
per fas aut nefas be masters of the World) can manage any Game, Play on any
Instrument, work with all Tools, transcend Proteus in change of shapes, have
while we slept (with the assistance of their Master) sown Tares in our Field,
which now they so carefully water and cherish that they expect a plentiful
Harvest, I mean those Dissentions and Animosities amongst Protestants, and to
that degree of bitterness, clamor, and reviling each other, that they hope it
shall not end there, but that (their other great Engines having lately
miscarried) they may sit still a while and see us with delight carrying on
their work for them how well do they know that a Kingdom or Church divided
against it self cannot stand? And though they need not to be Disciples to the
Florentine (for Ignatius his Conclave has far outdone him yet that short
Recipe, of Divide and Impera, they find such a never-failing Medicine, as they
have thereby Horse-leach'd a great deal of the best blood in Europe. What
Quacks are these in most Princes Courts? Who knows not what their Residence at
Vienna, and their hanging there (more close than Pendants) at that soft Head of
that Spread (or rather shattered) Eagle, has done? how have they drawn him to
make Enemies of good Subjects in Hungary, because Protestants? and by his
inexorable cruelty to them for Religions sake, to pull down with his own hands
the Ramparts of Christendom, by forcing those who heretofore were the Remora in
the Crescents Progress Westward, to take Protection under the growing but more
prudent Turk? How these Earwigs swarmed about Madrid and the Escurial whilst
there was any likelihood of the Austrian Families doing their work, and how
upon the decline of that they have crawld about the Flower de Lis, (for these
Summer-Insects do adore Eastward, and have no Deity but the rising-Sun); how
they (the most sedulous servants in Vulcan's shop) have plied their Bellows at
the Louvre, till their inflations have so swollen that already great-enough mind,
that the best part of Europe will hardly hold it, and most Nations of it have
smarted for presuming by just defense to interrupt his growing Glory? and how
they have horn-bound for several years past the Bavarian Duke, though never
without a considerable Army, from assisting his Neighbor Princes against the
Galick Invasions, they are strangers to the Affairs of Europe that know not.

And the Paris Cabal can tell us, that that fine Texture of setting the
Northern Princes of the Reformed Religion by the ears, was first spun in
Loyola's Parlour, though wrought up by Parisian Statists. I might trace the
Vestigia of these Hellish bloodhounds through many Countries, till I should
lose my self and weary you; but refer you to Mr. Wadsworth's Memoirs (which you
have seen e're this) for some of their Projects in Germany, wherein they
esteemed it a Masterpiece so to order the matter, as to set a Calvinist Prince
against a Lutheran, and so e contra.

But now, Sir, having been long enough a Transmarine Observer, (and considering
the case last mentioned makes me a good Errant home) I conclude it more than
high time to return, for I find they are arrived before me: And how willingly
would I lend my Optic Glasses to thousands of Protestants (otherwise I hope
loyal and well qualified) whose will or uncharitable humor so hanging in their
light, hinders them from seeing how busy at work these Scorpions are amongst
us: we need not to be sent back to 88, or the fifth of November. Anno 1605. These
Histories are believed by all good Protestants, though Apocryphal to them who
would act the same over again; and indeed if we will take their own words ex
post facto, they were never guilty of Treasons, bloody Conspiracies and
Tragedies, no not they. Oh what omnipotent Priests have they! that can, as they
make a god of Bread, make Treason and Guilt after a shrift to lose their nature
and the most enormous Traitors like Children unborn, innocent of all sins but
original, and that but some of them!

The worst on it is, that not only they have the Brass to impose on the World,
but that some of our selves have the facility (I dare not call it charity) to
take these counter feits for good coin, and forsooth out of animosity to other
Protestants to believe the Papists innocent. I defy the best Scholar of the
^ame Spanish Soldier to help forward the Popish Design more effectually than we
should do, were we but all o^ this mind; for my part, far be it from me to
palliate or extenuate Treasons or Rebellions under the Cloak of Religion and
Reformation, for these instead of setting a better gloss fix a deeper stain, or
more inexpiable guilt and horrid brand upon the Action and Actors; yet when all
is done you are satisfied as well as I that in the beginnings of our late
wretched Wars one might say of many of the other Party as of those that went
with Absalom, they went in the simplicity of their heart, and they knew not any
thing; to my knowledge many of them did as much as possible condole the horrid
consequences of that War, and did believe as you and I also did, that the
Finger of Joab had an unseen motion in those affairs, though personally and
visibly acted by men whose after climbing to the seat of Government showed what
was before in their hearts; as he sees little in the world that knows not that
the self-same Design may not be endeavored and driven on by men of contrary
Principles, and for contrary ends. I had not insisted on this so well known
already to you, but that I hear with some grief our young Levites (who neither
saw nor suffered what we did) Hectoring at that rate against some innocent
Protestants, and which my Ink it seems should blush to recite, declaring that
they would rather close with the Papists, than admit of composure with
Dissenting Protestants.

It is an ordinary Observation, That a quarrel amongst nearest Relations is
often most grievous; but when one of such for mere revenge will unite himself
to the mortal enemy of both, who will not affirm him void of not only grace but
good nature! Oh degenerate Age!

Where is that Evangelical peace and love, our Saviors blessed Legacy! where is
that servent charity! is it turned into burning hatred? Where Is that Moderation
we should show unto all men! is it degenerated into the most inexorable rancor?
That sheep should stray and sometimes encounter one another in the absence of
the wolf is not strange; but when the wolves come, they at least unite, and not
having power to resist, fly together. That these wolves of Romulus abound
amongst us, all now that are not already guld by them. But to elude the care of
our vigilant Shepherds, these Monsters worse than that which Hercules wrestled
with, have dwindled the Wolf into a Fox, and to avoid suspicion have cunningly
covered that too with Lambs wool, that it requires much circumspection to
discover them.

He that has read the Legend of their Clownish St. Francis, and the story of
the Illuminati, will easily believe who are the Fathers of our Quaking Sect,
though themselves possibly know not; and it is too eviden that they have
screwed themselves, and transsused their Influences into all the several
Persuasions amongst us, none excepted. And as they take the cawls of our sheep
in the fields for compounding their Fire balls to burn our Cities, so in
compensation they instill wilder fire under the notion of zeal, (an excellent
grace of it self, but misguided, of most dismal effects) into the sheep of the
great Shepherd, to the renewing of the complaint, Homo homini Lupus. And
without controversy, if they find their expected success, these Flambeaus will
much more prompt their work, than those they bestowed so freely toward the
destroying of our Mother-city in 66.

And that we may better conjecture what they are doing elsewhere, I shall give
you a skantling of what we observed in my own Parish, though too late taken
notice of, else probably the world might have known the persons as well as the
design: Two Gentlemen pretty well accoutred took up a Lodging together, they
seemed no contemptible persons, nor wanted moneys, they both wore Perukes, and
which made some the more suspicious of them) had considerable variety, and
differing much in color, yet seldom made use of their Flaxen ones in Town, but
as one of the Maids of the house observed, he that rode abroad oftenest took
one of that sort in his Coatpocket; the Neighborhood begun to imagine them
Highway-men, but one of them seldom riding abroad during their six Months stay
here, and their orderly Decorum and converse, begot a better opinion of them;
one was observed to go frequently to the meetings of Dissenters, and there
behave himself as seriously as any of them; the other when he was not out of
Town (sot he commonly ordered his Journeys on Friday or Saturday, and returned
on Monday) would mostly come to the Parish Church, and to any ones sight demean
himself very devoutly: He would ordinarily as ^e could find opportunity be in
the company of good Consormists, and if none else happened to speak of
Church Affairs he would break the Ice, and mostly begin with magnifying the
Church of England as the best constituted in the world; and after a large
Harangue (for he could speak with a Grace) would bemoan the Divisions in it,
and conclude with the necessity of extirpating all Dissenters root and branch;
for else, says he, those Samaritans will never rest till they have yazed it to
the very ground. This was his ordinary Theme, though with some variation of
words, till one time a good Neighbor of mine zeplied upon him: Sir, It Is a
true saying, it is easier to give than take Counsel; how do you practice what
you advise to, while it appears your Comerade your bosom-friend is one that
frequents Conventicles, and is daily in the company of such, cannot you either
win him or discard him? Oh, Sir, says he, I must tell you he is my intimate
friend of a long standing, and I can digest his conversation in all things but
that, which for good reasons I do a little indulge, for by him I have in this,
as well as other places where we have resided (my Neighbor thought this slipped
undesignedly from him) the advantage of knowing their secret discourses and
machinations against the Church, and thereby the means of justly inciting the
zeal of such good men as you against this generation of Vipers. This stirred up
the choler of an honest Mechanic that had quietly listened all this while,
that he broke silence thus: For my part I neither like you nor your friend; and
it is well if you be not brethren in evil, or like Sampson's Foxes that you turn
tails to do mischief; it is well known in the Town that I go constantly to
Church, and yet (I hope here is no Informers here) I often hear an honest
Minister preach elsewhere, and I hope my care of being instructed for another
world will neither offend the Justices, nor the Parson. If I had heard any
preach sedition, I would have quickly (as it is my duty) have acquainted the
Magistrates with it. But I tell you, (and then he spoke with more impatience I
never heard a man in my life talk so disloyally as your companion, so that I
have carefully avoided his company of late; and he has so bedawbed the Church
of England, and rendered the fears of Tyranical usage from them so formidable,
and that they would use us worse than Papists, that I believe his design was to
turn us Papists; and however most of the people that have any degree of
Prudence and sobriety could wish him with his fellows in Newgate, yet there is
one or two that I fear he has perverted, and it may be we shall hear more of
him, or you elsewhere; for I heard this very day of one of your haunts not far
from this place.

This smart Reply of an inconsiderable man, was rebuked by some as too malepert
to a stranger of seeming quality; but approved by others, as likely to have in
it as much of Truth as he wanted of Patience. The Gentleman concerned, though
he could not keep his color from changing, yet keeping his countenance as well
as he could; said, Gentlemen, I have sojourned now about six Months amongst
you, and I hope none has found incivility from me, neither have I till now
encountered any rudeness from any person, to the honor of your Town I speak;
and now that this mean person whose employment is about the feet, should thus
flee in my face, and to express his causeless pique against me, turn all his
Tools into Awls to gore that Reputation my fair deportment has obtained amongst
you, it is somewhat grievous; but when you have known me as long as him, you
will know how-little I have deserved to be thus accosted.

Hereupon the Company broke up, some of whom came and related the whole to me;
my advice was that they should acquaint the Magistrates, and take a Constable
with some assistance to search their Chamber, which (the day being far spent)
they resolved to do next morning. But before many people in the Town were up,
these hopeful Chickens had taken the wing; and notwithstanding all our care by
Messengers and Letters, where we imagined they had haunted, we could meet with
no further satisfaction than that our Town was well quit of them; and that by
their designed evil, this good is arrived to us, that my Parishioners of all
sorts live in more love and charity than heretofore: those of both parties that
have been most enflamed by these Boutefeus to the greatest height of animosity,
being most ashamed that they should have been over-acted by those Roman
Engines. Some of the Servants of that Inn where they Lodged, have since (which
they considered not in time) told several stories of having seen Beads and
other Trinkets too tedious now to recite. The story and design are plain
enough, they need no Comment.

Some that are backward to believe any thing against such men, will be ready to
say, Quorsum haes perditio, would they take such care and pains to play at such
small games? With the leave of such incredulous, this is no small game; for as
I hinted before, this is their chief though aftergame, and as like to do their
Jobb for them as any enterprise they ever undertook.

For my own particular I shall, by Gods assistance, keep my station, and I hope
rather grow than decline in that grace of Moderation I so much prise and praise
in you; and if some of our Tribe will go on to Lord it over Gods Heritage,
instead of being Ensamples to their Flock, or learning of Christ to be meek and
lowly in spirit: If others will be smiting their fellow servants, etc. I shall
make it my Prayers and constant endeavor that when my Lord and Master comes he
may not find me so doing.

Dear Sir, I was not so confident of any worth in what I could observe or
relate, but that I was about to caution you to avoid exposing it; but since that
might strustrate the end for which I have given you this trouble, I leave it to
your own Prudence to communicate as you think fit. I am,

SIR, Your unworthy Fellow Servants, N. Y.
September. 13. 1679.
An Answer to the former LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
ALthough your affections do blind your judgment, to think better of me than I
deserve, yet I hope you will always find me a true lover and practicer of that
moderation, which (is so much my duty, and which) you so much adore. I am very
well contented with the Station in which God has set me; High places will not
suit with such weak heads as mine: I am not sorry I am out of that temptation,
lest a Vertigo should take me, and make me fall down the precipice which lies
before me. I cordially approve of the honest design of your ingenious Letter,
and have taken the liberty (which you did not deny me) to putlish it, with my
own approbation of it.

He must wilfully shut his eyes, that will not see how busy the Jesuits and
Romish Emissaries are, both at home and abroad, to promote their grand design;
and how all things are lawful with them, that are useful to promote their
Catholic Cause: Their late desperate hellish Plot against the person of a
Prince so full of clemency toward them, and against our Civil and Religious
Liberties, as English men and Protestants; their devilish designs to destroy
our persons, and to enslave our consciences and posterities, may justly raise
our just indignation against them; and put us upon study and endeavors, to
beget a right understanding between all true Protestants, and not to narrow, or
weaken the interest of our Church, by our her childish contentions and
divisions; but to unite and strengthen it what we can, against the common enemy
that is undermining of it. Alas! our young raw heads grow giddy, and, I fear,
gaze so much at the golden Cup, that they will be easily tempted to drink of
the poisonous abominations contained in it. Nothing is more obvious to common
observation, than the Jesuits transforming themselves into all shapes, and
mingling themselves with all parties, to heat and heighten men's spirits, and to
soment and widen differences between true Protestants: And as no party can
excuse or clear themselves from having been abused by them, so all had need to
be watchful lest they give advantage and encouragement to them. It Is pleasant
to read the story acted in your Parish, and the wise improvement and advantage
that both you and your parishoners make of it. I heartily pray, that both you
and I may obtain mercy from God, to be faithful and diligent in our work, That
whilst others are found eating and drinking with the drunken, and smiting their
fellow servants; we may be like that faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord
will make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due
season.

We have two of the most precious, excellent things in the world committed to
our trust, viz. The glorious Gospel of the blessed God, and the precious souls
of men, and if we did more seriously mind the discharge of our trust, we should
find little heart or leisure to quarrel with others about trifles. I cannot but
bewail the unseasoanble heats of our younger fry, whose bitter zeal runs out
against persons and things which they do not understand. How nauseous is it to
sober ears, to hear a Hectoring youngster let fly at Jack Calvin, whom our
Reverend Prelates and Doctors of the Church (who were better Champions for the
Church of England, than these Novices are like to make) did never mention
without reverence and respect; as is evident to any versed in the Writings of
A. Bp. Whitgift, Bp. Andrews, Bp. Bilson, Dr. Willet, etc? Though perhaps it is
but a man of Straw of their own making, that these valiant Champions are
crowing over: And to hear these inveigh against our first and most zealous
Reformers, for some different apprehensions, or expressions, about some
abstruser and darker points, which (themselves have never studied nor
understood) and the Articles of the Church of England seem so much to favor,
is loathsome to sober minds; and begets an opinion in those that have any
prejudice against, or are dissenters from the Church of England, that we are
returning again to Rome, and enemies to the Reformation they first promoted.
Again, the putting all dissenters in the same rank, and bespattering them with
the names of Schismatics, Factious, and Seditious (though many of them do not
break communion with us) to me seems very harsh and unreasonable, if not
unjust. It Is well known to the world, there be many learned, sober, godly men
amongst them (some whereof, you and I have the happiness of a prositable
acquaintance, and sweet conversation with) who though they be not satisfied to
do some things the Law requires, (and which our Church might well spare, if our
Rulers saw meet to dispense with them) that otherwise are as true to, and some
of them as zealous, able Champions for the Doctrine of the Church of England,
as any of our selves. This foolish dividing humor, helps to widen, and keep
open the difference between true Protestants; and men's distances from, and
unacquaintedness with each other, makes them to look upon one another as
Hobgoblins, and frightful apparitions; whereas a more familiar acquaintance and
converse together, would let men see that they are not such Bugbears and
monsters, as some fiery Zealots on both sides represent them to be. When I came
first to this place, my Predecessor (who was a Don Furioso against Dissenters,
and looked upon himself thereby as better qualified for the Preferment which he
obtained) told me I must beware of such persons in my Parish that were
dangerous, factious, and turbulent fellows; and of such a Minister (who
preached amongst them) as a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition. But upon
a little trial and observation, I found they were the most serious diligent
Auditors I had; and upon a further enquiry after them, and acquaintance with
them, I perceived they were such as lived most conscientiously in the practice
of the great unquestionable duties of Christianity in all my Parish. I saw none
so charitably disposed upon any good occasion; none more just in their
dealings, none more ready or willing to give me my just dues; none more
peaceable among their neighbors, striving to prevent or compose differences;
none more careful to sanctify the Sabbath, to instruct their Children and
Servants; and to pray in their Families, making conscience both of first and
second Table Duties; and in one word, ready to every good work. I wish I could
say so of all those that glory to be styled true Sons of the Church of England;
and which he commended to me as such, whose zeal runs out mainly, if not only
for Rites and Ceremonies, and will cry devoutly on the Lords day with us in the
public Liturgy, Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners; and yet live all
the week without any open or solemn acknowledgment of God in their Families.
And as for the Minister he gave such a character of, I found him an holy,
learned, modest, self-denying man, who seems to have no design but to get to
Heaven himself, and to get as many thither with him as possibly he can. He is
frequently my Auditor, and I have much pleasing conversation with him. It Is the
grief of my soul that we cannot take such men into our Pulpits (without
offense), who if they might but have that liberty, would never run into corners
as we now drive them. And this Gentleman (to shun all occasions of offense)
never Preaches in the time of our public Service, but the people come
constantly to hear me, and when we have done, he Preaches to them, and many
others go to hear him, which I am not offended at, but rather bless God for
such an helper in my work.

And truly we may talk what we will of the Church of England, but if we do not
take care to build up the Church of God, and encourage men to serious diligence
about the business of Salvation, we may please our selves with such a notion,
but neither God nor man will be pleased with us. It Is no part of our prudence
nor interest, (I am sure none of our duty to widen the breaches, and weaken the
interest of true Protestants, but rather to study all amicable and peaceable
ways, to bring things to a better composure and to strengthen one another
hands against the common enemy. It was no pleasing sight to me, to see so many
of our Function to show so much zeal and heat (at our late Election of Knights
for this Shire to serve in Parliament) for such a Gentleman -- who though he
may be an honest Gentleman, and might serve his Country faithfully for ought I
know; yet both you and I know that he is untried, and a younger inexperienced
man, and never manifested that zeal and courage for the Protestant Religion,
and the Property of the Subject (which are the two things at this time chiefly
to be looked after) as his Competitor has done. And whether he be sufficiently
ballasted, and fortified against the temptations he might meet with in such a
station, is doubtful to all, especially to those that consider how the Papists
generally fall in with him, and the charge he is at (whether at his own cost,
or others, is not material) to procure it. I know both you and I are exposed to
the censure of some of our Brethren for not voting with them; and reproached
for being for a Fanatic or Presbyterian (though the Gentleman is known to hold
communion with the Church of England, and as conformable as the Law requires.)
And truly if sobriety and seriousness, and zeal for the Protestant Religion,
and the Properties of Englishmen, must denominate men for Fanatics, and
Presbyterians, we shall give the party so styled, a great reputation and
veneration in the minds of men, and draw contempt upon our own heads; and if we
go on at this rate, we shall make Ichabod to sigh out five groans more for our
Church; and instead of advancing the honor and reputation of the Church of
England, we shall but bring further odium, and scorn and reproach upon her. I
know there are many worthy men of the Church of England, whose sobriety, and
seriousness, and learning, and zeal, and moderation, does appear to all men,
which are a grace and an honor to her; but her spurious offspring are as
little pleased with them as with Dissenters themselves. And because they will
not rail at, and revile and reproach them that differ from them in lesser
things (though the Apostle spends a whole Chapter to teach us forbearance in
these things, Romans 14 and our Master has set us a contrary example, which we
are commanded to follow. 1 Pet. 2.21, 23. and we are called hereunto, 1 Pet.
3.8, 9) they reckon them no true friends to the Church of England. But I hope
you and I have not so learned Christ, as to be shamed or frighted out of our
duty, by such as know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm We are
satisfied in our Consciences to conform to the Discipline and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, and judge the things required not tanti to make us lose the
liberty of our Ministry for not conforming to them. Though we dare not so
severely censure others who profess they cannot in conscience submit to them.
(And they have manifested the truth of their profession by exposing themselves
and families to wants and necessities, to scorns and reproaches for not doing
of it.) For men may talk what they please, but I can never believe that
learned, sober, godly, wise men, as (bating their differences) their greatest
enemies must confess many of them to be, should merely out of wilfulness,
humor, peevishness and faction, keep off from these things, to expose
themselves and families to so many troubles and inconveniences for nothing. For
how censorious soever we are against them, I wish (for the honor of the Church
of England) it be a groundless censure of some (no enemies to the Church of
England I can assure you) that profess to fear, that if ever Popery should be
established by a Law in England (which God forbid) there would not be that
number of Nonconformists to it, as was found at St. Bartholomews, 1662. You and
I may heartily wish that they saw things with our eyes. But whilst men have
such different apprehensions of things, and the Apostles rules are so express
in this case, Romans 14.5. and again, verse. 22, 23. we dare not but observe those
excellent rules the Apostle gives us in that Chapter, which we could earnestly
desire all our Brethren would study and practice; and to as many as walk
according to these Rules, mercy and peace shall be upon them, as upon the
Israel of God. It Is sad to see how we gratify the Papists, and serve their
designs; and when one Plot has miscarried, they are so successfully carrying
on another, and laugh in their sleeves to see what fools they can make of us,
to have their work done to their hands, and can fail faster and safer with a
side wind than they could with a full gale! Oh how they hug themselves to see
Protestants set together by the ears, and like Solomon's foolish woman pulling
down her house with her own hands. How many daily under the vizard of the
Church of England, by specious Pamphlets, and cunning insinuations, would make
Protestant dissenters seem worse than Papists: So that whosoever shall but
offer to speak of any danger from the Papists, or move for a vigorous
prosecution of the Plot, he is presently branded for a Fanatic and opposed by
them that pretend to be of the Church of England, as the most dangerous of the
two. If the Dissenters had been convicted of conspiring to take away the Kings
life, to subvert the Government, to alter the Established Religion, had a score
of them been Executed at Tyburn upon that account, what could have been spoken
or written more severely against them? A stranger that knows: othing of the
late Plot, taking his measures, and making his judgment by the Popular outcry
and clamor, which some that profess to be of the Church of England make, from
the Press and in discourse against them, cannot possibly believe otherwise than
that Coleman was a Presbyterian, and Whitebread, Ireland, Gavan, Harcourt, and
Turner, were all ejected Ministers at St. Bartholomews. And this course of
theirs does more amaze the observing world, because Mr. Dugdale has openly
sworn it at the Trial of Whitebread, etc. That it was the opinion of them at
Paris, and St. Omers, to fling all this upon the Presbyterians, that is the
death of the King. That if any thing of that nature should happen, they should
be ready to give the first alarm, and give it out that it was those still King
killing Presbyterians that had done the fact. (Like Nero of old that set Rome
on fire, thinking he could never have a better prospect of it than by its own
light, and then to lay it upon the Christians; and as our Powder-plotters had
their Proclamations ready (if their design had taken) to have laid it upon the
Puritans.) And so they thought they should have brought the Episcopal party
into their company to revenge themselves upon the Presbyterians. To which the
Lord Chief Justice returned, It was pretty advice indeed, to have it first laid
on the Presbyterians, that they might get the Episcopal to join and cut them
off, and then their own Throats should be cut. For if they could get these old
Fanatics dispatched out of the way, which (if we may believe them that have
turned from them to us, and been the Discoverers of the Plot) they hate and
fear as much as any of us, they would quickly find out new and fresh Fanatics;
and some are ready to think the name of Protestant would soon be lost, that we
must be all termed Papists or Fanatics. Now I must confess to you when I
compare these things with the words and practices of some that would be thought
whiteboys of the Church of England, all the blood of my body flys into my face,
(and it is either shame or anger or a passion mixed of both, that sent it
thither) to observe how ready they are to close with this Jesuitical Artifice,
and to turn their spleen and indignation upon those whom notwithstanding the
more minute differences amongst us, I dare not but own as brethren, and esteem
as zealous Protestants as our selves. In a word, if the Dissenters be guilty of
this Damnable divellish Plot, let 'em die for it; if innocent, why are they
reviled for it? And should we tempt them to think there is very little
difference between guilt and innocence, that whoever is in the fault they must
bear the blame? Sir, it concerns us now to speak, or for ever to be silent, and
to warn our people, that they do not gratify the Papists in this design. To
conclude, Ministers in Scripture are styled Watchmen, and we had need to warn
our flocks of their danger; and they are styled Fishers, and whilst others
fish for Flaces, let us fish for Souls. We need not envy them their
Pluralities, and Dignities, and Preferments, that slight and scorn the
moderation we profess; if God will but enable us to be diligent, and faithful
in our work, and make us instrumental to do good to Souls, it will be a greater
honor and comfort to us, when we come to die, than all their worldly
advantages will be to them. Dear Brother, Farewell. Let you and I take the
Apostles Exhortation, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the flock which is amongst us, taking
the oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly; not for filthy lucre
but of a ready mind; neither as being lords over Gods heritage, but being
ensamples to the flock; and when the chief shepherd shall appear, we shall
receive a crown of glory that fades not away. And this is the highest ambition
of,

Sir, Your unworthy Brother and Fellow Laborer. N. D.
September. 22. 1679.

