THE DECLARATION OF HIS Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, AND HIS General
Council OF OFFICERS: Showing the Grounds of the Armies Advance toward the
City of LONDON.

By the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX Lord General, and his
General Council of Officers held at Windsor, November 30. 1648.

Signed, John Rushworth, Secretary.

LONDON, Printed for John Partridge. 1648.

The Declaration of his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and his general
Council of Officers, showing the Grounds of the Armies advance toward the City
of London.
BEing full of sad Apprehensions concerning the danger and evil of the Treaty
with the King, and of any Accommodation with Him, or Restitution of him
thereupon, we did by our late Remonstrance, upon the Reasons and Grounds
therein expressed, make our Application thereby, unto the present House of
Commons, that the dangerous evil of that way might be avoided, and the Peace of
the Kingdom settled upon more righteous, safe, and hopeful grounds, viz. a more
equal dispensing of Justice and Mercy in relation to things done or suffered in
the late Wars, and the establishing of the future Government of this Kingdom
upon a safe Succession and equal Constitution of Parliaments, and that (for the
ending of present, and avoiding of future differences) to be ratified by an
Agreement and Subscription of the people thereunto.

This course we took, out of our tender care and earnest desire, that all ways
of Extremity might be avoided, and that those matters of highest concernment,
to the public Interest of this Nation, might be pursued, and provided for,
(if possible) by those whose proper Work and Trust it was. And herein we were
willing to hope that the persons so trusted, or the Majority of them, might
possibly have been either driven into that destructive way, by forcible
Impulsions, or lapsed thereinto through some Inconsideration, or
Misapprehensions and conceived Jealousies: And therefore we did carefully
decline the insisting upon any thing that might continue or renew any former
Jealousies or Animosities, and kept only to such things as were of necessity or
advantage to the common Cause, and of common and equal Concernment to those
that have engaged in it: Which things we pressed in the way of Reason and
Persuasion only, that they might be duly and timely considered. But to our
grief we find, in stead of any Satisfaction or a reasonable reasonable Answer
thereto, they are wholly rejected, without any consideration of what ever
Reason or Justice might be in the things set forth or propounded therein; for
what less can be understood, when the things propounded were mainly for the
avoydance of evils appearing in the Treaty with the King: And yet they put off
the consideration of them, till there should be no place left for any
consideration at all: First, laying it aside till Monday last, by which time
the Treaty (as then supposed) would have been concluded; but that failing, and
two days more being added to the Treaty, the consideration of our Remonstrance,
on the day appointed, was waved and laid aside; the Treaty, the mean while,
going on in the former way and terms, and like to be concluded the very next
day.

Now, though we are far from that presumption, that the things should therefore
be answered or considered, because propounded by us, save for the Reason,
Justice, or public Concernment therein; yet, having no Answer, or any thing
showed us to the contrary, we cannot but upon the grounds Remonstrated (and
many more which might be added) remain confident in our former Apprehensions
concerning them. And seeing the prevailing part of those, to whom we did apply,
to have, as it we, their eyes wilfully shut, and ears stopped, against any thing
of Light or Reason offered to them, we find no place left for our former
charitable or hopeful Apprehensions, concerning their error in such evil ways;
but remainng fully assured of the danger and destructiveness thereof, as to all
those public ends for which they were entrusted, and also of the just
advantage and necessity which lie in the things we have popounded and insist
on, we now see nothing left, to which their engaging and persisting in such
ways and rejection of these better things propounded, can rationally be
attributed less then a treacherous or corrupt neglect of, and Apostasy from the
public Trust-reposed in them; although we could wish from our sons, we might
yet find the contrary. Nevertheless, we do not in these things assume a
standing Power of Judgment (as of Right or Trust) to conclude others thereby,
acknowledging that to lie most properly in those whom the people duly choose
and trust to Judge for them: But considering that such power, where it is, is
committed but in Trust, and that neither this, nor any other people, did ever
give up their Natural capacities of common Sense or Reason, as to the ends and
fundamentals of that Trust, and that as to the breach of such Trust, there is
no higher formal power of man in being to Appeal unto for Judgment, in such
case (as all others concerned in such breaches of Trust will) so as we cannot
but exercise that Common Judgment which in our Natural Capacity is left to us:
And though in smaller failers of such Trust, which might be born, without
hazard of Destruction to that Interest, and those People, for which especially
the Trust is, or where the Trustees were of an indifferent equal constitution,
in reference to the whole, or where we had an orderly and open way left for a
just succession of another formal and proper Judicature to be appealed unto in
due time; we should not oppose or hold forth our private Judgments to the least
disturbance of that orderly and peaceable course of Judgment so established; yet
in our present case we are so fully convinced of the greatness and
distructiveness of those evils we have declared against, and of the necesito
and esentiallity of those better things we have desired and propounded, and how
inconsistent it is with the public Trust, and fundamental ends of it, still
to pursue the one, and reject the other, as that we dare with confidence appeal
therein to the common Judgments of indifferent and uncorrupted men, and to the
more righteous Judgment of God above all.

And as the incompetency of this Parliament, in its present constitution to
give an absolute and conclusive Judgment for the whole, (especially to be the
sole Judges of their own performance, or breach of Trust,) does make the juster
way for such an Appeal, so indeed we see no other way left for remedy, in
regard the present unlimitted, continuance of this Parliament does exclude the
orderly succession of any other more equal, formal Judicature of men, to which
we might hope in due time other ways to appeal.

Thus then we appreehend our selves in the present case, both necessitated to,
and justified in an Appeal in this Parliament, in the present Constitution as
it stands, unto the extraordinary Judgment of God, and good people; and yet in
the prosecution of this Appeal, as we shall drive it on, but to the speedy
obtaining of a more orderly and equal Judicature of men, in a just
Representive, according to our Remonstance, (wherein to acquiesce,) so in the
present procuring of Justice with the peoples ease and quiet, and in the
settling of the Kingdom upon a due, safe and hopeful succession of Parliaments:
It is our hearts desire, and shall be our endeavor, that so much, both of the
matter and form of the present Parliamentary Authority may be preserved, as can
be safe, or will be useful to these ends, until a just and full Constitution
thereof, both for matter and form (suitable to the public ends it serves for)
can be introduced.

And therefore* first, It should be our great rejoicing, (if God saw it good,)
that the Majority of the present House of Commons were become sensible of the
evil and destructiveness of their late way, and would resolvedly and vigorously
apply themselves to the speedy execution of Justice, with the righting and
easing of the oppressed people, and to a just and safe settlement of the
Kingdom upon such foundations as have been propounded by us, and others, for
that purpose, and would for the speedier and surer prosecution of these things
exclude from Communication in their Councels all such corrupt and Apostatized
Members as have appeared hitherto, but to obstruct and hinder such matter of
Justice, Safety, and public Interest, and to pervert their Conncels a
contrary way, and have therein so shamefully both falsified and forfeited their
Trust.

But how ever (if God shall not see it good to vouchsafe that mercy to them and
the Kingdom,) we shall, secondly, desire, that so many of them as God has kept
upright, and shall touch with a just sense of those things, would by
Protestation, or otherwise, acquit themselves from such breach of Trust, and
approve their faithfulness by withdrawing from those that persist in the guilt
thereof, and would apply themselves to such a posture, whereby they may
speedily and effectually* prosecute those necessary and public ends, without
such Interruptions, Diversions, or Depravations of their Councels from the
rest, to their endless trouble, oppression and hazard of the Kingdom as
formerly, and for so many of them, whose hearts God shall stir up thus to do;
we shall therein, in this case of extremity, look upon them as persons having
materially the chief Trust of the Kingdom remaining in them, and though not a
formal standing power to be continued in them, or drawn into ordinary
Presidents; yet the best and most rightful that can be had, as the present
state and exigence of Affairs now stand; And we shall accordingly own them,
adhere to them, and be guided by them in their faithful prosecution of that
Trust, in order unto, and until the introducing of a more full and formal power
in a just Repressntative to be speedily endeavored.

Now yet farther to take away all Jealousies in relation to our selves, which
might withhold or discourage any honest Members from this course, as we have
the witness of God in our hearts, that in these proceedings we do not seek, but
even resolve we will nor take advantages to our selves, either in point of
Profit or Power; and that if God did open to us a way, wherein with honesty and
faithfulness to the public Interest, and good people engaged for us, we might
presently be discharged, so as we might not in our present Employments look on,
and be accessory to, yea supporters of the Parliament, in the present corrupt,
oppressive and destructive proceedings, we should with rejoicing, and without
more ado, embrace such a discharge, rather then interpose in these things to
our own vast trouble and hazard; so if we could but obtain a rational assurance
for the effectual prosecution of these things, we shall give any proportionable
assurance on our parts, concerning, our laying down of Arms, when, and as we
should be required: But for the present, as the case stands, we apprehend our
selves obliged in duty to God, this Kingdom, and good men therein, to improve
our utmost abilities in all honest ways, for the avoiding of these great evils
we have Remonstrated, and for prosecution of the good things we have
propounded, and also that such persons who were the Inviters of the late
Invasion from Scotland, the Instigaters and Incouragers of the late
Insurrections within this Kingdom, and (those forcible ways failing) have still
pursued the same wicked Designs by treacherous and corrupt Councels, may be
brought to public Justice, according to their several demerits. For all these
ends we are now drawing up with the Army to London, there to follow Providence
as God shall clear our way.

By the Appointment of His Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, Lord General, and his
General Council of Officers held at Windsor, Nov. 30. 1648. Signed, JOHN
RUSHVVORTH Secr'.

For the Right Honorable* The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
BEing upon an immediate Advance with the Army toward London, we thought good
hereby to give you notice thereof. For the ground, and necessity leading us
hereunto we refer you to our late Remonstrance, and to our later Declaration
concerning the same. We have only this further to add, That as we are far from
the least thought of Plunder or other wrong to your City, or any the places
adjoining (which we hope your former experiences of us will give you cause
enough to credit us in) so for the better prevention of any disorder in the
Soldiery, or of any abuse or inconvenience to the inhabitants in the
Quartering of the Soldiery at private Houses: We earnestly Desire, That you
would take a present course for the supply of Money to pay these Forces while
we shall be necessitated to stay there: upon which we assure you we shall so
dispose of them into great and void Houses about the City as much as may be
possible as that few or none of the inhabitants shall be troubled with
Quartering of any Soldiers at all. And for this purpose, We desire that forty
thousand pound may be forthwith provided upon the security of your Arrears to
be ready to be paid out to the Forces to morrow night if possible. And we shall
be ready to receive from you any intimations for the further prevention of hurt
or inconvenience to the City in this insinesse, I remain,

Your most assured Friend and Servant, T. FAIRFAX.
Windsor, 30 Nov. 1648.
FINIS.

