A Second Letter TO Mr. MILES PRANCE, In REPLY to the GHOST OF Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey.
Mr. PRANCE,
SInce my last to you of the 23 past, I have seen a prolix, railing, and
impertinent Pamphlet, entitled, Sir E. B. G's. Ghost, and pretended to be an
Answer to my said Letter. And conceiving You are better acquain^ed with Ghosts
than my self, I thought fit to direct my Answer to that Ghost to You, and
thereby show the ridiculousness thereof, as also vindicate the Truths contained
in my said former Letter, and show You and the world further circumstances to
justify the same, and therefore, according to the method of my former Letter,
I shall proceed by these Heads.

And first, not understanding what the Ghost means, by arraigning the Justice
of the Nation, unless he would assert that all that are legally, (are likewise
justly hanged;) and so consequently, that the Mother and her two Sons were
ju^tly hanged in Glocestershire, for the Murder of the Lady Viscountess
Campden's Steward, though he afterward appeared alive; And I do not find that
ever his appearance arraigned the Justice of the Nation And remitting the
consideration of Mr. B^owns, the Chyrurgions, and Mrs Curtis's Evidence in
relation to the Blood, to its proper place; and affirming, (as the truth is,)
that Mrs. Celliers, Mrs. Mary Gibbon the Newgate Priests, James Magragh, and
all other Irish men, or Irish Evidences, or other Papist or Papists, or
Popishly affected persons whatsoever; as also those concerned in the late Sham
of his having hanged himself, are strangers to, and had not the least knowledge
or intimation of the Contents of my said former Letter, nor any way concerned
therein, or in or with any part thereof; (as the said Ghost most falsely and
maliciously insinuates.) I take notice that the said Ghost seems to admit so
much of the truth of the said Letter, as that it was reported diverse days
before the dead Body was found, that he was murdered in Somerset House by the
Papists, and which report was made even the next morning after he was missing,
(being Sunday 13 October. 1678) Now I would fain have this Ghost to inform the
world who first raised that Report: But as to Mr. Dugdale's Letter of it I
cannot give it any better Answer, than that as his Evidence has since been
disbelieved in matters of greater consequence, so he not producing any such
Letter, you must give me leave also to suspect him in this. But as to the other
Evidences of Mr. Birch and the rest, Theirs I believe to be very true; for it is
no miracle that a Report so cunningly raised, (without any ground) might as
industriously be promulged to most parts of the Kingdom before the respective
days they speak of, especially when the Plot had filled all men's heads with
Fears and Jeolousies, without which it had not been in the power or art of the
Ghost, or any of his Tribe, to have suggested the least Surmise to contradict
his being Felo de se.

Next, whereas my Letter says, (and that truly) that the Coroner's Jury were
first of opinion, and accordingly declared, he was Felo de se, and that much
Art and Skill was used to procure their Verdict to the contrary. This Ghost,
instead of contradicting that Truth, would insinuate, as if that Letter
reflected upon the Reputation of the Jurors, when as there was no such thing
implied or intended, they being known to be honest men, of good Reputation, and
free from Fraud or Guile, and consequently the easier to be over-reached, by
the Cunning of those and that Party, whose interest it was to deceive them, and
who never leave any stone unturned to attain their designs. And I cannot but
observe how skilful and industrious these People still are, to hide and prevent
the truth of that man's Death from clearly appearing and shining forth, as
without doubt it would, and must do, was not the matter now (as formerly)
puzzled with Legends, and long Stories, nothing to the purpose And as to the
Coroner's Warrant for burying the Body, and recited in the Ghost, it is
Notorious they are common Tricks, used by men of his Profession, who (if any
money is like to come) will usually adjourn the Jury, and then make such
Warrants, (they knowing, that if the Verdict be Felo de se, it is then out of
their power to give leave to bury the Corpse.) And it would be very material, if
the Coroner would declare what he received for that Jobb, and of whom, and what
Evidence he had to induce the Jury to find (as the Inquisition imports) that he
was strangled with a Linen Cloth, a matter of Fact never so much as spoken of,
until You came in with your Evidence, which was not in some weeks after. And I
do again aver, That the Body was required by the Jurors to be opened, and was
refused; and if the Body was in their and the Coroner's power, (as the Ghost
insinuates) such power was concealed from, and denied the Jury. And it is very
probable the Coroner of Westminster's assistance was refused, for some such
indirect doings, for that there was not the least difference betwixt the
Coroners in relation to their Jurisdictions, and the Westminster Coroner came
not voluntarily of himself, but was importuned to be there by Mr. Wigg, and
diverse others of the chief Inhabitants of St: Martyn's Parish. And
particularly, the Reverend Dr. Lloyd (who preached the Funeral Sermon) spoke to
the Coroner of Westminster before he went, so that it had been proper to have
given the matters mentioned in that Sermon in evidence before the Jury. And
it is observable, the person mentioned to give the Information to the Doctor of
the two wounds in the Body, and that two hours before it was found, was never
produced; For if he had, and that Sir E. B. G. had been murdered, such person
might have been secured, and thereby the Murderers detected. But I suppose the
Ghost will not pretend either that Sermon, or the Pamphlet printed by Not.
Thompson to be legal, or (indeed) any Evidence at all.

And now, Mr. Prance, being come to the several Paragraphs of my Letter, I
shall take them in order as they are placed, and give the Ghost particular
Answers accordingly.

I. As to Sir E. B. G.'s Perambulations therein mentioned to be on the Saturday
he was first missing, they are true in every particular, and will be proved by
diverse able, credible and undeniable Witnesses. And how vain it is for the
Ghost to ask, Why these Witnesses did not come in sooner at the Trial of
Green, Berry and Hill, do you judge, when all the world remembers the great
Torrent that carried all before it in favor of the Plot, and the murder of Sir
E. B. G. by the Papists, without which (as T. O. was heard to say) his Plot had
failed; And when it is duly considered, that the two persons that first found
the Body, (for no other cause) suffered much in their Persons and Estates, by a
long and chargeable Imprisonment. And all others that then seemed to doubt of
the truth of that man's being murdered by the Papists, were stigmatized with
the odious Names of Papists, and Discouragers (if not Promoters) of the Plot;
It will appear no wonder, if people were unwilling to discover their
knowledges, or to come voluntarily (without process) to give their Evidence.
And how can it be imagined those three unfortunate men, being kept close
Prisoners, could make inquiry after proper Evidences, or (against the common
vogue) draw into suspicion the assertion of his being murdered by the Papists.

II. The Ghost has so much ingenuity to grant the 2d Paragraph of my Letter,
as to the place and posture he was found in, but would avoid the
inaccessableness of the place, pretending a Lane near, when as that Lane is, in
effect, unpassable, with two on a Horse, and comes not within 500 yards of the
place, and the Mounds thither very high, and the Constable and his Assistants,
(though they lived in the Parish, and well knew the way) were forced to break a
Gap in the Mounds, though they were singly Horsed. And whereas the Ghost
alleges, That you do not depose he was carried to the place wholly on
Horseback, he has run himself into a worse Dilemma, having made no provision
of men (either as to strength or number) to carry so great and weighty a Corpse,
in the dead of the night, over such Mounds and Fences; But let all inquisitive
People, desirous of Truth, take the pain, but to go to the place (and that
without any burden on their backs) they will soon be convinced of the
Assertion of the difficulty (if not impossibility) of the bringing a Dead Corpse
thither, either on Foot or on Horseback. And the pretensions of the Ghost's, as
to the limberness of the Body and Joints, does not answer that part of my
Letter which relates to the impossibility of his being put into a Sedan. For
his Body, when found, was stiff; so that what limberness happened or appeared
afterward, has no relation to the Question. For it is a certain Maxim, a dead
limber Body cannot be stiff'ned. And pray, Mr. Prance, give us an account what
became of the Sedan, and the Cords? and how you could carry it with Cords; for
the meanest Sedan-man in Town will tell you it is impracticable, or rather
impossible; And you may, if you please, make an experiment with a Cord.

III. As to the Body being full of Blood, when found; the Ghost endeavors to
disprove that Assertion, by the Evidence of Mr. Brown the Constable, the two
Chyrurgeons and Mrs. Curtiss, and produces the Evidence given at the Trial of
Green, Berry and Hill, and an extrajudicial Affidavit since made by Mr. Brown,
and another by Mrs. Curtiss, to countenance such his denial. But, Mr. Prance,
(when you see the Ghost) tell him the matter of the Blood will (and I assure
you and all the world it will) be proved by diverse credible and undeniable
Evidence; And that I may pacify the Ghost in the mean time, he is to
understand that Mr. Brown, the two Chyrurgeons, and Mrs. Curtiss, are no
competent (nor can be material) Witnesses in this case. For Mr. Brown; as he
did a rash and unaccountable act (to give it no worse name) in removing the
Body before the Coroner and Jury saw it, (which has occasioned all this
dispute;,) so he must not think to help himself by Affidavits, or to justify
one Ill Act by another; And besides, as he unadvisedly (and contrary to all Law
and Practice) removed the Body before the Coroner and Jury came; so he did the
same in the dark, (about Eight a clock at night) when the Candle was blown out;
whereby it was impossible for him to look for any Blood, so as to find it; And
neither he or the Chyrurgeons (by any daylight) saw the place where the Body
was found, or where the Sword was pulled out, until after 10 a Clock the next
day, before which time much of the Blood was taken up, and the rest trampled
out of sight by the great concourse of the People which came thither. And as
for Mrs. Curtiss, she only saw the Body after it was brought home, when as the
Body was stripped at the White-House, and a Blanket borrowed there to wrap the
Body in, So the world may judge of the Truth of her Affidavit. But (Mr Prance)
it will be fully proved, that the Body was full of Blood; and that the^ were
Cakes or Gobbets of dry Blood found in his Clothes, which (with his Body) stunk
extremely. And it will be also fully and effectually proved, that his Eyes,
Nostrils, and Corners of his Mouth, were Fly blown; though the Ghost (without the
least color of reason) pretends it to be contrary to Nature and Reason; when
as common experience daily evinces the contrary. And I do observe, that the
Ghost omits to take notice of Two material Circumstances in this 3 d.
Paragraph, ( viz.) The first as to the Swords crashing against the Backbone:
The second, as to that part of the Sword which was in his Body being
discolored. And pray, Mr. Prance, do You (or the Ghost) give the reasons
thereof, and of its Point being Rusty; As also, what was, or could be the cause
of the Spots in the Shirt, Wastcoat and Drawers, of Greenish Color, mentioned
in Mrs. Curtisses Affidavit.

IV. As to the 4th. Paragraph of my Letter, I perceive the Ghost admits, that
when a man is Strangled or Hanged, his Eyes will be extorted; and admits, that
Sir E. B. Godfrey's Eyes (when found) were shut; only he seems to quarrel with
the color of his Face; And, seeing he admits his Face not Black (as all Hanged
men's are, when cold) I care not to contest, whether his Face was Pale or Ruddy,
or a little Swelled, or not, those being very inconsiderable Circumstances. But
his denying the putrefaction charged in that Paragraph, and the consequences
deduced from thence, is not only a great untruth, but is directly opposite to
the Evidence given by Mr. Skillard, at the Trial before mentioned. Page 37, 38.

V. As to the 5th. Paragraph; The Ghost is so far from answering the Assertions
therein, as that he only quibbles at words; and begging the Question, deduces
thence impertinent and ridiculous Arguments. For it will be proved, that his
Shoes were glazed at the bottom of the Soles, and which must of necessity be
occasioned by his walking on the Grass. And (Mr. Prance) if you and the Ghost
will walk thither, you will easily experience it, and so may any body else
satisfy himself in this speculation; As also, as to the Grass-seeds that stuck
in the seams of his Shoes; which is so far from being impossible at that time
of the year, (as the Ghost would argue) as that it will be proved by undeniable
Evidence. But (Mr. Prance,) pray ask the Ghost how he came there without a
speck of Dirt? and who picked the Horsehairs off his Clothes; and let him
contrive (if he can) a probable or rational way for a Dead Man on Horseback.
to hold up his Legs, or to save them or his Clothes from the dirt: For though a
man may walk thither very clean, yet it^s impossible at that time of the year
to ride, either without being dirtied and some Horse hairs sticking on his
Clothes: But perhaps the next account from the Ghost will be, that he either
rid with Gambadoes, or else a pair of Fisher-mens Boots.

VI. As to the sixth Paragraph, Pray Mr. Prance tell the Ghost, his railing
against Popish Nurses and Popish Midwives is no answer to the Assertions in
that Paragraph: for all the women in the Town are competent Judges thereof, and
I hope the Ghost will not say they are all Papists. But pray tell the Ghost he
takes no notice of the height of the Collar, and its being fast buttoned about
his Neck when found. Nor the conclusion of that Paragraph; and therefore I
suppose he admits it to be all true.

VII And as to the 7 and last Paragraph, which relates only to the difference
betwixt Yours, and Mr. Bedlow's Evidence; I must take notice, that what You and
He swear, are very contradictory, and much more than I hinted in my said
Letter: And though part of it be as He and You were informed, yet You and He
swear the Informations were received from the Persons actually concerned in the
Murder, and who had confidence enough in Mr. Bedlow (though he refused 4000l to
help to kill him, and 2000l to help carry him away,) as to show him the dead
Body, and so were under no temptation of mis-informing either him or your self.
And pray Mr. Prance, will You let the world know what reward You were to have
for that Job: For certainly You deserved as much as Mr. Bedlow, and needed
more, you having a Wife and Children, and he a Bachelor.

Thus, Mr. Prance, having gone through each Paragraph of my Letter, and
answered the Ghost to your satisfaction; I should leave here, fearing I have
been too tedious already: But I cannot omit to take further notice of Mrs.
Curtis's Affidavit, in relation to the drops of Wax found upon the Clothes, in
which I cannot say but she may swear true; but this I do aver, that if it be
so, those drops were put upon the Clothes long after he was found, and after
the Jury had sat on the Body; for there was no such thing then on the Clothes:
And I suppose this was some Artifice used by those, who, either out of Interest
or Design, were desirous to confirm his being murdered at Somerset House, and
to carry on the great lie and impertinent story then invented, and given out
(amongst others,) that he was laid under the High Altar there; And if my
Information fail not, there were other such like tricks used, which I shall
make bold to acquaint those more nearly concerned therein, than your self; and
shall give them to understand, that it is no wonder a man in Sir E. B. G's
circumstances, should kill himself, such accidents being no News to that
Family, wherein Melancholy and Distraction (that often produces such effects.)
has been predominant, and might occasion the words he spoke to Sir Tho.
Robinson, as to his being the first Martyr.

And now, Mr. Prance, for a Conclusion, If you were guilty of the murder of Sir
E. B. G. how durst you (as you did) on the Friday after he was found, go to
Primrose-Hill to see the Body, and not be afraid it should at your approach
have bled afresh? And how came you (after Green, Bury, and Hill were hanged,)
to declare in answer to a solemn Question, that you knew nothing of the death
of Sir E. B. G. Pray remember me to your old Friend and Lodger Mr. Renn, My
Respects also to your Wife, not forgetting your little Daughter, who gave you
so good advice before you took your Journey into Nottinghamshire, and helped to
take Beddingfield, who was buried 14 months.

Cambridge, March 13. 1681. I am Your Loving Friend, Trueman.

LONDON, Printed for N. Thompson, 1682.


