AN ESSAY Concerning Friendly Reproof: Explaining clearly the NATURE,
Excellency and Usefulness Of it.

Proving both from Reason and Revelation that it is an Indispensable Duty.

And laying down very plain Rules concerning the properest Methods, both of
giving and receiving it, etc.

There is a reproof that is not seasonable. It Is far better to reprove than to
be angry secretly: How good is it when thou art reproved, to show repentance.!

Ecclesiasticus xx. 3. LONDON: Printed for R. Cumberland, at the Angel in S.
Paul 's Churchyard; where all Gentlemen may be furnished with Acts of
Parliament, new or old, 1696.

The Preface.
OF all sorts of Writings that have appeared in Public, in this keen and
satirical Age, I know none that have proved so beneficial to Souls as those
which have treated solely and practically about some particular Moral or Divine
Subject. And indeed a considerate Man need not wonder how this comes to pass;
for as such Subjects are the most excellent, because they serve the Interest of
our most permanent Part, so particular Discourses upon them bid fairest for
Success, being they are most instructive. A few general and quaint Sentences
will not serve the Turns of mean Capacities: The most are neither wise enough
nor willing enough to be so, to be improved and awakened by By-Hints.

The Anatomists, in their Pursuits after a more perfect Knowledge of the
admirable Structure of Human Bodies, pry into even the minutest Parts. They are
fit Patterns for Authors to imitate, for there is no Method so likely to enrich
Men's Minds with a competent store of Christian Wisdom for the Regulation of
their Manners, and the making them eminent Benefactors to Mankind, and to have
a clear Survey of the whole Body of Truth, as diving into its very Bowels, and
dissecting all the Veins and Membrules of it. The separate Observation of every
one of the Branches of Duty, as they are laid by the Hands of God and Nature in
the Bible of Reason and External Revelation presents us with a pleasant Sight
of the peculiar Tendency and Use of every one of them; and the rare Contexture
and beautiful Harmony of them all together. Do Physicians by their Art and
Scrutiny, see how the Health of the Body is hazarded by the Stoppage of a small
Duct or the Breaking of a Thread scarcely discernible to an obtuse or careless
Eye? Why? so many Christians too by narrowly looking into the Nature of every
Duty singly and apart, see the Office and Serviceableness of it to Man's
Spirit, and that the least of them cannot be spared by one who would repair his
Primitive Frame. A little Patience would by this means suffice to trace the
Excellency and absolute Necessity of it, how scornfully soever a hasty Glance
may detract from it.

But since this Method does discover to us the Brightness and Beauties of every
Duty, it unquestionably points out the absolute Necessity o^ Universal
Holiness, and consequently befriends and adv^^^^^s Religion very much In short,
it is a great Instrument of a gradual and deep-laid Conviction, and that is the
Mother of firm and pious Resolutions; and they are next to the Divine
Concurrence, the principal Movements of Growth in Grace; which is nothing less
than the Cement of Eternal Glory, a Prize which will answer the Cost of our
severest Meditation and Endeavor. Wherefore since Friendly Reproof is so
momentous an Office of Friendship that no one can entirely discharge his Duty
in that Relation without Reproving; It Is very convenient that every Christian
should be informed of his indispensable Obligation to reprove his Friend, and
be stocked with Rules for the more prudent Administration of it. So that I can
foresee no just occasion of making a long Apology for writing a particular
Discourse concerning it. And as the Dignity and Usefulness of Friendly Reproof
will vindicate me from the Imputation of being lavish of my Time and Ink in
handling it thus by it self; so there are many Circumstances which will
justify the Publication of it, with an enumeration of which I shall not stand
to trouble you. But there is one which I cannot forbear mentioning.

We live in an Age in which Curiosity it self is almost surfeited with both
ingenious and elaborate Tracts on almost all Subjects, and yet Friendly
Reproof, Admonition, Gratulation, and the other Offices of fraternal
Sociableness have been little more than just skirmish'd upon and coldly
recommended. Whence this strange Oversight took its Rise it is not material now
to enquire. To confine my Complaint to the Cause of Reproof. That a Work of
this Nature is too much wanted, is very manifest by the so common Omission of
this kind of Charity; for not only those Wretches who are enslaved to the worst
Habits and intolerable Enormities, but even Men who are strict Livers and
exemplary for other Acts of Beneficence, are very stupidly guilty of it. In the
first sort, who wallow in very filthy Vices, this Neglect may be suspected to
be presumptuous Wickedness; but the constant Circumspection of the latter
obliges me in Christian Charity to impute it to the want of due Conviction in
them. Indeed I have observed this in a great many pious Christians, who had
never a distinct Notion of Friendly Reproof, and confessed they were more at a
loss to understand this Moral Duty than any other. 'Twas this Thought which
made me commiserate the Condition of my Countrymen, especially of the sincerer
Members of our excellent Church. Some have been so courteous as to own that
they have gained more Light by my Conferences with them about this Matter than
they ever received before, and desired me, for the sake of their Memories, to
pleasure 'em with the Publication of a distinct Treatise on this Subject; which
Proposal, to speak ingenuously, I was very forward to comply with: For I think
it very fitting at such a Time as this, when Lay Christians are so very apt to
inveigh against the Laziness and Unsuccessfulness of the Clergy, to acquaint
'em what they ought to do for one another's Souls, among themselves; that they
may turn their Boldness against their excellent Pastors into a Severity upon
their own Negligence; for, unless I am mistaken, Ministers are as incapable of
being omnipresent as others; and if the Laity will not add their Endeavors to
those of their Ministers, God will not condemn these for not converting
voluntary Creatures irresistibly, which seems to be more than his own Province.

Some learned Friends, who had greater Abilities than my self, could not be
wrought upon to set about this necessary Work. When Hopes and Requests were
defeated, I could not think it becoming one (who had weighed the Usefulness of
this Undertaking, and for that Reason had been such an importunate Suitor to
others for a distinct Treatise about this Subject) to affect Deafness to the
Requests of well-meaning People; not that I think the Requests of Friends are a
sufficient Excuse for the Publication of a Book, if the Subject be frivolous,
or (though weighty and useful) has been largly and didactically handled before,
for this breeds Confusion: But I think that cannot be said in this Case. Men
have been very stingy of their Advice about this Duty, unless we can imagine
that some few Hints in general Treatises of Friendship, or a casual Sermon or
two upon it, are sufficient upon a Subject, barely to explain the Nature of
which, common Prejudices considered, will take up near the Compass of two
Sermons. 'Twas this Consideration, with my peculiar Love to the Subject, that
forced me to review some of my own Papers about it, and transcribe 'em fair for
the Press, hoping, that since better Supplies could not be obtained, these
Instructions might be accepted kindly, since they may contribute something to
the convincing Christians of the Importance of this Duty, and animating them to
the prudent Exercise of it. It can be no Breach of Modesty to suppose that it
will be better than no particular Discourse about it at all; and perhaps the
Simplicity of both the Style and Thoughts may make it fitter for the Use of
Illiterate People than close and polite Writings.

And now, Reader, my Request is (since I have done my poor Endeavor to bring
Reproof into Fashion again, in which Enterprise, if I succeed, I shall do a
considerable Piece of Service to my Country and the Cause of Virtue) that you
would deign to join your Interest with mine at the Throne of Grace, in a
fervent Prayer, that this little Treatise may be honored with the greatest
Encomium, th'Improvement of our Minds in the Theory, and of our Conversation
and Friendship by the constant and discreet Execution of what we are herein
exhorted to.

With which glorious effect that these Lines may be attended, I cheerfully
resign their Fortune to the Blessing and wise Disposal of the gracious
Providence of the One invisible and immortal God (to whose Glory my Heart has
dedicated them from the Womb) in the Name of Jesus Christ.

May his Grace be with thy Spirit evermore. Pray for thine and true
Friendship's true Friend.

ERRATA.
page lin. read. 6 17 by the Help. 15 27 Penitence. 18 20 as having. 21 9 Fuel
of. 22 12 fortuitous. 40 4 are curbed. 41 19 in their. 43 5 Mercy (which of) 6
is an Instance of Reproof. 44 6 Crimes against. 45 26 irreverent. 51 19 to. 57
3 us. 60 4 on. 62 16, 17 dele not. 75 14 never. 82 29 Faults. 91 7 (...). 92 14
(...) 109 2 unparall'd. 116 24 the sole way. 118 29 enclass'd. 131 31 (...).
133 25 Denizon. 134 14 in. 136 24 when. 140 18 of Anger. 150 24 there. 154 23,
24 Sociableness. Courtesy. 155 3 intercourse. 12 theatriz'd. 162 5 enhansing.
175 31 dele the. 182 24 especially when with. 183 8 are inseparable 199 1
avoidable. 212 7 seed on a. 225 22 the said. 26 my Memory incline.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction, distributing the whole Work, 1 CHAP. II. Explaining
the distinct Nature of Friendly Reproof. Sect. 1. of the Occasion and Method of
this Chapter, 3 Sect. 2. Regulating the Thoughts concerning Reproof in general,
as it differs from Admonition, Censoriousness and all manner of Vpbraiding
whatsoever, 5 Sect. 3. A brief Account of Divine Reproof, both General, and
Particular, and Human, viz. the Civil Magistrate's [as the Royal and Judicial]
the Ecclesiastical [as the Bishop's] the inferior Minister's, the Husband's,
Parent's, Tutor's, Patron's, Master's, Casual and Friendly Reproof considered,
as distinct from all the rest. 32
CHAP. III. Proving Friendly Reproof both a Natural and Revealed Duty. Sect. 1.
An entrance into the Chapter, 70 Sect. 2. Friendly Reproof proved a Natural or
Human Duty, 71 Sect. 3. Proving Friendly Reproof a Revealed and especially a
Christian Duty, 93
CHAP. IV. Giving a clear and particular Account of all those prerequisite
Qualities in the Reprover, who would reprove his Friend with most Success and
least Offense; together with some Plain Rules concerning the dextrous
Application of Friendly Reproof intermixed. Sect. 1. The entrance into the
Chapter, explaining the Term Spiritual in S. Paul, and assigning in general
Branches and Degrees of Spirituality, which are requisite for a Friendly
Reprover to be furnished with, 103 Sect. 2. Of Spiritual Love, 107 Sect. 3.
Spiritual Joy, 127 Sect. 4. Of Spiritual Peace, 138 Sect. 5. Of Long-Suffering,
150 Sect. 6. Of Gentleness, 152 Sect. 7. Of Goodness, 158 Sect. 8. Of Faith,
161 Sect. 9. Of Meekness, 166 Sect. 10. Of Temperance, 172
CHAP. V. Detecting the Vanity of those several Excuses which have been framed
for the Omission of Friendly Reproof, 178 CHAP. VI. Proposing some Motives for
the Encouragement of the frequent Exercise of Friendly Reproof, 188 CHAP. VII.
An instructive Address to reproved Persons concerning a grateful Improvement of
Friendly Reproof, 194 CHAP. VIII. Containing some practical Inferences, drawn
from the preceding Chapters, 207 CHAP. IX. The Conclusion, Exhorting
Christians to a conscientious Use of the whole Book, 216 Applicatory Collects
of Devotion, 224
Books Printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard.
AN Essay for regulating of the Coin: Wherei^ also is set forth, 1. How we have
lost tha^ Import of Plate and Bullion we formerly had 2. What is become of the
great Quantities of Money coined in the Reign of King Charles II. and the
preceding Reigns. 3. The Necessity ther^ is at this Time for to rectify the
present Coin o^ the Kingdom. 4. By what Methods the Charg^ of Calling in the
present Money, and bringing i^ to a designed Standard may be accomplished 5.
Whether the Method proposed for the Advancing of our Money (and the Bullion of
which it made) be Convenient or Inconvenient for the Trade of the Nation; by A.
V.

A Poem on the Taking of Namur, by Mr. Denne^

The Government of the Thoughts: A Prefatory Discourse to the Government of the
Tongue by the Author of the whole Duty of Man.

Serious Reflections on Time and Eternity; with some other Subjects Moral and
Divine. To which is annexed, an Appendix concerning the First Day of the Year,
how observed by the Jews, and may best be employed by a serious Christian With
an Exhortation to Youth to prepare for Judgment. By John Shower.

The Batchelor's Directory: Being a Treatise of the Excellence of Marriage. Of
its Necessity, and the means to live happy in it. Together with an Apology for
the Women against the Calumnies of the Men.

AN ESSAY Concerning Friendly Reproof.

CHAP I. INTRODUCTION Distributing the whole Work.
THAT this Useful Subject may be handled as plainly as I can, I shall (God
assisting) endeavor,

I. To explain the distinct Nature of Friendly Reproof. II. To prove that it is
both a Natural and Revealed Duty. III. To give a Clear, Separate and Large
Account of those several Qualifications, which are prerequisite in every
Friendly Reprover, to apply his Reproof with least Offense and most Success.
IV. To detect the Vanity of the Excuses which are usually framed for the
Omission of Friendly Reproof. V. To propose some Motives for the Encouragement
of the Constant, Careful and Seasonable Exercise of Friendly Reproof. VI. To
give Christians some easy Rules concerning their Conduct, when they are
reproved, and to excite them to a grateful Improvement of their Friend's
Reproofs. VII. To draw some Practical Inferences from all the foregoing
Chapters. VIII. To close the whole Discourse with an Humble, Affectionate and
Vigorous Exhortation to a wise Compliance with the Design of this Work: And to
annex a few applicatery Collects of Devotion.
CHAP. II. Explaining the distinct Nature of Friendly Reproof.
SECT. I. Of the Occasion and Method of this Chapter.
THE Method, in which I promised to range my Thoughts, obliges me, in the first
Place, to give a plain and distinct Account of the Nature of Friendly Rep oof.
This will, I doubt, take up more Room th^n I suspected, when I first resolved
upon this Undertaking; but, however, it is so very needful, that it cannot be
excusably past by: For it is impossible for any Writer to represent his
Sentiments, about any Subject, in a due Light, unless the Nature of his Subject
be first rightly understood. So that, though we should lay down the straitest
Rules that can be given concerning applying Reproof, they would be of no more
Use to my Reader, before a just Notion of Friendly Reproof has been founded in
his Mind, than a Lecture about the various Motions of Light upon our Eyes,
whence it is that we see so many Differences in Colors, would be to one born
blind, who was always wholly devoid of the Idea of Color in general. And truly
the generality have such a perplexed Idea of the Subject of this Book, that, out
of Pity to those mean Capacities, for whose benefit this Treatise was penned, I
shall be forced to make use of that Length, in order to disintangle their
Minds, which I do not at all delight in. And, moreover, which makes this
Enquiry the more necessary, it may easily be observed, That the Irregular
Conceptions which most Men always have had, and still do entertain, about
Friendly Reproof, have proved very Injurious not only to the Fortune, but also
to the Reputation of the Exercise of this Duty, as will shortly appear. Since
therefore this Enquiry is so necessary, we will immediately set about it.

Now our Misapprehensions in the present Case must spring from ^^^her, first a
too slight and scanty Defini^^on of Reproof in general: Or secondly from
confounding Friendly Reproof with other kinds of Christian Reproof.

Wherefore it shall be the Business of this Chapter to make the Nature of
Friendly Reproof the better apprehended, by giving,

I. A fixed and liberal Definition of Reproof in General: And, II. By pointing
out the particular Characteristick of Friendly Reproof, which distinguishes it
from all other Kinds of Reproof.
SECT II. Regulating the Thoughts concerning Reproof in general, as it differs
from Admonition, Censoriousness, and all manner of Vpbraiding whatsoever.
CArnal Prejudice and Inadvertence are the two principal Sources of Error; and
doubtless either one or both of them have a great Hand in making the bare
telling a Person of a real Fault, before his Face, pass so current with the
multitude for a perfect Definition of Reproof, as for the most part it does.

That this lame Definition is one main Reason why Friendly Reproof is so very
Nice and Difficult a Subject, and is very unaccountable, setting aside the
great Mischief it has been the Author of, will, I hope, quickly appear to any
but such whose great Affection for a Discharge from Duty, dressing up Sin in
the Garb of Virtue, and for being honored at the same Time with the Title of
Good and well-besigning Christians, has bribed them to shut their Eyes against
Conviction.

For, to weigh it is Consequences: First, if this Account of Reproof is perfect,
then Admonition and Reproof are one and the same thing; For if one Man
admonishes another against, and the second reproves him for the Commission of
the same Fault, after the first had admonished him against it, it is evident
both these Persons told that third Person of a Fault to his Face: And it is as
evident that he who admonished him, and he who reproved him, did two distinct
Acts of Beneficence: But these two Acts are confounded by the forementioned
Definition of Reproof. But, for Explanation's sake, we will dwell a little
here, and be beholden to the Light of a few Instances for a thorough Discovery
of the Difference between Admonition and Reproof. This I think is the more
convenient to be done, because they very often go together, are near-a-kin, and
very like, and therefore often mistaken one for the other.

Admonition and Reproof are both of them extraordinary Acts of Charity to the
Soul; they both aim at the Promotion of Virtue, and the Prevention of Sin.
Speech and Letters are the sole Instruments of serving Virtue either of these
ways. So far they both agree, their End and Conveyances are the same; but,
nevertheless, there are other Circumstances, which make them very remarkably
different.

For first, Admonition puts us in Mind of approaching Dangers, and is tendered
purely to instill Caution and Circumspection into a Friend; it has an Eye to the
future: But Reproof acquaints of past and actual Faults, and strives to beget
in the Offender humble Acknowledgment of, and hearty and complete Penitence for
them. For instance, If I am aware that my Friend's Business happens to compel
him, as he has regard, though but in a moderate degree, to his own or Family's
Temporal Convenience, to meet some Company at some certain Times, who are
enslaved to a fondness for Intemperance, and so inured to the Scourges of
Debauchery that Crapula's are no more than Flea-bites, or perchance Pleasures
to them; and who design, when they have got my Friend among them, to be forcing
Cups and multiplying Healths, not out of Loyalty and Love but a malicious
Principle to carry on the Devil's Plot, and to triumph over infirm
Constitutions, to whom excess of Liquor is not so portable; I will for the sake
of his Welfare indulge my Jealousy of the State of his Soul, and admonish him
of it, that he may be armed against the worst, prepare his Heart against the
Temptation by Prayer, Deliberation, Consultation, Resolution, and other holy
Aids and Policies. Thus, by Help of a loving Whisper, and a seasonable Memento,
he may be made both humble enough not to run too hastily into Dangers, and also
cheerful, prudent and courageous enough, with a pious Trust in God, who by his
Providence has called him to the Conflict (even though he should be one naturally
of a frail and limber Disposition) to resist and baff^e the Temptation, grapple
with Importu^ity, Reproaches and a crafty Assault, which it is hardest of all to
withstand; I mean their seeming Civility and pretended Concern for his being
fallen into Melancholy, which deprives him of all that Mirth and Pleasure which
they enjoy, if we may trust the Surface, the loudness of their Laughter, the
Pursiness of their Carcass without peeping within upon those growing Disorders
of the Blood, which are very busy in preparing Aches and Pains for their last
Years, and a more sumptuous Feast suddenly for Worms.

Briefly, my dear Friend, by this means may avoid their Vice without shunning
their Persons, be courteous without being caught by their Flatteries, sociable
without partaking of their Sin, virtuous not morose, may save his secular
Advantage without doing any thing which tends to the Loss of his Soul.

But, if for all this, or indeed though I had not admonished him, I find him
vanquished by Drink when he leaves his Company, I think it my part to arrest
the first Opportunity, when his Faculties are recovered, to reprove him for not
parting with Men, 'till he had made himself like a Beast. This is matter of
Fact, and therefore Matter of Reproof, not a mere possibility of Sinning, as in
the Case of Admonition. A Foresight of Tempration makes Admonition seasonable,
but only Compliance with Temptation makes Re^roof seasonable.

But, secondly, Admonition and Reproof differ in as much as Admonition may
address to all the Faculties of the Soul, whereas Reproof can only meddle with
the Memory and the Will. Thus, for instance, if I foresee any Danger of my
Friend's being ensnared into the Commission of any certain Sin, though he was
never guilty of it to my Knowledge yet I judge it my Duty, as I am his
well-wisher, to admonish him against it; if he has ever done it before, that he
do it no more, and if he has not done it, to make him still the more carefully
cherish and retain his Innocence. Perhaps he is not sensible that such an
Action is a Fault; if so, my Admonition informs him that it is such by
producing some positive Divine Law, or evidencing it by some clear Deduction
from some positive Divine Law, or from some common Principle or other, which
all, or at least most and the soberest, Men grant to be a firm Basis of
Arguing. When I thus admomish him, I do an Act of Charity to his Understanding:
I implicitly instruct him in such an Admonition; I say implicitly, for I must
acquaint you that Admonition and Instruction, though they may be coincident, as
in the pre ent Case, are two different Acts, and as distinct from one another
as Admonition and Reproof: For tho, when I admonish a Friend against a Fault,
which he did not know was a Fault, I instruct as well as admonish him, yet
since when I began to speak of this Fault, I considered him rather as one whose
Soul was approaching to the Brink of Danger (being certain of this, that he was
likely to be tempted) than as a Person who was ignorant that his Compliance
with the Solicitation, foreseen by me, is sinful and pernicious (for I was
uncertain whether or no he knew that it is sinful) it is evident that this
Exertion of Beneficence was casually, and therefore but materially Instruction,
whereas 'twas designedly, and therefore formally Admonition. For though he had
not been ignorant that* that Compliance with the approaching Temptation is
sinful, yet my warning him of it at this Juncture, before the Temptation
accosts him, might have been useful by reason of other Circumstances (and if it
may be useful where there is no need of Instruction, then they are two distinct
Acts) for though this my Friend has been told, and is convinced, that the Sin,
which I apprehend him in all likelihood a going to be strongly solicited to,
is a Sin, yet perhaps at that time he may be inconsiderate, his Imagination may
be obnoxious to Impostures, and may fancy some mighty* Purchase in showing his
Obedience to the said Solicitation: His Memory and Recollective Faculty may be
drowsy, nay perhaps in a dead Sleep. On all or any of these accounts my
Admonition may be seasonable, as a charitable deed to his Imagination, by
painting to the Life the Deformity of the Sin which lies in wait for him, and
the pitifulness of the Benefit which the commission of it can, at the best,
bring him in, if that benefit be compared in the Balance with the Favor of
God and Conscience, which will be interrupted by his so doing: Now, it is
advantageous to my Friend, in that Condition, with respect to his Understanding
and Memory; at such a Season it is a good Office to both of them together; for
by awakening the latter it puts the former into a due Posture of Consideration,
which is the faithfullest Watchman of the Soul.

Again, there may be a Time when my Friend may know such or such an Action to
be a Sin, but nevertheless may not be aware of his being in instant Danger of
being beleaguered by it, unless a Standerby mind him of it, and consequently
how well soever his Soul may be habitually prepared against all Temptation, he
cannot make such actual Preparation against that particular Temptation, unless
he is admonished of it; for it is particular Admoninition that makes him capable
of making such an actual Preparation as is necessary to countermine those
crafty Devices, and powerful Politics which the Devil and his Agents, both
within and without him, may use to circumvent and betray him into the Sin.

But lastly, suppose the Memory should be brisk, and the Understanding be not
benighted by Ignorance, nor cankered through Remisness of Thought; nay, though he
should have a Foresight of the Danger, yet perhaps the Will may be too pliant
and flexible to the Temptation, which I perceive just lighting upon his Head:
Perhaps it is a Temptation to that Sin to which the Soul yields soonest of all,
a Sin to which his Nature, Education or Calling inclines him most. The Thoughts
may be sound when the Affections lean awry: An ill Bent may be cocker'd in the
Heart, when sound Notions flourish in the Head: He may want to be fortified,
though not to be instructed. How seasonable Admonition is, when Matters stand
thus, I need not add: All true Christians who feel Divine Sensations in
themselves find Temptations very painful to 'em, and consequently find it very
difficult to row against the Tide of Temptation, when the Will is so
treacherous. Thus you see how Admonition has to do with all the Faculties of
the Soul; but Reproof does not reach so far. Reproof strikes not at the
Understanding, nor at all tampers with the Imagination: No wise Man will
reprove his Friend for Ignorance, unless it is wilful; and then he reproves him
not for his Ignorance, but for his foolishly abusing the Opportunities he had
to improve his Mind by Knowledge, which would have prevented that Ignorance.
It Is uncreasonable to blame a Person for what could not be avoided. Ignorance
considered abstractly from the Will is a Misfortune, not a Fault: A Pagan
cannot be blamed for not coming to the Lord's Table: It Is no Omission of Duty
in him, because he knew it not to be a Duty; but he may be justly reproved for
being churlish or slothful, since the unreasonableness of such Habits may be
learnt in Nature's School, and for that Reason they are such Habits as lie open
to the Condemnation of the Mind, unassisted by external Condemnation. Faults
only are the Subject of Reproof; now a Fault is, in more Words, any thing done
or omitted with the consent of the Will, in opposition to that degree of
Knowledge, which the Mind is in present possession of, concerning good and
evil. Knowledge is presupposed before the Will is capable of offending: Now
Knowledge is the Subject of the Intellect, and therefore where it is wanting it
must be infused by Instruction, for the Intellect is the Object of Instruction.
The Intellect is the sole part of Man which is capable of being assisted by
that Help; whereas Admonition assists all the Powers of the Soul, sometimes
severally, and sometimes two or more of them together: All the Faculties of the
Soul are the possible Objects of it, as I think has been sufficiently shown:
Whereas Reproof deals only with the Will and the Memory: The Will is the
principal Object of its Relief, for it excites the Memory only, that the Will
may be set to Rights. When one Man reproves another, he does not stand to tell
him, That such an Action is a Fault (for he supposes that the Reproved knows
that already, for otherwise it would be his Business to instruct, not to chide)
but he puts him in Mind that he committed that Fault, lest he should forget it,
and so not humble his Soul and repent of it, that he may dread it the more for
the future.

Briefly, Souls in the State of Danger are the Objects of Admonition; but Souls
in a state of Actual, new-contracted Guilt are the Objects of Reproof.
Admonition promotes Vigilance, Reproof advances Patience, that Admonition
against the Sin, after it is repented of, may take the deeper Root in the Mind
and Memory.

Thirdly, Another Difference between Admonition and Reproof is this; the
Subjects of Admonition are more than the Subjects of Reproof: Admonition may
safely meddle with Internal as well as External Acts and Habits: Whereas
Reproof cannot safely touch upon any Faults, but those which are visible to the
Senses; which we prove thus.

God's general Prohibition of Pride, Malice, Envy; etc. together with every
individual human Creature's self-consciousness of his being apt to be tainted
with these malignant Dispositions of Spirit in such and such Circumstances
sufficiently ascertains us that every Man is liable to be distempered with one
or more of these Maladies, according to the Variety of Conditions to which he
is obnoxious, unless Care is used to fill the Pores of the Soul with Thoughts
which are of a sufficiently Divine and Powerful Nature, to obstruct the Inroad
of the Infection. For since God does nothing in vain, it is clear that he would
not have prohibited those Habits, had he not foreseen a Necessity of such a
Prohibition; that is to say, that we should all of us, some time or other be
more or less tempted to all or some of them by bad Spirits: And as his both
gracious and general Prohibition of them suggests that every Man lies open to
these Arrows of the Host of Hell, so does every Man's self consciousness
suggest the same thing too (which was the second Proof hinted) since all Men
are of the same Frame and Nature with every Man, as well internally as
externally (for God loves Uniformity in Works of the same kind) and therefore
all do meet with such Injections, more or less, whilst they are here; though
individual human Creatures different Use of their common Nature, and that
common Grace which is tendered to them all, to improve the common Faculties of
the said common Nature (which different Use of the said common Opportunities
qualifies them for different Degrees of particular Grace) may make some Souls
abler, and others less able to resist these Injections of the Devil and his
Agents: For though God rewards an extraordinary Improvement of common Grace, with
Additions of greater spiritual Strength, in proportion to the said Improvement,
which makes such improved Souls the more difficultly passable to the Injections
of the Devil; as also, though the notorious Abuse of common Grace lays the Souls
of wicked Men more pervious to the Injections of bad Spirits, through the want
of that Strength which decays by the diminution of particular Grace, of which
God in just Judgment deprives them, yet all are vulnerable in this state. When
the Good shall enter into their ultimate State of Happiness, and the Wicked
into their ultimate State of Misery; they may be both properly enough said to
be invulnerable: For the Saints will be perfectly invulnerable there, where
they will be out of the Reach of all Temptation, where no Devil can any more
come near to assault them than they can find it possible to wound God himself,
in whose Presence they continually dwell; and then the damned may be said to be
perfectly invulnerable, because their Souls are all wound and anguish, and are
not receptive of more horrible Impressions from the whole Camp of Darkness than
those Torments which are inseparable to their state of Eternal Damnation. Now,
as the Blessed and the Damned will have invulnerableness common to them both in
their last State, so it is common to them both while they are in this State, as
have not undergone as long a Trial as Providence has designed for them, to have
vulnerable Souls, as well as vulnerable Bodies. Indeed their common
vulnerableness here does admit of Degrees, whereas invulnerableness admits of
none, and the Good cannot be said to be as easily vulnerable as the Wicked, yet
they are both vulnerable. Bad Spirits must be at more Expense to wound a good
Christian than a bad one, yet the best Christian is capable of being wounded.
Now it is this Universal Sense of the vulnerableness of Human Nature, taken in
its full latitude, that is to say, Soul and Body, sometimes singly and
sometimes together, which is planted by Nature in every Man's Mind, that
warrants a tender and affectionate Jealousy, which Men, who have a judicious
Kindness for their Friends, feel, at some Seasons, glowing in their Breasts for
one another's Souls. Consequently, it is not only lawful but laudable to
forewarn a Friend against those Stains and Pollutions of the Heart, Pride,
Envy, Malice, Incharitableness, Pusillanimity, Distrusting Divine Providence,
Immoderate Confidence in Self, etc.

Admonition against Pride and Elation of Spirit is seasonable when my Friend is
on a sudden raised to a higher Preferment than he did or could expect: And if
he should by some Private or Public Revolution be brought to endure Hardship,
to struggle with a narrow Fortune or Contempt, 'twill be seasonable to admonish
him against giving Way to Dejection of Mind, Despondence, Discontent,
Impatience, prostituting his Conscience, and the like: And whoever thinks
himself above being admonish against such hurtful Habits, because he is so
happy as not to crouch under them at present, forgets his Make and State,
forgets that he is of a brittle Frame, that he has a Soul that is as liable to
be dilapidated by Devils, as his Body is by the Hostility of any of the
Elements: He forgets that he is in a State of floating Circumstances, a State
of Cumber and Combat, where the Saints triumphant were formerly militant: In
short, he forgets that he is on this Side of Heaven, where many who once stood,
have, for want of Vigilance, and probably, through the scornful Neglect of
Admonition, in particular, desperately fallen.

But since it is given to no Man to know his Friend's Heart any farther than he
can gather from his own Information, and the common Tenor of his Carriage; and,
moreover since no Man is fatally proud when he is Rich, Ingenious, Learned or
in Dignity or great Esteem; or necessitated to envy his Thriving Enemy, or hate
his Competitor, or to blaspheme the Council of Heaven in Adversity, though all
Men are too much in Danger of being daubed with such odious Qualities, it
follows, that such internal Habits in particular Persons are not capable of
being reproved, unless the Owners of the Hearts infested with such Leprosies
make an ingenuous Confession of such Internal Disorders, though they are in their
own Nature worthy of Reproof: They are Subjects of General and unfixt Reproof,
but we cannot safely arraign This or That, or a Third Person, as guilty of
them, because Hearts are inscrutable to human Eyes, and it is Wisdom not to
sport with God's Prerogative.

Indeed, when we plainly see a Person carry himself too magisterially, and
making a Theater of his Heart by arrogant boasting; and a second make every
inoffensive Word Fuel or Flame; or a third railing often against a particular
Person behind his Back, this untoward Mien of theirs, licenses us to suspect
that Envy, Self conceit, or a quarrelsome Temper lurks and ferments in their
Hearts: And because since we are Creatures capable of Suspicion, and conscious
of the like Passions in our selves, when our animal Spirits undergo the like
Agitations, we cannot help harboring Suspicions arising from Probabilities:
For probable Evidence is the clearest we can have of one another's Hearts: It Is
prudent immediately to turn these Suspicions into Charities, by admonishing
Persons of such Conversations against the forementioned ill Tempers of Mind:
For it squares with our natural Notion of God's being a Good and Gracious
Being, to believe that this Passion of Suspicion was planted in our Nature, to
fit us to heal one another's Sores, not to make us dissociable and Devils to
one another: But we should never humor such Suspicions 'till they extort from
us a positive Sentence, and indeed by admonishing we keep our selves from being
betrayed into the Presumption of reproving in such a Case. Marvel not, Reader,
that I said Presumption, for though the Sentence may be materially true, yet it
cannot be formally equitable in. Man's Mouth, because he has no right to judge
his Fellow's Heart, our utmost Rule of judging it by, being but Probability;
for all Men must grant that Conjectures and Guesses are but fortuitous
Judgments, and therefore cannot be equitable, 'till Fortune and Providence can
be proved the same Being. Whence we may discern, that though we may safely speak
against Pride and such internal Habits, whatever they are, indeterminately, as
Ministers in the Pulpit, and Authors in Books, yet no Man can safely reprove
another for Pride or any internal sinful Habit, because Faults visible to the
Senses are the sole subject of Reproof in particular Persons; but internal
Habits don't lie open to the Discovery of Sense, which must, I think, be
granted to make a very remarkable Difference between Admonition and Reproof.

An Instance may make this clearer. Suppose two Persons, who profess to be my
Friends, wrote two Books, one of them a trifling Pamphlet for the Socinians, or
against this Government, which God created and still preserves in so mavelous
a manner (I said created, for the late Revolution was so surprising that the
effecting of it can properly be expressed by nothing but such a Term, which
denotes an instantaneous Act of the Divine Power) or, in short, in Defense of
any Opinion and Faction which aims at the Destruction of Peace in Church or
State, I should think it my Duty, as a Friend (I don't pretend to inform the
Magistrate what is his) to rebuke him sharply for contributing much to the
Interest of the black Republic below. This is a palpable Breach of Peace, and
therefore gives just Occasion of sharp Rebuke. But suppose my other Friend
composed his Book on an useful Subject, and fit to serve the Honor and Kingdom
of Christ in their Hearts, who peruse it with that Attention, Mixture of
Devotion, Candor and Condescension, which becomes wise and honest Readers, I
should think it very proper to forewarn this Friend against overrating himself
in his own Thoughts for his Performance, or by reason of the Applause which it
may be the Instrument of to him: And this I would do, as well knowing that the
Devil is a very indefatigable subtle Enemy: If he cannot discourage Men by
Sloth, and a contracted Spirit from endeavoring to serve the Public, he will,
after their Service to the Public, be flinging in some Idea's and Fancies into
the Minds of Public Benefactors; which, if they are hospitable to, will grow
into that dangerous Habit Pride, which makes Men idle and ridiculous by their
haughty Carriage, which will lessen their Reputation, and so lessen the Power
of their Endeavors, by prejudicing People against their Persons: But now, if
instead of Admonishing this Friend, I had arraigned him of Vainglory and
Pride, as I did the other for his Heresy or Faction, I should have affronted
God, by usurping that Tribunal which is proper only to Omniscience, and so by
my Pride mist of doing that Good which my Admonition might very fairly expected
to have done. In short, an Author of a Pernicious Book is an Object of Reproof,
but an Author of a Good Book is an Object of frequent Admonition against Pride
and Vainglory.

Fourthly and lastly, Admonition and Reproof differ, because Admonition is
given without any degree of Displeasure, but it is fitting to express
Displeasure in proportion to the Fault, when we tender Reproof. The Usefulness
of Admonition is bottomed upon the peccability of Human Nature: That which
prompts us is Jealousy, a still and silent Passion; consequently, to be angry
with a Friend, while we admonish him, is to be angry with him, because he is
peccable, which is very absurd; as absurd, we may be sure, as to charge God
foolishly, and to note down the Defects of his Handywork: He did not make Man
perfect in that sublime Sense in which he himself is perfect. That Liberty and
Principle of voluntary Agency with which Man was invested as soon as he was
created, is God's Work, essential to him as a human Creature, and therefore
peccability or possibility of Sinning is the Work of the Creator; for a faculty
of Acting Voluntarily implies a Power of a different Choice, and therefore
Man's being a voluntary Agent implies that he may choose which he will have,
Life or Death, Good or Evil, for they are both set before him; that is to say,
he may sin or obey, and if he is made so, that he may sin, then he is peccable,
for by a peccable Creature we mean only a Creature that may sin, not a Creature
that must sin.

But when we reprove a Friend, we are warm with Grief to see our second Self
choose Evil, when he might as well have chose the Good: It Is monstrous Folly to
abuse Knowledge, and employ Liberty in the Ruin of our Souls. Possibility of
Sinning can by no means be removed from our Natures, 'till it is thoroughly
completed and glorified; indeed when we shall commence Saints, peccability
will be as remote from our Beings, as possibility of becoming Holy is from the
Souls of the damned. Nevertheless, no one necessarily commits any particular
actual Sin, which cannot be denied, unless we suppose Man rather a machinal
than a voluntary Being. Now since no one fatally commits any visible Sin, though
we are all originally unclean from the Womb, and since Guilt is the Bane of our
Being, one Friend's Fraternal Concern for another's Welfare, will not only urge
him to use all loving Arts to defend his Friend against approaching
Temptations, by Admonition, but moreover compels him to be troubled in his
behalf, whenever he sees him worsted by them; and Guilt being a Calamity which
every Man has a Hand, more or less, in pulling upon his own Head; this Grief
will naturally swell into Anger, since the offending Friend might have avoided
it, if he had used his Powers as he ought. Besides too, Reproof has to do with
the Will, a very refractory Faculty indeed; to be sure more or less perverse
after any fresh Commission, which, for that Reason, cannot be handled to any
purpose, viz. so as to be mastered in order to it is being rectified again by
any but such a rough and rigid Passion as Anger is, which speaks aloud, and
awakens a Friend's Sense of his Misery, and want of extraordinary Discipline
and Watchfulness. Whence it is clear that Resentment becomes Reproof, tho it ill
comports with Admonition. This may suffice concerning the difference between
Admonition and Reproof. But though I have insisted on it some while, yet I think
my self obliged to give notice, that I neither pretend to have given, or did at
all design to give, a full account of the distinct Nature of Admonition, which,
God assisting, shall be the Subject of a particular Treatise: But thus much I
thought necessary to premise in this Place to distinguish Reproof from
Admonition, because I have observed that those few Authors, who have been
prevailed upon to speak a little, too little, I Am sure, of Reproof, have
confounded it with Admonition, which has made their Discourses about it, to say
no worse, fruitless and insignificant. But since Admonition and Reproof differ
in so many respects, it is manifest that the forementioned Definition of Reproof
is very imperfect, because it confounds two distinct Acts of Spiritual
Beneficence, which is of a very pernicious Consequence.

For first, He that takes these two Acts for one and the same Duty, must take
it also for granted, that when he has discharged one he has discharged both, so
that he ll either content himself with Admonishing his Friend against complying
with Temptations, without ever reproving him for actual Complyances with them,
or else he will only reprove him for actual Transgressions of Divine Precepts,
without ever admonishing him against those ill Propensions and inveterate
Disorders of the inner Man, which are the sole Sources of all the
Irregularities of the Tongue, and all our other active and social Faculties.

Nay, moreover, secondly, This curt Definition of Reproof, by confounding
Admonition with it, not only affronts the Law, by lessening our Duty, and
impairs human Virtue by contracting our Charity, but it also fondles one of the
most scurvy Humors which disturb Conversation; for it gives a Patent to
Censoriousness, even that odious, turbulent, pestilential Vice, Censoriousness:
For let Admonition and Reproof be once allowed to be the same, the pragmatical
may censure with Authority; for since a Friend may safely admonish another
against such or such an ill Biass of Mind, a Man may also, according to their
Notion of Reproof, innocently reprove a Person for an internal, invisible,
vicious Inclination, by which Reproof he inclusively denominates him guilty, in
such or such a degree of Discontent, Self-conceit, Envy, Vainglory, or any the
like malignant Disposition (I say in such or such a degree, because the subject
of a particular Reproof must be visible enough to have it is Aggravations
pondered, that the Resentment of the Reproof may be proportioned to the Size of
the Fault) which cannot be done without passing Sentence upon the Heart, where
none but God and Conscience have a Right to decide Cases: No Hypothesis can be
found which reconciles Quarrelsomness and Charity, Vice and Virtue, Duty and
Disobedience, and attempts to make us believe that it is possible to please God
and the Devil the fame way. He who censures his Friend to extort Occasions of
Reproof, though he should judge right, judges so but by good hap; he might as
well have played the Slanderer, for Man is a very blind Judge of his
Neighbor's Heart. Wherefore such a Method is but doing Evil that Good may come
of it; it is to commit Sin to do our Duty, please the Devil for fear we should
displease God, a very gainless Entrance upon a Christian Office without doubt.
This is a necessary Caution here; for tho some are so malicious as to effect
such gross and palpable Errors, yet there are others ignorant enough to be led
aside and deluded through Simplicity; and doubtless it is not an Entanglement so
inconsiderable that weak Minds can be quickly extricated from it. When
Censoriousness and Reproof are dissembled to be of the same Blood, scrupulous
Christians will either reject the Duty, through hatred of the Sin, or run into
the Sin for love of the Duty; the latter Choice too, which is the worse, is
most likely to be preferred; for ordinary Christians, when they are cramped are
apt to be dazzled into Sin by the gaudy Prospect of doing a good turn, when they
should stand still a little, and thereby take Care not to be imposed on by the
glittering Appearance of the stolen Robes of Zeal, lest when patient Examination
has sounded the Allurement, it be discovered to be Sin in Disguise. They are
rash and turned about by Pretenses, they will pretend mightily to do good by
Reproof, when in Truth they reprove not at all, but only busy themselves to
create Mischief and Contention, ill Words and ill Works enough by their
Censoriousness.

But 2. If bare telling a Person of a real Fault, before his Face, is a perfect
Definition of Reproof, then unmannerly Exprobration is so, for he that upbraids
a Person of a Fault, must be owned to tell him of that Fault. But alas! should
we grant Upbraiding to be Reproof, how strangely must we needs blacken Reproof?
What a monstrous Opinion of this excellent Duty must it needs beget in Men's
Minds? for, according to this Standard, a treacherous Familiar, who blabs out
the lesser Faults and Infirmities of his Friend, among his Enemies, if it be
but before his Face, may be said to reprove.

Nay, even Solomon's Fool, the profane Scoffer, who makes a Mock at Sin, and
hits his Friend on the Teeth with his Failings, only to feast on his Shame, and
make Pastime on his Wretchedness; this Burden, I say, of the Community, may,
with the rest too, cloak his Villainy under the fine Name of Reproof. Away
therefore, with a Vengeance, with such an account of Reproof which gives
Sanctuary to Atheistical and Pragmatical Men.

We have hitherto been setting a Mark upon all Counterfeit Reproof: It Is Time
now to seek out for some more tolerable Definition of Reproof, that we may rub
out those Stains which some giddy Pretenders have so industriously dropped upon
this excellent Duty. Reproof then, in general, is the telling any Person of his
Fault, with a peculiar Regard to the Advancement of Virtue, in such a manner as
comports with his Relation to the Offender, who tells him of the Fault. The
Knowledge of the proper Methods which must be used to serve this great End by
Reproof, is diverse, according to the peculiar Nature of the Reproof: For there
are several kinds of Reproof, of which we must necessarily give some brief
Account, before we can lay down a plain and clear Notion of Friendly Reproof.
This therefore shall be done next.

SECT. III. Giving a brief Account of Divine Reproof, both General and
Particular: And Human, viz. the Civil Magistrate's [as the Royal and Judicial]
the Ecclesiastical [as the Bishop's] the inferior Minister's, the Husband's,
Parent's, Tutor's, the Patron's, the Master's, Casual and Friendly Reproof
considered, as distinct from all the rest.
ANother Cause which was assigned for Men's wrong Notions of Friendly Reproof,
is their confounding it with other kinds of Reproof. Wherefore, having, I hope,
already said enough to rectify their Conceptions of Reproof in general, I beg,
your Attention to a brief Summary of the several sorts of Reproof, together
with a plain account of the distinct Nature of every one of them, that you may
with the greater Ease distinguish them among themselves, but especially from
Friendly Reproof: And to prevent Offense, I hereby desire you to remember, That
Friendly Reproof is the sole Subject of this Essay, and for that reason not to
expect any Directions about the Management of the others. I freely confess that
I have no Talent, neither does it become one in my Station to offer Advice to
Bishops and Magistrates, neither does the Title Page promise to give any Rules
about any but Friendly Reproof; and I hope it can be construed Presumption in
no one to pretend to understand the Duty of a Friend, since Friendship is a
common Relation to all who obey Nature's Instinct to a rational Sociableness.
In short, my sole Reason for mentioning the rest is, that you may discriminate
this from them, lest I should seem by urging Friendly Reproof thus at large,
without marking down the Distinctions, to confound Clerks and Laymen.

Reproof is either Divine or Human. The Divine is General or Particular.
General, as first, the public denunciation of God against all sin, in the
Writings immediately inspired by his Spirit: And secondly, the Conviction of
Universal Conscience, that innate Sense of the Eternal Unreasonableness of some
Actions, which checks us in the doing them, and causes an Uneasiness in bad
Men, in their first entrance on sinful Courses, and which tears their Minds
with such terrible Lancinations, when they consider and Reflect upon their
Offenses. Particular, as the Checks and Convictions of every Man's particular
Conscience, attended with more or less Horror or Remorse, according to the
different Circumstances which mitigate or aggrandize the Offender's Sins, and
the Measure of the Operations of the Divine Spirit, whose Incitements to
Repentance in particular Hearts, may very fairly be reckoned one sort of Divine
Reproof. This latter is the more extraordinary Reproof; but it is hard, perhaps
impossible to assign a Point where the natural Remorse terminates, and the
Spiritual begins. But there is no need of insisting on the Divine Reproof: This
cannot involuntarily be confounded with Friendly Reproof. I hasten therefore to
speak of the Human.

Now Human Reproof is of several sorts, for there is the Civil Magistrate's [as
the Prince's and the Judge's] the Ecclesiastical Magistrate's [as the Bishop's]
the Inferior Minister's, the Husband's, the Parent's, the Tutor's, the
Patron's, the Master's, Casual and Friendly Reproof.

The first that occurs is the Civil Magistrate's Reproof. To know the peculiar
Nature, Necessity, and (by consequence) Lawfulness of this Reproof in general,
we must consider that though all Sins, be they greater or less, either in Number
or Quality, make every Man a worse Member of a Commonwealth than otherwise he
would be, yet there are some Offenses and Crimes so notorious, and which have
such a fatal aspect upon the Prosperity and Peace of a Kingdom, that by reason
of the anomalous Tempers of some dissociable and rapacious Wretches, there
could be no safe or steady Commerce in the World, if they were not restrained
by the Shame of Public Cognizance and the Dread of Political Sanctions,
prohibiting Vices which tend directly to the unhinging Government, and quiet
Neighborhood in the World. Without the Protection of these Laws we could not
plant in Peace, or sow with Hope: We could neither enjoy the Fruit of our
Hands, nor the Merits and Treasures of our Ancestors, without continual Fear of
violent Usurpation, and being hastily dislodged, not only of our Possessions,
but of our Bodies too, by Men of bloody and wild Desires. Now the Magistrates
are the Guardians of these Faithful Guardians of our Lives and Liberties: They
execute their Commands, and so act the noble part of the Patriots of the
Kingdom. This is their Calling and Profession, and a great and honorable one
it is: Their Reproof of such horrid Crimes is not given so much for the sake of
the particular Offenders as of that Contract and Intimacy which they have
entered into with the Laws.

The Temporal Magistrate's Reproof may be divided into Royal and Judicical.

The Royal Reproof in our Monarchical, the best kind of, Government is, when
the supreme Magistrate, either of his own accord, or in concurrence with some
Resolution of that great Council and Fortress of the Realm, the Parliament,
issues out Proclamation against such and such Vices, and threatens agreeable
Penalties to be undergone by all who commit them. Now this sort of Admonition
is General and an Implicit and unfixt Reproof, because in forbidding such and
such Practices, with Menaces annexed against the Committers of them for the
future, it tacitly and inclusively expresses a Displeasure against the said
Practices, and all who have indulged themselves in them before, though the
Persons reproved are unknown and unnam'd. Thus Kings are said to be Terrors to
evil doers, attending continually upon this very thing, viz. to be the avengers
of the Public upon them who do evil, that under them we may lead peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. Princes therefore reprove their Subjects
for these Vices, as they are Fathers of their several Countries, and because
they have a tender concern for the Welfare and regular Order of them. Love for
Souls, Affection for Religion ought to be the Cardinal Motive of all Reproof
whatsoever. But that which particularizes the Prince's Reproof, is his Zeal for
the good of a set number of Human Creatures considered, as they constitute the
same Community. Whence it follows that the Royal Reproof has primarily an Eye
to the Temporal Prosperity of the Reproved, because Communities are only
capable of Temporal Rewards. They always flourish and decay at the long-run,
according as Virtue or Vice has the greatest Head in them. This is unavoidable;
for how otherwise shall we be able to vindicate to our poor Apprehensions God's
Government and Administration of the Human Universe? What will become of the
Equity of his Proceedings? Shall not the Judge of the whole Earth do right?
Shall not he, whose Nature is the Exemplar of Virtue, confer proper Rewards on
it? But if virtuous and vicious Communities cannot be rewarded and punished
hereafter, our natural Notion of God's infinite Justice obliges us to believe
that Kingdoms are more or less prosperous as they are more or less virtuous;
but it is evident that it is impossible for Polities, as Polities, to be
judged, rewarded or punished after this state. For though Polity itself will
survive it, yet the Polities that are now by reason of the different
Preparations which the different individual constituent Parts of them make for
the other World, will be then irreparably dissolved. Besides, Catholic and
National Righteousness, not only by God's Blessing, but if I may so speak, by
the Decree of it is own Tendency exalts a Nation; and, on the contrary, Sin is,
by its natural Tendency too, the Destruction of any People, and supplants the
Throne, by naturally centring to an opposite Point. So that it is not only the
Duty, but the Interest of Princes to discourage and reprove Libertinism.

Her most Gracious Majesty (whose late Decease turned our Feasts into Mourning,
and hung the Hearts of all those true Christians, who were true Friends to the
English Sion, in Sackcloath) expressed a maternal Care for her Subjects in
those Pious Letters which she sent to the Justices of Middlesex, for the
vigorous carrying on a National Reformation; and I heartily wish that those
whose extraordinary Judgment, eminent Stations, and other Opportunities
licenses them to be guilty of such an useful Presumption, as the reminding them
frequently of their weighty Obligation thereunto, would pleasure his Sacred
Majesty, the Tower of Europe, under God, by an unwearied conformity to that
excellent Command. Sure I am, unless that late dismal Frown of Heaven find more
success upon the Minds and Manners of the ungrateful People of this Land than
the rest have found, those Catifs of Unconstancy, who can requite God's
Kindness with nothing but Murmurs, will, without the Interposal of such unusual
and undeserved Mercy, which God has displayed to this Island during the present
Reign, for his Name's sake, and the sake of two such excellent Princes,
apprehend something quickly, which will draw a Veil of black Darkness over
their Faces. Oh! may they at last learn to be as wise in this their Day, as
they are already in their own Eyes, and to prize the Peace of our Jerusalem,
before Mercy is for ever hid from their Eyes.

The Judicial Reproof is the inferior Magistrate's Reproof of any Person or
Persons, who are detected to be guilty of such and such Crimes, after they had
been fairly forewarned against them by the Royal Reproof; and because that
Reproof did not prove powerful enough to keep them within Bounds, the Judge or
Justice inflicts some Pecuniary or Capital Punishment, or other, which may for
Pain and Disgrace match the Criminal's Offense: This he is obliged to do, in
Obedience to the supreme Magistrate, from whom he received his Commission: It Is
his Fidelity to his Prince, which peculiarizes his Reproof.

As for Socinians and others, who hold Capital Punishments Unlawful under the
Evangelical Dispensation, they manifestly represent the Christian Religion to
introduce and abet Anarchy: For since all Men are not overaw'd into Innocence
by the Belief of a future Judgment, some are too unreasonable, to let any
Government be secure unless they are bribed by the terrible Apprehension of a
visible Tribunal: Nothing strikes them but what is sensible and present. Since
there is so much Disorder even now, what would the World be but a Chaos, if
such Inflictions should be laid aside? Our Blessed Lord could never design
Christians to omit that Discipline which Gentiles and Jews have constantly
observed: If Christ has tied up the Magistrate's Hands, so that he cannot
conscienciously defend innocent Subjects from the Fury and Outrage of the
Injurious and Blood-thirsty, 'twill be impossible to clear the inspired S. Paul
from the Guilt of a Lie, who expressly tells us, That the Power holds not the
Sword in vain; which is such horrid Blasphemy that it cannot be mentioned by
any modest Christian without horror and trembling. In short, Capital
Punishments and Christian Charity agree very well, since Malefactors are
executed for no Crimes but those which have a direct malign Influence upon
Community: For it is unreasonable to think that Charity can flourish upon the
Ruins of Kingdoms. The Magistrate being thus severe to some few, is clement and
equitable to the whole.

But perhaps you may admire to see the Judge's Condemnation called Reproof: But
however, if we look narrowly into the Use and Design of it, it is such, and a
very terrible sort of Reproof, I confess: The good God grant that neither You
nor I, Reader, may ever plunge our selves into such a Depth of Guilt as to
stand in need of this Ferula.

That the Judge's Condemnation is one sort of Reproof, will appear, if we
consider, First, That no Human Condemnation is a final Condemnation: And,
Secondly, That those notorious Malefactors (who, in all probability were
seared, so as never to have come to any sense of their Spiritual Danger, and
who, for that Reason, would, without the Application of the rigidest Methods
always have persisted in the pernicious Course of Life, every Day growing worse
and worse, till some Disaster or other had hurried them down headlong into the
nethermost Hell, in a desperate and impenitent Posture of Soul) are allowed
more or less Space of Time between the Sentence of Death and the Hour of their
Execution to repent in. And if we consider, Thirdly, That the finding
themselves stopped, together with the Chariot-wheels of Life, in their Villainous
Career, by the Magistrate's Authority, is the most likely means to incline such
obdurate Wretches to Repentance; for if they are not utterly past feeling, this
Consideration must cut deep, and work upon them, to make the best Use of their
sorry Quantum of Time, by Restitution, Acts of Sorrow, Humiliation, Faith and
Devotion. And farther, if we consider, Fourthly, 'That this abortive Repentance
will both warn others the more solemnly, and give some Hopes of Salvation to
the Offender, since we cannot but grant, in the Fifth Place, That the least
Degree of Penitence and Hope waiting upon such Repentance, is far better than
perfect Impenitence and Despair; because though we should grant that it would be
no Breach of Moderation to believe that this Degree of Repentance cannot
procure Interest enough in the Court of Heaven to get a Ticket of Jesus for
their Admission into that Place, yet I cannot think it a piece of Rashness to
assert, That 'twill help to mitigate their Torments in Hell which does some
Kindness to the Criminals, and renders them more useful Examples of Justice to
the Spectators of their tragical End, whose Satisfaction, Safety and Admonition
is the main End of their being executed. For the severest Infliction which does
not leave those, on whom it is inflicted, wholly hopeless, as to their Eternal
Happiness, and may serve to discourage Vice in those of their Fellow Creatures,
who are yet in a Capacity of determining God's final Sentence upon their Souls
by their demeanor here, either to the Satisfaction of his infinite Justice, or
the Pleasure of his infinite Mercy; which capacity all the Spectators are still
presumed to be in possession of. Nay, who knows but the eternal Incubation of
God's fiery Wrath upon the Souls of the Devil and the Damned, after their final
Condemnation, may be one great means after the Day of Judgment of the Eternal
Confirmation of Angels and Saints in their State of perfect Beatitude? What
will be irreversible Punishment to Fiends, will be admonition to the blessed
above, and probably of as great Use to the Saints and those Angels who never
apostatized from God, as Reproof was to the Saints in this preparatory State,
where they got the mastery of their Corruptions. But not to digress, the
Premises, I think, being seriously considered, the Judge's Condemnation of
Malefactors may very properly be called Reproof. But since the Judge's
Condemnation may be properly enough termed Reproof, the inferior Inflictions of
the Civil Magistrate may very properly be placed in the Number of Reproof,
since they don't so much as include an Abbreviature of the Criminal's stay
here, after which all our Endeavors to avoid the final Condemnation, or to
lessen the Weight of it will be in vain.

The Ecclesiastic Reproof offers it self next.

It Is twofold. First, The Bishop's or Spiritual Magistrate's. Secondly, The
Inferior Ministers. By Episcopal Reproof I mean the Church Censures; the
Subjects of this Reproof are not only enormous Crimes, the Capital Laws of the
Realm, but Profaneness and avowed Heresy, scornful Contempt of the Lord's
Supper, and such like; because any who are obstinately Guilty of these Crimes,
are scandalous Members of Christ's Catholic, but especially of that National
Church, with which they profess Communion, and are Excommunicated by the
Bishop, or punished by some lower Mulcts. according to the Aggravations of
their Crime, by the Bishops, who are the Spiritual Fathers, and do reprove such
disorderly Members thus, not only to reform them (for the blasphemous are
mostly too obdurate to learn not to blaspheme) but for the Credit and Safety of
that Church, over which they preside, because a desperate Disease requires a
desperate Cure. But though the Recovery of the ejected Members is very Hopeless,
yet the Honor of the Church may be secured. Such strict Discipline is
necessary, to show that the Immoralities and fantastic Opinions of
Hypocritical and Lewd Professors are not encouraged and sealed by the Church,
but are the Creatures of their own imperious Lusts and Ambitions. It Is
necessary that Infectious Members should be branded with a Mark of Infamy, to
the end others may avoid them, 'till they are got quit of their Murrain, if
they are not incurable. The Ecclesiastical Magistrate's Reproof is an Act of
Fidelity to the Church, in which he is a Provincial or Diocesan Prelate.

The Private Minister's Reproof is either his condemning any Sin or Sins in
general before a whole Congregation; by which Denunciation He Publicly, but,
nevertheless, Indeterminately (for this is no proper Season to apply a
particular Reproof) reproves all there present, whose Consciences testify
silently against them: Or, secondly, his reprehending particular Persons in his
Parochial Circuit: It Is his Office to reprove both in Season and out of Season.
A fervent Ardour for the Improvement of his Flock in Goodness engages him to do
this: It Is incumbent on him upon the account of his Susception of the Pastoral
Care. The chief Subjects of his Reproof are, His Parishioners Neglect of the
Public Worship, irreverend Behavior in the Temple, infrequent or temerarious
Celebration of the Eucharist, apparent Fruitlesness under the Ordinances,
Omission of Family Devotion, neglecting to instruct their Children in the
Principles of Religion, indifferency as to the Minds and Manners of their
Servants or Children, etc. A Minister reproves, as the Angle or Messenger of
GOD, and as the Ambassador of JESUS CHRIST. He is not only the Feeder but the
Inspector, Moderator and Discipliner of the Laity committed to his Tuition,
according to the old Use of that known Phrase, (...); and therefore a peculiar
Freedom of Speech becomes him: His Gown and Unction bespeak Veneration to his
Reproof, from Persons of all Qualities and Degrees: He may reprove often, and
without Offense, and needs no familiarity with the reproved party beforehand,
to gain him Authority, and Permission to do so.

Come we now to speak of the Husband's Reproof. The Husband has a Right to
reprove his Wife, by virtue of the conjugal Relation. He is her Superior not
only by Sex and Order of Creation (for Adam was first formed, then Eve) but her
Lord (so Sarah called Abraham) by Marriage. The proper Subjects of his Reproof
are Instances of wry or profuse Management of Oeconomical or Houshold-Affairs:
The Chief End of Marriage is to procure a Family, and to keep it regular and in
decent Order. The Husband is to provide Necessaries for the Family, and when he
reproves his Wife he has a peculiar Eye to the good of his Family: He knows
that the Manners and Welfare of his Children, Inferior Relations and Servants,
that are under his Inspection, hang very much upon the good or indiscreet
Conduct of his Wife, and therefore watches her Carriage the more closely, for
she is Governess of the Family just as he is her Governor. Hence it is, that
to be much at home, has been always reputed a great Character of a Woman.

PARENTS have a Right to reprove their Children, not only because they are
inferior to 'em, but also upon the Score of a proximate and consanguineous
Relation. Their Reproofs enter with great Advantage, and therefore, if they
please, they may reprove very successfully, and do a great deal of Good with
their Tongues this way, for tender Years are easily suppled. Good God! what
Cruel Monstrous Creatures are some Parents, who, though they are called upon by
their own Bowels, a Tenderness planted in them by the immediate Hand of Nature,
to correct and reprove their Children (and thereby prevent ill Customs, which
take fast Possession in green Years, when their Minds are very malleable and
docile, and consequently tenacious of any, but especially bad Impressions) can
so unconcernedly let their Souls run to Ruin for want of due Correction and
mature Reproof! Parental Reproof is an Act of Fidelity due to Nature, and
therefore the Omission of it is a horrid Crime indeed. It Is a hard Case that
those who have not Judgment enough to make clear Distinctions between Good and
Evil, should be nursed up for Hell, only for want of such a cheap Alms as
Reproof, and that too from those who brought them into the World. How many
Children may at the last accuse their Parents of having coupled together merely
to gratify natural Instinct? Sure such Parents don't consider that these
corrupt Offsprings of theirs are obnoxious to Eternal Damnation, unless good
Counsels dye their Minds betimes with good Tempers. After one overgrown Vice
has beggared, another disgraced, a third diseased their Children, and all
together have Racked and Tortured their Minds with restless Passions and
ineffable, but fruitless Agonies; then you may hear them cry, That they are
heartily sorry that they were so neglectful: But alas! then it is too late, then
their own and their forlorn Posterity's Curses are the just and dire Rewards of
their barbarous Fondness.

Helleborum frustra cum jam cutis aegra tumescit
Poscentes videas; veniente occurriti morbo.
Persius. The best Prescripts, Preparations and Antidotes are of no use when
the Poison has impostum'd the whole Man: If you would countermine it is Rage to
any purpose, withstand it is first Onsets. Dangerous Diseases must be strangled
in Infancy; for when those venomous Seeds which seem small and contemptible at
first, have been long let alone, 'till they are grown and multiplied, they
become too sturdy and masterless to be subdued. Every Fault in Youth is a
Pestilence in Embryo; and every Repetition of the same Fault is a Step to a
vicious Habit, and every vicious Habit is the Addition of a Round to an Eternal
State of Hostility with God.

Nemo repent fuit turpissimus.
Juv. There was never such a thing as an upstart Devil. A Creature is an effect
appropriate to Omnipotence, and therefore though there is no need of Omnipotence
to uncreature a Creature, yet no Being can uncreature himself in a Moment; and
since a high degree of Wickedness ripens a Soul for Hell, where they become the
Devil's Vassals for ever, and consequently cease to be God's Creatures, with
those Devils who tyrannize over them, a presumptuous State of Wickedness cannot
possibly be a sudden Attainment. Wise Parents therefore will rather take care
to stifle Sin in it is Birth than despise the least Beginnings of Vice, since a
budding Vice may be crop'd with Ease by the Hand, which when it is become
inveterate will require the Aid of Spade and Mattock, and the Cost of a great
deal of Sweat before it be rooted up.

TVTORS are the Vice parents of their Pupils, and therefore by reproving them
they not only consult the Honor of their own Instructions and Methods of
Education, but also approve themselves faithful both in the Sight of God and
Men, to their natural Parents, who trust their Children in their Hands; which
is the chief Circumstance that specifies a Tutor's Reproof.

PATRONS reprove their Dependents chiefly, for the sake of their own
Beneficence. By so doing they act the faithful Bursers of God: They manifest
that they don't give partially, prodigally and at Random, or purely in
Obedience to a pliable Temper, without being the least solicitous for
benefitting their Country by their Bounty. They thereby show that it is their
Endeavor and Ambition to bestow a polite Education on such whose rich Advances
in Knowledge and Virtue promise brave Servants to the Church and State.

MASTERS hold a Right of Reproving their Servants by their Servant's voluntary
Submission of themselves to their Dictates and Commands. 'Twas their own and
their Parents Contract, That they should live in Obedience. It Is from their
Masters that they learn to get a handsome Subsistence in the World, by Skill
and Industry in some honest Calling; and therefore it is great Folly and
Ingratitude in them to be stubborn and surly when they are reproved. The
Christian Doctrine assures us, That Servants should be subject, not only to the
good and gentle, but even to froward Masters, and construes it no Glory (so
easy and fitting is it) to be patient when they are chastised for their
Faults. But if Stripes and Buffetings are patiently to be born with, much more
ought Medicinal Reproofs be contentedly received, since their Masters are
obliged in Point of Fidelity, Duty, Care and Love to reprove them.

All the forementioned sorts of Reproof are special relative Duties, and of a
very solemn Nature; and so far Friendly Reproof agrees with them. But there
remains one sort of Reproof more, of which we must say something before we can
conveniently speak of the Reproof of a Friend, which differs from all the rest,
and that is Casual Reproof.

Reproof may be called Casual when the Reprover neither reproves as a
Magistrate, nor as a Minister, nor as a Husband, nor as a Parent, nor as a
Tutor, nor as a Patron, nor as a Master: In short, upon no other Obligation or
Relation than those general ones of the Man, the Fellow Creature, and the
Christian. It Is called Casual, because it is given by Chance, without
Forethought, nay sometimes without knowing what the Person is whom we reprove:
There is no Plot laid beforehand, no Season pitched upon, no Opportunity
watched for; but the Offender is reproved without Stratagem and Preface upon
the Spot. The Subjects of this Reproof are (to use S. Paul's Phrase) works of
Darkness; that is to say, Words and Actions which are not sit or tolerable to
be spoke in Company, or to be done in the Sight of the Sun; such as are too
offensive to be born with by the Light, unless among the Scum or brutisher Part
of Mankind. Of this Nature are all Filthy and Unclean Hints, Lascivious
Motions, rash Oaths, hellish Blasphemies and Execrations, profane Derision of
the Sacred Scriptures, consecrated Places, dedicated Men or sanctified Days.
There is but little Hope of such Persons being reformed by such Reproof, and
therefore they are not reproved so much for their own sakes as for the
Company's good and Admonition: A Man must express his Abhorrence of Atheism and
Licentious Talk, as he is but a sociable Creature; for there can be no
continuance of sound Society, unless such exorbitant Tenets and Practices are
openly and unexceptionably discouraged and exploded in all Company. These are
the horrid Sins in which the Apostle so far disallows of our Partaking with the
Committers of them, that he commands us to reprove the Haughty and Scornful
Abettors of them, who shake Hands with Wisdom to pass for Wits; and indeed, not
to reprove them, is in some degrees to be Partakers of their Sins. Silence,
without doubt, is Connivance in such a Case, and therefore a perilous Omission
of one of the main positive Duties of the Tongue. What Love can that Man have
for exemplary Virtue, who does not find himself provoked by such notorious
Vice, and freely vent his Abhorrence of detestable, barefaced and impudent
Wickedness, when God and Religion are made Themes of Jest and scurrilous
Raillery? It Is true, there is a furious and overhasty Zeal, which is devoid of
Prudence, and therefore not commendable; but it is also certainly true that
there is a public and generous Zeal, that is consistent with Civility,
Prudence and good Manners. Lukewarm People may talk as they please, and
harangue very much in Commendation of Prudence, whilst, in the mean while they
donn't so much as understand wherein true Prudence consists.

PRVDENCE is the wary and practical Application of that Degree of Wisdom, which
we have in the industrious Promotion of those Designs which we are most
ambitious to see accomplished. The Difference between Wisdom and Prudence is
this. Wisdom is Knowledge, as it is treasured up and lies unactive in the
Intellect. Prudence is the eliciting it into Action, the seasonable Use of it
upon an Emergency. And indeed this practical Faculty of Circumspection is used
to different Purposes, according to our different Degrees of Faith. Those whose
Belief and Assent flows solely from their Eyes, that is to say, who are purely
sensual, employ it to dishonest Ends, to gratify their Inclinations, to enjoy
those things which seem beautiful and lovely to the Senses, such as
Covetousness, Ambition and Vainglory, because the praise of Men pleases our
Ears, and a Heap of Riches is pleasant to the Eye. Now their dextrous Use of
this comparative Faculty to such Ends is, properly speaking, nothing but
Carnal, Unlawful Prudence, or, to express it in one Word, Craft, which proceeds
from a culpable Self-love, a partial Love of themselves, considered abstractly
from the Human Community, merely as they are sensitive Creatures, and allied to
Brutes. Such Men act with a sole regard to that gross Body which they will wear
only in this perishing State; and therefore will do nothing which tends at*
present to the diminishing their Wealth or the Shipwreck of their Reputation
with the Crowd (which, if we would please in an Age when most are lewd, we must
omit many Duties, the Observance of which would promote the Honor of God, and
the Spiritual Grandeur of our own Minds) though indeed they will many times scorn
the good Opinion of their Fellow Creatures, if they cannot enjoy it, and some
vile Gratification at the same Time: And without Doubt their Sentence must be
dreadful at the last Day, who think that Credit is too costly a Victim to be
devoted to God, which they can very readily sacrifice to their own Lusts. But
those whose Faith is more extensive, and is freed from the Fetters of Sense,
who have a commanding Sense of the Divine Excellencies, whose Understandings
and Expectations are made more spacious by the Prospect of a future State, who
really believe that God is Spirit, and that the Similitude of God is stamped on
that part of their being, which is so bright and fine that it escapes the Sight
of our bodily Eyes. Those, those, I say, subject the Estimation of their Body
to that of their Soul, and, in short, make their Temporal seeming Interest give
way for the Advancement of Religion, and the continuance of the Honor and
Complacence of God with them, in which their real and eternal Interest is
wrapped up. In them the Use of their natural Faculty of comparing Circumstances
is, in the Dialect of God and Nature called Prudence. Immoderate Lovers of Self
abuse this Faculty: They who love themselves subordinately to the Love of God,
that is to say, love themselves not as sole, separate, independent Beings, but
as being related to God and his Creation, use it wisely and religiously. We are
in the first Place to take care that our Love of God be the supreme Love, that
we may ply all our Faculties to his Glory, like truly affectionate Creatures;
and since Reproof may promote his Glory, we are to reprove. Now the knowing and
being fully satisfied that the Promotion of his Glory ought to be our first Aim
and chief Endeavor, is Wisdom. Moreover, since he is a God to Order and Season
in his Works, and has invested Humanity with a proper Faculty to distinguish
Circumstances and Seasons, that our wise Ends and Endeavors may prove
successful, it is incumbent upon us not only to reprove, but to take Care to
reprove at fit Times and in a fit manner, which is the Exertion of Prudence.
And whenever we reprove without due regard to Season, though our Reproof may
prove as clear from carnal Prudence, and shows that we have more regard for the
Universal Reputation of Religion than our own private Esteem among others; yet
we may very properly then be said to be imprudent, and thus a Man may be wise
without Prudence. On the contrary, those who don't reprove when they might have
done it, without any Breach of what Reason calls Civility, being carnally
prudent, may very well be said to be prudent without Wisdom. But the truly
circumspect Christian is both wise and prudent: He will nether let the Offender
escape his Reproof, nor reprove an Offender in the height of Passion, or when
his Faculties are supplanted by Intemperance, not because Reproof will
displease them then (for the Wicked are displeased with it when they are sober)
but because if he consult the Nature of things he cannot but know that in such
a case no good purpose can be answered by the hazzarding his Reputation, and
that unseasonable and misapplied Reproofs (especially if they are of a casual
nature) do more Mischief to the Credit of the Duty it self than could have been
satisfied for by all the Good which it might have done, though it had been well
managed, and crowned with desirable Success. But now I am speaking of Season, I
must inform you, That your Rules of Seasonableness must be fetched from the
Dictates of Nature, not from the unconstant depraved Humors of some Men, for he
that thus observes the Wind shall not sow. We are not to reprove only where we
foresee it will probably find a welcome access, or omit this Duty upon the
prospect of probably being reproached for it: But our Care ought to be this,
never to reprove where or when some Circumstances considered, our Reproof, by
being a greater Breach of Decency than it can possibly be an Act of Duty, will
be not merely in the Opinions of ill Men, but by the Laws of Nature
Reproach-worthy. A rash Reproof represents a Man inconsistent with himself,
because it represents him an extraordinary forward Zealot, before he has
learned to show himself a Man by Consideration, which is to invert the Order of
God and Nature: For Consideration is one of the first Virtues, in order, and
his Zeal cannot be well founded, who is destitute of it; so that the Rashness
demonstrates that Zeal to he ill grounded, which the Reproof seems to express.
To which give me Leave to add, That the Observance of Caution and Season in
giving Reproof will free us from being charged with Vainglory and Arrogance by
any candid or sedate Christian for our Reproof. In short, We must first be sure
to have excellent Aims, and then study to serve them by proper means. But though
we are not to reprove every Person whom we know to be a scandalous Sinner, or
one who is superior to us in Age, quality or Function, yet we may reprove any
one to whom we are equal enough to be their Companion, if they do any thing
that is scandalous while we are in their Company. The Canons of common Civility
will Authorize us to reprove them: We may, without committing any Solecism in
Address, beg their Silence, and freely vent our Displeasure. For if we are
equal enough to be Companions, we are in mutual Society sociable upon equal
Terms, and on the same Conditions: And therefore every Companion may speak his
Mind in his Turn, and take notice of what offends him, without ministering any
just occasion of Offense, how ill soever Men, that have no Sense of the
excellent Nature of Charity to their Souls, may be apt to take it. Why may not
good Men consult their lawful Ease and Liberty as well as the Licentious? We
may easily level the Matter, by but putting the Case plainly. Should a
well-meaning Christian be so imprudently zealous (when he has by Chance or
Necessity fell into some Company who have little or no Love for Goodness, or
perhaps are bitter and sacramental Enemies to it) as to offer at a Discourse
about Angels, the future Judgment, the Benefit of Contemplation and heavenly
Things, Self-reflection, or some extraordinary Favors with which the Holy
Ghost has obliged his Soul, or any sublime and practical Topics which such
vitiated Palates cannot relish without Disgust, and ought only to be introduced
in select Conversation and extraordinary Times, when our Minds are best
seasoned, would they not presently begin to hiss, and bid him leave off
Canting, and tell him that was not a Place to preach in! I donn't question
they would presently inform him, without thinking it any Invasion upon Decency,
that he did but expose himself to them by so doing. Why then may not a fervent
Christian, when his Sacred Ears are assaulted with Curses, Blasphemy and
Obscenity, modestly beg the Favor not to be detained and disturbed with their
Sins and Follies, and tell them he takes such Demeanor as an Affront, and for
that Reason desire them to compound to talk about something that is useful,
which is neither sinful in its own Nature, nor has an immediate Tendency to
heavenly things, lies between two Extremes, and will prosit both without
offending either? When the Profane are very unseasonably Wicked, a good
Christian's exemplary Life constitutes him their Superior, and the Minister's
Deputy upon the Account of his Innocence, and for that Reason authorizes him to
reprove them, without waiting for a privater Season. Uncommon Impudence makes
an uncommon and public Reproof a just Correction of the reproved, and a
seasonable Act in the Companion who reproves, though he*s no farther related to
him than as he partakes of Human Nature, has been baptized, and is but a casual
Companion at the instant of the Reproof: And therefore, to omit Reproof at such
a Time is to neglect a decent Opportunity of expressing our Zeal for God's
Honor, and therefore is as blameable as to have no regard for Season at all.
In short, we must remember that Prudence has its Boundaries as well as Zeal,
and it requires as much Spiritual Judgment to assign the proper Limits of the
one as of the other: It Is as necessary to have Zeal enough to say to the Soul,
Hitherto thou shall go, as it is to have Prudence to add, no farther. Where
there is no Zeal for God, our Prudence cannot be Spiritual and Christian.
Luxuriant, or, to speak more properly, an unseasonable Exertion of Zeal makes a
Man prodigal of Indiscreet Reproofs, and carnal Caution makes him too stingy,
and therefore Prudence without Zeal is as certainly sinful as Zeal that is not
rein'd by Prudence, is but a false Image of Divine Love, and which rather ought
to be reputed a Zeal that is molten by some excessive Heat of an inconsiderate
Brain, than the genuine emanation of Christian Charity. Is not therefore the
Epidemical Omission of this Duty, my Christian Countrymen, a great Fault in
you? Casual Reproof may silence if not reform; make Wretches less contagious to
others, though not less wise and religious themselves. I dare be positive, that
wicked Men, how brazen soever the ill Complexions of their Minds may be, would
not have such callous Countenances, if the Virtuous did but assume their
rightful Boldness. Vice would not sneak and lower it is Head by Degrees, just as
it got Ground through the Neglect of this Duty. But you may tell me, That the
Custom of casual Reproof is antiquated and quite out of date now, and therefore
to, bring it up would look ridiculous, and expose those who should attempt it.
But give me leave to acquaint thee, Christian, that though the Heavens themselves
will be shrivel'd like Parchment before the Fire, yet Reason, and that God, who
is the Author of Reason, and has made this a Duty, will never grow old: No, as
he always was and still is, so he will be always omnipotent and immutable; for
which Reason they that trample upon his Laws cannot escape his Wrath, unless
they repent, whilst Repentance and Reproof will be accepted, and will
contribute to the eternal Felicity of Human Creatures. If the Herd are so
brutish as to despise, through Ignorance or Wickedness such an excellent Duty,
the wise and sincere Professors of the Religion of the Blessed Jesus have the
more Reason to exercise casual Reproof, since there is such a great and
lamentable Necessity for it. You, I speak to, the brave and generous Disciples
of my once Crucified, but now Glorified Lord, are hereby called to sacrifice
your Temporal Credit for Christ, and that Virtue of which he was both the
Principal Pattern and Patron, and will you shamefully desert'em in a Time of
Extremity? Do you really believe, that he, who, many hundred Years ago, said
these Words, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and say all manner of
evil against you, falsely, for my name's sake: Rejoice and be exceeding glad,
for great is your reward in heaven, knew what a weighty Truth he spoke?
Cowardice and Inconsideration may, but a Heart's Affection for Religion will
never away with the Neglect of Casual Reproof. Where is your Faith and
Christian Magnanimity, who are so basely ashamed of Christ's Cause? One that
cannot patienly bear with the Frowardness of Ignorant and Malicious Men, may
assure himself without the Gift of Prophecy, that he is not armed with a Spirit
of Martyrdom against those Storms and Tempests which may one Day sift his
Faith. If you deny and are ashamed of Christ before Men, he will disown and be
ashamed of you also before his Father, Angels and Men at the last. Measures of
Decency are not as in Matters of common Actions which relate to this Life, to
be taken in matters of Duty and Religion, firm the Notions and Customs of the
most, because it may be safely said, That the most have always been the worst.
Singular Examples are not fit to be constant and universal Rules, much less the
Lives of the Common If you think that we must act with the most always, for the
sake of Peaceableness, why don't you lie and equivocate, carry your selves
irreverently in God's House, trifle with the tremendous Name, turn your Backs
upon the Altar of Divine Love, and such like, since the most do so? Reprove
therefore the Works of Darkness. When one stands up in the behalf of Virtue the
rest will in all likelihood back and second him; but if the Company should be
mute, nay hiss and revile you, they will cancel their Scoffs when the Pitcher is
broken at the Fountain, and the Wheel at the Cistern, when the Evil Days come
and the Years draw nigh; and they shall say, We have no Pleasure in them.
Farther, This is the surest way to be rid of their troublesome Company: 'Twill
be Matter of Comfort too, to reflect that a Duty has been discharged, a Duty
too, which is in a great measure expensive of our Reputation, the dearest to
good Men of all Temporal Goods, in an Age wherein Virtue is made matter of
Satyr. However, it is neither Sin nor Folly, Dissociableness nor Incivility to
offend those who will construe the greatest Kindnesses Offenses, and whom we
cannot please without committing Sin, without the Loss of God's Favor,
deserting Virtue's good Name when it is assassin'd, and without the Decay of our
own Soul's Health. Do your Duty therefore cheerfully and doubt not,
notwithstanding the Wicked may now call your Life Madness, that Wisdom will be
justified of her Children.

This may suffice to suggest the use of this sort of Reproof, and of all the
rest. I could willingly speak more largely of the latter, but Friendly Reproof
is what I undertook to handle particularly now, and the true Reason why I have
insisted upon the other was to remove Men's gross Errors about it. I think my
self very happy that they have let me arrive, tho with so much Trouble and
Difficulty, to the Harbor of my Wishes, and the most delicious Entertainment
of my Thoughts. Now we may enjoy our selves without the least Alloy of
Controversy, and of any but affected Misconstruction. Now Friendly Reproof, a
golden and lovely Subject, indeed; that great, but despised Benefactor of
Religion, is ready to receive our eager Embraces.

Now Friendly Reproof is the Reproof given by a Friend to a Friend. The
particular End of this Reproof is the Perfection of the Soul of that individual
who is reproved. One peculiar Property of it is it is being always given
privately. It may happen indeed that a Friend may need to be reproved in
Public; but then he is reproved, in such a case, upon the account of some more
extensive Relation than that of a Friend. And as none but a Friend is the
Object of Friendly Reproof, and none but a Friend can properly give it, so the
Subjects of it are not only gross Faults, but even Specks and less discernible
Failures: For the Considerate would have their Friends not only abstain from
heinous Sins, but from all Appearances and Beginnings of Evil. It Is their
flaming Ambition that their Friends may not only not be legible Pictures of the
great Enemy of Souls, but that they may every Day lay aside every Encumbrance,
and grow nearer and nearer to the Nature of good Angels. This sort of Reproof
is given with an extraordinary Affection, a peculiar Force and Stream of
Benevolence. It Is an Act of Fidelity in him that reproves to his own Trust,
Pretenses and Contract; an Act of Love and Gratitude to the Manhood of the
reproved considered as his peculiar Fellow-Helper and Well-Wisher.

Hitherto we have been taken up with the distinguishing the particular Kinds of
Reproof, the neglect of which has been one main Fountain of erroneous Judgments
about the Nature of Friendly Reproof; for how many shall you hear excusing
themselves for not reproving their Friends, because they are neither
Magistrates nor Ministers whose Duty it is to reprove? whereas had these
Persons but observed this Distinction, they would have known that it was one
thing to reprove as a Magistrate, or a Minister, and another to reprove as a
Friend.

I shall conclude this Chapter with two Observations.

The first of which is, That sometimes several of these sorts of Reproof may be
coincident in the same Person: Thus, to give one very plain Instance, a Bishop
may reprove a Sin before a whole Congregation, in the hearing of a particular
Friend of his, to which this Friend is very much addicted: Here he reproves him
in general, and indeterminately, as a Minister. After Sermon he, in the next
Place, knowing this Friend to be guilty of the Sin, goes and reproves him for
it privately and particularly as a Friend. But if, notwithstanding his repeated
Rebukes, and the application of other prudent Methods, to recover him, his
Friend repeats and repeats this Sin, so long till by degrees it betrays him
into more heinous Commissions, and he by that means prove a scandalous Example,
the Bishop is obliged to excommunicate this dear Friend, as he would
conscientiously discharge the Duty of a Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Magistrate.
But though they may be coincident in Cases of this Nature, yet for the most part
they are not so, and Error being harder to be detected than Truth is to be
discovered, 'twas necessary in an Engagement with prejudiced Persons that our
Entrance into this Subject might be made the smoother to speak of every one of
them apart, and to mark down the particular Characteristicks of all of them
distinctly.

But, secondly, to conclude this Chapter, since there are different Uses of
different kinds of Reproof, it is evident that the Reformation and Improvement
of the reproved Person (though it is always to be charitably wished and hoped for)
is not the sole End of all Reproof. Whence it follows, That though a Man could
be safely confident (which cannot be without a Presumption, and a Violation of
Charity, which, as S Paul acquaints us, hopes all things) that an Offender,
whom he has a Right to reprove upon some of the precedent Accounts, will be
never the better for his Reproof, yet this can be no safe Pretext for his
omission of it, in not making a patient Experiment upon such an Offender, since
his Reproof may, supposing the worst, be often instrumental to the promotion of
Virtue in other Respects, as has been shown in the Case of casual Reproof, the
Temporal Magistrate's Condemnation, and the Spiritual Magistrate's
Excommunication, which is the principal End of all Reproof whatsoever, taken at
large.

CHAP. III. Showing Friendly Reproof both a Natural and Revealed Duty.
SECT. I. Entrance into the Chapter.
CARE has been taken to disburthen Men's Minds of all dark and confused Notions
of Friendly Reproof; so that I hope now I may proceed cheerfully and in good
Order to prove it of such a Nature as to oblige the Conscience to the diligent
Exercise of it. Which I have the rather chose to do, because I think my self
bound by a Principle of Charity to impute the Neglect of this Duty in the
better sorts of the Professors of Christianity, to their not being thoroughly
convinced that Friendly Reproof is a Duty and Obligatory of the Conscience.

Now there are only two ways whereby we can know whether or no any Action is a
Duty, and these are Reason and Revelation.

Wherefore I shall show,

I. That the Light of Nature discovers Friendly Reproof to be a Human Duty.
And, II. That the Inspired Writings testify Friendly Reproof to be a Christian
Duty.
SECT II. Friendly Reproof proved a Natural or Human Duty.
I Am first to prove from Reason, or the Primitive Light of Nature, that
Friendly Reproof is a Duty.

Now if it can be demonstrated, That,

1. Friendship is a Natural Relation, that is to say, A Relation which Man by
Nature stands in need of. And, 2. That no Man can discharge the Duty of a Man
in the Relation of Friendship, without reproving his Friend sometimes; then
questionless Friendly Reproof is a Natural and Human Duty. Now the Truth of
both these Propositions I dare undertake to prove.

And first, I prove that Friendship is a Natural Relation. Our unavoidable
Dependence on one another in this State, so full of Dangers and pregnant of
Necessities, which are too many and too tough to be conquered and forestalled
by the wisest, strongest and most industrious Man's solitary Powers,
continually minds us that we are sociable Creatures by Nature. This common
Principle of Sociableness is the universal Cement of all Mankind: Deserts are
too inhospitable to Man to be measured out for his Abode. But though all Men are
sociable Creatures by Nature, yet it is impossible for any Man to assist and
associate with all Men any other wise than as they form one Human Polity, one
Rational Orb. All Men cannot be helpful to all Men personally, though in
relieving any Man they should be intentionally, and are, ipso facto, centrally
assistant to all Men. Our Benevolence may extend to all, though our Beneficence
cannot. Nevertheless, every Man has a Power to be actually Helpful to a small
Number of his Fellow Creatures, more or less, this way or that way, and some
most, I might have said all ways, according to the Stature and Capacity of
their different Faculties, and the different Vigor and Tendency of their
several Genius's. Thus, by the communicative Powers of individuals in different
Employments all necessary Services are upheld, and all carry on the same End,
their own comfortable Subsistence and the support of the whole Human
Corporation: By the happy Concurrencies of every distinct few in the Aiding of
a few, all Men become in the End the Auxiliaries of all Men, considered as they
are clad with the same Nature and Members of the whole Human Universe. Hence it
was that the World was no sooner stocked with Inhabitants, but Men very
willingly, from the beginning of the World even to this Day, agreed to channel
themselves into Empires, Kingdoms, Shires, Cities, Towns, Neighbourhoods and
innumerable other less Societies and Branches of Polity. It Is also this
Necessity which is the Foundation of personal Relations. Civil Magistrates are
necessary to preserve distinct Bodies and Governments from Disorder and Ruin.
Marriages are necessary to erect a new Posterity in every Age, and for the more
careful Education of Children. The Relation of Masters and Servants is
necessary too for the Continuance and Improvement of all useful Arts and
Sciences, which are Instruments of Subsistence, Ornament and Convenience, to
both our Minds and Bodies.

I But since none of these Relations and Distinctions of Magistrate and
Plebeian, Husband and Wife, Parent, and Child, Master and Servant allow special
equality enough in their Correlates to admit of that Intimacy which every Man's
want of Consultation in Doubts, and those numerous Straits and Dangers which
Men of all Vocations and in all Circumstances are exposed to, together with
every Man's natural eagerness to empty his Bosom of his secret Joys and
Grievances require, Nature is bound, upon Peril of being reproached, together
with that God who is the Author of Nature, for haying made Man his own Burden,
and the supreme Species of all sublunary Creatures, utterly incapable of
moderate Comfort, to procure him another Correlate. It Is true, a Man and his
Wife are so near that they may, in one Sense be said to be one: They have the
same Family and Main Chance to take Care of, but they drive on this same End
different ways. Women are not fit to give counsel, nor, generally speaking,
able to lend a helping Hand in Masculine Affairs; and yet the Woman's Part may
be played well enough. Besides, a Wife is seldom so discreet as she should be,
and very few Men will trust their Wives with the Key of their Bosom, because
they know that it is not convenient for every one to see what is laid up in that
Closet. Nay, should a Wife be an extraordinary Woman and a great Blessing
(which few nowadays are) so as to serve not only for a Wife, but for a
Friend, yet she is but one; and he that has her would do well to prize her; and
if she be Loving and Peaceable, and keep a strict Eye over her Family,
supposing she be far from being such an extraordinary Wife, she is nevertheless
to be cherished and beloved, since she is, notwithstanding, a good Wife,
because Strength of Thought, a severe Discipline of Tongue, and strong Hands
are not common to the Female Sex. But to return, be she ever so extraordinary,
as I have before said, she is but one, and one assistant cannot be relied on:
One Person's Counsel will not suffice to furnish a Man with Prudence, and to
mould his Mind into a just equanimity in all Emergencies. Man's Affairs are not
established either by one or by a multitude of, but by two or three, private
Counselors. Whosoever therefore are not so unusually Happy as to have wise
Brethren by Blood, that are born for Adversity, must adopt the sincerest and
prudentest Equals they can get acquainted with for their Brethren; those
Brethren, I mean, who are commonly called Friends; who will join Heads, and
Hearts, and Hands, not only in Prosperity, but when Storms and Tempests do
induce Melancholy and Terror, and Fearfulness, and Trembling, get fast hold of
our Spirits, who (as my Lord Verulam has excellently well observed) redouble
our Joys and split our Griefs in two, who (than which I cannot add a greater
Encomium) as Solomon acquaints, do stick closer to one another than Brother to
Brother. In short, Friendship is so necessary to make our Joys real and
permanent, and to pillar up our Spirits in gloomy Days (which will certainly
come in their turns) that Reverence to Nature obliges us to believe that
Friendship is a Natural Relation.

II. The second Proposition to be proved, is this. No Man can discharge the
Duty of a Man in the Relation of Friendship without his reproving his Friend
sometimes.

To render this Truth apparent, it is requisite, and accordingly I desire you to
consider these three things.

1. That Reproof is a great Act of Kindness. 2. That it is an Act of Kindness,
which every Man stands more or less in need of. 3. It Is an Act of Kindness,
that every Man is capable of doing for his Friend.
1. First, I say, We should consider, That Reproof is a great Act of Kindness.

Natural Light informs us very clearly, and common Experience witnesses that
there are Actions and Habits, which gall Man's Mind, cheapen his Name, waste
his Estate, impair his Health, straiten his Faculties, and make him lavish of
that Time which was given him to improve his being in: And farther, Natural
Light does as clearly satisfy us that such Actions and Habits are Hurtful and
Evil to Man: Neither God nor Nature can approve of, nay not condemn what
disquiets us and serves no good End: Of this kind are all Extremes, as
immoderate Sleep, Eating, Drinking, Sociableness, Solitude, Talking,
Admiration, Grief, Joy, Anger, and the like. Agreeably the Heathens themselves
seated all Virtue in general and Mediocricy: Medio tutissimus ibis is a Proverb
in every School-Boy's Mouth: So far they were very well acquainted with the
Nature of Human Virtue.

But since we can find by the natural Tendency of these Actions and Habits,
that they are so many ways hurtful to us, the Bane and Burden of our being, we
must grant that the Removal and Prevention of such Habits and Actions is a
great Act of Human Kindness. For certainly nothing is a great Act of Kindness
if that is not such which contributes in a great Measure to the Health of our
Bodies, the Peace of our Consciences, the Preservation of our Credit, the
regular Steerage of our Faculties, and finally the wise Dispensation of all our
Time, to the Advancement always, more or less of our entire Man.

Now Private and Friendly Reproof does contribute very much to the Removal of
such Habits and Actions. The removal of them is the only Aim of Friendly
Reproof; and truly it is a means as fair as any for Success in such an Attempt.
For Reproof is always given with some Signs of uneasiness, and every Man highly
valuing one whom he takes to be his sincere Friend, reveres his Displeasure.
The Expression of Anger in his Friend makes the reproved Person conclude with
himself, That that Fault which causes such Anger in his cordial well-wisher can
be no such inconsiderable Evil as an inconsiderate Sinner, is apt to think it;
which Conclusion excites Remorse for it: And pungent Reflections create a
Horror of it for the future, and that Horror makes him seal the Will with firm
Resolutions against it, which is the most likely way to guard the Soul against
all the Attempts of the Devil. By this Method, if his Fault was a single Act of
any particular Sin, the Seeds of an ill Habit are choked; but if the Sin for
which he was reproved was habitual, this Reproof will animate him to labor
with all his Might by Severities upon himself and Consultation with others,
and, above all, by frequent and earnest Addresses to the Throne of Grace, to
demolish the strong Holds of the Devil. What is there so difficult that a Man
will not assay, in order to keep up the Love and favorable Opinion of his
Friend, who by daily Endearments and Obligations does manifest his Kindness to
be real and hearty? and sure Sins, if they are viewed when the Mind is in it is
Meridian, will not appear to the sedater Thoughts so lovely that a Friend
should rather be parted with than them. If a Friend has little Love for his
Soul, from a brutish Ignorance of it is Worth, yet a Friend's Displeasure may
force him to shake Hands with a Vice and his Darling Vice too, perhaps.

2. But secondly, As, a Friend's Reproof is a great Act of Kindness, so it is an
Act of Kindness which every one, more or less, stands in need of.

A Good and Circumspect Man May live above the Magistrate's Reproof, nay out of
the Reach of the envenomed Arrows of hellish Tongues, and above the Comments of
the Envious and Pragmatical, and yet be girt about with many dangerous
Infirmities, which his Friend, who is often with him, can easily spy out. There
is not that wariest Man alive who offends not: The righteous, it seems, offends
seven times a day, that is to say, frequently, but then this must be explained
rather of invisible than visible Faults. Nevertheless the best Men have their
visible Faults, even those that are Lights to the World have their Spots and
Littlenesses, which those who are often near and intent upon them, may easily
discern and count up without a Pick fault Inclination. They are Lectures of
Humility to great Examples. Where is the Man that is perfectly Innocent and
Virtuous, to omit the Refinements of the Gospel, in Nature's and a second Man's
Eyes? But though the best Men confine upon, nay slip into some of those Extremes
which are the Pests of Humanity, yet it was not convenient that all the
Miseries and Deformities of good Souls in this State, should be uncurtain'd to
the Crowd, because then the Reputation of the brightest Example of Virtue would
suffer a very dismal Cloud, and so miss of that Efficacy it has upon ordinary
Spectators. But though if those lesser Faults were visible to all that
transiently behold them, the Luster of their Credits would be eclipsed in the
Eyes of the World, yet God and Friends can have Generosity enough to Pity, Heal
and Pardon those retired Infirmities, without being alienated from the Patient.
And indeed since we cannot say he is happiest who offends not at all, because
this is absurdly to suppose what never will be, since no Man ever was, is, or
will be so happy in this State, as not to offend at all; we must be content to
say, He is the happiest Man who offends least. This is an Ambition which every
Man should suffer to bear the Scepter in his own Breast. Now that this sort of
Ambition in our Friends may be answered, we should acquaint them with those
Faults which are visible to us: For indeed many of good Men's smallest Faults
are not so discernible to themselves as to their Friends; so that unless those
who are oftenest with, and profess Kindness for them, tell them of their
Faults, which they note in them, they will in all probability escape their
Cognizance, and consequently their Vigilance, whereby they are deprived of
being so many degrees nearer to perfection. But I am sure if the best Men stand
in need of Friendly Reproof, others, but especially those who deserve Casual
and severer Reproofs, stand much more in need of Friendly Reproof. The natural
Corollary of which is, that all Men considered in their present Capacity of bu^
Candidates, not Masters of rational Perfection, are the Objects of the Relief
of Friendly Reproof.

3. But thirdly, Friendly Reproof is an Act of Kindness which every Man is
capable of doing for his Friend.

We have all, even the Ignorantest of us, a natural Capacity to perceive the
Eternal Unreasonableness and intrinsically evil Nature of some Actions and
Habits. Happy, happy should we all be, if we did but constantly avoid the
Commission of all those Sins, which because of their Ugliness and Deformity* we
cannot avoid knowing to be Sins. And as the Sense of the chief Subjects of
Reprehension is wrought in our Understandings: by Nature, so we have also a
natural Aptness and Sagacity to see these Extremes sooner and better in others
than in our selves. There is a due Distance of the Object, and a due hatred of
the Sin which we see: Self-love and Partiality don't blind and corrupt our
Judgments Abroad as they do at Home. Jealousy for our Friend's Welfare, Hatred
of Sin in him, and frequent Converse with him make us very quick sighted; and
when a Fault does but show it is Head, our Capacity of being angry is presently
kindled; which Passion of Anger, we need not doubt was planted in us by Nature
to serve some good End. Farther, That Volubility of Tongue which is every Man's
Talent when the Thoughts of others are the Theme of our Discourse, broaches our
Breasts all on a sudden, when they are stung with Grief for our Friend. Anger
and Grief are very necessary Tools for the rough Work of Reproof, which to set
about is so ungrateful to us (where observe, that I do not mean it is ungrateful
to rail, which proceeds from ill Will, but Reproof implies a Benevolence for
him whom we tell of his Faults, and therefore is an unpleasant Employment) so
ungrateful, I say, that had it not been for these Springs, Nature must have
been charged with our Neglect of Reproof. But all the forementioned Instincts
of Nature are such fit Instruments of Reproof that the Blood of our Friend, if
we neglect to reprove, must be required at our own Hands, and we need not doubt
but they were given us chiefly to make us execute this Irksome Task of Friendly
Reproof more cheerfully. What better use can we put them to? Doubtless the
great Creator did not design them to make us Treacherous to one another,
Quarrelsome about Straws, greedy to spill Human Blood, or prone to Defame and
Backbite our Neighbors, but the more ready to discover our Wounds betimes,
that they may be prob'd, and that we may close them for one another.

In short, since Friendship is a natural Relation, all those relative Acts and
Exercises which the entire Discharge of it necessarily requires at our Hands,
are Natural and Relative Duties: And farther, since Friends are the constant
Objects of mutual Reprehension, and are so richly capacitated to do one another
such a very good turn, such a complicated Act of Kindness, they are ungrateful
Traitors to one another, if they turn their other Policies and Courtesies into
Snares and Briars, by neglecting this principal Office of judicious Friendship.

Accordingly Isocrates, Seneca, Marcus Antoninus, Cicero, Aristides, and other
Heathen M^ralists, have given great Commendations of Reproof. Maximus Tyrius,
in his first or second Discourse, I remember makes Reproof* the great
Distinction of a Friend from a Parasite, and to recommend Reproof seems to me
to be the main Drift of that excellent Sermon out of the Bible of Nature. But
that the illiterate Reader may have a Taste of their Judgments in this matter,
I Will pen down some very excellent Lines out of some of the most eminent Heathen
Authors. And to begin with the Glory of the Romans, Cicero, in his Treatise of
Friendship, has these remarkable Words; Quanto id magis in homine sit natura,
qui and se ipse diligit and alterum inquirit, cujus animum ita cum suo misceat
ut efficiat pene unum ex duobus? fed plerique perverse, ne dicam impudenter,
amicum habere talem volunt quales ipsi esse non possunt; quaeque ipsi non
tribuunt amicis, haec ab eis desiderant. Par est autem primum ipsum esse virum
bonum, tum alterum similem sui quaerere. Equidem in talibus stabilitas
amicitiae confirmari potest^^ Cum homines benevolentia conjuncti primum
cupiditatibus iis quibus coeteri serviunt, imperabunt; deinde aequitate
justitiaque gaudebunt omniaque alter pro altero suscipiet. Neque quicquam
unquam nisi honestum and rectum alter ab altero postulabit: neque solum colent
inter se ac diligent, sed etiam verebuntur, nam maximum ornamentum amicitiae
tollit, qui ex ea tollit verecundiam. Itaque in iis perniciosus est Error, qui
existimant libidinum peccatorumque omnium patere in amicitia licentiam.
Virtutum amicitia adjutrix a Natura data est, non vitiorum comes, ut quoniam
solitaria non posset virtus ad ea quae summa sunt pervenire, conjuncta and
consociata cum altera perveniret. Haec est, inquam, societas, in qua omnia
insunt quae putant homines expetenda, honestas, gloria, tranquillitas animi,
atque potestas. What a great Prerogative has Man by Nature over the rest of the
Creatures, who both loves himself and seeks out a second with whose Soul he may
so contemper his own as to turn two Souls into one? But indeed very many are so
Perverse, I forbear to say Impudent, as to expect their Friends to be such as
they themselves are not, and such Kindnesses from their Friends, which they are
not sollicitous to retaliate. But in my Judgment it is but fit and equal that
every one should take care in the first Place to be good himself, and then to
make another so. For good Persons only are capable of a deep and stable
Friendship. When Men that are mutually united by Benevolence have once got the
Command of those Lusts to which others are envassal'd, then they will take Delight
in Equity and Justice, and exchange good Offices with one another. Neither will
expect any Compliance from the other which disagrees with Uprightness and
Honorable Principles; neither will they only love and serve, but also revere
one another. I say revere, for take away mutual Reverence and Awe from Friends,
and you will rob Friendship of it is greatest Ornament. Wherefore they lie under a
very dangerous Mistake, who think that Friendship is consistent with Toleration
of Lusts and Vices. No, no, Friendship was given by Nature to Aid, Promote and
Strengthen our Virtues, not to procure us Confederates in Vice, to the intent
that Social and United Virtue might reach that height of Perfection which
solitary Virtue cannot attain to. This, I say, is that Intimacy, Partnership,
Society, Friendship or whatever other Name you will give it, which includes in it
Honesty, Glory, Peace of Mind, substantial Pleasure, and whatever considerate
Men passionately desire to enjoy.

Again he says, Monendi amici saepe sunt and objurgandi: Et haec accipienda
amice cum benevole siunt. Sed nescio quomodo verum est, Obsequium amicos,
Veritas odium parit. Molesta veritas, siquidem ex ea nascitur odium quod est
venenum amicitiae. Sed obsequium multo molestius quod peccatis indulgens
praecipitem amicum ferri sinit. Maxima autem culpa in eo est, qui and veritatem
aspernatur, and in fraudem obsequio impellitur. Omniagitur hac in re habenda
ratio and diligentia est primum, ut monitio acerbitate, deinde objurgatio
contumelia careat: Assentatio vitiorum adjutrix procul amoveatur, qua non modo
amico, sed ne libero quidem digna est, aliter enim cum Tyranno, aliter cum
amico vivitur. Cujus autem aures veritati clausae sunt, ut ab amico verum
audire nequit, hujus salus desperanda est. Scitum enim est illud Catonis,
melius de quibusdam acerbos inimicos mereri, quam eos amicos qui dulces
videantur: Illos verum saepe dicere, hos nunquam. Atque illud absurdum est quod
ii qui monentur eam molestiam quam debent capere, non capiunt: Eam capiunt qua
debent vacare. Peccasse enim se non anguntur, objurgari moleste ferunt: quod
contra oportebat delicto dolere, correctione gaudere. We should often admonish
and reprove our Friends, and such Offices should be taken kindly from Friends,
who deal thus with us, because they have a true Affection for us. But I know
not how it comes about, but it is too true, that Truth is very offensive in
this Case, It Is the Parent of a very troublesome Damp upon our Spirits: Which
Readiness to take Reproof ill is that which poisons our Friendship. Deceitful
Complaisance entertains us with a momentany Delight, whereas Reproof creates a
sort of transient Hatred, but the former, how sweet soever it appears at first,
proves an Engine of great Trouble at length, because through indulging a Friend
in Sin, it lets him run on headlong in Ruinous Courses, without the least Stop
or Control. It Is the greatest Fault that a Friend can be guilty of, to slight
venerable Truth, and by an unlawful Obsequiousness be thrust into the Snares of
Deceit. Wherefore in every Undertaking of this Nature we should diligently take
Care that our Admonition be free from all Bitterness, and our Reproof be
applied without any sign of Disesteem. None but Tyrants deserve Flattery: It Is
a just Punishment of the Cruel and Haughty, but to flatter a Friend is the most
unseemly Ingratitude; for a Friend need not be humored and imposed on as a
foolish Tyrant, with whom you cannot be free without endangering your Life. His
Condition is very woeful and desperate who shuts his Ears against the Voice of
Truth, and will not suffer his Friend to speak freely. Cato very wisely
observed, That we are indebted to our very bitterest Enemies more than to those
who seem to be the sweetest Friends, who hide our Maladies and Dangers whilst
they tell us the Truth; and show us our weak Side plainly. And indeed nothing
is more absurd than to see Men when they are reproved, perfectly mistake both
the proper Object and the proper Cause of Trouble and Offense: For instead of
their being pleased with their being reproved, and troubled for those Offenses,
which occasioned their Reproof, they take it ill that they are reproved, and
are not at all vexed with themselves for having offended, that they would tempt one
to think they made it their business to thwart Nature's Commands. There Is a
great deal more to this purpose in his golden Essay about Friendship, which it
would be too tedious to transcribe. You see here that this Author thought
Reproof the Duty of a Friend, and gives some Directions about some regular
Managements of Reproof, which we shall speak of hereafter, and I hope that that
Circumstance in the present Citations of this Chapter, being but accidental,
will not be condemned for a Breach of Order, since my own Thoughts will be laid
down by themselves concerning it. But I have one thing more to observe, viz.
That this Author, in the Place which I last cited, makes a clear Distinction
between Monitio and Objurgatio; by which he hints, That the Words were
originally designed to signify two different Acts, viz. the first admonishing
against, and the second chiding for a Fault. But because when we reprove for a
Fault we implicitly admonish against it for the future, he has used the Word
Monere in the Sense of Reproof; but had he and those English Writers, who use
Admonish so, foreseen the Mischief and Confusion which it has caused in weak
Minds, they would, I doubt not, have, declined the freedom of using it
equivocally.

But to proceed, Antisthenes said long since what Cato observed, which Cicero
just now mentioned before, as Plutarch informs us, in his Manual about getting
good by our Enemies, and subjoyns to the Relation a Complaint of the general
Neglect of Friendly Reproof in his Time, which may be applied to our own Age:
For thus he tells us, That Men spoke with too faint a Voice when they took the
decent Liberty of Reproving a Friend, but were too nimble-tongu'd when they
flattered; so that there was great need for every one to be attentive to what
their Enemies said to them, That since they had no Friends to dress and cure
their Wounds, they might, like Telephus, heal them with the Spear that made
them. (...), etc. And Aris^ides's excellent Oration about Friendship is full of
such Observations about Reproof, and gives such excellent Directions about the
Management of it, as the greater part of Christians cannot supply us with,
which 'twill be fitter to mention in another Place, Aristotle tells us, That
there can be no profitable Friendship without Reproof, (...), viii. ad Nicom.
13. The same Author, in the same Book, gives this as his Opinion, (...). Where
there is true Friendship there is Equality and Likeness; and that Similitude of
Temper is the most durable and lasting which is formed in Human Minds by
Virtue. For the Virtuous only live a Life of Consistency, and are alike at all
times, both with respect to themselves and one another. They stand in no need
of naughty Machinations, nor unite their Strength to carry on base Purposes. On
the contrary, if I may so speak, they act the Part of Magistrates to one
another, to sense one another from the Commission of any sort of Villainy
whatever: For it is natural to the Good neither to sin themselves, nor to suffer
their Friends to commit or abet Sin: But the Wicked have no Firmness nor
Constancy in their Friendship. They don't continue in the same Mind or like
themselves. They are seemingly Friends for a Time, and for the sake of the
sensual Pleasure which they feel during their Confederacy in Wickedness. To
mention but one more, Jamblicus, somewhere in his Life of the famous
Pythagoras, tells us of that Philosopher, that he left it as a Maxim to all his
Followers, That the Renouncing any Friend or Friendship upon any other acccount
but the Abuse of Reproof and incorrigibleness under it, is by no means to be
approved of. What a great Opinion he had or Reproof, I leave Men of the meanest
Capacity to guess from hence. What has been said, I think is sufficient to
prove Friendly Reproof a Natural Duty. I shall therefore go forward, according
to my promise to show that it is a revealed and a Christian Duty.

SECT. III. Proving Friendly Reproof a Revealed, and especially a Christian
Duty.
CHristians, if they will consult the Sacred Scriptures, may be presently
ascertained that Friendly Reproof is a revealed and Christian Duty. Revelation
subscribes very liberally to this useful Proposal of Nature, and has made it an
inviolable Sanction by Immediate Divine Authority.

Revelation bestows great Eulogies on a Faithful Friend, and particularly on
this Act of Friendship, and taxes those who either omit to give it, or abuse
it, when given, with very odious Tempers of Mind: Thus Solomon: A man that has
Friends must show himself friendly, and there is a friend that sticks closer
than a brother; And here I cannot forbear mentioning something of the Son of
Sirach's, to this purpose, A faithful friend is a strong defense, and he that
has found such an one has found a Treasure. Nothing does countervail a faithful
friend, and his excellency is unvaluable, A faithful friend is the medicine of
life, and they that fear the Lord shall find him. Whosoever fears the Lord shall
direct his friendship aright, for as he is, so shall his neighbor be also. And
Solomon, He that covers a Transgression, that is to say, secretly reproves his
Friend, procures love. A just man falls seven times a day (this shows every
Man's want of Reproof) and rises up again by his own Endeavors and his
Friend's kind Assistance. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine
heart be glad when he stumbles. Such Carriage to our Enemies must needs endear
Reproof to good Friends, for the Reproof of so generous a Person cannot be
supposed to proceed from Delight in occasions of Reproof. Wherefore Solomon, in
dissuading us from such an Humor, exhorts us to Reproof, by recommending such
an extraordinary fitness of Temper and Demeanor for the more fruitful and
beneficial Exercise of Friendly Reproof. Again, Open [sincere, plain] for he
does not mean Public) Rebuke is better than secret love, that is, than a
concealed, stifled or uneasy Sorrow for a Friend's Miscarriages. Thus also, A
scorner hears not rebuke. Whosoever hates Reproof is brutish. Faithful are the
wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an Enemy are deceitful. He that rebukes a
man shall afterward find more favor than he that flatters with his tongue.
Again, He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed. To cite all the other Proverbs, he has to this Purpose, is needless;
since these sufficiently show what a great Kindness that Prince had for
Friendly Reproof.

Let the righteous smite me friendly, was the Psalmist's Request. And the Law
expressly says, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: Thou
shall in any wise reprove him, and not suffer sin upon him.

Christ and his Apostles are so far from vacating the Dictates of sound Reason,
and the Commands of the Moral Law, that they design, and accordingly have quite
filled up the Blanks of both. Love, as S. Paul tells us, is the fulfilling of
the Law. Their Interpretations of the Tables of Moses have both dilated the
significancy, and given a more explicit and perfect Account of the Contents of
them. We have in their Writings a full and fixed, a clear and established Rule
of Life to walk by. The very positive Duties of our Religion, such as our
Sacraments and other Ordinances, are not liable to the Alteration of any
succeeding O Economy, for the Christian O Economy is the last. We have a longer
List of Moral Duties, so that the Objects of Reproof are more numerous and
obvious to all Capacities in the Gospel-Age. Which Circumstance makes
Christians more obnoxious to the want of Reprehension, and in a Capacity to
know what are the proper Subjects of Reprehension, without tedious Disputes,
which opportunity those wanted who lived in former Times, without the Horizon
of the Gospel. Moreover, the surpassing Opportunities we enjoy of clearly
making a Distinction between Error and Truth, Virtue and Vice, together with
the Supremacy of the Dispensation which we live under (which accomodates us
with the Use of the most and richest Conduits of Grace and Assistance from
above to guard our Spirits from contracting conspicuous and heinous Guilt, and
to exalt them always nearer and nearer unto God) as also the Supremacy of the
Lawgiver (who is no less a Person than the Son, the express Character of God,
the Antitype of all the Patriarchs and Prophets) aggravate all our visible
Commissions and Omissions to a prodigious and towering height of Presumption.
Farther, Those Agonies which wrung Corpuscles of Blood from Jesus, together
with his effusion of his Life upon the Cross, to reconcile sinful Men to God,
do exhibit the Turpitude of all Sin, in such a lively, piercing and astonishing
manner, that the Folly, Horror and Sting of every degree of Sin is magnified
exceedingly by it is being committed since his Crucifixion.

But since every Sin is more dangerous and dreadful, in the Issue, to a
Christian, it must needs be confessed that it is a greater Piece of Beneficence
to rescue a Christian from the Clutches of a sinful Habit and an impenitent
Posture of Mind, after his Commission of any single Act of Sin, because by such
Endeavor we strive to deliver him from a more terrible Conflagration of
Conscience and Condemnation at the last. For the greater the Light of any
Transgressor is, the greater his Guilt is, and great Guilt is a constant
incendiary of Condemnation. And since Friendly Reproof spurs Offenders on to
the Exercising that Justice and wholesome Revenge upon themselves in this State
for past Offenses, which works in them that Repentance (which will ward off the
Eternal Condemnation of the Supreme Judge) namely dread and avoidance of Sin
for the future, Reprehension is to a Christian an extraordinary Exertion of
Love, a very generous and beneficial Exploit. And since Christians, if they
consider, cannot but know this, the Omission of Reproof is more Criminal in
them than in a Jew or a Heathen: Especially if they consider how highly all
sorts of Beneficence are encouraged, and with what prevalent Motives and
vigorous Exhortations they are recommended to the Welcome Reception of all our
Powers, by our Sovereign Master Christ. Beneficence is the richest Hecatomb a
Christian can devote to God. We do not now as in the state of Polytheism, serve
many Gods, Usurpers, divided and appropriate tutelar Demons. Such sort of
Divine Worship inclined the Thoughts of the Worshippers to patronize Cruelty,
Injustice, and the sordid Enclosure of their Affections. But we serve one God,
whose Creation of all Men and unconfined Sovereignty over, and Providence for
all Men, manifests him to be the true God, and the universal Friend of all Men:
This Notion of the Unity of God, and of his being the common Father of us all
(since to copy God wherein he is copyable, by our several Capacities, is the
highest Perfection any Creature can be copyable of) represents to us how
excellent it is to have a Catholic Love for all Men: A serious Contemplation
on him naturally instills this Catholic Love into us: We are the Disciples of
the Jesus, not of a few haughty morose and stiff Jews, but the Jesus of all
Nations and Ages. Unity, Loving and lawful Compliance, Solicitude for one
another's Good, Universal Benevolence and Charity are the Characteristicks of
Christians: We are to wish well therefore to the Bodies, Souls and Spirits of
all Men: Which does not, as some may be apt to think, in the least exclude the
lawfulness of cherishing a singular concern for the Members of the Family of
Faith. Neither does it force us to overlook particular Love and Friendship. We
may wish well to all, but we can be helpful but to a few: Our Faculties are
enclosed though our Affections are not. And by being very active and immediate
Benefactors to some, we declare that it is the Faintness of our Powers, not of
our Affections, which keeps us from being serviceable to every Individual of
the whole rational Globe: For whilst every Individual is particularly obliged
and benefitted by some few Individuals, all the Individuals are preserved: And
whilst all the Integral Parts are kept in just Place and Order, the whole Body,
of which they are the Constituents, stands firm and does well. Whence we may
learn that eminent Acts of Charity to some particular Persons are consistent
with universal Benevolence, and do really and centrally (as has been before
observed) satisfy the Aim of a Public and extensive Spirit: And therefore,
that the Christian Religion's noble Intention to infuse into the Hearts of all
it is Professors a cordial Love and diffusive Good Will to all Men, does not
disparage and condemn private Friendship, but rather obliges us the more
ardently to love those who are not only our Lovers, because they are the Lovers
of all Men, but are emphatically so: How can we conceive that that Institution
which enjoins us to love our Enemies as Men should forbid us to love our
Friends peculiarly as Friends? It Is impossible for the same Religion to
encourage the foulest Ingratitude, and the most signal Generosity.

Now therefore since Christianity directs our Kindness in an extraordinary
manner to some particular Persons, and requires us to do our Friends all the
good that it lies in our Power to do for them, we may be sure that since
Reproof is such a great Kindness, as has been proved (although we had had no
positive or particular Command to reprove) it obliges us to reprove our Friends
for their Faults. Sin and the terrible Consequences of it are plainly
discovered to Christians, and therefore it must grieve Christians the more to
see it in their Friends. That peculiar Gentleness, Judgment and other Graces
which they are capable of obtaining by a wise and conscientious Improvement of
the Means of Grace, fits them for the due Performance of Reproof. The Necessity
and Usefulness of Reproof has been sufficiently demonstrated already, and may
farther appear from the Scriptures, which represent Thrones and Principalities,
Powers and Dominions in Spiritual High Places, incessantly conspiring against
the Souls of Men. Nothing, therefore can be more convenient for Men than
conspiring to save one another's Souls. By Reproof and other pious Acts they
may pull one another out of the Fire: By mutual Admonition they may keep one
another many time from falling into Sin, and by mutual Reproof from obstinate
Persistance in it.

At length we may see how graciously God has made that our Duty which is our
Interest. What we are commanded by him to do, would, if we would but take the
Pains to mind the Drift of his Commands, be readily dispatched by us, not only
from a Principle of Filial Obedience to his Heavenly Majesty, but, withal, as
so many Instances of Loyalty to the genuine and commanding Beauty and
Loveliness of every one of his Commands. Surely we may say with S. John, His
Commandments are not grievous. This delightful Remark could not be past by
without Ingratitude, whilst we are going to take notice that Friendly Reproof,
which is of so advantageous a Nature, is one Christian Command, as the
subsequent Texts witness, If a man shall trespass, says our ever-blessed
Savior, go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone. Brethren, says
S. Paul, in his Epistle to the Galatians, if a man be overtaken in a fault, do
ye, who are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness. Brethren,
says S. James, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let
him know that he which converts the sinner from the error of his way shall save
a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins. In short, our Savior
diligently obeyed his own Command: His Example was a Precept of Authority, and
with the considerate might have saved him the Trouble of an Oral Command; for
Reproof was honored with a bountiful Largess of his precious Time, who went
about doing good. It Is true we cannot reprove with that Authority with which
he, to whom all power, both in heaven and earth, was given, did reprove:
Neither can we reprove particular Persons of Hypocrysie, Vairglory and Pride,
as he did the Scribes and Pharisees It Is not for us to pretend to be intimate
with the Hearts of Men, as he was. No Policies or external Wariness could hide
them from him. But though we cannot reprove as the Christ of God and the Jesus of
Men, yet we may do some good by our Reproof, according to our poor Sphere of
Knowledge and Authority. Finally, S. John prayed for Gaius's secular
Prosperity, as well became a Christian Votary, and that great Favorite of
Jesus, when he wished, That he might ^osper and be in health even as his soul
prosper'd.

CHAP. IV. Giving a clear and particular Account of all those prerequisite
Qualities in the Reprover, who would reprove his Friend with most Success and
least Offense: Together with some plain Rules concerning the dexterous
Application of friendly Reproof intermixed.
SECT. I. The Entrancce into the Chapter, explaining the Term Spiritual in St.
Paul, and assigning, in general, those several Branches and Degrees of
Spirituality, which it is necessary for a Friendly Reprover to be furnished with.
ONE great Hindrance of the cheerful and constant Ministration of Friendly
Reproof is, It Is being so seldom Successful, and one great cause of it is
frequent unsuccesfulness is the so usually giving it awkwardly.

Wherefore, to prevent this troublesome Infelicity, I think it expedient to
show what Virtues are directly requisite to set up an hopeful Friendly
Reprover, and so by the way what Demeanor and Methods are properest to gain
and recover a Friend by Reproof.

I now consider Friendly Reproof as a Christian Duty, and shall instruct you in
the Management of it as such, and for that Reason I choose the great S. Paul for
my Guide, who charges Christian Brethren to reprove, in case they are
spiritual, intimating that it signifies nothing to attempt to do any good by
Reproof, unless the Reprover be so and so qualified, and do apply it in such
and such a manner. What the Endowments and Qualifications are which equip a Man
to reprove his Friend with Success and least Offense, may therefore be easily
known by examining who are the Spiritual: Here then it will be convenient to
have Recourse to the Place in the Bible where this Qualification is mentioned.
Turn to the sixth Chapter to the Galatians and the first Verse, Brethren, if a
man be overtaken in a fault, do ye who are spiritual restore such an one in the
spirit of meekness.

Some Commentators are of Opinion, That the Spiritual, there mentioned, are the
Apostolical Magistrates or Bishops, because they receive a greater Measure of
the Holy Spirit than other Christians; and that this Command is solely given to
them, to endeavor the Recovery of Excommunicated Persons. That Reverence which
I bear to the Comprehensiveness of Christian Texts will not suffer me to reject
the Sense, with some on the one hand, nor to confine these Words to it with
others on the other Hand: The neighboring Precepts are general, and given to
both Clergy and Laity; and therefore I think these Words may be interpreted as
a charge to them all, to strive together to do all the Service they could to
the Church, by exercising all those several kinds of Christian Reproof, which
their different Degrees of Spirituality, and their different Stations and
Relations gave them Opportunity to give. Spiritual is a large Term, and it
becomes Interpreters to give it that full Scope which the Apostle seems to have
designed it. The same Measure of the Spirit does not fit a Man to reprove as a
Magistrate, which will qualify him sufficiently to reprove as a Man, a Friend,
and a common Christian; and yet the common Christian may be Spiritual as well
as the Christian Magistrate: It Is the same Spirit which is communicated to all
Christians, but then it is communicated in different Degrees. It Is not my
Business to enquire what degrees of Spirituality are prerequisite to authorize
a Christian to accept of Magistracy. Neither does it become those Plain and
Ordinary Christians for whose use these Course Papers were writ, to be itching
to know it. Fraternal amicable and Friendly Reproof is every Man's Duty (though
there be some savage Wretches who live without any Friendship) and therefore
it is every Man's Duty to know how to manage it. This is my Subject, in this I
am very ready to instruct you.

Spiritual then, if we take it in no higher a Sense than a Christian endu'd
with a competent Measure of the Divine Spirit to reprove his Friend, denotes a
Person whose Mind is so influenced by the Spirit as to elicit those Fruits of
the Spirit in his Life and Temper, which are mentioned just before, Chap. 5.
Verses, 22, 23. Now the fruits of the Spirit, says that Great Apostle, are
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance.

These Nine Ornaments of a Christian contain in them all that Virtue which is
necessary to make a Christian not only a skilful Reprover of his Friend, but
also a Successful one, unless the reproved be very brutish indeed.

Of these therefore I shall treat particularly in their Order. Indeed every one
of them deserves a whole distinct Discourse; but I shall content my self with
giving such a tolerable account as will suffice to show how essential they are
to a well-manag'd Christian Reproof, and to extract some good Rules about the
handy Administration of Reproof.

SECT II. Of SPIRITUAL LOVE, the first Qualification.
SIncerity, or a kind Intention, is essential to the Performance of any good
Office to another, and therefore essential to a Friendly Reproof, both as it is
a Friendly Office and a Christian Duty. Now there can be no true Sincerity
where there is not a precedent Plantation of Love in the Heart; and according
to the Degree and Firmness of the Prepossession of this delicate Principle of
Action, there our Sincerity is greater or less. Answerably also to the Value
and Dignity of the Object of our Love, our Love is more or less excellent: Our
Love takes its Denomination from it is Object. Spiritual Love therefore is that
Love which Christ recommended to his Followers and the Spirit of God, called
the Spirit by way of Eminence, kindles in our Hearts.

This Spiritual Love may be divided into the Love of God, and the Love of God's
Creatures.

I. The first Part of Spiritual Love is the Love of God. As Love is the first
Incentive of all voluntary Action; so the Love of God is the leading Principle
and Impulse of all Christian Action. Our Love of God must fit in the Throne of
the Affections, because he is the Fountain of all Loveliness. It Is but sitting
that this Love of God should be the reigning Principle of Action in rational
Creatures, who are capable of knowing that God is, and that he is the
perfectest Being, the Creator of all Things, and the Author of all Perfection.

This Love of God cannot be immoderate; for as his Creating all other beings
but his uncreated self, shows that he was once more perfect than all of them;
so his continual Preservation of them and their incessant Dependence upon him,
after their Creation, declares him to continue the same Perfectest Being still.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without End. Our
Love of him therefore ought to be constant. It should never Fade and Change.
But God being incapable of receiving any Kindness from us, because his immense
and unparall'd Perfections raise him above the possibility of being an Object
of Beneficence; the only way whereby we can express our Love is to obey his
known Will. Hereby we may know that we love God, if we keep all his
Commandments. He command us nothing but what he knows is convenient for us to
do: Our Acts of Obedience therefore are not Acts of Merit, with respect to him,
but Acts of Decency and Kindness to our selves: Which Conservation and
Promotion of our Beings, by so doing, is primarily owing to his Wisdom, who
first commanded us to do them. So that Humility, and a low Conception of any
Performance of our own, is a necessary Ingredient of a true Love of God. Now
this part of Spiritual Love is a necessary Qualification for our Christian
Administration of Friendly Reproof, as it is a Christian Duty in General, and
not at all peculiar to this or any other Particular Duty. Whenever, therefore,
we think of Reproving a Friend, we ought, upon this Consideration, to remember
it as a good universal Rule; this ought to be done Principally, because God has
commanded it; for the doing or not doing any thing Principally, because God has
commanded the one, and prohibited the other to be done, is the greatest
Expression we can make to God of our Love. This way of Expressing our Love and
Esteem of God is what is meant by that known Phrase, having an Eye chiefly to
the Glory of God. And when we offer Inferior Motives to persuade Men to do any
Duty, we do so in Condescension to the Frailty of a common Faith, that by
demonstrating the fitness of an Action in such a Method as does not surmount
the Verge of a sensual Apprehension, we may, by degrees, train up their Minds
to the ready Concession of this grand Postulatum in Christ's School; This is
fitting to be done, because God, the author of all beauty, has commanded it to
be done. The Entering upon an Action with this Reason in our Hearts, as the main
Ground and Spring of our setting about it, is that which consecrates Actions
and makes a Reproof or any other Action a peculiar Object of God's Care: It Is
this that secures his Blessing upon it, of which we need not fear failing,
unless the Action be of such a nature as to require the Concurrence of some
other voluntary Action under God (for it may happen often in many Actions, that
another voluntary Agent, for whom it is necessary to do something toward the
Completion, I speak of the Methods of God's ordinary Providence, may hinder the
perfect Growth of God's favorable Concurrence with such a dedicated Action.)
Thus when we reprove with an Eye to God's Glory, God begins to concur with this
Reproof, for the sake of our good Intention, and makes it as fair for Success
as, this Action considered as a solitary Action in the Reprover, can be: But
since the Concurrence of a second voluntary Agent, namely the Reproved, is
necessary, under God, and conjoyntly with the Reprover, to give this Action
perfect Success by his Reformation; if the Reproved is perverse, God may
withold his Concurrence, and so the Action not be crowned with Success:
Nevertheless, this Action was blessed with Success, as far as it was the Action
of the Reprover, though it was not blessed as it had relation to the Reproved: God
and the Reprover have done their Parts, and it is not fitting that they should
be charged with the Faults of the Reproved: So that whatever the Issue of a
dedicated Action be, among Men, it cannot be unsuccessful, if it be considered
as begun to procure and continue us in the Favor of God; and therefore every
Action, begot by a Principle of Love to God, is certainly Matter of
Satisfaction and Complacency to a reflectful Mind. Which Consideration makes
the Agent cheerful, constant and piously resolute to carry on his Attempt, and
not to be distrustful of the Goodness of it, whether Honor or Dishonor attend
our doing it, whilst he lives among Men of so many different Tempers. His
knowing the Action to be a good Action in it is self, because God has commanded
it, and a good Action too in himself, the Agent, because he did it purely
because God commanded it, frees him from the Trouble of making Superstitious
Observations upon the Event. This is the conscientious and the happy Agent. For
you hence see that he that does any good Action, because it is a Duty in
general, has a common Principle to act by, and cannot miss of attaining his
main End, viz. the Favor of God, in respect to whose Commands he does it:
Whereas, on the contrary, he who does an Action (though good in it self)
sometimes to nourish Pride, sometimes because it is gainful in that Sense in
which the World uses it, or because this or that Action is the darling Duty of
his Constitution, so that it is but casually an Act of Obedience to God, but
really an Act of Idolatry and Homage to self; in short, sometimes for one
Reason, and sometimes for another (if the Sense of a God and his Nature and
Laws be not extinguished in his Mind) he sets about it anxiously, for he may as
well lose as gain his End; and if his Reproof, or any other Action, though good
in it self, fails of Success, he has Reason, stand Cases how they will, to
doubt that it was not so much because of the Default of other voluntary Agents,
but because God did not vouchsafe to prosper it, for the Discouragement of such
sinister and pitiful Motives of Action. Be sure therefore, Christian, when you
are about to endite your Friend lovingly, for any Transgression, to remember,
before you use any Human Means, to look up to God, as him who has Commended the
Attempt, by commanding it. Entertain an humble Sense of the inconsiderableness
of your own Endeavors, and then cheerfully trusl the Issue with him.

II. The second Part of Christian Spiritual Love is the Love of God's
Creatures. Now our Love of the Creatures may be immoderate. This is manifest:
for since we ought to love God above all things, it is certainly unlawful to
love the Creatures more than, or as much as, him. Our first Rule therefore to
be observed in the Love of the Creatures is, That the Creatures must neither
have a greater nor an equal Share with God in our Affections. But though we must
beware not to love them immoderately, yet they may all claim some Degrees of
Love from us, because they are all the Workmanship of God; and if we love the
Creatures as they are the Works of God, our Love of the Creatures is an
Expression of our Love of God.

But farther, to make our Love of the Creatures just and moderate, these four
Rules should be observed.

1. The whole Universe of Creatures is to be beloved more than any particular
Species; for the most glorious Species of all is contained in the Universe of
Species's; and besides the whole Universe of Creatures gives more Glory to God
by their harmonious Variety, and are a greater Demonstration of the Existence,
Power, Wisdom and Majesty of God than any, even the most glorious single
Species of Creatures.

2. All the several Species's of Creatures ought to be loved in different
Measures, according to the different Degrees of their Resemblance of God;
because one Species does not bear such signal Characters of the immense
Perfections of God their Creator, as another does.

3. Every particular Species is to be beloved more than any one single Creature
of that Species; because every individual is contained in the Species; and
every Species is the immediate Workmanship of God, whether it be a Species of
Generable or Ingenerable Creatures; but we know very well that all the
Individual Creatures of Generable Species, setting aside the two first
Protoplasts of each Species, are not the immediate Works of God in such a
Supreme Sense as Angels and those Protoplasts were.

4. Particular Creatures of the same Species, in case they are voluntary
Creatures, ought to be loved by us, more or less, according to their different
Improvements of their Nature.

They all resolve themselves naturally into this Proposition. Creatures are the
Objects of Man's Love in different Degrees, according to the different Degrees
of their Approach to the Nature of God. Whence, among other Consequences, we
may deduce, First, That we should prefer the Good of our Neighbor's Soul
before the good of his Body, because Man's Spirit is of an Angelical Nature,
which is the Supreme Nature we know of under God; but his Body is of a brutal
Nature, which is a Nature inferior to his own Nature, if his whole Nature be
considered. Secondly, That we should love Man's Soul and Body, in Conjunction,
more than either of them apart, for a Human Spirit or a Human Body, alone, is
but an imperfect Creature. That a Human Body is so, I suppose I need not prove:
But that a Human Spirit is such, perhaps, may sound somewhat harsh: But, is it
does sound so, I desire you to consider, That if the Soul, when it leaves the
Body, were a perfect Creature, there could be no Reason given, Why after this
State no Man is capable of.preparing himself for Heaven? of which we are as
certain as that the Scriptures are the Word of God. And yet the final Sentence
is at as great a Distance from Separate Souls (by Separate Souls I only mean
Souls not yet rebodied) as it is from those that are yet alive; for God has
appointed one Day, in which he will judge the whole World. This Truth is
likewise manifested by considering, That all Souls, immediately before their
final Condemnation or Justification, shall be rebodied by the Omnipotence of
God; and then, and not till then, be either perperfectly Miserable or perfectly
Happy (happy or miserable they will be (though separated) but not perfectly so.)
Thirdly, We hence learn that every Man ought to have some Men the peculiar
Objects of his Love and Care: For Men are the chief Objects of Man's
Assistance. Angels indeed are more lovely than Men; but then they are above the
want of Man's Help. Now the Soul, were it to benefit the Human Universe, is to
benefit some few particularly, as has been before shown. Fourthly, Every Man
should choose for the peculiar Objects of his Love, the best Men, or at least
those of the best Inclinations, with whom he can get acquainted; for good Men,
who labor to polish and perfect their Nature, love God more than bad Men, who
deface their Make; for good Men strive to be more like God, and a Desire of
being assimilated and united to any Object, shows an entire and firm
Complacency in that Object: But Wicked Men so impair their Frame, that they
every Day go farther and farther from God's Presence, and are nearer and nearer
to that horrible Condition, of being disowned by God. When I say, They fly
from God's Presence, I do not speak with respect to God's Omnipresence, for the
right Hand of his Power holds them fast, wherever they are, but my Meaning is,
That God is less visible to them here, where neither Mercy nor Justice have
their perfect Work, and will be eternally invisible to them in that Glorious
Attribute, his Mercy, in the other World.

Now, first, we may learn that this Spiritual Love of the Creatures is a
necessary Qualification for the Performance of Friendly Reproof, if we consider
the particular Nature of this Duty, either with respect to the Reprover, or
with respect to Reproof it self, and the Subjects of Friendly Reproof; or with
Respect to the Reproved, who is the Object of Reproof. For first, As for the
Reprover, it makes a Man do this Duty with cheerfulness: For his greater Love
for Souls than Bodies convinces him that his Friend's Peace of Conscience,
which is the Reward of a sober Life, does bear some Glimpse of the Satisfaction
of God himself, is a more solid, perfect and durable Pleasure than the
transient and momentary Pleasures of Sin, which Conviction makes his Reproving
his Friend not only a good Act, as it is good in it self; but a good Act in the
Agent, and consequently makes it a more rational and self-satisfying Act of
Charity in him, which will make him administer it cheerfully and constantly;
and by his cheerfully doing his Duty he procures the Pleasure of God, for God
loves a cherful Giver. A Man that loves the Creatures spiritually, knows that
by his Reproof, which is a sign of a transient and wholesome Displeasure, he
endeavors to prevent his Friend's Pertinacy in Sin, which will degrade his
Friend's Being, and force him, out of Love to God, to be eternally displeased
with his Friend: For Devils and damned Ghosts are their own Creatures: They are
Eternal Enemies to God, and therefore are no longer reputed the Creatures of
God, or to be looked on by God as such; and therefore it is impossible to love
God eternally, without hating them with a perfect and unalterable Hatred.
Consequently, when our Friend is once enclosed in that horrible Order, by his
Impenitence in this State, we must either part with ou^ Friend or our God for
ever; but our Reproof may make him exercise that Repentance, to which
(notwithstanding some loving Feuds and Uneasinesses during the Intervals of
giving and receiving Reproof) we shall owe the Eternal and uninterrupted
Enjoyment of both him and God too, where he will be as much above the want of
Reproof, in his Capacity, as the bright Seraphim or Cherubims themselves.
Secondly, Spiritual Love is a necessary Qualification for a Friendly Reprover,
if we consider the Nature of Reproof it self, to make it Perfect and Impartial;
for this Principle will not suffer him to pass by any visible Faults, as many
do, who reprove for some Sins, but do not reprove for others. The Spiritual
Love of the Creature does make a Friend not only reprove his Friend for
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Profaneness and such gross Sins, but also for those
Extravagancies of the Tongue, and other Faults which the World counts small
Sins, and not needful to be reproved, because they are not so destructive of
Temporal Credit and bodily Health, or lay the Committers of them open to the
Lash of the Law. Men of carnal Minds will reprove one another for Vices of the
first Nature, and that too with a sincere Affection; but then this Affection is
but Brutal, Partial and Injudicious: It Is an Affection only for one another's
Bodies and Secular Interests, and does not come up to the noble Pitch of true
Spiritual Love. Should one of those carnal Well-wishers see his Confederate,
for the Term Friend is too excellent to be used of them, commit some private
Act of Injustice or any other Sin which does not strike the Eye of the World,
and so undermine their Secular Credit or Welfare, he would rather approve of,
than reprove his Chrony for so doing: For as for the Welfare of the Soul, lie
is not at all sollicitous about that; and when he reproves him for palpable and
open Vices, that threaten his Health and Temporal Reputation, he only does it
out of Self-Love, because constant Companions being always judged to be alike,
one Friend's Reputation suffers with the Reputation of another; or at least he
considers that a Friend of an ill Name will have the less Ability to serve him,
because his Interest is thereby weakened in the World. But one who reproves by
the Impulse of the Divine Principle of Spiritual Love, having a View of the
Soul and the Body together, as they constitute one Man, will reprove a Friend
with Regard to his whole Manhood, and therefore will reprove him not only for
those Sins which maim his Secular Welfare, but for all visible Sins whatsoever,
whether Commissions or Omissions, and that because he knows they are Sins, and
therefore, without doubt pernicious to the Soul here, and which, if unrepented
of, will treasure up Anguish to both Soul and Body in the other World: For he
knows that no Actions can be so private but God sees them, though the Eyes of the
World are regardless of them, and that all Sin being contrary to the Nature of
God, God must needs hate Sin, and will punish it hereafter if it be unrepented
of. He wisely considers, that let a sinful World pass as favorable a Sentence
as they please on Men of loose Lives, whose Interests do not stand in
Competition with theirs, nor hinder their Temporal Quiet, that his Friend must,
however one Day answer for it before the final Tribunal, as well as Cutthroats
and Robbers must for their Public Injuries which molest others. If they are
Sins, be they against which of Tables they will, the Devil is very well
pleased; for he knows that if they are unrepented of, he can take an occasion
from them to blast the Reputation of the Agent before God and Angels, whose
Esteem ought most to be prized. So that we see how necessary a Qualification
for a Friendly Reprover a Spiritual Love of the Creatures is: For it has a
Regard to both the present and the future State, and if our Welfare and
Prosperity in the present stands in Competition with our Prosperity in the
future, it submits our present Welfare to our future, because the future is
Eternal and the present may be buta Moment, at least it is but a Moment, if
compared with the future. So also if the Pleasure of the Body stands in
Competition with that of the Spirit, and consequentially with that of the whole
Man, if we have a Regard to Futurity, it submits that to this, the lesser to
the greater. Whence it is manifest that Spiritual Love is the perfectest Love
with which we can love our Friend, because it comprehends the whole Duration of
our Friend's Existence, and all his Human Capacities. Thirdly, We may farther
learn from the third Corollary (which was drawn from those Rules which we laid
down as necessary to be observed, to regulate our Love of the Creatures and to
make it spiritual) that a peculiar Love for the Person whom we reprove, is
essential to a Friendly Reproof, and so the Spiritual Love of the Creatures is
a necessary Qualification in a Friendly Reprover, with respect to the Reproved,
because it regulates the Choice of the particular Object of our Reproof, for
(tho it comprehends all Subjects of Reproof) yet it regulates the Reprover a
different way, with respect to the Object, for though all Offenders, whether more
or less, are the Objects of Reproof, yet every Offender is not an Objects of
Friendly Reproof in every Man's Eyes. To make a Friendly Reproof agreeable with
a Spiritual Love of the Creatures, it is requisite that he whom we reprove be
our Friend. One of the Rules of a Christian's Love of the Creatures is, To love
his Fellow Creatures above all other Creatures under Heaven: Now if he wishes
well to them all, he must, as has been shown, love some more peculiarly than
others. Should every Man attempt to reprove, or in any other respect relieve
every Man, there would, through the impossibility of performing it, be nothing
but attempting to do good without bringing any attempt to Completion, and so
there would be no perfect good done. Wherefore the good Christian endeavors to
exert his Love, according to that degree of Strength that God has given him: He
can very cheerfully praise God, for having made him a Man, and therefore will
be far from aspiring to be above the Capacity of an Angel: He considers that it
is God's sole and inviolable Prerogative to show Mercy over all his Works, and
therefore humbly shows his unfeigned and discreet Love to all, by being a
peculiar, constant and extraordinary Benefactor to some. God and Nature have
taught us, by the Deficiency of our Strength, that private Friendships are the
strongest Pillars of Universal Love. He that climbs to take hold of the
Godhead, will fail of discharging the Duty of Humanity. A wise Christian will
not, under Pretense to that Spiritual Love, the Nature of which many, who
pretend to it, do not so much as understand, act pragmatically. If he is called
to be a Temporal Magistrate, he will reprove as a Temporal Magistrate: If he is
called to be a Bishop, he will reprove as a Bishop: If he has Children or
Servants, he will reprove as a Parent or Master: If he has Pupils or Dependents
he will reprove as a Tutor or a Patron: And if there is extraordinary Occasion
of Casual Reproof, he will cheerfully obey the sudden Call of the Divine
Providence, and stand up for the Honor of Religion. Otherwise he will meddle
with no Body's Faults except his own and his dear Friend's, who sticks closer
to him than Brother to Brother. Nevertheless, if he sees a Stranger offend, and
knows one who is intimately acquainted with the said Offender, he will mind
that Man's Friend of his Trust. But not to digress; Friends are equal, they
know how to insinuate into one another, as far as is consistent with Duty, and
to please one another's Humors, when there is occasion to speak of a Fault.
They know what particular Arts of Address and charitable Policy are most likely
to work best upon one another: They can urge, That they arc obliged in
Fidelity, Gratitude and Love to reprove. Besides, the Remembrance of a Friend's
Favors and Helpfulness ingratiates his Requests, sweetens his Reproof, and
makes the Physic less loathsome: His Universal Assistance suggests that the
Reproof is given out of a loving Heart, as far as Love is discoverable: But any
Act, if it be construed an Act of Love, how tart soever it be at the first to
the Taste, is pleasant and grateful in the Digestion. Once more, a Friend may
reprove constantly: He can reprove with Freedom and Parrhesie; he need not do it
obliquely and cowardly. All these Circumstances plainly show how necessary it is
for us to take care that we reprove none but our Friends for our Faults. Indeed
a Friend's Reproof is not always welcome: There are a great many Motives that
go to the making it so, and therefore a Stranger's Reproof can look but for
cold Entertainment. This I thought fit to insist on, because most of those few
who can be got to consider, that Reproof is a Christian Duty, find it so hard
to be induced to remember not to stand tampering with the Sores of Strangers:
So very much has Friendly Reproof suffered by those unseasonable Expressions of
good Will, which indiscreet Reprovers have made. We need not question but every
Man has some Person whom he calls his Friend, and if they who pretend to be
his Friends, do not show themselves friendly in this Respect, let them see to
it, what is that to us? No Man can be every Man's Friend without Fickleness and
Inconstancy: And, considering the depraved Tempers of the generality, Reproof
is not a sit Act to begin with, in order to recommend us to any one's
particular Esteem and Friendship: So that it is properest, unless you meet with
an extraordinary wise Professor Christianity, to give a Signet of your peculiar
Kindness in all other Instances first, and perhaps Reproof may be grateful in
the rear; for if we would cure the infirm, we must handle them as infirm. In
short, when any one is your Friend, you may reprove him as your Friend: If he
is not your Friend, it is his Friend's Business, not yours, to reprove him for
his lesser Faults. Give others fair Liberty to choose their Surgeon, since they
have as much Right to a free Choice as we can have; and if they make an ill
Choice, and will not choose new ones, after they have made such a Choice, they
are rational Creatures as well as we, and have Ministers to direct them, and
their Blood will not be required at our Hands. Nature will seldom let any but a
Friend's Reproof operate kindly: No Man can do all Men good: Let us therefore
do good thoroughly to those few with whom we have handsome Opportunities of
striking a wise Friendship, and then we need not question but that the great
Inspector of the generous Desires of our Hearts, and the shortness of our
Abilities will not condemn us for not doing more than we were able to do, and
not assaying rash, extempore and effoet Charities, but will pronounce us before
Angels and Men in the great Day of Accounts, faithful Stewards of all our
Faculties, to God, and God's stately Universe of Creatures.

SECT. III. Of SPIRITUAL JOY, a second Qualification for a Friendly Reprover.
THE great Alienation of Human Nature from the Divine, by the Fall of Adam, has
engendered such dismal and dark Apprehensions of Virtue in our Minds, that we
are apt to suspect that a Hook lies under every Reproof, and that those who
endeavor to separate us from our Sins have a Design to abandon us to a State
of Melancholy.

Wherefore, to stab this groundless Suspicion in the Hearts of any whom we
would reprove, Spiritual JOY is a necessary Accoutrement for a friendly
Reprover: He must beware of giving way to any Symptoms of Churlishness and
Melancholy, such as clouded Looks and waspish Answers, and endeavor to breath
an Air of innocent Alacrity in the whole Tenor of his Conversation. By Joy I
don't mean foolish and profuse Laughter; no, I am speaking of Spiritual Joy, a
Joy that is the Author of sober and serene Smiles, Smiles that agree with a
thankful Recital of Psalms and Hallelujahs in God's Temple: This represents the
intensest Acts of Devotion as Acts of Pleasure: This is a Pleasure which the
Carnal are not capable of, and yet those who enjoy Spiritual Pleasures enjoy
the prime of all carnal Pleasures, for indeed none but a Moderate Use of Carnal
Pleasures can properly be said to be Enjoyment. He that moderately uses them,
has the Prime and Youth of sensual Pleasures, without that Languor, Deadness,
and those Diseases which the immoderately Sensual find in the extreme and
decrepit Use of them: In short, Smiles, which are the Presents of a sedate and
gratified Conscience. It Is Conscience that must be pleased: For Conscience only
can procure this Joy of God's Spirit for us. This Spiritual Joy then is to be
got by constant, circumspect Walking: For Conscience has an Eye always bent
upon us, and therefore we must be always very cautious of doing any thing which
will grate upon Conscience. Innocence, delightful Reflections and Obedience to
the Divine Precepts is the richest Sacrifice we can offer to Conscience. True
Universal Repentance is the only Holocaust with which we can appease this great
Personage, which sits Representative of the Majesty of Heaven in every Human
Breast.

This Reverence of Conscience is a great Preservative against Envy, to which
the other Sense of Spiritual Joy is opposite, viz. Fraternal or Friendly
Gratulation. Gratulation is a Duty, which through the Prevalence of Flattery,
being confounded with it, is very much despised and rejected in this Age. What
Gratulation is, and what an excellent Office of Friendship it is, will take up
too much Room in this Treatise to show it at large, for it cannot be done
without discussing the great Ends the Creator had in imprinting on our Natures
the Faculty of Admiration, an Appetite after Glory; wherein the true Use and
Abuse of it consists; how Gratulation differs from Flattery, and how we may
distinguish these two Acts in another. Farther, this cannot be done without
showing wherein Pride consists, and what is not Pride, which seems very like
it; as also without explaining the Nature of Vainglory, and what is not Vain
glory, which seems at first Sight to unthoughtful Men to be so. The generality
have very ill Notions of these Matters, and therefore to instruct them fully
about the due giving and receiving Gratulation, I am convinced (though against my
Will) there will be need of a distinct Treatise. However, I shall speak two or
three Words of it, as far as it has Connection, I think, with the Duty of
Reproof. To return then, whoever leads such a Spiritual Life as to rejoice in
the Lord, will be so far from grudging and fretting, that he will exult,
triumph and roar like the adoring Waves in Heaven, through Joy of Heart, when
he sees God and his lovely Features delineated in another virtuous Person: He
will rejoice, according to the excellent Counsel of S. Paul, with them who
spiritually rejoice. Do you therefore, who would reprove acceptably, learn
hence to be every now and then congratulating your Friend's Virtues. Seize on
all Opportunities of acquainting your Friend how the pleasant Remembrance of
such and such a good Action in him, chears and transports your Spirits, and
confirms and heightens your Satisfaction, in having made Choice of him for your
Friend. Frequently tell him, That you think Heaven expects no small Improvement
in Piety from you, upon the account of your Intimacy with such a brave Example
of Virtue as he is. This is the way to convince him that whenever you chide him
you are not egged on by a Spirit of Envy, Detraction, Uncharitableness, or an
Humor that feasts on other Men's Faults, to censure him, but that you were
constrained by a great Love to his Soul, and a Principle of Fidelity to your
Pretenses to reprove him. He that praises always is treacherous; and he that is
always complaining cannot but be very Burdensome. By owning freely and
frequently his Instances of a Virtuous Conduct, and hanging much upon these
fragrant Flowers, your Reproofs will not tempt him to be dronish and despair:
And by telling him often of his Miscarriages, your just and prudent Commendations
will not puff him up. Your Praises-will prove your Reproofs no Reproaches, and
your Reproofs will vindicate your Praises from being calumniated for
Flatteries. The contempering Gratulations for good Actions, with Reproof for
bad ones, shows a true Friendship, as Agapete, that pious Deacon, has very well
observed. He only mentions Speech, but what he says may very well be applied to
Actions. Look upon those, says that excellent Author, to be your truest
Friends, who diligently weigh your Discourses in a just Balance, and express a
Fellow-complacency with you in the best of them; but are troubled and frown
when you speak otherwise; for these produce a sure Token of their unfeigned
Freindship. (...). Farther, your intermixing Gratulations with Reproofs, shows
that you are not guilty of too forward a Suspicion. Thus Cicero, in the
forecited Essay upon Friendship, when he had just given a Charge to Friends to
beware of Dissimulation, recommends a sweetness and pleasantness of Behavior
to our Friends; For, says he, there can be no Friendship but amongst good Men;
for a good Man will observe these two Rules in Friendship; First, not to
dissemble or cloak any thing which offends him; for a fair and sincere Person,
who is of a generous and ingenuous Temper, will rather choose to be an open
Enemy than a deceitful discontented Friend, and such an one who will not speak
his Mind freely in case of Transgression: So also, secondly, he will defend his
Friend's Reputation against the Accusations of others, and scorn to be always
suspecting that his Friend has violated some Law of Reason. Courtesy and
Pleasantness in Speech and Demeanor is that which seasons Friendship and gives
it a grateful Savor. In compliance then with the Judgments of wise Men, do
you, when you reprove your Friend for a Fault, mention one of your Friend's
principal Virtues, and ask him calmly how incongruous that Divine Grace, and
the Sin for which you reprove him are. Ah! say with Fraternal concern, Is it
not a thousand Pities your Life is not all of a Piece, and that you have not a
whole set of Graces answerable to that? And that he may believe that your so
greedily praising whatever you see laudable in him, does not proceed from
Partiality from him, or is merely used as an Engine and for Stratagem's sake,
endeavor to bring your self to a Habit of inflaming his and your own
Emulation, by refining on the Excellencies of all the Heroic Examples which
you either know in Person, have heard or read of. Talk not of other Men's
Lives, are the admired Words of an admirable Writer; if by Lives, as the
Context informs us, be understood their Faults, Misfortunes and Private
Concerns. But were it possible for an Author of that excellent Spirit to have
counseled us to have declined Speaking of the Virtues of others, according to
the false Glosses of Modern Conversation, they would have been the fittest
Motto to be inscribed on the Gates of Hell that any Division of that City of
Horror and Confusion could have invented. The Desperate have made themselves
incapable of Virtue, and therefore the Thoughts of Virtue are dire and odious
to them. Virtue indeed is a beautiful and pleasant Object in it self. Nothing
less than an Heaven, a God, an all-wise and powerful, a supreme and infinitely
gracious Being to be eternally possessed, is the Purchase of it: This they
know, and, O wretch'd Creatures! They know withal, That there is an unpassable
Gulf fixed between it and them: Thus they do believe and tremble. So that a
mere Notional Faith is very consistent with a State of Eternal Distance from
God: As Unbodied Spirits, they clearly see wherein true Happiness consists, and
the means that lead to it. It Is this joined with a Sense of Unattainableness of
it to them, that turns every Exertion of Joy unto good Spirits into a
Thunderbolt against themselves: It Is for this Reason that every Virtue in Man
whets their Rage, when they sincerely consider, That had they followed after a
firm Virtue when they were here, as well as those Christians whose Prosperity
they envy and continually undermine, that dreadful Condition need not have been
their Portion. But with the Inhabitants of the Earth, blessed be God, it is not
so bad: Nevertheless, it is too reasonable to conclude from what has been said,
That their Souls are very near those black Clims, who feel all manner of Vice,
but especially Envy and Uncharitableness, so imperious in their Breasts that
they cannot bear with the mention of a good Example, or those Graces of God in
those who are the brightest Lights of a dark Age: They will grant that a Man
may be Proud, Self-conceited, Pharisaical, Vainglorious, and make a show of
Piety before Men; they know so much by themselves, their Experience tells them
this is practicable; they have acted a Part before now as well as the demurest
of their Neighbors, and can, upon occasion, do it again, in the presence of a
pious Prince, Benefactor or the like. But as for such or such an one's being
Devout from a Sense of an omni-present Being, and an inward Complacency through
a state of sincere Righteousness, constant Peace and ineffable Joy in the Holy
Ghost, they question that very much: You may easily apply this to other
Virtues, and the false Names with which they take care to sully and obscure
them; but every Failing, especially in one who seems to have a little more Zeal
than the inconsiderate Herd, is rich and just Matter of Censure and Invective.
Here Tautology and Exaggeration is pardonable, and you may prate and parrot
with a Grace: Comparisons themselves are not odious, because by this means the
Drone and the Sot is as good as his Neighbors, though he does not make so much
Appearance: But to buffet his Ears with a tedious and impertinent Harangue
about this Man's Temperance, another's Industry, lashes his Idleness and
Debaucheries, and it seems in this Age is formal and unmannerly; the Sight of a
good Example gauls him sufficiently, and therefore to dwell upon such Topics
in Company will disturb Conscience too much for the Sinner to enjoy his
deceitful Mirth. The good Man's Virtue, naturally of it self, upbraids the
Sinner with his Transgressions, he reproves his Thoughts: He is grievous to him
to behold, for his Life is not like other Men's, his Ways are of another
Fashion; and hence it is that though the Wicked Man confronts the Sun in his
scandalous Courses, and the whole Town is made privy to his Debaucheries, yet
when his Infamy is ripe, and he sees himself become the Nuisance and Contempt of
those that are round about him, the virtuous Neighbor notwithstanding his
constant, courteous and peaceable Demeanor, is suspected, nay, it is well if not
positively arraigned with an Oath, to be the sly Informer and a vile
pragmatical Person: And to render him such, if he speaks the last of the
Company, tho never so innocently of another Person's Fault which first provoked
to it, or modestly addresses to them not to be so severe on the absent, they
will squeeze an Offense out of his Words: They have an hundred Gins in their
Ears laid for him, and do not question but they shall catch some slight
occasion or other, for a monstrous Report. Wherefore, virtuous Reader, 'twill
be our safest way to leave them; and since they resist the Endeavors of their
Friends for their Conversion, let us by no means forget them in our Closets. I
am now speaking to Men of Candor, who delight in praising famous Men, and are
as eager to admire their Splendours as they are to declaim against their
Defects. You know this is the way to imitate them, and advance daily in Virtue;
to excel yourselves as much as you do your Neighbors already, and yet still to
be humbler every Day than other: Viewing and conferring about excellent
Examples curbs a good Christians extravagant Thoughts of himself, and yet makes
him a fitter Object of selfesteem; hereby he has always very sensible
Exhortations to Virtue; for Examples not only exhibit Virtue as lovely, but to
be possible and attainable; nay, it will not suffer him to be contented with an
ordinary Measure of it, and to be at a stand, but always gasping after nearer
Approaches to a perfect Human Representation of his Creator. Speaking of them
to generous Souls is an inoffensive and effectual Reproof of not only opposite
Practices, but every degree of Sluggish Lukewarmness, and other Infirmities
which are so little taken notice of but by self-consciousness, that we have no
express Names for them to reprove them directly: And, I believe, this indirect
Reproof, by the Rules of Prudence, should always be tried first; that the
reproved Person may have an occasion of hereby knowing how far Generosity has
got Ground in his Heart. This will demonstrate that you delight in Virtue, and
that you reprove Sin from a hearty hatred of Sin. Throw a Rose therefore on
every worthy Man's Coffin: His Merits claim Respect to his Monument: They may
exact some Tribute toward the persuming his Name, and the embalming his Memory
from every pious Mouth.

In short, if we would accomplish generous Purposes by mourning with them that
mourn, it is expedient to rejoice in due Season with them who rejoice. The first
is a powerful Antidote against Vice, the latter a brisk Spur to Virtue.

SECT. IV. Of SPIRITUAL PEACE, the third Qualification of a Friendly Reprover.
Spiritual PEACE is a necessary Qualification, whether we take it, first, for
the particular Virtue of Peaceableness. Or, secondly, for a Satisfaction which
arises from a general Testimony of the Reprover's industrious Endeavor to lead
an universally righteous Life. Or, thirdly, If we take Peace for a particular
Satisfaction from the Reprover's consciousness of his own good Intention, and
of the just Grounds of his Reproof. And, first, it is necessary that the
Reprover be noted for the Virtue of Peaceableness; for he that is given to
Censoriousness and unreasonable Suspicions, to be Quarrelsome and Upbraiding on
every occasion, exposes his Reproof to Misconstruction, and gives Birth to a
Jealousy in the Reproved, that he reproves with a fierce Appetite, and gluts a
malicious and envious Temper in so doing. As therefore you prize the thriving
of your just and friendly Reproofs, beware of running into false and
counterfeit Reproof. Take heed of confounding Admonition and Reproof. Remember
that God alone is the Judge of Hearts. Beware of arraigning any one for
Hypocrisy, like Job's indiscreet Reprovers, for that is enough to provoke the
Patient himself, and will betray them at least into some indecent
Justifications; for the Imputation of Hypocrisy is always very offensive,
because it is not for one Man to arraign another of Hypocrisy; and therefore to
such presumptuous Reprovers, Job's Words may be replied, How forcible are right
Words, but what does your Arguing Reprove? chapter 6. v. 25. Their uncouth Reproofs
seemed to be the greatest Affliction of all to him; and indeed it is a common
Fault for People to be censuring others very deeply and severely, when they are
in Calamity through their adulterate and confined Notions of the Methods of
Divine Providence. If they are Persons more Circumspect than others, as to their
external Carriage, then, if they can observe some Specks or Failings in them,
they are apt to think that all their Devotion and Wariness of Behavior was
nothing but Hypocrisy, and a Net to get Love and Repute amongst Men; but these
should remember, that notwithstanding some particular Offenses, they might be
sincere as to the main, and that Afflictions are sent rather as Signs of Favor
than Tokens of Favor by our Heavenly Father. In short, not only beware of the
more open Violations of Peace, but don't so much as vouchsafe your Ear to a
backbiting and slanderous Tongue. Strive to Reconcile many Differences, and to
repair broken Credits, and live as peaceably with all Men as it is possible for
you to do in this Abusive and Opprobrious World; as far as is consistent with
your Affection for your Religion, and that Peace of God and Conscience which
passes all Understanding, and which the Violence of no Rabshekah can take from
you. Follow Peace, I say, with all Men, with this Limitation: For the peaceable
Man's Reproofs must be taken in good Part, if any one's are.

But secondly, Peace is a necessary Qualification, if by Peace be meant that
Satisfaction which arises from a general Testimony within the Reprover, that it
is his hearty Endeavor to live Godlily, Righteously and Soberly,
notwithstanding very numerous Imperfections in him may be seen by his Friends
in this Mortal State. This Satisfaction is in a great degree the Largess of the
Spirit of God; and indeed this Testimony is necessary to make a Friend vigorous
and earnest in giving Reproof, to inspire a proper Countenance, and to make it
awful, that his Reprehension may be the keener, and touch the reprehended
Person to the Quick. The Sense of that inexpressible Comfort with which an
inward Testimony of a Tenor of Christian Sincerity refreshes the Reprehender's
Mind, will not let him, in all Love, dismiss his Friend, before he has so far
wrought his Brother, whom he would have be as happy as himself, up into such a
reflectful Posture of Soul, as to give Audience to the Majestic Voice of
Conscience, against the Sin for which he reproves him: Which is such a terrible
Prediction of the intolerable Anguish of a wounded Spirit, and an eternally
irreconcilable Conscience, that it cannot but convince the offending Brother
that there is no Peace to the Wicked, while they continue impenitently such;
and that true, solid and permanent Peace is only the Harvest of Christian
Integrity. I would not have any one think that I am of Opinion, That no Man can
reprove to the purpose but he who is conscious of unsinning Obedience. No,
alas! for after that rate no Man could be capable of being a Benefactor by
Reproof, for in many things we offend all, even the best of us. Heavenly
Perfection is as inconsistent with the Life of Man, in this frail State, as
Imperfection is with the Converse of blessed Spirits above. Whilst the Devil
slides along the Earth he will be flinging some Dust into the Eyes of the
vigilantest Christian. Neither Imperfections nor Sins, if the Offender show his
sincere Repentance by a Tenor of good Life, render a Man unfit to reprove his
Friend. On the contrary, this common Sense of the lability of Mankind, proves
the Necessity of Mutual Reproof among Friends, and is a fit Motive for every
Friend to reprove his Friend, that when he offends, himself he may merit his
Neighbor's Reproof, and the Benefit of such wholesome Awe upon his Soul. But
however it ought to be considered, that there is a great Distance between
Blemishes and transient Apostasies, which show the best Christian here to be a
Man and a Mortal, and that wretched Carelessness and habitual Irregularity of
Life, which proclaims many who have been baptized, and do throng our Churches,
to be mere, and consequently hypocritical, Professors of the Christian
Religion. We generally charge those who live strictest, though they sin the
least, with Hypocrisy, for sinning at all; and it must be confessed that every
Sin is more or less an Act of Hypocrisy, or at least appears such to the Eyes
of the World, from which Hearts are locked up: But then, certainly those lewd
and vicious Livers, whose whole Lives are, as it were, but one continued Chain
of Sin, have the most reason to count themselves Hypocrites, since by sinning
most they give others the strongest Temptations to brand them for Hypocrites;
so that the profane Person who tramples upon the Promise he made at Baptism,
in the Highways and Turnings of the Streets, till he renounces his Baptismal
Vow, must be confessed to be the most monstrous Hypocrite, though he is the most
ready to call others so, who (though they really may be so inwardly) ought to be
clearest of the Imputation, in our Judgments, because the seldomness of their
Offenses gives us less occasion to mistrust that they are such. They that
offend seldom, do not like notorious Sinners, come with prodigious Beams in
their own Eyes, to spy and pluck out the Motes of others. Alas! who will ever
(though upon other Motives he may) desist from a Sin which is of an inferior
Nature to every one of that vast multitude of Sins which are inveterate in such
a Reprehender, for the sake of his Reproof? The Serenity and Consistency of a
vigilant Person's Manners (though they be not perfect and unblameable in the
Sight of the spotless omniscient Being, and when they are compared with the
exact Prescripts of the Divine Law, yet since they are perfect, considered as
the Manners of a Human Creature, in the state of Trial and Probation, where
many Spiritual Enemies and Temptations are to be encountered with) will make way
and raise Veneration for his Reproof. But that extraordinary Shame and
vexatious Contradiction of Conscience and Countenance, which tormentingly
haunts profligate Livers, will not permit them (supposing they should have so
much Sense as to pity Sin in their Friends, because they have the Opportunity
of seeing the Ugliness and Turpitude of Sin with more Advantage in others than
in themselves) I say, supposing this, unless they have got such a Mastery over
Shame, as to be thoroughly prepared Candidates of Devilship, it will not suffer
them to reprove with that Freedom, Courage and Authority, which is the Grace of
Reproof. A good Man's Infirmities may allow him some time to do others good;
but scandalous Livers are too wretchedly in the Mire, and labor under too
heavy a Load of Sin themselves, to have Heart, Time or Strength enough to
relieve others. Whence you see how an erroneous Life deprives us of the
possibility of doing any good this Way. It Is impossible for those who are
remiss in other Duties, to discharge this. Such a close Friendship of Society
do all the Duties of our lovely Religion hold together: So necessary is
universal Righteousness. He that does one Duty and neglects others, in vain
Hopes to do any Duty perfectly, and so as to have it construed Duty by God
Almighty. I therefore advise such not to unhallow this excellent Branch of
Charity with their impious Mouths, till they have cleans'd themselves from
their Ethiopian Filthiness, till they are as pure in the Eyes of the candid as
they would seem to be in their own Eyes, though their Consciences testify
against them at the same time, when they desecrate, ridicule and backbite this
admirable Duty of Reproof, under a Pretense of Reproving by their uncouth
Exprobrations.

Moreover, thirdly, Peace is a necessary Qualisication in a Friendly Reprover,
if we understand by Peace a particular Satisfaction proceeding from a
Consciousness of a good Intention, peculiarly when we reprove: For it is; a
particular kind Intention for the Person whom we reprove, which peculiarizes
this Reproof; for unless you reprove as a Friend, your Reproof is not friendly,
though he whom you reprove has approved himself a Friend to you: For, as we have
shown in the second Section concerning the Spiritual Love of the Creatures,
that in order to constitute a Reproof friendly in his Eyes, whom you reprove,
it is necessary that you should first have received some visible Token of
Friendship from him; and moreover that you should have also given him some
visible Signet of your Friendship; so also it is necessary to constitute your
Reproof friendly in the Sight of God, that you be incited to reprove him by a
peculiar Love for him, which is visible only to God.

Lastly, To have that entire Peace which is requisite to make you a thorough
Friendly Reprover, you must not fail to have a firm Assurance that you reprove
him for a just Cause and upon just Grounds, such as your seeing him commit a
Fault, and that it is really a Fault which you reprove, a commission or
omission of something that is forbid or enjoined either explicitly or
implicitly in the Holy Scriptures. Adhering to this Rule is the Top-Branch of
Christian Prudence in administering Reproof. S. Paul has told us, That all
Scriptures, inspired by God, was given us, among other excellent Uses, for
Reproof. It Is by them that we infallibly know, without the Pains of long
natural Demonstration, what are the fixed and certain Subjects of Reproof and
Commendation; and it is an indiscreet, I might say an impious, thing, to draw
Matter of Reproof out of our own Humors: For, what is this but to dictate a new
Bible, and to suppose the Divine Inspired Writings imperfect? Every one is
guilty of detracting from the Bible, who offers to make Actions Subjects of
Reproof, which the Divine Oracles have not declared to be so. A wise Christian,
who looks on the Christian Canon of Reproof to be perfect, need not fear making
foul Blunders, or incurring the Censure of captiousness and impertinence, which
are the two unlucky Apes of Reproof, except it be from some Men, who can charge
God foolishly, as though he would call Good Evil and Evil Good. It may therefore
be convenient to mention the Text which forbids the Act which he committed, or
enjoins the Duty which he omitted, and to desire him to declare his Judgment
about it, before you apply your Reproof, that so his Conscience may speak
before you, and your treading so surely may make your Reproof take the deeper
Root in his Mind.

It must be confessed, there are some indecent Singularities which are
offensive in Company, and do discredit them in whom they are observed; though the
Gestures or Actions considered simply in themselves, are not Evil in their own
Nature, nor forbidden by God, but are accidentally evil, because they are
offensive, as deviations from Custom in indifferent Matters, for which indeed
Custom is a Law: And therefore a Friend may very commendably strive to break
his Friend of them, because by this means Peace is promoted and Offenses are
prevented. Nevertheless, it behooves a Friend not to express Indignation, when
he speaks of them, since they are not Vices, or simply unlawful in their own
Nature: And in such an Attempt he should chiefly urge, that we should keep
Harmony with all Men, by complying with their Humors as far as we can without
Sin, and displeasing God, always dreading to approach the Heart, and rashly
imputing it to Affectation. Charity will sooner reckon it an Habit and an
Infelicity contracted in Youth; and which for that Reason must be got rid of by
degrees. But be sure you do not dehort him from it gravely, and with as much
Solemnity as if it were declared Matter of Reproof by God; for we should always
take Care to put a Distinction between Actions that are necessarily and
intrinsically Evil, and those that are but contingently so; for if we should
speak of offensive Singularities with that trembling and concern as we should
when we reprove for a Fault, we should seem to be as sollicitous to destroy a
Habit, which is only displeasing to Men, as we are to destroy a Habit, which
ought to displease Men, and does certainly displease God; which is to represent
our selves, as having an equal Fear of God and Man, that is to say, as dreading
Infirmity and Omnipotence alike. Besides, such a manner of Speaking about
indifferent Habits would make our Reproofs for necessary Evils the less
regarded because this would make our Reproofs too frequent and trivial; by
which means they will bear a hue of dastardly Fretfulness instead of the
majestic Characters of Reproof. In short, we should take Care to admonish them
against affecting them, for if they are affected they are wilful Violations of
Peace, and so they are Sins: But however, affected Offenses are not the Object
of particular Reproof, because the Root of Affection is in the Heart, but the
Springs of the Heart are invisible to us. Wherefore, all that we can do is
solemnly to give a particular Admonition against affecting them. And when we
have admonished them against affecting them, the best Art we can use to break
them of them, whether they be affected or not, will be to smile them out of
such Habits: By smiling you will hint that they are ridiculous Actions and Objects
of Laughter to you, as you are a risible Creature by Nature: And by struggling
with your Sides at the Temptation, you will suggest, that though you could not
help smiling, you would have helped it if you could, for your not suffering
your self to laugh will demonstrate that you are willing presently to withstand
the Assault of any Temptation to such Carriage, which savours of Disrespect to
a Friend; for loud Laughter stirs up Rage, and no Man can endure to be made his
Fellow Creature's Baboon.

SECT V. Of LONG-SUFFERING, a fourth Qualification in a Friendly Reprover.
LOng-Suffering is requisite to make us constant in Reproof, and not weary of
well-doing, though our Friend is uneasy under Reproof. Reproof ought to be
uneasy. Both the Reprover and the Reproved should be troubled at their being
Occasion for Reproof. It Is this Uneasiness that makes patient Perseverance in
Reproving our Friends a Virtue, and the Virtue Long-Suffering a necessary
Qualification whenever we Reprove. Without this we shall quickly be discouraged
from ever reproving our Friend. We should consider one another's Infirmities;
by bearing one another's Burdens we shall fulfill the Law of Christ. Man would
fain be innocent though he is unclean from the Womb, and therefore we must allow
him to be disturbed while his Friend is smiting him. After the Potion is
settled, perhaps that which was Gall in the Throat will be acknowledged to be
Honey in the Stomach: And, grant, the Worst, though he should be ungrateful a long
while, yet your patient bearing with his Ingratitude against you, will shame
him into a grateful Sense of your Long-Suffering Love. It Is very unaccountable
to leave off Reproving because Reproof is bitter to the Palate. Many Friends
have sown good Inclinations in one another, which, for all their gliding
Displeasures, have showed their Heads above Ground at last. God is a God of
Patience and Season. We should imitate him, and know when to sow a Reproof; and
when we have cast it prudently into our Friend's Ear, learn to wait with
Submission for the Usury of our Grain in due time. If the great God condescends
to call and invite, after many gracious Invitations have been slighted, and
many Fatherly Corrections have missed of Success, shall we think much to wait
and condescend not to desert our Friends, even for repeated Abuses of our
Reproof? Is the Servant above his Lord?

Briefly, Reproofs are generally owned substantial Acts and Exercises of Love
upon the Deathbed. Which consideration, methinks should be a powerful Motive
to Constancy in this Duty.

SECT. VI. Of GENTLENESS, a fifth Qualification of a Friendly Reprover.
GEntleness. or Courtesy storms Hearts without Noise. Affability and humble
Submission to all Men, and readily clasping with the lawful Desires of our
Friend, and giving him the Precedence in Debates about indifferent Matters,
especially in the Presence of others, arms Reproof with the most charming
Endearments, ushers in with great Authority into his Closet. Wherefore be sure
always to remember never to give Whisperers an Advantage of spoiling your
Reproofs, or of Soiling them, by being able to tell him, when you so much as
spoke disrespectfully of him, or made a Complaint of this or that personal
Offense. Always set a Watch over your Lips, and keep the Wicket of your Mouth.
Speak evil of no Man, that is the surest way never to speak Evil of your
Friend. He that suffers his Friend's Faults to be the Entertainment of the
Company behind his Back, abuses his Friend, if he tells him of a Fault before
his Face, though never so privately. We cannot either jeer, or slander, or
backbite and reprove the same Person, at least till we have repented of our
Misdemeanors behind the Curtain.

Take Care farther, Friendly Reprover, not to let your Freedom with your Friend
in private be blur'd by a downish Carriage to him in Public. Whoever contracts
friendly Intercourse with you, honor him at all times according to his
Character and Dignity all one as tho he were a Stranger; and though some may
think this Formality, yet I Am sure it is such a Formality as Reason prescribes,
for it is a foolish thing to adopt those for our Friends whom we don't really
esteem, and very absurd (nay I cannot conceive it possible) to forbear
expressing Honor outwardly to those whom we inwardly revere, since we are
naturally willing that our Friends should believe and know we have a sincere
Respect for them. But, indeed, I don't wonder that those partial Friends who
are only Partners in Vice, and employ their Tongues against the Absent, should
condemn outward Expressions of Respect among Friends, since they have at best
but a brutal Love for one another, and are incapable of exchanging a rational
Esteem. It Is Flattery in them, and therefore deservedly odious, since they are
conscious they don't deserve it from one another. But I am giving Directions to
true Friends, who are the Tutors and Patrons of each other's Souls, who
discourse of those Subjects which belong to them, and scorn to turn Society
into an Hell, and Salamander-like to delight to live in the Fire of Strife and
Contention. If they talk of others it is to contrive to do 'em some good, and to
make one another useful Servants to the Public. In short, Flattery,
Dissimulation and toyish Complements may be banished and yet regular Civility
may be preserved. Friendship and Sincerity, and a useful Familiarity may be
maintained without odd Names, and affected Bluntness, which befriends nothing
but a licentious irregular Sociableness. To conclude this Section, Courtesy to
our Friend will vindicate our Reproof from the Censure of Disrespect; and I
hope nothing is to be accounted inconsiderable and fit to be rejected, which
may gain a free access for your Reproof through your Friend's Ear, to his Heart
and Affections, which is that Familiarity which regulates the noblest sort of
Familiarity.

True Familiarity consists in the prudent exercise of a free and generous
Intercouse of Hearts among Friends: When Friends have such a generous
Confidence in one another, after a long Experience, and many alternate Trials
of each other's Fidelity and Circumspection, as to be able, without Dalliance
and Reluctance, to uncloset their Hearts upon any occasion: When they can
confess their Sins humbly together, without Fear of being threatened to the
World for their Simplicity: When they can mutually enumerate the peculiar
Instances of God's gracious Providence and Care of them, without the least
Dread of being posted up for Vainglorious Pretenders: When they are so wise and
happy as to have no Grief, no Joy which they durst not communicate: Friends may
be truly said to be true Friends and Familiars. These are the Friends who may
rationally rejoice in one another: For such Friends, when the greedy Grave
snatche; them away, Grace as well as Nature wrests Tears from us: What Tongue
can express that mighty Satisfaction which their being possessed of an Intimate
who is so trusty and discreet, must need afford? An Intimate, to whom I can
venture to reveal all that I know of my self: To whom I can reveal those
Deviations of my Mind, which, for ought I know, none but my God and my Jesus,
my Tutelar Angel and my affectionate Pastor know besides my self: Who will
bespeak my Tears for his Failings, and my Thanks for the Mercies which he has
received from the Hands of our common Father in Heaven, who has an Ear always
open to the pure and sincere: An Intimate who will use his daily Endeavor to
make my Soul more rich and beauteous: Who will instill into me a Spirit of
Thankfulness by his seasonable and decent Gratulations, and strive to make the
Incense of my grateful Heart more acceptable to the great Patron of Angels and
Men, by his Devotion and Gratitude to God on my behalf: Whilst millions of
Souls, in all probability are made vain in their Imaginations by the Flatteries
of their false Friends: Who will contribute toward my obtaining a Spirit of
Humility, Penitence and Prostration of Spirit, by his Confession of his own
Sins and his Reproofs of mine: A Spirit of Charity, by his fervent
Intercessions: A Spirit of Vigilance, by his Admonitions: A Spirit of uncommon
Zeal, by his powerful Exhortations: A Spirit of Prudence by his Counsel; a
comprehensiveness of Understanding and a Volubility in the holy Dialect, by
communicating whatever useful Maxim he has got by Books, Conversation, Sermons
or Experience: This is the Familiarity which enlarges the Understanding,
rectifies the Will and sets us forward on our Journey to Happiness. Is not this
therefore the noblest Familiarity and most becoming wise Men? According to this
Account of Familiarity, Friends may be familiar without using the Language of
the Plough, an affected Bluntness: The reason why I insist so much on this is,
because I have observed it is an Art whereby the Devil, though few observe it, has
promoted Unprofitableness and idle Jesting in Conversation. There may be a
constant Use of such Expressions as denote Respect, without any Danger of
Distance: This is convenient, that Friends, when they are together, may have
that continual Sense of the Dignity of Human Nature, which is very necessary to
procure us the true Advantages of Friendship: For it is this that is the Primary
Cause of our Capableness of receiving mutual Benefit by Reproof.

SECT. VII. Of GOODNESS, the sixth Qualification for a Fri^ndly Reprover.
GOodness or Benignity and Usefulness in all Respects, as Opportunity favors,
demonstrates a Man a Friend indeed. Men judge of the Sincerity of their Friends
by universal, not single Kindness, especially if it be a Kindness which
peculiarly Eyes the Soul. Such is the Frailty, so great is the Sottishness of
lapsed Man! O how strangely are we immersed in Sense! But I will not dwell upon
this melancholy Thought. Show your self an entire Friend to your Friend: Trust
him with great Secrets, even the Secrets of your Soul, as Pledges of your
Secrecy, and of not taking Notice of his Faults to any Body else: Instruct him
wherein he is ignorant, counsel him wherein he doubts, relieve him in Distress,
readily receive and faithfully retain his Secrets, have an open Ear to any
re^sonable Request, comfort him in Affliction, as on the Bed of Sickness and in
the Day of Adversity, when his Spirits are sad and low; vindicate his Innocence
when he is defamed; palliate his Faults when you hear him complained of;
forgive his particular Breaches of Trust in your self; have useful Conferences
frequently with him; praise his good Actions behind his Back; congratulate any
sort of Prosperity and his Virtues before his Face; exhort him to Perseverance
in the ways of Piety, and in all laudable Designs and Endeavors; lastly,
admonish him against Offenses to come. Admonition is a great Act of Charity,
and every Reproof should be backed with it: It is a Shield against all Sins
whether external or internal, and assists all the Faculties of the Soul.
Wherefore, whenever you reprove your Friend for an actual, visible Fault, don't
fail to for warn him against it for the future; as also against those secret
Maladies of the Soul, bad Suggestions and Habits of the Heart, of which the
visible Sin seems mostly to bear a hue; for no human Eye can pierce the Heart,
and therefore they are Subjects only of a general and indeterminate Reproof;
but, however, they are the Subjects of particular Admonition. The being an
Example of so many excellent and various Offices of judicious Friendship cannot
but captivate his Esteem, and open his Eyes to see that your Reproof is a Ray
streaming from a Divine Principle of heavenly Love.

But since Goodness is so lovely, certainly Gratitude for Goodness is comely
and sitting; and therefore I cannot but think it a Piece of Prudence, and very
conducive to the Success of the Reproof at the very instant of your giving it,
to mention to him such or such a great ^^ndness which he did for you, and to
tell him that, that would have been Fuel of Horror to you one Day, if you had
neglected to have reproved him for the present Fault, and that you expect him
by way of Return to lay the Obligation of a Friendly Reproof upon you.

Lastly, To all your other Acts of Beneficence add one more; frequent, earnest,
particular and private Intercession to God for his Soul. This is the greatest
of them all. Thus we may be charitable to all Men, but we cannot allow every
Name a Minute in our Retirement: Nevertheless, no Man would grudge it, or many
Minutes upon an extraordinary occasion, upon a Relative or Friend whom he loves
as his own Soul. Pray therefore for him, That he may prosper even as his Soul
prospers; That his Love may abound more and more in Knowledge, and in all
Judgment; That he may approve of Reproof and Experience, and delight in all
things that are excellent; That he may be sincere, and without Offense at the
Day of Christ, being filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ, to the Glory and Praise of God. Gods Arm is not shortened, that he
should not save, though ours is.

SECT. VIII. Of FAITH, a s^venth Qualification in a Friendly Reprover.
FAITH is so essential to constitute any Action Good and Christian, that
without it it is impossible to please God. Every Attempt must be dedicated to
him in the Name of our Lord Lord Jesus Christ, whose Blood shed upon the Cross
was the sole living Fountain of Pardon and Reconciliation. We must remember
that it is principally for the sake of this one Mediator that any of our
Services are accepted by God. We were put by the Fall of Adam into such a state
of Distance from God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, that had he
not so loved the World as to send his Son to be a Propitiation for the Sins of
the whole World, and imparted of his Spirit liberally upon the Apostles, after
our Savior's Ascension, for the sake of his inestimable Sacrifice and Victory
over Death, and imparted ever since more or less of the same Spirit to all his
Followers, none of us could have been in a Capacity of presenting any Oblation
without Presumption, and without rather exchanging his Anger and Indignation
than procuring his Favor; for the Unclean can offer no Clean Sacrifices 'till
they are cleans'd from their Filthinesses, and the Return of the Spirit of God,
without whose Aid and Presence it is impossible for us to purify our selves
from our original Turpitude. And since the Spirit comes upon his account, we
must remember in every Undertaking that it is principally for his sake that any
of our Services are accepted; and when we have offered it to God in the Name
and Mediation of so great a Person as the first-begotton Son of God must needs
be, we ought in Reverence to his Merits, notwithstanding our own unworthiness
to countenance a cheerful and steady Confidence in God, as to the Event and
Fruitfulness of Reproof.

If we verily believe that God is, and is a Rewarder of them that seek him in
the humble Obedience of his Commands, we cannot but rest s^tisfied in his Arms,
and secure of a Reward to our selves of whatever Consequence the Reproof be to
our Friend. God sees all the hidden Determinations of the Will, and notes down
every loving Experiment in his Book; so that we need not suspect that we shall
fail of a Reward for the discharge of our Duty. And then as to our Neighbor,
though he is peevish and apt to be Senseless of his Spiritual Interest, for Sin is
a very dangerous Sorceress, and our awkward Reproofs (for such all, even the
best Reproofs of sinful Creatures are, and rather irritate than heal of
themselves) yet Faith fixes our Hope on God, and excites us humbly to bespeak
God's Grace, to give us Prudence to reprove in such a Manner as becomes such
Creatures as we are, to reprove and to prosper our Friend's Charity to the
Health of our Friend's Soul, after we have used our best Endeavors. This
Method, if any, is likely to succeed. And here it may not be amiss to caution
you against Sacrificing to your own Net, and burning Incence to your own Diag,
when your Reproof has took effect. 'Twas by his Breathing on your Project that
you so happily caught a Soul: Give his Blessing therefore the Glory, lest in
just Indignation he deny it another Time.

And indeed one great Reason why general Reproofs have sometimes pierced some
Men so deeply, even when particular ones have failed, is to teach us to look up
to God who superintends all our Actions and Hearts, as the great Author of all
Success; and for that Reason always to remember, That his Glory should
principally be Eyed, since the Conversions of all that repent, as well as the
Obstinacy and Presumption of the Obdurate will terminate into his Glory in that
great Day, when the King of Glory with a mighty Power shall open the Gates both
of Heaven and Hell, and all human Souls, according to their different Demeanor
here, shall be admitted into their everlasting state of consummate Bliss or
Misery. This Consideration was entertained by S. Augustine, when he had
unexpectly been an Instrument of Conversion to Alipius, who, it seems, laid out
too much time on the Races and other Diversions of the Circus, tho he had a
long Time, in vain, laid in wait for a seasonable Application of a particular
and designed Reproof. Those of us, says that admirable Father, who lived
friendly together, used to bemoan the Riots that are rife upon such occasions,
but especially Alipius and Nebridius, who would speak their Minds the most
freely and familiarly wi^h me: Alipius was born in the same Town as I was, some
Years after me. When I first taught in my native Town and at Carthage, he had
studied with me, and had a great Kindness for me, because he took me for a good
and a learned Man: He was one of a great Genius and eminent Virtue, so great
indeed that it could not lie hid in his first Years: But the corrupt Morals of
your Citizens grew so raging and prevalent, by reason of those vain and
trifling Spectacles which daily encouraged Idleness in that Place, that they
swept him away like a fierce Whirl pool, and plunged him into a fierce Love
with the Pastime of the Circus. And though, at this Time, I was a public
Professor of Rhethorick, he was not then one of my Auditors, upon the account
of a private Grudge between me and his Father: Nevertheless, I was very much
concerned to see such a great Hope in Danger of being shipwracked; nay, indeed
my Hope was almost expired, for his Levity and Madness at that Time appeared
Mortal and Incurable: Besides, I had no fair Season or Pretense to Admonish or
Reprove him; for I could not reprove him as a Master; and as for Friendship, I
thought that could gain ^o standing in his Mind, being, I thought, his Father's
Enmity had alienated his Mind from me. But thou, O Lord, did teach him to
slight and forget it, for he came and heard me at last, and very respectfully
attended to, and considered upon my Lectures: In one of them I occasionlly
brushed upon the Folly and Abuse of Public Shows; which sunk so deep into the
Youth that he was enraged with himself for his past Resort to them, and loved
me more ardently than his Father could possibly hate me; that thy Words, O God
of Love and Wonders might be verified; who have said, Reprove a Wise Man and he
will love thee. But indeed I had not reproved him: But thou can use, in thy
own good Time both the plotting and the ignorant to the Service of thy Designs:
These Ways surpass our Thoughts; however thy Order and Method is just, comely
and best; and we thy poor Creatures hence do learn to blush at the
Insignificancy of our Works, and do revere the Beauty and Depth of thy Counsel.
Thou made my Tongue sharper than a Sword, and his stupid Mind sensible by thy
Causticks, and hotter than burning Coals till thou had healed him: So happy
is the Son whom the Lord chasteneth. See S. Austin, l. 6. c. 7. of his Book of
Confessions.

I leave the Reader to apply this Instance to his own Mind.

SECT. IX. Of MEEKNESS, the eighth Qualification of a Friendly Reprover.
THE Virtue Meekness consists, either in not being soon Angry, not being easily
Provoked, or Angry without a just Provocation, and when we should not be Angry;
or, secondly, when we are Angry on a just occasion, in bounding that Anger,
which S. Paul calls being Angry without Sin, for Anger is a Natural Passion:
Meekness is not the Extinction of Anger, but our regular Use of it. Now
Meekness, in both Senses, is a necessary Qualification for a Friendly Reprover:
For, first, habitual Meekness, or seldom being angry, and never exerting it
without just Provocation, is as great in effect as trivial and groundless Anger
is in Show. Who can withstand Meekness? When a meek Man, who is not known to be
often or hastily angry, complains, a Friend will conclude that one of the
Divine Tables is broken, for it must be something that is not only offensive to
his Disposition but is really ill in its own Nature, that can provoke a Moses
to exert Anger. A mean occasion will not raise such a one's Passion. Bur,
moreover, Meekness is necessary too, because it fits us to bear Reproof
patiently and thankfully, and it must be confessed that such a Temper is
necessary for a Reprover, that he may be one of an exemplary tameness when he
is reprovd: For how can he expect that Gratitude from others, which, when he is
reproved, he will not express himself? No one will ever think such an one a
sincere Reprover. In opposition therefore to such gross Hypocrisy, do you,
when you reprove, chide your Friend for not reproving you for a Fault which you
have traced in your self by Reflection, and for which he did not reprove you,
tho he could not but observe it in you; that is to say, if ever the Case stands
so indeed, Then you may say to him thus, or to this purpose, If Impenitence for
this Fault would have damned me, I should have been never a whit helped by you
to prevent the Cause of such eternal Misery. Is not this very unkind?

And as habitual Meekness is a necessary Qualification for a Friendly Reprover,
so, secondly, actual Meekness is a necessary Ingradient of a dextrous Reproof.
Actual Meekness consists in moderating our Anger. S. Paul charges us
particularly, to Reprove in the Spirit of Meekness, and afterward subjoyns
this excellent Reason for it, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted;
to which give me leave to add, and when tempted fall: For, as it is no strange
or unusual thing for us to be tempted in this state; so neither is it a
surprising Business for a Man to be overcome by Temptations. When we reprove a
Friend, therefore, we should take Care to express our Grief and Anger (for
Resentment has been showed to become a Reprover) without Pride and Fiercenses.
It must be the Anger of a Friend, not the Anger of a Panther. Be not
high-minded but fear. Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall, are
excellent Sentences, and should always be writ upon our Minds, when we are
going to reprove, that we may do our Duty without the Commission of a Sin. It Is
a dreadful Presumption to tell a Person of a Fault only to tease and exasperate
him: But I am not addressing to such Wretches. No, no, there are too many, who,
though they reprove with a benign intention, fly from a decent hatred of the Sin,
and Sorrow, and Trouble for the Offense of their Friend, into an extravagant
Anger with the Person who committed it. Hear me, my beloved Friends, Is this to
reprove as Brethren? Rage is no fit Companion for Reproof: This Wrath of Man
will not work the Righteousness of God in our Friend: The best Reprovers are
not spotless as God. Men should, when they reprove, consider that they are Men,
not Brutes and destitute of a thinking Capacity; and that they have to do with
Men, not Angels, who are out of the Shot of Temptations. Friends should not,
when they reprove, speak like Masters and Magistrates, but like Friends and
Equals. Alas! What mean poor Mortals by a magisterial Carriage in reproving?
Surely they forget that we all tread upon slippery Places, and wrestle with
Principalities and Powers, often stumble and are often worsted: That though some
Humble oftener than others, yet all stumble often enough to be lowly, and when
they 're trip'd up by a Temptation they stand in need of a helping Hand. Surely
they forget that before Baptism they were polluted Lumps of Clay, and have
frequently since contracted Guilt enough to have been thrown long ago into the
Kennel of Devils for ever, if infinite Justice had dealt rigorously with them;
and that it is by the Grace of Jesus they are what they are, capable of Heaven
by true Repentance, and obnoxious to Hell, notwithstanding all Repentance,
without the Application of his Merits. For God's sake, let us remember, and for
Christ's sake, who does not drag but draw our Souls by his Spirit gently and
compassionately, that when we reprove a Friend, Sinner speaks to Sinner, lest
Haughtiness and Wrath anathematize our over-pompous Charity in the Sight of
God, with whom a meek and quiet Spirit is of great Price. When Friends carry
themselves like Furies to their Friends, the Sense of the Sin (to quicken which
is the peculiar Drift of Friendly Reproof) is drowned in that Amazement and
Vexation which boisterous Passion is wont to raise: It Is to be Precedents of
Sin, and perhaps a greater Sin than the present Subject of our Reproof, even
whilst we bring an Action against it. But God will not suffer the Meek to
reprove so awkwardly, for them that are meek God will guide in Judgment. A Mind
that is not ruffl'd with disorderly Passions will not suffer a Man to reprove
his Friend, but when his Friend is sedate and fit to receive it with Profit.
The Meek Man reproves with a degree of Anger proportioned to the degree of the
Nature of the Crime, and not only weighs it is Aggravations, but also considers
its Alleviations, and to be sure he always takes Care never to be hurried into
that degree of Anger which does not comport with a due Respect for Human
Nature, which becomes him as a Fellow-partaker of it; and because in this State
the Image of God, which was originally impressed on all Men, cannot be
perfectly obliterated. A meek Man never reproves, only to sluice a private
Humor, or unseasonably; but he patiently watches for a convenient Opportunity
to promote a Soul: He hugs and makes much of all Seasons to do good in: He is
not rash and temerarious; he does not censure, envy, repine or fret, nor meddle
where his Fingers have no right to feel: He constantly uses his Tongue as an
Instrument of Good and a Messenger of God: He always avoids hurtful Blabbing
and Fomenting Strife and Folly by needlessly multiplying Words: He imitates the
Divine Spirit, the Arch-reprover of Mankind, by reproving in a private Place,
and in a soft Voice, mingling with his Resentment a powerful and commanding
Tenderness: His Tears are not as the Tears of the revengeful, Resemblances of
the Sparks of Hellfire, but they are the overflowing Emanations of a silently
active Love; and, if I may be allowed so to speak, effluvia's of the Bowels of
the long-suffering God, and therefore they cannot but be successful Spells for
good to the reproved, unless he has a Heart of Adamant, a Conscience all
incrusted over with numerous Sins, that have settled themselves into invincible
Habits, and a Mind entombed in Sense.

SECT. X. Of TEMPERANCE, the ninth and last Qualification in a Friendly
Reprover.
THAT Temperance is a necessary Qualification in a Reprover, is so obnoxious
that I need not spend Time to prove it, since no body will listen to the
Reproof of a debauched, flagitious and intemperate Fellow. For his Reproof will
never be taken for a serious Reproof, who is never serious himself but when his
Drunkenness ties his Tongue, and the Diseases consequent upon his immoderate
Use of sensual Pleasures confine him to his Bed. This cannot properly be called
a voluntary Gravity, and it is a very dangerous Error to think that such a
Repentance will suffice to curry us to Heaven Besides, I have premised that a
preconceiv'd Belief of the Reprover's good Intention, Friendship and Secrecy
(for retentiveness of Secrets is one peculiar Office of Friendship) is one
great Recommendation of Reproof. But who is there that cannot more than
conjecture that a sottish Fellow, who vomits out his Breast before Enemies as
well as Friends, can be no secure Cabinet to lay up Secrets in?

I have now spoke as much as I thought would be convenient concerning those
nine Qualifications which constitute a Friendly Reprover, viz. Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance,
and have no more to say of them than with the great Apostle that mentioned them
in this Order, Against such there is no Law. A Reproof thus managed cannot
justly be excepted against. Such a Reproof is a true Friendly Reproof, if any
Reproof can deserve the Name of Friendly. Is a Friend qualified with these
Virtues? He need not fear but he will reprove his Friend with Success and
little Offense. And if his kind Aim should meet with a Frustration, it is the
reproved Person's Fault, not the Reprover's.

As for those, who though they are utterly, or for the most part destitute of
'em, will be reproving, they had as good lecture to the Winds. Indeed
thorough-pac'd Christians, whose extraordinary Prudence and eminent Advances in
Piety enable 'em to turn Calumnies and Curses into Blessings, may be the better
for such sinister Reproofs and Reprovers, but they may thank themselves, not
their Reprovers for it. Ordinarily speaking, Reproof is more or less
Successful, according as those who offer it do administer it, and are more or
less spiritually prepared.

After so much has been said concerning the Qualifications of a Friendly
Reprover, the Reader may admire that I have not spoke (except it be
occasionally) concerning Prudence, which is generally accounted, as in reality
it is, one of the principal Ornaments of a Friendly Reprover: To abate the
Reader's Surprise for this Oversight, I desire him to consider, 1. That to
speak largely of Prudence in general would take up too much compass in this
little Tract, and, besides, 'twill be more conveniently done in a particular
Discourse about Counsel. And then, 2. That Prudence considered abstractly, as
the Qualification of a Friendly Reprover, it is the natural Result or Offspring
of all those Qualifications which I have already insisted on: They are all of
them, as it were, means tending to this End: For first, does not Religious
Prudence consist in the Choice of some Divine End and Undertaking, and in
prosecuting any Undertaking of that Nature knowingly, upon good Principles, by
wise Rules, with Wariness, Vigor and Constancy? Now (to look back a little
while) Does not Spiritual Love make the Restitution and Renovation of the
Divine Image in our Brother, the End of our Reproof, and a Desire of being in
God's Favor, and being more and more assimilated to the Source of Charity and
Blessedness, the Principle of our Reproof? Does not Spiritual Joy clear it from
the Ignominy of being taken for Counterfeit and Spurious? Does not Peace give
the Reprover a becoming Majesty, and propose a sure Canon to walk by, as to the
Matter of our Reproof? Does not Faith make us humble, full of pious Assurance
and Satisfaction? Does not Meekness and Temperance always preserve our Minds on
their Guard, and so make them capable of forming sit Stratagems, and of
sufficient Strength to encounter with our Friend's Infirmities? Do not these
Virtues show the fittest Seasons and Methods of handling a Friend after a late
Lapse? Lastly, Do not Gentleness, Goodness and Long-Suffering enable us to be
patient and unwearied in this sort of Well-doing? For who can be so foolish as
to suffer all his Kindness in other Respects, to putrify and be lost, only for
want of Repeating one Part of the Beneficence? especially with a very little
Consideration, he may sufficiently satisfy himself that this will mightily
enhanse the Value and Dignity of all his other Assistances. But, secondly, the
Consideration of the Nature of Friendly Reproof has furnished us with many
useful Rules for the dextrous Application of Friendly Reproof; now a dextrous
Reprover is a prudent Reprover, and I do not question that if those Rules
(which by way of Consequence have been interspersed in this Chapter be
conscientiously observed) but the meanest Christian may have Prudence enough to
reprove his Friend. But the I speak thus, I am very sensible that there have
been many Rules given besides these; nay, indeed, some which run full but
against them: But 'twas for want of distinguishing between those Places in
which the Scriptures speak of Admonition, or Casual, or Episcopal, or other
sorts of Reproof (which must be known by tracing the Connection that the Places
usually cited have with the Context) and others that peculiarly respect
Friendly Reproof. Wherefore, since the careful Use of this Distinction will
serve for a general Answer to all that oppose me herein, I shall not swell the
Chapter with a particular insistence on every contrary Direction: For the same
Reason I do not think it necessary to beg the World Pardon for not Transcribing
all those Texts which Concordances and Systems have in considerately pil'd
together. Thirdly, I desire it may be considered that these are the
Qualifications which S. Paul has particularly assigned. And I hope we need not
doubt but that God will bless those Means which he himself has instituted: Can
we have a better Guide than the Blessed Spirit? Prudence as well as Courage are
his Gifts: Those that bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit are under his
peculiar Conduct and Tuition, and are the Objects of his extraordinary Bounty
(I mean a greater Measure of his ordinary Gifts) and therefore have no reason
to dread a Want of true and real Prudence; for the Nature of true prudence
cannot be inquired after to any purpose among the Crowd, who make every Sense a
Pythagoras, and swear an implicit Faith to them, but in God's Word and our
Closets, where the Divine Spirit confers with pure Souls. When all is done, the
Race is not to the Swift, it is God that must make us Successful in the
Administration of Reproof as well as other Affairs; and if we follow the
Methods which he has prescribed, we may cheerfully rest on the great Disposer
of all Events: He that lives well and loves much is most likely to reprove best.

CHAP. V. Detecting the Vanity of those several Excuses which have been framed
for the Omission of Friendly Reproof.
BY this Time I hope we may bring those who neglect this Duty to the Bar, and
be able to see through those Cobweb-Excuses that Men usually bring for their
not reproveing their Friends.

And first, Men in vain ask, Am I my Brother's Keeper? Will not every Man bear
his own Burden? It Is well if I can preserve my own Soul with all my Care and
Diligence: Truly, I find that difficult enough. Experience has clearly verified
to me those Words of our blessed Lord, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way
which leads unto life. There is no need for me to be bound for others: For
does it follow, that because you dare not undertake to fit and dress another
Man's Soul for Eternal Salvation in another World, you may not lawfully
contribute all you can to the fitting of him for it? Will the doing another a
good turn, when you have a fair Opportunity, increase the Difficulty of your
Preparation for Heaven? Is not doing your Duty to God and Man one part of that
Preparation? How then, since Friendly Reproof is both a Natural and Christian
Duty, can the Performance of it in due Season be a Hindrance in your
Preparation for Heaven? Reproving our Friend agrees with the Golden Rule of
Jesus, the Law and the Prophets; Whatsoever you would that Men should do unto
you, that do unto them, for this is the Will of your Heavenly Father. Any wise
Man and knowing Christian must acknowledge that he would have his Friend
reprove him when he commits a visible Fault: Why then should he think much to
reprove his Friend? Alas! Men fondly imagine, That if they avoid Commissions,
that is sufficient to save 'em; but I must plainly tell 'em that gross
Omissions are not good Preparations for Heaven, for he that does not what God
commands him to do, disobeys God's Commands as well as he who does what God
forbids him. In short, any Man in Misery would be relieved. Charity is Justice
among Christians, and without it we must never expect to set one Foot in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

In vain, secondly, Men pretend, if they should reprove every one whom they see
commit Faults, they should have so much Work to do as to have no Time to follow
their Calling, for if they mind their Business closely they cannot see so many
Faults in others. All Sins should be unpleasant to their Eyes. They are so far
from being enjoined by their Duty to reprove, that they ought to scorn, to make
a Business or a Recreation of hunting after Matter of Reproof. Besides, it has
been shown, That Providence expects us very rarely to reprove any but our
Friends and Intimates, and I hope that which seldom happens will not take up a
Man's whole Time. Is your Friend no more to you than any Body? No Man of
Principles will think his Friend not worth his troubling his Head about. Since
it is inconsistent with any but the Pragmatical to reprove all Offenders whom we
know to be such, we ought to reprove our Friends the more constantly. Our
Beneficence is confined to a few Objects, which few should be our Friends.
Reproving then cannot devour much time. There are none so hurried with Business
but they will allow themselves Times of Relaxation. Now, at these times we are
with our Friends: The being in their Company often refreshes and whets our
Appetite to Business again: It renews and invigorates our Faculties with fresh
Vigor and Briskness for the Employments of our Calling; and when Friends are
together how can they lay out their Conversation better than in filing and
burnishing one another's Lives? If our Business will not permit us to secure
our everlasting Salvation, we had as good, nay better, be cast, with a Millstone
about our Necks, into the Sea, as to mind it: Such Business is as bad or worse
than Idleness.

In vain, thirdly, Men urge our Savior's and S. Paul's, forbidding us to judge
one another, against giving Reproof; for we must not suppose that God has
forbid any thing in those Texts which he has commanded in others. We ought not
to judge Men's Hearts, but we may and ought to judge of the different Natures
of Human Actions, for we are not to call Good Evil, nor Evil Good, and those
that are visibly Evil may be judged and reproved in our Friends, without
invading God's Right. We cannot pass a final and sixth Sentence upon the State
of any Man's Soul, for he stands or falls before the universal Sovereign of the
World; but we may pass a Sentence on some of his particular Actions, to prevent
his Falling before his Lord. This is Charity, whereas the other is
Uncharitableness, which makes a very wide Difference between 'em. Moreover, we
have answered this Objection sufficiently, because we have already directed you
very largly how to distinguish Reproof from Censoriousness; and one Rule given
concerning applying Reproof was not to reprove for indifferent Matters, but
only for those visible Actions which we can make out to be Faults by any Part
of God's Word.

In vain, fourthly, say some, It Is the Magistrate's Business to reprove: For
though the Magistrate must reprove for the more heinous Breaches of the Law, for
the Safety of Government; yet it is a Friend's Province to put a Stop to ill
Customs betimes, that his Friend may not by degrees become such a scandalous
Offender as to deserve the Reproof of the Magistrate.

In vain, fifthly, some tell us, it goes against me to reprove, I am too
good-natured to reprove my Friend often, because I cannot but be an Instrument
of Uneasiness to him, and a burthensom Companion by so doing: For it is not the
causing an Uneasiness to our Carnal Dispositions, that will mantle our Neglect
of a positive Duty. Without doubt, if Friends reprove one another for little or
no Cause, such as innocent Freedoms, Festivities and Infirmities that are so
inseparable to Human Nature in this State, and therefore cannot properly be
called wilful, they will unavoidably reprove too often, and with great Offense,
for it is a great Trial of a Man's Patience to be perpetually chid for what he
cannot avoid. Avoidable Infirmities only are the Subjects of Reproof. But if a
Friend cannot safely reprove for such lesser Freedoms, their Case is very
pitiable who think they may lawfully censure good Men, that are Strangers to
'em, for such Infirmities more than these good Men censure them,
notwithstanding their loose and licentious Lives. And it is worth observing,
That if Friends reprove for none but real and unavoidable Faults, that it is
charitably to be hoped that there will not be such numerous Occasions of
Reproof among Friends, who are so conscientious as to give and receive Reproof,
and if there should be, this uneasiness will diminish and wear away by degrees,
with occasions of Reproof, through the Delight which its being an Instrument of
a correct Life will procure: for frequent Reproof is the way to weary a Friend
out of his Faults, and so Friends prevent, by this means, the trouble of
frequently receiving and giving Reproof, and the Sin not only of positively,
but even so much as negatively flattering one another. Whether you reprove your
Friend or no, uneasiness for his Sins must be felt some time or other, to keep
him from flaming for ever in Hell. If he will be comforted he must mourn for
his Sins, Blessed are they that mourn thus, for their Tears make Angels
rejoice, and they shall rejoice themselves to all Eternity. So that by creating
or exaggerating this wholesome uneasiness you do him a great and unspeakable
Kindness: You should not fear your Friend's present Displeasure more than his
Eternal Ruin. That dastardly, cereous Temper, which is the Cause of Men's not
reproving one another, is falsely called good Nature; it is a judicious Kindness
only that can deserve that Name. He that is good-natured in the first Sense
does but consult his Ease and fleshly Interest, has not a regard to Futurity:
All that he cares for is to please and benefit his Friend in those Cases which
are sufficient to uphold a worldly Correspondence and Dearness: He has no
Divine Sensation nor Principle of Divine Life in him, for if he had he would
know, that reproving one another here, however uneasy it is for the present,
is a part of Discipline to admit us into the state of eternal Gratulation. In
short, it is uneasy to ev ry good Man to reprove his Friend; it is his hearty
Wish, that there were no need of Reproving; but he considers, that this is a
state of Trial and Lability, and therefore contentedly submits to God and obeys
him, since he has enjoined him to reprove, tho it interrupt the Ease of his
Mind here; and he that will not do his Friend a good Office but when it may be
done without the least Trouble, does but very cheap Kindnesses, and so cheapens
and undervalues his Friendship.

In vain, sixthly, you pretend that you do not reprove because your Reproof is
not successful, and is very much abused and misnam'd, for Men's Errors and
Wickednesses will not satisfy for your Neglects. Discharge your Duty, reprove
whom and as you ought to do, and be constant in well-doing and your Charity is
the greater, and therefore will find the greater Recompense, because it is
indefatigable, and you suffer for it. Obedience to God's Commands is sure of a
Reward, which should be a sufficient Motive to the true Disciples of Christ.
But we have no Promise that every Reproof shall be blessed with Success upon
the reproved, and therefore our Savior, when he commanded us, If a Man shall
trespass, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, adds, If he
shall hear thee thou have gained thy Brother; as if he had said, This is a very
likely way to gain thy Brother, perhaps thou may gain thy Brother. The Rule
is certainly good, but the Success is uncertain.

In vain, seventhly, says another, my Friend commits many Faults which I know
nothing of; how then shall I reprove him for them? How indeed? This is a
foolish Question certainly, for because you are not bound to reprove for those
Faults which you know nothing of, therefore you will not reprove him for those
that you do know of. Good Christian, learn to be ashamed of such idle
Sophistry; reprove him for his visible Faults, and your Duty is done. God does
not require us, to do what it is impossible for us to do. Others may perhaps be
apt to say, as vainly, we have too many Faults of our own to reprove others. I
ask those why they don't take care to have fewer. Again, all Men's having
Faults proves Friendly Reproof the more strongly to be a Friendly and Social
Duty.

But lastly, many may complain, That they are not prequalified to reprove with
Prudence, and the like. Either these Persons who say they are not prequalified,
are prequalified, or they are not prequalified. If they are prequalified, they
tell a gross Lie: If they are not, they are not good Christians: For all the
forementioned Qualifications are as necessary to form a good Christian as they
are to make a Man a good Reprover. Men's not loving God above all things,
immoderate Love of the Creatures, want of Spiritual Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Habitual and Actual Meekness, and the like, proceeds from
a mere formal Profession of Christianity; and since all Christians are capable
of these Virtues, unless they deck their Souls with 'em as soon as possible
they can, this Excuse will not only be rejected as frivolous at the last Day,
but as more inexcusable than even that Neglect of the Duty for which they
apologize with it.

There are many other Excuses of the like Nature, which if I should stand to
answer particularly, would distend this Chapter to too great a Bulk, and may be
easily answered by a close Attention to those Principles which have run through
this Discourse, and by which I presume I have sufficiently refuted the
forementioned ones: For which Reason, I think it would be an unpardonable Abuse
of good Men's Candor and Patience, and a too culpable Compliance with the
affected Perverseness of those wicked Christians, who in Truth have no
Inclination to promote the good of Souls, to crowd 'em into this little Book.

Search your Hearts therefore, Christians, penetrate 'em to the Core, and see
whether or no your true Reasons are not all, or some of these, unconcernedness
to obey the Divine Commands, Dread of the Disgrace, or Shame of a Repulse, want
of Zeal for God and Virtue, or want of judicious Love for Souls and your
Friends, or an Approbation of your Friends Sins, and an unwillingness to set
them an Example, to disturb your quiet Enjoyment of some darling Sins, which
you your selves actually are (and which is worse) too likely to be impenitently
guilty of till you drop through the Grave into everlasting Torments.

CHAP. VI. Proposing some Motives for the Encouragement of the frequent
Exercise of Friendly Reproof.
HAving detected the Emptiness of those Excuses which have been framed for the
Epidemical Neglect of Friendly Reproof, I proceed now earnestly to exhort you
to throw away all foolish Pretenses for the future, and to resolve to reprove
your Friends as becomes Christians. Which that you may do, I beseech you,

I. Consider, first, you obey one of Christ's Commands when you reprove, which
will be matter of Peace and Satisfaction to the Conscience, whatever the Issue
of it be here. And,

II. Consider, secondly, by omitting to reprove your Friend you disobey an
express Command, and by not reproving him for some Faults, you would have
heaped to your self Treasures of Wrath, even though you had been but an Heathen:
Of which sort are all Trangressions against the Light of Nature: How horrible
must this Neglect then be in a Christian?

III. Consider, thirdly, what an excellent Duty it is: It Is an Act of Charity to
the Soul, and thereby an Act of Charity inclusively to the whole Man, which is
an Essence of an Immortal Nature, capable of Eternal Happiness or Eternal
Misery, an Essence for which Jesus himself shed his Blood to redeem it from
Sin; to destroy which, in this Essence, is the Aim of Reproof, that it may be
delivered from that Eternal Misery and Vengeance into which Sin precipitates
all its Slaves. Oh! How must it transport you to see Souls triumphing in
Angelical Glory, who, for ought you know had never come thither had not God's
Providence done you the Honor to have used you as an Instrument in his Hand of
their Conversion and Glorification pursuant thereto.

IV. Consider, fourthly, on the other hand, what Horror the Eternal Damnation
of your impenitent Familiars must needs excite in you: Familiars, with whom you
have committed many Sins, and whom perhaps you first betrayed into a sinful
Course of Life, but never reprov d 'em for it or begged their Pardon for
showing your self so much an Enemy to 'em, by deluding them when they took you
for a true and real F^iend: Familiars, who, for ought you know, had never
plunged themselves into that miserable Condition, if you had but piously
husbanded the Advantage of your supposed Friendship, which would have
introduced your Reproof with much Interest and Authority into their Breasts.

V. Consider, fifthly, how impossible it is to quit the Friend without
promoting your Friend's good as much as you can, and consequently without
reproving him sometimes, since the best Person sometimes wants Reproof, and
none but bad Men, who are incapable of true Friendship, can want Ability and
suitable Endowments to reprove. Will you be a Traitor? Will you be ungrateful
to him who is a Benefactor continually to you?

VI. Consider, sixthly, what a beautiful Act of Charity Christian Friendly
Reproof is, if it be well managed, and every Christian may manage it well, by
God's Help, if he will. In this Act almost all the Human Passions are in
Agitation, and every one of these Passions exerted on its proper Object, and
kept within its due Bounds: For it is compounded of Grief for our Friend's Sin,
Anger with the Sinner, kindled by a just Hatred of the Sin, and that over-awed
and disciplined by a peculiar Love for his Person, Joy for the Discovery of the
Sin, since it is befallen him, and there is no possibility of unsinning any
Sin, and we have hereby an Opportunity to heal him, Fear of his Ruin, governed
by a comfortable Hope that he will recover: In short, the whole Chorus of Human
Passions is made unanimous and virtuous by their every one of them taking up
that space, and being intended on that Object which the Decree of God and
Primitive Nature has marked out for 'em.

VII. Consider, seventhly, of what a noble Stock of Virtues it is descended. A
fixed and exalted Love of God, Complacency in all excellent Examples, Charity
to the whole Creation, regulated Passions, and unwearied Longanimity, Universal
Usefulness, a peculiar Condescension, a canonical Temperance, Meckness,
Magnanimity, and a constant Peaceableness of Behavior, are all, as it were so
many necessary Materials to build this one beautiful Fabric.

VIII. Consider, eighthly, what a splendid Train of Blessings are the Equipage
and Attendance of it; for by giving Friendly Reproof we tie our selves the
faster to a constancy of regular Demeanor and Christian Circumspection for the
Sake of the Success of our Reproof: We engage those whom we reprove, in
Gratitude and by way of Debt, to be watchful over us for our good, in the same
manner. We endear our Souls to God's Blessing upon our Spiritual Attempts and
Protection against all our Spiritual Enemies: We bespeak a greater Measure of
his Grace to adorn and strengthen them with all the Virtues and ordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, and admit our selves the peculiar Pupils of that excellent
Tutor, to guide us in the sure way to Heaven.

IX. Consider, ninthly, that we hereby make our Names precious to the public
Body, of which we are Members, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, because Friendly
Reproof tends to make the reproved, make both a quicker and richer Improvement
under the Minister's Reproof, and prevents him from running into those Crimes
which are the Subjects of the Magistrate's Reproof, as may be observed in our
Savior's Directions concerning our giving Reproof, and the Order and
Gradations of it. If thy brother, says our blessed Lord, shall trespass against
thee, go and tell him his fault, between him and thee alone; if he shall hear
thee thou have gained thy brother: But if he will not hear thee, then take with
thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word
may be established: And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee at an
heathen man or a publican, Matthew. 18.15. So that we may se we hereby do some
Service to our Country, by making our Friend a more useful Member of the
Commonwealth, the holy Catholic and his National Church. The better Christian
we make our Friend, the better he will be in all Relations and Conditions of
Life.

X. Consider, tenthly, we lay up in store for our selves many Gratitudes in
Heaven, from our Friends; who will then be forced with Joy and Exaltation to
declare, That a calm and prudent Reproof is the richest Present we can make to
a Friend here on Earth.

Certainly all these Blessings crowning your Magnanimity and Spiritual Love,
will recompense the Luxations of your Friend's Affection here, upon the account
of your reproving him for his good, which ought always to be preferred before
his transient Smiles, that may be purchased by sordid Flatteries, which are
very cheap and vile Gratifications: Especially if we consider,

XI. Eleventhly, That the ever-blessed Spirit of God sets us an Example every
Day upon our own Minds, an Example of a silent but powerful Reproof: He sets
all our Sins in order before us, and reproves us for those which are invisible
to the Eyes of others, so that he is in Example of Constancy in this Duty to
us. Neither need you wonder at this, if you can be prevailed on to consider,

Lastly, That there is no room for Reproof in the other World. All of us there
shall be either in a State of perfect Bliss, or a State of Eternal and perfect
Misery. If our Friends are in the number of the Happy above, they will be above
the need of the Assistance of Reproof: If they are condemned to everlasting
Misery, no Reproof will do 'em any good, for there is no Redemption out of
Hell. Consider therefore once more, I beseech you, of what has been said,
whilst Consideration can be useful.

CHAP. VII. An instructive Address to Reproved Persons, concerning a grateful
Improvement of Friendly Reproof.
HItherto I have been speaking concerning giving Reproof, it is high Time now to
pass from the Reprover and visit the Reproved, in order to speak something
concerning the due receiving Reproof. And here every one is apt to say, It Is
better to give than to receive: Which universal Humor of corrupt Mankind makes
it seasonable to write a Word or two to assuage Men's Uneasiness when they are
reproved. An Uneasiness becomes 'em, but this Uneasiness must be steered and
mitigated by Reason: It must not be immoderate. If we are reproved
undeserv'dly, we ought to make our Defense modestly, and sill thank the
Reprover for his Good Will. Now those who don't regulate and bound their
Uneasiness when they are reproved, whether justly or unjustly, would do well to
consider that immoderate Fretfulness under a well-manag'd Reproof, must proceed
from either a scornful haughty Temper, or an habitual Brutishness of Soul. Men
would fain have others think that they are wholly free from Pollution and
Guilt, and not Sinners like their Neighbors the Publicans; which unequal
Justification of themselves makes them carry themselves frowardly to those who
inspect their Carriage for their good, and apt to think that they are above the
Assistance of their Fellow Creatures. But does not such Pride provoke God, who
is jealous of his Honor, and will not bear being vy'd with by any of his silly
Creatures? Unity and Independence are incommunicable Perfections in God. We
don't stand and fall by our own Sentence: It is not forward and lofty Thoughts
of our own Dignity that will bribe or scare God into a false Judgment and
Preference of us before all Mankind. Neither will our swollen Imagination bias
and oblige other Men into a Conspiracy against the Truth. They know that we are
Men, and Branches of the same corrupt Stem with themselves, since they see us
sin as well as themselves. They will not trouble themselves to ask us whether
we are Sinners or not, when we palpably offend under their Eyes. Not only the
great God, but even weak infirm Man is not to be mocked in this case. So that
proud Rejection of Reproof is as unlikely to procure Reputation with Men as it
is to obtain the Favor of God. Consider, I entreat you, that though your
Reprover had never told you of your Fault, he would have known it, and might
have made it a Subject of Public Merriment and Derision among your Flatterers
and Enemies, instead of reproving you kindly and privately, that you may repair
the Loss of your Reputation by your future strictness. In short, by your
indecent Pride and Rage you discover your self more and more what you most
industriously avoid to seem. For no Man, doubtless is the less a Sinner for
being obstinately such. Brutish Carriage is but an ill Stratagem to fish for
Esteem with.

But nothing, secondly, can be a greater sign of Brutishness than scornful and
untoward Be(...) so a Friendly Reprover. For consider, what foul Ingratitude it
is to resist such a beautiful Act of Love, and to affront a true Friend for
showing himself friendly, when so few now will show themselves such in this
Respect. Alas! he could easily have enjoyed your Smiles by a lazy Silence that
flatters Sense; but being a true Friend he cannot, like Flatterers, enjoy
himself, or relish your Smiles with any Delight, whilst Smiles are not
seasonable, and you are in the high Road to Eternal Destruction. Scorners of
Reproof show themselves brutish, because they don't behave themselves like
Creatures capable of Consideration; for if they did consider, they would show
themselves Men, that know Sin to be the greatest Evil, because it is opposite
to the supreme Good, and therefore would know that their Deliverance from that
is the greatest Deliverance. These are the Thoughts and Sentiments which will
not suffer Men to kick at the Hand that offers to help 'em out of the Gulf of
Sin, which leads to Eternal Damnation. Considerate Men know that it is good for
them to be corrected and reproved in time, that they may not still go on
astray, and so be condemned for ever. They will kiss the Rod before God in
justice turn it into a Serpent, and make that which should have melted, an
Instrument of hardening their Hearts. The greatest Mercies, if they are abused,
will prove the greatest Judgments. A lasting Unsuccessfulness under Friendly
Reproofs gives a Friend such a great occasion of dissolving his friendship,
that if your Friend has a true Notion of Christian Friendship (as doubtless one
who reproves his Friend with a Christian Spirit has) he must think it his Duty
to discipline you after many Reproofs have been, in vain, by professedly
cancelling all particular concern for you: Long-Suffering has its proper
Limits, and when it is trampled on, will provoke him that has it not, to throw
Pearls before Swine only to be trod under Foot. Stubbornness must be cured by
suitable Severity. It Is true, a Consciousness of good Intention props up a
Man's Spirit, after his Kindness has been very much abused: He has done his
Part, and may expect his Reward. Nevertheless, since we are confined to no
particular Person, though Friendship must be exercised with some, a Man may
reasonably, especially when he has been very patient, seek out a Friend who is
more worthy of his special Care and Respect. Success in God's Eye is
Satisfactory alone; but Success upon the Reproved also is very desirable, and
is necessary to heighten our Alacrity, if we can find a Heart that is malleable
to Reproof, receives it kindly, and makes the Reproof fructify in the
Reproved. One would not willingly be always wasting Seed a barren Soil, a
perverse Intimate, who when he should obey the first Call to Repentance,
slights Call upon Call, and baffles Reproof after Reproof, till every Fault is
grown to that strong Head, that he is as hard to be converted as that Wretch
was to be dispossessed, who was besieged with a Legion of Devils. True, our
Reproofs clear us from the Imputation of a perverse Friend's Blood; but to see
it spilt whilst he is our Friend, creates much Trouble. When a Friend for a
long time has refused to receive Reproof as he ought, we are exempted from our
Obligation to reprove him as a Friend, because by his Unfriendliness he has
made our Tie to such a near Correspondence with him, void. Such an one shows
such Signs of the dereliction of God's Spirit, that all we have to do, till he
mends, is to bespeak with strong Prayers and Agonies some awakening Affliction,
which is a Divine Reproof, since Human Reproof proves so weak. But in this last
we must not too hastily rescind our Contract: this Sentence, it must be
remembered, must be passed with much struggling, and after Charity has had its
perfect Work. Wherefore, as you dread falling into one of the most execrable
Conditions that you are liable to here, for such your justifiably being
deserted by a faithful Friend, is, I desire you to make the fastest Improvement
that you can under every Reproof: Consider that your Friend is your adopted
Father: What your Father was to you in your Youth, he is now: Now a wise Son is
better for Correction. It must be confessed that all Sins cannot be conquered
quickly, but yet they may be conquered after more or less Tract of Time: And
you must carefully beware of Mocking your self into a Toleration of Sin in you,
and a neglect of fit and requisite Repentance, by a frequent and formal Use of
this Pretext. Beware of resolving to justify your self in an ill Matter; love
Truth, though she condemn you for the present, lest you be condemned eternally.
Accustom your self to examine the Justice of every Reproof, because that is the
way to imprint every just Reproof the deeper in your Mind, and so will be a
means of making it more conducive to your Manners, by exhibiting the
reasonableness of it the clearer to you; for mild Reception of Reproof without
that, though it is far better than ungrateful turning it from you, will not answer
the proper End of Reproof, viz. the Purification of our Hearts, and the
Amendment of our Lives. Another Art of curing this rise Inclination to
Untractableness under Reproof, is the Reprov'd's transferring the Indictment to
a third Person: Thus Selfishness may be removed and the Ugliness of the Act
will appear the plainer, and by consequence the Reasonableness of the Reproof
will exert it self also with the more Advantage. The Truth of this may be
evinced by what David said to Nathan's Parable, whereby he made way for a
successful Application of his Reproof. The last Method that is proper to be
used in order to make us grateful when reproved, is Prayer to God for a meek
and hearing Heart, and the agreeing upon some particular Times of giving and
receiving Reproof mutually for known Faults, and confessing secret Faults to
one another: For solemn Seasons make the Mind considerate, and presuppose a
good Resolution, whatever Defect there may be in our natural Temper. Repetition
of such Exercise will make it habitual and easy, as easy I mean as Acts of
that Nature can and ought to be; for Stupidness under Reproof is far from being
commendable. It must be confessed that there is an Uneasiness which shoots out
of a sharp Sense of the mischievous Familiarity of Sin with the Soul, which
cannot laudably be escaped. It becomes us to examine the Justice of the
Reproof, that by fixing our Thoughts the more intently upon it, if it be just,
our Compunction may be the severer; and if it be not just, the Consideration of
the great Kindness it would have done us, supposing it had been just, may be so
far from rendering us ungrateful, as to make us the more thankful to the
Reprover; and though it became him to have reproved upon juster Grounds, yet the
less nicely the Reproved weighs the Qualifications of the Reprover, the more
wise and virtuous will he be made by every Reproof Wherefore you see that the
forementioned laudable Uneasinness will not evaporate into stubborn Defyance of
Brotherly Discipline: No, it will rather incline you to comply with the Request
I am just now going to make.

When your Friend justly reproves you, look on him at that instant as the
peculiar Messenger of God, and under God the Tutor of your dear Soul. Open your
Ears, humble your Heart, and bow your Neck to his Reproof. Freely acknowledge
your Fault, and your Obligation to him for forwarding your Repentence, by
minding you of it, and beg of him meekly to pray for your Improvement of so
great a Mercy. Note it in your Diary, and thank God for the Warning, beseeching
him to reward your Friend for his Charity.

This is the way to be truly grateful to God and your Friend, to have a Soul
always thriving in Virtue, and making every Day nearer and nearer Advances to
Perfection, to have a faithful Friend constantly by your Side, and a gracious
God always at Hand to bless and succor you. This is the way to obtain true
Peace, and to instill a Reverence of your own Reproofs into others; which
Honor can never be their Lot who entertain and requite their Friend's Reproofs
with nothing but gloomy Looks and shappish Replies.

Indeed Meekness, under truly Christian Reproof, is so seasonable and lovely a
Virtue, that I cannot but advise every Christian, as I have briefly already,
though he be reproved unseasonably and indecently, not to give way to Fury and
Indignation. Patiently bearing with the Infirmities and Indiscretion of the
Reprover, is a lively Draught of the Christian Spirit, and will make every one
admire that beholds. Nevertheless, when you thank such a Reprover for his
good will, you would do well to advise him at the same Time to observe Season
and Moderation in applying his Reproof for the time to come, lest his
Indecencies scandalize weak People, to deter them from this excellent Duty. To
be brief, Meekness, under the slanderous Tongue is the noblest Triumph and most
creditable Vindication of our Innocence, and therefore it cannot but befit a
Christian when he is reproved by his Friend.

One more Memento may be of great Use. Be sure to take heed of quenching the
Spirit. Don't struggle with, don't go to foil the Reproofs of Conscience, which
convinces of Sin, and accuses us impartially of all Faults. This tremendous
Friend is about our Beds, and spies out all our Ways. Our Thoughts can find no
Shelter from its Eye. Learn to tremble at God's Word, and those Threats which
he pronounces by his Ministers against all Sin. Honor his Ministers for the
sake of their Work and Message. Don't despise God in them, for he that despises
the Reproof of God cannot be fruitful under the Reproof of Men. It Is our
Respect to those inward Convictions which God forms in our Minds, when we read
his Law, and hear the Ministers of Jesus Christ, which makes our Souls truly
hospitable to the loving Accusations of our Brethren. Be sure to search your
Heart and humble your self in the Day of Affliction, for Afflictions are the
Reproofs of God, who charges even his Angels themselves with Folly, and
therefore, without Doubt, there is no Man that is afflicted but has some Sin
which God designs to cure in afflicting him. This, my Friends, is a great
Truth, for how, as Job speaks, c. 9. v. 2. should man be just with God? If he
contends with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand: He is wise in Heart
and mighty in Strength. Who has hardened himself against him and has prosper'd?
Who removes Mountains and they know not, who overturns them in his Anger, who
shakes the Earth out of her Place, and the Pillars thereof tremble, who
commands the Sun and it rises not, and seals up the Stars. Dwell upon this
Majestic Description of God to us, but a very imperfect one, if considered
with relation to his incomprehensible Excellencies and Perfections, that you
may revere and make the best Advantage of his kind and paternal Reproofs. And
then read on again, v. 8. Who alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon
the waves of the sea; who makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the chambers
of the south; who does great things past finding out, and wonders without
number. Lo^ he goes by us, and we see him not: He passes on also and we
perceive him not: He takes away, who can hinder him? Who will say unto him,
What do thou? If God will not withdraw his anger, even the proud helpers must
stoop under him: How much less shall the humble Christian, who owns God just in
all his ways, and that Pride was not made for Man; who was at first a Clod of
Earth, and came a Mass of Corruption into the World, answer God and study a
Controversy with him, whom, though we were declared Righteous by our own Hearts,
and in the Judgment of our Neighbors, yet we should not contradict? For God is
greater than our Hearts. Supplication better becomes us before our Judge, our
All-seeing Judge: For he is not a Man, that we should set a Time to plead with
him. It Is vain and impious to justify our selves before God. Humble your
selves therefore all ye that are afflicted, that he may lift up your Souls in
due time. I shall conclude this Chapter with some excellent Passages out of the
Son of Sirach. There is a Reproof that is not comely. Again, Some man holds his
tongue, and he is wise. It Is much better to Reprove than to be angry secretly;
and he that confesses his fault shall be preserved from hurt. How good is it
when thou art reproved, to show repentance? He that hates to be reproved is in
the way of sinners, but he that fears the Lord will repent from his heart. A
stubborn heart shall fare evil at the last, and he that loves danger shall
perish therein. An obstinate heart shall be laden with sorrows, and the wicked
man shall heap sin upon sin. In the punishment of the proud there is no remedy,
for the plant of wickedness has taken root in him. The Advice is very plain,
and need not be enlarged on, since I hope you will be so wise as to enlarge on
them in your own Hearts.

CHAP. VIII. Containing some practical Inferences drawn from the preceding
Chapters.
ENough, I hope, has been said concerning the Usefulness of giving and
receiving Reproof meekly: But since it is so useful we may learn,

1. First, That Fraternal, Private and Particular Confession of Sins is very
beneficial; for since Reproving for visible Sins is of such great Use to the
Soul, and we are conscious of many Sins which are invisible to our Friend, and
for which, upon that account, he cannot reprove us; the obliging our selves to
a Custom of mutually confessing all our known Faults will give Friends an
Opportunity of Reproving and being Reproved for them too; whereby among other
ordinary or extraordinary Helps, we have this Amulet of Reproof against all our
Sins that are either discoverable by our private Reflection or our Friend's
Inspection. But this is not a Place to insist at large upon this excellent Duty.

2. Secondly, We hence learn that we ought to repent of our past Neglectfulness
of those with whom we professed Friendship, I mean our not reproving 'em in due
Season, as also of that peevishness under Rebuke, by which we have frequently
discouraged our Friends from reproving us; for since the said Neglect of
Reproving, and the said peevishness when we are Reproved, have been
demonstrated to be of a malignant Nature, they ought to be repented of, since
it is our Duty to repent of all our known Sins.

3. Thirdly, We hence learn to abhor all Flattery, that great Enemy and
Opposite of Friendly Reproof, which, like the Music of the Sirens, forebodes
Shipwreck to all their Souls who listen to it, and are entoxicated with it from
others, or deceive and injure others with it themselves. We hence learn not to
trust the gaudy Promises of the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and to love and
prize our Friend's Favor no farther than he acts as is consistent with the
Favor of God, who is every Man's chief and best Friend, for he is the Friend
of the whole Universe. The Earth is the Lord's and all that therein is. The
Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord.

4. Fourthly, We hence learn the dreadful Danger of irreligious Sociableness;
for since not reproving a Friend for a Fault, if it be habitual and unrepented
of, is such a great Sin, then certainly to be Confederate with Sinners, to
partake directly of other Men's Sins, by tempting them to commit 'em,
patronizing them, or the Committers of them, or any other Methods of the like
nature, must he very dreadful indeed, and ought always to be avoided by you, as
you tremble at the Apprehensions of being thrown into the hottest Regions of
Hell.

5. We hence learn, Fifthly, To compute our Friends, to know who are our true
and who are our false Friends. It Is but asking one Question; Do they use to
reprove me, or do they not? Do they cocker me in my Sins, or do they strive by
Reprehension to deliver me from the Dominion of Sin?

6. Sixthly, We hence learn, that it is our Prudence to strike Friendship with
those who sincerely, as far as we are able to judge, endeavor to lead a
virtuous Life, and to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and
toward Man, and to walk in all the Ordinances of Christ blameless; those, in
short, who will consent that it shall be one Article in the Contract,
constantly and mutually to reprove one another for the Faults which either in
the other may discern, and that this Article may be the better kept, 'twill be
prudence to choose one who lives near you, and can have a frequent Eye on your
Behavior. Moreover,

7. Seventhly, because ill Inclinations and Habits are quite opposite to one
another (for Vice is a medly of Contradiction, whereas all Graces compose one
beautiful Harmony in the Soul) it is advisable to choose one for your Friend,
whose darling Corruption is opposite to your own, because he has not any
Fondness for the Sins which most easily beset you, which will make him reprove
you the more constantly: And you too, for the same Reason, the faithfuller on
your part. When two Extremes lovingly encounter, the two Minds, which are apt
to sink into these Extremes, will by degrees be polished into that golden
Mediocricy, which is the Center of all Virtue. All Men are naturally prone to
be carried away without the Grace of God and their own Endeavors, by some
particular ill Inclination.

Thus some are apt to be too flexible, others of too stiff a Disposition; some
are never angry and some are always so; some are aspiring, others dejested;
some are too jealous, others are too careless. 'Twould be endless to instance
in all. Now if we observe by the Tenor of a Man's Life, notwithstanding some of
these particular ill Inclinations that he strives to live unblameably, we have
no Reason to except any Man, when we would choose a Friend for the sake of any
such particular ill Inclination. It Is an habitual Indulgence of Sin, not an ill
original Inclination, which makes any Person unfit for Friendship; for the
having some ill original Inclination is inevitable, though the being domineered
over by it is avoidable by the Grace of Jesus Christ. If we defer our Choice of
a Friend till we find a perfectly good Friend, we must stay till we are
launched into the Ocean of Purity, the Kingdom of Heaven; and 'twill be too
bold to promise our selves, that we should get thither, if we don't accept of
the Advantage of but the imperfect Friendship of good Men in this State to
advance us there, where we shall be above the need of particular Friendship.
The best Rule that we can observe is, to choose those for our Friends, whom we
observe to be the most industrious in their Preparations for Heaven, though we
cannot any more than charitably hope that they are in a way to be prepared for
Heaven. It Is a great Mistake to think that similitude of natural Temper is a
Foundation of Christian Friendship. Such Men's Compliance and Complacency in
one another's Tempers, I question not, will make their Friendship, such as it
is, last long; but the Question is whether or no, since these Tempers are
natural, and traduced from corrupt Parents, if we thoroughly enquire into 'em,
they will betray us (if indulged too much) into Sin. If so, they must be rooted
up, if we'll be true Christians, and consequently that durable Friendship
rooted up with 'em too, which the Similitude of the Saints natural Tempers
pitched in our Minds. Choose the good natured for your Friend, and avoid the
Angry, is a common Maxim. And who are the good natured? Why, in proper Speech,
those that are good by Nature, of which sort, since the Fall of Adam, it may be
safely said, There was never yet one to be found. But good-natured, in the
Lexicon of the Vulgar, denotes those that are easy and compliant, so
immoderately compliant that rather than they will displease their Companions,
though it is very agreeable to the Dictates both of Reason and Religion, for us
to displease and contradict one another, Truth shall be betrayed and exploded,
Black shall be voted White, and their Friends, though they sin never so
heinously, shall always pass unreprov'd, Religion shall be ridiculed Scot-free,
and what not? These good-natured People, with the Religious are Religious, and
with the Irreligious can be as contentedly Irreligious. Now whether or no this
sort of good nature (if I may be allowed to show my self an Example of it, by
complying with the Erroneous Multitude in calling it so) be not a predominant
Passion, which must be corrected, cultivated and moderated by our Endeavors,
concurrent with the Spirit of God, who alone can make us Peaceable without
being sinful, and which otherwise will be a very serviceable Tool in carrying
on the Devil's Trade of Undoing Human Souls, let the unprejudiced judge.
Solomon indeed says, Make not Friendship with an angry Man, but he does not
advise us in those Words to contract Intimacy only with Men of a peculiar,
branchy and compliant Nature; for he does not mean by angry there, one who is
naturally inclined to be angry, but one who does not curb, withstand and
regulate a peculiarly vigorous Inclination to Anger; for if we should suppose
the first, we must suppose a great part of Mankind excluded from all
possibility of Friendship, since a great many are inclined to be immoderately,
and too soon angry, which nevertheless may be good Christians, and therefore
good Friends: For why may not the Grace of God cure that as well as other
Inclinations? Nay, indeed, I need not have said a great Part of Mankind, for
according to that Interpretation of the Word Angry, in Solomon, no Man is fit
to be a Friend, since every Man is visibly inclined very ^^^^gly to some
particular Extreme, though not to the Extreme of Anger; and thus we must exclude
our good-natured People too: For never to resent, be the Occasion never so
just, or the Consequences never so momentous, is as bad as to be continually
resenting without Cause, out of Place, too long or too soon. Is there an Anger
which tends to no good? Why, so there is a Bashfulness (if we may believe a
very wise Man) a Silence, a sluggish, immoderate, irrational Compliance, that
has trundled many Souls to Hell, and therefore tends to no good.

To draw near to a Conclusion: It Is impossible to have Friends here, that are
good by Nature or perfect by Grace; the best do but follow after Perfection
here. Your best way then will be to deny your self, by choosing one for your
Friend whose Capital ill Inclination (be it that of Anger or Compliance, or any
other) is contrary to yours, that is to say, provided, besides the Oppositeness
of his original, involuntary Inclination, he has made a steady Resolution
(which is but the adopted Inclination of the Religious) with your self to
strive against it, and to assist you to subdue your strongest ill Inclination:
For this will show that you are ready to deny Self for the sake of Virtue, and
that you are willing to cut off the excessive Inclination; which is the most
deformed Protuberance of your Soul. Your Endeavor should be the same with your
Friend's, to conquer all immoderate Inclinations to Extremes in one another;
but it is most eligible that the peculiar and strongest Inclinations of both of
you to some certain Extrems should not be the same, because your Danger will in
all likelihood by this means be strengthn'd instead of being lessened. If the
flexible associate mostly with the flexible, they will but make one another
more credulous and apt to be deluded: If the Choleric are frequently with the
Choleric, they will in all probability inflame one another's Passionateness:
Melancholy People are not fit Company for the Melancholy, because they are not
fit to carry on the general good Inclination of vanquishing all Extremes in one
another. The Observation holds good in other Cases. Many Men had never been so
sottish and knavish, so morose or circumducible, if they had had the Prudence
not to have accompanied with those mostly whom they found strongly inclined by
Nature to the same Extremes. But I shall have occasion to speak more largely of
this in another Essay. Eadem velle and nolle firma amicitia est, as a certain
Historian speaks: And Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est, to speak with the
Comedian, are very excellent Sentences, and very reconcilable with one another:
For it is true, that to have the same virtuous Resolutions which cannot
contradict one another, is the Foundation of a firm and sound Friendship; and
it is as true, that to let our Vices, which are opposite to one another, draw
Blood from one another, is the way to dispatch the Traitors, and to bring you
to that Place where your Friendship will be no longer athletick, but like the
Union of the glorious Angels, will suffer no Interruption, and be too strong to
be broken by the conjoynt Forces of Hell.

CHAP. IX. The CONCLUSION. Exhorting Christians to a Conscientious Use of the
whole Book.
MY Discourse is now almost expired, all that is yet remaining is the
Exhortatory Part: And since I have done my poor Endeavors, I hope, Christian
Reader, I may without Offense humbly mind thee of thy Part. To read Books like
Cormorants of Novelty, only out of Curiosity, and an Insatiable Thirst after
New Notions, is rather to strive to be singular, than to be good. When the Mind
is made Tid by a multiplicity of Books, and our Life, instead of being improved
and formed more regularly, becomes superciliously more and more neglected;
Reading is so far from Benefitting, that it does great Mischief to the
Perusers, for to him that knows God's Will and does it not, to him it is Sin. I
do therefore earnestly exhort thee, Not to suffer these Leaves to increase thy
Condemnation, by a cursory and fruitless reading of them. Think and consider
seriously of what has been writ, that thou may not repent in the End that
thou have bestowed so much Time, Candor and Patience on this rough Work.
Consider, I beseech thee, that Opportunity and Condescension are too valuable
to be flung away: They are rare and of great Price in every wise Man's-Eye, and
therefore it is Unpardonable Folly to be prodigal of them. And, if after due
Consideration, thou art convinced of the Reasonableness of the Counsels herein
given, join with thy sincere Well-wisher and say: The Lord prospers the Devices
of the Simple, and breaks in Pieces the (...) Mighty Spirits; blessed be the
Na^^^^ (...) Lord, How great are the contempt (...) they are Instruments in the
Hand of (...) great a Lord? O who is like unto the (...) God, who has his
Dwelling so high (...) humbles himself thus to behold the weak Contrivances of
his vile Creatures on Earth!

And I am inclined to believe, That if the Drift of this mean Performance be
answered by but a very few Christians, God may thereby be moved to enable thy
sincere Friend to write with that Clearness and Vivacity hereafter, which I
ingenuously own are very much wanting in the present Work: Nay, perhaps, if the
Reader, though not out of Kindness to me, yet for the Sake of the Subject, and
the Public, will be so wise as to connive at the Deformity of it, some great
Master of this Faculty may at length be prevailed on to take the other Acts of
Spiritual Beneficence into their own Hands: For they know the Worth of their
own Time and Labor too well to run that Hazard which the mean do. But indeed I
have found so much Repulse in this Affair, that I have almost condemned all
such Hopes for Dreams and deceitful Expectations. We do not see the Nakedness,
Poverty, Filth and Dangers of our Souls, as we do those of our Bodies: Were the
Informations of patient Thoughts as obvious and as easy to be got as those of
Sense, 'twould be otherwise; but since it is not so, I don't wonder that so many
Persons, whom God has blessed with excellent Parts, when they have no set Seasons
of serious Meditation, should flight those Subjects which immediately relate to
the Improvement of the Soul, whilst to pleasure some corrupt Patrons and lewd
Opinions of this Age, for the sake of a little vain Applause and less Profit,
they have dressed up Vice and Debauchery in all the Gallantry of Wit and
Expression* to the great Disadvantage of Religion, and the Dishonor of a
Christian Kingdom: But not to distract the Good, or enrage the Bad with any
more Reflections of this Nature; Let, I earnestly entreat thee, Love be without
Dissimulation: Speak the Truth from the Heart one with another, for we are
Members one of another. Abhor that which is Evil, and cleave to that which is
Good: Follow after Charity, for this is the way to possess your Souls in Peace.
Do good and reprove according to your several Opportunities: Walk worthy of the
Vocation wherewith you are called, with all Lowliness and Meekness, with
Long-Suffering, forbearing and curing one another's Disorders. Walk in Love, as
Christ, who gave himself for us, that ye may be angry and yet not sin: That ye
may reprove, and yet put away from you all Bitterness, Wrath and Clamor, with
all Malice; being hind, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for
Christ's sake has forgiven you: Learn to be impartial, and to converse with
all Godly Simplicity in the World: Walk as Children of Light: The Fruit of the
Spirit is Righteousness, Goodness and Truth: Wherefore prove what is acceptable
unto the Lord. Let no corrupt Communication proceed from you, but that which is
good and edifies, and will minister Grace to those that hear. And that you may,
when your Friend strikes you on the one Cheek [any tender part] turn the other
also [be ready still to be disciplined for some other Sin which does most
easily beset you] submitting to him in the Fear of the Lord. Be sure never to
grieve the Spirit of God. Christians, Be not wise in your own Conceits: Be not
lofty in your own Eyes. We stand here in the midst of Snares and Enemies,
whether we be in Honor or Dishonor, whether we abound or are in Want: We
wrestle not only with Flesh and Blood, but with Principalities and Powers, with
Spiritual Wickedness in High Places, and therefore had need stand in a watchful
Posture: The Devil accuses us before our God Day and Night: Is it not therefore
prudent to link together, to sympathize with one another's Infirmities? To be
weak with our Friends when they are weak, to burn when they offend, after the
Example of S. Paul? Sin is the Adversity of the Soul, and therefore the sorest
Adversity of all: The Spirit of a Man may sustain his Infirmities, the Soul may
be above all External Calamities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Nothing
can give the Soul any lasting Support, under Guilt. Misery will cling for ever
about the Spirit, unless that be removed: Now it cannot be removed any where
but here: So that it is in vain to think of Relieving a Friend under this
Adversity in the other World, as the Devil, who makes it his Business to throw
us into it, very well knows, when he suggests Delays to us, if he finds us
inclined to help one another out of it: Let us therefore speedily unite our
Endeavors, and not be so base as to disown our Friends in the dark Season of
Adversity: To day it is not too late: To Morrow it may be so. Let us
countermine him in his own Way, by accusing our selves and one another, that by
our Humiliations we may deliver our selves from the Power of Sin here, and the
dreadful ways of it, even Eternal Torments in the other World. When we use our
best Counsels and Endeavors both by our selves and with one another, we may
reasonably trust in God, and in a pious succumbency on his powerful Grace and
Spirit, promise our selves a Victory, if we continue unto the End. But proudly
contemning such a mighty Enemy, and a lazy Relyance on God, who has made us
Creatures capable of Vigilance, Activity, Counsel, and assisting one another's
Souls, will not avail us now, nor answer for us before the Final Tribunal.

This is not a Place of Ease and Rest: We have many Corruptions to subdue:
There is no Possibility of living without some Interruptions of our Peace, some
Thwarts and Rebukes, till we are arrived thither, where there will be no such
thing as Improvement, but we shall always enjoy that degree of Glory, with
which we are inverted at our first Entrance. But here the best Man may excel
himself and daily find some Occasions of Alteration in his Life. The Sensual
only seek Rest in this World, and therefore think much to be in the least
disturbed in the Enjoyment of their Lusts. They are impatient of any Let in
the Career of Concupiscence: The Reason of this is because they have shook off
the Reins of Reason; but a wise Man has regard to the End. And for that Reason,
how irksom soever the Method of Frienship, which has been now proposed, may be
to the Flesh, he will readily embrace it, since 'twill prove, after
considerable continuance in it, Sanatary of the Spirit, and Perfective of the
Man. Religion at first walks with its Subjects by crooked Ways, brings Fear and
Dread upon them, and torments and searches them with her Discipline 'till they
see the Beauty of her Laws, and she can trust their Souls, refined as Gold in
the Furnace, without Curb and Restraint: Then she ravishes them with ineffable
Comforts, and that Peace which is the Secret of the Saints: Before the last
solemn Tribunal, the Tribunal of an honest Friend will be an entertaining Image
to the Memory. When the outward Man decays, the Renovation of the inner Man
will be a great and inestimable Staff to the Heart: When we are visited by
extreme Sickness, the captivating Prospect of our Admission into a Place, where
all Society is of a gratulatory Nature, where we shall be above the Aids of all
Discipline and Ordinances; where all Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes; where
we shall converse only with God, Christ, good Angels and glorified Human
Spirits irreprehensibly, and every Reproof will be multiplied into Myriads and
Myriads of Gratulations, will more than compensate our Loss (to speak for once
in the Dialect of the Earthly) of the transitory stinging and allayed Pleasures
of Sin.

Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ sanctify your Spirits, Souls
and Bodies, and strengthen you in every good Work and Word; and pour his Grace
plentifully upon you, that you may be fit to Reprove and receive Reproofs from
one another in all Lowliness and Love; that your Love and Friendship may abound
more and more in all Judgment; that you may approve all things that are
excellent, and be sincere and without Offense till the Day of Christ, being
filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the
Glory and Praise of God, Amen; For his beloved Son's sake, who dyed for our
Sins and rose again for our Justification, and to make us zealous of good
Works.

Applicatory Collects of Devotion
I. For Purity.
DEar Jesus who wast the great Exemplar of Holiness, when thou did condescend
to wear Human Nature, and who did dye for lapsed Man, that they might be
capable of Pardon for their Fall in Adam, and of Regeneration and Purity, by
the Assistance of the Holy Spirit: Deign, I beseech thee, to send that Spirit
to breath upon me, that I may be Holy and Pure in all my Conversation, as thou
wast, and may utterly detest* Familiarity with any kind of Wickedness whatever.
Give me a clear Sight of the Deformity of all Sin, and of the unvaluable Worth
of a Soul, that I may purify my self from all filthiness both of Flesh and
Spirit.

II. For Catholic Benevolence.
GRant, Heavenly Father, I beseech thee, that by the Residence of thy Holy
Spirit in my Heart, all the Christian Graces may flourish there, and adorn my
Life more and more every Day, till my Love of God be fixed and immutable, and I
can truly say, I have an universal and entire Love for all Mankind.

III. For Prudence in the Choice of a Friend.
TEach me, good God, to know the Weakness of my Frame, and the Treachery and
Uncertainty of this State and all that therein is; and since I can be useful
but to a few, point out and procure to me the fittest Objects of my Love, and
Receptacles of my Secrets; that my Choice being approved of by thee, I may
never have Cause to repent of my Contracts, but may daily find fresh Occasions
of lauding thee on their behalf, who honor or benefit me by their Intimacy.

IV. For Fidelity and Gratitude to a Friend.
INstruct, Incite and Enable me, O Lord, I beseech thee, frequently to manifest
the Sincerity and Briskness of my Love to all those who have been Ministers of
Good to me under thy gracious and wakeful Providence. O never suffer me to
provoke my Conscience to upbraid me of Unkindness, Ingratitude and Treachery to
any, to whom I have betrothed my Soul, and from whom I have received many
Pledges of Love. Treasure up their Kindnesses securely in their Memory, and
give me Power to make suitable Returns to them: And because all other
Usefulness will not suffice to make them Happy unless they be Virtuous, and use
their Opportunities and Prosperities to thy Glory; make me abhor all Flattery,
Dissimulation, and hypocritical Love or Complacency which may entitle me to
connive at any sinful Action in my Friend. Give me Courage to frown in due
Season; and when my Contract cannot but be violated unless my Affection for
him, in Subordination to the Love of thee, Great God, feel a Medicinal
Interruption; suffer me not, O Lord, to turn my other Kindnesses into Curses,
by withholding Seasonable Reproofs, lest we prove eternal Enemies to one
another in an eternal Banishment from the Light of thy Countenance: From which
good Lord deliver us.

V. For Peace.
THat my Reproofs may work benignly and fruitfully in his-Soul, I do with the
lowest Prostration of Soul and Body implore the Pardon of all my past and
notorious Offenses, and the Auxiliaries of thy Grace and divine Spirit in the
Hour of Temptation, against all presumptuous Wickedness, that it may never
domineer over me, and hinder me by a Load of intolerable Guilt, from being able
cheerfully to attempt to rescue my Brother out of the Talons of Sin. Give me
that peaceable and quiet Spirit, which is not only a Recommendation of Reproof,
but an universal Ornament of every Christian.

VI. For Spiritual Love and Spiritual Joy.
BEautiful Creator of Spirits! inflame me with an unextinguishable Love of
thee, that I may obey all thy Commandments; and when I reprove or do any thing
else in compliance to thy known Will, I may have an Eye to thy Glory, and the
Pleasure of my Friend, as far as it consists with thy Favor, and not
idolatrously pay Homage to a private carnal Humor. O may it not be thy
Servant's Lot ever to cringe at the Beck of Malice, restless Envy, or an
unreasonable Jealousy, or to have Ears greedy to suck in Complaints against
him. But grant that all the Offenses of my Friend may be matter of uneasiness
to me, and so every Reproof be matter of manly Self-denial; that Reproof may be
my strange Work, as Judgment is thine.

VII. For Gentleness.
MAke me Affable, thou God of Bowels, easy of Access, and easy in
Conversation, always ready to yield in matters of an indifferent Nature; that I
may never unhinge my Friend's Mind, but when his having done something, which,
if unrepented of, will alienate him for ever from thee, the Fountain of Peace
and Felicity, urges me, from a Principle of judicious Love, to rouse him out of
a dangerous Lethargy of Soul.

VIII. For Goodness.
FUrnish me, O thou giver of every good Gift, with Judgment to counsel my
Friend in his Doubts, Knowledge to instruct him in his Ignorance and dispel his
Errors, that he may not be led captive by thorny Scruples and heretical
Opininions. Capacitate me to comfort him on the bed of Sickness and in
tempestuous Times, when his Mind is disturbed by dismal Representations. Make
me free of Hand to him in Danger and Poverty, and liberal of my Strength and
Possessions for his Help. And because I am a Fellow-Subject to the same
Infirmities with himself, raise both our Eyes to thee, O Lord, who art a
present Help in Time of Trouble, when the deepest Policy, the closest Fidelity
of Friends and even Princes cannot supply us. Supply me, I beseech thee, with
Largeness of Heart and undaunted Faith, and an inexhaustible Spring of Charity,
Hope and Tears, before thee, my God, in my Intercessions for him.

IX. For Faith.
Honor me with that Faith with which thou rewardest a sacred Intention, and
which will free me from Pride and Self-Confidence on the one Hand, and a
servile Distrust and Despondency on the other Hand, that I may enjoy that
equanimity which he that is unfettered from all immoderate Passions, and
adheres only to thee by an humble Application of Christ's Merits, and an
universal Conformity to his excellent Laws, only can enjoy.

X. For Meekness.
BEstow on me, finally, my Long-Suffering, though offended God, Meekness to
Reprove with Humility, a Sense of my own Weakness and Lability, which will
direct me to reprove with that Tenderness which the Frowardness and Infirmities
of a Patient require, that I may constantly remember how ill Majesty comports
with a Sinner, a Friend, and a Brother, and may not provoke him to be
inconsiderate and to trample on my Reproof. And that I may be always ready to
receive his Seasonable Reproofs with a grateful Mind, that our Defects may be
every Day both less in Number and less in Appearance, and our Excellencies and
Virtues may be still more and more illustrious and Exemplary, till we shall be
both translated into that State where Virtue will cease to be gradual, and
receive an unchangeable Perfection. Which Favors I beg in the Name and Words
of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, not only in our own, but in the
behalf of all Mankind, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. FINIS.

