(...) OR The IMAGE of the BEAST, Showing, by a Parallel Scheme, what a
CONFORMIST the Church of ROME is to the PAGAN, and what a NONCONFORMIST to the
CHRISTIAN CHURCH, in i'ts Rites, Service and Ceremonys, the better to Exemplify
the True and False CHURCH.

By T. D.

Obed. 6. How are the hidden things of Esau sought out?

Dan. 3. 17. 18. Our God whom we Serve, is able to Deliver us, and he will
Deliver us: But if not, be it known that we will not Serve your Gods, Nor
Worship the Golden Image that ye have set up.

Rev. 14. 9. And the Angel said with a Loud Voice, If any man worship the Beast
and his Image, and Recive his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the same
shall Drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which shall be poured out without
Mixture, in the Cup of his Indignation.

Printed in the Year, 1684.

READER.
You have here a brief and I hope Satisactory account (from many Learned
Authoritys) of the Rise and Original of many of the Rites and Ceremonys now in
Question (which have and do occasion so much trouble, and distress) the only
right way to end disputes, and which was the method Christ took with the
Pharisees, Mat, 19. 8. And which Dr. Pierce so wisely observes from him, in
confuting the Papists. Whereby it is easily discerned what is from above and
what from beneath, what from God, and what from Man. This proves their Rise,
and Birth, to be many hundred Tears before Christ, therefore not from him for
Christian Service.

The learned Causabon in his Original of Idolatry (Writ in French and collected
(as his Epist tells us) from Elasopolitanes Commentaryes, Translated by Mr.
Darcy) Says P. 73.

That the maine and principal parts of the Mass are digested and brought in by
Numa Pompilius, [the 2 King of the Romans, a great Magician about 700 years
before Christ, P. 37.] The sarthar Additions were Invented, by other Roman
Pontiss, and especially by a Monk called Gregory, the 1st of that Name, who
attained the Papacy being Instructed in Pythagoricall Magic and Philosephy,
having also studied the Laws of King Tullus Hostilius successor to Number4, and
to the end he might Perpetuate his Name, Instituted diverse additions to the
Mass, etc.

You have therefore (for your better Information) this parallel Scheme here
presented to you, of the Pagan and Papal, Rites and Ceremonys, where you find
the great Harmony and agreement thatis between them theirin (The Child being
not more like the Father, then Rome Papal is to Rome Pagan, in its
Ecclesiastical Rites and Service) and therefore is it not significantly by the
Holy Ghost shiled the Image of the Beast? Rev. 13. 14, 15. etc. And did it not
prove the healing the deadly wound given to the Dragonical Beast? verse 4. And
who you will find not to be in greater Conformity to the Pagan, then in
Nonconformity to the Christan Church, of which you have a brief Prospect from
the Scripture. The true Standard to try and judge all Images and Idols by.

But you will say, why do you give the Heathen the Denomination of a Church, Is
that proper? Yes why not? Do not you read of the Church of Evildoers? Ps. 26.
And Synagogue of Satan? Rev. 2. And I know no reason why Rome Pagan the Mother,
may not be so called as well as Rome Papal, the Daughter, who fetches so much
of her Ecclesiastical Policy, Church Rites, Services, and Ceremonys, from
her; But did not Pagan Rome kilChrist, and disown Christianity which Papal Rome
did not? It is trve Rome Pagan, did Murder Christ in his person, and so does
Rome Papal in his members, which is kiling him a fresh, and tho in words they
seem with Judas to say hail Mr. And kiss him, with a Jesu Jesu, yet in works
they deny, betray, fell, and Crucify, himand by Blasphemous Traditions, and
Impious Superstitions, make void his whole Law, usurp his Throne and Authority,
sit in the Temple of God as God, changing times, Laws, Ordinances.

As to the Authoritys to justify each Particular, which you might have expected
under eachhead, I must referr you to a larger Piece, treating theirof, which
does it very distinctly, this being but an Epitome of it, though in the general
you may understand the following Authors have been consulted hereupon, viz.
Plutarch in Numa, Tacitus, Titus Livius Decad, Pliny Alex ab, Alexander, Blund
De Rom triumph, Durandus, Darcys translation of Cousabon, Dr. Moors, Mistry of
Iniquity. And that (...) worthy and most Excelent piece called Pagana (...) etc.

Thine in the Service of Truth. T. D.

(...) OR The IMAGE of the BEAST.
Showing by a Parallel Scheme what a Conformist the Church of Rome is to the
Pagan, and what a Nonconformist to the Christian Church, in it is Rites Services
and Ceremonies.
The Dragonical or Pagan Church Consists in, viz. The Beastly Papal Church
is conformable to the Pagan in The Christian Church consistoth in, viz. 1. It Is
Head. 1. It Is Head. 1. It Is Head. The Emperor of Rome presiding by the Policy
of Hell, over all Ecclesiastical affairs as well as Civil, was called Pontifex
Maximus or high Priest; to whom was given Divine Honor and prostration at his
Feet: And as head of the Church or high Priest had first Fruits. Annates
Oblations, etc. paid him and also a Purpurate Synod or Princes in Purple to
assist him. The Pope of Rome presiding by the Policy of Hell, over all
Ecclesiastical affairs; clayming the Civil also is called Pontifex Maximus or
high Priest; to whom Divine Honor is given and prostration at his Feet: And as
Head of the Church and High Priest has first Fruits. Annates and Oblations,
etc. paid him; And a Purpurate Synod, viz. Cardinals in Purple to assist him.
Neither Emperor, Pope nor King, but Christ himself to whom the Father has
committed it, having purchased it also with his own blood, who as High Priest
and King is the alone Author and Institutor, of it is Order, Rule and Worship,
with all things that belong thereto, and necessary to be Observed therein. To
whom Divine Honor is duly paid: God blessed for ever the Government upon his
Shoulders, without any Catholic Vicar to assist. Secondly it is Members.
Secondly it is Members. Secondly it is Members. The Members and parts of the
Church were the parts of the Empire, as divided into ten parts; Horns or
Kingdoms. And those ten Kingdoms distributed into Nations, Provinces, Diocese
and Cures, under respective Governors. Civil-Military, and Ecclesiastical. The
Members and parts of this Catholic Church, are the parts of the Empire, as
divided into ten Horns or ten Kingdoms. And those ten Kingdoms distributed
into Nations, I'rovinces, and Diocese, and Parishes, for the better
Administration of Papal Juris diction The Members of the Christian Church are
not any Empire, Region, City Diocese, or Province, but only such of the
faithful, or believers in all parts of the World, who are called to visible
Saintship and orderly put together into distinct Congregations, as Christ has
directed in the New Testament. 3dly, The Gods they Worship. 3dly, The Gods they
Worship. 3dly, in Worshipping the true God, only and truly. Besides their
Supreme God Jupiter, or Jove, whose name they derived from Jehovah: the
Governor of Heaven and Earth, They had diverse inferior Deities, Gods* and
Goddesses, whom they divinely worshipped, viz. Diva Vesta, (Juno or Luna) the
Queen of Heaven (and Mother of God) with Saturn, Mars, Venus, Mercury, Phoebus
Beacchus, Vulcan, to whom they as their Numens Heroes or Intercessors built
Temples, erected Alatrs and Statues. Dedicated Feasts, and called the days by
their names; They had Doemons Ethereal, and Tutular Gods and Goddesses, to be
applied to, by several Vocations, Country's, Cities, Families, Orders, Sick
Persons; As Divus Neptunus for Mariners, Divus Pan for Shepherds, Diva Pales
for Husbandmen, Diva Flora for the Curtisan, Diva Diana for the Huntsmen, Divus
Esculapius for the Physician, Divus Bacchus for the Good fellow, Divus
Mercurius for Tradsmen; They had gods for every Family, Country City, Decease,
as Cant, sicat, Era, etc. Besides in the Pontifex Maximus, and Synod, was
placed the right of Apotheosis, or God making, viz. to create and Inrole some
deceased, worthy in the number of the Gods to whom Temples, Altars, Orders, and
Statues were appointed, and Festivals in their names celebrated. Besides the
Supreme God Jehovah, the Governor of Heaven and Earth they pretend to
Worship, they have diverse inferior Deities, Gods and Goddesses whom they
divinely Worship, viz. Diva or Sancta Maria the Queen of Heaven (and Mother of
God) with Divus Petrus. St. Paul, St. John, St. Thomas, St. Stephen, St.
Andrew, etc. To whom they as their Numens, or Intercessors, build Temples,
erect Altars, dedicate Feasts, paying also so much reverance to the Pagan Gods,
as to keep up their Names in the Day's of the Week, viz. Sunday, Monday,
Tusday, Wedensday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday. They have also Tutular and
Ethereal Gods, and Goddesses, to be applied to by several Vocations, Countries,
Citys, Families, Orders, Sick-Persons, as Divus or St. Nicolas for the Mariner,
St. Windoline for the Shepherd, St. John Baptist for the Husbandmen, St.
Magdaline for the Curtisan, St. Hubart for the Huntsman, St. Crispian for the
Shoemaker, etc. The City, Country, Family, and Physic Gods are innumerable.
St. George for England, St. Denis for France, St. Mark for Venice. etc. Gods
almost for every Disease, Besides the God making power, that is in the Pope and
Cardinals to canonize what deceased worthy, they please and to appoint them
Temples, Altars, Orders, Festivals. Though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven or in Earth (as there be Gods many, and Lords many) But to us
there is but one God; the Father of whom are all things and we in him. And one
Lord Jesus, by whom are all things and we by him; 1 Cor. 5. 6. Make no mention
of the names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy Mouth, Ex. 23.
13. Thou shall have no other Gods besides me, thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or
Earth beneath. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them; for I
the Lord thy God am a Jealous God; Ex. 20. 4, 5. What agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God? Wherefore come out
from amongst them, and be ye separate says the Lord and touch not the unclean
thing, etc. The things which the Gentles Sacrifice; they Sacrifice to Devils
and not to God; and I would not that you should have Fellowship with Devils; 1
Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 4thly. The Places of their Worship.
4dly, The places of their Worship. 4dly, In it is Worship, respecting place.
Temples or Fanes both rich and magnificent, they built in the names, and
dedicated to the honor of their Gods; As the Temple of Jupiter, the Capital of
Rome was dedicated to him. Vesta the Q. of Heaven, and Mother of God, had a
Temple, and Nunnery, dedicated to her; And so had all the rest of the Gods.
Saturn, Mars, Venus, Diana, Minerva, Neptune, Apollo, etc. Yea, one to all the
gods called PANTHEON. They build their Temples East, and West, Worshipping
toward the East. By their Auguri, and Auruspices, With many Frayers,
Ceremonies, and Solemnitys. they consecrated first the Ground, and then the
Temple, upon which it was built: Altars were erected in them, and sumptiously
adorned, and Statues placed in them with lighted Candels which they Worshipped:
A Feast of Dedicaiton was Annualy kept to the Honor of the Demon, the Temple
was dedicated to, which after their Rligious Rites were over, was spent in
Revelling and Jollity: And This as Gods House, they paid great Reverence to.
They Enjoyed the Temples of the Heathen, only new consecrated and dedicated
them to their own Gods to whom they gave new Names at their Christnings, As St.
Saviors for Jupiters, St. Mary's for Vestas Temple, And so for the rest of
their Gods, St. Peter's for Apollo's St. Paul for the Temple of Diana (so it was
at London) St. Nicolas, for Neptunes, And all Saints, for PANTHEON. They build
new Temples, East and West, and Worship as the Heathens did toward the East:
And do by their Priests consecrate first the Ground, Then the Temple, upon
which it stands; Altars are erected in them, and sumptiously adorned, and
Statues, placed on them with lighted Candels, which they Worship; a Feast of
Dedication is annually kept to the Honor of the Saint, the Temple is
consecrated to, which is spent with Revelling and Jollity. And this as Gods
House they pay great Reverence to. There having been no conse crated place, or
holy Ground since the dissolution of the Temple, by Gods appointment to build
Temples, or holy places for Worship. The true Worshipers, who worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth, are truly his Church, and House, where ever they
meet, be it in Wood, Field, House, or Barn; so says the Apostle, with all who
in every place call upon the Lord Jesus Christ our Lord; 1 Cor. 1. 2. Whose
House are ye. Heb. 3. 8. The most high dwelling, not with Temples made with
Hands as says the Prophet; What House will ye build me? Or what is the place
of my Rest? Who Filles Heaven and Earth, Act. 7. 48, 49. No Altars and Candels
Worshipping East and West, or Feasts of Dedications in Christ's Church, being all
Pagan and Papal inventions. 5ly. The times of their Worship. 5dly, The times of
their Worship. 5thly, In respect to the time of Worship. They divided their
days into Fasti feast days, Profaesti Working days, and Intercisi hase holy
days; The feast days they dedicated, in the Names, and to the Honor of their
Gods werev ery many, some of their Capital Feasts were these, viz. Their
Saturnalia, kept several days together in December, with Eul-game, Mrs. of
Misrule, Mascarading; and all Debocheries, adorniag their Temples, and Houses
with green Leaves, and Boughs, The Epiphony, (from the appearing of their Gods)
Their Proserpinalia, or Feasts of Candles. In February Their Palelia, or
Shepherds Feast on Midsuner-day, Their Florialia on May Day, with great Jollity
by the young People of both sexes, scattering Boughs and Flowers, and Dancing
about May-poles, Their Ambervalia, or Procession, when they begged a Blessing
on their Gods, upon their Fields and Fruits; The Feast Easter to that Goddess
in April. They had their Bacchanalia, their Ceralia, their Venalia and their
Panathenea, a Feast to all their Gods. Canonical hours for Sacrifice, and
Devotion, and a Jubilee, or year of Rest They divided their days into Feasts,
Fasts, Vigils, and Working days (as their ^alender mentions) their Feasts
dedicated in the Names, the* And to the honor of their Saints (orGods) are
very many, some of their Capital Feasts are these, viz. Christmas (their
Saturnalia) Observed directly, both in time and manner as there is was, with
Eule-games, Mrs. of Misrule, Mascarad's, Debocheries, adoraing their Houses,
and Temples, with green Leaves and Boughs. The Epiphony Feast, as there is. Also
Candlemas the purification of the Virgin Mary. In February, as their
Proserpinalia, or Candle Feast. There St. John Baptist on Midsomer-day, as their
Palelia, Also Philip and Jacob on May Day, kept as their Floras Feast, time,
and manner, Also procession, or Perambulation, in Rogation Week, time and
manner with their Ambervalia; Also the Feast of Easter, time, name, and manner,
They have their Whitsonales, for their Bacchanalia, Their Allsaints, for their
Panathenea, Canonical hours for Service, and a year of Jubilee for Rest. The
firist day of the Week is the Christians Sabbath, and the only standing time
for Rest, and Worship to be Observed Holy unto the Lord; The other six days
being appointed for Labor, As the forth Commandment Orders, viz. Remember to
keep Holy the Seventh Day, Six Days shall thou Labor and do all thy Work. The
Pope that changer of times says, Thou shall Labor but Three or Four Days; the
rest are his Holy days. No set times, either sor Feasts, Fasts or Vigils are
appointed by Christ, which are only to be Observed as accasion is Administered.
All their Holy days, and Festivals, celeberated in Honor of the Papal and
Pagan Gods, Numens, or Demons, are an abomination to the Lord, and a great
oppression to the Nations. God requiring but a 7th part of time for his public
Worship and Service; and they exact half, if not two Thirds of it for the
Worship and Sevice of their Idols. 6thly, Their Priesthood. 6thly, Their
Priesthood. 6thly, In it is Ministry. They had Superior Priests, viz. Flamins
and Arch-flamins, for Sacerdotall service in their Provinces, and Diocese, and
Inferior Priests, distinguished by dignified names, Tonsures, Orders, Habits,
the dignifyed Priests, were those who attended on the Capital Temples, as the
proper Priests of Jupiter, Appollo, Minerva, Vesta, Diana, Venus, Cybel, some
of which were called Dialia, Martialia, Querinalia, Augures, Saliens, Fecialls,

And more inferior Priests who had the care of the sacred Celebrations, in the
cures called Curiones, there were proper Habits, for all the Priesthood, and
particular Vestments, for their Divine Service, viz. Albes, Tunicles, Amicts,
they had Tonsures, and shavings, so the Priests of Isis, Diana, Jupiter, diverse
orders of Priests, whereof most Caelebate, to whom Marriage was prohibited as
the Priests of Vesta, Minerva, Appollo, and those of Cybil, who were castrated,
Elected, and concecrated according to the Ritual of Numa, and put in to their
cures, by the Pontifex, maintained, according to their Ecclesiastical
constitution, the Pontifs, by Annates, Oblations, and the Priests by Benefices,
Offerings, Obsequies, etc.

Their Priests were either superior, viz. Bishops and Archbishops, for
Sacerdotall service in Provinces, and Diocese, or Inferior, distingushed, by
dignifyed Names, Tonsures, Orders, Habits, the dignified clergy were those who
attended the Capital, or Cathedral Churches, as Deans, Chaptrs, Prebends,
Arch Deacons, And the more inferior Priests, who have care of Sacred
Celebrations, in the cures, or Parishes, called i Cureats, Parsons, Vicars,
Deacons, answearing their Curiones, they have proper Habits for the Clergy, and
particular Vestments for their holy ministrations, viz. Surplices, or Albes,
Chasubles, or Tunicles, Vailes, or Amicts, to which they add Coaps, Ephods,
Miniples, Zones, etc. They have Tonsuers, or Shaveings of their Orders, and
most whereof Caelebiate, to whom marriage is forbiden, Elected, and
consecrated, according to the Popes canons, and put into their Cores, by his
Authority, maintained according to their Ecclesiastical customs, the Popes by
Annates, Oblations, etc. The Priests by Benefices, Offerings, Oslations,
Obseques etc. In Christ Church there are only two sorts of Offices, and
Officers, (by his New Testament appointment) viz. Elders, and Deacons, the
Elders, to administer Ordinances, and Govern the Church.

And Deacons, to make Provision for, to visit, and take care of the Poor, none
of the Minestry, distinguished from the Layety, by Habits, or Tonsuers, which
are all Pagan, and Papal, Inventions, and Abominations. The prohibition of
Marriage being a Doctrine of Devils, Elected and Consecrated according to
Christ's cannons, by the particular Congrigations, wherein they serve Christ,
and according to Christ's Law, and primitive practice, are maintained by the
vollentary contribution of the Flocks they feed, and Rule, having no Benefices
or forced maintenanc of Tithes to live upon.

7thly, Their Rites and Ceremonies. 7thly, Their Rites and Ceremonies. 7thly,
Their Rites and Ceremonies. Their principal service compreh ending most of
their Rits and ceremonys, was called the Mass, whereof ten principal parts, viz
1. The Asperges, which was their Sprinkling with holy water at the Temple door,
all that attended that service for sanctification, 2dly, The Procession, when
the Priest in his Vest, shaven crown, Taper in his hand, carried about Shrines,
with supplication, and thanksgiveing, with Music. 3dly, Triming Altars, with
Clothes, Lights, and Images. 4dly, The Confiteor, making Confession, and
Supplication to the Gods. 5dly, The Vertegines viz. Antic postures, and
gestures, of the Priest at the Alter. 6ly, The Church Music, Vocal, and
iustrumentall putting up Canticles, Paeans, Collects to their Gods, with Organs,
Flutes, Vials, etc. 7thly, The Thurall part, Offering, Insence, Odours, and
Perfumes. 8thly, The Offertory, viz. Oblations, and Offerings. 9thly, The Round
host, or small round Loaves, given to the Communicants. 10ly, The conclusion,
with Ite missa est pronounced by the Priest they had many curvations, or
bowings, fastings, flagellations or, whipings, lying-wonders, by Sorcery, and
miraculous Appearing of their Gods, Dirges, worshipping toward the East. There
principal service comprehending most of their Rites and Ceremonies, is called
the Mass, where we sinde, 1. The Asperges, or Sprinkling with holy water, at
the Temple door, for sanctification, all that attend the service. 2ly, The
procession, wherein the Priest in his Vest, shaven crown Taper, in hand,
carries about the Relics or Shrines, with Supplication, and Singing, with
Music. 3ly, Adorning the Altars, with Cloths, Lights, Images. 4ly, The
confeteor or confession, 5ly, The Vertegines viz. Windings turnings, and
lifting up of the Priests hands. 6ly, Their Church Music vocal and
Instrumental, their putting up Songs, Collects, Anthems, etc. With Organs,
Flutes, Vials, voices. 7ly, Offering Insence with Odours, and perfumes. 8ly,
The Offertory or offerings. 9ly, The wafer or round Host, given to the
Comunicants. 10ly, the conclusion with Ite missa est pronounced by the priest,
they have curvations, Flagellations, penances, Lying wonders, dirges,
worshipping toward the East, They have also several additions, to the Mass, as
Letanys Epistles, Gospels, Canons, Tracts, Kiss-pix, crosses, Kneelings, etc.
No such things in Christ's service, by his appointment, as Liturgys, Letanys,
Church music, Organs, Flutes, Vials, Singing of prayers, Anthemes or collects,
no burning Incence, Odours, Tapers, Candles, upon Altars, no cringings
crossings, Kneelings, at Altars. bowing to the East, but praying in the Spirit,
and praising in the Spirit, And receiving the Lords Super, the Bread and the
Wine, according to his Institution, without all their Pagan and Papal
inventions and Superstitions. 8thly, Their Imposition, and Persecution. 8thly,
Imposition and persecution. 8thly, In it is Love Meekness. They violently impose
their service, and Ceremonies, not suffering the Dissenting Christians, to buy
or sell; persecuting them to confiscation and to Blood. They violently Impose
their Service, and Ceremonys, not suffering the Dissenters to buy, or sell, but
persecute them to confiscation and Blood. No forcible Imposition of Christ's
Service, no Persecution, corporal mulects, and punishments, upon Dissenters, or
gainsayers, but the exercise of all Love, Patience, and long suffering, with
Gentleness toward them.

FINIS.

