Die Sabbathi, 26 Maii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That all the Rents and Profits
of the Estates of all sequestered persons (not excepted from Composition) which
were due at Lady day last, or at any time since, and which shall be due on or
before the four and twentieth of June next, be retained in the hands of the
several and respective tenants of the said sequestered Lands, until the first
day of July next; and that the Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents
of Goldsmiths-hall; be required forthwith to give notice hereof to all
Committees and Sequestrators in the country, that the same may be observed;
And that it be referred to the Committee at Goldsmiths-hall to give order that
the Rents and Profits of the Estate of such Delinquents as have or shall
perfect their Compositions before the first of July next, which were due on the
five and twentieth day of March last, or that are or shall be due at any time
from thence before the first of July next, may be paid to such persons so
perfecting their Compositions as aforesaid.

Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliament.

Martis 29 Die Maii, 1649. Goldsmiths-hall, By the Commissioners for
Compounding, etc.
ORdered that the Vote of Parliament of the 26 of this instant May, for the
further detaining of the Rents and Profits of sequestered Estates, be forthwith
printed and sent into the several Counties of England and Wales: And all
Committees, Sequestrators, and other Officers whatsoever, are hereby required
to take special notice thereof, and to yield all due obedience thereunto, as
they and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils.

Jo. Ash.

London Printed by Richard Cotes.


