AN ORDINATION AND DECLARATION Of both Houses of PARLIAMENT sent to the Lord
Mayor of London, for the religious observation of the Lord's Day, commonly
called SUNDAY.

And a command from the Mayor, directed to all Churchwardens and Constables,
in every Ward in the City of LONDON, for the due execution thereof.

Also concerning the Election of certain new Captains chosen for the security
of the City, in these dangerous times, with the names of the said Captains,
chosen for the New Militia.

Also a Relation of a late tumult, happening in Chancery Lane, by certain
Gentlemen of Lincolnes-Inne, to the great disturbance and amazement of all the
Inhabitants.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. C.

London, Printed for John Hawes. 1642.

An Ordinance and Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, sent to the Lord
Mayor of London, for the Religious observation of the Lords day commonly called
SUNDAY.
THe good of the Commonwealth, consisting in the due and religious conformity
to the laws both of God and the King, which the Parliament, has and does with
vigilant and exact care, seek to promote by their prudent and pious
Consultations, they considering that nothing is more pleasing to God, and
consonant to the Protestant Religion, than the careful keeping of the Lords
day, and vindicating it from the abuses which are commonly committed by
profane persons, who despise all order and regular government concordant to
the purity of Religion, have heretofore formerly sought to keep it pure and
entire from all profanation, and the Mayor of this Honorable City of London,
duly weighing the premises aforesaid, being the religious observation of the
Lords day, has carefully took order for the same through all parishes, as may
appear by his special command hereunto annexed.

And as the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and strength unto a
Nation and Kingdom, prayer and supplication unto God, with the observation of
the Sabbath day, being the internal means to avert the imminent dangers now
threatening this Land, so the vigilant care of the City, considering the
present distractions of the times, and the disorderly tumults of ill-affected
persons, as that in Chancery lane, and endeavoring to restrain all eruptions
and civil mutinies, engaging the City into common danger, have therefore, for
the more assurance, and safety of the City, lately chosen and elected diverse
worthy and well-affected Captains, for extraordinary Military service upon any
emergent occasion, in whose knowledge, vigilance, and fidelity, they do for the
better security of the City, much confide.

The Names of these men elected Captains, being underneath inserted.

The Names of the Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeant Majors and Captains,
appointed by both Houses of Parliament, for the ordering and governing of the
New Militia for the preservation of the City of London.
Captain Ven, Captain Manering, Colonels;

Captain Roe, Captain Bradley, Lieutenant Colonels;

Captain Buxton Captain Shepherd Sergeant Majors.


The Captains Names.
Captain Sanders. Capt. Basse. Capt. Southern. Capt. Hanes. Capt. Langham.
Capt. Pane. Capt. Lane, Capt. Andrews. Capt. Back stead. Capt. Pinchon. Capt.
Stackhouse. Capt. Simmons. Capt. Player. Capt. Wilson.

An Order from the Lord Mayor of London.
FOrasmuch as the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, is of late, much broken
and profaned by a disorderly sort of people, by frequenting Tavernes,
Alehouses, and the like, and in carrying and putting to sale victual and
other things, and in executing unlawful games and pastimes, to the great
dishonor of God and reproach of Religion, whereof the House of Commons now
assembled have been pleased to take notice, and by their Order intimation has
been given, That the Statutes for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in
execution. These are therefore in His Majesty's name to will and require you,
forthwith upon the sight hereof, that you give strict charge and command unto
all and every the Churchwardens and Constables within your ward, that from
henceforth they do not permit or suffer any person or persons in the time of
divine service, or at any time upon the Sunday other then at dinner or
supper-time only to be drinking in any Tavern, Inn, or Tobacco-shop, Ale
house, or other victualling house whatsoever, nor suffer any Fruiterers or
Hearbe-women to stand with Fruit, Herbs, or other victual or wares in any
Streets, Lanes, or Allies within your Ward, or any other ways to put these
things, or any other to sale upon the Sunday at any time of the day, or in the
evening; or any milke-woman to cry milk on that day in any the streets or
places aforesaid, nor to permit or suffer any person to use or exercise upon
that day their labor in unlading their vessels of fruit, or any other goods,
or in carrying goods on shore, or in the streets, or in packing and loading
any goods, or to do any unlawful exercises and pastimes within your Ward; and
that express charge be given to every keeper of any Tavern, Inn, Cooks shop,
Tobacco-house, Alehouse, or any other Tipler or Victualler whatsoever within
your Ward, that hereafter they receive not or suffer to remain any person or
persons whatsoever, as their guests or customers, to tipple, eat, drink, or
take Tobacco in their houses upon any Sunday, other then that Inholders may
receive their ordinary guests or Travelers, and such like, who come or remain
for a time in their Inn for dispatch of their necessary business according to
the Laws of this Kingdom: And if any person or persons shall be found
offending in the premises, that then they be brought before me the Lord Major,
or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within this City to them,
they may receive such punishment as the Laws do prescribe, or as to Justice
shall appertain. And hereof not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at
your peril. This 27. day of September. 1642.

A Relation of a late Tumult happening in Chancery Lane by certain Gentlemen of
Lincolnes-Inne.
THe night as wellas the day is not exempted from nefarious practices; for on
the fasting-day night 28 of September, at 11 or 12 a clock, 9 or 10 Gentlemen
would violently have attempted to set fire on the Court of Guard-house in
Chancery Lane, taking thence away diverse boards; but by the sudden confluence
and flocking together of many of the Inhabitants of the Lane, they were
disturbed in their intent and opposed, so that they conglomorated and gathered
together to the number of 20 or 25, threatening sudden destruction to all
opposers. M. Lee an Apothecary being a spectator of this beginning mutiny, came
down to give Captain Brown information thereof, and desire his assistance,
who replied that there were at the Exchangesome City forces, but knew not
whether he should meet them oportunely or no; and therefore he would beat up
his Drums for security of his own men, while these distractions continued, and
matters were in the heat of agitation. Captain Lieutenant Flanes led 60 or 80
men into the Lane, not advancing any further, because he had certain
information of iminent danger and destruction. This doubtful retraction in the
Captain animated one John Reeve a Cook to be forward in this design,
desiring his staff out of his hand, and promising to lead them up boldly to
the Gates of Lincolnes-Inne, to affront and suppress the said Delinquents:
Whereupon, by his earnest persuasion, and forward preferring of himself, the
Captain at his instigation resigned and delivered him up his staff, who with
a valiant resolution conducted his men forward with his sword drawn and
elevated in his hand, victoriously captivating 3 of the delinquents opponents
prisoners, who had formerly transported by their own unjust passion, which
blinds judgment, inflicted disgraceful punishment on his man, insomuch as
they pumpt him most opprobriously for a trespass of words, in saying, that the
house that was building in Iack-an-apes-lane, and in Chancery Lane, was a Court
of Guard-house: Whereupon they presently carried him away, and in executing on
him their punishment of pumping, they upbraided him with many menacing
cominations, saying, that they would instruct his ignorance in the definition
and nature of a Court of Guard-house, and teach him to know what it was, and
after many bitter and reviling speeches, their anger being grown outrageous,
they conveyed him to the pump and pumpt him, which disgrace reflecting on his
Master must needs irritate and incense him much by this indignity thus offered
in this conflict and sudden mutiny, he said, John Reeve was wounded in both his
shoulders, the Inhabitants by this unexpected tumult were put into a great
distraction, fears and murmurs being always the consequents of such
temerarious rash actions; but because they were afraid to give impediment to
their trading, that private interest stopped the clamor and activity of this
disordered eruption of the Gentlemen, and the various accidents aforesaid,
though most certain and too lately done, were silenced. Thus discontentments,
though long stifled, daily break out in this Kingdom.

FINIS.

