An ENTIRE VINDICATION OF Dr. Sherlock, AGAINST HIS Numerous and Uncharitable
ADVERSARIES, To his Late Book, called, The CASE of Allegiance, etc.

Licensed, December. 30. 1690.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1691.

To the READER.
IT IS a ticklish Task I have undertaken, to write to justify the Man, and yet
not entirely to espouse his Cause, to vindicate the oppressed, and yet at the
same time not to maintain all his Proceedings; I say, this may look seemingly a
Contradiction to some Men, that carry not a due Charity in their Censures; but
to him that follows the pure and ideal Feature of Virtue, it will look as
rational and accountable, as the compleatest Vindication whatever.

Nor am I ashamed on this, to entitle this Treatise, to the style of an Entire
Vindication of the Doctor; for what tho the Doctor be not infallible, nor his
Reasonings the unalterable Standard of Wisdom? that is not a Character he ever
presumed at, nor that could ever be expected from him, the rational Vindication
to be expected therefore, either of the Doctor, or any Man else, is, that he
has kept in the track of Virtue, and preserved his sincerity entire; and if
that can be maintained, I presume, we may very well bear with a perfect Salvo
to the Doctor's Reputation; nay, and Parts too, notwithstanding he is not
infallible.

And methinks it grieves me here, that I am forced as it were to go between the
skin and the flesh, to seem to discountenance the Method of Mr. Per. and to
vindicate a Doctrine I can by no means approve of; methinks, I say, this seems
of great difficulty to me; for I always had too great an esteem for the English
Liberties, to disrespect their true Patriots; and on the other hand, injured
Innocence on the Doctor's side, has forced me to take his part against them.

Therefore Reader, excuse me that I do this Office for the Doctor, nor be
surprised, why I should do it, that am his Adversary in some things. Who was
that, that dared the fury of the Priest^ in the late Reign, in all their
Controversies, was it no the Doctor? Who was it durst then assault Popery, not
only with the vigorousest Reasons, but with his open Name to his Books, was it
not Dr. Sherlock? indeed, who was more eminent in all those Controversies than
he?

When the Bishop of London, and Magdalen-Colledge, became Confessors to the
late Tide of Romish Tyranny, and when Dr. Sharp was silenced, did he recant his
Proceedings, did he dread the imminent Dangers, or was he afraid of the
threatened Oppression, or did he not rather like a stout Champion for the
Church, stand unconcerned in the midst of these things? And must the Doctor
then, now, become the only Object of our Contempt, must a little point of
Casuism, make him too mean to live amongst us?

Are we all Protestants, are we all resolved against the Common Enemy, the
Romanists? If we are, I say, how can this method he accountable with our
designs? not, I say, that therefore we should through respect of Persons, let the
Doctor lead us blindfold; but as we should not, so we should not for our own
sakes, let every little Controversy ruin the Reputation of such a Man.

I cannot think the World fond to desire the Doctor to be an ill Man, that they
might make that out in matter of fact, and truth, that some of his Enemies have
too much already done in pretenses; I say, I cannot be so uncharitable; but if
they do not, let them for their own Credit treat him better for the future.

To be short, as for the general unreasonableness of his Tenets in this matter,
it is not the work of a Preface; however, thus much I shall say, that the
Doctor has not undeservedly the Name of an eminent Reasoner; and if in some
things his Notions are not exactly accountable to us, we have no reason to
admire; for had any of us laid our Breasts so freely open in our Writings, as
he has done, I may add, the best of us, it is not impossible, but that some of
the World, had we as great a Post, would give us as hard a Censure as ever the
Doctor had.

A VINDICATION OF Dr. Sherlock, etc.
WHEN a Man is unfairly Prosecuted and Libelled rather than Answered, and when
the Crowd of Mobile-Writers break in upon him, as if they would crush and
murder his Reputation with their Numbers, even his very Enemies, if they have
any Generosity, ought to step in to support him; indeed, it is the common Cause
of all Mankind not to see any man unjustly suffer, and therefore though in some
things I differ from the Doctor in Judgment, yet I cannot but rescue him from
those Aspersions that are so basely cast upon him.

But as his Adversaries are now grown to such a number, and their Arguments for
the most part a borrowed Tautology and Plagiarism from each other, that except
some few they almost all write the same thing, so I shall neither give my self
nor the Reader that trouble, as to trace out all their little crooked Paths,
but examining the sum of all their Objections against the Doctor, at least of
all those that are considerable, I shall briefly, and generally, as if they
were all but one, show how little he deserves their ill treatment, and how
eminent an Example he is of Innocence abused.

Without therefore particularly regarding either the Vindications or Answers
that the Doctor has had upon this Subject, for that were endless, and were too
perplexed a Method to do him Justice by; I say therefore, without hinting at
either Persons or Answers, I shall take the Liberty to make some few
Reflections on the chief Points in Controversy, in favor of the Doctor, and
if any of his Adversaries think themselves therein aggrieved, I Will promise them
they shall not want a reasonable Satisfaction.

But it may be objected, That under this Pretense perhaps I shall conceal or
slur over those things that may be most considerable, and only Vindicate the
Doctor in those that are obvious or trifling; I say as to that, the World will
judge, and will see when they have read what I write; but if at the entrance it
can encourage them to know whether I am not conscious to my own defects in it
or not, I assure them, I know nothing that is material that is objected against
him, but is reconcilable to the Doctor as a Learned, Ingenious, and Sincere
Man; and if his Adversaries can see any thing to the contrary, I shall leave
them to show it.

To proceed therefore, I say then first, is it generous for Twenty men together
to throng in their Answers to one Man? Indeed, is it not just as if they were
afraid of having Replies, or at best, that thrusting thus into the Throng, they
might escape the better for their being in the Multitude; and yet not I mean,
that I believe that all those Gentlemen that have wrote against him have had so
mean a Design neither; but I say in general, is it a Credit for any man to be
caught among the Mobile, and giving an Eminent Divine an ill Name, when at the
same time he has all Billingsgate upon his back?

Methinks, I say, these Gentlemen, for as for the others they scarce deserve to
be taken notice of; and therefore I say, methinks the choice and flower of the
Doctor's Adversaries, had they been brave, might have waited till the Doctor
had been in a capacity to Answer them, and not Assault him as they have done,
where they could have no rational prospect for a return; I would only ask them
one Question, when they so much as favor so dirty a proceeding in others, in
Writing after them, do they not as good as half take their Guilt upon them? Is
this their doing Justice to their Cause? Indeed, is this their doing as they
would be done unto?

In short, Gentlemen, supposing the Doctor in some measure to blame, and taking
it for granted he deserved your Answers, yet when some for Malice, some through
Mistake, and some for Gain, had thus meanly and disingenuously attempted to
deface his Reputation in what he deserved not, would you after this pretend to
any thing like Honor, and yet back them in their proceedings? Surely Sirs, for
the future, if Generosity cannot move you, yet Humanity, nay, your own Interest
and Reputation ought to make you more wary; methinks in such case, rather than
fail, you should Vindicate him your selves, at worst you should leave such
little Raylors alone to expose themselves upon him.

In short, Sirs, if you have a mind for the Reputation of Common Wittists,
Buffoons, and Mercenaries, write on; but if you have not, ingenuously retract
your Methods and Proceedings, and cease to Triumph at trampled-on Innocence;
and to vent your Spleens, where I am persuaded, had you better considered your
selves, and were you not rather Bruits than Men, you would turn your Assistance.

Besides, Gentlemen, give me leave to tell you, I mean some of the best of you,
I cannot accuse you all, for some of you have wrote as becomes Gentlemen, had
you not thronged your selves into the Crowd; but some of you, I am afraid too
many, have wrote as if you had neither Charity nor Justice in your Censures;
you have demeaned your selves like Tyrants in your peremptory Decisions, and
treated the Doctor no better than if he were the worst of Men.

I shall not hint at any particular Answers in this matter, because I had
rather smother than increase the flame; and though the Doctor's Adversaries
have had but little Charity in sparing him, yet his Friends think to take
another course, and as they apprehend would become him, are willing rather if
possible to overcome evil with good, and to show them whatever rash Judgments
they have been guilty of, they do not delight in Recriminations, though possibly
they might make them even with Justice.

However in general to point at some of your Guilts; and to show you I do not
write without good Grounds, pray but reflect a little: Christianity bids us not
think easily any evil of our Brother, but put the best sense and construction
upon his words and actions: but you will outface us, he means ill, though he
declares his sincerity; whilst you know after that, that none but God can
censure him, that alone knows his Heart. Thus one tells him, his Wife sways
him; another insinuates, that it is Preferments without his Wife; and a third,
that his Pride has born him to this singularity.

But, Sirs, whilst you did thus, I am afraid you forgot what might be said of
your selves, I mean justly of you that censure so; the Doctor may be in the
right, as I am persuaded he is, but you as false Judges must be in the wrong;
nay more, were the Doctor corrupt in his Protestations, which far be it from us
to think, yet if there were but a possibility that he might be sincere, I am
sure nothing can excuse you from the guilt of a mean, wilful, and uncharitable
Slander.

And I write this the rather, on the supposition of the truth of the worst
Character, that your conjectural thoughts can give the Doctor, because the
least lurking-hole may not be left for your Apology; in plain terms, to show
the World, that nothing but Brass, Impudence, and mere Jack-pudding Grin, can
excuse some of the Doctor's Enemies, and a dishonorable and uncharitable
Carelessness, most of the best of them in their proeeedings.

Had they in general showed the Inconsistency of the Doctor's Reasoning, and
the Danger of it to the State; and had they upon this exhorted him modestly to
re-consider, and thereon to renounce his new and ill-grounded Opinion, they had
acted something like Christians: but point blank, the first word, to accuse
even a Father in the Church of Corruption and Design, before any proof to
justify it, indeed before the offer of a Conviction by stronger Arguments; I
say, to proceed thus peremptorily and rashly, and to anticipate all hopes of
his vindicating himself in a Reply, through their unjust Sentence past upon him,
is to Execute him first, and Try him after; and a piece of Justice, that of
itsself alone, with any Man either of Honor or Honesty, were enough to
vindicate the Doctor.

But for once, I shall pass by these two little faults in the Doctor's
Adversaries; to wit, want of Generosity and Charity; for it is possible the
Absurdities the Doctor has committed in his Vindication, has fired them to
over-see themselves to this degree in their Answers: and therefore, because as
the Doctor's Friend, who I am persuaded would not serve them so himself, I
shall show them, I am willing to allow them all the fair Play imaginable, and
therefore we will see what it is they have to say to his Cause.

In the Doctor's Cause, then I say there are two things principally which they
are offended at; the First, That it is very disagreeable to the State. And the
Second, That it is unreasonable. Now as to both these, I shall give them brief
and solid Answers; and though, as I have said, I am not altogether of the
Doctor's Mind; yet it is because I think he has not a sufficient ground in
Revelation, and not in Reason, as his Adversaries charge him; and therefore I
do not doubt, I say, from their Principles, to show them, that they have but
little reason to be so offended with him.

As to the first of these two Objections, to wit, The disagreeableness of the
Doctor's Principles to the State, I shall return two Answers; the first, That
his Adversaries have abused him, and put a worse sense upon his words, when
they were very well capable of a better. And Secondly, That even in the very
sense they have taken them, they state an Hypothesis as agreeable to the State
as any of them, I may say the very best of them have proposed.

First then, I say, when the Doctor laid it down as a Principle, That whoever
was settled in a Government, I mean peaceably, and by consent, had God's
Authority, though he at first attained it by force; I say, when the Doctor laid
down these Propositions, what did he do, but as it were declare, that a King by
Conquest and Consent after it was a good King, and whether he were an Usurper
before or not, I challenge all his Adversaries to disprove his Title.

Now I say, when the Doctor's Principles can so justly resolve themselves into
a Conquest, and though not of the People, yet of the King, by, and through the
Consent of the People; I say, when the Doctor by this prudently chose a middle
way, to avoid the Scilla and Caribdis of Passive-Obedience and Resistance,
methinks his Adversaries might have been so ingenious, as to have understood
him so, and not to have pressed him to a nice decision, which be it pursued home
of either side, must needs offend the State.

Now whether what the Doctor in this Case has laid down, will amount to a Right
of Conquest or not, shall be made to appear more plainly by and by; but if it
does, as I do not question but I shall be able to make out, it is plain, how
disingenuously his Adversaries have dealt with him. Let him call it a Divine
Right, and let them expect him to call it a Legal Right; yet as what he has
wrote, has evidently amounted to a Right by Conquest, as good a Right as Mortal
need desire to possess in a just Cause; I say, as it amounts to that, and as
that is evidently the drift of the Doctor's Reasonings, methinks they needed
not to have distorted him from it.

But Secondly, even in their own way, in their tacking this Principle to
Passive-Obedience, and so endeavoring to expose it, with all the absurd
Consequences they can draw from both together; I say, even in that dress, it
appears more likely to be agreeable to the State, than any thing his
Adversaries have set up; in plain terms, the State has as much reason to be
disobliged at their Title, with its Consequences, from Resistance, and from the
Doctor's Title, and Consequences from Passive-Obedience.

The Doctor sets up Force and the Consent of the People, to transfer God's
Authority; and his Adversaries say, The Choice of the People gives a Legal
Right. Thus the Doctor seems to disoblige the Prince, by denying him verbally a
Legal Right: but his Adversaries do as bad, when they show him by Example, that
he is to bear Rule only Durante Beneplacito, of the giddy Mobb. But what? you
say his Adversaries Complement him with a Legal Right; it is true, they do: but
as their fickle Case stands, I don't know whether Dr. Sherlock's Divine Right,
and Passive-Obedience, may not be more acceptable to them.

And what then, is the Case come to this? The King then has surely great reason
to be beholding to these his Durante Beneplacito Men, and to be aggrieved at
the Doctor's Methods; they honor him with a Legal Right indeed: but they tack
it so to Abdications and Forfeitures, that a Man had better be Tenant at Will
to a good Landlord, than Absolute Monarch on such Terms, and to depend so much
upon every giddy relish of a factious Populace.

I say then, is this be the Case, as it manifestly is, with those that give the
King a Legal Right, from the Deposing the late King James, and the choosing
Their Present Majesty's; I say, if this be the Case, I am sure the Doctor's
Principles are not half so likely to be offensive to the Government, as his
Adversaries, and therefore on their own supposition, they have brought in this
as a Motive for their Writing, against all the sense and reason in the World.

In short, can his Adversaries have the Face to say, that when a Man has
acknowledged a King invested with God's Authority, without the words of Legal
Right, that he can half so much disoblige the Government, as he that lays down
Principles (or at least implies them) of Abdication and Forfeiture, Principles
that like the Arcana Imperii, at best ought to be kept secret, and not preached
abroad, if allowed, and that like Swords in Childrens and Mad-mens hands, ought
not too freely to be trusted in the hands of a giddy Populace.

Indeed, had his Adversaries but modestly urged, that he had better have
concealed his Reasons to himself, than so have urged them to offend the State,
I had agreed with them, had it been only on the probability, that what he has
wrote might have afforded offense; and yet not, I say, but that methinks too,
if he has given offense, by not granting a Legal Right, he has made it up again
by his Divine Right; and if what he has wrote may be taken in an evil sense, it
may also receive a better.

So that in truth, the suggestions of the Doctor's Answerers are to be blamed,
and not the Doctor; and indeed, whatever they pretend, the Government is as
much obliged to them, as a Man on Horseback to a Stander-by, that tickles his
Horse, when he knows he is used upon it to throw his Rider; and whether like
cunning Statesmen, in imitation of Watermen, they oppose the Doctor seemingly
for the Government; but really as they are against it; whether they Look one
way, and Row another, or not, I dare not be so uncharitable as to censure; but
as I dare not, yet this is manifest, and may be averred, this seems the natural
effect and tendency of their proceedings.

And indeed, this brings it to my mind, that the Doctor has Jacobite Enemies as
well as others, and may be could one see the bottom, one would find, that it is
from them that the greatest part of this Fire is kindled; and in truth, as
manifest as it is, methinks his other Adversaries should be ashamed to
persecute him as they do. St. Paul could rejoice, that Christ was preached,
though even in Contention, and really, did the most Loyal of the Doctor's
Adversaries, rather seek the good of the Government, than the mere resentments
of their Spleens and Factions, they would be glad, that the Doctor had brought
in this New Principle of Allegiance, were it only to bring over, if possible,
those Members that dissented from the Government for Passive-Obedience, and not
quarrel with him for the novelty of it.

And really when I consider this, methinks I cannot but admire to see, how much
Men are blinded by the fondness of Opinion, that they can rather bear to
sacrifice their Interest, than to allow the least latitude in their Casuistical
Decisions, that they will rather fright every body that is coming into the
Government, than embrace them, if not exactly of their Sentiments; in short, an
arrogant Tyranny, and as Enthusiastic, and as much against all the natural
Principles of Self-defence, as ever can be pretended of Passive-Obedience, at
the worst of it.

But to turn my Argument to those Jacobites, that under the pretext and color
of Passive-Obedience, would fain destroy our present Settlement and Allegiance;
I say, as to them, methinks the Doctor's Argument is as full and convincing, as
either they can expect, or the nature of the thing can bear; and it is well for
those, that the Doctor has so many Enemies to keep them in countenance, that
they might be the better able to withstand his Reasonings.

I say therefore, if the Doctor's Adversaries Arguments from the Right of
Resistance cannot move them; yet the Doctor's from the Right of Conquest must
do it; or else there is no Prince may be in the World, at least very few, have
any Rights, at best, originally to their Thrones. In truth, the Doctor's Right
by Conquest is as well the most comprehensive, as the most justifiable Title.
And indeed, the Doctor's King, settled quietly, and entirely by the Consent of
the People in possession, is the Resistances's Man King by a new Election; and
were the Quarrels about Words taken away, they would amount to just the same
thing.

No, but you say, it is the Election gives the Title, and not the Consent to
possession; I say, it is false: the Consent to Possession argues an Election,
though not a Formal one; and it is such an Election, that no Christian, I am sure,
can evade with a safe Conscience; indeed, without Men will be treacherous, and
that barbarously too, they owe Allegiance where they receive Protection, and he
must neither pretend to Generosity, Honor, or Conscience, that will not pay it.

A Generous Enemy will scorn to stoop to so mean a Dissimulation, a Man of
Honor would take the Field against such an Usurper, and a Man of the least
Conscience, would sooner die than he would play the Viper in the Fable, sting
him to Death that gave him warmth and life, or at the best pretense, do Evil
that Good might come, and ungratefully receive the Courtesies of a Friend, the
more basely to do the viler, I should say Offices unworthy of an Enemy.

Indeed Popery, as it has corrupted our Religion, so it has our Morals also,
and has made even Christians to do those things, that the honester Heathens
would blush at; but as they have, I hope we will not corrupt with them, and
think to conquer them by out-villaning of them; but rather bravely, at least
our selves, be good and honest, and deter them from their black and devilish
Practices, by a Vengeance and Resentment suitable to their Demerits.

In short, if there be either Laws or Rights of War and Peace, a Government by
Consent is as just as by Election, and as secure a bottom to found it (...);
and if Men are resolved to cavil, they may justlier do it at a Right through
Election, than Possession: for instance, When a Government is dissolved,
(pardon the expression) why am I bound to stand to any Man, or Councils
Election for me, why shall some Vills, and yet not some whole Cities, send
Members to Conventions? Indeed, were I not by the Laws of God, bound to study
and follow the best Methods of Peace, where were otherwise my Obligation to
these things?

And therefore I say, the Doctor's Argument, that as God manifestly allows,
indeed requires Changes in State, so he confirms the New Model, by its entire
Settlement, is irrefragable, against all the Attacks either of
Passive-Obedience, or Resistance-Men in the World, and the Objection about
Usurpers against it, is as idle as weak; in plain terms, we exclaim in
Complement to New and Rightful Princes, at the removal of Usurpers; but in
truth, whoever by Force, or otherwise, has once secured to himself peaceably,
the possession and enjoyment of a Throne, is at least to his Subjects as good a
King, as either the Right of Conquest or Election can make him.

Has the Usurper no Right, why do you transmit it then to him by a
pusillanimous submission; and why do you not at the first approach of the
wrong, fly to Arms and Councels to resist the Injustice, and to support the
injured Prince? But if basely you once sacrifice your Loyalty, and his Right,
by at least an implicit Contract of Allegiance; think you like a Coward and an
Arch-Traytor, afterward to reassume that Right you have resigned, and meanly
to take advantages from your own Villainy.

Nay more, to push this Argument home further, such a Title through Possession
exceeds all the Elections in the World, a quiet Possession shows a complete
Election, whilst a formal one, by a Convention, or otherwise, may be corrupt
and packt, and more unjust and illegal than the Tyrant and Usurper himself; in
plain terms, were any Convention or Parliament so packt, and can you think any
honest Subject thereupon bound to leave his Lawful Sovereign against his
Consent and Conscience? which it is evident, when either by inadvertency or
Treachery he has suffered an Usurper, even for but a Month to enjoy quiet
possession he is bound to do.

Having therefore I hope sufficiently cleared the Doctor hitherto, I shall try
to descend a little further, to free him from those Calumnies that are cast
against him from the Topics of Passive-Obedience, etc. not but that his
Adversaries, as I have observed have dealt very unfairly with him in this
thing; for when his Argument, as I have shown, might justly have been
maintained without the least thought of Passive-Obedience, or affronting the
Government; I say, what needed his Adversaries to bring in those things upon
it; indeed does it not seem merely as it were to calumniate him, as if they
would insinuate all that the Doctor has wrote is wrong, because we have already
prejudicated him in that one Error of Passive-Obedience?

I say therefore, as I am by all Circumstances hitherto convinced of the
Doctor's Integrity, and as this prejudice of Passive-Obedience is reflected
upon him, whether besides the purpose or not, at present I shall not regard;
but as I am resolved to vindicate him thoroughly, and as the prospect of his
Cause does not afford me any thing to discourage me, so I do not doubt but to
show his Adversaries, that for all what they have wrote against
Passive-Obedience, it is not so contemptible a Doctrine, that a Man should be
hooted out of the World for it, or that the Doctor should lose his Reputation
through professing it.

And I venture to write this, as I have said, though I do not believe the
Doctrine myself, for as the Arguments the Doctors Adversaries insist upon
against it are Irrationalness and Enthusiasm, and as mine is from quite another
Topic, the want of clear Revelation for it, I say as we reason quite from
different grounds, and as I apprehend his Adversaries grounds very
insufficient, I think I may justly vindicate the Doctrine as to them, though I
neither believe it, no^ desire to set it up myself; and this I conceive will be
a sufficient Vindication of the Doctor in the Case, that though he may be in an
Error* it is not so gross as they would suggest, nor indeed in any particular
like unto any that they have alleged against him.

Nor shall I in this Case make any Apology for the Doctor, that we might justly
bear with him in this prejudice, when a University, indeed a whole Kingdom near
once gave him its encouragement in it; and yet this methinks, I might justly
say to his Adversaries, surely, had their Zeal been so great merely against the
Doctrine of Passive-Obedience, they might have vented it, without flinging all
the Dirt of it upon one Man; indeed, to prevent them from the Uncharitableness
of particular Reflections, they would have done more honorably to have fell
upon the University itsself, that many Years since, burnt all the Propositions
in contradiction to it.

And as I shall not insist upon this prejudice, so I shall not upon another,
may I say, full as considerable, to wit, with what deliberation and thought,
Men of true Piety alter their Opinions; I say, I shall not insist on these
things, though yet I take the liberty to hint at them, be it only to show the
Doctor's Adversaries, that even these very prejudices, how trifling soever they
may appear, yet they might justly have moved them to a greater Moderation and
Charity in their Censures; but as I have said, I shall not insist on these
things, but arguing for the Cause itsself (for all the Objections that have
been made against it) I shall show, that it is neither so scandalous, nor so
senceless as has been imagined.

Now the better to do this, I shall state the Objections against this Doctrine
of Passive-Obedience, under two heads, viz. the first, The general
Unreasonableness of it. And the second, Its Enthusiasm. As for the
Scripture Proof of it, as I have said, I shall not so much concern myself about
it, because it has not been any ways made use of as the Foundational Argument,
and therefore, I say, I shall leave that to what the Doctor has already wrote
upon it.

First therefore, as to the general Unreasonableness of it: I would fain ask
the Doctor's Adversaries, what it is they think more reasonable. What,
Resistance? I say, it must be that, if any thing, for there is no mean; and
this is manifest, it is the Duty of the Clergy to acquaint their Flock of one or
other, when they consult them Casuistically; I say, therefore let us suppose
these two set together in comparison, and let us see which is the most
reasonable of them.

Passive-Obedience leaves all to the Fury of a Tyrant; Resistance to the Rage
of the Rabble: but you say, the Rabble may be restrained of such their Right of
Resistance, by (at least unjust) Laws (for so you must call them in such case);
and so I say, the Prince will be restrained from his Tyranny, by means of
Passive-Obedience, through the fear of an unlawful Resistance in his Subjects.

In short, you object the mischiefs that have ensued upon Passive-Obedience;
and I tell you, as great have followed the giddiness of Resistance; or if you
cannot believe what I write in this matter, on my bare asseveration, and want
an example, pray examine Matchiavel's History of Florence, and there you will
find it set out effectually; indeed, we do not see so many Examples of the
Tyranny and Mischiefs of Resistance in the People, as of the Arbitrariness of
Nero's; but the reason is, because that few States have been framed so, as to
tolerate such free Resistances, and which indeed is a plain and experimental
Argument, that one Tyrant is more tolerable and easy than many.

So that in plain terms, both ways are extremes, and equally unreasonable, and
if either be supportable, it is Passive-Obedience, which seems an Error on the
right hand, and in favor of Government; and yet for all that, in truth, the
Controversy is as dangerously touched on the one side, as the other, and the
Error of both sides is, that Men would vainly endeavor to bring the Actions of
Man to a steady Rule; when alas, he is too giddy a Creature, to bear it.

In plain terms, a Free State should neither suffer any Man to preach up
Passive-Obedience, nor Resistance; neither Passive-Obedience, I say, for fear
of slaving it, nor Resistance for fear of embroiling it; and indeed, if Men
have honest and peaceable Intentions, they may very well be content to preach
up Obedience to Governors, without touching at the nice Casuisme of it, of
either side.

Nor is it enough in such Case to say, that you can define the exact Rule of
Resistance, where, and in what Case it ought to be used; for the same may be
alleged for the Doctrine of Passive-Obedience; for even the Teachers of that
Doctrine have declared and limited the Authority of Princes also, that they
might not abuse their Power; I say, these defining and casuistical Decisions of
Resistance and Command, will do no more good on the one side, than the other;
for put the Sword either into the hands of the Prince or Rabble, there is equal
danger that either of them may abuse it.

I think therefore the Doctor's Adversaries have had but little reason to
charge him with the Unreasonableness of Passive-Obedience, when they set up
Resistance themselves; indeed, had they barely rejected Passive-Obedience as
unscriptural, and not endeavored by Reasoning to undermine it with a Doctrine
raised from Topics of a far worse consequence. I mean, had they insinuated to
him, that he had done better, had he relied merely on the Right of Conquest,
without hinting at Passive-Obedience; then, I say, they would have had the
Justice of the Cause of their side, and their Demands had been modest and
reasonable, and possibly what the Doctor would never have denied them, for the
very drift of his Reasoning tends the same way; but the Unreasonableness taxed
on his Principles from their Grounds and Reasonings, has not the least manner
of color for it.

The Second Objection that I am to answer against Passive-Obedience, is the
Enthusiasm of it; a Charge as I find flung upon it, because out of its abundant
Confidence in God, it flings a Man up into the very Jaws of Danger, without so
much as the very thought of Self-defence; I say, this seems a very formidable
Objection against Passive-Obedience; but when we come to handle it, it moulders
away to nothing.

Previously therefore to this matter, and to clear the Controversy about it, I
shall define what is properly Enthusiasm, and what not. I say, then to offer at
a private Revelation, or any private Rule of Faith from unwarranted Conceit, is
Enthusiasm; but only to trust the known Revelation, was never called Enthusiasm
properly, and by any Man of Sense that ever I knew yet.

I say therefore, the Doctor in following sincerely the Scriptures, though in a
mistake, is no more guilty of Enthusiasm, than his Adversaries are of Innocence
in slandering him with it. This may be indeed, the Doctor may be in an Error in
interpreting Scriptures, as I believe he is: and if he is, they would have done
well to undeceive him; but then, if they would, they should have studied to
have done it with that sincerity and candor, that their Methods might not
prejudice him faster, then their Arguments convince him; or else they would
have but little right left to the claim of Charity, and good Intention in the
case.

But methinks I hear it objected, That this Answer is not sufficient, that the
trusting in God, and omitting Self-defence still remains, and it is that is the
Enthusiasm; I say it is not, but it is Faith, and possibly not so unaccountable
a one as some Men imagine neither; indeed is there not an Example in the Jews
where a whole Nation thus trusted in God for their Deliverance, nay, and that
more then once too, and was delivered accordingly.

Nor is it an argument in such case, that because we have not seen any example
of such Deliverance of late, that therefore we may not expect it, if the World
be generally so vile as not to deserve such a Protection from God, shall we
therefore be wicked in despair of it, in short, because the coldness of Men's
faith has now reduced it to be perfectly without efficacy, shall we therefore
fling Faith itself aside.

But to illustrate this by Example: The Martyrs in Queen Mary's days they
trusted in God, and quitted their Self defense, nay, and that to a great number
together; yes, and more after that Queen Mary both corruptly, and contrary to
the most solemn Engagments, had violated the Laws, and persecuted them, I say,
after all this, yet they through their trust in God, quitted their Self-defence
and Right of Resistance, and yet no one that ever I knew, called them
Enthusiasts.

Indeed by the Principles of Resistance they might have concluded the whole
State, King, Queen, Lords, and Commons void, if not for their unjust Law of
destroying for Religion, mere Religion I mean, yet at least as the first had
broken their Trusts, and the latter were rather packed then legally called to
their Assembly, I say, by the Principles of Resistance they might justly have
concluded thus; but as they did not, and did not fly to resolve themselves to
their first Elements the Sovereign Lords the People, I say, though they did
not, yet I hope we may justly give them the Titles of Martyrs through Faith,
without branding them with Enthusiasm.

In plain terms, at this rate at last we shall drive Martyrdom out of the
World, and he will be reputed equally Fool and Coward that does not dye with
his Sword in his hand: Is Martyrdom in a great many private Men a Duty, I may
say to half the People, as has lately near happened in France; I say, why is it
not in Kingdoms also, does Enthusiasm recipere magis and minus, or is it to
hold in all cases alike; indeed why must we be Enthusiasts in part through a
Revelation, and not throughout; so that it is plain these Men must either quite
reject Martyrdom with Passive Obedience, or else ingeniously acknowledge, that
laying aside all the Absurdities of reasoning in it, they will with me wholly
rely on the Authority of the Scriptures for it.

So that the reasoning of the matter will be resolved thus: All People that
have trusted in God through Passive Obedience, have not been delivered with the
Israelites; no more have not all Martyrs like Shadrack, Meshack and Abednego,
been delivered from the power of Flames and Tortures; I say, therefore as we
are not to expect always our Faith to succeed in the latter case of Martydom,
shall we be so unreasonable as to murmur and repine that Sufferings are likely
to befall us in the other, and for that reason only to conclude it cannot be a
Duty upon us?

In short, I know no other way that the Doctor's Enthusiastical Adversaries
have to evade the force of this reasoning, unless by pretending that it is one
thing to resist the King that has only the Executive Power, and another to
resist the Fountain or Legislative Power; and as I have showed that cannot help
them, for under the pretense even of the Parliament's being packed, or
Pensioners, the Resistance Men will allow themselves to oppose the Legislative
Power also; so that we may well conclude this Principle of Resistance can
scarce rationally admit a Man in such circumstances as to be a Martyr, and if
it does not by that trespass as much on the side of Infidelity and Diffidence
in God, as Passive Obedience does on Enthusiasm, I am very much mistaken.

Nor indeed is this the only parallel Case to justify this sort of Enthusiasm,
wherein a Man so trusts in God as to give up himself, for if all such courses
must imply a ridiculous Enthusiasm, Faith it self must be ridiculous also: Thus
Abraham must be an Enthusiast for leaving his Father's Country: And the
Christian that bestows a Charity is an Enthusiast for parting with that present
supply, that by possibility he may stand in need of.

So that I hope I may now very well conclude, I have acquitted the Doctor from
all pretense of Enthusiasm, when the very same Argument that his Adversaries
have brought to accuse him with, as I have manifestly shown, will not only, if
not softened, ruin Passive Obedience, but even Christianity, and all manner of
Faith and Religion whatever also.

And I think I may now draw to a Conclusion, and I hope to the general
satisfaction also, for if I am not as much mistaken as ever I was in my life, I
have given the Doctor an effectual Vindication, I mean such an one as is not
only able to return the Dirt cast upon him back upon his Adversaries, but with
all good Men to restore him to his former Reputation and Esteem.

I think I have sufficiently shown to the World, that his Adversaries are not
generous, that they can assault him thus in Crowds; that they are not
charitable, that they can attribute Scandals to him against all the Rules of
Sincerity and Honor; I have shown moreover, that what he has wrote may
receive effectually a good sense, and that without Scandal to the Government
too, without Men are resolved to force his Words to the worst; and as I have
shown this, so I might have staid here, and said this is enough, had I thought
fit only just to Vindicate his Cause.

But for the satisfaction of his Enemies I have gone on further, I have shown
them his Doctrine of Passive Obedience is not so absurd neither as they would
insinuate; in short, I have shown them it is as good as Resistance, and let
them make the worst or it; and to this I have added, that the Aspersion of
Enthusiasm on the Doctor, is manifestly an Injustice and a Reproach.

To this I might add his Praying for King William, when he wished King James
the Success, his Protesting against his promoting Non-swearing, when at the
same time when asked he gave his Opinion, and his Inconstancy in changing his
Principles, and many other such trifling Objections, that a good Man would be
ashamed to bring them; however his Adversaries have alleged them, and as
those three I have named seem the most considerable of them, I have resolved to
give them the satisfaction that their Objections are not Unanswerable, and then
I hope they will be content to dismiss me.

I say then the Doctor prayed for King William, he did so, and it is the Command
of Christ to Pray for our Enemies, as I presume the Doctor's Loyalty then to K.
James could not make him otherwise; I say then if he did this, and has Christ's
Command to justify him, what hurt is there in it? indeed if the Doctor had
used particular and inconsiderate Expressions in his Prayer, he had been to
blame, but as long as he delivered himself in general Terms, who shall accuse
him for it.

When Christ bid us pray for our Enemies, did he command us to imply in such
our Prayers, that God would prosper them so as to confound and destroy us, or
not rather that God would direct their hearts to save them, and move them to
right us where they injured us? Surely I say the latter; and if that were so
necessarily implied in the general Command of Christ to pray for our Enemies,
shall we deny the Doctor that privilege in the particular application of it.

But you will say he named him King when he did so; and what then, was it not
then rationally a doubt in his thoughts, whether he were a King or no? and if
it was, might not he justly use the common Style and Name he then went by,
without either Hypocrisy or Cowardice, when at the same time by his refusing
the Oaths he put the World out of all doubt of his Dissimulation, I say, might
he not honorably, as well as concientiously in such a case Complement the King
on his Doubt, at least with the name of King.

Indeed if he had had no Doubt upon him, but was convinced that he ought
immediately to have helped his distressed Prince, I say, then either he or any
Man else under such a Conviction, though they ought from the Command of Christ
to pray for the new Prince, yet withal they ought to refuse to Complement him
so far as to call him King, but, I say, when the Doctor was without any manner
of such Conviction, and was at least satisfied that he was quit of his
Assistance if not of his Allegiance to his former Prince: Surely, I say, in
such case for his very Doubt's sake the Doctor might Complement his new Prince
with the name of King, especially when settled by the Choice of the Nation in
the Throne; and methinks no Casuist in the World should deny him that liberty.

And in truth the Doctor's Enemies who pretend thus to refuse to pray for the
King, ought withal to remember, that they ought to act accordingly; they ought,
as I have said before, to declare themselves in Hostile manner, and fly from
his Protection, for if they once basely or lazily submit to him, as I have
before observed, they transfer their Allegiance, and as long as the new King is
in Possession, they cannot retract without Treachery; and consequently, they
ought to pray for him as King also, if the Title they suffer him to usurp be
such.

And I might add to this also, that those Men that are guilty of such a mean
and clandestine Treachery against the State, have the more reason in gratitude
to her Mercy, to acknowledge her for the future; for however they harbor
themselves under the scruple of Passive-Obedience, or otherwise, they ought to
remember withal, that it is a singular Charity, may I say a greater, than ever
they showed to the Doctor, that the State shows to them, in not treating them
as Enemies; when indeed, without under a Prince of such an unparalleled
Clemency, I don't know what they would well expect otherwise.

The second Charge against the Doctor, is, That he has changed his Opinion:
right, and suppose he has, What have not others done it before him? or must it
be an offense in the Doctor, only to be converted from a mistake; but you say,
he did it with deliberation: and it may be so; but what then, that shows him
the more likely to be a Master of the greater Integrity in it, and not that he
is corrupt; in plain terms, these Exceptions are rather Cavils than Reasonings.

When a Man ties himself to Principles by the Catalogue, I must confess he may
be more constant than the Doctor; but when a Man allows himself free liberty of
thinking, and sicerity, he is a confident and ignorant Pretender, that dares
say, he shall not change his Opinion.

Nor is it difficult in such Case to say, why some are longer in their change
than others; for Gentlemen that give their Reason free reigns, pursue her at
first sight: corrupt Men act without Examining; but Divines that walk by a
double sight, Reason and Revelation; nay, sometimes cast in Tradition to them,
may be fairly allowed a longer time to deliberate; and yet who shall say to a
sincere Man, just so long.

The mischief on it is, honest Men change their Minds out of Conviction, and
Knaves out of Design; now the uncharitable World in this case, though it knows it
cannot discern between these two, and therefore ought in all Cases to put the
best face on things; straight without more ado, upon every little peck or
passion censures Men, just as if they had got the sole Prerogative of God in
searching Men's Hearts.

Nor is it enough in such case to say, that such a Man is Learned, and cannot
but know better; for Men that say such things, do but blindly discover their
own presumptuous Ignorance. Alas, there is no Casuist can answer all
Objections, even in the plainest Cases; perfect Wisdom is the Prerogative of
God: and besides, if they could, we should consider how much such Men as the
Doctor are diverted by the Public, by his Sermons, by his writing necessary
particular Tracts and Controversies, etc.

The last thing I proposed to speak to, is, that they find fault with the
Doctor, for giving his Opinion, when he would pretend himself free from
dispersing his Doctrine of Non-Swearing formerly. Now as to this, I say, it is
a mere Calumny; and indeed, its own disingeniousness speaks it so. To give our
Opinion, when asked, of a thing, where good or evil, is a Duty that no Man can
dispense with in himself; and therefore, when the Doctor declared he was not
for spreading his Doctrine, who would lay that upon him, that he could not
avoid.

Had he wrote Books to convince others upon it, or had he but wrote Letters to
that purpose; nay, had he but sought to promote the Subject and Controversy in
discourse, where he was not directed by a Letter for satisfaction, or a Friend,
in a Casuistick Question; I say, had the Doctor's Adversaries proved this, they
might have showed this expression of his inconsistency, and proved him guilty
from his own words, of what he would insinuate himself to be innocent; but to
do as they have done, is to show only that they would be glad of the occasion
for such a false Judgment.

All things therefore considered, I hope his Adversaries will repent what they
have been guilty of, and endeavor to repair that Reputation they have so
unjustly injured. I am sensible what I can write in his defense, is not likely
in all particulars to be so strong, as what he himself might allege; but as
indeed the Cause is too nasty for the Doctor himself to meddle with, and as the
apparent Merits of it on his part want little help to illustrate them, so I
thought it better that a Stranger, I might say an Enemy, like myself, to the
Doctor, should undertake it, than he.

I might add, that I could wish that the Task had fallen into a better hand;
but since it is where it is, as I can solemnly before God satisfy myself of my
proceedings in this matter, so I shall endeavor to make them good; and if the
Doctor's Enemies are resolved on no Peace with him, I am resolved on his
behalf, to see how powerful they will prove in the Polemicks.

All therefore that I shall desire of his Enemies, for now if they persist they
are mine also is, but that they answer me with candor and ingenuity, with
brevity and perspicuity, and with solid sense and integrity; and if so, they
endeavor to refute what I have said for the Doctor, I Will promise them, they
shall not want as fair a Reply as they can wish for.

But if notwithstanding all has been said, they will still continue to Libel a
Member formerly of the greatest Reputation in the Church, and to whose
Controversies all Protestancy is obliged; I say, if such Elders who as St. Paul
advises, must be treated with the greatest respect, cannot have common Charity
allowed them; I say, if this be the temper of his Adversaries, let it suffice
the World, at least the worthier part of it, that they revile him without
reason, that they have had a tender of a fair satisfaction, and have refused
it, whereupon all Mankind must acquit the Doctor, and restore him to their
former esteem, whilst they wholly lay the blame and guilt upon his Enemies.

But methinks I have a prospect of better hope, of his Enemies, at best of the
more considerable of them. It cannot be, that they should persist to do as they
have done; nay, I am persuaded they will not; for however they may charge
Passive-Obedience honorably with its Mischiefs in their Zeal, yet they will
not surely thus force an occasion for it, they will no longer keep Men in fear
from joining with the Government for being of that Principle, nor encourage the
continuance of so unjust a slander; methinks, I say, for their own, nay, the
Public, and Piety's sake, they will cease to persist in this course longer. I
end with the Commandment:

Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor. FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface, p. 1. l. 23. Mr. Per. read Mr. Parkinson; and in the last line was it
no the Doctor, read was it not the Doctor. p. 8. l. 30. and from the Doctor's
Title, read as from the Doctor's Title.


