TWO PROCLAMATIONS BY His EXCELLENCY ROBERT EARL of ESSEX; Captain General of
all the Forces raised, or to be raised for the defense of the King and
Parliament, and Kingdom.

Printed by the Command of His Excellency.

Essex.



March 8. 1642. London, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop
next door to the Kings head Tavern in Fleetstreet.

Robert Earl of Essex, Captain General of all the Forces raised, or to be
raised for the defense of the King and Parliament, and Kingdom.
I Do hereby require and command all Colonells, Captains, and all other
Officers of the several Regiments of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, or of the
several Troops of Horse, Dragoones, or Foot-companies in the Army under my
command, That they, and every of them do within sixteen days after this
Proclamation shall be published by the Provost-Marshall General of the Army,
Recrute their several Regiments of horse or foot, and several Troops of Horse
and Dragoons, and companies of Foot to their first complete number (the Troops
of horse and Dragoons having horses allotted unto them for their Recrutes) upon
pain of cashiering.

And I do hereby Declare, That all such Officers as shall so Recrute their
several and respective Regiments or companies of Foot, shall have such
reasonable allowance for the Recruting of them, as is, or shall be agreed upon
by the Counsel of War in that behalf. And I do likewise hereby require and
command all the said Colonells, Captains, and other chief Officers having any
command of Horse or Foot, to give just account to the Commissaries of the
Musters at the next Muster of all such Arms as are now remaining in their
custody; As also of all such other Arms as shall be delivered for the Recruting
of the several Regiments, Troops, or Companies; which said Arms shall be from
time to time accounted for by them, To the end that all such arms as shall be
wanting upon the several Musters from time to time (and shall not appear to be
lost in actual service) shall be supplied to the said Regiments, Troops or
companies by the several and respective Officers belonging to them.

Given under my Hand and Seal at arms, this Twenty fourth day of February,
1642. Robert

Robert Earl of Essex, Captain General of the Army raised for the defense of
His Majesty's person, the Parliament and Kingdom.
To all whom it may concern:
I Do hereby strictly will, require, and command all Officers and Soldiers of
Horse or Foot now under my command, That within two days after this
Proclamation shall be published by the Provost Marshall-Generall of the Army,
they and every of them do repair to their several Quarters, there to abide,
and to perform the Duties of their several places, And that they nor any of
them do presume upon any pretense whatsoever, to depart from their several
Quarters without especial License first to be by them and every of them
obtained from my self, And that under the penalty of cashiering. And I do
further require and command all the chief Officers of the several Regiments of
Horse and Foot, to certify unto me from time to time the particular names of
such several Officers and Soldiers under them, who either neglect or wilfully
contemn this command, commanding all Officers and soldiers to be obedient
hereunto, as they will avoid the penalty of cashiering as aforesaid, and will
answer the contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms, this Twenty fourth day of February,
1642.
FINIS.

