VOTES etc. Of the Honorable House of Commons: Febr. 25. etc. 1662. Upon
Reading His Majesty's Gracious DECLARATION and SPEECH, etc.
Die Mercurii 25. Feb. 15. Car. R.
Resolved, etc. nemine contradicente,

Resolved, etc.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, did
with great joy receive Your Majesty's most Gracious Speech, at the opening this
Session of Parliament: And being thereby invited to consider of Your
Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December last; they have with all Sobriety,
Duty, and Affection, examined the grounds thereof; and do by me present unto
Your Majesty, Their most hearty Thanks for the same, and humble Advice
thereupon; both which, I do beseech Your Majesty, that You will vouchsafe me to
deliver in their own words.


May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, having with all
Fidelity and Obedience, considered of the several Matters comprised in Your
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration of the 26th of December last, and Your most
Gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session,

Do, in the first place for our selves, and in the names of all the Commons of
England, render to Your Sacred Majesty, the Tribute of our most hearty Thanks,
for that infinite Grace and Goodness, wherewith Your Majesty has been pleased
to publish Your Royal Intentions of adhering to your Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, by a Constant and Religious Observance of it. And our hearts are
further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgivings, when we consider Your
Majesty's most Princely and Heroic Professions of relying upon the Affections
of Your People, and abhorring all sort of Military and Arbitrary Rule. But
above all, We can never enough remember, to the Honor of Your Majesty's Piety,
and our unspeakable Comfort, those solemn and most endearing Invitations of us
Your Majesty's Subjects, to prepare Laws to be presented to Your Majesty,
against the growth and increase of Popery; and withal, to provide more Laws
against Licentiousness and Impiety; at the same time Declaring Your own
Resolutions for maintaining the Act of Uniformity. And it becomes us always to
acknowledge and admire Your Majesty's Wisdom in this Your Declaration, whereby
Your Majesty is pleased to resolve, not only by Sumptuary Laws, but by Your own
Royal Example of Frugality, to restrain that excess in men's Expenses, which is
grown so general and so exorbitant; and to direct our Endeavors to find out
fit and proper Laws for Advancement of Trade and Commerce.

After all this we most humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, That it is with
extreme unwillingness and reluctance of heart, that we are brought to differ
from any thing which Your Majesty has thought fit to propose; And though we do
no way doubt, but that the unreasonable Distempers of men's spirits, and the
many Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on, during the late Intervals
of Parliament, did reasonably incline Your Majesty to endeavor by Your
Declaration to give some allay to those ill humors, till the Parliament
Assembled; and the hopes of Indulgence, if the Parliament should consent to it,
especially seeing the pretenders to this Indulgence, did seem to make some
Titles to it, by virtue of Your Majesty's Declaration from Breda. Nevertheless,
we Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are now returned to
serve in Parliament, from those several parts and places of Your Kingdom, for
which we are chosen, Do humbly offer to Your Majesty's great Wisdom, That it is
in no sort advisable that there be any Indulgence to such persons who presume
to dissent from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion established,

For these Reasons, Breda, and are humbly of opinion, That Your Majesty ought
not to be pressed with it any further,

Because it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of
Your Majesty's Intentions, to do what in You lay, and what a Parliament should
advise your Majesty to do; and no such Advice was ever given, or thought fit to
be offered; nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with, but by Act of
Parliament.

They who do pretend a right to that supposed promise, put the Right into the
hands of their Representatives, whom they chose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have passed, and Your Majesty consented to the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume to say, that a Right to the benefit of this
Declaration does still remain after this Act passed,

It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a disability
in Your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any
part of Your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise Your
Majesty to it.

We have also considered the nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those Consequences, which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the Censures of it of no Moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at
one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the
execution of it.

It will expose Your Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will weaken
the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be difficult for
it, to defend it self against them: And, which is yet further considerable,
those Numbers, which by being troublesome to the Government, find they can
arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, which
Your Majesty has declared against; and in time, some prevalent Sect, will at
last contend for an establishment; which, for ought can be foreseen, may end in
Popery.

It is a thing altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of
convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the method and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly, It is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence proposed, will be so far
from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance. And on the contrary, That the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce a settled Peace and Obedience throughout Your Kingdom: Because
the variety of professions in Religion, when openly indulged, does directly
distinguish men into parties, and withal, gives them opportunity to count their
numbers; which, considering the animosities, that out of a Religious Pride will
be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and inevitably to
open disturbance. Nor can Your Majesty have any Security, that the Doctrine or
Worship of the several Factions, which are all Governed by a several Rule,
shall be consistent with the Peace of Your Kingdom.

And if any persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, We do in
all humility declare, That we will for ever, and in all Occasions, be ready
with our utmost endeavor and assistance, to adhere to, and serve Your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.


FINIS.

