To the Right HONORABLE The LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, And to the
HONORABLE the COMMONS of England in Parliament Assembled; A PROPOSAL to Mend
Rye Harbor in Sussex. Is Humbly Offered by Robert Colepepyr, Gent.
May it please your Honors.
THAT Harbor is by (Numb. 10.) on the Map herewith given, and was Faulty in
1635: And then Repaired by an open Navigation on Appledore-Channel, and the
Rother; And the same Harbor may be Repaired, again, If your Honors approve
such Navigation, and will please to favor the same by Act of Parliament.

That Work was done to mend a general Land-drain, that is now in Decay as well
as the Harbor, and both from ill Advice in Draining. And although much
Marsh-land was then used as a Basin, yet the same only Subjected Marsh Owners
to great Charge, without Benefit; as herein after appears.

The upper Levels were most Damnified by that faulty Drain: So their
Commissioners of Sewers undertook to mend the same, at their uncertain Charge;
yet other Commissioners of Sewers (also Damnifyed) did agree to make certain
Annual Payments toward that Work. Which Payments, or their Value by Purchase,
and some Arrears due thereon; together with His Majesty's Derelict Lands in
that Channel: I humbly propose to your Honors as a Fund for this Work. And
that the upper Levels most subject to Land-floods) do after Cleanse the same
Channel with the Rother: And also Pay Rent for that Part of the latter in
Wittersham Level, and maintain the Banks there, and higher up, as in their said
Agreement. And so they will be at far the greatest Charge on draining.

I apprehend the Gentlemen most concerned, were satisfied in the King's Title
to such Navigation the last Sessions of Parliament. Yet notwithstanding that
Title, I do not believe such Bill will find any Favor, while your Honors and
those Gentlemen apprehend their Marshes will be Drowned thereby. Therefore it
seemed fit I next state their Objections, and Answer the same.

Object. 1. The uppermost Stop in Appledore Channel at Number. 6. in Map, was made
in 1623. That the Tides might flow no more above that place. Therefore it
appears the Land-drain had then some defect in that part.

Answ. I do not find our Ancestors (in their Books of Sewers) have recorded the
Damage their Drain received: And do not think fit to entertain your Honors
with my apprehensions touching the same where Proofs are wanting. But will
presume to say those Lands were long Drained by that Channel before 1623. even
from 1272. At which time the Rother left Rumny out-fall (Numb. 14.) and fell
into the Sea at Rye. (Numb. 10.) If well informed by the History of Hector
Boiethias. And that the same stop was the first made in that Channel, seems
plain from Records of Sewers. For the then Commissioners applied to the Lord
Warden at that time being; and obtained permission for that stop, till found
hurtful to Rye Harbor; but the latter stops were made without such Application.

The upper Levels then were Drained 350 Years, either by common or
extraordinary Charge, then attended that Navigable Channel. And whatsoever Evil
our Ancestors hoped to avoid by their stop, yet the Drain that served 350
Years, (while an open Channel) was quite destroyed in 12 Years by that stop, as
the following Objection shows.

Object. 2. That before 1635. 3000 Acres lay Drowned, and 2000 more was much
Damified with Fresh Water in the upper Levels. Also the Drains of Rumney, and
Walland Marshes, were much Decayed in Appledore Channel. And 1600 Acres of Low
Marsh was Decaying, and like to be lost in Wittersham Level, called the Basin
there. Wherefore the Commissioners of the Sewers, and Land-owners so Damnifyed,
met on Views; and found Appledore Channel (their general Land-drain) had lost
much Depth, by Sea Sullage that dropped and subsided there, by Salt Water
standing dead against their stop, at (Numb. 6.)

On the said View and Consideration, 'twas Concluded, That a Channel or Cut
through Wittersham Level, to give all Water free Influx and Eflux there, and in
the Rother, was the best means to gain depth in Appledore Channel; especially
if the 1600 Acres were used as a Basin: Which Method was also presented
necessary by 48 Jurors.

The upper Levels, accordingly agreed for a Channel or Cut, of 50 Foot Broad
in the bottom; and 12 Rods between Bank and Bank, through 1200 Acres of High
Marsh in Wittersham Level; and were bound for ever to defend those Banks and
Marshes, from Damage by salt or fresh Water: And by that Agreement, the Owners
of those 1200 Acres, were Annually to pay the upper Levels, so much toward the
Sea Banks, as they paid before that Agreement.

The upper Levels, also hired the 1600 Acres of Low Marsh adjoining, and were
obliged to hold it as a a Basin under salt Water, till (in Judgment of its
Owners, the same could receive no more Benefit from Sea Sullage. Yet with
Liberty to those Owners, to enclose any part on abatement of Rent.

To preserve the high Marshes, great endeavors were used soon after the Tides
were let in; yet they washed down the fore Lands and Banks thereof, and Drowned
much of those Marshes. And since that Inundation, 200000 l. or thereabouts,
has been paid for Rents of Wittersham Level, and works done there. Wherefore
those Land Owners desire the Tides may no more have Inslux through Wittersham
Level, to mend Rye Harbor at their Risque and Charge; But do think that
Experiment sufficiently tried, and may now pass for impracticable in that Level.

Answ. These Gentlemen I think ought to do no more Works in Wittersham Level,
to mend either Harbor or Land; till they see the Rock that so racked their
Ancestors, and find the same avoidable. For whose satisfaction therein, I
inform; That all Rivers cut by Water or Hand Labor in Sea Sullage, do fret and
wash away soil, till they come to moderate running; because that soil is
penetrable, So most Channel Room will always attend the greatest quantity of
Water there.

The old Channel North of Oxny, (where well proportioned) had more Breadth than
was intended for the new Cut. Yet the latter was to carry most Water; and that
by all the Basin could receive. Which Basin being a deep wide vacuity laid open
to an Arm of the Sea. The same might draw the Water through that 50 Foot Cut with
great Rapidity, till Three quarter Flood: About which time the fore Lands of
that high Marsh might begin to carry Water. Which Rapidity did continue, to
widen that 50 Foot Cut, till it made the same a sufficient Water-fret, or
Channel, to fill, and empty that Basin in Tide and Ebb: And that by such
moderate running, as attends Marsh-channels.

The Water however could not come to such moderation and leave fretting, till
it did bring that 50 Foot Cut, to a Waterfret or Channel of 500 Yards broad.
Yet but proportionable with the Water-fret in Appledore Channel, (as on View
may apappear) Nevertheless the like penetrable soil remains, in which that
Water-fret might have grown much wider, had more room been wanted, so to fill
and empty that Basin.

I have drawn the said Basin to contain 1600 Acres, by the Scale in the Map
herewith delivered. And thereby have also laid down the Water-fret of 500 Yards
Broad, through Appledore Channel, and Wittersham high Marshes: For by showing
that Basin as the Tides found it, and the Fret that filled the same as made by
the Tides; I seem the more preceptable in answering this Objection. I also show
my proposed Channel in the 500 Yards, Water-fret; yet my Channel is much too
narrow to be truly shown in this Map, and the 50 Foot Cut made there formerly,
not well to be shown.

The Cut our Ancestors made to fill the Basin, was in Breadth but the Thirtieth
part of the Fret or passage the Water made to fill the same. So their ill
advice is shown by Earth and Water. And since their want of Breadth was so
great, the Tides might raise the Water many Foot higher in Appledore Channel by
Three quarter Flood, than the 50 Foot Cut, could raise the same in the Basin by
that time. This would give the Water a great Fall and Rapidity. So the same
might wash down Banks and Marshes apace: And Works that so much opposed the
Waters Tendancy, might well fail. And since so great a Basin was made in 1635,
with an ill proportioned Cut to fill the same; and I propose no Basin;
therefore what I now offer was not tried in 1635.

Object. 3. The fresh and salt Water had the proposed open Channel through
Wittersham Level, and also round Oxny at the same time; yet then Sullage did
subside in the Channel near Reading, (Numb. 4.) and there raised a stop of Sand
some 60 Rods long; and to such height, that the same turned low freshes back to
the Cut in Maytham Wall (Numb. 3.) And the old Rothers other parts from (Numb.
3.) to Appledore Channel, were made very narrow by side Benches; And of late
Years very much Sullage is settled in Appledore Channel, near down to Rye;
which Sullage will come into Wittersham Cut and the Rother; and fill the same
were they laid open as desired.

Answ. Touching the stop at Reading, (Number. 4.) I apprehend the Tides flowed up
Wittersham Cut and Basin, into the Rother, at (Numb. 3.) did there divide, and
both flow up and down that Channel; but because Water will rather run with a
small Current than against it, therefore I apprehend the Tides flowed
downwards; till they were met at Reading, by the other Water that came up by
Appledore, (Numb. 5.) So at Reading, these two Waters swelled up, one against
the other; till the Tides left flowing; and in that time they dropped Sullage;
which by subsidence made that stop. But conclude the Water went up by
Appledore, could not flow round Oxny, while Wittersham Passage was open;
because a stop with Water was made at Reading every Twelve Hours, (over the
Sand stop there) and that to the height of high Water. Nor could the Water
(with any good Strength) flow up the old Channel, from Maytham Wall, (Numb. 3.)
toward Bodyam, (Numb. 1.) till a Current was turned that way by the height of
the said stop, so made by Water: Therefore, unless these two Waters had flowed
up two several Channels, till the Tides had been spent, and had never met; the
same Sand so settling, can be no president against a single Channel. Nor do
those Channels, in any measure show that my proposal was tried in 1635.

As to the Sullage settled in tide Benches from (Numb. 4.) up to (Numb. 3.) and
down to (Numb. 6.) I say the Passage through Wittersham Level, divided the fresh
Water, between that Passage and the old Rother. Yet the whole Water was not
sufficient to scower the Rother, without help from hand Labor; to wit, the
casting of side Benches out of the same.

The Wittersham Passage took all the fresh Water in Summer, (as Reading Sand
stop shows) and far above half in Winter, for the Cut, or Wittersham
Water-passage is one part in 3 shorter than the old Circular Channel of the
Rother; and consequently has so much the more fall. For admit the descent
between Maytham Wall, (Numb. 3.) and Craven Out-fall, (Numb. 9.) is 6 Foot.
Then as 6 Miles of Channel through Wittersham Level, has 12 Inches fall to each
Mile; So the old Channel can have but 8 Inches to a Mile; the same Channel
running 9 Miles, to come against Craven Out-fall, (Numb. 9.)

The salt Water then that flowed up the old Channel, had from Maytham Wall,
(Numb. 3.) but a weak fresh follower at Ebb, even in Winter, and none in Summer
there, nor at Reading, (Numb. 4.) and this is the Water found insufficient to
cleanse one Channel; yet was there put to cleanse two: So the Tides might well
leave Sullage in the old Channel, and raise side Benches there; above, and
below Reading, (Numb. 4.)

Now to the Damage feared from Sullage, in Appledore Channel, (viz.) its coming
into the proposed Channel, and subsiding there. For satisfaction therein, I
intend the Mouth or widest part of the proposed Channel, shall not exceed 20
Rods, (if it be so Broad.) So 'twill draw no more Water in, from Appledore
Channel, than is necessary to preserve or gain a suitable Water-fret there.
Which fret in Appledore Channel, (if now too wide) will lose Breadth, till it
has not too much to fill my new Channel: as Wittersham Cut grew wider till it
could fill the Basin; for Tides will leave Sullage in over Breadths of a
Water-fret; as well as make Breadth where it is wanting.

While the Rother, Basin, and high Marsh Water-fret were open, yet much Sullage
subsided on Wittersham side of Appledore Channel; because the same Channel had
more Breadth then was necessary to fill those open Receptacles, however, since
the stops were made cross the said Level and Channel, much more Sullage has
settled where the same is complained of then was there before.

Since the Tides have a tendency to leave Sullage in Appledore Channel, we need
not fear any quantity will thence remove; but were that Channel never so clean,
yet every Tide would carry in Sullage, and soon destroy the Navigation and
Drain, I prepose; If by casting of side Benches out of the upper half, and
fresh Water there, the same would not be kept open, and be come a Salt Basin,
to scower the lower part.

By such cafting with a small fresh from two Mill-streams, drained by
Winchelsea Channel (Numb. 11.) the lower half of that Channel is constantly
kept clean and deep; and the side Benches there cast out, do cost Three
Shillings the Rod, or therebouts once in 7 Years. And no reason appears, but
such casting in the proposed Channel, may perform as well (if not better) for
this last Channel drains 9 Mill-streams; yet no Mill stands on this Channel,
proposed to be made Navigable; but many Iron Works are on the Mill-streams, and
would be much served by such Navigation.

Object. 4. That we have the Example of the Dutch for shutting the Tides out of
our Navigable Channels by Sluices, who have long used them with good Success;
and they are a People well esteemed for Draining, and by none thought Enemies to
their Navigation. And when part of a great Landfloud Drowns many Marshes,
before it comes into the Imbank'd Channel, and there other part of that
Land-flood meets high Spring Tides, and so swells higher then the Marshes: Then
for want of Sluices to keep the Tides back, those Marshes must lie the longer
under fresh Water.

Answ. First, touching the Example given us by the Dutch; I say, the
Spring Water and Land-floods Drained by their Channels, bear very little
Proportion with ours in quantity; Nor have they such Descents to strengthen
their motion: Therefore the Dutch Freshes are not sufficient to sweep out the
Land and Sea Sullage, would settle in the upper part, or half of their Channel,
should the same be set open. And unless the upper half of a Channel be a Salt
Basin, to help weak Freshes, to scower out, Sullage would settle lower down:
The Land-drain and Navigation of a whole Channel would soon be obstructed, by
Sea and Land Sullage. And I presume no Channel in Holland, (running through
Sluices) has near so much Fresh Water as Winchelsea Channel, (Numb. 11.) before
mentioned.

In following this Dutch Example, we should lose depth of Water in our Harbors,
and want the same as much as they; or come as near it, as our better natural
helps will admit of. And so far make the King's Ships more unsafe, unless we
Build them on Dutch Bottoms. Therefore, I hope we shall not suffer that Evil
out of Chouse, which the Dutch submit to from necessity.

Touching our use of Sluices, to keep Spring Tides from meeting Land-floods, and
so holding our Marshes the longer under Fresh Water. I say, the highest Spring
Tides make the greatest reverse, and leaves the least Salt Water in our
Harbors and Channels for several Miles next the Sea. For the Sea makes a large
vacuity at low Water, sufficient to receive any Land-flood comes in reach of
its Ebbs. But in parts of the same Channel, where the Salt Water does not flow
and Ebb; There following Rains may keep a Land-flood high; because this part of
the Channel empties it self into the part next below it, where Breadth does
little increase.

These Observations also appear from Fact, for Land-floods obstruct Travelers
several Days at some distance from the Sea: yet the Outfalls of those Waters,
are drawn down every Ebb. To prove this, the Land-floods on Newinden Highway
(Number. 2.) and Ebbs at Rye, (Numb. 10.) will afford an instance to the upper
Level-owners; For the said Highway is hardly passable for many Days, yet from
their Sluices to Rye, the greatest Landflood runs very shallow at Low Water.

So much of Rye Harbor, and Appledore Channel, as are not yet Imbank'd and
Drained, then seem remains of a Basin, that Empties it self into the Sea every
Ebb; and is refilled in 6 Hours. (viz.) by Salt Water the Tides bring in, and
Fresh that gets through the Sluices, before they are shut by the Tides. Therefore
to that time the Salt Water comes into the Basin, does exceed the Fresh in
quantity, as the Harbors Mouth exceeds the Sluices in Water Passage: And from
the shutting of the Sluices, that Basin must fill wholly with Salt Water; and
Water then spreads to the greatest Breadth. So the Basin of Water goes to Sea
every Ebb, carrys very little Fresh Water out with the same.

The open Channel proposed, would carry out Sixteen times as much Water as the
Sluices, or thereabouts, when the Sluices carry most; and would Contribute so
much more fresh Water to the Basin while the same is filling; and especially
when the Marshes are most Drowned; For the greatest Land-floods press hardest
on the Tides, and stop them nearest to the Sea in an open Channel: So far are
open Channels from keeping Landfloods longer in, or Sluices from Draining them
sooner out; and if extreme Tides and Land-floods meet higher up in an open
Channel than the Sluices lie, and make the Water swell the highet there; yet the
Banks prevent Damage, as in other such Channels, and the same Water presently
abates; and much the faster in an open Channel, as before shown.

Object. 5. That Appledore Channel (the general Land-Drain) was always in the
upper Level's Commission of Sewers; near down to Rye. And no more than a Power
to sew into the same, contained in any Commission of Sewers between the upper
Levels and the Sea: Nor did those lower Commissions contribute toward the
Cleansing of that Channel before 1635.

After 1635. the Lords of Rumny and Commissioners of Walland Marshes did enter
into an Agreement with the Commissioners of the upper Levels, containing
several Conditions on the part of the latter, to be performed, (viz.) That
those Commissioners should turn their fresh Water over to Rumny side of
Appledore Channel, to make and preserve Depth near the Sluices there; and never
after alter the Course of the said Water.

In Consideration of which Water, and for the upper Level's great Charge on
their Salt Basin, and other Works; and the Benefit thereby received by the
Lords and Commissioners of Rumny and Walland Marshes ( viz. by the better
Draining such of their Marshes as issue Water into that Channel:) They the said
Lords and Commissioners did agree to Pay the upper Levels 160 l. per Annum;
Which Payment to continue so long as those Lands should be well Drained by the
upper Level's Works; and no longer. Yet with Proviso, That the said Agreement
shall not be drawn into future Precedent.

Notwithstanding the Proviso, and that Rumny Marsh, and other Marshes below
them, Paid nothing toward Appledore Channel before 1635. And also the upper
Level's Stops; whereby they have turned their fresh Water cross that Channel to
Rumny side, below the Sluices were in 1635. and thereby forced Rumny and Walland
Marshes to lay new Sluices nearer the Sea. Which Charge must be repeated as more
Stops shall become necessary. And notwithstanding the upper Levels have also
Drained their Basin; yet it is now desired that the 160 l. per Annum, may be
perpetuated by Act of Parliament; and made saleable, to raise Money for the
open Channel proposed. Though if such Act pass, and the Work fail: Then those
Lands will be double Charged for Draining.

Answ. I presume all Marsh Owners have a Right to Drain into an adjoining
Navigable Channel without Charge, Provided the Natural Helps of such Channel
will preserve depth so to Drain: But Rumny and Walland Marshes could not so
Drain, as their Agreement beforementioned shows; and the supernatural Helps
then thought necessary, were done by the upper Levels (as agreed on) and
remained, till the Stops complained of, were found necessary to Drain the upper
Levels, in their Method; but those Stops yet cause no Prejudice to Rumny and
Walland Marshes, or any other, save the Charge they have Paid, or may be put
to, on new Sluices lower down.

Touching the said Stops, I say yet further, That in 1646, the Basin was found
much too large for the Cut made to fill the same: Therefore a Bank (No. 7.)
called Blackwall, was made cross that Basin; with Sluices therein to obstruct
salt Water, and give passage to the fresh. And the same Wall left about 900
Acres open to salt Water, and the other 700 Acres under fresh Water, as the
latter remains.

It appears there was then no intention to Drain Land by this Stop; yet on the
side thereof nearest to the Sea, much Sullage subsided, and did damnifie many
Lands in the upper Levels: Therefore (as a growing Evil) that Sullage was
considered in their Sessions of Sewers. And 'twas the Commissioners opinion,
That the same Sullage might be raised much higher, by the salt Water, and Drown
all their Marshes with fresh Water.

To avoid such Drowning, a second Stop was made below that Sullage. Which
second Stop did Drain the Sullage raised by the first, and raised more Sullage
on its side next the Sea, after Drained by the third Stop. And thus they went
lower with Stops, till they Drained all Wittersham Level, and part of Appledore
Channel; as (No. 9.) shows.

As these Stops come nearer to the Sea, Appledore Channel (the general
Land-drain) sooner decays, because there the Tides stand longer dead to drop
Sullage; yet the upper Levels are first damnified, and now want a new Stop or
Out-fall nearer to Rye; Though their last Stop was made but five Years since, or
thereabouts. So in this Method they must soon destroy Rye Harbor, and probably
much damnifie many Marshes Drained through the same.

The Drowning of the upper Levels thus kept off by Stops, was no other way
avoidable, save by an open Channel. So here appears a necessity to Drain that
Basin; either by Stops, or Channel-banks. And the upper Levels had no Power to
keep the same Basin always open, as appears by their Prior Agreement with
Wittersham Level, herein before mentioned; For those Land Owners had Power to
make such Side Banks as are now Proposed: Nor is the Continuation of that Basin
made a Condition of Payment, but that Condition is good Draining at the upper
Level's Charge: And by their Works, and Water, the Lands so agreed for, have
been Drained ever since 1645. and without the same would soon be Drowned: For
otherwise they need not go lower with Sluices, for benefit from the upper
Level's Fresh: when no cross Stop is made between them and the Sea; yet so they
have Done. Therefore the Contributers seem liable to continue their Payments,
whether Drained by an open Channel or Sluce-stops.

Touching the open Channel's sufficiency to Drain Rumny Marsh, and other
Marshes lower down. I say, that further up than their Sluices, the open Channel
will be drawn Low every Ebb: Therefore all Lands so near the Sea must be well
drained thereby, except low Bogs. And a narrow Water Fret in Appledore Channel
against those Sluices, is now scower'd only by the upper Level's Fresh, and by
Salt Water Leaks through their Sluices in Tide time, and returns at Ebb.

The said small Influx and Efflux perform so well, that I hear of no Lands
there ill Drained; and the open Channel will extremely increase that Influx and
Efflux. So here is fact at home, to show those Lands must be Drained well by
such open Channel. And all Marsh Lands in the Map were made by salt Water: And
Sluce-stops were also used in Winchelsea Channel (No. 11.) till the same were
removed for obstructing their Drain; and now that Channel maintains a good
depth much farther from the Sea than Rumny and Walland Marsh Sluices: And many
more Precedents might be cited, did the same seem necessary.

Touching the Side Banks to be made for the open Channel, and the sufficiency
of the same to stand there; I say, the Workmen in those Parts, have of late
years made many Sea-banks, in Wittersham Level; and Stops cross the deep
Water-fret there, and in Appledore Channel. Which Stops and Banks were much
more exposed to Storms than my Channel Banks will be. So no failure in the said
Channel Banks may be presumed irreparable. And now I hope all Objections are
answered.

By an open Channel, I apprehend much Money may be saved (otherwise soon to be
spent and lost) viz. by the upper Levels, on a new Stop or Out-fall. And by
Rumny and Walland Marshes, on a new Channel and Sluices, to issue their Water
out below such new Out-fall of the upper Levels. For the open Channel proposed
will scower all necessary Sluices where they now lie.

I do not endeavor to break Agreements by which any Lands were Charged for
Draining; but desire the present Owners may perform the same, to which they
seem liable as before; And that some Marshes that but lately used Appledore
Channel (the common Land-drain) may pay to the Charge of the same; as other
Contributors agreed to pay for Draining there. And this Money, with the
Derelict Lands proposed, as other part of a Fund for this Work; being laid out
on an open Channel; the same will mend the Drain, and Harbor both; and seems
the only way to make either of them lasting.

Touching the Bar, or flat in Rye Bay. The Water there in Calms, and near low
Ebb has no motion but a small swell against the Shores, and back again. So when
a Channel falls into such Bay, the Water of the Channel must lose its motion
and strength, and drop Sand; which Sand subsides till that Water is disturbed
by Winds; for such Efflux as cannot keep Sand in motion, can never dislodge it.
Therefore a great Efflux seems no further useful on a Bar, than by laying the
Sand makes the same, in reach of Storms. For though all Water now within the Bar
covers but 500 Acres, or thereabouts; yet this Bar is now as Navigable, as when
3000 Acres more of Marsh lay under salt Water, that is now drained. That 500
Acres seem more by the Map, but the same was not nicely plotted, nor are the
South Channels so to be shown on this Map, they are so small.

The above Bar is deeply Imbayed to the North, and West, by Beach-banks; were
raised by great Storms: For the same are much higher than any quiet Tide comes.
So Storms from East and South, drive Sand from the Sea, and Bar, up against
those Beach-banks; and bring it back by reverse; but that reverse cannot carry
the same out of the Bay.

The Bar is defended from North and West Storms, by those Banks, till the
Storms that blow over these Banks, can disturb the Bar Sand, and drive the same
out to Sea; but when any Sand so goes to Sea, the Bar must exceed its common,
and guarded height. For these Reasons I expect to do nothing on this Bar by an
open Channel.

The open Channel with an Out-fall less Imbayed, may yet keep a Bar as
Navigable there, as any Bar in a Sea of such depth, and so exposed to Storms:
If hereafter such Work shall find encouragement, and public Charge: Such new
Out fall I would make against Pett Level, lying between Winchelsea (No. 1^.)
and Hasting (No. 12.) because an Out-fall Bar there will be well disturbed by
Storms that blow in and out; and also receive much more benefit from Side
Storms than Rye Bar has. I apprehend the Bar without this new Out-fall will
lie above 6 Foot deep at Low Water; but admit it should be kept no deeper than
6 Foot, yet Second Rate Ships may come in at half Flood, and ride in the
Channel, or in a Basin may be made, with Gates into the Channel, to receive
Ships in, and keep Sullage out, and such Ships may ride in the Bay from low
Water till half Flood, without Damage; especially when the Winds are North or
West, from which Points they blow some three parts of the Year. The principal
part of which Charge, will then be required for 1280 Rods of Channel Banks, or
thereabouts. For (with some help) the Tides and Ebbs will make a better Channel
there, than can be made by hand Labor. But no more of this, till we see what
Depth the open Channel will make in Rye Harbor, between the Beach-banks there.

The Beach-banks of the Bay do Suffer Storms to keep the Bar or Flat Navigable
there, from Half-flood to Half-ebb; for from Half-flood, small Men of War,
Tenders and Store-ships may come in; and better Ships may enter near
High Water: and a few Ships may now Ride in the Harbor at Low Water. And it is
probable, an open Channel will make room and water for many more; For before
the said Imbankments, the Harbour's depth of Water, and Expansion of the same,
was much greater than the same now are.

I hope more is not necessary to satisfy your Honors, and the Land Owners
concerned: Therefore now pray Leave to give Particulars, touching the Charge of
this Work. And the Fund to Answer the same.

Charge.] By two Channel Banks, to run from Craven Sluice (Numb. 9.) up to
Black-wall, (Numb. 7.) and from thence a single Bank to run near Sussex
Uplands, to the West End of Maytham Wall, (Numb. 3.) at which place this new
Channel will fall into the River Rother. Which Banks I compute at 4040 Rods,
and hope the same one part with the other may be made for 33 s. the Rod, and
afford Impliments for the Work; which comes to -- 6666 l.

By Repair of old Channel Banks on the Rother, above Maytham Wall (Numb. 3.) --
1500 l.

By a Sluice in the Rother, just below the new Channels Passage into the same.
To keep the Tides up toward Bodyam (Numb. 1.) and Four smaller Sluices above
the said Sluice: To keep the Tides out of small Drains -- 1200 l.

By Repair of the two most Easterly Breaches in Maytham Wall (Numb. 3.) and for
two small Guts or Trunks, To Drain that fresh Water Basin (lying between the
said Wall and Black-wall (Numb. 7.) into the new Channel -- 100 l.

Total 9466 l.

Fund.] To Fifteen years Arrears of 160 l. per Annum, seems Due from the Lords
of Rumny Marsh, and Commissioners of Walland Marsh; For about so long since
they denied Payment. Because put to the Charge of removing their Sluices: and
for other Causes of Complaint in the Fifth Objection. So if your Honors shall
think those Arrears due, and appropriable to this Work, Then the same (if right
in time) come to -- 2400 l.

Yet Money so spent on removing of Sluices, seems deductable from the said Sum
--

To Money may be raised by that 160 l. per Annum, at 20 Years Purchase, If your
Honors shall be satisfied the open Channel will be a good and lasting Drain to
to those Lands; and will please to perpetuate that Annual Payment -- 3200 l.

The 1200 Acres of high Marsh in Wittersham Level, were to Pay as much annually
for Repair of Banks, etc. as they Paid before 1635. (as in their said
Agreement) but most of those Lands were drowned soon after that time; And so
the full Rents thereof were Paid, pursuant of the upper Level's Covenant to
Indemnifie. And those Rents Paid free from wet and dry Fence, with other
Charges incident to Marshes and all Lands) were much more to the Owners
benefit, than if their Marshes had been defended at their agreed Charge.

Because those Marshes were not Drained and their Banks repaired; Therefore the
Gentlemen most interested in Wittersham Level, (being Commissioners of Sewers
for the same, and also for the upper Levels) did omit to Pay for Securing their
Wittersham Rents; yet the annual Values of those Lands have been secured at the
upper Level's Charge, either by Payment of Rents, or Expense on Banks; and that
for 65 years.

Brought over -- 5600 l.

The Owners of these high Marshes, therefore seem indebted to the upper Levels,
or toward the open Channel, in 65 such annual Payments, as their Charges of
Draining came to before their Agreement. But least that Charge be not
ascertainable, I compute the same at 4 d. per Annum the Acre, as the Marshes on
the South of Rye do Pay. And so it comes to -- 1300 l.

To the whole Level of Wittersham, and a Marsh adadjoyning called Playden
Level, both containing 3000 Acres; which at 4 d. the Acre, will Pay 50 l. per
Ann. And that Sum being perpetuated, will at 20 Years Purchase, raise -- 1000
l.

To the Owners of Guildford Level, for the Draining of some 3000 Acres of Marsh
for 15 Years last past, or thereabouts; which at 4 d. the Acre comes to 50 l.
per Annum: And so for 15 Year is -- 7^0 l.

To the same annual Payment at 20 Years Purchase if perpetuated -- 1000 l.

These Lands did Drain out into Waine-way Creek, (Numb. 16.) till the Stops
there made Land of that Creek, and shut up that Drain. And therefore the Owners
of this Level made no Agreement for Draining when the said Agreements for
Draining were made.

To 300 Acres of Derelict Land, or thereabouts; gained out of Appledore
Channel, by the two lowest Stops made cross the same. These Stops turn all the
Channel above them into marsh Land; except a small Drain for freshwater. This
new-gain'd Marsh has sometimes been drowned with salt Water to scower Sluices.
The Lordwarden also may lay it open to the Sea again, for benefit of
Navigation; and no Claim is made thereto, by those at whose Charge the same was
gained. Therefore these Lands seem to be in the Crown: and not the Property of
any Subject. 2700 l.

An Appropriation of these Lands to mend Appledore Channel (the general
Land-Drain); will divide the been fit thereof, to the several Land Owners
Drained the same, and that in proportion to their Payments for such Draining;
And Rye Harbor will have some Reparation, by those Stops, from whence it
received much Damage. This Marsh so used to scower Sluices, is not fully
improved; but that Improvement will be received, if the said Channel shall be
opened. For there will after be no need of a Basin on any Land to scower
Sluices. So the Condition of this Land considered; I value the same but at 12 s.
per Annum the Acre, and fifteen Years Purchase, and so it will raise -- 2700 l.

Fund 12350 l.

Charge 9466 l.

Yet this Overplus of 2884 l.

seems subject to Abatement for Removal of Rumny and Walland Marsh Sluices as
before.

That part of the Basin above Black-wall, was hired at 400 l. per Annum, or
thereabouts in 1635. and is now Let for 60 l. per Annum; notwithstanding all
Endeavors for better Draining, consistent with Sluce-Stops. But I hope the
open Channel may Drain that low Marsh as well as formerly: However, if I
mistake herein; yet as I propose to Imbank it, the same may easily be Drained
by a Mill: For less Rain than falls on twice that Expansion, will be all the
Water we can have there.

Six year after that Land shall be Drained, the same may be delivered back to
its Owners (as agreed); So the Commissioners of the upper Levels, will save 340
l. per Annum, by an open Channel; even in this Basin. Therefore should my Fund
of 12350 l. before mentioned prove Insufficient, either by your Honor's
Disallowance of any part thereof, or otherwise: Then I humbly submit it to your
Honor's great Judgment, how far the upper Levels may be Charged to make the
same good, in Consideration of the said 340 l. per Annum.

The same Commissioners also, have several other Marshes in their hands;
because not well enough Drained to pay the Draining Taxes, now about 9 s. per
Annum the Acre; yet those Lands, were formerly worth 20 s. per Annum the Acre,
or thereabouts. So far a better Drain is now wanted.

FINIS.

