A COFFIN FOR THE Good Old Cause; OR, A Sober Word by way of Caution to the
Parliament and Army, or such in both as have prayed, fought, and bled for its
Preservation.
Written by an Affectionate Friend to it and them*
SIRS,
IT is a solemn and sacred saying, That a wise man foreseeth an evil, and
preventeth it, but fools go on, and are punished: That there is such an eminent
evil impending, as your eye has not seen since first you sat in your Seats,
or wore swords by your sides; such an Evil as will (if the wisdom and goodness
of God prevent not) be the inevitable Ruin of that Interest you have been the
Assertors of, is most certain; or no less than all your friends in England are
in an extreme error.

But a little to convince you hereof (because man is a rational creature, and
ought not to stir one step in any Act, but as he is led thereto, by the light
thereof) I shall endeavor to spread before you the danger, and then pray the
Father of Mercies to give you hearts to do your duty in preventing it.

1 Your Army is unsettled. 2 Your House divided. 3 Your Friends discouraged. 4
Your Trade decayed. 5 Your Treasure exhausted. 6 Your Enemies increased and
heightened.
1 That your Army is unsettled, is most certain; Neither can the course you take
settle it, but discompose it more every minute; for you fill it with strange
faces, which will make as strange effects. It is true, the Heads of Regiments
(yea and Captains) that have been Capital Offenders, it is not your prudence to
trust; but for the Inferior Fry, (who ever yet have been the fastest friends
to your power, and the public) to be turned out by wholesale, without a fair
and legal hearing, is not for your honor, nor interest. You have seen how
little a Colonel signifies, where his acquaintance is but green; soldiers
love to be lead by them, they have bled withal.

Again, How many men have you turned out even for their Judgments sake, that
never sinned against your power at that rate, as many that are kept in? If an
Anabaptist has behaved himself equal with one of another persuasion; Let their
encouragement be equal also: how will you persuade the people you intend a
Commonwealth, whiles thus partial in your petty proceeds? it is not what he
is, but what he has done ought to be the question to all. I know a Quaker in
Arms, that eminently served you* yet me^^ I not with one that is willing to
serve him. If you will call in the Conduct of the Army, as in 46. (which was as
Presbyterian as ever) they will lose it before a year be over, as then they
did. The Anabaptist was thicker in Office, than any other persuasion but
immediately before this turn, yet could he not keep it, nor stem the tide,
when the turn came; and just is it with the Great Jehovah, that that party that
pretends to Common Liberty, and yet grasps at all, should lose even what he
already has. Much Reason might also be urged for this; for naturally all
parties conspire against any that alone injoyes the Power* as nine at a Table
would at the tenth, when he ingrosses the entertainment of the whole.

Moreover, that party that is so industriously set upon incroaching all, can
least be credited, because of their many former defections, and attempts to
betray the Cause: Love was belyed, if not a Presbyterian, and Booth no less. I
speak it not to reflect, for there are that I love and honor of that
persuasion, as convinced they do indeed deserve it, both as ^uly pious persons,
and friends to the public: As of the other hand, I do believe there is more
than a remnant of that opinion; Royal. Whereas the Sectarian party cannot be
charged by envy it self, with treason of that nature, nor is this a bare
surmise issuing from a jealous brain, whiles we see even one of the
Commissioners refuse the Oath against the Stuarts claim, and Sir Authony Ashly
Cooper (an old Cavalleer) made a Colonel, whiles his Malignancy incapacitates
him to be a member of the Council; Officers generally are most civil, and
pocket up injuries silently; but when you come to model the Troops, as you have
done the Conduct, your work will recoyl; or if you do it not, your New Officers
will have no command over the old fouldiers. Thus the further and faster you go
in your Settlement, the more unsettled are you; like one that mends his pace
when his way is wrong.

Secondly, Your House is divided. I will only Reminde you of the Word of the
Lord Christ, from whose lips never came guile, and who certainly may be
believed. A house divided against it self cannot stand, which carries
conviction with it, that your Ruin (except prevented) is ready to enter. And I
think, you think, the Cause and you must fall together.

Thirdly, Your Friends are discouraged. Many ways, and for many things: your
new modelling the Army, putting the Sword into the hands of Rigid, Royal,
Neutral spirits, that never yet were judged worthy to be trusted with the
Cause, that never bled, nor fought, nor prayed for it, that have neither
Courage, nor Conduct. They see you prone to pardon a spirit beneath your own,
but not above; they that would carry you back, or halt you in the work, but not
they that press you forward: they see you shrunk, and less in your Public
Declarations than many years ago; you were taller by the head and shoulders in
your public words and works, in 49. and 51. than now, they saw greater reason
to rejoice at what you said and did then, than now; They had higher hopes of
true Liberty, both as men and Christians then, than now: which shows that the
Rebukes that have been upon you, have not been Sanctified, nor you bettered and
improved thereby At your first sitting, you were an apparent blessing to the
Nation, which begat in all good people longings for your rerurn again, in hopes
to find you yet better: but not so; you were a second time interrupted, and
good men engaged for your Return, with heightened expectation you would rule
righteously and purely for God and your Generation; but behold worst of all. I
beseech you lay it to heart, examine and see what is the reason you dye and
wither in the esteem of good men; see whether you have answered those private
and personal Obligations to good people at Portsmouth, the Fleet, London, and
every where, which made them not value their lives for your sakes; and see
whether all this gives not Great Ground of Fear, that your (and our) glass is
run, and an overflowing scourge just ready to seize upon us.

Again, Lesser faults in good men are punished severely, while greater in
others are let go scot-free; which does demonstrate your spirit is rather
united to evil than good; what else can be the reason that Sir Henry Vane's
expelled your house, for framing only a form of Government, never received nor
practiced (though I desire not to be understood, as adjusting his Act, or
condemning yours simply considered) and Oliver St. John, one that was both, yet
he can keep his Seat, have impunity, and rule the Roast? it is true, the Act
was private and personal, yet did it, and the secluding Major Salloway,
liberally discover the Complexion and Temperature of your house.

Again, You kiss and hug them, that scorn and hate you, and slight such as
faithfully served you. Your declaration (a pitiful dull confused sapless
piece) courteth the Clergy and the Lawyer, a brace of birds, that ever yet have
endeavored to pick out your eyes; Oh Lord! what sad fate must needs attend
that power that accounts it their interest to exalt their Eminentest Enemies,
and shake off their surest friends? was it the Lawyer brought you back to the
exercise of your power? Or did he not rather laugh and scorn you? was it
Oxford and Cambridge, Calamy and Case, that steered your Fleet? raised your
Siege? incensed your soldiers so, as they would either die or set you in your
seats again? Was there no Sectarian put their neek in the Noose for you? and
did what none else either could or dared to do? and must they now despond, hang
their heads, and be ashamed to look their friends in the face, through your
abuse of the adventure of their blood?

Furthermore, it is a great discouragement to your friends, to see the giddiness
and instability of your actings. One day solemnly thank Col. Rich for his good
service; the next, conspiring to cut his throat: if he did indeed serve you,
your latter proceeds are ugly: If otherwise, your thanks was grounded upon
ignorance; so that whether he served you, or served you not, you do much
disserve your selves by such actings. For the veil is too thin, all men do see
and say, it is not Rich or Ludlow, but the whole Sectarian party, some among
your selves design to ruin; and to the end, they may the better usher in the
exiled Interest.

Moreover consider, Can you at once suppress the Sectarian, and keep out the
King? I know not what you may imagine, but the wisest without doors think
otherwise. Now if this be impossible, then an idiot may make the inference,
that look how much you lay aside the Sectarian, just so much you lay aside of
your strength, and propagate the interest of Charles Stuart. How behoveful
therefore is it, that you eye this evil betimes, and suffer not your Forces nor
Fleets to be baptized too much into the Boothian Spirit; Enfeebling your
selves, and laying further pressures and discouragements upon the hearts of
your Friends. Many other discouragements I might enumerate. But your time is
precious, so also is mine.

4 Your Trade's decayed. I presume you will give me your faith (without proof)
that it is so: how it came and why it continues; every one satisfies himself
with his own reason, and therefore I shall spare my pain and your trouble:
only let me tell you, this is the dame of all, idleness; and no vice can be
your friend, if you intend a Commonwealth. Lack of employment first foments,
then fosters discontents. No men of metal will starve while meat is to be had,
if they cannot have it by a civil employment, they will by a military, and if
you cannot list them, others shall; for it is not choice but necessity which
brings them to you, and that also shall carry them from you. Thus you see how
nature has distressed your affairs, and all men lay all their lacks on you. A
speedy applying of your selves therefore effectually to remedy this distemper,
is certainly your duty, or this single evil, which is not easily buried, will
sink you.

5 Your Treasure's exhausted; yet would not this disease be incureable, were
not your Army and Navy in Arrear; invert therefore, that proverb that money
answers all things, and you will take a true account of your own condition: how
you will fill the empty purse, considering the difficulties, as well foreign
as domestic, that you must encounter, is worthy your serious thoughts. You may
assess, but the humor of a Free Parleament, supported by all the art and
interest of the Royallist and Secluded Members, gives too good reason to doubt
the Collections will be but slow in the Country. Add heteunto the Enemies you
make your selves (to wit) all the Sectarian interest, (who certainly will most
unwillingly maintain their oppressors) together with the general want of Trade,
as aforesaid: and I fear you will find such a dullness, as (if I mistake not)
your Exigents cannot endure: How hardy you are, I know not, but I assure you
this consideration has a very grim and ghastly aspect, and has in very legible
characters (at least in my apprehension) the death of our Cause engraven on it.
I shall not so much as mention the infinite inconveniences that are entailed to
this; only will say (what you may observe) this Army serves you not on
principle, but ^or pay; I will not deny but there are among them that would
have me by the ears, should they know I said so: but deceive not your selves:
could Dick have kept them, they had never been yours; and they staid with
Fleetwood till they had eat up the three last months Assessement; nor had they
left him yet, could he have got or lent them more.

Lastly, Your Enemies increase, and that both in Nnmber and Nature; for you
create Enemies to your selves, and this with so great an industry, that were I
an alien, I should think it your interest to do so; For no man ever could
imagine any power should be so busily occupied in kicking off its fastest
friends. Are not your Old Enemies enough, but you must make New? This carries
conviction with it, that you intend to take your Old Enemies, for New Friends,
but woeful is this advice; and unavoidable ruin will be the effect, and if you
enter not into new Counsels, farewell for ever the Old Cause. The ways to save
you, are but two. Espouse again, and indulge the Sectarian Interest; for a
little time will tell you, you cannot keep out the King without their aid, his
interest or theirs you must make yours. The Presbyter alone cannot preserve you
if they would, and three parts of four would not, if they could; think not I
speak at random.

The other is, the speedy filling up your house; contempt's upon you, because
of your paucity; nor will the secluded Members give up their claim, till
others are in their room.

Besides, as you are, you are not a Competent Representative, for so large a
Territory, as England is. Many places have none to represent them at all, and
you have ost declared no Laws shall be made, nor many raised, but by the
peoples Representatives in Parliament, so that you your selves have tied their
purse; nor will you get it open without knocks till then. Moreover, your
enemies increase upon you, because no man sees you have any maw to this work,
but rather think of keeping the power in your own clutches. This also is the
reason of your want of Trade, because every wise man sees you cannot hold it as
you are; and no man will manage affairs, and adventure his stock, whiles
affairs of State are at this uncertainty; and they who would mind their
business, and employ themselves and others, growing idle, and their moneys
lying dead, become enemies to you, as the cause thereof, nor can any excuse be
formed for you.

To conclude, how many would be through Common-wealths-men, saw they you so?
but whiles you are uncertain, so are they, and judge it imprudent to outpace
the power; to abjure Monarchy, and the Monarch also, till the State does it;
after you is good manners, because if you vary, they are undone; would you tie
any faster than your selves? that is most unrighteous; if you will reserve a
turn to the King, quarrel not others for being reserved also; Lead the Van
therefore over Rubicon, doubt not enough will follow, but it must be also for
a free, just, and equal Commonwealth; not that one party or persuasion must
have all the Magistracies in their own hands, and all the rest as Servitors
attending it; no, this is but the name, it is the thing you must set up, or the
name of Charles Stuart will be better, and find more followers than it. Sirs,
your Vessel's leaky, and your Pump too little; carreen her quickly, or you sink
past all recovery. This is the humble, but hearty advice of

Your Faithful Servant.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1660.


