A Whip of small cords, To scourge ANTICHRIST (Sitting in the Temple of God,
and exalting himself above, and opposing himself against all that is called
God) Out of the Temple of GOD; AND Clearing up the way for the receiving in of
the Lord JESUS CHRIST in his glorious power in and over the Church; now
exercised in The Working of Miracles, Gifts of Healings, and Other
extraordinary Gifts.

WITH The Knot at the end of the Whip.

Whereunto is added, The Sheerer sheer'd, and casheer'd; The Shaver shaved, and
the Grinder ground.

By MATTHEW COKER, being Apostolicus Propheta, and Propheticus Apostolus; ut
Bapt sta severus, Christi praecursor; Bapt^smate Sp^r^tus baptizatus;
Antichristi and Antispiritus: ant^thetos oppositus; necnon Angelus: n^n Evanus,
(qui vanus) sed Evangel^cus.

Lonndon, Printed by James Cottrel, on Addle-hill. 1654.

WHereas some persons (curiously wise) have taken upon themselves to be the
onely-best interpreters of those most sacred gifts of God's holy Spirit, which
none can so well judge of, or understand, as he or they that have received a
greater measure of that same Spirit, and been made thereby partakers in some
sort of some Gifts, at least, likewise:

I therefore, who (as the works best testify of me) have received the power of
working Miracles, and the gifts of Healings, have thought fit (hoping to be
soonest heard) to speak both experimentally and knowingly: And my Method shall
be, in resolution of Questions in this Age proposed, or that happily may be
proposed; and answering Objections which have been, or may be made unto or
against the same.

Whether the Gifts in the Apostles times be in our times.

gifts of Gods Spirit, as recited in Chap. 12. of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, have extremely abated since the division of us and Rome, that is,
of us living in the Jurisdiction of the Church of England, and them under the
Papal power usurped over the Church of Rome; and so the spirit of Unity having
much ceased in that respect between Churches at home and abroad, and the spirit
of Division having advanced it self, the faith of Christians through want of
true Charity has been much weakened, to the great disabling of them in the
receiving of those great Gifts, which the Apostles, inflamed in holy flames of
Love and Zeal for the Truth, even unto the death, received in their time, and
men nearest approaching unto them in several Ages since, have, according to the
great measure of God's Spirit imparted to them, and their great care in not
resisting the motions of that blessed Spirit, received gifts measurably
answering to the Grace given and received.

Then none can have those gifts, but he or they that have such grace given.



How then is it that they can be received?

If you believe, the things that I do you shall do also, and greater things
then these.

Are not miracles ceased according to the opinion of the Church of England?

it cannot be presumed that any member will say, Those gifts are ceased which
are in Christ the head, from that time especially that he ascended into heaven,
and so ever since. Ceased indeed, as to the great operation there was in the
Apostles time, as yet they have; but ceased so, as never to be again exercised
in the Church of God, will sure be maintained by none, that believe, That that
same Spirit shall be given more and more in the later days, till Time's last
day; after which, in Eternity, we shall live in and by the full measure of that
Spirit, for ever.

What has the common received opinion been, touching Miracles ceased?

the Sun of righteousness, which has been long set in the firmament of the
Church, (in respect of the great wane of light which the Apostles had) shall
arise oriently and purely, to the bringing in at last of the perfect day. But
that being come, or near his full approach to the high noontide of
Gospel Light; Ignorance, Schism, etc. are dispersed, and vanish quite away into
the bottomless pit, back into the smoke again from whence they ascended up; and
then those gifts appear more and more, as fast as the contrary flee away.

Whether it has been held, that gifts of Healings in the Church have ceased?



What is to be conceived the scope and intention of God, in sending to any
person the power of working Miracles, gifts of Healings, and suchlike
extraordinary gifts of Gods Spirit in these later days?



These things done in our age, are not the works of God.



But, Sir, these things cannot be done.



There are many wise men, and many grave Divines; and why he? and why not
rather they?

Moses raised up a Deliverer, David a King, Daniel a Prophet, Paul an Apostle?
Let God, or his Word, or manifested will, declare that; and the same God, and
his yet-secret will, in time manifest the other.

To the Christian Reader.
I Trust thy judgment, by committing it to the Spirit of God for directions to
read both my words and meanings. I pray God give thee charity to love the works
and matters spoken of, says to believe them, and then wisdom to apply them to
their right use designed. This short Narrative I have this afternoon at my
leisure drawn up, with little study, and yet by good advice. Those works of
Miracles and Healing that are not only talked of, but really performed, I will
own: and in brief, that I have the power of working Miracles, the gifts of
Healing, of Prophecy, and the spirit of Discerning, I will justify, if I am
called to it, not only before God, Men, and Angels, but before Satan,
Antichrist, and all the powers of hell: yea, if I knew the way to enter the
gates of hell, by way of confirmation of these Gifts, and of revenging the
abuseful reproaches of them from the devils and their agents, I would; and,
through the power of God and his Christ, make the devil and his Antichrist roar
and howl their worst, that they might be the sooner silent.

The 25 of May, 1654. MATTHEW COKER, the Apostolical Prophet, and Prophetical
Apostle.

The Knot at the end of the Whip: Added this 25 of June, 1654. being on the
Lords day.
TO my unbelieving Opposers, especially those who not only maligned me, but
also at least ignorantly blasphemed the works and operations of Gods Spirit
mightily shown forth at the time of participation of the holy Mysteries of the
Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, at the Chapel of Lincolns Inn, last
Michaelmas-Term.

It is by reason of you, hypocrites at best, but halfconverted Christians, that
the Name of God is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles. Had you had the least
measure of true grace amongst you that looked so high and so scornful at my
devotion, because surpassing yours, you would rather with humble admiration
have given thanks at such time, then have been so unreasonably bold, to have
then and after judged the worse of me, only because of the different sound of
my voice, which I am sure was rather by a change through a more heavenly and
melodious accent, as the piously-devout could and will assert, and not so
strange, and even barbarous, as the hypocrites would then (and still, if they
could) make it. But I wish them to confess their hypocrisy and rash judgment
to the world forthwith, yea though they suffer shame for their ill doing, as
well as I have far and near suffered reproach for and through their foolish
judgings, censurings, and unhandsome and uncharitable informations of and
against me, whereby I was so blemished and tainted by all sorts of men, not
excepting one as I knew to the contrary, that even every one spent his verdict
of me; and he or they that would not so egregiously censute me in my Religion,
did at least hold and suppose I had been under some bodily distemper: whereas,
for mine own part, I still call God to witness, I was only weak in body, as I
had been many days before; whereby my soul and spirit being more at liberty, I
was then in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard a Seraphical voice singing
with me, and my self in the mean time (whether in the body, or out of the body,
I say not) was in a great ecstafie, and perfect ravishment of soul and spirit.

And you who were of the more charitable sort, and who, together with the
Spirit of Christ in you, had also a conscience bearing witness within you, at
that very time, of and concerning my unblameable deportment in every respect at
the Sacrament, insomuch that I hope even to this present you deem my actions no
otherwise, then only obedient to the holy Spirit of God, moving in and on my
heart, tongue and voice.

I have also against you a few words; that is, because, notwithstanding the
unreasonable struggling of all sorts, even of men, women, and children,
censoriously in City and Country upbraiding me, or rather, the works of God by
me; That you then should be so timorously silent, and so modestly wicked, in
that point, as not to spend a little breath, in a few words, to have choked
that stinking breath of Antichrist, which cunningly did vent it self, not only
in Sorcerers, Magicians, and suchlike vile persons, but also, as much as it
could, in the children of God themselves, to be even their instruments and
trumpets to noise abroad disgracefully those works of our LORD JESUS, which in
themselves were right glorious, and not a whit beneath those he has since by a
mighty power shown by me in and near this City of London.

And as for you Hypocrites, of whose amendment there is small hopes, you will
without sound Repentance, both you and your relations, become a stink in the
nostrils of all the generations to come.

And you poor faint-hearted ones, (though I confess many of you amongst the
number of Gods dear children) will never be thought worthy, unless your own
consciences, being now pricked, shall incite you to make amends for your former
defaults, by a greater future sincerity to the works you have childishly, and
yet stubbornly opposed, or at least not maintained, as you ought; you will
otherwise, through the just hand of God, be restrained from entering into that
good land in this our Nation ere long to be possessed by those true Israelites,
who become like those obedient ones under the Conduct of Moses their Deliverer,
so known to be, notwithstanding his being despised, by the signs and mighty
wonders God wrought by him.

My Advice is to all Christians in general, and even to all good Moral just
honest men, That they no longer stand in awe of Beelzebub, a god of Flies; of a
Devil, the begetter of strange fancies, and foolish fears; and that they show
the like confidence when their time shall be, as I my self intend in mine, that
is, To go up to the face of Antichrist; whom I shall know by this mark, That he
and his will riggle and struggle at the noise of my Whip of small Cords.

And if he and they will not hear and obey, and permit the Gospel to have its
free course, as it ought to have, (with all Blasphemies, Heresies, and
Oppositions, taken out of the way;) then I will, in the power of Christ, come
in that zeal as he entered the Temple, to whip out all defilers thereof; and
with a real (and not fictitious) Whip, of smarting (though) small Cords, whip
him and them out, not only out of the Temple and Temples, but out of house and
houses also, which they say are Temples.

Wrote by MATTHEW. COKER, (ut Baptista severus, Christi praecursor, Baptismate
Spiritus baptizatus) in his fervor of spirit for Christ's cause and the
Gospel's.

The Sheerer sheer'd, and casheer'd: The Shaver shaved, AND The Grinder ground
to powder, As will be the end of those that puff with a weak breath of
Antichrist against the Lord Christ, who will destroy that wicked one with the
spirit of his mouth, and brightness of his coming.
June 26. 1654.
I Understand this morning, That a Sheer-grinder living near the
Palsgraves-head-Tavern without Temple Bar, is, with the rest of his faction of
fools, much troubled at those things done by me in the power of God, which he
cannot understand; and that he does not only, with this last Faction of the
world, speak evil (with those foretold) of things he understands not, but also
of the person he knows not. For if he knew me, as the Angels of God, and all
holy men inspired, do, he would not this morning have said, That he hoped to
see me hanged one of the first.

But I advise him and them Antichrists, and Antiworkers against the Lord
Christ, and the works done through his power by me, That they bear in mind
what they have heard and read of the great success Haman had, by preparing the
gallows for Mordecai; whereby this benefit accrued, That they were the better
made ready to hand, against Haman's time came. I would desire this sort of
people to make application: only I fear that some of them, worse then Haman,
as bad as Judas, or worse, may do that office on themselves, which Judas did,
who betrayed his Master on earth, as these would the Messenger sent from him
now our Lord and Master in heaven.

I see the sheep of Christ would be well sheer'd, if they came under this
Sheer-grinder, who very likely for his Pension does sharpen the sheer, and put
an edge to the instrument or cause in hand, for others to proceed the better.

But if there are many more such Sheerers, I fear they will prove but Shavers,
and that not of us, but of their own scabbed flock; who with their crooked
Rams-horns, and crookeder conditions, will at last ere long butt at one
another. And my reason is this; for that such are all of the household of
Antichrist, the old enemy of Christ come in the flesh, however they pretend to
confess him openly, whiles in the mean time they deny his works, or at least
will not or dare not let them be vindicated, or at least examined impartially
and in a right way. And whereas it is said, That an house divided against it
self cannot stand, thence I infer, That because this house of Satan cannot long
stand, therefore it will of necessity be divided against it self. God send no
worse divisions amongst us Christians, and all good Moral peaceable honest men,
and we shall quickly outlive for ever the threats of Hanging, Stabbing,
Pistoling, and enjoy a continued Peace to us and ours for ever. And this is,
next to the Gospel, the greatest thing I aim at, and which, through the power
of God, I intend still to go on to accomplish, till by death or violence I am
taken out of the way; which my faith will not easily admit of, believing in
this cause, till I feel the last grasp of the fatal hand of death, if so be I
shall.

MATTHEW. COKER, the greatest Opposite of Antichrist in our Age.

God deal by me, as I intend by his Cause and the Gospel's, for which he
himself has stirred me up, and I must go on with, though through a sea of blood.

His will be done on earth as it is in heaven. MATTHEW. COKER, Angelus
Evangelicus, Fidelu Nuncius.



FINIS.

