To the Honorable the COMMONS of ENGLAND, in Parliament Assembled.
A Proposal for Preventing the farther decay of our Harbors: Humbly Offered,
by Robert Colepepyr, Gent.
SINCE the Prosperity and Safety of this Island seems to be owing (next to the
Providence of God) to the greatness of our Trade and Shipping. And since some
of our Harbors are grown much worse, therefore it may seem fit to examine the
cause thereof, the better to preserve them from further decay, and also to keep
such Harbors good as yet remain so; and since the same decay proceeds from
Sand that does settle and remain on our Bars and in our Bays, therefore I shall
endeavor to show these two things. First, from what Cause those Sands do
settle and remain. And Secondly, propose a way to prevent further increase of
such Sands: Yet without Charge. And for proof of each of these General Heads, I
will offer only such Observations and Reasons as are confirmed by Experience.

First, I apprehend that those Sands are brought from without by Storms, and
from within by Landfloods, and remain there for want of a large Basin or
Indraught; for such increase of water would strengthen the influx and efflux,
and not suffer any such Sand to remain.

And first touching the settlement of Sea Sand. The Land that makes the mouth
of the Bay or Channel, breaks the force of the water, and gives the Sand a more
quiet place to settle in, than it had in more open parts of the Sea, and those
parts are more quiet when the Ebbs issue out against Storms, than when Storms
find the Tides flowing up the Channel; and in such Ebbs all the Sands are
fenced out on the Bar, and in the Bay, and part of them cannot come into the
Channel as they do in Tide-times; and if all influx and efflux were constantly
so stopped, then a Bar in any Channels mouth would soon be raised, and grow
level with the Sand and Beach lying on the Shoars thereof. Therefore your
Navigation requires influx and efflux that are great as well as constant.

I confess the influx and efflux of Tides and Ebbs do keep some Sand from
settling, and also remove other Sand after the same has settled. But yet since
the Sea-Charts show more Sand-banks in Bays and Channels mouths than are
elsewhere found. Therefore the Land that makes them Bays, seems to be the cause
of the Sea Sands settling therein.

Secondly, I believe Sands may settle and remain on Bars, from the great
disproportion in breadth between that part of a Channel where a Bar lies, and
the upper adjoining part of the same Channel; for the Ebbs have strength in the
narrow part, and do thence remove such Sand as Land-waters or Tides and Storms
cause there to settle, but cannot carry it all out beyond the Bar part of the
Channel. First because there an over breadth does weaken the Ebbs. Secondly,
because the Sea is most apt to leave Sand on the Bar, and this Barr-sand
obstructs the Channel-sand, and thereby augments the Bar, which will thus grow
higher, till want of depth in the out fall brings the water to a rapidity
(notwithstanding overbreadth) and gives it strength to remove all that shall
afterward settle on the Bar.

And touching the weakness of influx and efflux to remove Sand, I apprehend the
same may come from two Causes within the Bar. First, from checking the
Land-waters in their passage out; and Secondly, from lessening of that
Indraught or Basin the Sea has within the Bar.

First, to show this check given to Land-waters; I say the same is too often
made by a Dam cross a Channel, with Sluices therein; yet this stop is intended
only to keep Salt Water out of Land, and give passage to the fresh water. But
these stops always do damage to Bars and Bays. For in whatsoever part of the
Channel this stop lies, the same detains Land-floods, and makes them pass out
with less rapidity, and thereby abates their service to the Bar and Bay. For
if you force water to pass through one foot square, that ought to have two, then
you must give that water time to balance that restraint.

And, Secondly, the Seas Indraught may be lessened by these two following ways.
First, by the said Sluce-stop; for when the Tides reach this stop whilst they
are flowing in over the Bar, then the stop does this farther damage; for then
it lessens the Indraught, and abates water (viz.) so much as would flow in
beyond that obstructing part of the Channel, before the Tides ebb on the Bar,
and this is the better part of the indravght, because the water that flows
farthest in, returns latest over the Bar, and then the ebbs have the greatest
rapidity.

Secondly, these Indraughts are sometimes made less by Imbankments of
Green-salts from the sides of a Channel. That is, when those Salts were drowned
by high Spring-Tides, before those Tides did ebb on the Bar. But when the Salt
you would imbank lies dry, when those Tides are ebbing on the Bar, then you
may imbank that Salt without prejudice, for the Sea will not send in one Tunn
of water the less for such Imbankments; and these Works in this place, and also
higher up, will contract the water, and deepen the Channel; and the Thames with
some other Channels have received depth from these Imbankments; therefore I
think this Rule for Imbankments will hold good in any Channel, however the
Tides flow as to distance from the Sea. And if Green-salts are found in a Bay,
the same may be Imbanked with benefit, both to Navigation, and the Imbanker.

It Is generally concluded, that all Green-salts on the sides of Navigable
Rivers, come from overbreadth (viz.) in the parts of the River where the same
are found; and adjoining Land-Pearagers believe that all such Salts may be
imbanked, and that Navigation will receive no detriment thereby.

Touching the lower and Sea Indraught, part of a Channel that has Green-salts.
These parts I confess are too wide for their common Freshes and low Tides, as
well as higher parts of the Channel, and by that means they lie dry sometimes,
and bear Greens, and Imbankments here will deepen a Channel as well as those
made higher up; but the Channels in those lower parts are not too wide for
Land-Floods, when the same meet pretty high Tides; nor are they ever too wide
for the Spring-Tides, and to receive water from the Sea to scower Bars and
Bays.

Though Imbankments out of these Sea Indraughts have been thought beneficial to
Navigation, as well by the Government, who have Entitled, Permitted or
Encouraged Men therein, as by those Men of Skill in such Works that advised the
same. Yet I fear most of your Bars and Bays have been rendered more unsafe by
those Works. And if Patentees, and Land-Peeragers remain permitted to lessen
your Indraughts by such Imbankments, whilst yet your Bays and Channels mouths
retain their old breadth, and so require the same influx and efflux to keep
them to their depth, then I apprehend your Bars and Bays may have an increase
of Sand, and that in proportion to the abatement of water made by such
Imbankments.

And I presume the damage these Imbankments will do to Bars and Bays, is far
more considerable than the benefit of deepning your indraught Channels, because
good entrances into Harbors, tend most to the increase and preservation of
Seamen and Merchandise. And when a Ship finds sufficient water at a good
distance from the Sea, then she can hardly want till she comes to the Bar or
Bay. But if such want of Water be found, then smaller Craft may Navigate in the
Channels.

I believe the Salt Indraughts do carry more Sand from Bars and Bays than
Land-waters, for these two Reasons. First, because the Land-waters bear but a
small proportion with the Salt. And secondly, because the Tides of flood run
strongest, and the Sands that lie firm and close during the Ebbs, are yet by
the flowing waters made very loose and hollow; wherefore I think flowing Waters
do most stir the Sand on the Bars and in the Bays, and leaves it in motion to
pass out to Sea in the Ebbs. And thus I hope I have shown that the imbankments
of those Indraughts do abate the influx and efflux of your Water, and increase
your Sands. Yet to make this point more plain, I pray leave to cite the four
following Presidents.

First, That many years since, a River called the Rother did pass through
Rumney-Marsh in Kent, and near its issuing into the Sea, anciently made a Haven
and Bay; but the Sea laid more Sand in the mouth of this Haven, than its
indraught of salt Water and fresh could remove; and thereby shutting out the
salt Water, and keeping the fresh in, it caused the latter to swell back in its
own Channel, about six Mile, and there the fresh Water broke over its bounds,
and went no more through Rumney-Marsh.

There are many thousand Acres of imbanked Land under high water mark in that
Marsh, and lying on the sides of that Channel and Haven, and whilst unimbanked,
the flowing water must drown the same before it ebbed in the Haven. Therefore
before Imbankments, those Lands were a large Indraught or Basin to that Haven
and Bay. And if those Lands were imbanked from the Rother's Channel and Haven
before they were so choked up, then we have good reason to believe those
Imbankments choked up the same.

And that those Imbankments did precede that Sand-stop, seems clear from the
two following Causes. First, For that in an ancient Mapp of Rumny-Marsh the
Haven is plotted, and in this plott are these words ( The old decayed Haven of
Rumney now swerved up, and the walls broken and decayed) and no Man would
Imbank Land from a Haven, after 'twas left both by salt and fresh water. I can
direct to the Original Mapp, or show a Copy thereof.

But least the Authority of that Mapp should be questioned. I will secondly
offer an argument from the natural tendency of Water (viz.) That the lower end
of that Channel was more pressed with fresh water after that stop, than the
parts six Miles higher could be; and all bounds of that Channel were equally
strong, if the Lands were not imbanked. Therefore if no Banks had been in the
way, save that in the Havens month, then the Freshes had swelled out at the
lower end of their Channel, and there made a new Out-fall by the old one. Yet
so it did not happen; but the Sea-barr and Channels-banks seem to force this
water back, 'till it found a low or weak part of the Bank.

I have an old Original Mapp showing the upper end of the Rother, and down to
its falling into Rumny-Marsh. And in the same, Information is given, where nine
Heads of several Rivers rise, and that they all served Mills, or Iron-Works,
and after fall into the Rother. Hereby this Honorable House may see, that much
Land-water must pass through that Channel into the Sea, from whence with the
vast Indraught this Haven had, it is probable it might be a Royal Port. Yet
these Rivers make but a very small fresh water in Summer, and such as might
easily be overcome, and stopped in by Sand in Summer Storms; for the Haven must
be very much too wide for its Indraught, after Rumny-Marsh was Imbanked. Thus
much on this first President, which I hope is well proved.

Secondly, After the destruction of Rumny Haven the River Rother did pass
through Rye Harbor in Sussex, and in 1623 the then Commissioners of Sewers for
the Rother did make a Dam cross that River with Sluices therein to let out the
fresh Water, and keep out the Salt; and this stop lying but six or seven Miles
from the Sea, therefore the same did damnifie the Harbor and Bay of Rye, as
well by abatement of Efflux of Land Waters, as by lessening the Seas indraught,
and these Sluices also caused so much Sullage to rest without them, that several
Thousand Acres of Land within were thereby drowned with fresh Water.

In 1635. 2000 Acres of Marsh (lying below that stop) were laid open to the
Sea, and used as an Indraught or Basin to scower the Land drain; and this
Indraught so far mended the Influx and Efflux, That soon after a Ship of 700
Tuns did ride at low water in Rye Harbor: But some Years since this Indraught
and some green Salts began to be imbanked, and as the Seas Indraught was
lessening by many imbankments, the Harbor and Bay did decay gradually and
visibly, as those imbankments were brought to Perfection; insomuch that in the
place where the Ship did ride at low Water, there the Sands now ly dry 'till
half Flood; yet it is well known Rye was the best Tide-Harbour between the Downs
and Portsmouth, into which good Ships could come from half Flood to half Ebb,
but now that Coast affords no shelter to Ships of Burden: To prove the Stop
made in 1623 and the Indraught in 1635 with their Consequences above Rye
Harbor, for Vouchers I can direct to Records of Sewers, and for the Ships
riding in Rye Harbor, with the after abatement of Water there, I have the copy
of a Certificate under the Seal of that Corporation, and can inform where the
Original may be seen.

I believe the Harbor and Bay of Rye have lost three parts in four of their
Indraught in manner as before, therefore the want of Influx and Efflux may well
cause Sand to stay there, and make them decay more visibly and faster than most
other Harbors and Bays; and although in some Bays the mischief done by
Imbankments may not yet be perceived, yet the same leiseurly abatements of
Water there may have an ill Consequence on this Kingdom, by obliging it to
Ships that draw less Water, while neighboring Nations build larger Ships of
War: And so much on this second President.

Thirdly, Least the Service my self and other Men allow to Imbankments in the
parts wherever they are made should be ill applied, and brought as an Argument
to clear Imbankments from all Damage in general, and thereby charge Storms as
well with the cause of the Sands remaining, as with its first settlement, I
will therefore pray this Honorable House to remember, that a few Years since
the Thames made a narrow Breach in the Bank of Westthorock Marsh in Essex, and
there drowned about 900 Acres of Land, and the Water by means of that narrow
Passage in and out, was put into a great Rapidity, and thereby deepened its
Entrance so much, that the Water was there near twenty foot deep at low Ebb,
and the same Strength and Radity of Water so far continued after its Entrance,
that the same cut a Channel near a Mile long in that Marsh, and this Channel
bore a Depth in proportion to the mouth of it.

This Channel was preserved deep by the Influx and Efflux of that 900 Acres of
shallow Water, and the same remained an indraught, and scowred that Channel
some Years; but 700 Acres of those Lands have been imbanked from the sides of
that Channel, yet the Channel's Mouth retains its first Breadth; therefore the
Influx and Efflux are abated in proportion to those Imbankments, and thereby
much Sullage does now remain in this Channel by lessening the Influx and Efflux.

Since the last mentioned Channel or Water-fret is a good parallel with Rye
Harbor, as well in holding Depth sufficient for Shipping whilst their
Indraughts remained, as by increase of Sullage and becoming shallow as their
Lands were imbanked; and since Rumny Haven was not destroyed 'till the Seas
Indraught was taken from it, and since Westthorock Channel could have no
Sullage driven into it by Storms, the same must be filled up by Imbankments,
therefore all these decreases in Depth seem to come from Imbankments; and
indeed we have little ground to think Storms without Imbankments will injure
any of our Navigations, unless we can believe such Storms happened since our
Imbankments as never came before: And this Honorable House may conclude that
Kinsail would soon be rendered like Rumny, were not the Sand settles there
removed by Influx and Efflux.

The before Imbankments happening within my knowledge, or being so capable of
proof as before, I therefore contented my self with certifying the same, and
have not enquired after other Damages of this kind, save only the decay of Lin
Harbor, and I conclude this Honorable House may be assured that Denver Sluice
lying in the River Ouse does retard the Land Floods in their Passage through
Lynn Harbor, and that by such abatement of Rapidity the more Sand stays there,
and if that Sluice does stop the flowing Tides before they ebb in that Harbor,
then it lessens the Indraught, and abates the Influx and Efflux, and thereby
also causes more Sand to remain. So in the first, if not in both these ways of
Damage, this Harbor becomes a fourth President.

These Imbankments of green Salts always make adjoining Slubbs and Water fretts
to hold shallower Water, if not to become green Salts; so the cutting shallow
Water off from the Indraught makes other Water that was deepeer to become
shallow: And thus by degrees Rye indraught was imbanked, and that Harbor and
Bay made shallow, and in the same manor the indraught of any other Harbor may
be imbanked, and no good Harbors left to Posterity. Therefore I hope this may
show what imbankments will do, especially when a Channel's Mouth is left to the
old Breadth. And hereby I hope I have proved my first general Head.

Some Gentlemen are entitled to Salts by Pattent, and others are entitled or
permitted to imbank them as Land Pearagers; but the Government always presumes
they cannot damnifie the Navigation, and sometimes provides against it: Yet
when Gentlemen have annexed these Lands to their Estates under Sales and
Settlements, then I believe this Honorable House will always be tender, and
not ruin Families by drowning of these Lands, and to buy them out may be very
expensive; yet one of them may become necessary for the restroing of indraughts
to their Ports.

Workmen are much improved in Imbankments of late Years, for they imbank near
the Sea, where the Income was formerly thought too little for the Risque and
Charge: Therefore they may now do more of this Damage than was heretofore done
in longer time. Wherefore if this Honorable House believes the Navigations in
the said danger, then a Prohibition against any other Imbankments in the Seas
Indraughts may preserve the Navigations from growing worse than they now are,
and without Charge, and the same seems good Proof of my second general Head.

And I believe the Bars that now hinder Navigation may be mended, if their ends
at any time lie dry, for if the sand which Storms lay there, can be kept from
washing away, then the Current (by abatement in Breadth) will be more rapid and
deepen such Bars; and this Informant believes he can keep the Sand from washing
off from the ends of a Bar, and that without any kind of Wood, or much Expense;
which Experiment he is willing to impart at large to any Member of this
Honorable House, or any Person from the Ports concerned, and will wait on them
to that end, on a Note to be left at the Grocers over against the South Porch
of St. Paul's Church: But I forbear herein to give this Honorable House any
Particulars on this Head: First, because I presume the Charge will be thought
private; and, Secondly, because I have no ample Presidents for this Work.

FINIS.

