THE Captain's Ghost Appearing to the COUNT.
BLess me! what Horrid and Dismal shade is this, that dares presume to enter my
Chamber, and not only disturb my Peace, but thus continually hinders my Rest?
What shall I do? this bold Ghost affrights and terrifies my Soul more, than all
the dangers of War, when Death marches in Triumph upon the Swords Point, and
breaths forth dire Threatenings from the Thundering Musket, and the Roaring
Cannon. Whose Ghost are you? are you the Ghost of Mr. Thynne, or of my old
Companion Captain Vratz, or any other who have Murdered, or been Murdered upon
my account?

Know Sir, That I am the miserable Ghost of Christopher Vratz, who was so
unfortunate to be prevailed upon by you, to Murder a poor innocent Gentleman,
who never had wronged or injured either my self or you, and that in the most
Barbarous and Cowardly manner imaginable. Oh Cursed wretch that you were, to
make your Countenance and Favor, and the hopes of being preferred by you,
Arguments to persuade me to ruin both my Soul and Body, and all this to be
done, to gratify your devilish Revenge, and satiate your wicked and hellish
thirst after Innocent Blood. And although out of an affected Bravery, I
obstinately denied you were any way guilty of that Barbarous Fact, yet without
my appearance, your Conscience must tell you, That it was you that Contrived
it, it was you that procured it to be done, it was you that encouraged it by
Promises of Present Pay, and future Gratuities; you know this was the thing you
carried me over for; you know the Polander and Stern were both entertained by
your direction, to assist me in the accomplishing your Wicked and Bloody
Contrivance. And notwithstanding all the time of my Imprisonment, nay, even the
time that I were to draw my last breath, I appeared with such Unconcernedness,
and took all care not to let fall any one word that might prejudice you, or
stain your Honor, or wound your Reputation, and make your Countrymen, as well
as the English abominate and shun the Company of so base and ungentile a
Murderer: and passed out of the World as much like an Atheist as I lived in
it; and to show the greatness of my pretended Heroic Resolution and Constancy,
took the whole Guilt and Odium of the Murder upon my self, yet you were as
Guilty of it, nay, more Guilty then I; and therefore know, that although you
have escaped that Ignominious Death, which you as well as I justly deserved,
yet you shall always carry about you a sting in your Bosom, as bad or worse
than Death itself; and your Guilty Conscience by a perpetual reading an
Indictment of Murder to you, shall be instead of a thousand Tormenters, to
make you as miserable in your Life, as the Murdered Gentleman was unfortunate
in his Death. In a word, you shall be a Terror to your self, be afraid of your
own shadow; and notwithstanding your former Courage and Valor, yet now you
shall become as timorous and fearful as the silly Hare, and flee at every
noise, and tremble at the shaking leaf; and your mind shall be so disturbed and
perplexed, that you shall always fancy the Ghost of me, or the Murdered
Gentleman to appear to you, and haunt you into all places and company that you
frequent, and not only spoil the pleasure of your Recreations by day, but when
you retire to your Chamber, we will follow you thither to, and be within the
same Curtains, and lie in the same Bed with you. Nor shall the contrivance of
your ^oks, nor the strength of your Bars, or the closeness of your Curtains, be
able to keep out this affrightning Ghost. And that which shall yet further
heighten your misery, and render Life it self a burden to you, is, the
consideration that you have contracted the Guilt, and brought the Odium of one
of the basest and most inhumanst Murders that ever was committed, upon your
self and Family, not only without any kind of provokation, but also enjoying
any kind of benefit thereby; for you may assure your self, you shall never
obtain the unjust end you aimed at. Neither will all your endeavors or
greatness be able to reconcile, for -- is too Virtuous to Marry one so justly
suspected of Murder, and too wise to believe you Innocent.

And to make you yet more completely miserable, so as that it may bear some
proportion with the guilt of the Murder, I will for ever be your constant
Companion and Tormentor, and instead of being a Comforter, I will make appear
to you nothing but Horror and Dread. I will Haunt and Torment you in all your
intended Divertisements, in your Visits and your Feasts, your Closet and your
Bed; I will imbitter all your enjoyments; I Will make you incapable of taking any
pleasure in your great Relations, or your large Possessions, your full Coffers,
or your Honorable Titles, your stately Buildings, or your curious Gardens. I
will be continually sounding in your Ears, the dismal Horrors, and
unexpressable Torments I suffer for your sake; and never hope that you shall be
rid of my Company, for I will haunt you as long as you live on earth, and then
to the Grave, that if you are doomed to bear company with Murderers and
Adulterers, I may there, if possible, farther Torment you.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. 1682.


