Some Farther CONSIDERATIONS Concerning ALKALY and ACID, By Way of APPENDIX To
a late ESSAY.

WHEREIN The Terms are made Clear, and the Natures of them Both more fully
Explained: Together with an Answer to the Objections that have been raised
against some Things contained in the said Essay.

By John Colbatch, Physician.

LONDON: Printed for Dan. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar. 1696.

TO THE Learned and Ingenious Dr. Edward Baynard, Fellow of the College of
Physicians, London.
Honored Sir,
THE Civil and Gentleman-like Treatment I met with the first time I saw you,
and the many Favors I have received from you since I have been honored with
your more Intimate Acquaintance, emboldens me to prostrate this Trifle at your
Feet; not pretending thereby to merit any thing from you, but as a just
Acknowledgment of the many Obligations I lie under. It would be a Wrong to you
for me to speak any thing in your Praise, your Merits being better known, than
I am able to represent them. It was you, SIR, who were (for ought I know) the
most early Cultivator of the Doctrine of Acids in the Cure of Diseases, in this
Nation; and the Success you have had in your Practice sufficiently makes it
appear, that you very well understood what you went about, when you durst
contend with the whole World, by treading in a New Path to Aid and Succor Life,
which few Physicians ever went before. Macte! SIR, in so Great a Work as in
Saving from the Grave; so shall the Name of Baynard not be known to the Widow,
nor the Cries of the Fatherless entail Vengeance on your House. And would your
Multiplicity of Business but permit you to collect your own Observations, and
make them Public, I am sure the Mouths of all your Opposers would be for ever
stopped, and their Errors cured by your Healing Hand; for I know your Charity
extends to Lunacy, as well as other Diseases: For none but the Moon-sick can
doubt so known and clear a Truth, as are the daily and most apparent Cures done
by (the Happy Discovery of) the Use of Acids. It Is well known, SIR, that Nature
and Art has sufficiently armed you for any Enemy, if such there are; tho your
Condonable Disposition is like the Sun, which shines even upon the Curs that
bark at him. Your Pardon, SIR, for this Trouble, and I doubt not but from you
to meet with a Generous Acceptance and Protection; and if Dr. Baynard espouse
my Cause, I care not who is against me. I assure you I bring no common
Inclinations to serve you; neither would I by ordinary Testimonies express that
Passion wherewith I am,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Devoted Servant, JOHN COLBATCH.

THE Preface.
I Have so enquired into the Causes of Diseases, as to be altogether certain of
the truth of the Hypothesis I have already advanced, and am now, in some
measure, endeavoring to confirm: But I don't at all pretend to have arrived to
so much Certainty as that by the Methods I take, to make People Immortal, and
that no Person shall die with whom I am concerned, which is what I believe some
People have expected from me. But, for my Part, I shall always entirely submit
to, and have respects for the Providence of the Almighty, who alone is the
Author and Disposer of our Lives; and who by the mouth of an Inspired Writer,
has declared, That our days are determined; and beyond the Limitation, set by
that wise Author of Nature, we cannot pass; it being altogether impossible for
Creatures to contend with their Creator, or to extend the Time that he has
limited.

Physicians are, of all men, without doubt, the most unhappy; People, in their
Extremities, looking upon them as their Saviors and Deliverers; yet after all,
they having done as much as 'twas in the power of man to do, having in all
respects acquitted themselves with the utmost fidelity and diligence, if their
Patients die, their appointed time being come, and the number of their days,
allotted them by the Almighty, being expired; yet the Friends and Relations of
the Party deceased, seldom fail to charge them in one respect or other, though
instead of being blamed, the Physician has deserved their utmost Favor and
Esteem.

By what I have said, I would not be so understood, That I am so far a
Predestinarian, as to believe that Peoples Lives are not frequently prolonged
by the use of fit and proper Medicines: For if it were not so, why should the
wise Creator have been at so much trouble, in providing such a vast number of
Medicines, in the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Kingdoms? if he did not by
them design a real service to Mankind in distress.

God generally gives a Blessing to proper means, it not being usual for him to
work Miracles every day. He teaches the Plowman how to plow his Ground, and the
Seedsman to sow his Seed; but the Plowman, instead of a Plow, must not use a
Harrow; neither must the Seedsman expect to reap Wheat, if he sowes Barley: So
it is in the practice of Physic, he that expects success in his Practice, must
first endeavor rightly to know the Causes of Diseases, and then to use fit
Remedies, and after that, the Event must be left to the Blessing of the
Almighty.

The Plowman may plow his ground aright, and the Seedsman sow his Seed in due
season, and after all is done they may reap no Crop: so the Physician may have
an exact knowledge of the Causes of Diseases, and may use the most fit and
proper Medicines in the World, and yet at last be frustrated in his Aim: Which
ought to show us what an exact reliance and dependence we should have upon the
Blessing of God on all our Endeavors, without which, we are like to make but
little progress in any thing.

I tread in an unbeaten Path, and therefore cannot so happily and easily arrive
at my Journeys end, as if I had had some body or other before, to have chalked
out my way for me.

I hope I shall not by these my Endeavors, incur the displeasure of any one of
those Physicians who are of a contrary Judgment to me, they being still left at
liberty to use their own Methods and Alkalious Medicines: For tho we act upon
different Principles, our Ends and Designs are the same, which are the Cure of
Diseases; and if I, after a multitude of Experiments, am convinced that Acids
are not the Causes of Diseases, but, on the contrary, that Alkalies are, and
upon that score am induced to use Acids in all or most Distempers; I don't see
any reason why People should reproach me for it, since I have made no Personal
Reflections upon any one.

As for the Physicians of our own Nation, I have the highest Value and Esteem
for them, having generally found them to be Men of greater Learning, and who
understand the business of their Profession better than any of the Physicians I
have at all met with abroad.

As for going again to Flanders with the Army, I never design that any more,
being sufficiently deterred from it, by the ill Treatment I had there last
Year, by the means of some of my old Friends the Surgeons. And that I may no
longer continue at Variance with so great a Body of Men, I have sold the
Receipt of my Vulnerary Powder and Tincture, and all the said Medicines I had
by me, to a Gentleman who is better able to dispose of them for the Public
Good of Mankind than I could; and therefore shall for the future wholly apply
my self to my Practice of Physic, in which if I have Success (which I doubt
not) I shall have business, maugre all my Enemies Malice.

From my House in Villars-street, York-Buildings in the Strand, Mar. 25th.
1696.
Some further CONSIDERATIONS Concerning Alkaly and Acid, etc.
I Thought to have said no more upon this Subject, until the Publication of my
History of Human Blood: But I finding that to be a thing of greater difficulty,
and that a much greater Number of Experiments than I at first thought of, will
be necessary to make that History complete in all its Parts; by which means it
will be something longer than I at first intended, before that Piece appears in
the world: Therefore I have thought fit,

First, To explain the Terms, or what is meant by Alkaly, and what by Acid;
which I find very many people, who are not Physicians, are in great measure
ignorant of.

Secondly, To explain the Nature of them somewhat more fully and clearly than I
have yet done.

Thirdly and Lastly, To answer the Objections that have been raised against
some particular things contained in my Essay.

All which Heads I shall handle with as much Brevity and Perspicuity as
possibly I can; omitting the more full Prosecution of them, till the
Publication of my History of Human Blood, which, I hope, will be ready for the
Press about the Month of June.

I shall make bold to declare, That I have not Published this Doctrine of
Alkaly and Acid, out of any design of appearing singular, or being the Head of
a Faction, but out of mere Pity and Compassion to Mankind, my Fellow Creatures,
whose deplorable Circumstances under Mistaken Methods, I have long bewailed; to
see Physic made the Scene of Slaughter, and so many miserable Mortals (the
helpless Sick) sent daily to their Last Homes, as Victims to Error and
Ignorance: Whilst the Learned Prescriber jogs on in his old mistaken Alkalious
Road; not dreaming (as the Wiseman says) that Death is there, and that his
Portion (I mean the Patient's) is with the Worms.

But that I may return to my Business.

First, To explain the Terms, or what is meant by Alkaly, and what by Acid.

Alkaly derives its Name from the Herb Kaly, from the Ashes of which Herb is
extracted a large quantity of Salt, which by the Venetians and others is much
used in the making of Soap and Glass; and this Salt they call Sal Kaly, and by
leaving out the S Alkaly. Now the Ashes of all or most Vegetables affording a
Salt of the same nature with the Ashes of the Herb Kaly, therefore all Lixivial
Salts are equivocally called Alkalies, and all other things of the same nature,
whether manifestly Saline or not, Alkalies; such are Arsnick, and all the
Testacea, as Pearl, Coral, Crab's-eyes, Oyster-Shells, etc.; and all Urinous
Spirits and Salts, such as Spirit and Salt of Blood, Urine, Hartshorn, etc.
And some think, that of these Alkalies are made the famous White Powder, so
much talked of, which kills without a Bounce, and murders without making a
Noise.

Acid, I suppose, did first derive its name from Acaid, an Arabian Word for
Acetum, Vinegar, which is the most common and known Acid; and therefore all
things of the same Taste and Nature with Vinegar, Acids; such are the Juices of
most Fruits and Plants in their Natural state, and unfermented; though all
fermented Vegetable Juices do after fermentation retain something of their
pristine Acidity, though not in so eminent a degree: But every body knows that
all fermented Juices, such as all sorts of Wine, Ale, Beer, etc. let them be
preserved with never so much care, will at last return to their pristine state
of Acidity. All Metaline Sulphurs ate to be ranged amongst the Number of Acids,
they being nothing but a Congestion of Acid Particles. I may likewise without
presumption reckon all sorts of Balsoms and Pinquedinous and Oleaginous
Substances, amongst the number of Acids; by reason that in the most bare and
simple Distillation, they afford large quantities of Acid Substances, but
nothing that is Alkalious. Bread also, that is, not without reason accounted
the Staff of Life, affords also by Distillation a large quantity of an Acid
Substance, which is no despicable Menstruum. Sugar, which though in its Taste
seems to be nothing less than an Acid, yet by a Philosophical Management
appears to be nothing else but a Congestion of Acid Particles.

Thus for the present I think I have given a sufficient account of what I mean
by Alkaly, and what by Acid; and also what things are to be accounted Alkalies,
and what Acids.

There are some things which seem to be of a mixed nature between Alkaly and
Acid, which things we call Neutrals. Now those things of this Tribe which
afford by much a greater quantity of Acid Substances than Alkalious ones, I
stick not to call Acids, because the Acid predominates; and those that afford
by much a greater quantity of Alkalious than Acid Substances, I call Alkalies.
Though in a more strict sense they deserve rather to be called either Sub-Acid
Alkalies, or Sub-Alkaline Acids, according as either the one or the other
predominates.

I shall now proceed to my Second thing, which is, To explain the Nature of
Alkalies and Acids more fully and clearly than I have yet done.

For the well Performance of which Task, I shall compare the Operation of them
both upon Human Bodies, both internally taken, and externally applied.

I shall begin with Sal Kaly, which is the Standard of Alkalies, and compare
that with Vinegar the Standard of Acids.

Sal Kaly, and so all Lixivious, Vegetable Salts, as Salt of Wormwood, etc.
being applied outwardly to the bare Skin, scorcheth and burns the same, all
one as if a Red Hot Iron were actually applied to it, causing an Escar, which
falling off, an Ulcer follows: Nay, indeed there is scarce any other Caustic
used, than a Lixivium of Sal Kaly, which is what the Chyrurgeons call Capital
or Strong Soap-Lees, evaporated to Dryness. The same being taken inwardly,
without being greatly diluted by some Aqueous Vehicle, in most people causes
enormous Vomitings, which I my self have formerly experienced; and if it be
never so much diluted, if it does not excite Vomitings, it rarely fails of
either depraving, palling, or totally destroying the Appetite: Besides, being
conveyed into the Blood, by breaking its Globules and spoiling of its Texture,
it causes either Scorbutes, Rheumatisms, Sciatica's, Consumptions, Gout,
Palsies, or some other of the fatal Tribe of Chronical Diseases.

Now I have shown what Sal Kaly, and the rest of the Tribe of Vegetable
Lixivious Salts will do; in the next place let us see what effects even common
plain Vinegar, which is the standard of Acids, will have, being externally
used, and internally taken.

It is well known, that Vinegar being externally applied, is of extraordinary
use in a great many sorts of Inflammations, of singular use in an Erisipelas, or
St. Anthony's Fire. Clothes being dipped in it, and applied to the Forehead and
Temples, to the Wrists, the Stomach, and bottoms of the Feet, I have
experimentally found to be of extraordinary use in some very burning Fevers: I
have likewise my self (before I had found out a more certain Remedy) sometimes
made use of it with good success in great Bleedings at the Nose, by dipping a
Sponge in good strong Vinegar, and applying it to the Scrotum. I have also
known it with good success to have been made use of by poor people, in stinking
old Ulcers. From all which it appears, that being externally applied, it is no
Caustic, and will make no Ulcer, but on the contrary, will cure Ulcers, ease
Pain, etc.

Now we have seen some of its good Effects, being externally applied; let us see
what it will do being internally taken.

In the first place I shall mention an Account given of it by the Ingenious Dr.
Baynard: He says that he was called in to a Person who had a Total Suppression
of Urine, under which he had labored some considerable time, and that several
things had in vain been given him; he immediately gave him a large Draught of
Vinegar, which soon made him to Piss freely; and by repeating of it two or
three times, he was perfectly freed from his Indisposition. The Doctor has
given an account of this in one of the Philosophical Transactions; but I have
not read it, neither have I time at present to look over those Papers. I think
also he has told me, that the same thing he has done with the same plain
Medicine two or three times. He likewise gave me several Instances of many
Persons in most violent Fevers, who have been presently cured by drinking large
Draughts of Atterpool Water well acidulated.

I am also most creditably informed, That Dr. Bently, a late famous Physician
in Cheshire, who lived to almost a Hundred Years of Age, had such wonderful
Success in Fevers, that he acquired the Name of the Feaver-Doctor, and that his
Medicine was nothing else but the Decoction of a certain Herb well acidulated
with the Spirit of --; a Noble Acid, which I am obliged not to reveal.

A Worthy Lady, whose Name I must not mention, has assured me, That she has
brought in the use of Vinegar or Verjuice Posset Drink, amongst her poor
Neighbors in the Country where she lives, in the Smallpox; and where that
has been used from the beginning, she has scarce observed any one to dye or be
disfigured; which is agreeable to what I observe in my Essay, p. 24.

I have likewise frequently observed, that three or four Spoonfuls of Vinegar,
will immediately check the most violent Vomitings, occasioned by the taking of
some harsh Antimonial Medicines.

A great many other good qualities has simple Vinegar internally taken, and
externally applied (besides its being a good Menstruum) that I think not fit
here to enumerate.

The next thing I shall do will be to compare Arsnick, as the highest and most
exalted Alkaly, with Oil of Vitriol, the most exalted Acid.

As for the external use of Arsnick, I know nothing of it experimentally; but
it being a thing of that pernicious consequence internally taken, I suppose it
can have no very friendly operation externally applied.

Internally taken, it causes the most enormous Vomitings and Convulsions of
the Stomach, Cold Sweats, Palpitations of the Heart, Swoonings, most violent
Thirst, and in general, seems to be a direct Enemy to Life, which in a short
time it fails not to destroy. All which effects it will not fail to have, given
in never so small a quantity. And all those people who have been so vain as to
pretend to correct the Poisonous Venomous Quality of Arsnick, so as to convert
it into a good and safe Medicine, have attempted it only by the means of Acid
Salts, such as Sea Salt, Nitre, Tartar, Vitriol, etc. wherein I cannot tell
whether any man has yet been so happy as to succeed.

To prove Arsnick to be an Alkaly, and as such is the Cause of all those
dreadful Symptoms that attend those people who are so unhappy as to take it, I
shall insert a Relation made to me by Mr. Pain an Apothecary of Brandford, on
Saturday, Feb. 16. which was as follows:

A certain Young Woman of Brandford having taken a very large quantity of
Arsnick (as he told me, an Ounce) she was immediately attended with all the
most violent Symptoms imaginable; upon which Dr. Morris was called in, who gave
her large Quantities of Sallad Oil, the usual Remedy, without in the least
abating the Symptoms: Upon which he ordered them to procure a large quantity of
Lemmons, and to press the Juice out of them, of which Juice he plentifully gave
her, which soon took off and abated those imminent and direful Symptoms which
inevitably threatened Death; though the Operation of the Acid might be somewhat
impeded, through the quantity of Oil she had taken before.

But to return to my Business, which is to see what are the Effects of Oil of
Vitriol.

I confess the Acid Particles of Oil of Vitriol are so concentrated, as to make
it unfit to be externally applied, or internally taken, of it self; but being
diluted in any proper Vehicle, is a Medicine second to none that I know of. A
few Drops in Canary, given to the youngest Children who are troubled with
Worms, seldom or never fails of having the desired effect. It being mixed with
Honey of Roses, is one of the best Medicines that perhaps is known, for the
Scurvy in the Gums, breeding Flesh where it it is wanting, and fastening the
Teeth. Being mixed with Spring Water and Brandy, of each equal parts, to a
moderate Acidity, is no despicable Medicine in giving ease in the most
Tormenting Pains of the Gout, the Part being fomented with it Night and
Morning. I may be almost positive, that the Medicine used by the Ingenious
Swiss Gentlemen who now reside in this City, and are become so deservedly
famous, particularly for the Cure of Sir Robert Howard, is nothing else but a
Mixture of Oil of Vitriol with a certain Oleaginous Body, in due proportion.
The same Medicine is also used and sold by Mr. Fisher, Chyrurgeon in
Aldersgate Street: Which Medicine rarely fails giving immediate Ease in the
most Tormenting Pains of the Gout. Which is a Confirmation of the Truth of what
I have said in my Essay concerning the Gout, wherein I assert, that it is not
from any Acidity in the Blood that the Gout is occasioned, but from Particles
of a quite contrary nature, (viz.) Alkalious ones; as plainly and evidently
appears by Analyzing the Chalky Substance contained in the Nodes.

A better general Medicine than Oil of Vitriol is scarce known in most
continued Fevers, any small Liquors, as Barley-Water, Small-Beer, etc. being
well impregnated with it, and drank freely.

The following Mixture is a very noble Medicine in that painful Distemper the
Stone in the Kidneys.

Take of Oil of Bitter-Almonds one Ounce, Oil of Vitriol Two Drams, Oil of
Sassafras a Scruple, mix them very well, then add Spirit of Wine rectified
three Ounces, digest two or three days in a gentle heat. The Dose is a small
Sweetmeat Spoonful in Old-Hock, or Infusion of Juniper Berries, once in four
hours during the Paroxism.

Given for a Month or Six Weeks in an Infusion of Lavender Flowers, is an
admirable Medicine in Epilepsies.

I could mention a great many Cases more in which this Medicine is of singular
use; but in so doing I should swell this Appendix to too great a bulk.

I shall next compare the Testacea, such as Pearl, Coral, Crab's-eyes, etc. with
natural Balsoms and Gums, such as Balm of Gilead, Tolu, Peru, etc. Gum
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, etc.

As for Pearl, Coral, and Crabs Eyes, I know not that they are of any use at
all, being externally applied; and being internally taken, no body that I know
of pretends that they are useful any further than to absorbe the Acidity of the
Stomach, where people labor under any Indisposition that is attended with an
Acidity there. But they are so far from being useful in that case, that I have
scarce known them useful to any one that has taken them upon that score: And in
any other case they have not the least show of being at all useful, but
frequently do a great deal of mischief, as I have observed in my Essay upon the
Smallpox, etc.

Here give me leave to mention a short Case related to me by my worthy Friend
Dr. Baynard, pertinent to this place.

A Merchant's Wife of some Eminence in the City of Bristol, laboring under a
decayed Stomach, was reduced to such Weakness as not able to go, vomiting all
she took: Her Physicians supposing her Blood abounded with Acids, had from time
to time loaded her weak Stomach with the whole Retinue of the Alkalious
Kingdom, keeping their old Circle, from the Testacea to the Volatile Alkalies,
and from thence to the Testacea again; and at last she was perfectly cured with
some few Doses of the Gas Sulphuris, given in the Bath-Waters cold, twice or
thrice a day.

As for Balsams, if I should take upon me to describe their Excellencies, it
would be more fit for a large Volume than to take any room in the Appendix to a
small Essay. What a Noble Medicine is Balm of Gilead in many cases? The
Excellency of which is such, that God by the mouth of an Inspired Writer, by
way of Allusion, when his people were in a calamitous Condition, cries out, Is
there no Balm in Gilead? Are there no Physicians there (to apply it)? Why then
is not the wound of the daughter of my people healed? What a Noble Medicine is
Ammoniacum in the most deplorable Astma's? the Spirit distilled from which, and
an equal quantity of Verdigrease, in a naked Fire, I believe to be as Noble a
Medicine as ever was used; nay, all the Gums and Balsams freed from their
Ramous, Viscous parts by Distillation, become much better Medicines than when
they are in their Natural state.

I shall say no more of Balsams, for fear I outrun my bounds; but shall proceed
to answer some Objections raised against what I have said in some parts of my
Essay.

Object. 1. You say that the Scurvey is occasioned by too great a quantity of
Alkalious Particles in the Blood, and is only cured by Acids. How comes it to
pass that those people that live upon nothing almost but highly-salted Meat,
are more troubled with the Scurvey than other people, when you own Sea Salt to
be an Acid?

Answer. I own that Seamen and People who live by the Sea side in Marshy
Grounds, who for the most part live upon Salt Meat and Fish, are more troubled
with the Scurvey than other people: But this does not proceed from their eating
a larger quantity of Salt than other people, but from their eating more Flesh
and Fish than other people do, which abound with Alkalious Particles, and from
the moistness of the Air about them, which hinders their free Perspiration. As
for the Sea Salt which is in great quantities mixed with their Food, that is
all or most part of it soon carried off by Urine, and with it some of the
Alkalious ones also, and thereby framing an Armoniack Salt, which it is well
known the Urine of such Persons abounds with: Now what we call Sal Ammoniac, is
only a mixture of Volatile Alkaly and Sea Salt. But the Pores being shut by
reason of the moisture of the Ambient Air, the Volatile Alkaly which should be
discharged either by insensible Transpiration or Sweating, being pent in,
causes all the Symptoms complained of by those Persons. To confirm the truth of
which, it is well known, that Seamen at Sea, or those people who live in Marshy
Grounds, will scarce be made to Sweat by the most violent Labor. Now all
people who have been so curious as to taste Sweat, do very well know, that it
has an Alkalious, and not an Acid Taste; so that Sweating or free
Transpiration being hindered, the Blood must necessarily abound with too great
a quantity of Alkalious Particles; all those that should have been discharged
by the Cutaneous Glands, being kept in it. And so I hope this Objection is
answered.

Object. 2. In your Essay, Page 80. you do allow that Acids in some Distempets
do exorbitantly abound in the Stomach: Now how comes it to pass, that there
being so great a quantity of Acid in the Stomach, that the Blood and other
Juices should be destitute of Acidity; there being no other way to convey any
thing into the Blood or Juices, but through the Stomach; and therefore whatever
the Stomach abounds with, one would think must necessarily be imparted to the
Blood and other Juices?

Answ. I have before observed, Nov. Lum. Chyr. page 3, 4. That there is no
Innate Ferment in the Stomach, but that the Menstruum made use of to dissolve
our Food, and to turn it into a Nutritious Juice, is the Liquor that by chewing
of our Meat is squeezed out of the Glands of the Mouth, and parts adjacent,
which by numerous Experiments does appear to be an Acid. Nay, all or most of
the Noble Menstruums I know of, either in the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral
Kingdoms, are Acids. Now the Food being conveyed into the Stomach, and mixed
with the Volatile Acid Liquor of the Glands of the Mouth, is by the means of
the said Volatile Acid Liquor dissolved, and turned into a Substance fit for
the Nutrition of our Bodies; a state of Health being supposed.

It is very well known, that few people are troubled with an Acidity in their
Stomachs, but those who use very little exercise, or whose Business disposes
them to a Sedentary Life, and by this means the Chyle when made, for want of
Motion and Exercise, the Fibers of the Stomach also having lost their Tone, and
become laxe, is not soon enough carried out of the Stomach, and lying there too
long, the greatest part of it is turned into a Substance like unto the Ferment
which at first dissolved it: All people who know the nature of Ferments, will
readily enough agree with me in this, That it is the nature of them to
endeavor the Change of those things they are mixed with, into their own nature.

Object. 3. But some will say, We can agree with you in what you have said
hitherto; but how will you do to clear your self of your own seeming Objection,
which is, That this Acid Substance shall be kept from being conveyed into the
Blood, and so being the only Cause of many Diseases?

Answ. I have always observed, That those people who complain of an
extraordinary Acidity in their Stomach,

First, They make Water often, and in large quantities. Secondly, They are very
Lean. And Thirdly, They are (for the most part) very Costive.
All which Symptoms I shall endeavor to prove are occasioned for want of the
Acid Substance contained in the Stomach, being conveyed into the Blood.

As for the first Head, Why people who complain of an Acidity in their
Stomachs, make more Water than those who are destitute of it; the Reason I
judge to be as follows:

The solid Food they eat, instead of being converted into a Viscid, White
Liquor, we call Chyle only, by means of too great a quantity of Acid is
over-attenuated, and converted into a Thin Limpid Substance, and that in a
short time; which Thin Substance, by means of the Liver pressing upon the
Stomach, instead of passing into the Small Guts through the Pylorus, is
squeezed into certain Vessels which pass from the bottom of the Stomach to the
Kidneys, and so is carried off by Urine.

To prove that there are such Vessels which pass immediately from the bottom of
the Stomach to the Kidneys, I shall transcribe a Passage out of Doleus's
Encyclopedia Med. page 359, 360. speaking of the parts affected in the Dropsy.

I suppose (says he) that Liquid Substances may be conveyed from the Stomach
through the Omentum or Cawl, to the Kidneys; hence it is those Animals who have
no Cawl, make no Water, as may be seen in Birds and Fishes. For the
Confirmation of which Opinion, I have dissected many Animals, always taking
care before the Operation to gorge them with large quantities of clear Water,
afterward have dissected them alive: I have found the Stomach as yet distended
with the Water, but pressing the Vessels of the Cawl which lead toward the
Stomach, which being covered over with Fat like unto the Milky Veins, were to
my no little satisfaction very Turgid: And forasmuch as in a living Body the
Pores of the Stomach and other Passages are always more open than in dead ones,
where all things are flaggy, and fall together, therefore the said
Transmutation is not at all to be wondered at: And, which is worth taking
notice of, in those Hydropical People I have opened, I have always found the
Cawl either Putrid, Torn, or full of Tumors. The following Experiment has also
much confirmed me in my Opinion, viz. That there are Vessels to convey Liquid
Substances from the Stomach, through the Vessels of the Cawl to the Kidneys:
Not long since, an experienced Herniotomist or Cutter of Ruptures, of Hanover,
whose Name was Wedling, by Section cured a certain Person of an Omental
Rupture; and because a part of the Cawl was also cut away, the Patient, who is
yet alive, does greatly complain of a difficulty in making Water; and if at any
time he drinks any large quantity, he perceives a very great Weight and Pain
about his Stomach, and is always loose; hence, in my conjecture, some Vessels
which carry the Urine right on to the Emulgents, were cut, by which means all
the Drink he drank was carried into the Duodenum, and so hinders the
Fermentation that is there performed, and makes all the Fibers laxe. From all
which may be proved, that all we drink, and of consequence all other Substances
made very liquid in the Stomach, do not pass through the Intestines to the
Lacteal Veins, and from thence through the Thoractuck Duct to the Heart,
because the Pylorus is reflex to the Stomach, lest the Liquid Substances
contained in it should slide out: It is therefore certain that Liquid
Substances lying at the bottom of the Stomach, do pass through it in that part
which is joined to the Cawl; and if these Vessels, or the Cawl it self are
either lacerated, broken, putrified, or obstructed with Oedematous Tumors, it
necessarily follows that the Liquid Substances contained in the Stomach must be
let fall into the Cavity of the Abdomen, and so a Dropsy is caused. But being
free from any such disorder, Liquid Substances must freely pass through them to
the Kidneys, and so to the Bladder. I could cite other Authorities, besides my
own Observations, as Sir George Ent, Charlton, Waldsmiedght, etc. but this one
is, I think, sufficient.

From this Doctrine may very great Consolation be afforded to People laboring
under the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder; and Industrious Physicians need not
despair of finding out such Medicines as will Dissolve or Break to pieces
Stones contained in either of those parts. One great reason I verily believe
that has hindered Persons from making diligent search after such Medicines, has
been from a supposition, that scarce any Medicine could retain its Virtue, but
must be in great measure or altogether destroyed by the many Alterations it
must undergo, according to the ordinary Laws of Circumlocution; but were they
fully satisfied (as there is no reason to the contrary) of this nearer Cut, I
suppose people would not think the dissolving Stones in the Kidneys and
Bladder, so difficult a Task as it has hitherto been thought to be.

To prove the Existence of the foresaid Passages for Fluid Substances from the
Stomach, through the Vessels of the Cawl to the Kidneys, and that Medicines may
pass unaltered to the Kidneys and Bladder, I shall insert a Couple of Cases.

One Mr. Bradford, an Eminent Tradesman of Worcester, sent to me one Afternoon,
desiring me to make all possible haste, for that he was upon the Wrack: When I
came to him, I found him in a most dreadful condition, he not having made Water
of two Days, and such an intolerable Pain in his Back, that he was not able to
support himself under it. I presently gave him some Medicines, ordering him to
take them in large quantities once in half an hour: In an hour and half's time,
at furthest, he sent to me to acquaint me that he was well, and at ease, having
pissed two large Chamber-Pots full, which held at least Two Quarts apiece, and
in the first Pot-full above Two Large Spoonfuls of small pieces of broken
Stones. He several times since, occasioned by hard Drinking, has been under the
same Circumstances, and upon taking the same Medicines has found immediate
Relief. Now had these Medicines been conveyed from the Stomach to the Small
Guts, and from thence by the Lacteal Vessels, the common Receptacle of the
Chyle in the Mesentery, and so on to the Blood, and from thence be separated by
degrees in the Kidneys, as it is brought there by the Emulgent Arteries, it had
been altogether impossible that the Effect could have been so sudden, and that
the Medicines should not have been greatly altered, or totally destroyed, by
the many changes they must have undergone before they could come to the Part
affected. But by the way I have been speaking of, the Medicines might all of
them, and that without being in the least impaired in their Virtue, be
transmitted to the Part affected, and so perform their Operations in breaking
to pieces the Stone or Stones they met with, either in the Kidneys or Bladder.

Mrs. Wheatly, a Glasier's Wife without Smithfield-Bars, had a long time been
afflicted with the Stone in the Bladder, and for about Nine Months had confined
her self to her Chamber, the Misery she underwent being such, that made her
altogether incapable of any business; and of ever being delivered she was
perfectly in despair, all common means having in vain been used; at last by
some means or other she was prevailed with to send for me: When I came to her,
she gave me a most lamentable Account of her Case; and although I gave her all
the Encouragement imaginable, yet all that I could say, made but little
impression upon her, she supposing her Condition to be so deplorable, that to
expect deliverance was vanity in the highest degree: However, she was at last
prevailed upon to try what I could do for her: I began to give her some
Medicines, which she took in large quantities, and repeated them once in four
hours: It was upon a Monday morning she began to take them, and on the
Wednesday night next following I examined her Water, and found some small
ragged Pieces of Stone in it; and tasting the Water, I could discern the Taste
of the Medicines, which were Salino-Sulphureous ones, to be as vigorous
altogether, as they were before she had taken them into her Mouth, and not, as
I could discern, in the least altered in their taste. On the Morrow Morning,
being Thursday, by Five a Clock she sent her Maidservant to me, to my House in
St. Martins-Lane, to acquaint me that she was delivered from her Misery, and
perfectly well. About Eight a Clock I went to visit her, and found a Stone that
she had voided with little Pain, the Medicines having acted upon the Sphincter
Muscle of the Neck of the Bladder, and so relaxed it, as to make it give way
for the Stone to pass: The Length of the Stone was an Inch and half and half a
quarter; it was Three Inches and a half round one way, and Two Inches and a
half another. There were some small flaws in it, which were made by those
little ragged pieces which came away the Night before, which I found in the
Chamber Pot. The thing was so extraordinary, that it came to the Ears of her
late Majesty, who desired to see the Stone, which I procured for Her, and she
was pleased to say, That it was the most Extraordinary Thing She had ever seen
or heard of, to be brought away without Cutting or Instruments. Any one who
doubts the Truth of this Relation, may yet see the Stone at Mrs. Wheatly's, who
carefully preserves it: The extraordinary Veracity and Integrity of the Person
is such, that I am sure she would not tell an Untruth to do any man service.

I could give several other Instances of this nature; but these Two are, I
think, sufficient, and a plain Demonstration that there are Vessels which carry
Fluid Substances immediately from the Stomach to the Kidneys, without those
many Circumgyrations that people generally imagine: Nay, I don't question but
suddenly to make it appear by Ocular Demonstration; which if I could not do, to
people who are not mere Scepticks, Demonstrations deduced from reiterated
Experiments will be sufficient.

I am sure I have a great deal more to say for the Existence of these Vessels,
than any of those Learned Gentlemen who assert the Doctrine of Nutrition by the
Nerves, have to say for that.

The Learned and Ingenious Dr. Baynard's Account he gives of the sudden Effects
of Vinegar beforementioned, in a total Suppression of Urine, is also a good
Argument to evince the Truth of what I have been speaking of. But to proceed to
my Second Head, which is,

That those people who abound with an Acidity in their Stomachs, are generally
very Lean.

To prove which Position, will be no very difficult Task; for the solid Food
they eat (and generally they have good Appetites) which is that which affords
most Nutrition, being over attenuated, is by that means made capable of passing
through those Vessels I have before mentioned (which I shall presume to call
Urinary Vessels) the more gross parts only being conveyed to the Small Guts,
which having but few Nutritious Particles in them, can afford but very little
Nourishment to the parts; and the parts being destitute of their usual and
necessary Nourishment, Leanness of consequence follows.

A sufficient Argument to prove that Leanness proceeds from the want of a
sufficient quantity of Acid Substances in the Blood, is this: That Fat is
nothing else but a Concrete, produced from the Mixture of the Acid and Oily
Parts of the Blood: Now the Blood has never any Acid in it, but when people
are in a perfect state of Health: And when at any time the Blood is destitute
of Acid Particles, and abounds too much with Alkalious ones, (which argues a
Morbid state) as it does in all those people who have too great a quantity of
Acid in their Stomachs, which upon experiment any man may find to be true,
although at first sight, I confess, it looks very like a Paradox. Now the Blood
being destitute of Acid Particles to coagulate the Oily ones, there can be no
fresh production of Fat, and that already generated having its Acid Particles
mortified by the great quantity of Alkalious ones, presently loses its
consistence, and is again converted into a thin Oil, which is soon carried off
by some of the Emunctories, there being nothing in the Blood fit for it to
incorporate or mix with; and when these Oily Fat Particles are gone, then the
Corrosive Alkalious Particles prey upon the Musculous, Nervous Fibers, and so
cause general Disorders; at other times when they are in great quantities
thrown upon particular parts, according to the nature of the part affected,
they cause different Diseases: But I don't know any one Disease caused by
Acids; unless it be overmuch Fatness, and what we call the Heart-burn, if they
are to be accounted Diseases; the most Healthy People being subject to the
Heart-burn: Though the Heart-burn is as often cured by Acids, such as Ol.
Vitriol. Dull. etc. as by Alkalies: From whence I conjecture, that the
Heart-burn also may be occasioned from the Blood which is brought to the Coats
of the Stomach, abounding with too great a quantity of Alkalious Corrosive
Particles, which may vellicate and contract the part. Having in short
dispatched this Head, I shall proceed to my Third;

That those who abound with an Acidity in their Stomachs, are for the most part
very Costive.

From the same reason that people abounding with an Acidity in their Stomachs,
are Lean, it is that they are Costive also; the more Thin, Fluid Substances,
being carried off by the Urinary Vessels, and only the more Gross ones conveyed
into the Guts, and for want of a sufficient quantity of Moisture, the
Excrements are over-harden'd, and the Guts not sufficiently lubricated; and
therefore Costiveness must necessarily follow.

But after all, I foresee another Objection will be raised; and therefore to
make every body easy, I shall lay down the Objection, and endeavor to answer
it.

Objection: If the Acidity in the Stomach be the Cause of the solid Food we eat
being over-attenuated, and so the Nutritious Particles being carried off by the
Urinary Vessels, as in Atrophies, etc. without being conveyed into the Blood,
to afford Nutrition to the parts; How comes it to pass that Iron or Steel,
which you own to be an Acid, can be of any use? For instead of being useful,
one would think that by increasing the Acidity, it should exasperate and
increase the Malady.

To which I Answer: I have before observed, that Iron or Steel cannot be
conveyed into the Blood before it is turned into a Vitriol; and therefore to
those people who have a great Acidity in their Stomachs, it is found absolutely
necessary to give Iron or Steel without any precedent Preparation; which has
been long since taken notice of by the Learned and Judicious Dr. Cole, in his
Physico-Medical Essay concerning the late Frequency of Apoplexies. Now Iron or
Steel being given crude and unprepared, is by the means of the Acid in the
Stomach turned into a Vitriol, by which means the Acid is so embodied, as to
make it incapable of passing through the almost imperceptible Urinary Passages;
and likewise by embodying the Acid, hinders it from overmuch attenuating the
Chyle; so that being mixed with the Chyle, they are together conveyed into the
Small Guts, and so on to the Blood, and by its Stiptick Acidity it confirms the
Texture of the Blood, and mortifies the luxurious Alkalious Particles it meets
with.

As for what I mention concerning the Efficacy of Juice of Lemmons in
immediately abating and taking off the violent Symptoms that attended a Person
who had been bitten with a Viper, after the Volatile Salt of Vipers, and other
Antidotes, had in vain been given; I find the very same thing taken notice of
by Hoffman, in his Clavis Pharmaceutice Schroderi, page 444, 445.

An Ingenious Person not long since, who had formerly embraced the Doctrine of
Acids, was willing to try what Effects the Transfusion of Acid and Alkalious
Liquors into the Veins of Dogs would produce; accordingly he injected some Oil
of Sulphur per Campan. into the Veins of one Dog, which instead of disordering
him, made him brisk and lively, and very hungry: But another Dog into whose
Veins some Oil of Tartar per Deliquium (a known Alkaly) had been injected, it
produced a clear contrary effect, the Dog being lumpish and dull, and in a few
days died: But it is to be observed, that these two Liquors were so diluted as
to make them fit to be taken in at the mouth before they were injected.
Something (as I remember) of the same nature, is also taken notice of by Fred.
Hoffman, Fill. de Acido and Viscido.

I have been well assured from a Person of the Greatest Honor, That the Jews
in Constantinople (who are the only Physicians there) advise their Patients, in
times when the Plague rages, to eat Lemon and Sugar, and to drink Lemonade in
large quantities, and that by way of prevention; and those people who do so,
seldom or never have the Plague: And if at any time they are called to Persons
who have the Plague upon them, if they will but take the aforesaid Medicines in
large quantities, they very rarely miscarry.

From many late Observations I am fully convinced, that the Gout is without any
great difficulty to be cured, or at least a Fit to be taken off, in a small
time, by a proper Course of Acid Medicines, both internally taken, and
externally applied to the Part affected, and that without the least
Inconvenience afterward: And I am altogether certain, that the only reason why
people have hitherto so frustraneously attempted the Cure of the said
Distemper, has been from the general Prejudice they have had against Acid
Medicines, which are the only things capable of doing service.

Tho I do so mightily contend for the Use of Acids in general in the Cure of
Diseases; yet I do not in the least pretend that any one Acid is capable of
answering a Physician's Intention in the Cure of all Diseases: Neither Vinegar
nor Lemmons are to be reckoned Panacea's; tho, for ought I know, in the hands
of a Person who well understands their use, they will either of them do more
than many of the celebrated Panacea's.

No man is fit to be called a Physician, who does not well understand the
Nature of Diseases, and of the Juices contained in a Human Body, which is what
has hitherto been but little enquired into; men taking up with general Notions
that had no Foundation; which has been the only reason that Physic has been
so long practiced without the least certainty; Physicians changing the Method
of their Practice almost as often as we do that of our Clothes. Being extremely
well skilled in the Anatomy of the Solid Parts, is a Noble Qualification, and
enables a man to talk finely, but does not in the least tend to enable men to
cure Diseases. It is an exact Skill in the Anatomy of the Juices, the Fluid
Parts, that will make a Man a good Physician: But in this sort of Study few
have been conversant. An exact Knowledge of the Materia Medica in general, and
the Specific Differences there are between those Medicines, seemingly of the
same Tribe, is also an absolutely necessary Qualification: For that Acid that
will cure a Fever, will not cure the Gout; and that which will cure the Gout,
will not, perhaps, cure another Chronical Distemper; there being a vastly wide
difference between those very Medicines which are seemingly the same.

I do positively affirm, That neither Blood nor its Serum being any way exposed
to Putrefaction, will by that means in the least become Acid, but rather more
Alkalious: Now Acids in general hindering Putrefaction, and likewise reducing
things from a state of Putrefaction that are already become Putrid, must be the
great Medicines to cure Diseases; for there is no Disease but what proceeds
from some sort of Putrefaction of the Fluid Parts of our Bodies.

What I have said in my Essay, and also in this Appendix, has been only in
general terms; but I am now reducing all to a Method, I designing my History of
Blood to be also a Methodical History of Diseases, with an Account of the
Medicines proper to be used in the Cure of them: I being resolved to serve my
Generation to the utmost of my Power, let my Treatment be what it will.

I shall conclude this Appendix with Two or Three Cases, and the Method I used
in the Cure of them, as a Confirmation of the Truth of what I have said
concerning some things in my Essay.

Case the First.
A Gentleman who had long labored under a Sciatica, viz. Two or Three Years,
and had applied himself to several Persons of the greatest Eminence for Advice,
and had by their Prescriptions been loaded for that whole time with Alkalious
Medicines, without receiving the least advantage, the Leg and Thigh of the Left
Side being greatly Emaciated, and a very large Glandulous Tumor on his Hip: He
was never free from violent Pain, and very Lame. I first of all Purged him well
for about a Fortnight with Calamel. Tart. Vitriolat. and Rezin of Jallap: I
afterward gave him the following Medicines, which he took constantly Three
Times a Day for about Ten Weeks; in which time, without any External
Application at all, his Pain left him, the Tumor disappeared, and his Leg and
Thigh, which were before wasted to mere Skin and Bones, became equally Plump
and Fleshy with the other.

Recipe Cinnaberis Antimonii, vel (quod melior est) Factitii Com. Officinarum
Recenter Levigat. Unciam Unam. Gum. Guaiaci Dracmas Sex. Cons. Cynosbati Uncias
Tres. Sir. Sambuci q. s. F. Electuarium. Dosis est quant. Nucismoscatae Ter in
Die, Horis Medicinalibus, super bibendo Uncias Octo Infusi sequentis.

Recipe Rad. Bardanae Siccat. and gross Contus. Uncias Octo. Baccar. Juniperi,
Uncias Quatuor, sem. Bardanae, Faxini ana Unciam Unam semis. Sassafras Unciam
Unam. Tartari Vitriolati Dracmas Tres. Aq. Font. Libras Sex. Infunde Clause and
Calide per horas xii. and Coletur, Colaturae sing. Libris duabus. Add Sp. Liq.
Guaiaci Rect. Unciam Semis M.

This Method I have so often experienced in this Case, that I dare recommend it
as to be depended upon.

Case the Second.
A pretty young Gentleman, who had been too free with the Fair Sex, by his
over-frequent Embraces was Poxt to the highest degree, being Leprous from the
Crown of his Head to the Soles of his Feet, and all other Symptoms of the most
confirmed Pox I ever met with. He was altogether averse to Salivation, I
therefore gave him the aforesaid Medicines, which he took three times a day for
about two months; but I first of all purged him very well with Calamel. Tart.
Vit. and Rezin. Jallap. and for the last Fortnight sent him to the Bagnio three
times a week, ordering him to take a large Dose of the Electuary and Infusion
about an hour before he went into the Bagnio. At the two months end he was
perfectly freed from his Leprosy, and his Skin as clean and white as ever I saw
any one in my life; and all other Symptoms that attended him, were perfectly
vanished.

Case the Third.
A Corporal in the Right Honorable the Earl of Oxford's Regiment, was Poxed to
the highest degree, upon which he applied himself to a Physician near Chelsey,
who put him into the powdering Tub of Affliction three times; and although he had
each time undergone a Regular Salivation, his Symptoms were not in the least
abated. He was emaciated to such a degree, that he was like a mere Skeleton. He
had violent Pain in his Head, Shoulders, Arms, Thighs, and Shin bones; and when
he was warm in his Bed, the Pain was so exasperated, that although he was so weak
as to be scarce able to stand, yet out of his Bed he was forced to get, and
crawl about in the cold, which afforded him some small Relief; his Appetite was
quite lost, and a continual Hectic upon him. To be short, I think I never saw
so miserable a Spectacle in my whole life. To this Man I gave the Electuary and
Infusion three times a day, which soon abated the violence of the Symptoms, and
continuing the use of them about three months, although he had seldom less than
four or five Stools a day, yet he gathered Flesh, and in that time became a
hale, hearty Man, to the great surprise of all who knew him. I may be positive
that it was not above six weeks before he was able to walk about his business.

I have given these very Medicines to I believe Two hundred People in several
Chronical Distempers, with extraordinary success; and although in the day time
they seldom fail of working three or four times by Stool, and in the night
provoking Sweat; yet I have scarce known any one person who has taken them,
that during the very time they are taking them, for all the very great
Evacuations they cause, that have not sensibly gathered flesh, and if weak,
recovered strength. Whereas let the strongest person take any of the common
Purgers but a month together, and although they have not above two or three Stools
a day, yet they will emaciate them, and weaken them to a great degree, which is
a very great Argument of the excellency of Cinnaberine Medicines mixed with Gum
Guaiaci above the common Purgers: The one carrying off the Nutritious Juices,
as well as the Excrementitious ones; the other only causing a due Secretion of
the Noxious, Excrementitious Juices, which by so doing, Nature is thereby rid
of any Load wherewith she is oppressed, and enabled to apply the Nutritious
Juices to the ends they are designed for.

I have in some extraordinary Cases, given above a pound of Cinnaber at times
to one person, and never knew the least ill Symptom follow, nor ever once to
excite Salivation. And I do verily believe, that in the hands of a person who
knows how to use it, it is one of the greatest Medicines in Chronical Diseases
in the World; but being used with Gum Guaiaci, and Spiritus Guaiaci Rect. it
does much better than alone, they greatly assisting it in its operation. Being
mixed with proper Cephalicks, and taken for some time, it is a wonderful
Medicine in Epilepsies, and some other Nervous Distempers. Hoffman has wrote a
whole Treatise of Cinnaber; and I am capable of speaking ten times more in its
praise from my own Experience, than Hoffman has done.

Convulsions are Distempers that Children are frequently troubled with, more of
them dying of Convulsions than of all other Distempers, Testaceous Powders are
the Medicines generally given, as the great Asylum to which Physicians fly, but
very rarely with Success. But upon the giving them temperate Acids, I have
generally found them to answer my Intentions.

I was, not long since, sent for to a Child who had Convulsions to such a
degree, that his Parents believed it to be an Epilepsy. His Belly was hard like
a stone, and continual Tortions and Convulsive Contractions, sometimes of his
Hands and Arms, sometimes his Legs and Thighs would be distorted and almost put
out of Joint; sometimes had the most violent Vomitings, at other times the
Muscles of his Face would be strangely contracted. I gave it the following
Medicines, and in about two days he was perfectly free from his Convulsions.

Recipe Tart. Vitriolati Dracmam Unam. Crem. Tart. Dracmas Duas. Castorei
Dracm. Semis. Sacchari Albi Unciam. Sem. M. F. Pull. in viii Chartis
distribuend. ex quibus cap. no 1. quarta quaque hora in Cochlear. Julap. seq.
super bibendo Cochlear. Tria vel quatuor ejusd.

Recipe Aq. Rorismarini, Pulegii ana Uncias Tres. Peon. Comp. Uncias Duas.
Ol-Vitrioli Dull. Scrupul. Unam. Sir. Peoniae Dracmas Tres M. F. Julap.

Recipe Ol. Amigdala. Amar. Unciam Unam. Ung. Dialtheae Uncias Duas. Ol.
Annisi, Pulegii ana gut. vi. m. F. Linimentum, cum quo Illinatur Regio^^^^
Umbel. liculem Mane and Vesperi, Superponendo Pannum Laneum ter duplicatum.

By this Method, with some variation according as different Symptoms appear, I
have known multitudes of Children, whose Lives have been despaired of, cured of
the most violent Convulsions in a small time.

I have likewise observed, that in malignant Fevers, those people who are
treated according to the usual custom, with Alkalies and Alexipharmicks, are
generally attended with violent Convulsions: But those who use Acids
plentifully, are seldom or never Convulsive.

I have cured abundance of people of that troublesome Cough that has raged
this March, by only giving them large quantities of Lemmon and Sugar, to be
eaten both day and night, and giving an Opiat with some Drops of Oil of Sulphur
per Campan. at night going to Bed.

In violent Hysterical Fits in Women, I have frequently, without (seldom)
failing of Success, given a Mixture of Two or Three Spoonfuls of Vinegar, a few
Grains of Castor, and about a Quarter of a Pint of Spring Water: Which Mixture
has frequently abated and taken off the Fits, when before they had been greatly
exasperated by Spirit of Hartshorn, Sal Ammoniac, etc. Gas Sulphuris also
given alone is a wonderful Medicine in violent Hysterical Fits. And in the
beginning of Consumptions, I believe there is not a better Medicine than Gas
Sulphuris given in large quantities. But the Cortex, which is now so
universally used in Consumptions, without the least show of Reason, I believe
to be the most pernicious Medicine in Hectical Distempers that ever was given.
I have enquired lately of several Persons, both Physicians and Apothecaries,
whether they ever yet saw a Hectic cured by the Cortex, who have unanimously
declared they never did, and that scarce any one that has taken it, but have
died. I must declare that I never yet saw any one cured of a Consumption, but
by Acids, such as Gas Sulphuris, Ol. Sulphuris per Campan. etc. by the means of
which I my self have cured many. But sometimes, in some very extraordinary
Cases, especially if the Distemper have been of long standing, and the Texture
of the Lungs much spoiled, even Acids themselves will leave us in the Lurch,
even after Symptoms have seemed to be much abated, and things have looked with
a promising Aspect. Which I my self have in one or two Patients whose Lives
have been very dear unto me, experienced; which I cannot mention without the
greatest Concern. For all which, I dare not, even in Consumptions, leave off
the use of Acids, because I am sure they will do more than any other besides;
and there are no Medicines whatsoever that will make people Immortal. I have my
self cured many with Acids, but never could yet see or hear of one that was
ever cured without them.

The Learned Dr. Jones, whose Civility to me (tho an utter Stranger, whom I
never saw) I cannot sufficiently express; in a very kind and obliging Letter
has sent me a Catalogue of Distempers he has in the Course of his Practice
cured by Acids.

(1.) Hard Bellies in Children with an Atrophy attending it, which is very
common, and seldom cured by other Methods.

(2.) The Stone, that is, to take it off (if of a passable Bigness) with Ease,
Speed, and Safety.

(3.) Child*bed Fevers, of which Dr. Willis says, they are most difficult to be
cured of any.

(4.) Catarrh or Defluxion.

(5.) Cholera Morbus.

(6.) Diarrhea and Dysentery.

(7.) Jaundice.

(8.) The Smallpox, etc.

This Worthy Person, whose Name is deservedly famous throughout Europe, for his
Noble Piece De Febribus Intermittentibus, thus concludes; I would have sent you
more, but these coming readily to my mind, have been certainly cured by me, by
the means of Acids.

The wonderful Success Dr. Baynard (whose intimate Conversation I have of late
been honored with) has had through the Course of his Practice, is eminently
known both in London, Bath, and Lancashire, where he formerly dwelt: And his
Practice has chiefly run upon Acids; which (as he has all the reason in the
world) he does strenuously vindicate and defend; and by whom, I must own, since
my Acquaintance with him, I have had clearer Notions of the different sorts and
various use of Acids than ever I knew before; he being one of the most Candid,
Ingenious, Communicable Persons, I ever met with.

It was out of a Life saving Principle, that these Gentlemen embraced this
Doctrine of Acids, in opposition to the Multitude; who for want of this
knowledge, daily record their sad Cures in Sextons Books and the Weekly Bills:
And I dare say, they have wrought more Substantial, Good Cures, than any Twenty
besides them, who have acted upon different Principles.

I don't find that the Method of making the Gas Sulphuris, which I have often
mentioned, is any where set down; I shall therefore give an Account of its
Preparation, which tho a very easy one, is for all that a very Noble Medicine.

Gas Sulphuris.
Put into a large Glass Receiver, that will hold Six or Eight Gallons, about
Four Quarts of pure Spring Water; when you have so done, burn in the Receiver a
Quarter of a Pound of pure Sulphur Vivum made into Matches: You must take care
that your Matches be very long, so that when they are lighted, the Flame may be
as near the middle of the Body of the Receiver as may be: By that time you have
burnt Three or Four Matches, the Receiver will be so full of the Steams of
Brimstone, that when the lighted Match is put into it, it will be immediately
extinguished; you must then stop the Mouth of the Receiver very exactly with a
Wet Cloth, and let the Steams condense; when you see the Receiver clear, then
burn more Matches till the Receiver is again filled with Steams, then stop up
again, and repeat this work till your Matches are all burnt, and your Water
will then be impregnated with the Volatile Acid Steams of Brimstone.

This Medicine given liberally in Malignant Fevers has done Wonders, even where
people have been given over as dead. It is an excellent Medicine being taken by
way of Prevention in Infectious Seasons. And I think, if any Medicine deserves
that Name, this does deserve to be called the true Prophylacticon.

Dr. Baynard has another way of making the Gas Sulphuris somewhat more warm and
Alexipharmick.

Take a large Glass Receiver with a mouth of three or four Inches Diameter,
place it Horizontally, into which pour Aq. Petasitid. Ulmariae simp. Vini
Rhenani, ana Libras duas Aq. Rutae, succi Pomorum silvest. vet. ana Libram unam
Aq. Theriacalis, Prophylact. Sylvij ana Uncias quatuor M. Then take an Iron
Ladle fitted to the mouth of the Glass, with a long Handle, put into the Ladle
half an Ounce of Sulphur Vivum powdered, accend with a small Gad of red hot
Steel, when lighted, clap it into the Receiver so far, that the Fumes may arise
in the middle of the Glass, and the bigger the Glass the better; for the more
Fumes it contains, the sooner will your Operation be over. Stop the mouth with
a wet Cloth, that the Steams get not out; when the Fumes have extinguished the
Flame, let it stand, that the Oleum Sulphuris may trickle down the sides of the
Glass, and subside upon the Menstruum; when the Fumes are settled, and the Glass
clear, quickly draw out your Ladle, and repeat the Action, until it be well
impregnated with strong Volatile Gas. Remember always to keep the mouth of the
Glass well stopped with the wet Cloth, otherwise the Gas, which is of a most
subtle nature, will evaporate.

A Spoonful of this given once in two or three hours, in any proper Julap, does
most wonderfully extinguish Thirst in Fevers, procure Sweat or Urine
infallibly, takes off the dryness of the Tongue, temperates and cools the
overheated Bile, and procures Rest. Also mixed with a little Claret Wine, and
a Drop or two of Oil of Cinnamon, does, to a Miracle, stop Vomiting, and the
best Peptick for a weak and decayed Stomach.

Note, That when the Gas is quite gone and flown off, the mixture will
notwithstanding remain sour, as impregnated with the Oleum Sulphuris; but the
Gas, which is the better part, will in time be lost, (it is so subtle) even
almost through the pores of the Glass. You must dip the Cork-end of the Bottle
in melted Brimstone, and keep it always immerged in cold water. But the best
way to keep it is in small Glasses, and open no more at a time than you use, it
losing its volatile parts very much every time the Bottle in which it is kept
is opened.

As a further Illustration of the Doctrine of Acids, I shall add an account I
received from Dr. Oliver, one of the Physicians of the Fleet, about the use of
Beveridge.

Beveridge is a pricked, sour Spanish Wine, one Hogshead of this mixed with 3
Hogsheads of water, makes the Drink the Sailors are allowed to drink ad libitum.

By my Experience in the Fleet, those Ships Crews who drank this Acid Liquor
for their common Drink, were much healtheir than those who by their obstinacy
would not be brought to it; as for Example:

The Royal Oak a third Rate, carrying about 500 men, whose Ship's Crew, by
Admiral Nevil's particular Order, began first to drink Beveridge, (he having
had experience of it two years in the Mediterranean in the Crown, in all which
time he lost not above two men), and in three months time I don't remember I
had three Complaints, tho at the same time, in other Ships where they drank no
Beveridge, Fevers and Fluxes were very frequent. Here I shall insert one thing
worthy of Note, That the Royal Oak wanting Beveridge, and being obliged to
drink water only, in a few days time they grew very sickly, and lost above 30
men in a month, insomuch that the men themselves were so sensible of the
advantage they had by drinking Beveridge, that they heartily desired that they
might drink nothing else but Beveridge, and begged it wherever they could find
it. The like experience I had of the Eagle, Norfolk, and several other of our
Ships, who were always better in health when they drank Beveridge, than when
they drank Water alone, or found Wine and Water. From these Experiences, I
advised the Captains of each respective Ship, to procure Beveridge for the
common Drink of the men, and the Success answered my Expectation.

This is an exact Relation as I took it from Dr. Oliver's own mouth.

I have more to say, but have already outrun the Bounds of an Appendix, and
therefore shall omit what remains, for another opportunity.

FINIS.

