To the Right Honorable, the Lord Major, and Common Council of the City of
London.
PETER CAPONI Citizen of Florence, sends greeting.
Right Honorable,
KNow ye, that when Charles the Eighth of France entered our City of Florence in
Hostile History Florence.
and Triumphant Manner, Himself and Horse armed, with his Lance upon his Thigh,
many Insolences being committed by the French, and much Argument of Quarrel
being ministered between them and our Citizens, so far forth that the
Florentines (to preserve their Liberties) were driven to prepare to fight: And
Charles propounding intolerable Conditions, certain great Sums of Money, and
absolute Seigniory over the whole State, as conquered by him, who entered the
City in Arms: I Peter Caponi, catching these Proposals from the Kings
Secretary, and tearing them before his Face, bade him sound his Trumpets, and
we would ring our Bells; which resolute words made Charles bethink himself, how
dangerous a matter it would be for his Army to fight in the Streets against the
Armed Multitudes of that City, having advantage of Place, Provisions,
Multitude, yea, of Women armed with Tilestones, that he was glad to accept of
Conditions, and depart the City.

Now therefore understanding that your great, glorious, and most populous City
of London is invaded (by no CHARLES) but by a handful of starved, pitiful, and
perfidious Red-coats, Anabaptists, and Quakers, (which your Boys at Football
can kick out of Town in an hour) I cannot but incite you to follow our Example,
and the Dictate of your old Britain, Forget not your Ancestors, remember your
Posterity.

December 16. 1659. PETER CAPONI, Citizen of Florence.


