A COLLECTION Of Pleasant Modern NOVELS. Vol. II. VIZ. Heroine Musqueteer: Or
Female Warrier, in ofur Parts. Incognito: Or Love and Duty Reconciled. By Mr.
Congrave, The Pilgrim, in two Parts.


LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at Grays-Inn-Gate, and Richard Wellington,
at the Dolphin and Crown at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard: E. Rumbole,
at the Post House, Covent Garden, and J. Wild, at the Elephant, at
Charing Cross. MDCC.

THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE Female Warrior. A TRUE HISTORY. Very
delightful, and full of Pleasant Adventures in the Compaignes of 1676, and 1677.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by James Orme, for Richard Wellington, at the Dalphin and
Crown, at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCC.

THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE Female Warrior.
BEARN, though one of the least Provinces subject to the Crown of France, may
be accounted among the most considerable, for the great number of Soldiers it
sends into the Armies. It has the honor of giving Birth to the Renowned
Prince, Henry the Great, and the Privileges he granted it are sufficient proof
of the esteem he had for the Inhabitants. And those who now serve the King in
his Wars, have made it appear they have not degenerated from the virtues of
their Ancestors. Besides, as if it were not enough for this Province to produce
Heroes in an Age, when all parts of France furnish such plenty of them, it has
signalized it self in giving Birth to a Heroine, who seems to have forgot the
infirmities of her Sex, to assume the vigor and generosity of the Masculine,
without losing the beauty and sweetness of her own, and to compose of both, the
most perfect Person in the Universe.

Her Name is Christina, Daughter to the Baron of Meyrac, one of the most
eminent of the Province, though less known at Court than in his Country, where
he spent all his days. He had an only Son brought up at the College of Pau,
whom he designed to send timely to Paris to learn his exercises, the better to
fit him for the King's service, in the Armies where he intended to provide him
employment. Christina was bred at home with her Parents as their darling: she
naturally had that strong inclination for Arms, she knew sooner how to
discharge a Gun, than to handle a Distaff; and at nine years old could handle
and use all sorts of Firearms with incredible dexterity. She was extremely
averse from Learning to read, and to persuade her now and then to look on a
Book, they were obliged to permit her to go a-hunting twice a week; but to
purchase a pound of Powder she would do any thing, how difficult soever. This
for a time was a divertisement to her Parents; till Christina having one day
shot at Pigeons in a Barn full of Corn, it unfortunately took fire, which
consumed a great part of it, though a great many hands were presently at work
to quench it. At this the Baron was so offended with his Daughter, that he
would not see her for many days, nor pardon her, but upon condition she would
never handle a Gun. Poor Christina was very glad to be readmitted upon any
terms into the favor of a Father, so severe as she knew hers to be: but that
way of living being quite against her temper, a week was scarce past, but there
appeared a visible alteration in her looks. This alarmed her Mother, who
tenderly loved her, and having often, but in vain, endeavored to prevail with
her Husband in favor of his Daughter, to remit a little of the rigor of his
orders; she ordered a Gun to be carried to a Neighbor's, where Christina, by
agreement with her Mother, sometimes resorted: And not daring to go a-Hunting,
least the Father should know it, she shot at a mark for her exercise. This
restrant but heightened her passion for Hunting and Shooting, as she made
sufficiently appear by the advantages she took of her Father's absence, in a
Journey about that time.

The Baron in the Vacations sent for his Son home; and Hunting being the
principal Recreation of Country-Gentlemen, scarce a day past, but his Son made
a match with his Friends for that sport: He never went forth, but Christina was
cruelly vexed, she could not make one of the Game; and when he returned, she was
not less troubled for the pleasure she fansied he had enjoyed, and she was
unjustly debarred from, and seeing her Brother come every day home laden with
Game that he had taken, she could not forbear tormenting herself for fear he
would leave none for her.

One day, as the Baron and his Son were a-Hunting, a Farmer came to the Castle
to make his complaint of the great spoil done in his Corn by a wild Boar, and
to beg assistance for killing him. The Baroness being assured the Boar never
failed coming to the Corn in the Twilight, promised to take order in it, and
dismissed the Countryman. Christina having overheard the discourse, said not a
word to her Mother, least she might endeavor to divert her from her design;
but charged her Gun with two bullets, and as it began to be dark, went away to
the place the Countryman had spoken of; and to make the surer work, got up
into a Tree a little distant from the Corn, with a resolution to wait there the
coming of the Boar. The same Countryman having met the Baron's Son as he
returned from Hunting, told him the story, who loath to lose so fair an
occasion, instantly turned back into the Field, and fearing he was come too
late, stole gently across the Corn, and attended the Boar's coming near half
an hour: But growing impatient of longer stay, he resolved to retire. His
Sister in the Tree, not well able to discern what she imagined she saw, the
Corn being high and night come on, made no doubt but it was the boar stirring
up and down; and to lose no time discharged her Gun, and killed her Brother. As
he fell he cried out for help, which so troubled the unfortunate Christina,
that she presently fell down from the top of the Tree. The Countryman running
in at the noise of the Gun, immediately met Christina tearing her self like a
Woman distracted, and thought the Boar had wounded her: He asked her several
questions, which she answered not, but he took her up, and helped her to walk a
few steps. When she found her self in a condition to go alone, she ordered him
to make all the have in his power to let the Baron know his Son lay a-dying,
having been dangerously wounded by the Boar; with that she made away as fast as
she could possibly, not knowing whither to betake her self. Having traveled
above an hour she found her self near a Castle belonging to the Abbot Dizeste,
who was extremely surprised to see her so bloated with crying, and at that time
of the night. But Christina, having given him as good an account of her
misfortune as she could in the case she was in, the Abbot who was her fathers
very near Kinsman, instantly got on Horseback, and arrived at the Castle, the
very moment they brought in the Body of the poor Gentleman, who having lost
much blood for want of help, died in the Arms of the Surgeon who first dressed
him. All things in the Castle were in such a confusion, the Abbot could not
learn tne truth of the accident. The people would needs believe the Boar had
killed the Gentleman, though they found two bullets in his body: But the Baron
and his Lady, not finding Christina, made no doubt but it was her act; and
though they believed she had don't by misfortune, the Baron was so transported
with passion, for the loss of his Son, that he made search for his Daughter all
over the Town, with his Pistol in his hand, to sacrifice her to his Wrath. The
Abbot being told of it, ran after him, and having said to him all that might be
expected on such an occasion, he brought him back to the Castle, where he made
use of many tedious discourses to comfort him, but all to no purpose. Two
Capuchins came in at the noise of the disaster; and the Abbot having left them
the care of comforting of the Baron, returned home to bring Christina the news
of her Brothers Death, and the danger she was in, if her Father should discover
where she was; yet he assured her of his protection, and that he would never
forsake her.

Returning two days after to Meyrac, he was not a little surpised to find the
Capuchins exhortations had not abated in the least the grief of the Baron, nor
diminished his anger, but that he persisted in his resolution to be the death
of his Daughter, and would not admit of his Wife into his presence, because she
had been prevailed upon to speak to him a word or two, in favor of the
unfortunate Christina. This obliged the Abbot to hold a conference with two or
three Kinsmen more of the Barons, and to debate the business with them, and
find out some means to save her from her Father's resentment. After long
discourse, it was agreed she should be sent into Spain; and Arragon being not
above nine or ten Leagues from Bearn, and the Abbot having a Brother settled at
Saragosa many years, he was entreated to bear her company thither, and
recommend her to his Brother, which he readly promised. Christina, troubled as
she was, received with joy the result of this conference, and put her self in a
posture to be gone on the morrow, according to order: but the Abbot having
reflected in the night on the consequences of the intended Journey, found in it
so many difficulties, that he had almost altered his resolution by morning. He
foresaw the beauty of Christina would make a great noise in a strange Country,
being at twelve years old far taller and handsomer than Maids of that Age
ordinarily are, and especially in Spain, were the Women are generally very low:
besides, he apprehended the frank humor of his Kins-woman, and the
inclinations she had so different from the rest of her Sex, would hardly ever
agree with the Genius of a Nation, where Women are obliged to live with a great
deal of circumspection, and that it might prove very troublesome to his Brother.
But the business was urgent, and he must resolve: Christina perceiving him
waver, asked him the reason; he acquainted her with the difficulties he
apprehended, and added, It was not decent or fit a young Maid should run
rambling into a strange Country. Christina longing to get out of her Father's
reach, whom she feared, and having a passionate desire to see Spain, proposed
to the Abbot, that if he would give her leave, she would put on Boys Clothes:
And that she might have a plausible pretense for staying in Spain, he need no
more but tell his Brother he brought him a young Kins-man to learn Spanish, and
study some Months in the University of Saragosa. The Abbot at first boggled at
the proposal as ridiculous and childish. But finding her persist in it, and
promising she would so disguise her self they should never discover her Sex, he
was persuaded by her. And having caused her to be privately put into a habit
suitable to her inclinations, he thought she became it so well, that he made no
more scruples, but parted the next day with her for Saragosa. Being arrived
there, they were received by his Brother with incredible joy and abundance of
thanks, that he would trust him with the Education of a Kins-man of so
promising a mien. The Abbot returned, and Don Lorenzo his Brother, took
pleasure in making provision of necessaries for his young Kins-man. Scholars in
Spain wear long, loose, black Vests like the Jesuits; a Habit that served very
well to make Christina look taller and handsomer, and her Hair being of a
delicate-brown, and cut after the Spanish-mode, had an admirable effect upon
the beholders. She no sooner appeared in the University, but she drew after her
the Eyes and the Hearts of the Students. It is incredible what an advantage
this was to the French Nation; for Spain being a Country inconvenient for
Travelers, few Persons of Quality go thither. And they seldom have amongst
them any French, unless it be some poor Laborers of the Mountains of Auvergne,
Limosin, and Bigorre, who for very small wagers do all manner of Drudgery. And
the Spaniards, who are naturally lazy, are willing to employ Frenchmen who
serve them for money. This is the reason the People of those Countries, who
seldom travel abroad, slight the French, as they do, judging of the whole
Nation by those they see amongst them. This general prejudice heightened their
astonishment, who admired the beauty of Christina, and called her The Handsome
Frenchman. Everyone one strove to be acquainted with the Stranger; and her
Reputation was in a short time so well settled at Saragosa, that those of the
best Quality there ordered their Children, to get acquaintance with the young
Frenchman, and to make him their Friend.

The Marquess d'Osseyra then a Student there, went every morning to take him
with him in his Coach to the University, and Don Philip de Palafox, Son to the
Marquess d' Arizza, brought him back for the most part in his. He visited these
two young Lords oftener than any other, especially the Marquess d' Osseyra, who
took pleasure to teach him Spanish, and tell him when he spoke amiss. This
Gentleman had a Sister married to the Marquess d' Aytona; who having heard an
excellent Report of the handsome Frenchman, desired her Brother to bring him
with him to her House, proposing to her self the pleasure to be expected from
the Conversation of two young Lads of their Age. But she found it more
charming, and was so satisfied with the first Visit, that she prayed her
Brother to bring him often to her; being extremely delighted to see him and
hear him speak. To engage him to come again, she presented him with a Sword,
and her Brother with another; which they carried commonly under their Gowns, as
the Scholars in Spain usually do. This Present was fatal to them both: For as
they were going homewards one Evening very late, they met other Scholars who
knew the Handsome Frenchman, and could not forbear (out of a Natural antipathy
against the French) to give him ill-language and call him French-bougre. The
Marquess d'Osseyra, thinking himself concerned in their ill-usage and
incivility, and not daunted with the number of his Enemies, charged them
vigorously with his Sword in his hand. The Handsome-Frenchman seconded him so
well, that they two beat back five Men above thirty paces: till putting on two
far, they were at last forced to give Ground, oppressed with numbers of fresh
assailants. The Marquess had a slight wound on the Face; and the
Handsome-Frenchman received a cut upon the Belly. Some Tradesmen getting out of
their Shops, the Marquess discovered himself, and the Scholars took their a
heels to avoid the punishment their insolence deserved. The wounded Persons
were carried home to the Marchioness d'Osseyra's, who was so troubled at the
news of her Sons being wounded, that she swooned away twice: but the Surgeon
having convinced her it was only a Scratch, she turned all her care toward the
Pretty Frenchman, who would not be searched though they preceiv'd him lose much
blood: but he was obstinate, and all they could say could not prevail with him
to let the Surgeon see his wound. The part he was wounded in troubled him
more than the wound, as foreseeing it impossible to keep the secret of his Sex
undiscovered among such a Crowd as waited there to see the first dressing.
Being pressed, and seeing them ready to force him to give way for the
Surgeon to search the wound, he desired to speak a word with the Marchioness
in private; and told her, that for very substantial reasons she should one day
be acquainted with, she had been obliged to disguise her Sex; and begged of her
by all that is Good, not to discover her, and to charge the Surgeon not to do
it. The Marchioness surpised at the news, promised what she desired: and
having commanded all the rest to quit the Room but the Surgeon, she remained
alone with him and Christina, whose wound appeared not dangerous: and the
Surgeon undertook it should be cured in five or six days. The Marquess not
able to comprehend why his Friend was so scrupulous, earnestly begged his
Mother to tell him what he had said to her in private, and why she made all the
Company quit the Room: She gave him an answer that satisfied him.

In the mean time, Don Lorenzo coming in hastily, upon the news of his Kins-man
being wounded, would have carried him home; but the Marchioness refusing her
consent, told him, His Kins-man had been wounded in the defense of her Son, and
should not go out of her House uncur'd. On the morrow Don Lorenzo renewed his
Request to have his Kins-man home, whom he loved as tenderly as if he were his
Son. The Marchioness stuck to her first Resolution; and the Surgeon who had
the Frenchman in cure coming in, Don Lorenzo would have the satisfaction to see
the condition of the Wound: but the Marchioness obstinately refusing him a
sight of it, without giving him any tolerable reason, Don Lorenzo fansy'd his
Kins-man mortally wounded, and that to be the cause of her obstinate refusals.
This made him send for two very able Surgeons, in whom he thought he might
place an entire confidence. And when they were come he prayed them to see the
Wound, and give him their Judgment of it. Christina more troubled with the
unseasonable kindness of her Kins-man than the pains of her Wounds, was forced
to impart the secret to him, as well as to the Marchioness, that she might be
at ease from his importunate Care of her. Don Lorenzo could hardly believe her,
and thought they but jested with him, till the Marchioness seriously affirmed
it. Christina was perfectly cured in a short time, and sooner perhaps than she
could have wished, imagining a Secret known to so many, could not long be kept
private. She was loath to expose her self to the discretion of so many; and
having retired to Don Lorenzo's, notwithstanding the resistance made by the
Marchioness, she was dressed in Maids Apparel, and so continued thenceforwards;
being so ashamed of what had happened to her, that she would not stir out of
her Chamber.

The Young Marquess d'Osseyra hearing the news went to Don Lorenzo's to see his
old Comerade, more out of curiosity than on any other account. The Marchioness
d'Aytona longed extremely to see Christina, and take her home to her: But
Christina obstinately refused to receive any Visit. And to be rid of their
importunity, prayed her Kins-man to put her into a Nunnery for some time, and
to give it out she was returned into France Don Lorenzo approved the design,
and made a Visit to the Lady Abbess of the Vrsulines, to entreat her to receive
a Kins-woman of his into the number of her Pensioners. All things beieg agreed
on, Christinae was privately put into the Convent of Vrsulines, where she was
kindly entertained, her beauty gaining her the affection of all that saw her.
And when she had been there long enough to give them a taste of her Wit and good
Humor, the good Nuns were singularly well-pleased with her Company; and she
gained so great a Reputation among the Pensioners, that they did nothing
without her advice. She spent about six Months in this Place of Refuge and
Security, from the great power of Fortune; who vexed to see her so much at ease,
cut her out more work, and raised her new troubles, which forced her out of her
port to be tossed with fresh turmoils.

The Prelates of Spain are very exact in visiting Religious-Houses, as well for
encouragement of the Nuns who have great veneration for them, as to discharge
the duty of their Pastoral-Office. The Archbishop of Saragosa going to visit
the Convent of Vrsulines, the Nuns having received his Benediction, treated him
with a pretty merry Comedy, wherein Christina acted the part of Don Sancho
Abarca King of Arragon, and did it admirably well. The Archbishop who had
several times seen Christina a Student, looking on her in Man's Habit on this
occasion, presently knew her; and the more easily, for that Christina being
extremely handsome and of more than ordinary stature, there was scarce such
another to be seen in Spain. The Comedy being ended, the good Nuns who expected
great applause for performing so well, were astonished to see the Prelate's Face
glow with indignation and anger: He called the Superior aside with two of the
gravest Nuns; and told them, he was very much scandalized to see that in
contempt of the Rules of their Order, and to the great scandal of so many
Devout Souls in the Convent, they had the boldness to introduce into it a Young
Man to act his part in the Comedy. The Nuns looked on one another without
saying a word: The Superior more surpised than the rest, spoke for her self,
and assured the Archbishop there was not a Man among the afters; and that
every part of the Comedy was acted by such only as she very well knew, and had
long been of the House. The Archbishop thinking himself as fully assured of
the contrary, asked her who acted Don Sancho, and how song that Person had been
of the House: The Superior answered, it was a French Maid, a Kins-woman of Don
Lorenzo's, who recommended her very earnestly to them, and one who behaved her
self very well. How credulous are you, poor Innocents, says the Archbishop,
you have taken in a Wolf, and locked him up among the Sheep. The good Souls
were presently nonplust; and without farther inquiry, prayed the Prelate the
Criminal might be instantly arrested, and brought to Exemplary Punishment. The
Archbishop being a Person of more than ordinary discretion, was not of their
mind, but represented to them the inconveniences might attend the publishing
this business, which would be matter of laughter and sport to the World, and a
dishonor to the Convent; adding, that without doubt the Young Man had been
blindly led away with a violent Passion he had for some one of the Pensioners;
that they should watch and endeavor to surprise them, and then have them
Married. The Nuns received with a great deal of respect the Archbishops
Counsel; and having given him thanks, promised to follow his Advice. He was no
sooner gone, but the Superior called for the Sister who had the Government of
the Pensioners, and having made particular and exact inquiry into Christina's
Life, and which of the Pensioners she was most intimate with, she found she
lived in very strict Correspondence and Amity with Zeraphine Cortes, one of the
handsomest Sisters in the Convent, and a considerable Fortune: That same,
without doubt, is the Wretch has yielded up her Honor, and profaned our
Convent, says the Superior; and forgetting the secrecy the Archbishop had
recommended to her, immediatley she called a Convocation, and with tears in her
Eyes declared to the Sisters the misfortune befallen their Convent, and desired
their advice in that important Affair. Many, especially the Elder Nuns,
insensible of the pleasures of Youth, were for delivering the Criminals into
the hands of the Secular Justice. But it was carried by Majority of Voices, and
resolved that Christina and her supposed Mistress should be locked up a part in
several Cells, and fed only with Bread and Water, till the Archbishop should
prevail with Don Francisco Cortes for his Pardon, and consent for Marriage. The
Criminals were accordingly called to the Bar, where they received as severe
Reprimands as anger could suggest. Christina who at first thought all done in
Railery, could not forbear laughing; but finding them in good earnest she stood
upon her Justification, but to no purpose; for without giving her leave to
speak they shut her up, and executed the Order of the Convocation with that
rigor, they gave only pitiful old Pallets to lie on. Christina sent the
Superior word by her Keeper, that to know her mistake, she need only have her
searched; and that she would most willingly undergo any punishment if she were
not as other Women. This was reported to the Superior; but the Nuns were all
so prepossest, that there was not one in the Convent would undertake searching
her, for fear of meeting some Bug-bears the Nuns are terribly afraid of. Don
Francisco Cortes being privately told of the business, was for having them
punished as Vitiated Vestals, and buried alive. The Archbishop who was for
moderate courses, sent for Don Lorenzo; and having aggravated the Enormity of
the Crime he had committed in introducing his Kins-man among the Nuns in Women's
Apparel, without giving him time to answer, he asked him of what Quality and
Fortune that Wretch was. Don Lorenzo astonished at this long Discourse, gave him
an account of Christina's Adventures, and made him clearly sensible of the
Error he had committed in the Judgment he made of those two Young Persons; and
added, the Marchioness d'Osseyra would confirm all he told him. The Archbishop
was satisfied, and went directly to the Convent to disabuse the poor Nuns, by
acquainting them with all that had happened to Christina ever since she came
into Spain. The Prisoners were set at Liberty, and having thanked the
Archbishop, were the first that laughed and diverted themselves with their
disaster. The Marchioness d'Osseyra understanding Christina was in the Convent,
and not gone into France, as had been reported, went to see her, with the
Marchioness D' Aytona her Daughter, who was ravished with her company. The
young Marquess who was in the Country, having heard the News by Letter from his
Sister, came away Post to see Christina, who appeared so Charming in her
Natural Habit, that from that very moment the Friendship he had for her
improved it self into Admiration and Love: Christina perceiving it by his
discourse, and the disorder he appeared in, would have withdrawn, telling him,
unless he would alter his Language, he should never see her more. The Marquess
to keep her a little longer with him, promised all she desired, and prayed her
to admit him to visit her at least thrice a week, but she gave him leave to see
her only once a fortnight.

The Nuns, the mean while, strove who should first make her Peace with
Christina and her Comrade, telling them how sorry they were for their ill
usage; and upon this occasion every one would needs persuade them she had voted
in their favor, or at least had still a good opinion of them. But all agreed,
that the Sister who was over the Quire had been the most bitter against them;
and when she saw she could not prevail to have them made away, she insisted
strongly, they should be made a public example. Christina had particular
confidence in that Nun, and took her for her best Friend; for that the Choire
and the Vestry being under her Charge, she often prayed Christina (who was very
handy) to help her to wind up Ribband, and other little offices, which she did
for her with singular dexterity and neatness. This Nun was prodigiously
covetous, and not liking the Wax-lights a Chandler provided for the Convent,
she would needs try the making some with the help of another Nun of her humor;
but her Huswifery proved so bad, and the Candles burnt so dim, they could
scarce see by that light in the Choire, which was excellent sport for the other
Nuns, especially the Pensioners, who hated her mortally: they resolved to play
her a Trick; Christina having got some Powder, with the help of her dear Friend
Zeraphine Cortes, sowed two Cords together, and having rolled them up hollow,
she covered them with Wax, and filled them with Powder so neatly, that no body
would have thought but they were Wax-Candles: they had the dexterity to put to
them little Matches, which should burn about half a quarter of an hour before
the fire came at the Powder. At night when prayer time in the Choire was come,
they took away the Lights that were in the Candlesticks, and put in theirs in
their stead: as soon as they were lighted, they presently observed they burnt
dimmer than ordinary; but this was no news: yet the good Sister (who thought
they were her handiwork) impatient to see them cast so dull a light, would
needs mend one of them, and take off a little Wax that was melted about it. By
this time the Powder took fire and went off like a Gun: the poor Nun fell flat
on her back, and the rest were so amazed, they were ready to run away. One of
the boldest of them running in to help the distressed Surintendant of the
Choire, the other Candle fired with more noise than the former: this put the
poor Nuns into a perfect Confusion; the fearful runaway, the rest staid to help
their Companions, only Christina and her Friend were pleased with the disorder,
and laughed as if they would burst. The Morrow they held many Arguments about
the accident; most were of opinion the Devil had a hand in it, and that the
Lights were bewitched: The Nun, Surintendant of the Choire, would no longer
meddle with them, and the Superior was forced to make use of her old Chandler
again.

The Marchioness d' Aytona being alone, by reason of her Husbands absence at
Madrid, to attend his employments there, had long (but in vain) wished to have
Christina at her House; and being obliged on the Morrow for the Country, she
begged her company so earnestly, it was not in her power to refuse her. The
Spanish Ladies have commonly as little divertisement in the Country as in Town,
being generally shut up in their Chambers, and receive no Visits but from their
near Kindred. The Marquess d' Osseyra made so good use of his privilege of
Brother, that he went every day to see his Sister, though not so much to
complement her, as to have a sight of Christina, with whom he was Charmed. In
one of his Visits he had the opportunity to declare his passion for her, and
let her know the violence of it in the tenderest expressions, assuring her it
should last while he lived. Christina interrupting him, entreated him to quit
his Passion, and think no more of Love; since in the condition she was in,
there was reason to believe he intended to make her his Mistress, and could not
have any thoughts of Marrying a Stranger, being utterly unaquainted with her
Quality and Fortune. But the Amorous Marquess having sworn several times he
would Marry her when she pleased, though Christina was of all persons the least
inclined to Love, to satisfy him, she told him, if he would continue in the
same mind two years, that she might be convinced he had no ill design, she
would allow him the liberty to hope: that in the mean time she expected it as
an Evidence of his Love, to say no more of it, but rest satisfied with her
Promise. The Marquess had that respect for her, that he forthwith retired for
fear of displeasing her, and resolved to keep silent the Passion he had for her
two years, in hopes by so signal obedience to win upon, and master the
insensibility of his Mistress. The Marchioness had sent for a Fowler who had
the Reputation of the best Marksman in Spain. One day in complaisance to
Christina, she went out in her Coach to see the skill of the Fowler, who made
five shots at Partridges flying, and killed but two: however he was admired, so
few there are in Spain that shoot flying. Christina slighting the pretended
skill of the Fowler, lighted out of the Coach, and taking the Marquess
d'Osseyra's Gun, made ready to shoot the first Partridge that sprung: By good
fortune they put up a Covey, Christina shot and killed three of them; and
unconcerned at the Applause of the Spectators, new-charg'd her Gun, and having
observed the Partridges light in two several places, she ordered two should be
sprung (one from either place) and killed both with two several shots. The
Marchioness and her Brother, could scarce believe what they saw: however they
made her get into the Coach again, fearing so violent an Exercise might
incommode her, and brought her back, in a manner, against her will.

About this time Christina received Letters from Bearn, which brought her News
of the Death of her Father, and the great desire her Mother had to see her.
This obliged her to pray the Marchioness to bring her back to Saragosa to speak
with her Kinsman about the present condition of her Affairs. At her return she
was visited by most that knew her: Amongst the rest, her Ancient Comrades in
the University pretended a right to make Love to her. Don Philip de Palefox,
formerly mentioned, was one of those who appeared most concerned, to let her
know they had more then ordinary kindness for her. Amidst all these pretenders,
she preserved her usual indifferency. Don Philip not discouraged by the small
Progress of his Amors, fancied he might better please her with a Serenade
which he gave her. Christina who was not of the humor of the Spanish Ladies,
who all love this kind of Entertainment, was so angry at the noise it made in
the Street, where two or three Persons were abused on this occasion, that she
would not see Don Philip any more, nor appear to any person, no not to the
Marquess who loved her with the greatest respect. Being thus deprived of the
sight of her, and not able to bear so killing a loss, he inquired and learnt
the cause of her anger, and resolved to demand satisfaction from Don Philip,
and did it with a great deal of courage, but so little success, that he
received two dangerous Wounds, and lay at the Mercy of his Rival, who taking
his advantage, required him to quit all pretense to Christina, The Marquess
choosing rather to lose his life than his Mistress, Don Philip disarmed, and
left him. The Marchioness d' Osseyra seeing her Son in that condition, knowing
Christina was the cause of the Quarrel, was extremely offended with her. The
Marchioness d' Aytona, came to her, endeavoring to comfort and divert her from
the violent resolutions she would have taken against Christina; but could not
prevail with her to forbear sending Don Lorenzo word, that if Christina staid
longer in Spain, she would set fire on his House. Christina who was preparing
for her return, hastened her Journey for Bearn; and coming home, was received
by her Mother with a great deal of joy, as far as the different Passions of Joy
for sight of her beloved Daughter, and sorrow for her Son, would allow her.

All the Persons of Quality in that Country complemented her at her return, and
several thought her so Amiable, that in less than a Month she had many very
advantageous Proposals of Marriage: Her Mother had partly made a Promise of her
to a Gentleman, one of the most considerable in those parts. But Christina who
loved her liberty, whether she had a secret inclination for the Marquess, or a
natural aversion from Marriage, declared she would not put her self under a
Master; and since she was now in a Country where those of her Sex are no
Slaves, she would enjoy her privilege. The most concerned, thought to overcome
her with diligence of attendance, and would not be discouraged, till they found
she was indifferent for all, and made no account of their services. In the mean
time, the Marquess d'Osseyra being cured of his Wounds, and hearing his
Mistress was gone, was very much afflicted with the News, and would have
followed her into France, but for fear of displeasing her. He ordered one of
his Family to pass the Pyrenees, and carry a Letter (he gave him) to Christina,
which probably was full of tender and passionate Expressions: (I wish it in my
power to have pleasur'd you with the Copy.) But the Marchioness, his Mother,
having discovered the Intrigue, caused her Sons Confident to be staid by the
way, and the Letter to be burnt; and obliged him with fearful threats to tell
her Son, his Mistress was Married, and had sacrificed his Letter to her
Husband, who having read it, threw it in the fire. The passionate Marquess was
so vexed at the News, it almost cost him his life: At last, at the persuasion of
his Friends, he went to Madrid, where Ambition quickly justled out Love, as
usually happens to the misfortune of Ladies. Don Philip was better served, for
having sent a trusty Messenger to Bearn, to know whether the News he had heard
of the Marriage were true, he was informed she was not Married; and that she
went very often a-Hunting, as the greatest pleasure she took. This made him
think of stealing her; and the rather, because he was of Opinion there was no
winning of her by fair means: A Man of that Country, whom he gained by his
Liberality, offered to be his Guide, and represented the matter so easy, that
Don Philip resolved to put his design in Execution. Accompanied with this Man,
and two others well mounted, he past the Mountains, and the third day in the
Evening came to a Village near Mayence; and that less notice might be taken of
his Arrival, he sent the two Persons who bore him company to lodge in another
Inn: the Morrow betimes his Guide was in the Field, and brought him news that
Christina would not stir abroad that day; and that the next day she was to
visit a Kinsman, within a League of her House. Don Philip having informed
himself of the way she was to take, and knowing pretty near what time she would
set out, gave his Men order to advance softly, and keep the Road: a moment
after he followed with his Guide, having taken his Measures so right, that he
arrived precisely as Christina was passing by, attended only with a Footboy.
As soon as Don Philip saw her, he was so troubled and assaulted at once with
Passions of so different Natures, that he was upon the point of altering his
Resolution, and begging her pardon for the rashness of his Attempt. The
suddenness of the accident had a suitable effect on Christina, who presently
suspected his design; and he as quickly put her out of doubt, when he told her
as she was returning back, upon pretense to receive him at her House, that he
was come to take her back into Spain, where he could not live without her;
assuring her, he would Marry her as soon as they got thither. Christina by a
readiness of Wit, natural to many of her Sex, concealing her surprise, looked
smiling upon him, and told him she was very sensible of the greatness of his
Passion for her, and was ready to go back with him to Spain, to receive the
Honor (he was pleased to promise) of being Married to him; only she prayed him
to allow her so much time as was requisite for executing a Design of that
Nature with decency. Don Philip credulous as true Lovers are, was Charmed at
the good Fortune, to see himself not obliged to use force, but hoped he might
enjoy her without offering any violence: He flattered himself she loved him;
and quitting a design Despair had engaged him in, he willingly embraced all
Expedients she proposed. They went to Meyrac, where Christina ravished with joy
for having escaped so great danger, made as if she were extremely concerned to
have him well entertained; and under that pretense, dispatched two or three of
her Servants, to pray three or four Neighbors to come in all have to Meyrac.
They all came in the Evening, and were much surpised at the strangeness of the
Adventure; and animated by an indiscreet Zeal, and the anger of the Mother,
agreed upon resolutions very violent, and contrary to the Laws of Hospitality.
But Christina being of the humor of most Women, who seldom hate those that
love them, though they love not again, and weary already with the noise she had
made in the world, could not be induced to consent to a cruel Revenge of a
design undertaken for love of her, but was content to go into Don Philip's
Chamber, attended with some Gentlemen of the Neighborhood, and tell him she
had no small respect for his Person, but could not yet resolve to Marry. With
that she retired, to avoid hearing the reproaches of a Lover, who after she was
gone, could not forbear complaining of her; and those who accompanied her
thither, told him harshly enough he must be gone. He returned in a desperate
mood into the Inn where he had left his People, made them get hastily on
Horseback, and rode all Night, detesting his Passion no less than his
Credulity. Not long after he addressed himself, to the Duke de S. Germain,
Viceroy of Catal^nia, for employment, perhaps to have the better opportunity to
take revenge on the French for the ill usage he conceived he had received from
Christina, who had her share of the trouble occasioned by this Adventure by the
fright the Spaniard put her in, and the importunity of Suitors, whose Passion
was awakned by the accident, and put them upon new and pressing Addresses to
her. Her Mother and Relations made use of it, to persuade her to Marry Marmon,
a Gentleman of great Merit, who had long endeavored to gain her, and had his
Estate conveniently seated near hers. This business was believed of so much
advantage to both, and the Relations on either side desired it so earnestly,
that Articles of Marriage were drawn upon the assurance the Barroness gave to
prevail with her Daughter to consent: But Marmon being informed how much they
pressed her, went to see her, and having complained of her indifference,
assured her, he was ready to set her at liberty from any Engagement she might
be conceived under to him, and would endeavor to merit her by such services as
he thought most acceptable to her. Christina who had not before vouchsafed him
an answer, observing his sentiments so full of respect, declared to him she had
no aversion against his Person, tho a strong one against Marriage, and was
resolved to prefer her liberty before all other advantages; but if it should be
her fortune one day to lose it, she should be glad to sacrifice it to a person
who appeared so reasonable. He was satisfied with her answer, and prayed his
Relations to speak no more of the business, but give him time to win her by his
services. He waited on her thenceforward with a great deal of diligence, but
with so much discretion (not speaking a word of Love) that she received all his
Visits with much satisfaction, and had a real Esteem (though no Love) for him.

One Afternoon she had been abroad with Marmon a-shooting Quails with a
Cross-bow without a Gun; a great Mastiff set upon her Setting-Dog: she
presently ran in to force the Mastiff to let go his hold, which he too quickly
did upon the first blow she gave him, and flying at her, bit her in the right
Arm. Marmon, who was hard by, pursued the Mastiff; and having overtaken him,
presently dispatched him, though not without being bitten by him. He had scarce
laid him dead, but he spied two or three Countrymen coming with Guns in pursuit
of the Mastiff, who told him it was a Mad Dog, and had already bit three or
four. Christina was so frighted at the News, she was ready to sink; and getting
hastily home, sent for an able Physician of the Neighborhood, who according to
the Custom of those of the Profession, made slight of the matter, and undertook
to cure her in few days, and ordered her several Remedies for the purpose.
Marmon was so transported, they doubted he would run Mad; for a long time he
obstinately refused to take any thing, imagining if he could (...) ^^^self from
Love, he had no reason to fear Madness, being resolved to follow the Fate of
his Mistress. Christina being told of it, conjured him to use the same Remedies
that she did; assuring him she was much concerned for his health.

Some days after their hurts, there was a report, that a Woman bit by the same
Dog was run Mad, and that they were forced to smother her. They would have
concealed this News from them; but Christina's Mother having heard it, was so
alarmed that in spite of the Physicians and their Medicines, she resolved to
take her Daughter to Bayonne, to dip her in the Sea, as a Sovereign Remedy in
the case. Marmon would make one of the Company, more for the pleasure of
attending his Mistress, than for the Cure. The morrow after their arrival the
Ladies were visited by most of the Persons of Quality in the Town. The Viscount
Ronceval, then at Bayonne, was one of the first to pay them his Civilities: He
was of a good Family, of a haughty humor, and Mein, and had a considerable
Estate in the Country of Besque: But he had the intoletable vanity to think he
did a Lady Honor, if he took the pains to come near her. The first time he saw
Christina, thought her so Amiable, he resolved to see her often; the second
Visit amused him, and filled him full of Amorous Inclinations: and having been
a whole Week without seeing her, being in a Course of Physic, his Fancy had
the opportunity to represent her to his thoughts to the utmost advantage. The
third Visit he made her, he went with a resolution to declare his Love, but did
not, having not been able to find her alone; but he returned home up to the
Ears in Love, which may be reckoned among the Triumphs of Cupid. The morrow he
desired to speak with her before eight in the Morning, but was put off till the
Afternoon. The Ladies had scarce dined but he came in, and happily finding
Christina in her Chamber alone, he began with telling her he had brought her
the best News she ever heard. This Lady, who took singular delight to hear
News, and was passionately concerned for the Progress of the Victorious Arms of
France, fancied she should hear from him of some Victory in the Field, or the
taking of Cambray, or Valenciennes, and was upon that account very earnest to
know the News. The Viscount having a more than ordinary Confidence, and a
Stranger to the fears incident to most Lovers when they are to declare their
Passion to their Mistresses, never stuck to tell her, that a Person of great
Merit and Birth, and as great a Fortune, admired her and was resolved to marry
her. Christina who little expected such a Complement, answered, that how little
soever he was concerned for that Person, he would do well to advise him to
think no more of that business, it being more than probable that for all his
great Quality and Fortune, he should but lose his time in Courting her. The
Viscount was not discouraged at this Answer, but thinking she had not well
understood him, told her, she would not be so indifferent, did she but know the
Gentleman's Name. It madded him the while to see her so incurious, and not
inquisitive who it was, and himself deprived of the occasion he expected to
have from her question, to answer, it was he: Were it you replies Christina
coldly, I had no more to say to you than what you have heard: It Is not
Possible, says the Viscount, you should be so much your own Enemy, to refuse
such a settlement as I propose to you: I have that excess of kindness for you,
I will give you time to think on it, and doubt not but you will alter your mind
when you have considered the advantages of the offer I make you. At this
another coming in, he withdrew, and came two days after to know if she had though
of the proposal he had made her: 'Twas to no purpose to think of it, answered
she, having nothing to add to what I said to you at first. She spoke these
words so unconcerned, and with so much scorn, that the presumptuous Viscount,
not able to endure it, took his leave, and went away, telling her, since she
made so ill use of his kindness, he could alter his humor. Christina to be rid
of his extravagant importunities, gave order they should answer him at the door
if he came again, that she was not well, and in few days returned with her
Mother to Bearn. Every body at Bayonne admired her, and spoke well of her when
gone; only the Viscount Ronceval haughtily published, she was in Love with him,
and added many ridiculous Circumstances to make the story more probable.
Christina heard of it, and was touched to the quick, though 'twas told her for
her comfort, the Viscount usually took that liberty, and that his Acquaintance
made very little account of it: But this would not satisfy her; she was ready
to take Horse for Bayonne to punish his insolence, wanting neither courage nor
dexterity to have satisfaction from him; nothing but the fear of giving
occasion for new discourse held her back. Marmon having had some confused
account of it, resented it with all the indignation of a passionate Lover: To
be clearer informed, he goes to his Mistress, and finding her much out of
humor, asked her the reason. You are the only Man in the Province (says she
very seriously) that is ignorant of it. It Is somewhat extraordinary, a man who
has declared a Passion for me, should be the last that knows I have been
abused Marmon who wanted not the most delicate sentiments of a man of Honor,
made her a profound Reverence, and retired: Two hours after he got on
Horseback, and took the Road for Bayonne, where he was told at his arrival,
the Viscount was gone to one of his Seats in the Country a-Hunting. He resolved
to follow him, and found him just as he was going from home to a Gentleman his
Neighbor to dine with him. The first Complements past, he let the Viscount
know he had business of consequence to communicate to him, and that it would be
convenient they might be private. Ronceval ordered his Servants to go before,
and ^ell his Friends, that he brought with him a Gentleman of Bearn who would
be glad of being known to him. Ronceval and Marmon rode gently after,
discoursing together. When the Servants were got out out of sight, Marmon told
him he was come to demand satisfaction of him for what he had said to the
disadvantage of the most Charming Person on Earth. This surpised the Viscount,
who would have turned all unto Raillery; but being pressed to take his Pistol in
hand, he answered briskly, and fought with courage enough: But whether Marmon
were really the braver man, or that Love made him the more dextrous, he shot
him dead upon the place, and made away to a F^iends House upon the Mountains,
where he hid himself many days to save himself from the pursuit of those who
would have ruined him, by making this pass for a Duel. Christina expressed her
self sorry for the News, but could hardly be troubled at heart, which was so
bitterly enraged against Ronceval: the only means to appease it, was to make
him a Victim. The heat of the first pursuits being over, Marmon longing
impatiently to see his Mistress, stole away privately to Meyrac, where he was
received with all the marks of esteem and acknowledgement he could expect from
Christina; who seeing him in trouble for a Pardon from the King, told him, it
became not a man of Honor to desire it, without having deserved it: And since
his Majesty commanded the Armies in Person, it would be an easy matter for him
to make himself known to that great Prince by some signal service, which might
assure him of pardon for a reward, and was the only way to gain her Heart. He
was ravished to find her sentiments so different from the weakness of her Sex,
and taking his leave, promised never to return till he had made it appear, he
was not altogether unworthy the concern she expressed for his reputation. He
ordered his affairs at home with all possible expedition, and came to Paris a
little before the opening of the Compagne for the French County. Two or three
of his Friends, who were Musketeers, spoke so well of that service, and the
frequent advantages they had to signalize themselves, that he resolved to list
himself in the second Company, where Mounsieur Jauvelt very gladly received
him, and Marmon as worthily served him with a great deal of reputation and
courage. At their return from the last conquest of that County, he gave
Christina a particular account of what had past; and am^ng the rest, the Death
of Captain Floris her Kins-man. He enlarged his Letter with ElogieS of the
valor and conduct of the indefatigable Lewis the great, whose heroic actions
excel and deface what History has left upon Record of Caesar's and
Alexander's, and what Fabulous Writers have invented of imaginary Heroes;
extolling in the conclusion their happiness and satisfaction who serve so brave
and virtuous a Monarch. Christina ambitious of Glory was so transported with
this faithful relation, she forgot her Sex; and taking a resolution beyond her
self, or at least such as she only was capable of, espoused a design to dispute
with the bravest of Men, the honor of well-serving so worthy a Master; yet
found upon second thoughts so many obstacles in her way, that would have
discouraged any other from executing so generous a resolution. She made the
Abbot of Dizette her intimate Friend acquainted with her intentions, who having
endeavored (but in vain) to divert her from pursuing them, promised to serve
her to his power; the Death of her Mother happening about that time facilitated
her design, though it retarded the execution some Months. Every day some new
difficulty arose, and seeing it impossible to settle all her Affairs, she gave
the Abbot a general proxy, and under pretense of following a considerable Suit
at Law depending at Grenoble, she went thither, and having dexterously rid her
self of her Country Folks who came with her, she put her self in Man's Habit,
and without having any Mercy on her delicate Hair cut it short, and with a
Footboy newly taken, went for Paris under the Name of St. Aubin. The second
days journey she overtook a Gentleman of Provence going to Court, who was very
glad of her Company; this Gentleman was Brother to the illustrious Chevalier
Fourbin, and was so pleased with the conversation of St. Aubin, and took that
esteem for his person, that he freely offered him his interest and his Friends
to help him to an employ proportionable to his merit. St. Aubin telling him he
had never been in the service, but was desirous to list himself a Musqueteer,
he presented him to his Brother, who commands the first Company, and
recommended him as affectionately as if he had been his Son.

The morrow after he was lifted, the King was present at a general muster of
his Guards; and the new Musqueteer appearing in the ranks was admired by all
that observed him. And as if France could not have produced so good a Face, his
Comrades said he was an English man, and Nephew to my Lord Douglas; though this
was but surmise, yet none were inquisitive as to trouble themselves about the
truth of it, and most believed him a stranger: One more curious than the rest,
being in the same rank with Marmon, told him of it, and prayed him to go see
him when the first Company filled off. Marmon was so astonished to see how like
his Mistress the pretended Englishman was, he could not forbear telling his
Friend, this Musqueteer had the Mien and Air of a Gentlewoman of his Country:
And as soon as he returned to Paris, he writ a Letter to Christina, (whom he
thought still in Bearn) wherein he acquainted her how much his fancy was
possessed with her, and every moment represented her Charms to his thoughts; and
that Fortune in favor of his Love had vouchsafed him another piece of
happiness by placing among Musketeers an English youth, who was the very
Picture of her, and dissipated by his presence the trouble her absence would
have given him this Campaign. St. Aubin having resolved not to discover himself
to Marmon before the opening the Campaign, and observing he took particular
Notice of him, and that it would be impossible to avoid Discovery long, went
one day to his Quarters: and finding him alone, told him he desired to be
acquainted with him, and could do no less to requite the desire he had expressed
on two or three occasions to contract a Friendship with him. Marmon was
strangely surpised at the Voice, his Heart telling him presently 'twas
Christina, spoke to him, though his reason could hardly give him leave to
believe it. St. Aubin smiled, which put Marmon out of doubt. May I credit my
Eyes, says he, or is it an illusion? St. Aubin interrupting him, declared the
motives for the resolution he had taken, charging him at his peril not to
discover him, and promising to be very sensible of the discretion he should
show on this occasion, and after they should have both gained credit in the
service they would retire together and enjoy one another the rest of their
Days: Marmon, who knew her humor, thought it to no purpose to endeavor making
her alter her resolution, told her, It was a resolution worthy a noble Soul. He
added a thousand obliging expressions and so very kind, St. Aubin told him he
must alter his Language, and call him Cousin; which he promised to do, and
observed it so carefully that their Correspondency was never perceived.

The Musketeers within few Days followed the King to Flanders; the Campaign
(being that of the taking of Limburg) was so lamentably wet it would have
discouraged any but St. Aubin from being a Soldier. Marmon, who came often to
see him as his Cousin, having entered his Tent, found him so weary, he could not
forbear telling him how troubled he was to see him drudge in that hard service,
the fatigues whereof the ablest Men were scarce able to endure. His discourse on
this Subject was so tender and passionate, that a Soldier who overheard them
through the Tent-Cloths, came briskly in, and gave them cause, by his
expressions to believe he suspected the words he had heard Marmon speak, could
not be addressed but to a Maid. St. Aubin perceiving it, answered, his foolish
Cousin there, was so deeply in Love he could not abstain from discoursing of
it, and repeating to him what he had said to his Mistress; and with that,
turning to Marmon, I would advise you, Cousin, to write to her, says St.
Aubin: Marmon answered, Matters were not yet ripe for writing and he durst not
do it; the Soldier believed all this true, and presently went out. St. Aubin
took that occasion to represent to Marmon the Inconveniences might happen if he
used discourse of that Nature, and charged him not to speak a word to him
during the Campaign, but as to his Cousin.

The News about this time was, that the Enemies fearing the approach of the K
marched further off, and retired into their Countries, giving out (to amuse the
People) they would go besiege Maestricht. This obliged his Majesty to send
thither a detachment of his Musketeers under the command of Monsieur Jauvelle;
those Gallants being all willing to go upon that service, in hopes to see the
Enemy quickly. To prevent discontent, the King was obliged to take the fourth
Man of every rank till they made up the number desired. It was St. Aubin's
Fortune to be detached, among the rest, and Marmon's to be left behind; he ran
to the first Company to enquire how his Cousin sped, and to his utter vexation
heard he was of the number of the detached. Marmon, unwilling to part with him,
prayed several of his Comrades to give him their place, pretending he had
business of Consequence with a Captain of the Garrison Maestricht: But he was
so unfortunate, or those Companies were composed of young Gentlemen so
passionately ambitious of Honor, he could not find one willing to lose so
promising an occasion to signalize himself. Part they must, and Marmon remained
under such a consternation, nothing for a long time could comfort him. The mean
time the detachment arrived at Maestricht, where the Marshal d' Estrade
joyfully received them; though till then, no Soldiers had been quartered with the
principal Burgers, on this occasion no Man was exempted.

An Officer of the Town who gave out the billets, to take away all cause of
complaint, said, he would quarter a Musqueteer at his House: And having spied
St. Aubin slipped into his hand a billet for his House, fancying a young Man so
handsome could not but be of a very quiet temper, and complying humor. This
Burgher was very rich, and had to Wife one of the handsomest Women of the Town;
and a Sister, whose Beauty and Fortune had made a great number of Officers her
Servants. These Women having heard those of their acquaintance tell of the
disorders Soldiers usually commit in their quarters, trembled at the thoughts
of having one in their House. But they must have one quartered with them, and
they had taken their Fortune for the Man, and resolved to use him the best they
could. St. Aubin coming to their House with a Billet in his Hand, they came
down to receive him, and were so pleasingly surpised with the sight of him,
(capable to move the most indifferent to have kindness for him) that they could
not forbear viewing him with astonishment, and applauding in their Hearts their
very good Fortune: His obliging way of Discourse, and the excuses he made that
he was forced to trouble them, absolutely gained him their Hearts. And to let
him presently see the esteem they had for him, they gave him the best Chamber
in the House, though designed for another. It was very richly furnished, and St.
Aubin after long excuses the contrary, was forced to lie there. The Master of
the House having made provision of some Bottles of Rhenish Wine to Welcome his
new Guest, was angry to find him as sober at Table, as modest every where else.
St. Aubin had not been two days there, but his Hostess was desperately in Love
with him: Her Sister Rachel had very kind thoughts for him, and having twice or
thrice in his Company resolved to make Conquest of him; her Suitors had so
often told her she was amiable, and her Glass confirmed it so well, that she
doubted not of success when she should apply her self to gain Love. These two
fair Ones had no other discourse but of the new Beauties they discovered every
moment in the face and wit of their new Guest, and he very glad of so pretty an
amusement, spent whole days at home, to divert himself with them at some little
witty Games he taught them, with a penalty imposed on those who did not well.
They took occasion to commend his Complaisance before the Master of the House,
who was ravished to find his Guest so well disposed, as to apply himself for
their divertisement. And when his Wife was out at play, he never failed, for
her penalty, to require her to kiss the Musqueteer; which she was so pleased
with, she never minded her Game, that she might by her faults have the occasion
to kiss him the oftener; and the Husband in good humor, would sometimes say he
would excuse his Wife, should she be unfaithful to him, to pleasure a person of
so good a Mien. Rachel, who applied her self particularly to please him, was
distracted to see Saint Aubin pleased with those small Penances undergone with
her Sister, without expressing any preference for her, and became so jealous of
him she resolved to make him jealous too. To effect this, she sent for a
Gentleman of the Garrison, who had long been in love with her. St. Aubin being
excellent Company, was very glad to see him, and grew so intimate with him,
that in a short time the Gentleman still made one amongst them in all their
divertisements. It madded Rachel to see St. Aubin, not only unconcerned, as
formerly, but very earnest to have the Gentleman sent for, when he staid away
long; so that she resolved to quarrel with him, that she might no more be
troubled with him. The Musqueteer very glad of an Assistant to bear the Women
Company, and desirous to have him continued, when he found the difference
between Rachel and the Gentleman, interposed to reconcile them. The Amorous
Rachel, not able to deny him any thing, granted his request. The Gentleman,
who, notwithstanding the Civilities of his Friend, suspected he might be his
Rival, was so sensible of the obligation, that he acquainted him with his
Passion for Rachel. St. Aubin, in requital of the confidence, promised him all
the service in his power. The Sisters, the mean time, observing they were both
in Love with their Guest, watched one another narrowly, and if he chanced to
let fall a kind expression for the one, he was presently called to account for
it by the other: And if he stirred a quarter of an hour out of doors, he was to
expect a strict examination at his return, what he had been a doing. Thus far
they held a fair Correspondence, and concealed nothing from each other. The
Married Sister being bolder than Rachel, to prevent and engage her in her
interests, or at least discourage her from daring to declare her love for St.
Aubin, acquainted her with the kindness she had for him, desiring her
Assistance to make him sensible of it, when she found a favorable opportunity
to do it handsomely. Rachel very dexterously hiding her jealousy, and glad of
the discovery her Sister had made her, promised her secrecy and assistance.
Her Sister to make advantage of the good temper she appeared in, desired her to
do it that very day; and told her, that to the end she might hear their
discourse without blushing, and be a Witness of the service she would do her,
she would stand behind the Hanging, and take notice of all. This put Rachel in
some disorder, but she must dissemble and hide it the best she can. Her Sister
had St. Aubin called up, and had posted her self behind the Hanging; and as
loath as Rachel was to speak for any but her self, it must be done. The
Musqueteer being entered the Room, after half a quarter of an hours discourse,
she extolled his Merit and good Mien, and told him, that having so many good
qualities, he must not be supriz'd to hear a handsome Woman, and one he saw
every day had ki^d inclinations for him. St. Aubin musing at this, Rachel told
him, he need only take good notice of her Sister, and he might read in her
looks the truth of what she said. St. Aubin tired with their forwardness which
he had hitherto wittily diverted, answered her in general, that from the day he
first came to their House, he found himself extremely obliged to both the
Sisters, and wished himself in a better condition to express his
acknowledgments. Rachel would have broken off there, but remembering her Sister
was near, she pressed further, to draw him to a more positive answer; and to
bring him to it, magnified the Charms of her Sister: You are pleased to be
merry, says St. Aubin; but since we are fallen on this subject, you will give
me leave to inform you of a Passion as real, as that you tell me of is
imaginary. Rachel making no doubt but he spoke of himself, was mortally afraid
her Rival should hear the Declaration she thought he would make: And to save
her the trouble of it, would have presently withdrawn, but for* fear of
discouraging him, she altered her mind. Her Brother coming luckily in, helped
her out of the perplexity she was in, but not out of the impatience she was
under, to hear the Declaration expected. Not long after she found him alone,
and insensibly fell into the discourse he begun when the Brother interrupted
them. St. Aubin very glad to serve his Friend, spoke so much to the Gentleman's
advantage, and described to the life the Passion he had for her, that Rachel
could not forbear sighing out, Cruel Man that you are, how is it possible you
that have so little sense of Love, should so powerfully persuade others to it?
She was so ashamed, having let fall these words, that she retired, without
giving him time to answer; and grieved at heart for his insensibility, she gave
free passage to her tears, the usual comfort of those of her Sex. Her Sister,
who studied every moment how to conquer his obstinate indifference, thought to
do it by her liberality. St. Aubin not so well able to disguise as his Sex, or
not so careful to do it, had often said he admir d the rare Workmanship of some
Table Linen she had shown him: She presented him with it; and though he made
very shy of accepting it, she prayed him so earnestly, on pretense he might
have need of it in the Army, that she forced him to take it. After this she
would have made another present of a Locket of Diamonds, which she could not
persuade him to receive, but he could not refuse a very curious Toilette Rachel
bestowed on him. There was news about that time, that the Commander of the
Musketeers had Order from the King to lead his Detachment to Paris. This put
Rachel and her Sister in a fearful Consternation: The latter was pretty well
satisfied, because her Rival being the handsomer and younger, had met with no
better Fortune than she: But Rachel was so troubled at it, the very thoughts of
St. Aubin's absence almost distracted her; and judging no misfortune equal to
that of lossing him, she cast about how to keep him near her. The Orders for
their marching suddenly away, afflicted her extremely; for believing she had
fortune large enough to make her a Musketeers Wife, she made no doubt out St.
Aubin would gladly marry her, could she but have time to get her Friends
consent, who were already under some Engagement of marrying her to a young Man
of Amsterdam, and very considerable. But not daring to expose her Love to the
uncertain success of a hasty Negotiation, she took a resolution, the most hardy
and bold a person of her Sex could be capable of, and prayed her Brother to go
along with her to her Uncle, who was her Guardian. Being alone with them two,
who were her nearest Relations, and entrusted to dispose of her, she fell down
at their feet; and having endeavored to sweeten them by a Preamble not much to
the purpose, she declared to them she had been so unfortunate, as to yield to
St. Aubin, upon his Promise to Marry her, but was afraid he would leave her
without making her his Wife: that she had rather die than live dishonored, and
begged their pardon, and that at the same time they would dispatch her out of
the World, or afford her their necessary assistances to make him repair her
Honor.

The Brother having a real esteem for St. Aubin, could have been very well
content to have him for his Brother in-law, and excused his Sister so well,
that the Uncle, who had threatened to forsake her, joined with them to agree
upon the means to settle the Affair. Rachel blind with Passion, told them the
only way to do it, was to surprise them a-bed together, and persuade or force
him presently to marry her. This appeared so easy they promised to do it; and
having agreed of the time to put it in execution, Rachel at the hour went into
St. Aubin's Chamber, and having found him a-bed (as she had forecast) she
threw off her Nightgown and laid her by him, telling him, if he thought her
too forward in doing thus, he must thank himself, who had put her in a
condition to consider neither what was decent nor reasonable. St. Aubin would
have got out of Bed, and would not have been staid there, but for the noise the
Uncle and Brother made as they entered the Chamber with Pistols in their Hands:
they came to the Bedside, and having drawn the Curtain, found, to their
astonishment, the Bed-fellows were both of a Sex; and Rachel perceiving her
mistake in having loved a Woman, under the disguise of a Musqueteer, was amazed
to that extremity, she could hardly be brought to her self: But convinced by
Experience, she confessed to her Relations, that the fear she had to lose that
lovely Maid, whom she thought a Man, had seized her with that violence, that to
assure her self of him, she forced her self to declare he had robbed her of her
Honor. St. Aubin confounded at the Adventure, instantly begged them to keep it
secret, telling them how much he was concerned it should not be discovered; and
adding, he would be revenged of them if they divulged it. They were obliged to
silence by common Interest, and the Musketeers marching away the next day, St.
Aubin saw himself at liberty, and well-rid of the Raileries and Reproaches of
his Hostesses.

At his return to Paris, he saw Marmon, who longed for his coming; and to
please him, St. Aubin made him a faithful Relation of what he had seen since
parting, not forgetting the least Circumstance of what happened at Mastricht.
Marmon took occasion to renew his request, that she would save her self those
toilsome Fatigues, and appear in a habit suitable to her Sex, if she could not
resume the inclinations proper to it. St. Aubin to oblige him, promised after
one Campaign more to retire, being unwilling to quit the service without
engaging an Enemy, for which this Campaign had not afforded opportunity.

St. Aubin being quartered at the Hostel de Nostre Dame, the Baron of Quincy,
who lodged there, surprised at the good account St. Aubin gave of the Campaign,
desired to be acquainted with him; and having made some Overtures for the
purpose, found the Musqueteer so glad of it, that they became very good
Friends. The Baron, little acquainted with the Women of Paris, went to a
Flemish ladies house* who attended a suit of Law there, and presenting St.
Aubin to her, as a Person of Merit, spoke much to his advantage. This Lady
being the Marchioness de Belabre, judging all other things suitable to St.
Aubin's good Mien, received him very kindly, and gave the Baron thanks for
bringing him to her.

The Lady was so pleased with this first Visit, that St. Aubin returned
frequently thither, sometimes with the Baron, and often without him, much
delighted with the Ingenious Conversation of the Marchioness. These Visits gave
him opportunity of being acquainted with two or three Gentlemen of the best
Quality; it was the time of the Carnaval, and one night they desired the
Marchioness to go to a Ball: She refused it at first as a thing improper for
one Lady to go along with three Men. One presently told her she need only dress
St. Aubin in Maids Habit, which could not choose but become him well enough,
being so pretty a Youth. This was so generally approved, that the Marchioness
presently took St. Aubin by the hand, led him into her Wardrobe, where she gave
him a Maids Habit very fit for him, and went out to give St. Aubin time to
dress himself, and returned by and by to put him on a Tour. This Dress appeared
so natural and agreeable to his Countenance and Stature, that the Marchioness
and Gentlemen admired it. They went to several Balls, and were very well
received. They were told there was one at Monsieur Strasbourg's, where was very
good Company: thither they went, and found so great a number of Persons of
Quality, they could scarce get entrance. Monsieur Strasbourg, Who had heard
talk of the Marchioness of Belabre, and was told it was she, received her with
a great deal of Civility; and seeing her Companion very handsome, he spoke to
one of the Company to take her forth to Dance, which she did so well, that the
Marchioness and her Company were mightily surpised. Every one took her for a
Flemin, and made no further inquiry. The Baron of Angosse being at this Ball,
remembered he had seen her at Bayonne, and having taken a strict view of her,
knew her to be Mademoiselle d' Meyrac: He came to her, and Complemented,
telling her how glad he was to see her at Paris. As ready as her Wit was, she
could not forbear blushing a little; yet she answered confidently enough, she
understood not his meaning, and that he was certainly mistaken. D'Angosse
begged her pardon, and retired. The Marchioness, and the Gentleman who Ushered
her, laughed at the Adventure, and were extremely well pleased at the good
success of St. Aubin's disguise. D' Angosse perceiving they laughed at his
mistake, and concerned to find the truth, went down to inquire for the
Marchionesses Servants, and having found one of them, prayed him to let him
know the Gentlewomans Name who was with his Lady. The Fleming for answer
laughed in his Face, and so heartily, 'twas long e're he could speak: At length
he told him 'twas a Boy in Maids Habit. D' Angosse returned to the
Dancing-room, and making up close to that handsome Person, told him he had now
learnt what he was; but that all who saw him in that Habit, and knew the
Gentlewoman he had spoken to him of, would have certainly mistaken him for her;
and that if he were minded to divert himself, he might meet with many pleasant
^dventures, if he would go in that Habit to some Ladies of Bearn, where he
offered to conduct him. St. Aubin thanked him, and said very coldly, he was not
of an humor to deceive any Body. Presently after the Ball ended, and all
returned. The Marchioness was so pleased with this Nights Adventures, she
prayed the Gentlemen, especially St. Aubin, to come again, and go on the like
Frolic. But Marmon having heard by one of his Countrymen, that there was seen
at a Ball a young Fleming, the very Picture of Christina, and that ever since,
two Gentlemen of Be rn, run with d' Angosse all over the Town, from one Ball to
another, to meet him, he went to his Cousin St. Aubin's to carry him the news.
St. Aubin to disabuse him, acquainted him with all that passed at Monsieur
Strasbourg's; and that he might handsomely disingage himself from visiting the
Marchioness, he feigned himself sick. By this time Lent was come, and
preparation must be made for the Campaign. The King notwithstanding the rigor
of the season, set out the fifth of April to Besiege Conde, and the Morrow
after he arrived in the Camp, the Trenches were opened. Three days after the
Musketeers were commanded to take a Half Moon, and behaved themselves so
bravely, that having beat off the Enemy, they entered the Town, which was taken
by Assault, and not by Composition, as many believ d His Majesty's Clemency
(who was content to make the Troops he found in Garrison Prisoners of War,
without taking the advantages of Victory against those unfortunate Persons who
did their duty very well) raised that report. St. Aubin and Marmon signalized
themselves in this service; the former received a slight wound in the Arm, and
Marmon had the good fortune to take Prisoner an Italian Captain, whom he seized
by his hair: And having been shot in the Arm, he held him fast with the other,
and brought him to the King, who was at the Head of the Trenches. His Majesty
having commended the Action, promised to have a particular care of his Fortune,
and ordered they should be very careful of his Cure.

The morrow all the wounded men were carried to Fournay, and Marmon much more
troubled for his Cousins Wound than his own, had the satisfaction to see it was
not dangerous; and St. Aubin told him he would not have gone to Fournay but to
take care of him, expressing extreme satisfaction to have been an Eyewitness
of his Valor in this action. Marmon taking advantage of so favorable an
occasion* minded St. Aubin of his promise to recompense his perseverance if
supported by some glorious action. St. Aubin without giving him leave to
finish, prayed him only to have a care of being cured as soon as possible,
assuring him he was very sensible of his misfortune, and had a very great
esteem for him, adding (for his comfort) other very obliging discourse. Marmon
was so well pleased with it, those that saw him said he was visibly much
better: However it was his fate to die two days after, as most of those did who
had been hurt at the Siege, though their Wounds appeared not dangerous. St. Aubin
who was almost well of his Wound was so troubled for Marmon's Death, that he
resolved to continue in the service to avoid the reproaches of Marmon's Friends
who knew St. Aubin had engaged him to list himself a Soldier, and would
certainly lay the loss of him to his charge. The grief this put him to,
occasioned by some inclination and a great deal of esteem and acknowledgment he
had for Marmon, retardded his cure and kept him long at Fournay.

The Baron of Quincy having Commission to raise a Regiment of Horse at Fournay,
met St. Aubin at the Governors; where he showed him a great deal of civility,
and finding him somewhat unwilling to go again among the Musketeers because of
his Cousin's Death, offered him a Company in his Regiment. St. Aubin accepted
it, and assisted the Colonel in making the Levies, the Regiment was not long in
raising; the Baron who for good Reasons had lately quitted the service of
Spain, having given notice to the Officers of his Regiment in Garrison at Mons,
that he was raising a new one for the service of France, and those under his
command when he served Spain, were so satisfied with his person and conduct,
that most of the Troops and several of the Officers deserted the Spaniard to
meet their Colonel at Fournay. This Regiment being composed of men of that
Country, who were better acquainted than strangers with the Roads, was
frequently employed upon Parties: they acquitted themselves so well, that they
never failed of certain News of the Enemy upon occasion. St. Aubin always
ambitious of Glory, having had good success in two or three Parties, never
failed to make one among them though he were not commanded. The Spaniards vexed
at the advantages daily gained by the French Parties, especially those of
Quincy's Regiment, that the Governor of Valenciennes had order to lay an
ambuscade for them; and did it so effectually, that of a party of thirty nine
Troopers commanded by a Lieutenant, twenty two were taken, and the rest killed
or fled. St. Aubin who served there as a Volunteer was one of the Prisoners:
they were all carried to the Army, where the Duke De Villa Hermosa who was gone
to Brussels had left the Marquess d' Osseyra general of the Artillery Commander
in chief in his absence. The Marquess called a Council of War, to advise what
should be done to the Prisoners, several of which, and particularly the
Lieutenant, who commanded them were known to be deserters. It was resolved the
Troopers (on condition they would serve Spain again) should be pardoned, as
having been debauched by their Officers. But as for the Officers, for terror
to others, they were all condemned to be hanged as Deserters. St. Aubin, though
not taken in that quality, was carried away as involved in the condemnation,
the Troopers having declared he was an Officer: The Council being broke up,
they sent a Confessor to every one of the condemned. St. Aubin was frighted at
the Horror of so shameful a Death, and to escape it, was upon the Point of
declaring who he was; yet he could not find in his heart to expose himself to
be laughed at by the whole Army, his modesty prevailing over his fear; he
prepared for Death with an heroic Courage. The Army was drawn up in Battalia,
and these unfortunate Prisoners were brought to the Gibbet: The Lieutenant
being hanged, St. Aubin frightened at the apprehension of so infamous a Death,
desired to speak with the General, who to give reputation to so exemplary a
Punishment countenanced it with his presence. The Marquess approached him, and
surpised at the good mien of the Criminal, whose face he thought himself not
altogether a stranger to, he heard him with compassion. St. Aubin so clearly
made out the injustice they would have done him, by violating the Law of War in
his Person, who had never been in the service of Spain, that the Officers
fearful of like usage, if taken by the French began to murmur. The Marquess
perceiving it, and unwilling a mutiny should rob him of the glory of saving St.
Aubin, hastened the setting him at liberty.

The Army was so satisfied with this piece of Justice, scarce any Officer of
Note but waited on the Marquess to give him thanks: And as we usually love
those we have obliged, the General was so pleased with his saving St. Aubin,
that he took him to his Quarters, and finding he had all Accomplishments of a
Person of Quality, he kept him in his House, and treated him with all the
kindness and esteem he could have showed the best of his Friends. The Marquess
being the same who had been in Love with Christina at Saragosa, was so changed
since that time, and so disguised by his great Spanish Mustaches, that S. Aubin
at present knew no more of him but the Name: But afterward having recollected
himself, he found his Deliverer was the same who had been his Ancient Contrade,
and first Lover. He was so pleased to owe his life to this Illustrious
Marquess, that he resolved to stick to him, and forbear writing, to undeceive
his Friends who had heard he was dead. The Marquess also remembering S. Aubin
had much of the Air of Christina, and asking if he were not related to her, for
fear of being discovered, he confessed he was his Brother. The Marquess embraced
him, and with a deep sigh said, he could never forget his Sister, though she
had given him cause enough, in making the Letter he had written to her a
Sacrifice to her Husband; and that he could never have resolved with himself to
love any other, till he had heard of her Marriage.

The memory of Christina, the merit of St. Aubin, and particularly his speaking
Spanish so well, procured him every day new marks of the generosity of the
Marquess. The Generals soon after marched toward Brussels, and the Marquess D'
Osseyra being in Love with the Countess of Benavidez, a young Spanish Lady
newly arrived with her Husband in Flanders, went frequently to her House, and
would oblige her by bringing her a French Gentleman who was excellent Company,
and a great Master of the Spanish Tongue. The Countess, who seldom saw any
French, was so pleased with the Novelty and handsome Mien of the Gentleman that
she received him very kindly; and having told him she was extremely desirous to
learn a little French, and S. Aubin having as frankly offered to teach it her,
she prayed him to come to her every day at an hour. The Marquess making no
doubt but S. Aubin might be very serviceable to him in his Amor, made him
acquainted with it, and conjured him to do him this piece of service with all
the zeal and diligence in his power, in confidence he would be extremely
sensible of the obligation. This was enough for S. Aubin, who besides the tie
of gratitude he was under, felt in himself a violent inclination to undertake
for his Friend the most difficult Enterprise. In the mean time, he thought he
had seen the Countess before; but not daring to trust his Eyes, nor rely on
her Testimony, he asked an old Chamber Maid if her Mistress had ever been at
Saragosa: When she answered the Countess was born there, and that she was the
Daughter of Don Francisco Cortez, S. Aubin was convinced he was not mistaken,
when he took her for Zeraphine, his good Friend, and pretended Mistress, in the
Convent of Vrsuline's. The Countess too, she thought she had seen a Person that
had the Air of that Gentleman, but not being sure of it, she never spoke to him
of it: Besides, she was so taken with him, she would have been troubled had she
found out her mistake. The Passion of the Marquess increased daily; it rejoiced
his heart to see S. Aubin returned to bring him News of his Scholar; and when
he perceived him high in her favor, he declared to him the violence of his
Passion, and entreated him to employ for his advantage the Credit he had with
her. St. Aubin, who was deadly afraid of the Progress of this Passion, did all
he could to divert his Friend from it, giving him very clear Reasons how
improbable it was to gain the affections of a Lady, who had to her Husband so
lovely and handsome a Gentleman as the Count Benavidez, and loved him entirely.
But the difficulties he endeavored to represent to the Marquess, proved but
Oil to his Flames, and St. Aubin could not avoid promising him all the service
that lay in his power: But the endeavors he used in favor of his Friend,
produced a contrary effect; for the young Countess having strong inclinations
for St. Aubin, found her Passion increase by his frequent Visits: This set her
mind a roving, and she took that pleasure to look upon him as he taught her
Lessons, that she was a whole Week learning the Verb Aimer, to Love. And making
as if she thought it a very pretty word, but hard to be remembered, she spent
several hours in making her Master repeat the first Person of it, I Love. She
affected this repetition so often, that St. Aubin believed she loved him in
good earnest, and resolved to apply himself to please her, to prevent her
answering the Passion of the Marquess; and incline him to quit it, by letting
him see she could love another. Fortune afforded him an occasion, which
contributed very much to heighten the Passion of the Countess, and the good
Opinion she already had of her Master. One of the Countesses Women being
grievously tormented with the Toothache, and fancying all strangers skilful in
one Mystery or other, applied her self to St. Aubin, and with incredible
confidence, and a most assured Faith, prayed remedy from him. He presently
answered, he could infallibly cure her: And having touched the aching Tooth with
his Fingers end, and said two or three barbarous Words, whether this Maid was
cured by conceit, or that her pain naturally ceased, she came to give him
thanks for having wrought her Cure. The Countess wondering at the quick Effect
of the remedy he had used, took that occasion to commend him who had applied
it, who having the knowledge of such considerable secrets concealed with so
much modesty. S. Aubin taking advantage of her Credulity, told her, he knew
many secrets far more considerable; and that by looking on ones hand, be could
tell all that should happen to that person: Women are naturally curious. This
Lady adding impatience to her curiosity, prayed him instantly to look in her
hand, and tell her what he knew by it. St. Aubin, without further entreaty,
fixed his eye upon it, and having long been this Ladies Confident in Spain, and
known her privat'st inclinations, he easily told her an infinite number of
things that appeared admirable to her, by his giving her an account of the
particulars of several Adventures of her life; and above all, how she had been
in danger of punishment for a Crime she had not committed, and of being buried
alive as a Prostitute Vestal. The Countess was extremely surpised at every
word he said; and when he had done speaking, she confessed all he had said was
very true. This was not sufficient to satisfy her curiosity; she had no sooner
heard what was past, but she was willing to know what was to come, and conjured
him with that earnestness to tell her what should befall her, that he was
obliged to promise the doing it another day, praying her to allow him a little
time to think on it: But upon condition she should keep it private without
speaking a word of it, for he had no mind to be taken for a man that meddled in
such matters. Things being thus agreed, he presently withdrew, and shortly
after went into the Marquesses Chamber, where he found him busy writing a
Letter to the Countess, which he prayed St. Aubin to read, and tell him what he
thought of it. It was in Spanish, but so well expressed, it is impossible to
translate it, without losing much of the Beauty and Energy of the Original. Let
it suffice, that we know 'twas well writ, and that the Marquess would have put
it upon his Friend to deliver it. St. Aubin, though very loath to undertake it,
could not refuse him, but represented so dexterously the inconveniences that
would attend his presenting it, and made the Marquess so sensible how fearful
he was it would too much discover his being engaged in his favor, and deprive
him of the means to do him more considerable services, that the Marquess was
convinced, and found another expedient for conveying the Letter to his
Mistress, who thought the time long while St. Aubin returned, not only for the
pleasure she took in his Company, but the passionate desire she had to know her
Fortune. St. Aubin came at the usual hour to teach her her Lesson, but before
she would fall to it, her Curiosity must be satisfied St. Aubin was prepared
what to say, and being concerned, to divert her from entertaining kind thoughts
for the Marquess, he resolved to dissuade her from loving him, upon pretense
the Stars were against it: And having assured her of very high Fortune, and
Honors proportionable, he told her the Planets threatened her with a misfortune
of being twice suspected to hold scandalous Correspondence and that the
suspicion would be so strong, she should be in danger of her life, but that she
should at last appear Innocent, and more glorious for her sufferings: But are
you sure says the Countess, I shall not lose my life? Mine for yours, Madam,
answers St. Aubin; and I observe you have already escaped one of your dangers,
and I see nothing can disturb your happiness but the like influence of your
Planet that threatens you at present. This signifies, as the Rules of my Art
tells me, that a Person of Quality of your Country shall be in Love with you,
and do extraordinary things to please you, and make you sensible of his
Passion; and if he prevails, you are to expect a long Train of misfortunes and
disasters. The Countess judgings of what he said should happen, by what she had
heard him say of what was past, never doubted the truth of his Prediction, and
resolved never to Love Spaniard but her Husband. Two days after, the Marquess
having sound a means to have his Letter delivered, was not a little surprised
to see she had sent it back, without having read it, but expressed great
indignation for his boldness. You cannot imagine how much the Marquess was
troubled at the ill Fortune of his Letter; and not knowing what other comfort
to have, went in search of his Friend to make his complaint to him, and desire
his advice. S. Aubin glad at Heart for the good issue of the Game he had played,
bid him not be discouraged: And to let him see how much he was concerned for
him, he offered to make the Countess and him very good Friends again. The poor
distressed Marquess was so pleased with the thoughts of the promised
Accommodation, that St. Aubin to oblige him went to the Countess, and prayed
her to be reconciled, and receive him into favor, assuring her, that the
Billet she fancied so Criminal, contained only four Verses. It Is easy for
those who are beloved, to persuade; the Countess, who had passionate kindness
for St. Aubin, granted his request: And to give him a fresh instance of her
Complaisance, she promised to admit of his Friends Excuses, as she very well
might, being really not much offended with him. The Marquess made several sorry
Excuses, which past for good; but the disorder he appeared in, gave the
Countess a clearer account of what was written in the Billet, than the reading
of it would have done: And had she not been too much possessed with the fear of
S. Aubin's Predictions, she had managed this Affair to better advantage: But
her fear made her stand upon her Guard, and avoid all occasions of being found
alone with the Marquess, or giving him opportunity to acquaint her with his
Passion. St. Aubin appeared every day more lovely than other, and she made
discovery of so many good qualities in him, that she could not forbear praising
him in her Husbands presence; who having observed the pleasure his Wife took in
speaking of him, and sometimes very little to the purpose, and oftener far than
she was aware of, he began to suspect: And having watched the Countess more
narrowly, he found this stranger, under pretense of teaching his Wife French,
was grown very familiar with her. Jealousy made the most Innocent Actions
appear Criminal, and the Count resolved to break off their Acquaintance: But
having lived very lovingly with his Wife, he was unwilling to express his
Resentments, but took a time to tell her, that though he had a good opinion of
her Conduct, he feared the Spanish Ladies would not think well of it: And since
she had a mind to learn French, 'twere better for her to take a French Woman
into her Family. The Countess was extremely displeased at the advice, though
she made as if she approved it; but though she promised to follow it, she
continued taking her Lessons from St. Aubin, telling the Count, 'twas only that
she might not forget what she had learnt, while she could provide her self of a
Maid. It went against the Heart of her to part with a Master that pleased her
so well; and because she was under a necessity to obey, she resolved to make
use of her time. As soon as St. Aubin returned to her, she acquainted him with
the Jealousy of the Count her Husband, and that she had never given him cause
to suspect her Conduct. Her duty, fortified by a strong inclination for him,
having always made her abhor all unfaithfulness to him: Yet she never thought
to have found her resolutions so ineffectual, but she saw her self under the
necessity of yielding to an inclination involuntary and long checked, but in
vain. St. Aubin relying on the modesty of the Lady, thought it the duty of a
Civil Gentleman to take advantage of her disorder, by pressing her a little
faintly: But he found her so unexpectedly coming and kind, that he smarted for
the small advances he made, and saw he must use clearer and more passionate
Expressions. And as the Lady unwilling her Compliance should be wholly useless,
and thrown away upon him, reproached him with ingratitude for the favor she
had showed him. The Count having heard all behind a Hanging, came forth with
his Poiniard in his hand to stab his Wife, if St. Aubin with laying his hand on
his Sword had not hindered him by a vigorous resistance; and seeing the Count
ready to go call in his Servants to his Aid, chose rather to hazard the
discovery of his Sex, than expose that unfortunate Lady to so many
inconveniences, and himself to ruin. He prayed him (before he would make any
more noise, or call in his People) to have the patience to hear him a moment:
And to convince him he had something considerable to say to him, he laid his
Sword at his feet, and himself at his discretion. The Generous Spaniard seeing
his Enemy disarmed, became more tractable, and permitted him to speak. St.
Aubin told him, it was for the Countesses Interest and his, the Count should be
undeceived, by the discovery of a secret he had resolved to conceal all his
Life. With that St. Aubin declared himself to be a Woman: and that in Spain
under her true Name Christina, she was intimately acquainted with the Countess,
and her very good Friend; that since that, a violent passion for Arms had
engaged her in the Kings service in the Wars, which was so agreeable to her
inclination, that she hoped he was too Generous to discover the secret she
acquainted him with, when she had declared to him the consequence of it. The
Count could hardly be satisfied with the bare words of Christina; but his Lady
upon hearing the story, and Name of Christina, having recovered her Spirits,
and taking advantage of her Husbands disorder, persuaded him she very well knew
who Christina was; and having reproached him for the ill Opinion he had of her
Conduct, she took her turn to run into passion; and her anger which her Husband
thought real, and several other Circumstances a great deal more true,
especially the relation of what passed in the Convent, put an end to all his
suspicions. He begged his Wives pardon, and thought, in favor of her chastity
he remembr'd several particulars he had never heard of. He went out, to give
them time to come to themselves again, out of the fear he had put them in. The
Countess being recovered of the fright she had been in for her Gallant, and her
self, continued a while under a grievous Confusion to find her self deceived:
However she expressed her self very joyful to see her old Friend, but not without
reproaching her; for that by concealing her Name, she had exposed her to
weaknesses, no other in the World could have made her fall into. St. Aubin was
so perplexed, he knew not what to answer. The Marquess, in the mean time, not
able to Master his Passion for the Countess, whom he hoped to work upon by his
perseverance, and the assistance of his Friend, had by his Liberalities gained
one of her Women, who gave him an account of all that past in the House: And
having observed St. Aubin using his Mistress with a familiarity unfit for any
other Person, she thought it might be an acceptable service to the Marquess, if
she watched them more narrowly. St. Aubin coming one day to the Countesses
before she was up, was sent for into her Chamber, and made sit on her Bed; and
that they might discourse more freely, the Countess bid her Maids quit the
Room. This liberty, though ordinary in France, appeared to the Marquesses
Pensioner so Criminal in a Spanish Lady, that she thought he would be very well
pleased to know it, and went instantly to tell it him. The Marquess, no less
Jealous than Amorous, was so surpised at the story, he was vexed at the heart:
and his Jealousy persuading him more than he had heard, he resolved to be
revenged upon his Traiterous Friend for all the ill usage he had received from
his Mistress, not doubting but he had contributed a great deal to it. A secret
inclination, he knew not the cause of, but attributed to the remains of Respect
and Kindness he still had for the Brother of a Person he had loved above any,
rendered his resolutions uncertain and ineffectual. Yet calling to mind how he
had obliged him, and made him his Confident, and that St. Aubin had upon his
word engaged to do him the best service he could with the Countess, he thought
no Resentment too severe for a Traitor. But not finding in his heart to violate
the Law of Nations, by taking a revenge unworthy his Quality and Honor, he
resolved to sight him fairly, in hopes to disarm him; and without further
punishment, than to reproach him with his ingratitude. Having met him an hour
after, he fell upon him briskly, without making any words. St. Aubin defended
himself, but as a Man who would only ward off the blows of his Adversary,
without doing him hurt. The Marquess making at him, with design to seize his
Sword, dangerously wounded him. Upon that they were parted, and the Count
Benavidez coming in, ordered St. Aubin to be carried home to his House; and
fearing his Wound more dangerous than it proved, he could not forbear sending
for the Marquess, and telling him the Name and Sex of the Person whose life he
had endangered.

The End of the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE Female Warrior. A TRUE
HISTORY. Very delightful, and full of Pleasant Adventures in the Compaignes of
1676, and 1677.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCC.

THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE Female Warrior. PART II.
NEver was Man so astonished as the Marquess d' Osseyra, when he found he had
wounded his Mistress the same moment, and with the same Weapon he thought he
had taken Revenge of his Rival. The Count de Benavidez gave him an account of
all that had happened, when he surpised (the supposed) St. Aubin with his
Lady, and particularly of the discoveries he fansied he had made of the
Intelligence between them: The Relation was so surprising, and the
Circumstances so extraordinary, the Marquess was so confounded, and under so
strong a Convulsion of different Passions, that what with fear, what with
grief, he was Mute for some time, and appeared like a Statue without Sense or
Motion: But the Passion he had had for Christina prevailing over the rest, and
reproaching him secretly with having destroyed her, he prayed the Count to go
instantly learn what news of her wound; the disorder he was in, being so great,
he had not the confidence to visit her; but he followed the Count, though he
scarce knew what he did. At the news of the Rencounter, several of his Friends
flocked to the Marquess; some of the Commanders were so impertinently
officious, they would needs stop him from going any further, to save him the
trouble of seeing his Enemy the second time: But the return he made their
mistaken Civility, was so unexpectedly untoward, his best Friends, not knowing
the motions of his heart, were highly offended at it. They were all amazed to
see him so troubled and not one could imagine what reason he should have to go
to the Count of Benavidez's, where he knew they had carried his Enemy St.
Aubin. The Marquess was not inclined to violent courses, yet they apprehended
he might use his Authority to ruin the unfortunate Person that so publicly
engaged him. A Colonel, his Friend was so officious, that to prevent a mischief
he dreaded so much, he met him by the way, and entreated him to go no further,
assuring him St. Aubin was so desperately ill, he could not live an hour
longer. This was the Critical moment the Marquess really needed the assistance
of his Friends, and had they not hindered him, he had certainly stabbed himself.
The Count de Benavidez, mindful of the disorder he had left him in, returned
as hastily as he could to let him know St. Aubin's wound was not dangerous: But
the Marquess, who began to relapse into the extremity of his first Passion for
Christina, was so fully prepossest with the discourse of the Colonel, that he
thought the Count did out of kindness conceal the danger St. Aubin was in, and
was loath to tell him News he knew would grieve him. This made the Marquess
resolve personally to visit St. Aubin in his Chamber; and he had certainly done
it, had not the Count diverted him, by representing the inconveniences might
attend the surprise and discoveries their first Enterview would occasion before
so many persons who were of his Retinue, and then bore him Company. The
Marquess yielded to the persuasions of his Friend, but not till the Surgeon
had assured him the wound he thought so dangerous would be cured in a short
time. The Marquess could not forbear telling the Chyrurg on his Life should
answer for St. Aubin's; and swore to him, that if he died, he should be
concerned to make ready to follow him presently into another World. This being
past, they brought the Marquess home, where he was visited by all the Persons
of Quality in the Court at Brussels, who complemented him for his pretended
advantage: Some carried on the Complement so far, that they blamed him for the
trouble he was in, having so great reason to be satisfied with the advantage he
had gained over one of the bravest Men of France. He was so tired with these
troublesome Civilities, that to be rid of them, he was forced to give order to
his Porter to say, he was not to be spoke with. The Count de Benavidez loath to
leave him under so much vexation, staid with him, in hopes by his Company to
ease him a little of the Tyranny of his Passions. As soon as they were alone,
the Marquess conjured him, to tell him truly what he thought of Christina's
Wound: The Count assured him it was very slight; and to pleasure him, offered
to prepare Christina to receive his Visit that night. This offer comforted the
Marquess, and the Count had no sooner made it, but he was forced to go home to
find means to satisfy the impatience of his Friend. At his return he found his
Wife was gone to Christina's Chamber, and he took the advantage of it to give
her a Visit: When he had expressed the trouble he was under for her misfortune,
he assured her the Marquess was almost distracted at it, and begged her
permission to throw himself at her feet. Christina thinking the Marquess still
took her for St. Aubin, not knowing the Count had told him all, was extremely
surpised at the News; and answering, she passionately desired to justify her
self, and let the Marquess know she was incapable of betraying so generous a
Friend who had so highly obliged her. The Count hailed away to carry his Friend
the good News, and shortly after both entered the Chamber where Christina lay,
who taking upon her to be St. Aubin, assured the Marquess he could never have
been satisfied with himself for being so unfortunate as to have disobliged him,
had not the Counts Relation, and the generous Visit he was pleased personally
to make him, given him reasonable hopes he was satisfied of his Innocence. The
kind Marquess, as if he had forgot Christina had ever been St. Aubin, answered
in terms full of transport and tenderness, praying her to change her Language,
and quite rid her self of that unfortunate Name of St. Aubin, that had so
unhappily occasioned his mistake, and engaged him blindly to attack a Life a
thousand times dearer to him than his own. He continued the discourse with so
much Passion and Kindness, that Christina finding it impossible to keep him
longer in Error, gave free vent to her tears, perhaps for Joy she found him so
constant: However, she pretended her self angry with the Count for having
broken his word in discovering her to the Marquess. The Marquess then telling
her how much he longed to know what had befallen her since she left Spain, the
Countess having observed how much he was concerned for Christina, saved her the
trouble of the Relation, and gave the Marquess a complete Relation of all the
Adventures Christina had acquainted her with. The loving Marquess who thought
all along Christina was Married, but hearing no such matter in all the
Relation, was extremely impatient to know the truth of that particular. But the
Count having bethought himself that longer discourse might incommode the Sick
Party, told his Friend of it, and prevailed with him to withdraw.

The Marquess was so full of the Idea of Christina, that he called to mind the
smallest circumstances of his first passion; and not able to comprehend how she
had left her Husband, his Love made him wish heartily he might find she had not
been Married. He could not give over musing of his former Amor; at length he
remembered, that the Person he had employed to carry his Letter, and told him
she was Married, was a Sergeant in a Spanish Regiment in Garrison at
Valenciennes: He presently dispatched a Messenger to bring him to him in all
haste: The Sergeant being arrived betimes the next morning, the Marquess locked
him up with himself in his Chamber, and with horrible threats charged him to
declare truly why he had deceived him, and what reason he had to tell him his
Mistress was Married, whereas he was newly informed by a French Prisoner, she
never had been so. The Man was so astonished at the Marquesses Menaces, and
betrayed by his own Conscience, that he stood for a while mute as a Fish: But
being pressed to tell the Truth, he fell at his feet, and confessed he had been
forced by the Marchioness his Mother to tell him that Lie. The Marquess not
desiring to know any more, sent back the Sergeant; and not doubting but
Christina had been always faithful to him, he resolved to love her as long as
he lived. A Servant he had sent to enquire of her health, brought him word she
was much better: With that he went presently to her, and entered her Chamber the
moment they were going to blood her: But the Chyrurgion remembering how terribly
the Marquess had threatened him the day before, was so disordered at the sight
of him, that he missed the Vein twice; so that they were forced to pray the
Marquess to withdraw, and sent for another Surgeon, who had a better heart,
and did the business. As great care as was taken to conceal Christina's Sex,
her Combat with the Marquess was become the Discourse of the Town, and the
noise of her Adventures had inspired into all a curiosity about her: Every one
spoke of her according to his Humor: The Public is never satisfied with the
bare truth of things, and you may believe so many circumstances added to the
disadvantage of the Countess in the story of Christina, that coming to her
Husband's Ear, he could not forbear expressing to her his Resentment, and in
very harsh terms. The Countess having already entertained a secret Jealousy
against Christina, and perceiving her self the Cully of all this Intrigue, was
vexed at the heart to see her self robbed of her Gallant, and at the same time
in disgust with her Husband. This made her resolve to endeavor making sure of
the Marquess, being satisfied, that Guilty or Innocent, she should be equally
odious to her Husband, having the misfortune to be already suspected by him.
The design was scarce framed into her mind, but the Marquess entered her
Chamber, entreating her, that since he could not with decency visit Christina
alone any longer, she would favor him with her Company to Christina's Chamber.
The Countess received him with more kindness than ordinary; and the Marquess
sensible what advantage it might be to him to have her his Friend to do Him
good Offices with Christina, laid hold on the occasion, and answered her
Civility so very obligingly, it gave her great satisfaction.

As soon as Christina began to be somewhat better, she was visited by all the
Persons of Quality in the Court at Brussels, Curiosity moving several to see
her, who had no other reason to perform that respect. Her illness made her look
much thinner than ordinary, but her Complexion had mended upon it, her long
lying a bed having recovered the delicate white and red of her face, which the
service of War had miserably tanned. She appeared very charming in very plain
habit; and the Gentlemen of the Court expressed so much esteem for her, that it
contributed very much to her cure. It may be said to the praise of the Spanish
Gentry, that they are the greatest Gallants of any in Europe; and in menage of
Intrigues, and carrying on the subtilties of neat and delicate Gallantry,
exceed the French, who value themselves so much upon it. They have the Sex in
so great Veneration, that to praise their Mistresses, they seldom scruple to
run into profaneness: So that it will not appear strange, that the miserable
condition of a Person beautiful as Christina, confined to her Bed upon an
occasion so unusual with those of her Sex, moved all those who visited her, to
pity her extremely.

But the Count de Salazar, Governor of the Citadel at Antwerp, had scarcely
seen her, but he fell desperately in Love with her. This Gentleman was a near
Kinsman of the Countess de Benavidez, which gave him the advantage of visiting
her oftener than others. His Love tormented him, yet he durst not complain of
it, either fearing it might be in vain, or finding no small reluctance in
himself to act so unfaithful a part against the Marquess d' Osseyra his Friend.
Love observes no mean, when fixed on extraordinary persons; and every Visit the
Count made Christina, he found his Passion increase. At last it became so
violent, he could not master it: He thought it high time to make his
Declaration, and resolved twenty times to tell her how much he loved her, and
twenty times failed of the confidence to do it. After all, he resolved to make
his Kinswoman his Confident; and having acquainted her with the vehemence of
his Passion, the Countess pretending her self very much concerned for him,
promised to serve him; though in truth the principal motive that engaged her in
that affair, was her particular interest to rob Christina of the Marquess, and
at the same time to revenge her self of her Husband for his Jealousy. Salazar,
assured of the Protection of the Countess, visited Christina very frequently,
who as courteously received him, as introduced into her Acquaintance by the
Marquess. Christina's Civility made Salazar believe the Countess had spoken to
Christina in his favor. Being full of this Opinion, he spoke to her with that
liberty he durst not otherwise have done. Christina perceiving by Salazar's
discourse he was more concerned for her Recovery than might be expected merely
from his Friendship for the Marquess, made as if she understood not his
meaning; and to prevent the occasion of a breach with him, answered in Railery
his obliging expressions. Salazar applauded himself for the good success of his
first attempt: This confirmed his Passion, and made him forget the respects he
should have retained for his Friend. The Countess de Benavidez omitted nothing
the while to rekindle the Marquess's flame: But finding her endeavors vain to
recover for her self the affection of a heart which had newly submitted it self
to the violence of its first impressions, which are ever the strongest, she
bethought her self of an expedient, which (she doubted not) would make her
Mistress of her design; and the better to deceive Christina, pretending her
self very much her Friend, she told her, by way of confidence, she had newly
learned a secret Christina was very much concerned to know. When she had made
all the Preambles usual to smooth the way for a piece of ill news, she fell to
aggravating the unhappiness of Woman that trust the Oaths of Men who make Love
to them, when after her signal fidelity to the Marquess d' Osseyra, he was
still in doubt of her, and set on his Friend Salazar to try her, by pretending
to Love her: That the conduct of the Marquess in this particular appeared so
criminal, when he had so great reason to rest assured of her fidelity, that she
thought it her duty to make her acquainted with it as soon as her Kinsman
Salazar had told her of it. Christina calling to mind Salazar's discourse,
thought the intelligence the Countess had given her, of very great importance,
and no less sincerity; and having expressed no small resentment against the
Marquess, she thanked the Countess, and assured her she would take her
advantages of the advice she had given her, and would make that fickle headed
Lover know the interest he had in her was not so well grounded, but a
proceeding so unhandsome and disobliging as this might utterly destroy it. The
Countess joyful to see her Intrigue take so well, and making no doubt but
Christina, to be revenged of the Marquess, would use Salazar well, made him
sensible what good service she had done him, and told him he might declare
himself freely, and never fear the success. This made him wait on Christina the
oftener, and take his opportunity to make a formal Declaration of his Passion.
Christina received his Complement so gently and quietly, that Salazar flattered
himself she was in Love with him. The Marquess observing how constant and
diligent his friend Salazar was in visiting his Mistress, began to apprehend he
might be his Rival. And she used him with that kindness in the Marquesses
presence, it almost distracted him. He made his complaints of it to Christina,
but she made so light of all he said, it vexed him at the heart. The Countess
watching all opportunities, took her advantages of th se favorable
circumstances, to invite the Marquess more than ever: But all to no purpose;
this threw her into absolute despair, and made her to resolve to satisfy her
Revenge if she could not her Love. A Woman in that condition will sacrifice any
thing to her resentment; and the Countess had recourse to new Artifices to
provoke Christina against the Marquess, and him against Salazar: They were all
so disposed for her purpose, she easily accomplished her design. The Marquess
and Salazar were at very high words; and the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands being informed of it, ordered them both to be secured. Christina
having newly recovered her health, was so troubled she had been the cause of so
much noise, she resolved to return into France, and spend her. Life in a
Convent, and be no longer the May game of Love, and of Fortune. She imparted
her resolution to the Countess, who seeming to disapprove it, offered some weak
reasons to divert her from the design, though in truth she was glad at heart
she had taken that resolution, in hopes to see so dangerous a Rival at further
distance, which Christina might have easily perceived, had she not been possessed
to Blindness with the Opinion of sincere kindness she thought the Countess had
for her.

The Duchess of Arschott having about that time obtained a Passport from his
Majesty of France to go from Mons to Lille, to settle some private affairs,
passed through Brussels. Christina being in search of means to execute her
design, and looking upon this as a favorable occasion for her return into
France under the Passport of the Duchess, communicated her thoughts to the
Countess, who seeing her resolved, facilitated all things for her private
retirement, that the Marquess might know nothing of it. She presented her to
the Duchess, and said in her favor whatever she thought necessary to persuade
the Duchess to take her along. The Duchess received her very obligingly, and
declared her self very glad of the company of so lovely a Person. Christina
left Brussels abundantly satisfied, at least in appearance, to have the
opportunity of returning to her Country, yet not without a secret reluctance to
be at so great a distance from the Marquess, for whom she had more kindness
than she was aware of. The Amorous Marquess failed not a day to send to the
Countess to inquire of his Mistress: The Countess fearing he might have News of
her departure timely enough to stay her, took care to tell those who were going
from the Marquess to her Lodging, that she went to Bed very late the night
before, and desired not to be awaked. The second day the Countess laid her self
in the Bed Christina usually lay in, and counterfeiting her voice, answered the
Person the Marquess had sent to inquire of her health, that she was much
obliged to his master, for his care of her. The Countess had longer continued
the cheat, had not one of her maids (who knew by experience the Marquess never
failed to reward very liberally the smallest services done him) given
Intelligence of those Passages; those who have been in Love can easily imagine
the effects this News had upon the Marquess: He would presently have followed
her, but that he continued under confinement: the thoughts of the ill condition
he was in, inspired into him a thousand extravagant resolutions, when he called
to mind how he had lost a Person whom he had so dearly loved in the Flower of
his Youth, and had luckily met with after so long separation by extraordinary
Adventures, and had no sooner discovered her, but he yielded himself absolutely
at her dispose. He strictly examined his Conduct in the affair, to the ^ery
smallest Circumstance, but could not find any cause to charge himself with
having occasioned so sudden a departure: it was not in his power to guess the
reason of it, though sufficiently assured he was not the cause of it; but he
looked upon her remove as fatal to him, who could not live separated from her.
Having tired himself with reflections, he thought he should but labor in vain
to retrieve her, who in all appearance was got already to Lille: Yet unwilling
his passion should justly reproach him to have omitted any thing in his power
for recovering Christina, he resolved at all advantures, to pray the Duke de
Montalto, General of the Horse, and his very good Friend, to send out a strong
Party toward the way of Lille, with strict Order to stay all they met with,
whether with Passport, or without. The Orders were punctually executed, and
the Party brought in several who Traveled with Pass-ports, but no News of
Christina; and all this a-do served only to make a great deal of disorder, and
give occasion to the Rumor raised about that time, that the Duke de Villa
Hermosa had called in all his Pass-ports.

The Marquess would not be discouraged for all this, but searching the means to
have a Letter conveyed to her, he found a man who promised to follow her to her
very home, rather than fail to bring him an account of her. The Marquess in the
condition he was in, thought this some comfort; and having loaded the man with
his liberality, and filled him with hopes of more, he dispatched him away with
this Leter: WAS it in your power to resolve to be gone, and leave behind you
the most passionate of Lovers? Did you not think me sufficiently mortified by
your permitting Salazar to presume to make Love to you, but you must utterly
destroy me, by your unkind departure? Ah Cruel! Can you doubt that if you
continue your Voyage, I will not quit my Charge, my Fortune, and (it may be) my
Duty to follow you? I had done it already but that I looked on my Employments
as advantages that belong to you, and I ought to preserve, to take away from
you all pretense for reproaching my Love. Heaven is my Witness, that to engage
my self to you with bands indissolvable, I waited only the recovery of your
health, with that extremity of impatience you might easily have perceived, had
you not been the most insensible person in the World. Let me know what shall
become of me, and assure your self, your Answer shall regulate the Destiny of
the most faithful of Lovers,

The Marquess d' Osseyra.




When the kind Marquess had written this Letter, he read it several times, and
finding it very agreeable to his sentiments, thought it long till 'twas
delivered to his Mistress: But fearing the Bearer might by the way be taken by
some Party, he resolved to send a second with such another Letter, in hopes
that if one miscarried, the other might pass safe.

Salazar was much troubled for Christina's departure, though the despair his
Rival was in gave him some comfort: The passionate Love he had for her, and the
opinion he flattered himself with, that she hated him not, made him send after
her a trusty Person, that upon his report he might the better take his measures
for his future Conduct: And not long after the Marquesses Friends, and his,
reconciled the two Rivals, and Salazar received Order to repair to his
Government.

The Countess the while triumphed for the good success of her Artifices; and
the passion her desire of revenge had given birth to, was grown up to that
violence by the resistance it found from the Marquess, and the advantages she
promised her self by the remove of her Rival, it was not in her power to
conceal her Joy and her Transport from the passionate Lover; who far from
answering her hopes, loaded her with reproaches; letting her know, he was not
ignorant what Tricks she used to make his Mistress fall out with him. This
touched her to the quick, and put her into such a confusion, and so desperate a
fret, to see her Artifices discovered, she took her Bed upon it that very day,
and continued a long time very dangerously ill; the Physicians who attended her
having never discovered the cause of her distemper, but using Remedies for
Diseases she never was troubled with.

While the Countess was in Cure, the Duchess of Arschott was at Lille, so well
pleased with the agreeable Conversation of Christina, that she entreated her
Company, at least for the time she tarried at Lille. Christina finding her self
staid by reasons she could not master, easily consented, being glad of a
pretense to continue a little longer in Flanders. He whom Salazar had employed
to inquire after her, had learnt she was to spend some days at the Duchess of
Arschott's; and as he returned to give Salazar that account, he met one of the
Marquesses Messengers; and being a witty man, and well acquainted with
Salazar's secrets, he presently suspected the Messengers business, and examined
him so cunningly, that at last he discovered the occasion of his Journey: And
applying himself after to get out of his hands the Marquesses Letter, he set
about him so dexterously that, that he fingered the Letter, and carried it to
Salazar, who received it with all the satisfaction imaginable. But the
Marquesses other messenger more fortunate than his Fellow, delivered his Letter
to Christina; who heartily glad of it, was extremely satisfied to find the
Expressions so passionately kind, answered it thus: THank your own Jealousy,
and reproach not me so unjustly, that I admitted of Salazar's Addresses: The
passion of Love is none of the weaknesses I am subject to: yet I must own, I
make a great difference between you, and any other man; and find, that could
you be constant to the sentiments expressed in your Letter, it will be very
difficult for me to hold the resolution I have taken, never to love. The
Duchess of Arschott has a desire to keep me here, and I cannot deny her,
without appearing unworthy of the kindness she has for me. In the mean time
you may assure your self no Person has a greater respect for you than

Christina.




The Marquess having received this Letter two days after it was writ, was so
well pleased with it, that he never inquired whether both his Letters were
delivered. He kissed Christina's a thousand times over; and impatiently longing
to see her, he did nothing but think of the means how to do it: The enterprise
was dangeroous, and he saw well enough what a hazard he should run, to enter an
Enemies Town, where the vigilance of the Governor justly heightened his
apprehension of being surpised.

But Love, which never loves long debates, especially such as tend to keep it
at a distance from its object, quickly suggested an expedient the Marquess
thought infallible. He procured from the Marshal d' Humiers a Passport for a
Peddler of Brussels to go Trade at Lille; and having got some English Point, the
best he could meet with, he went for Lille, and easily got entrance to the
Duchess of Arschott's, under pretense to sell his Points; which were so fine,
and so very cheap, he sold many of them to the Duchess, and her Women. At last
he was brought into Christina's Apartment, who very luckily was alone in her
Chamber, perhaps to read over the Marquesses Letter.

The Love she had for him preserved the Idea of him so fresh in her mind, that
disguised as he was, she knew him at first sight; and concealing her surprise,
she prayed the Dutchesses Maid who had brought in the Peddler, to go call
another Maid who had good skill in Points. By good fortune that Maid was
abroad, and she who had been to call her being withdrawn, the two Lovers having
cleared all misunderstandings, and the Marquess having justified himself, they
had the opportunity to express themselves with all the freedom and tenderness
imaginable. Christina quarreled with him for having exposed himself to such
evident danger: The Marquess took that occasion to tell her, that if she were
so much concerned for his danger, as she appeared, she might easily prevent his
exposing himself for the future, by permitting him to take her back with him to
Brussels, and marry her. She confessed with some trouble, she could find in her
heart to do it; yet found by her self, it would be impossible for her to
resolve to be married to an Enemy of the Kings: What, interrupts the Marquess,
would you have me then be a Traitor to my Prince, and my Country? I am not so
unjust, replies Christina, nor can I think you capable of such a thought, and
should esteem you much less if you were: But there is hope the War will not
last ever; and the scruples you make to be married to an Enemy of your Prince,
I may very justly pretend to, would my Love give me leave: Do not you think we
sufficiently espouse the Quarrel of our Sovereigns, by sacrificing every day
our Lives and our Fortunes to their Interest, without making our Love a part of
the Sacrifice? But pray, let us have no more of these matters of State, but
employ better the moments of a Conversation has cost me so dear. Company,
coming in as he was speaking, Christina was forced to dismiss the pretended
Peddler, and appoint him to come two hours after to her, being unwilling to buy
any thing till she had first shown it to one who had Judment in it. He went
away displeased he was so unhappily interrupted. Christina seeing it would be
hard for her to have private discourse with him, writ him a Billet which she
resolved to deliver him secretly, to let him know her mind.

The supposed Peddler being returned at the hour assigned, Christina who was in
the Dutchesses Chamber went to meet him at the Door, and told him aloud, she
had as much English Point as she needed, and would buy none but Spanish, which
pleased her best of any. With that she nearly slipped into the Marquesses hand
a Billet to this effect: I Cannot without fear see you here; if you love me,
provide for your safety and stay not a moment in a place so dangerous as for
you this. Time peradventure will be more favorable to us, than we can hope for
at present. Ths Duchess is so obliging, I doubt not but she will engage me to
continue here longer: if I comply with her, you may believe it is much for your
sake. Once more, let me beg you instantly be gone, and think that my repose
depends on your safety.




The Marquess having understood by this Billet, the disquiet of his Mistress,
returned for Brussels, and appeared at Court before they missed him: the
Duchess of Arschott was the mean time visited by all the Persons of Quality at
Lille, her merit no less than the respect due to her Birth, drawing to her
House all the good Company of the Town. The Marchioness de Belabre, in her
return from Paris,) where she had been cast in her Suit) gave the Duchess a
Visit, and was extremely surprised at the sight of Christina there, whom she
presently knew for St. Aubin; and calling to mind the last years Carnaval, she
made no doubt but Love had a great share in this new disguize; and according to
most Women's Humor, thinking it a mighty matter to penetrate the depth of an
Amorous Intrigue, she was ready to applaud her self for the discovery she had
made; and to carry on her design, came frequently to the Dutchesses. Christina
having been very well acquainted with the Marchioness at Paris, presently knew
her; and not able to forbear blushing as often as she saw her, she resolved to
take her time to speak to her in private, and undeceive her: But the
Marchioness out of excess of discretion always avoided her; and perceiving it
troubled Christina, she came to her one day, and whispered her in the Ear,
Trouble not your self, and never fear me, I can keep my Friend's counsel.
Christina endeavored to disabuse her, but in vain. The Marchioness having a
strong fancy she knew the Lady had engaged St. Aubin to put on this disguize,
though she made a thousand false guesses: for as soon as she saw St. Aubin speak
to any Lady, immediately she concluded she was the Person.

After much labor in vain, and fruitless observation, the Marchioness made the
Baroness of St. Sauveur her Confident in the business, imparting to her the
mighty mystery; imagining St. Aubin not mistrusting the Baroness, she would not
be so reserved in her presence; and so she might easily find out the truth of
what she earnestly desired to know. The Baroness being a young Lady, and of a
very jovial humor, was ravished with joy at the discovery of such a Secret,
and applying her self to a business so suitable to her humor, she observed
Christina with a great deal of care, though little satisfaction. Angered at her
ill success, and apprehending the Marchioness would impute it to want of
Address, she doubled her diligence, and watched Christina more narrowly than
before: But all this care and extremity of attention served for no more, than
to make her take better notice of the good mien of the pretended Gentleman. She
thought him so amiable, and took such delight in viewing him, that in a short
time she found her Curiosity had produced an effect quite other than she
expected, having insensibly engaged her in a passion for St. Aubin which was
already so strong, she perceived she was not Mistress of it. This made her long
for an intimate acquaintance with so Charming a Person; and the better to
obtain it, she sought for cccasions of seeing and discoursing her; which was
easy to find, all Persons of Quality having free access to the Dutchesses.
Christina satisfied the longing of the Baroness with so good a Grace she was no
less pleased with her Civility, than taken with her good Mein. She was a
hundred times upon the point of telling her, she knew the secret of her Sex;
and that natural modesty that sticks so close to Women well-born, made her as
often change her resolution, and quit her design. After many Conflicts in her
heart, where Love, Modesty, Freedom and Reservedness strove in vain to get the
better one over the other, she found Christina alone, and adventured to tell
her, she had never known a Person so deserving of Love as she was, and that had
Heaven made her of a Sex different from hers, she should have found it very
difficult to save her self from passion for a Person so amiable. Christina, who
thought of nothing less than Love, thought this discourse an effect of her
Friendship; and answered she was extremely obliged to her for her kindness,
assuring her, she would endeavor to return it her with all the tenderness of
affection she was capable of. The Baroness having already advanced so far, was
not satisfied with so cold an answer: However, she thought it necessary to
appear content for the present, and to prevent the loss of all, she embraced
her tenderly, and gave her many thanks. The Duchess coming in, and finding
them in that posture, asked the reason. The Baroness who thought her embraces
as criminal as Christina believed them innocent, answered with some trouble
(for a pretense to deceive the Duchess) that she was upon going, and could not
take leave without embracing her dear friend. What she said was believed, not
one having percciv'd how heartily she was vexed to leave a House where she so
much loved to be.

Every time the Marchioness saw the Baroness de S. Sauveur, she asked if she
had not found out the reasons why S. Aubin had disguised himself: But having no
account to satisfy her Curiosity, she became more impatient, and resolved to
know it one way or other. Having mused a while, she resolved to tell her (whom
she thought S. Aubin) of the business, and to oblige him to impart to her the
secret of his Love; and in case of refusal, to threaten him she would publish
the secret of his Sex. Christina extremely surpised with the Proposal, would
have undeceived her, by making her a faithful Relation of her Adventures. But
the Marchioness prepossest with an Opinion she spoke to S. Aubin, gave no
credit to the discourse, telling him, she would allow him till that time to
morrow to think on it, assuring him he might rely on her discretion; but if he
delayed any longer to acquaint her with the secret, she would certainly spoil
all. Christina who concealed nothing from the Duchess, gave her ah account of
the perplexity she was in, by the earnest solicitations of the Marchioness.
This was good sport for them, and made them laugh heartily, and resolve
together, since the Marchioness was so absolutely bent to be deceived, and not
be disabus'd, they would for their divertisement afford their help to deceive
her: the sole qnestion remained was, what Lady should be the Object of the
pretended passion: Several were in nomination, but none so likely to take as
the Baroness de S. Sauveur, being a handsome and jovial young Lady, and
Christina's intimate friend. The Marchioness being told of it, was surpised at
the news, but promised to keep his counsel, and expressed great satisfaction at
the confidence he reposed in her.

Christina, by agreement with the Duchess affected thenceforward so much
kindness and care for the Baroness de S. Sauveur, and to appear so much
concerned for her, and still long for her company, which the Baroness answered
on her part with a great deal of pleasure, that the Marchioness having often
observed them, was confirmed in her Error; and inwardly applauding her self
for having so luckily discovered the Intrigue, would needs make the Baroness
sensible of it, that she might know her self at her mercy for the discovery.
And not longer able to keep a secret which was already a burden to her, she
gave her a visit; and having reproached her for not dealing clearly by her, in
concealing her knowledge of S. Aubin's passion, In earnest, says she, by way of
Railery, I was not ill prepared to penetrate S. Aubin's concerns, and you have
acted your part very well, only it is pity you had not to do with a Fool. All
things seemed to conspire to deceive the Marchioness; for the Baroness
blushing, made her think that change of her countenance an effect of her
confusion at the discovery she had made. You do not deserve, adds the
Marchioness, I should use so much discretion in your concern, who were so
unwilling to make me of your counsel: But fear me not, had I not promised S.
Aubin secrecy at his confession, the respect I have for you would oblige me to
silence. The Baroness surpised at the discourse, stood mute for some time, not
knowing what to think on it: But as we easily believe what we passionately
desire, the Baroness no longer doubting but S. Aubin loved her, and that the
Marchioness spoke in good earnest, quickly past out of a great astonishment
into a far greater joy: If a man will love one, says she, how can we help it?
Would you not think it hard to throw a Gentleman into despair, who does things
so extraordinary for his Mistress, and demonstrates by his actions the violence
of his passion? I will pardon you, replies the Marchioness, your want of
confidence in me hitherto, upon condition you will hide nothing from me for the
future. It was agreed, and they parted both very well-pleased with their
mistakes; the Marchioness to see her self the Confident in an Intrigue she had
so great a desire to penetrate; the Baroness to be assured by so good a hand
things that did so much flatter her passion. She was so fully persuaded S.
Aubin was in love with her, she began to repent she had been so forward to let
him know the kindness she had for him, fearing it might have lessened the
esteem she could wish he should have for her This made her resolve to force
herself into more reservedness, and be more shy for a while, to set an edge on
his passion. It fell out as she wished; for Christina to maintain throughout
the part she was to act for the Dutchess's divertisement, and her own, was
every day kinder than other to the Baroness, who through dissimulation (usual
with Women) receiving Christina's Courtship very coldly, hoped by that means to
heighten the Passion of her supposed Lover.

Christina not knowing the intention of the Baroness, nor the reasons she used
her so, took so ill the flight return she made of her Civilities, that she for
bore the continuance of them, and shunned her company, to prevent occasions of
discourse with her. The Baroness perceiving it, could not brook this
indifference above a day; the morrow she goes to Christina, and in some heat
asked her what she had done to be slighted so by her, and make her affect
avoiding her company, as she observe d she did. She let fall some, other hasty
words, which surpised Christina extremely; who answered she had never been
wanting to the friendship she had promised her; but that the Baroness had
appeared so cold the day before toward her, she had no reason to wonder it had
made her more shy. The Baroness was so impatient, she would not allow her time
to finish, but embraced her instantly, and was upon the point of telling her,
'twas in vain to endeavor concealing his Sex from her, who know it already, by
very good information: But she forbore, foreseeing she could not with decency
take some little liberties with S. Aubin discovered she used with Christina
disguised. Never did Woman love more to deceive her self, and never was there
love of so singular a Character. Pressed by her Passion, she gave S. Aubin a
thousand occasions to declare himself to be what she took him for: but finding,
all would not do, and attributing it to his fear, she studied a thousand
expedients to accomplish as Adventure she could not endure should hang in
suspense. Time furnished her with an unexpected occasion: Her Husband being
gone one Evening for the Country, she sat up very late at the Dutchesses, and
having cunningly let fall a word, she would willingly lie there that night: She
asked one of the Dutchesses Women if she would admit her her Bedfellow:
Christina offered her a part of her Bed; the Baroness at first seemed loath to
accept of it, for fear of incommoding her, but at last she was persuaded, the
maid she had first spoken to having a Bedfellow already, which the Baroness
knew, though she pretended the contrary.

When they were just ready to go to Bed, the Baroness retaining some remains of
modesty, was so troubled, and out of countenance, she knew not what she did.
But to give her dying Virtue some small satisfaction for the disorder her
passion had brought her in, she told Christina she would have only one corner
of the bed, where she prayed her to let her sleep quietly without touching her
all night. Christina very readily promised what she desired, and as readily
performed it. When the Lights were taken away, the Baroness wha expected with
impatience the darkness she longed for, was astonished to find Christina fast
asleep. At first she thought it her own fault, and that her Gallant feigned
himself asleep to express his obedience to her; yet she knew not what to think
on it. But having long expected in vain to find him more confident she asked him
if he were asleep: but receiving no Answer, it almost put her beside her self.
She fell a sighing, but her sighs as little affected Christina, who was in a
deep sleep. The Baroness thought 20 times to awake her, but shame and vexation
made her forbear. Never had Woman so bad a Night, though never Woman expected a
better. At length it was day; and seeing her insensible Lover lie still as a
Stock, she dressed her self hastily; and the despair she was in not permitting
her to quit the Room without leaving behind her some mark of her resentment,
she found Pen, Ink and Paper ready on the Table, and writ immediately this
Billet: I Have received from you the most sensible outrage a Lady can suffer;
but it is what I deserved, having so blindly abandoned my self to a passion for
a man who knew no better to answer it. I must now endeavor to cover my shame:
As for you, I advise you to continue the disguize that becomes you so well. You
have already the modesty of the Sex whose habit you carry; and you are not to
despair, but Heaven sensbile of its Error in making you a Man, may take from
you that little you have remaining of that Sex.




The Baroness having written this Letter, laid it on Christina's Toilette, and
withdrew. As soon as she got home, she feigned she had been all night up at
Play; and having had her self undrest, went presently to bed, which you may
believe was not very easy to her. Christina at getting up having found the
Billet, dressed her self in all haste to carry it to the Duchess: it made them
good sport; and when they reflected on the course the Baroness had taken to get
an interest in Christina, they concluded the Marchioness had imparted her
secret to her, and so involved her in the same Error with her self.

The Duchess was concerned at it, and had the goodness to go to the Baroness
to undeceive her; and having fully told her what she knew of the business, at
last, though with difficulty, disabus'd her. She would have gone thence to the
Marchioness of Bellabre to do her the like g od office: but the Baroness
sufficiently confounded already, and fearing further explication might reflect
more on her Credit, entreated the Duchess to say no more of it but to leave
the Marchioness to her mistakes, as not daring to trust her discretion in so
tender a point, where the matter appeared so fit for mirth, and her Reputation
was so deeply concerned.

The Duchess had now almost finished her business at Lille, and had written to
Brussels she would return thither speedily, and hoped to bring Christina back
again with her. The Countess de Benavidez, who was pretty well recovered, and
had not lost by her sickness any part or her passion for the Marquess d'
Osseyra, hearing talk of Christina's return, was so frighted at the News, she
made it her business by all means to prevent it; and at length found an
occasion to have a Letter writ to the Duchess of Arschott by a Lady, and one
of her best Friends, to inform her she was with impatience expected at
Brussels; that her concerns being very dear to her, she thought fit to acquaint
her there was great murmuring at Court that she had thoughts of bringing back
Christina, who would not fail to give intelligence to the French of all she
could learn at Brussels; at least it would be believed so, Christina being
already under suspicion of Guilt in that particular. The Duchess being highly
concerned to hold fair with the Spaniards, and fearing their jealousy of her
long stay at Lisle, especially since the News spread in Flanders of her having
had a hand in the Marriage of the Prince of Izinguien with the Daughter of the
Marshal d' Humiers, looked upon the advice as not to be slighted: And whatever
kindness she had for Christina, she could not find in her heart to expose her
self to mine for her sake, in praying her to bear her company to Brussels. As
they were alone one day, the Duchess took her opportunity to make a long
discourse of the state of her affairs, and the necessity she was under to avoid
any thing that might give a jealousy of her to the Spaniards: adding, that
this obliged her to be very cautious in her Conduct; and to deny her self many
things in themselves very agreeable to her. Christina had too much Wit not to
apprehend the meaning of this discourse, and answered, she had for the same
reasons resolved to return into France, as soon as she should receive Answer to
a Letter she had writ into her Country; and in the mean time to put her self
into a Covent. They concluded their discourse with mutual assurances of Eternal
Friendship; and two days before the Duchess left Lisle, Christina entered the
Covent of the Nuns of S. Thomas.

The Marquess d' Osseyra seeing the Duchess arrived at Brussels without
Christina, was very much alarmed at it, and went in great haste to inquire the
news of her. When he heard she was gone into a Nunnery, it extremely disturbed
him, not knowing what reason she had for it: But the Countess de Benavidez
watching all occasions to vex him, dexterously gave out that Christina had long
since privately communicated to her the disgust she had for the World, and the
design she had espoused to spend her days in a Religious House. This coming to
the Marquesses ear, the violence of his affection allowed him so little time of
consideration, that he went away that Evening for Lisle, with his former
Passport as a Peddler; and made such haste, that he would have been there
timely the next day, had he not been unfortunately staid by the way by Robbers,
who pretending themselves Soldiers of the Garrison of Ypres, got together to
the number of seven, and robbed Travelers without any regard to their
Pass-ports. They led away the Marquess into a very thick Wood, where deceived
by his Habit and Pass-ports, they took him for a Tradesman, and forced him to
draw a Bill of Exchange upon some of his Correspondents, threatening to kill him
if it were not paid at sight; and that in the mean time he should stay with
them for security. The Marquess was in no small perplexity, not knowing who to
draw the Bill on; and if he discovered himself, they would certainly kill him,
for fear of being punished by him when once at liberty: what course soever he
took, death seem d inevitable; but to gain time, he gave them a Bill upon an
Innkeeper at Brussels, who had been his Servant, and knew his Character. When
he had written it in the most pressing terms for payment at sight; they could
not agree which of them should be trusted with it for receiving so considerable
a Sum: At last they pitched upon two of their Company whom they put most
confidence in: The Marquess in the mean time endeavored to insinuate himself
with the Robbers, letting them know he could scarce find in his heart to be
angry with them, not doubting but that they had been reduced to that way of
living through the avarice of their Officers, who perhaps defrauded them of the
poor Pay their Prince allowed them; and that he thought himself happy, in
falling into their hands who used him so civilly, and were satisfied with a
little Money. The desire he had to see Christina made the Marquess descend into
Complaisances for saving his life, he had disdained to stoop to on any other
score: These were so agreeable to their humor, that he was presently very
familiar with them, and they used him more kindly than at first, and made him
sup with them. The morrow betimes they sent away one of their Comrades to buy
in Provisions; the Marquess seeing their number lessened, and fearing the
return of those who were gone to receive the Money on his Bill, resolv d to
seize one of their Swords and die at least with his Weapon in his hand. One of
the four who staid in the Wood, watched always while the other slept: The
Marquess feigning himself very sleepy, the Watchman observing it himself, went
a little further into the Wood. The Marquess to lose no time, instantly seized
their Guns before any of them awaked: but being too generous to kill men in
their sleep, he took out the priming out of two of the Guns, having the other
two in readiness to be discharged: Then went he to meet him who was gone into
the Wood, and having threatened to kill him if he made the least resistance, he
told him he was unwilling to take the advantage he had against him, and his
Fellows, and was content they should have the Money on the Bill of Exchange,
but that for his safe passage through the Wood he must have his company a
League further, assuring him he would do him no harm. The Robber believing a
Tradesman incapable of so bold a resolution, and astonished to hear him speak so
stoutly, was forced to obey, and do whatever the Marquess commanded him. They
were scarce got out of the Wood, but they were met by a Party of Horse of the
Garrison of Lisle. The Marquess immediately presented his Passport, but having
been taken with two Pistols about him, and in a quarter very suspicious, they
told him, he made use of his Pass-ports to rob the more safely: The Marquess to
clear himself, told them, he had been robbed in that Wood, and related truly
what had past, and how he had escaped out of the Robbers hands, which made the
Troopers resolve to enter the Wood to seize upon the Thieves. But the Commander
having be thought himself this discourse might be a mere invention of the
Marquesses, to draw them perhaps into some Ambush, ordered only ten Horsemen to
dismount, and go into the quarter the Prisoner should lead them, where they
found the Rogues, and took them without resistance. They were all brought to
Lisle, and having confirmed all the Marquess had said, he had his liberty, and
no doubt made but he was, as he pretended, a Tradesman. What became of the
Robbers, I know not, though likely they were hanged: But it is certain, the
Marquess impatiently longing for news of Christina, went strait to the Covent
where he had been told she was. When he was come, they told him there was no
speaking with any of the Nuns, that day being set aside for receiving a French
Gentlewoman into the Habit.

The reports which had past of Christina's having taken that resolution, and
the Marquesses fears, made him believe it was she. Confirmed in this Opinion by
his desperate Love, he bustled through the Crowd, and without further inquiry,
addressed himself to the Priest ready to begin the Ceremony, and prayed him to
stay till he had spoke with the Abbess. Those who observed with what disorder
he pronounced h is words, were surpised; and the Priest who had prepared an
Elegant discourse in praise of a Religious Life, was afraid, he should be
obliged to reserve it for another occasion. The Marquess in the mean time was
got to the Grate, and the Abbess appearing, he told her he was come to
acquaint, the Person she intended to receive into the Number of her Sisters had
promised him Marriage, and all the Vows she should make would be null. The
Abbess much surpised, called the Maid to the Grate, and having told her what
the Marquess had said, she charged her to declare the truth. The Young Maid,
already sufficiently perplexed under the apprehension of that variety of
Functions she was to undergo that day, thought the discourse of the Abbess a
piece of formality, usually observed on such occasions, the better to assure
her self of the willingness of those who took the Habit; and turning toward the
Sister who had the care of her Education, she asked her very Innocently, what
Answer to make. This, and the confusion in the Marquesses countenance at the
sight of a Person he knew not, made all believe she was in good earnest. And
the people cried out the man was a Fool. The Marque's defended himself so ill,
that the distraction of his looks, and his silence, made them absolutely
conclude he was mad; and they drove him out of the Congregation, without his
being able once to make his Complaint.

While his passion procured him all this ill usage, his friends were extremely
concerned for his person. The Innkeeper at Brussels having been much pressed by
the Thieves to pay his Correspondents Bills of Exchange, knew the hand, and
pretending he would pay them, went to the Marquesses quarters, and showed the
Bill to one of his principal Servants, who confirmed it was of his Masters
handwriting, which made them believe he was in the Robbers hands: They applied
themselves to the Duke de Montalto, whom they knew to be his very good friend;
and having showed him the Bill, the Duke caused the two men, who demanded
payment of it, to be presently arrested; and having severely threatened them,
they confessed all. The Duke was in fear for the danger of his Friend, and went
out in person in the Head of a Party of three hundred Horse, and some Dragoons.
When he came to the Wood where the two Robbers had left their Comrades, he
placed Guards at all the Avenues, and went in himself at the Head of his
Dragoons, and so crossed all the Woods, but found not one Person. This
heightened his fear, and made him detach three several Parties, sending them
away into several quarters to endeavor a discovery where these Rogues had
their refuge, but all to no purpose; so that he was forced to return without
having any account of his Friend.

The morrow, a servant of the Marquesses impatient for news of him, and
thinking he might find him at Lisle, put himself into Boors habit, and went in
search of him. As soon as he was arrived at Lisle, he pretended he had a Letter
for Christina; and having got her called to the grate of the Covent she was in,
he asked her privately what news of the Marquess. Christina not able to give
him any account of him, the Servant acquainted her with the departure of the
Marquess from Brussels, the adventure of the Bill of Exchange, and all other
circumstances of his absence. Christina who found in her heart a stronger
inclination for the Marquess than she thought she had, was so concerned for his
misfortune, that the trouble she was in at the news convinced her of the height
of the passion she had for him. She earnestly prayed the Man to return
instantly for Brussels, not to omit any thing to learn some news of his Master,
and to let her know without delay the success of his care. Before she could
make an end of these few words, her tears betrayed the affection of her heart.
When the Servant was gone, she past some hours in those inquietudes none can
comprehend but those only who have been in Love. The mean time the Marquesses
Servant being an honest Fleming, and very devout, despairing to find his
Master, goes into a Church, and having heartily prayed God to inspire him where
to meet with the Marquess, he no sooner turned himself about toward the
Church-door to go out, but he spied the Marquess standing before him; and not
able to contain himself; cried out at the Miracle. The Marquess also astonished
at so unexpected an accident, had much ado to make his Man hold his peace; and
giving out he was his Comrade, he told those who came running in at the report
of the Miracle, that the Man was a little cracked, and had often such Fits.
They got off by this Artifice, and went into a house where the Marquess had
lain. His Man gave him an account of what had past at Brussels, and of the
disorder Christina was in at the news; the tears she shed, and the lamentable
condition he left her in. The Marquess, who after the last days work durst not
appear at the Covent-gate, was ravished with joy at the news of her being so
concerned for his misfortunes; and having got her called for by his Man, he
slipped into the Speaking room, and quickly revived her by his presence. Never
was Conversation more tender than theirs; 'twas not in Christina's power to
reproach her Lover with any thing the violence of his passion for her could not
presently justify. She promised him once for all, never to be any man's but
his, and prayed him not to expose himself again to so many accidents, assuring
him she had already written into her Country to desire the Abbot Dizesle, who
had the management of her Affairs, to take a journey into Flanders to agree
with him about her Marriage. The Marquess well satisfied with these fair hopes,
that she might be at ease, withdrew sooner than he would have done, and
returned to Brussels, where his Friends by their joy to see him again,
convinced him of the trouble they were in by the fears they had been under of
having lost him. To keep them in ignorance, lest they should discover the
mystery of his absence, he gave out he had lost himself a Hunting, (a Sport he
was known to use) and was taken by Robbers, who having detained him three days,
set him at liberty. This past for current, being so very probable, only the
Countess of Benavidez would not believe it, her Jealousy having given her a
true guess at the cause of his absence; it vexed her to that height, she
presently resolved to leave no stone unturned to break the Correspondence
between the Marquess and Christina.

About this time news came to Brussels, the French Troops were on their march:
it was very early in the year, and the Spanish Generals were extremely alarmed
to hear of an Army in the Field in January, in a very cold season. All the
considerable Officers came to Brussels to assist the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands with their counsel in a conjuncture of this importance. Count
Salazar being arrived there one of the first, and having given the Countess of
Benavidez a Visit, she endeavored to revive his passion for Christina,
reproaching him with his indifference, and acquainting him the same time with
the dangers his Rival had exposed himself to for a sight of her. Salazar, who
had been discouraged from seeing Christina by the difficulties appeared in the
attempt, was somewhat ashamed; and to cover his coolness with a plausible
pretense, and let her see he had not been wanting to his Duty, he bethought
himself of putting a Trick on his Kinswoman, and persuading her he was more in
Christina's Books than she made account. The Countess answered, She could
hardly believe it: He offered to make it out, and desired only time to step to
his Quarters to do it. 'Twas not long ever he returned, and brought her a very
passionate Letter of the Marquesses to Christina, being the same formerly
spoken of which Salazar's men cunningly got from the Marquesses. Salazar having
in his hand a Letter which so clearly proved what he had said, showed it his
Kinswoman, and told her, she might judge by the Sacrifice Christina had made
him, how much he was in her favor. The Countess having read the Letter, was
very well pleased, and thought it very proper and effectual for setting the
Marquess and his Mistress at variance: She spoke Salazar so fair, that she
prevailed with him to leave it in her custody, upon her promise to make no ill
use of it; which she kept so ill, that the very next moment she went to one of
her friends, a Lady of the Marquesses familiar acquaintance, and having
aggravated the dangers the Marquess had exposed himself to for seeing
Christina, and the ill consequence of his passion; it might be excused, adds
she, did Christina but love him; which she is so far from, that she cannot
endure him, but sacrifices his kindest and most affectionate Letters to
Salazar, who to my knowledge has several of them, though he has the
discretion not to show them. To this she added many other particulars which
convinced the Lady, and made her believe she could not do the Marquess a better
Office, than to cure him of his passion, and disabuse him as to his Opinion of
Christina. She fell to work on the morrow, and made use of all means the
Countess had furnished her with to persuade the Lover to think no more of so
faithless a Mistress. The Marquess who could not imagine Christina capable of
falsehood to him, did not easily believe what was said of her, and would not for
a long time admit the suspicions they endeavored to infuse into him of her:
But this Lady Pressing him to it continually he promised at length to believe
what she said, if she would show him one Letter to convince him of the falsehood
of Christina The Countess of Benavidez informed of this good success, sent the
Letter to her good Friend, who having showed it the Marquess it extremely
disturbed him. He read it over and over, and knew it to be the same he had wit
to Christina, and she had sent him an Answer of. He made no longer doubt but
she had betrayed him, and his heart reproaching him for having been so long
fooled by so ungrateful a Wretch, he blindly resolved to declare his
resentment, by writing her a Letter full of Scorn and Contempt, and in the most
vilifying and bitter terms he could invent; which he did to this purpose.

THe Interest I have in your Concerns ingages me to write to you, to furnis^
you the means to make new Sacrifices to my happy Rivals. But I advise you to
make good use of this Letter, as the last you shall receive from me. Force your
self no further to comply with me, yet assure your self I shall not envy the
surprise of Salazar, for I hope you will revenge me of him, and will in a short
time make a sacrifice of him also to another, who could find in your heart to
betray the most sincere and most passionate of Lovers,

The Marquess d' Osseyra.


The Marquess had no sooner written this ^etter, but he gave it him who carried
the former, charging him to be gone immediately, and deliver it Christina. Ill
news fly apace, and the Letter was delivered her within two days after the
writing it. Christina was so little acquainted with the language of it, she
could hardly believe what she read: We are naturally inclined to be ignorant of
what we wish should not be, and she would fain have been deceived. But seeing
the Letter unquestionably of the Marquesses hand writing, and knowing the
Bearer to be one he confided in, it offended her so highly, she thought it
below her to justify her self against an Accusation so improbable and unworthy
her Noble and Generous Soul: And laying aside, on the sudden, the gentleness
and sweetness of her Nature, she angrily told the man who waited her Answer,
she would never take the pains to clear her self to a man who thought her
capable of Falsehood. And tearing the Letter in pieces in the presence of him
who delivered it, she threatened to have him apprehended for a Spy, if he went
not away immediately, or ever saw her face more.

As haughty and courageous as she appeared before the Marquesses man, it was
not in her power to overruled the infirmity of her Sex, but she burst out into
tears, and was tormented with a thousand different thoughts. The despair she
was in pressed her to take a course that should remove her for ever far enough
from the Marquess: yet a secret inclination (the cause whereof she knew not)
rendered her resolutions uncertain and ineffectual Sometimes she thought to
return home, but presently disliked it, as having lately received a
considerable supply of Money, and desired her Friends Consent to be married to
the Marquess, which now could be of no other use to her, but to procure her the
reproaches of a Province where people naturally love to talk of their
Neighbors: A Religious Life pleased her as little, and after a thousand
Reflections, finding none so agreeable to her humor as the Military, she took
a strong resolution to spend the rest of her days in Arms.

While she was taking private order for going to another Town to put her self
in fit Equipage for War, the Marquess (now his passion was over) began to
repent all he had done: And having considered former passages, and endeavoring
to find his Mistress less guilty, he bethought himself that the man who had one
of his Letters to carry to Christina, never came back again, but took Arms for
the French. This made him believe he had sold his Letter to Salazar, and
deserted the service of his Prince, for fear of being punished. The quick
return of him he had sent to Lisle two days before, who brought him the news of
Christina's indignation, and the Answer she had made him, confirmed his Opinion
of the Innocence of his Mistress. He was upon the point of going to cast
himself at her feet; but desirous to know the manner how this Letter came into
the hands of his Rival, he prayed the Duke de Montalto (who was both their
friend, and charged them never to question one another) to go to Salazar, and
entreat him to tell him upon the word of a Gentleman, how he came by that
Letter; assuring the Duke however it had happened, he would not resent it,
provided he might know the truth, which for other reasons he was concerned to
be informed of.

Salazar being pressed by the Duke to give a positive answer, was highly
displeased to find himself reduced to such a strait by the indiscretion of the
Countess; and after a weak denial, was at last obliged to confess to his Friend
the truth of the business. The Marquess having made this discovery by the Duke,
was ready to die for grief, for having upon so light grounds suspected the
fidelity of his Mistress. This was not all his misfortune; for while he thought
of going to ask her pardon, news came to Brussels, that the Monarch of France
was at the Gates of the strong Tower of Valenciennes, which he besieged in a
season when the Heroes of former Ages would have thought it impossible to have
an Army in the Field: Wherein he surpassed the Sun (which he has taken for his
Devise) since the Frost and the Snow which hinder the appearance of that
Luminary, could not retard for one day the course of his Conquests.

The surprise the Spaniards were under at the news, was incredible. Every man
had order to be in readiness; and the Marquess d' Osseyra, Master of the
Artillery, had his hands full; yet he was not so taken up with the business of
his Charge, but he th^ught how to make his peace with his Mistress. But how
pressing soever his passion was, his duty was more; and he found himself under
the necessity of being content with writing her a Letter, which probably was
very submissive and kind: What it contained I cannot give you a certain
account, Christina having never received it. This Illustrious Heroine, who had
laid her design for serving in the Wars, and promised her self never more to
entertain any passion but for Honor, had left Lisle, and put her self into
Equipage, good or bad; and having joined the King's Army, near Valenciennes, in
a Troopers Habit, and under her former Name S. Aubin, he made his Court to the
Marshal of Luxembourg, who formerly knew him; and having prayed to be admitted
to serve him in the quality of Aid de Camp, the generous Marshal having
inclinations of kindness for those who are handsome, especially if persons of
Merit, granted his request, and employed him that very day to carry Orders into
several Quarters of the Camp. Valenciennes, which boasted it self to have been
fatal to the French, willing to preserve the reputation it had gained in the
late Wars, made a vigorous defense. This happy beginning put the Spaniards in
hopes the valor of the Inhabitants, assisted with the rigor of the season,
would give them time to assemble their forces, and expect those of their
Confederates for raising the Siege. But the renowned Monarch who besieged it,
taking notice of this vigorous resistance, and that they were provided to
endure a Formal Siege, caused them to be attaqu'd a new way, which may serve
for an example to the Captains in future Ages. For having made a Detachment
from his Army, those brave Souls animated by the presence and Orders of a
General so much Superior to others, made themselves Masters of all the
Outworks, in open-day: Nor can it be said it was by surprise, or without
resistance, eight hundred men having died upon the spot, in an obstinate
defense of their several Posts. The Kings Musketeers being foremost of the
Assailants, entered the Town pell mell with those that fled into it.

I shall not undertake to write the Great Actions done this Remarkable
Expedition, I leave it to the Historians, whose business it is, and shall speak
only of what concerns my Heroine. This Generous Person was always near Monsieur
de Luxembourg, who being upon the service of the day, commanded that glorious
Detachment. S. Aubin seeing that Worthy Marshal carry his Orders in Person
throughout, thought the assistance of an Aid de Camp very useless in so hot a
service, and having mingled himself among the Kings Musketeers, he entered the
Town with them, and shared in the glory of so hardy an Action. The Granadiers
of the Kings Household, and the Regiment of Guards following the next moment,
the Garrison laid down their Arms, and the Squadron of Horse who were drawn up
in the Marketplace were dismounted. The Townsmen, who never expected an
Assault of that nature, were so amazed to see the French in the Town, that most
of them retired into the Churches and Monasteries to avoid the fury of the
Soldiers.

While all was yet in Confusion, some greedy Soldiers broke into the first
Houses they met with; and S. Aubin seeing no more Honor to be gained where
there was no more resistance, was marching out of the Town; and having by the
way spied some Soldiers entering a House, which probably belonged to some
Person of Quality, his generosity inspired him to enter among them, to prevent
their pillaging it. He presently met with a young Maid, very handsome, who all
in tears threw her self at his feet, praying him to save her Honor, and rest
satisfied with the many Goods he should find in the House, which she wholly
yielded up to him with all her heart. S. Aubin's heart melting at the disorder
and tears of the poor Maid, he put on a face of Authority, and made the
Soldiers, partly by civility, partly by force, to get out of doors; and having
locked them, promised the Maid he would protect her, and stay by her as long as
should be necessary to save her from the insolence of the Soldiers. This
discourse, which in appearance should have dissipated her fears, served only to
heighten them: She could not imagine a man covered with blood, and with dirt
('it was not a season for dust) should have so much Humanity, but fancied he
saved her from others, the better to play a Game for himself. Prepossest with
these thoughts, she stood at a distance, and in a lamentable tone prayed him
not to lessen the Greatness of the service he had done her, by offering her
violence to no purpose, being resolved rather to lose her life, than her
honor: Fear nothing, says S. Aubin, were you acquainted with me, and knew me
better, you would have better thoughts of me: I stay here only to guard you,
and will be gone as soon as you command me.

This Maids Mother was gone that morning to Mass, and the Town was so suddenly
taken, she had not time to return home e're the business was done. The Father,
who could not find in his heart to see his House rifled, retired into the
Covent of Capucines, in company with several others who expected like usage, as
very well knowing the Rights Victory gives them who take a Town by Assault. But
the Serene Monarch of France, as full of Clemency as Valor, and willing the
season of the Siege, the taking of the Town, and the use of the Victory should
be equally extraordinary, sent in Monsieur de Louvoy, who by mentioning the
Kings Name, presently staid the fury of the Soldiers, and within a quarter of
an hour caused better Orders to be observed in Valenciennes taken by Assault,
than had been observed by the Enemies at three days end in Treves, surrendered
by Composition. It Is easy to guess what a pleasant surprise it was to the
Inhabitants, when creeping out of their lurking holes, and places of refuge,
instead of smoking ruins thy expected to see, they found houses very well
furnished, and in the same condition they had left them; and instead of Fire
and Sword they were so justly afraid of, they met with Officers coming into
their houses with Gold and Silver in their hands to pay for what they wanted.
S. Aubin a while after looking out at a Window, saw all things quiet by the
indefatigable cares of the Minister I have named: And having observed the Shops
of that great City begin to open, and that his fair Hostess was now out of
fear, he went out to seek his General, whom he found with his Majesty, giving
him an account of the particulars. The Parents of the Maid S. Aubin had so
generously protected being returned home, ravished to find their Daughter
there, embraced her with inexpressible joy. The first transports of this
pleasant Enterview being over, she made them a faithful Relation of the
Obligations she had to the brave Frenchman who succored her, and declared the
circumstances of the service he had done her so much to the life, and how free
the Gentleman appeared from Self-Interest, that her Father conceiving it not in
his power sufficiently to acknowledge so virtuous and excellent an action,
resolved to clear himself from being liable to an imputation of ingratitude and
spent two whole days in searching (though in vain) for his Daughters Deliverer
in the City and Camp. Having heard the Kings Musketeers had first entered the
Town, he presently fancied the man he looked for might be one of them. But
having acquainted his Daughter with his thoughts, and told her the Musketeers
were Red-coats, she presently undeceived him, by assuring him, her Protector
was in a Habit of a different color. Those who are good natured, will easily
guess what a torment it was to those grateful persons not to find him they held
themselves so much obliged to: They were vexed at the heart they could not have
saved their Goods without being ungrateful, and resolved to make new search for
the man, when S. Aubin curious to know who she was, he had been so happy to
save from the fury of the Soldiers, entered the House by a Backdoor, the very
same he entered by at first.

He crossed a little Yard, and found himself just in the Room of a young
Servant maid, who not fully recovered of her frights the day before, was so
troubled to see a Stranger in her Chamber, that she, set up her throat, and
with the loudness of her cries drew all the House to her. They had certainly
taken him for a Robber, had not his good mien, and his Habit, which was very
decent, made them think him no such man. They looked on him with astonishment,
and knew not how to begin speaking to him, till the Daughter of the House came
in after the rest, and knowing S. Aubin's face, cried out, That same was her
Guardian Angel, and stood at his Elbow in a transport of joy with the ingenuity
and innocence of a true Flemish Girl. The Father and Mother as sensible as
their Daughter of so happy a rencontre, ravished with joy to find themselves
under those strong obligations to so lovely a Gentleman, embraced him with that
affection and kindness may better be understood than expressed. The Father made
him an offer of what part he pleased of his Goods, owning he held them of him,
by whose bounty and goodness alone they were still his. The Mother, who had not
yet spoke a word, interrupted her Husband, telling him, that in giving the
Gentleman part of their Goods, they paid him only in part for the service he
had done them: But since he had preserved Mary-Anne their Daughter, dearer to
them than all the treasures of the world, it was but reasonable to recompense
so considerable a good Office to the full, by entreating him to marry her;
adding, she was their only Child, and that they had denied her to Wife to one
of the best Gentlemen in their Country. The Father applauded his Wifes
Proposals, and Mary-Anne gave consent by her silence. S. Aubin who was not
altogether so hasty, answered their offers with a great deal of Civility, and
gave them thanks for the Honor they would have done for him. The modesty of
his answer heightened their kindness, and made them more eager, and put him to
no small trouble to resist their pressing solicitations.

After long discourse, S. Aubin being called away by his Employment, was going
off with promise to see them again; but his intended Father-in-law looking upon
him already as his Son, would not run the hazard of seeking him in vain, as he
had done, over all the Army, but bore him company to his Quarters. By the way
he gave him an account what a considerable Estate he had, and forgot not to
acquaint him with the Personal Merits of his Daughter, and the Quality of her
Suitors. S. Aubin desirous to put the thoughts of Marriage out of his head,
took occasion to tell him, it would be great wrong to the Fair Mary-Anne to be
married to a Stranger, who had nothing to trust to but his Sword, and must
needs make her unhapqy, by being forced the morrow after his Marriage to follow
the Camp, and leave her. The grateful Father was so far from being discouraged
by these Reasons, that having highly commended St. Aubin for his modesty, he
embraced him again, and with wonderful frankness told him, he thought himself
the happiest man on Earth for having it in his power to contribute to the
making the Fortune of a Gentleman of so singular Worth. With that they parted,
and the Father, when returned home, gave there an account of his discourse with
S. Aubin, magnifying the good Fortune of his Daughter, now likely to be the
Wife of a Gentleman, the handsomest, the least huffish, and the best humored
of any in France.

The mean time the Victorious Monarch having given order for the reparations
necessary for the safety of the place, decamped a few days after; and St. Aubin
going to take leave of those who had so much kindness for him, the whole Family
was extremely surpised to see him upon going. To be rid of them, he told them,
he was under an indispensable necessity to follow the Army the beginning of the
Campaign, upon pain of losing the little Honor he had gained, and the esteem
of all that knew him; yet to satisfy their importunities, he promised in some
time to come and refresh himself at their house for a month. The Mother taking
notice he said not a word of Marriage, asked him if he intended not to be their
Son-in-law. S. Aubin having thanked them for the Honor they would have done
him, repeated almost the very words he had said to the Father on the like
accasion: But being desired to speak more positively, he answered in general
terms, he had never yet thought of Marriage; that in truth he found himself
very averse from it, and would advise them to lose no time for settling their
Daughter. The Parents offended at the Answer, thought he slighted their
Daughter. S. Aubin perceived it, and knowing they were troubled at it, he took
his occasion to speak of Mary-Anne with all imaginable esteem and respect: But
seeing they were not persuaded his discourse was sincere, he was at last
forced, for their satisfaction, to make them a promise (which they desired of
him) that he would never marry any other Maid but Mary-Anne. The Father
presented him with a very fine Horse, which he was obliged to accept, to avoid
utterly disgusting them: And having taken his leave, after a thousand embraces,
S. Aubin got again to the Army.

All Europe had their eyes fixed on the march of that victorious Army; some
believed, that after an advantage which appeared rather the work and fruit of
an entire Campaign, than a Conquest of fifteen days, the King would have
returned to S. Germain to refresh himself after so great Fatigues, especially
when his Majesty had News from all parts of the motions of the Prince of
Orange, to join his Troops with those of the Spaniards, with design to oppose
his Majesty's undertakings. But that great Monarch not used to quit his
delicious Palaces, to end a Campaign by the taking of one Town, how important
soever, doubled the surprise and astonishment of the World, by pouring his
Forces upon Cambray, the same which the Emperor Charles the Fifth had fortified
with so much care and expense, the last Age, to heighten the Trophies of that
Great, that Wise and Generous King, though the Emperor, when he fortified it,
designed it the Bull-wark of the Low Countries, and Citadel of France, as the
Spaniards in the late times called it.

While the greatest part of Europe was differently concerned for so famous a
Siege, S. Aubin was busy in the service of his General with extraordinary
assiduity and care, far beyond the usual rate of Ayds de Camp, which the
Marshal de Luxembourg so well approved of, that he chose to employ him before
any other. The City of Cambray being reduced to capitulate, the Governor,
before he would retire into the Citadel, desired some favor (the particulars
I know not) in behalf of the Wives of the principal Officers. Monsieur de
Luxembourg being upon the service of the day in the Trenches, and concerned in
that Negotiation, sent S. Aubin to Complement the Ladies from him. He entered
the City for that purpose; and having learnt that several of these Women were
retired into a Monastery, he went thither; and seeing two or three amongst
them, to whom all the rest paid extraordinary respect, he made up to them to
speak to them. He had scarce begun, but he perceived he spoke to the Countess
de Benavidez, who had followed her Husband to Cambray, where his Regiment was,
S. Aubin, though surpised at the sight of her, endeavored to recover himself,
and would have made an end of his Complement: But the Countess, who presently
knew him, would not give him time, but embraced him with such a transport, as
scandalized the Company, this Lady, who always loved S. Aubin, having then
forgot her Jealousy that made her hate Christina. They spent some time in
private discourse; and S. Aubin having told her what great reason he had to
complain of the Marquess de Osseyra, the Countess who had so great a hand in
setting them at variance, was glad at the heart to hear the News, and
pretending her self much concerned for her, prayed her to show her the
quarrelling Letter he had injuriously sent her, S. Aubin having torn it, could
not satisfy her desire, but told her the substance of it, assuring her it had
occasioned her taking Arms afresh, with a resolution not to entertain any
passion but for Honor and Renown. The Countess would gladly have Continued
this discourse, but fearing the Company would take it ill, she put an end to
it, telling them this Gentleman having been Prisoner the last year at Brussels,
had done her the Honor to visit her often. S. Aubin having confirmed what the
Countess had said, retired, having offered them all the service in his power to
obtain the favor they desired; which he performed so well, that the Ladies
were satisfied, and gave him thanks by Letter.

The King desirous his Subjects of the Province of Boulonnois might be eased of
the continual Incursions of the Garrison of S. Omer, and by his reducing that
place might enjoy the redress his Majesty intended Picardy by the taking of
Cambray, and the quiet all the rest of the Provinces of his Realm are blessed
with in the heat of War, his Majesty ordered a Body of an Army to be formed
under the Command of his Worthy Brother for besieging S. Omer, the same time he
lay before Cambray. This Enterprise appeared so great, that Strangers doubted
the success; and the Spaniards, who very well knew the strength of those
places, and how well they were provided of necessaries for a long resistance,
made no great haste at first to send their Succors: But frightened by the
example of Valenciennes, they used extraordinary diligence to join their Troops
to those of the Prince of Orange, in order to raising the Siege of S. Omer. The
King having notice of their motions, and forseeing their design, made a
Detachment out of his Army* which he sent under the Command of Monsieur de
Luxembourg, in aid of the Duke of Orleans before S. Omer.

While Monsieur de Luxembourg was conducting his Detachment with his usual
activity and vigilance, S. Aubin, who followed him still, and animated by the
happy success of the Kings Arms, and the Marshals Illustrious example,
fortified his resolution of continuing in Arms, had by his diligence so far
gained the esteem of his General, that he took particular notice of him, and
employed him on all remarkable occasions. This drew on S. Aubin the envy of his
Comrades, particularly a young Gentleman, whose other good qualities prevail
with me to conceal his right Name, and to give him that of Richmond. This young
Gentleman, jealous of the kind usage S. Aubin received from the General
Officers, and looking on him as an Upstart, and a very raw Soldier, let fall
on several occasions some sharp language against him. S. Aubin, who was
naturally good humored, and had a very insinuating way, perceiving his
disgust, endeavored to gain him by fair means, Courting him every day, and
omitting nothing that might oblige him to answer his kindness by some evidence
of affection. Richmond had the ill nature to attribute S. Aubin's Civilities
and obliging Carriage to his weakness, and fear of quarrelling with him. This
made him more insolent, so that he purposely affronted him on several
occasions, reproaching him often with his Woman's Face, and telling him a
Martial-soul seldom lodged in so delicate a boby. S. Aubin finding himself
touched in so nice a point, could not forbear blushing at his reproaches; but
willing to decline the noise of a quarrel, endeavored to put off all with a
Jest, which did but encourage Richmond to be worse than before. At last S.
Aubin, urged by frequent persecutions, and sensible he could no longer conceal
his resentment, without exposing himself to continual affronts, he took his
time to find him alone, and tell him he was a weary of his Raileries, nor would
endure them any longer, but prayed him, once for all, to put an end to them;
other wise he should be obliged to let him see, he knew how to revenge himself,
though unacquainted with the ways of giving affronts. Richmond made small
account of this discourse, but fell again to his old way of Jeering. S. Aubin
met him one day on his march, and taking his Pistol in his hand, told him, he
was now resolved to keep his word with him. Richmond having put himself in a
posture of defense, S. Aubin discharging his Pistol, wounded him in the arm he
held his Pistol by Richmond being disabled, S. Aubin making use of his
advantage, laid his other Pistol to his breast, threatening to kill him, unless
he would beg his life. Richmond obstinatly refusing, S. Aubin insisted on it no
further, but told him, his obstinancy should not make him forget to be
generous. Presently after they were parted by some Horsemen that overtook them.
The Marshal of Luxembourg having heard of the Combat, caused them both to be
arrested; and having carefully inquired into the cause of the quarrel, he heard
only in general, that S. Aubin was the Aggressor. This surpised him the more,
as having ever known him of a sweet and peaceable humor; which made him
believe, he came not to these extremities without great provocation: So that he
resolved to know the bottom of the business, and found S. Aubin had made use of
all fair means in his power to win over his Adversary (but all to no purpose)
before he had engaged him. Richmond was blamed for it, and Monsieur de
Luxembourg unwilling he should serve any longer under him, sent him to Perron,
under pretense of having his wound cured, though 'twas very light. The Combat
proved much to S. Aubins advantage, the General esteeming him the better for it;
and the other Ayds de Camp finding 'twas ill jesting with him, forbore their
Raileries.

Monsieur de Luxembourg was by this time arrived before S. Omer, just as
Monsieur was preparing to quit his Lines to go meet the Enemy, though far more
numerous. The succor came so seasonably, that both Armies being engaged, and
that of the Confederates were entirely defeated: The particulars of the Battle
have been already so faithfully and fully related, I shall not attempt writing
what is better done to my hand by another; the very relations made of it by the
Enemy, attribute all the advantage and glory of it to the Valiant Philip de
France, who was every where present; reviving their courage who began to give
ground, and animating the whole Army by his Example and Orders.

S. Aubin having still had a longing desire to see a Battle, was heartily glad
of being at this; the several Orders he had from his General to carry through
the Army, gave him the occasion to satisfy himself to the full, and to be
present where the Victory was most smartly disputed. Happening to be at the
defeat of a Spanish Battallion of Foot, out of his natutal abhorrence of
bloodshed, he saved the lives of two Officers, under pretense of carrying them
Prisoners to Monsieur de Luxembourg: And having as'd them several questions
about the condition of their Army, and what Generals they had, he found the
Spaniards made a Body apart, under the Command of the Marquess de Osseyra. S.
Aubin was so troubled at the Name, he stood mute for some time. He was thinking
at first to seek him out, and demand satisfaction with his Arms in his hand for
the outrage he conceived he had received from him; but he had scarce framed his
design, but he felt his heart fail him, and more concerned for the person of
the Marquess than it could be for an Enemy. He did what he could to suppress
and get rid of that unseasonable tenderness, but all would not do, his heart
still hankered after News of the Marquess, and was strongly bent to save his
life, if possible.

While St. Aubin continued under these uncertainties, the King's Victorious
Brother taking his advantage of the disorder and consternation the Enemies were
in, commanded Mounsieur de Luxembourg to pursue them with some Squadrons: And
with admirable foresight, his Royal Highness sent other Troops to possess
themselves of the Posts, by which the Enemies, though routed, might have
attempted the relief of St. Omer. The Duke of Luxembourg the mean time being in
pursuit of the Enemy, and perceiving the Dragoons (who should have followed
him) lag behind, and busy themselves in taking Prisoners, which would but
hinder the service of the day, he sent S. Aubin with Orders for them to march,
and to kill all their Prisoners. S. Aubin carried these Orders, but with some
reluctance; yet knowing it his duty to obey, not dispute the Orders of his
General, he carried them with his ordinary diligence; and had no sooner
approached the Dragoons but he discerned the Marquess de Osseyra among the
Prisoners, which troubled him beyond expression. The Officer who commanded the
Dragoons, seeing an Aid de Camp coming toward them a gallop, made no doubt but
he brought orders; and having advanced a little way to receive them, St. Aubin
concealing to his power the surprise he was in, without loss of time, he made
use of that readiness of wit incident to those of the Sex, and told the
Officer, that the Marshal de Luxembourg demanded a Prisoner, named the Marquess
de Osseyra: As for the rest, they should be put to the Sword, and the Dragoons
to march up to the Troops, in pursuit of the Enemy. The Order was presently
obeyed, and the Marquess consigned into the hands of S. Aubin whom he followed
some paces on foot, not able to comprehend by what good fortune he had escaped
the fate of the rest of the Prisoners. The Countess of Bonavidez had told him
Christina was in the French Army, which made him resolve, after the loss of the
Battle, to expose himself where he might be made Prisoner, in hopes by that
means to have a sight of his dear Heroine. The thought of this flattered him so
pleasantly, that he had not yet cast his eyes on his Deliverer, being
overjoyed with his having escaped the danger be feared of dying with grief,
for want of an opportunity to clear himself to his Mistress. This joy was but
short; for S. Aubin to carry on his design to the utmost, clapped a Pistol to the
Marquesses Breast, and bid him prepare for death. This troubled the Marquess
more now than it would have done on another occasion; and not able to Master
his passion on the sudden, he reproached S. Aubin with his cruelty, in making
him languish so long, when he had resolved to kill him. But reviving himself; I
will die (says he) contentedly, if you will give me your word to look out in
your Army a Cavalier who goes under the Name of S. Aubin, and tell him, the
Merquess de Osseyra thought upon him to the last moment of his life, and had
some pleasure in his death, as having been occasioned by the Love he had for
him. He fixed his eye the while on him he spoke to, and began to remember
himself, when S. Aubin being on this occasion more Christina than S. Aubin, and
having had much ado to act this part with her Lover, dismounted, and expressed by
her tears the passion of her heart, with greater Eloquence than the best Orator
on Earth could have done it. The Marquess by this time knowing Christina was
his Deliverer, was so deeply affected with this new O^ligation, that he stood
seized with a pleasant amazement at the goodness of his Mistress, at a time
when she had so great reason to be angry with him. Yet as joyful as he was for
having found her again in so extraordinary a manner, when he called to mind he
had given her cause of offense, it almost distracted him; and not able to
endure the misery of that condition, he begged her pardon, in terms so
submissively passionate, that it was readily granted him, before explication
made of the mystery of the Letter which had caused that disorder.

They had scarce understood one another, but they found themselves hemmed in by
a Body of Spanish Horse, which the Duke of Montalto had sent to rescue his
Friend out of the hands of the French. The Marquess was so full of Idea's of
Love, and appeared so little concerned for a liberty he was no longer Master
of, that he was not yet sensible of his good fortune when the Duke of Montalto,
who had given him up for dead, or a Prisoner, embraced him with all the marks
of joy, a true Friend could express on such an occasion. The Duke seeing him
out of humor, and musing, imputed it to the ill success of their Enterprise,
and thinking to comfort him said, their loss was not so great perhaps as they
feared it on the sudden, and assured him they had taken a considerable number
of Prisoners. He observed, in the mean time, the Marquess had his eye fixed on
S. Aubin, Which obliged the Duke to advise him to send away that Prisoner with
the rest, and not trouble himself with taking charge of him. I owe my life and
my my liberty, says the Marquess to his Generosity; but these are the least of
my Obligations to him, and the weakest reasons I have to share fortunes with
him; and then judge you what reason I have to see him well used. This Discourse
awakened the curiosity of the Duke, and made him look more earnestly than
before on S. Aubin, whom after a short view he knew to be the fair Christina he
had seen at Brussels, and was no stranger to her extraordinary Adventures. He
gave his Friend joy of his good fortune, and being well acquainted with the
passion he had for her, he easily imagined they had many things to say to one
another, and discreetly retreated, on pretense of fetching up the Straglers of
his Troops.

Though the day of the loss of a Battle may be thought a time very improper for
a General Officer to busy himself with matters of Love, the Marquess could not
forbear entering into a large discourse, to clear all misunderstandings between
him and his Mistress. After a thousand reciprocal assurances of loving one
another for ever, Christina represented to him the incoveniencies she exposed
her self to, by being discovered by several Officers, as she had been by the
Duke de Montalto, and made him so sensible of the injury it would do them both,
and what a trouble it would be to her to be the subject of discourse for a
whole Army, that the Marquess persuaded by so convincing reasons, consented at
last she should return to the French Camp, having faithfully promised him she
would presently retire, to Paris quit an employment so unsuitable to her bex,
and put her self into a Covent till the end of the Campaign, and that she would
then marry him; it being her desire to delay it so long, that she might do it
with more decency. The Marquess in Person guarded her as far as he could, and
then ordered a Trumpet to bring her safe into the Camp. The General was in pain
for S. Aubin when he arrived, and had sent into several Quarters to inquire
what was become of him: He told him, he had had the misfortune to be taken
Prisoner; and that he was let go upon his Parol. Monsieur de Luxembourg
believed him, and promised to send the Spaniards a Prisoner in Exchange.

The morrow after the Battle, Mounsieur to make his Victory complete, by taking
S. Omer, returned to his Camp before the place, and pressed it so vigorously,
that they were glade to Capitulate before he was Master of the Counterscarp:
And S. Aubin had the pleasure to be in employment about his General, the day
the place was surrendered, as he had been at the taking of Valenciennes and
Cambray, Monsieur de Luxembourg having had the good Fortune to Command the
service of the day, when every of those places was surrendered.

Three of the most considerable places of the Low Countries reduced under the
Kings Obedience, a great Battle won, wherein the Forces of two great Potentates
were defeated; and all this in the height of Winter, and in less than six Weeks
time, are Prodigies Posterity will have scarce Faith to believe: Yet hardly any
were surpised at the News, though very surprising; all who had heard of the
Kings Marching in February, having expectated Actions altogether extraordinary:
And we may truly say of him, he has taught the World not to be amazed at his
extraordinary performances. His Enemies do him right in that particular. The
Court of Spain was in some Consternation at the News, the wise Prince, who is
Prime Minister there, having heard some Grandees speak of it with surprise, and
attributing the success of the Kings Arms to his good Fortune, interrupted
their discourse, to tell them, his success depended more on his Conduct and
Merit, than on his good Fortune.

When S. Omer's was taken, the King put his Troops into Quarters of
Refreshment, until the ordinary season for drawing them into the Field: And
most of the General Officers went to taste the pleasures of Paris. The Marshal
of Luxembourg being of the number, S. Aubin to perform the Promise made to the
Marquess, would not lose so favorable an occasion of accompanying the Marshal
to Paris. He found himself by the way engaged in an Adventure extraordinary, as
those he had formerly met with. The Duke of Luxembourg and Count Louvigny go in
to together for Paris, the Baron d'Angosse, who has a dependence upon the
Count, having in their March taken notice of S. Aubin's Countenance, thought he
had seen him, but could not remember the time, or the place: He took occasion
one day to tell him, he had seen him before. S. Aubin blushing at it, made d'
Angosse more inquisitive. Having racked his memory a good while, he bethought
himself at last this Aid de Camp had the Air of a Man he had seen at Monsieur
Strasburg's at a Ball the year before, whom he had taken for Mademoiselle de
Meyrac: the only thing that puzl'd him was, that Man was a Fleming, and the
Duke of Luxembourg's People assured him, this was a Frenchman, and had served
among the Musketeers. This put him upon a second address to S. Aubin, to pray
him to tell him seriously, if he was not the same Person who was in Maids habit
when he mistook him for a Gentlewoman of Bearn. S. Aubin perplexed to find him
so closely and busily curious, thought it better confess he had been disguised
in Maids Clothes, than give him occcasion to discover he had been disguised in
Man's Apparel, d' Angosse having learnt what he so much longed to know, told
him, they might have very good sport when they came to Paris; and that if he
would but put on Woman's Clothes, he should easily pass for Mademoiselle de
Meyrac, by the help he would give him, to put a Trick on his Countrymen, which
would be excellent divertisement. S. Aubin promised him all he desired; both
arrived at Paris extremely well satisfied, D' Angosse tickled with the Conceit
of his Projects, and S. Aubin glad at heart to get rid of his Importunities.

FINIS.
THE THIRD and FOURTH PARTS OF THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE Female Warrier.
A TRUE HISTORY, Very Delightful, and full of Pleasant Adventures in the
Campaigns of 1676, and 1677.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington, at the Dolphin and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE FEMALE WARRIER. PART III.
AS soon as S. Aubin was returned to Paris, he thought of nothing more than to
throw off a Disguise had occasioned him so many troublesome Adventures. He had a
Design to resume the Habit of his Sex; but finding himself engaged in Business
for settling his Affairs, which he might act with more Freedom and Convenience
in Man's Habit, he resolved to respite for some time his putting on the
Petticoat. The Morrow after his Arrival one brought him a Set of Ribbands,
which did not please him, who had retained so much of the Humor of the Sex
whose Habit he had put off, that he was very curious of his Dress, and went in
Person to the Palace to make choice of Ribbands to his Mind. Having satisfied
his Curiosity, he retired in Company with a Man who quartered with him: As he
passed through the great Hall, the Booksellers taking notice of his Soldier's
Habit, thought he might have a Fancy for some Book treating of Matters of War,
and showed him several, of which he made no Account: As he was hasting away to
get rid of their Importunities, they told him, he must needs buy the Heroine
Musqueteer: The Title was so extraordinary, it awakened his Curiosity, that he
went to a Shop, and taking the Book in his Hand, opened it with that haste,
they might easily see, by his Eagerness, the impatient Desire he had to read
it: Having run over the first Leaf, and found it was the Story of his Life, he
blushed: When he came to the Relation of his Brother's Death, he turned pale;
and all the Wit he had was little enough to conceal the Astonishment he was
under upon reading a Passage he was so much concerned in. His Companion
observing him change Color, thought him not well, and entreated him to go to
his Quarters, and let alone those Books, which he might better see another
time. But S. Aubin was so busy a reading, that he minded not his Companion,
but read on with incredible eagerness. His Companion observing him so intent on
the Book, snatched it out of his Hand, and told him it was Dinnertime. Being
much pressed by his Friend, he concealed his Surprise, and went along with him,
having first bought the Heroine Musqueteer, and some other Books, which he took
not out of any mind he had to read them, but to prevent being suspected for the
concern he appeared in for the Heroine Musqueteer, had he bought it alone. When
they came to their Lodging there was very good company; but S. Aubin impatient
to read out his Story, withdrew into a Corner of the Hall, to go on with the
Book while the Meat was served in, and was hardly persuaded to give over till
after Dinner. His Companion taking notice of his earnestness and haste to read
over this Book, took occasion to railly him for his Curiosity. An Abbot who was
in company, mingled in discourse with them. Having spent much time at Paris
(where he wore a starched Band, which he took more care to change than his
sorry discourse) he had the arrogance to take upon him to decide and censure
all matters whatever; and told S. Aubin he was to blame for being so much taken
with the reading of that Book, being but the Relation of a rambling Wench, whom
the Author had transformed into a Heroine. A young Marquess who lodged in the
House, interrupting the Abbot, said he was much surpised at his discourse; a
Musqueteer his Kinsman, having assured him he knew the Maid, and had been an
Eyewitness of her brave actions: The rest of the company took part with the
Marquess, and the Abbot who loved not to be contradicted, maintained what he
had said with more obstinacy than reason. They came to high words on both
sides, and the Marquess had almost forgot all respect to the Abbot. S. Aubin
was the only Person had not declared himself, and though glad at the heart to
see the Abbot worsted, he thought himself obliged to endeavor to reconcile
them, since he had occasioned the quarrel. He entreated them all not to be so
much concerned for a thing they were not assured of; adding, he had heard speak
of that Maid, and that her Conduct was not to be blamed: As for him, he was not
surpised at the common injustice of Men, who will not admit a Woman capable of
performing actions of Valor, but make it their business to cry them down, upon
the account of weaknesses usually incident to Women, though it cannot be denied
there are great Souls in that, as in the other Sex. The good Mien of S. Aubin
gave new Eloquence to his discourse, which was applauded by all; and the Abbot,
who was seldom used to yield, confessed at last, that if the Story was not
altogether true, it was at least very probable. When the company broke up, S.
Aubin continued reading without interruption: And having read the Book over, he
reflected seriously on the condition he was in. He guessed by what had passed
at the Table, what disadvantage it was to him to have the Story of his Life in
Print, which exposed his Reputation to the different humors of the Readers:
And fancying that probably there were more of the Abbots opinion, he
apprehended it might be much to his prejudice; and what a trouble it would be
to the Marquess D' Osseyra if he should chance to know of that Book: This was
the reflection most afflicted S. Aubin.

As he was under this inquietude, the Marquess D' Angosse came into his
Chamber; and finding S. Aubin alone, said, Mademoiselle, it is in vain to
endeavor concealing your self longer; I have learnt who you are, and am come
to offer you all the service I can do you. Christina, surpised at the
Complement, was forced to confess all, praying him to keep her Counsel, and
assist her in deceiving those who had a suspicion of her. D' Angosse, glad to
be her Confident, promised all she desired; assuring her he should esteem
himself very happy to have the good Fortune to contribute any thing to her
satisfaction. Company coming in, they changed their discourse: D' Angosse
presently after withdrew, and taking delight in musing on what had happened, he
made several reflections upon so extraordinary an Adventure. Being a Gascoyn he
could not think any thing too difficult, and being a Person of Quality and
Merit, but of a slender Estate, he took a fancy he might perhaps Marry
Mademoiselle de Meyrac, whom he knew to be a considerable Fortune: He presently
apprehended the Marquess D' Osseyra's Passion to be a main Obstacle; but easily
flattering himself into hopes of attaining what he so earnestly longed for, D'
Angosse looked upon the Marquess D' Osseyra's Passion as matter of humor, and
a mere piece of fancy: And resolved to ply Christina close, he frequented her
company with great assiduity. S. Aubin looking upon 't as an effect of his
civility, was not backward in returning it, making him acquainted with her
greatest concerns, though (with a reservedness usual in such cases with those
of her Sex) she spoke very modestly of her Engagement with the Marquess: This
encouraged D' Angosse to take an occasion to tell her he was obliged, as her
Servant, to inform her, the pretended Passion of the Marquess was entertained
in the World as a very ridiculous thing, this being not the Age of those
imaginary Heroes who would attempt any thing for their Mistresses service; but
a Season wherein the longest-liv'd Passion lasts not three Months: Adding, he
saw no great likelihood of their Marriage, but could discover many invincible
difficulties lying in the way, which induced him to advise her to be undeceived
in time, and think of a better settlement; and not furnish matter for new
Stories. S. Aubin had wit enough to perceive D' Angosse's design, and thinking
this discourse a little too free, and having not the patience to endure advice
so contrary to her inclinations: answered, she had already thought of this
business, but that there are some occasions People are unwilling to hear reason
in, and contribute to their being deceived, though sure to be so, and to smart
for it. However that she had not the least cause to distrust her Lover, but was
extremely obliged to him, and sensible he would love her during life: This had
been enough to have dashed the hopes of any but a Gascoyn, whom nothing can
discourage. D' Angosse, notwithstanding all he had heard, resolved to pursue
his design.

D' Angosse being one day in company with some Ladies of the highest Quality,
reading the Heroine Musqueteer, and seeming concerned at her Adventures; he, to
oblige the Ladies, told them he was assured the Party was at Paris. The Ladies
(as curious as those of meaner Quality) prayed him to enquire her out, and
procure them a sight of her, which he undertook to do. The Morrow he told S.
Aubin all France read his Story, and that he knew Persons of very good Quality,
who expressed much concern for his Fortune, that it might be his advantage to
make use of the occasion to engage two great Ladies in his favor. I have no
broken business to manage, says S. Aubin, that I should need go a begging
protection; nor will I make my self the talk of the Kingdom by trusting two
Women's discretion with a Secret, which, if discovered, will expose me to the
raillery of all the Court: You have promised to keep my Counsel, and I believe
you will keep your word with me. D' Angosse, fearing her displeasure, assured
her again he would never speak of the matter, and that she might rely upon him
in that particular.

A while after the Ladies (the one being the Duchess of -- the other the
Marchioness of --) complained to D' Angosse he had broken his word with them,
and prayed him to make new search for that Maids Lodging, who they were assured
was at Paris: He engaged himself to do it, speaking with such an Air, as made
them believe his former failing was by wilful neglect, but that he would now
assuredly satisfy their Curiosity. He was troubled not a little, how to bring
it about: S. Aubin had already given him such an answer that he durst not
propose it the second time; on the other side, he was very unwilling these
Ladies should have cause by his failure to question his address, a quality
those of his Country much value themselves upon. He was loath to do any thing to
anger S. Aubin yet very desirous to oblige the Ladies: At last he resolved to
rid himself of their importunities, without exposing S. Aubin. He bethought
himself of the Marquess of Mesples, a young Gentleman of Gascoign, who was then
in the Academy in the Fauxbourgs of S. German, learning his Exercises. This
Marquess had a delicate Complexion, and a Countenance perfectly Feminine: D'
Angosse prayed him to go along with him to the Tuilleries, where he would order
it so he should be taken for the Heroine Musqueteer. Mesples having heard the
Story, promised to act the part. D' Angosse having given the Ladies notice,
they came to the Tuilleries, and seated themselves on a Bench: D' Angosse and
Mesples came (as by chance) and sat near them, on the same Bench, D' Angosse
insensibly fell into discourse with the Ladies, who eyed very narrowly the
pretended Heroine. They were so prepossest with the opinion of Mesples being a
Maid, that they whispered one another they could not be mistaken: As for me,
says the Duchess, I had no need of being told she is one of our Sex; the sight
of her would have convinced me: Examine but her Face, the discovery will be
easy. Being deeply engaged in discourse, the Ladies stood up, and went with
the two Gentlemen into a solitary Walk: The Marchioness not able longer to
forbear declaring what she thought she was so well assured of, said to Mesples,
Really, Sir, your disguise serves you to little purpose; for upon a slight
observation of your Countenance, any one may perceive you are nothing less than
what you appear. Mesples affecting to appear confoundedly out of Countenance at
the discourse of the Marchioness, seemed extremely disordered, which confirmed
the Ladies in their error. They had the good nature to take pity upon him, and
help him to recover himself, confessing they had intelligence from D' Angosse,
and had desired her acquaintance to offer her their services. Mesples very
courteously answered their civilities, but expressed resentment against D'
Angosse for being so easy, as to discover the Secret. They walked together a
while, and asked Mesples a hundred questions; and he had the wit to answer them
so, that he came off very well. The Marchioness, as sure as she was that
Mesples was of her Sex, had a longing desire to know whether her Breasts were
not hurt with her wearing so strait a Habit. She asked him the question, and
without giving time for answer, suddenly unbutton'd Mesples's Justacorps up to
his Stomach, which upon view appeared to be a Man's. D' Angosse, who never
expected the Ladies would be so free, was extremely surprised: And Mesples,
seeing himself discovered, fell a laughing so vehemently he could not speak a
Word. The Ladies retired, much offended with the trick put upon them.

The next Day D' Angosse went to the Duchess's, and begged her Pardon a thousand
times for what had passed; confessing ingeniously it had not been in his Power
to keep his Word with them, S. Aubin having flatly denied his Consent. This
Confession heightened the Curiosity of the Duchess, who at the length Pardoned
him on Condition he would get her a Sight of Christina: He prayed her to have
Patience two or three Days, and he would endeavor in that time to find an
opportunity to satisfy her. D' Angosse frequently visited S. Aubin, and though
he had not made a formal Declaration of his Love for Christina, she discovered
it plainly by his deportment: The Condition of her Affairs obliged her to
manage him as one who might be useful to her in discoursing her Kindred, and
would be easily persuaded to take a Journey into her Country, if her Business
required it; so that she went sometimes with him to the Comedies and Opera's:
About that time was presented the Opera of Cadmus, and took very much; D'
Angosse made use of the occasion to take Places for S. Aubin and himself, in a
Box, ever-night. Having received his Ticket, he sent the Duchess Word of it,
and advised her and the Marchioness to take Places in the Box right against
them, to have the better view of S. Aubin; which was done accordingly. D'
Angosse and S. Aubin having taken their Places, the two Ladies little minded
the Opera, being wholly taken up with viewing S. Aubin. Having taken exact
notice of him, they thought they were not deceived this time; yet the Duchess,
who could scarce believe a Maid capable to run through so many Adventures,
would be better satisfied. She sent for a Lacquey, who was a witty Fellow; and
having showed him S. Aubin, bid him put off his Livery, and having put on
another Coat, follow that Gentleman when he went out of the Playhouse; but be
sure to do it so closely that she might have a certain Account where he lodged.
The Lacquey performed, and gave his Mistress an Account. She and the
Marchioness resolved on a Frolic to try if S. Aubin were in Truth the Heroine
Musqueteer, as they were made believe: After several Expedients, proposed and
rejected, they pitched upon sending him a Billet that Evening, which was to
this effect.

WHoever you are, you are a dangerous Gentleman. I never saw you but once at
the Opera, and you force me to a Confession which the handsomest Gentleman of
France have, by long Service and great Assiduity, in vain endeavored to draw
from me: I love you, Sir, and am ashamed to let you know it, yet pleased with
the thought of it. How great soever you are, you must expect no more. I desire
a quarter of an Hours Discourse with you: my Quality debars me entertaining a
Stranger in Public: follow this Lacquey, he will bring you to a sight of me.
If afterward you think me worthy the esteem and addresses of a Man of Honor,
I dare not pass my Word, but Time and your good Mien may triumph over my
Weakness.


They read the Billet several times over: The Duchess thought it too free, and
would have burnt it; but the Marchioness told her it mattered not, being
written to a Maid, and by an unknown Hand. The Duchess, swayed with these
Reasons, called for the Lacquey; and having instructed him what to do, gave him
strict Charge of the Billet. The Lacquey being come to the House where S. Aubin
was quartered, went to his Apartment, and delivered him the Billet; which he
read, and was not a little surpised. Having read it, he was very much
perplexed, having a thousand Thoughts in his Head not knowing what Course to
take: He was fearful of engaging in an Affair might be difficult to get rid of:
On the other side, he knew that a Lady of Quality, if slighted, is a dangerous
Enemy: This, and his Natural Curiosity, made him desire the Ladies
acquaintance. He read the Billet over again, and seeing nothing desired but
what he thought might be granted, and judging others as reserved as himself, he
resolved to follow the Lacquey; and having wrapped up himself in a Cloak, bid the
Boy lead the way. Probably the Reader may think a Maid scarce capable of such a
Resolution; but he is to consider our Heroine was naturally courageous and
bold, yet as tender of her Honor (in the Essentials) as the most reserved. I
have heard her say, she thought her self safer in Man's Habit, than that of her
Sex; as exposing her more to Discourse commonly used to Women, if tolerably
handsome, which at length leaves an impression. About Eleven a Clock the
Footboy led him through a little Gate, of which he had the Key for the
purpose; S. Aubin staid in a Closet while the Lacquey gave notice of it to the
Duchess, who was then with the Marchioness. It surpised them to hear the
Gentleman was come, as appointed; they began to repent their hasty engagement,
fearing they should meet with a second Marquess de Mesples. The Duchess being a
Lady of eminent Virtue, and highly concerned to preserve her Reputation, was
upon sending him away without seeing him; and possibly had done it, but for
fear of her Letter, which S. Aubin, if a Man, (as for ought she knew he was)
might make very ill use of: The desire she had to have it again in her Hands,
and her natural Curiosity, made her Resolve to admit him entrance. The first
Civilities being over, S. Aubin being alone with the two Ladies, who eyed him
very narrowly, appeared so handsome, that they believed him of their Sex. The
Duchess, willing to get her Billet into her Hands, told him he might perhaps
have a very ill opinion of a Lady who appeared so forward; yet she thought she
could not do too much to make sure of so handsome a Gentleman: The Lady you see
with me is my Confident, and we two framed the Billet I sent you. I fear it may
appear too passionate, and being not so well acquainted with you as to leave in
your Hands a Paper of that freedom, I desire you to restore it me; hereafter
possibly I may know you so well, as to put my Reputation into your Hands. S.
Aubin presently took it out of his Pocket, and the Duchess receiving it threw
it in the Fire; and changing her tone, I must confess Sir, says she, my
Curiosity has exposed me to a great deal of folly. We have read a Book, called
The Heroine Musqueteer, and had a desire to be acquainted with so extraordinary
a Person. We were assured she was at Paris, and that you were intimate with
her: You will highly oblige us to bring us acquainted with her. S. Aubin was so
astonished at the Discourse, he had not a word to say: The Marchioness
perceiving it, made use of that Moment for the Trial she had unhappily made
upon Mesples, and found what she looked for: The Ladies embraced our Heroine,
and made her a thousand obliging Offers of their Services. Christina, ashamed
to see her self discovered, answered them with as much Civility as the Disorder
she was in would permit. The Duchess conjured her to tell her sincerely if all
that was written of her was sincerely true, and what was of the Author's
Invention. The Duchess was so well satisfied with out Heroine's Modesty and
Discourse, that she pressed her very much to take a Chamber in her House,
assuring her she should be used as a Person of Quality and Merit. Christina
refused, and gave so good Reasons for it, that the Duchess was satisfied, but
prayed her to visit her as often as possible: Christina promised it, and after
a long Discourse, and mutual promises of secrecy, retired. But for all their
assurance of keeping her Counsel, she doubted their performance; and could not
rely on their Discretion without scruple and diffidence, which gave her no
small disquiet.

About this time S. Aubin received news from Bearn, that upon a Report of his
Death some of his Kindred had possessed themselves of part of his Estate. The
Abbot Dizett, who had the management of his Affairs, advised him to make a
Journey to Bearn, to dissipate, by his Presence, the false Report of his Death,
and to take Order for other Mattrers. S. Aubin loath to go so far from the
Marquess D'Osseyra, and expecting, with impatience, the end of the Campaign in
order to Marriage, chose rather to hazard the loss of his Estate, than to
engage in Business that would Rob him of those precious Moments he thought
better bestowed in thinking of his Love. Upon a second Letter to the same
purpose, S. Aubin desired D' Angosse to undertake the Business; he readily took
the Charge of it, and set out for Bearn within two Days.

S. Aubin reflecting on his Engagement to visit the Duchess, thought himself
indispensably obliged to be as good as his Word. He went to her, and was kindly
received; there was commonly good Company there. S. Aubin was treated in so
obliging a manner, that every one took notice of it, and inquired who that
young Gentleman was, and very few knew him. A Principal Lord of the Court had
long been in Love with the Duchess, and visited her frequently, but found his
addresses fruitless, and had no further advantage by them, than an opportunity
to gain an interest in the Servants by his Liberality. He was not discouraged
by the severe Virtue of the Duchess from seeing her often, in hopes to prevail
with her at Long-run. The Count d' Ex (for so was the Gentleman called) was so
far in Love, that he easily became jealous, and could not with patience endure
to see how familiarly the Duchess conversed with this Stranger: He questioned
the Maids of his Party about it, but they could not give him a satisfactory
account; the Lacqueys were as much to seek as the Maids. He whom the Duchess
had employed to carry the Billet to S. Aubin being no more proof than others of
his Coat to the temptations of Gain, and finding no advantage from being his
Mistresses Confident, would not slip the opportunity of getting something from
the Count on this occasion. He told the Count of the Billet, and how he thought
the Duchess became first engaged with the Stranger, not forgetting the Passage
at the Opera. Here I cannot forbear blaming the injustice of most Men, to be so
easily persuaded of the ill Conduct of Women: How many are there who are very
Virtuous, yet have not escaped being condemned for debauched, upon the Report
of Maidservant dissatisfied, or a Footboy mis-inform'd? This Report passes to
other Women, and seldom fails of coming to the Ears of one or other, who will
be glad of the occasion to speak as ill of another, as she knows her self to be
deservedly spoken of; and will be sure to divulge it very carefully, in hopes
to confound the Criminal with the Innocent: The Story loses nothing by the
Carriage, every one adds something to set it off the better; and there needs no
more to destroy a Woman's Reputation: Of which, I could give you several
Instances.

The Count was much surpised at the discourse of the Lacquey: He believed it
without examination, and his Jealousy made him believe much more: It failed
not to represent to him, that a Stranger of Quality, perhaps as obscure as his
Name, was in favor with a Lady of her Merit and Rank, when she slighted him
who was inferior to few in the Kingdom, for Handsomness, Birth, or Employment.
This made him resolve to be revenged of his Mistress, by depriving her of her
Favorite. The Count, though otherwise very civil, was hasty of humor, and
fiery: His Jealousy required him to make his Rival a Victim, which the
goodness of his Nature would hardly consent to: It would have been no hard
matter to ruin his Rival, but his revenge would not have been complete, if
some part of it fell not on his Mistress. After much irresolution, he pitched
upon a satisfaction no less cruel, than gallant: He had a Domestic, very witty
and intelligent, to whom he discovered his design, and told him he intended to
trust him with the execution; that his first care must be to find out a Wench
who had been debauched through want of Money and Experience, and liked it so
well that she continued the Trade; that he could not fail of choice in so great
a Town, and therefore must pick out the handsomest he could find, but she must
be such as could do him a kindness he should have cause to remember while he
lived: And to that purpose, he was not to spare cost or pains; but withal, to
put her into excellent Habit, lodge her in the best Apartment of the House, and
instruct her how to counterfeit, in her deportment, a Lady of Quality. The
Servant found a Person excellently qualified for the service his Master desired
from her, and so witty, that she quickly learnt her Lesson. This was so well
performed, that the Count, who had resolved to have S. Aubin stolen away,
committed the care of it to the same Servant; and took him along with him to
the Duchess's to show him S. Aubin, to prevent a mistake. S. Aubin went
commonly in a Chair, and usually retired from the Duchess's at Ten or Eleven,
Clock at Night. The Count's Servant having made the Chair-men drunk, got others
to wait in their room: S. Aubin, at coming off from the Duchess, not finding
his Chair-men, made use of the next at hand. Three Men, well-arm'd, had order
to guard the Chair: One of them, by the way, whispers S. Aubin in the Ear, that
a Lady of Quality, being passionately in Love with him, had ordered them to
steal him to her, for they were able to force him. S. Aubin, though surpised
at the Complement, was so used to extraordinary Adventures, that he permitted
himself to be quietly carried where the pretended good Fortune waited him: As
soon as he was arrived, two Men seized him, and led him in the dark up a back
stair; and having crossed two Apartments, thrust him somewhat rudely into a
Chamber full of lights, and nobly furnished: One of them who brought him thither
took care to shut the Door fast enough. The Illustrious Personage, who was
there ready to receive him, would not give him time to know her, but took him
about the Neck with demonstrations of a passionate joy, as true as what is
affected can be; you would have thought the rich Habit she was in had made her
forget the meanness of her condition. S. Aubin, resolved what to do, was not
daunted at all, but answered her Passion with all the civility and respect
imaginable: But these were not the Entertainments she looked for, and after
long discourse, the fair Lady having in vain endeavored by an affected modesty
to raise the Gentleman's Spirits, was quite tired with his reserv'dness, and
attributing his want of boldness to the trouble he said he was in at sight of
her; I come not, says she, to give you trouble, but to receive Love from you:
At this, she hid her Face with her Fan, as if she had been ashamed she had let
fall expressions so free. S. Aubin who thought of nothing more than how to get
well out of the Briars, was in some hopes, observing her modesty, and assured
her he had a great inclination to Love her, that he was unworthy so much
favor, but would make it his business to merit it by his services: I will
dispense with you in that point, replies she, and since I must tell you all, I
desire we may spend this Night together: S. Aubin, who could not believe what
he had heard say of the impudence of some Women, and expected not so very plain
English, stood a while mute; and seeing no other course to take, fell at her
feet (whom he thought had been a person of Quality) and confessed ingenously he
was a Woman: The poor Wench who was made believe she should be largely
rewarded, was in a lamentable fear to lose what was promised her, if it were
once known she had not done the service expected from her: Which troubled her
the more, for that she had designed the Money for several necessity uses,
particularly for getting rid of that which made her so fit for the present
purpose of her Paymaster; she then fell at S. Aubin's feet, and told him word
by word all the Intrigue, advertising him the Master of the House, (whom she
knew not) was jealous of some Person of Quality. It was no hard Matter for S.
Aubin to guess it was the Duchess, and reflecting with horror on the Regale
provided for him, he made the Wench sensible it was their common interest to
keep mutual secrecy, which was accordingly promised, and having agreed what to
say; the Wench went to Bed, which she took care to tumble so as if two had lain
there: S. Aubin lay upon the stools. And on the Morrow, a little before day,
the Wench went according to order to give, a Boy who was in an Antichamber
hard by, notice of what past, assuring him he might when he pleased send away
the Gallant, who was so foundly peppered, she undertook he should never forget
that nights work. The Boy gave his Master this account, and he was very well
satisfied. He sent the Wench word she should blindfold her Lover, and persuade
him to be led so into the place Royal, it being too early to get a Chair: And
it might concern her how she got rid of him. S. Aubin well pleased to see an
end of an Adventure had so terribly frightn'd him, forgot not to give her who
had so faithfully served him, some marks of his acknowledgment: His virtue
prompt him to exhort her to live honestly, which he seconded with giving her
some means to do it, he followed his guides, and as soon as he was at liberty,
went to his Lodging to Bed.

When he had rested sufficiently, he went to the Duchess's as soon as he thought
her in a condition to be seen, and prayed her to send one for the Marchioness,
assuring her she had news to tell them would make them very merry: As Soon as
she was come they locked themselves up in a Room, where S. Aubin told them the
particulars of the Adventure he had met with the Night before: The Duchess, who
very well knew the kindness the Count had for her, and was sufficiently
acquainted with his jealous humor, presently suspected he had the principal
hand in it, which was confirmed by the circumstances, S. Aubin related. To put
it out of doubt, they agreed that S. Aubin should not for two days appear at
the Duchess's, and that when first the Count came thither, the Marchioness
should insensibly fall into discourse of S. Aubin, and the Duchess should
express much sorrow for his sickness; which would certainly produce a discovery
of the Counts thoughts of the business. S. Aubin vanished, the Count came, as he
was wont, to the Duchess, and saved the Marchioness the trouble of the
Discourse agreed on, by asking the Duchess why she looked so sad: The
Marchioness answered that S. Aubin, whom the Duchess had a value for, was sick,
and that she was troubled for want of his good company: The Count was so glad
at the news, that he could not forbear asking merrily, what he ailed; the
Marchioness, who knew the reason of the question, said she knew not, and
proceeded no further.

The Duchess, who lived very lovingly with her Husband, had told him the story
of Christina, and how she had got acquaintance with that Maid in Man's Clothes:
And being glad of an occasion to make him merry, she scrupled not to tell him
the Adventure of the Count, at which they laughed very heartily.

It was a fine time for going into the Country: The Duke having a House within
fifteen Leagues of Paris, was minded to spend some time there, and told his
Wife she would do him a pleasure to bring some good company thither. The
Marchioness being a very Jovial Lady promised to make one; they had a great
desire to have S. Aubin along with them, and the Duchess had invited him two or
three times, but could not prevail: When he came to take his leave of these
Ladies the day before their departure, the Marchioness told him, if he would
not go along with them, she would discover the secret of his Sex. S. Aubin was
loath to go far from Paris, for fear of exposing himself (as it is said) to new
Adventures, though it was for another reason; yet he was so moved with the
Marchioness threats, that he resolved to go along: The Duke very glad, and they
promised all to keep S. Aubin's Council. When they were got into the Country,
the Ladies thought of nothing but their pleasures; Hunting, Gaming, walking and
making good cheer took up their time: The Duchess having considered that the
Count continued his mistake, and still thought her Criminal, was troubled she
had not undeceived him; she spoke of it to her Husband, who thought she had
reason, it being ever to a Ladies disadvantage to give any cause of suspecting
her Conduct. They resolved the Duke should write him a Letter to invite him
into the Country: The Count, who thought very ill of that Journey the Duchess
had taken, though he did not know S. Aubin went with her, was glad the Duke had
given him the occasion of visiting them, and imagined the Duke had written
without acquainting his Duchess. He got thither within two days, and was
surpised to find so good company; there care was taken at his first arrival to
have S. Aubin out of the way. After Supper the Marchioness said, she had
lighted that day on the pleasantest story in the World: They prayed her to
acquaint the company with it; she excused her self, saying, she had a very ill
memory: With that, she stepped a little from the Table, and taking a Book out of
her Pocket, where she had writ what she had to say, she pretended to make use
of it to help her Memory, and said that a person of quality had been jealous of
a Maid in Man's Clothes, and so went on, giving an exact and particular account
of all that had happened to S. Aubin at the Counts, and how he had been
deceived when he thought himself revenged: The Duke and his Duchess the mean
while observed the Count, who knowing himself by the description to be the
Party intended, changed color and countenance at every word: The Marchioness
having made a stop at the feigned sickness of S. Aubin, the Duchess was earnest
to know if the Count had been disabus'd: The Marchioness takes her Book in
hand, and read that; the Lady principally concerned, went shortly after into
the Country, and having scrupled the leaving the Count in a mistake so
disadvantageus to her, had prayed her Husband to invite the Count to come and
visit them. But how did she justify her self, says the Duchess? My Book says no
more, replies the Marchioness. This Gentleman, the Count, being newly arrived
from Paris, may probably inform you. Never was Man more out of Countenance than
he: The Duke pitying the Disorder he was in, told him, S. Aubin was, The
Heroine Musqueteer; the Count begged the Duchess's Pardon, giving her many
sorry Reasons to justify himself, which she little valued: They sent for S.
Aubin, having first engaged the Count not to discover the Secret: They had good
laughing at the Adventure; but the Count was so confounded at it, that he durst
no more speak to the Duchess, and shortly after returned to Paris.

S. Aubin in the mean time was not so merry as formerly, the same Reason that
stopped his Journey to Bearn, would not permit him to be long absent from Paris
with Patience: He expected News from the Marquess D'Osseyra, but received not
any, though they had taken care to agree a way to maintain a Correspondence. As
he was walking one Day with the Duchess, he spied three Spanish Soldiers
returning homewards from Flanders, he spoke to them in Spanish, and asked them
a hundred Questi^^s about the Marquess d'Osseyra: One of the Soldiers hearing
him repeat so often the Marquess's Name, asked him boldly if he knew him, and
had any Concern with him. I have been his Prisoner, says S. Aubin, and he used
me so well, I shall acknowledge it while I live: The Duchess perceiving by S.
Aubin's Countenance how glad he was to discourse with the Strangers, was
willing to give him time enough to do it at his leisure, and ordered one of her
Servants to entertain them that Day, and take care of them: They were scarce
got into the House, but S. Aubin found them out, and addressing himself to the
Soldier, who seemed best acquainted with the Marquess, he asked a thousand
Particulars concerning him. The Soldier astonished to find a Gentleman so
acknowledging, and perceiving him the Marquess's very good Friend, confessed he
was his Domestic, and had by the way met with those two Soldiers going for
Spain: But as for him, he went no further than Paris, on business from his
Master: S. Aubin Ravished at the News and thinking himself concerned in the
Journey, asked if he had not Letters for Christina: The Spaniard astonished to
find him so well acquainted with the Marquess's Affairs, told him he had
several for her: Give me 'em then, says Christina, forgetting her self to be S.
Aubin. The Spaniard looked attentively on him, and with the cool Gravity usual
in those of his Nation, answered, he would rather part with his Life: I am
Christina's Brother, and a good Friend of your Master's, says S. Aubin. And you
may trust me with them; but the Spaniard was not to be persuaded out of 'em.
Christina seeing it, and being impatient to have a sight of Letters she so
dearly longed for, confessed she was Christina, and had that Day disguised her
self into Man's Habit for Hunting: Old Birds are not caught with Chaff, says
the Spaniard, I Will as soon part with my Life as my Letters, which he bound with
two or three Spanish Oaths, and quitting S. Aubin, went strait to his Comrades,
and set forwards immediately for Spain: S. Aubin was upon the point of
following them to set upon 'em by the way, and force the Letters from 'em; but
fearing the Consequence of an Action so rash in a Kingdom, where such Violence
is not allowed, he prayed the Duchess to give Order for Horses to carry him
presently to Paris, fearing if the Spaniard mist of him there, he would return
presently for Flanders. The Duchess not knowing the Reason of this haste,
endeavored very civilly to engage him to a longer stay. S. Aubin vexed at her
unseasonable Civility, acquainted her with what had past between him and the
Spaniard: The Duchess, in Compassion to a Lover's Impatience, sent Horses the
same day to wait S. Aubin's coming by the way, who on the Morrow went off in
her Coach, and in a short time arrived at Paris. He failed not to go to the
place where the Marquess would address his Letters, and thought it requisite to
put on Women's Habit, lest the incredulous Spaniard should scruple delivering
him the Packet: Soon after the Spaniard arrived, and having desired to speak
with Christina, he delivered the Letters, applauding himself much that he had
not trusted them with a Young Gentleman, who would have surpised him with
Untruths; but he had mistaken his Mark; for he could have rather parted with
his Life, than his Letters. Christina more intent about reading her Letters,
than hearing his Bravadoes, opened several which pleased her well: I would have
inserted them here for the Reader's Satisfaction; but there are a sort of
Letters very good for the Writer, and for the Party they are written to, but
flat and insipid to others who have not the Key to understand the Meaning, and
apprehend the Delicacy of them: I shall only give you one I thought easiest to
be understood.

ATtribute my Silence to the Excess of my Love: when my Letters are written I
look upon them as yours, which makes them so dear to me, that I cannot find in
my Heart to expose them to the danger of falling into the Hands of Strangers.
By all those I send you by the Express, you will find you wholly take up my
Thoughts. It is an Age since the beginning of this Campaign: why should the
imaginary progress of our Armies stop that of my Love. If possible, draw near
one of the conquered Towns, that I may have the Pleasure at last to think I am
not far from you, and that if we lay a Siege, as the Discourse is, I may
flatter my self with the hopes of haing you my Prisoner: But for Heavens sake,
be not in the Place, for I foresee the Cannon will be ill served, when I think
it may be discharged against you. And I would choose rather to lose my Office,
than do it on such an occasion.


Christina in Reading the several Letters had all the joy a Person in Love is
capable of after long expectation of News from her Lover.

This was her Answer.

I Am very well pleased with your Letters: they are all very passionate. But
you alarm me, in telling me you are going to form a Siege. I tremble for you,
that the success will not answer your hopes: Let me entreat you to think of
nothing but loving me, there you are sure of Conquest, the other is uncertain.
I will draw toward the Frontiers, because you desire it; I know I shall be
better at ease, and I take Pleasure beforehand to think I shall hear from you
oftener: Make an end of this Campaign as soon as you can, Love will make you
amends for the damage your Glory suffers by it.


Christina sent back the Marquess's Man with this Answer, and resumed her Man's
Habit, and the Name of S. Aubin.

D' Angosse in the mean time was returned from Bearn, and had, with the help of
the Abbot d' Izzette, happily ended what he had to do there on S. Aubin's
account, and much to his advantage; for which D' Angosse expected no small
acknowledgment. He could not imagine but Christina would at length be sensible
of his affection for her: And when S. Aubin would have made him a considerable
Present, proportionable to the Service he had done him, D' Angosse took it for
an affront, and told Christina he thought himself not unworthy of her
affection. S. Aubin was so well acquainted with the boldness natural to those
of his Country, that it surpised him not at all: But to undeceive him, once
for all, told D' Angosse, he had a very high esteem and value for him, and
would evidence it on all occasions; but entreated him for the future to order
his Thoughts better, than to give him occasion to forbear his company, and
forbid him further Visits; which he would infallibly do, if he continued to
discourse him at that bold rate. D' Angosse was too much a Gascon to be
discouraged at this, so that S. Aubin, to be rid of troublesome importunities,
was forced to change his Lodging.

There was about this time, a Report that the Confederate Army had invested
Charleroy, and begun already to form the Siege: Most of the young Gentlemen at
Court, and other Volunteers, left Paris upon the News, and went for the French
Army, not doubting but the Marshal Luxemburg, who Commanded it, would attack
the Enemy in their Lines. The Army increased extremely in two or three Days,
Volunteers coming in Post from all Parts, and not finding Horses on the great
Roads, some were forced to take by ways to furnish themselves, that they might
come in time. The Marquess de Fervaques, willing to be there with the first, to
signalize himself on this, and other occasions, had the misfortune to be taken
by the way, by a Party of the Enemies. The Officer who Commanded the Party,
having seized some Books among Monsieur Fervaques's Baggage, opened one, which
proved the Heroine Musqueteer: the Title made him eager to read it. This
Officer had been bred Page to the Marquess D'Osseyra, and not a little
surpised to find the Marquess's Name so often in the Book, he sent it the
Marquess, who was extremely astonished at it.

While every one wondered at the Confederates Resolution to lay Siege to
Charleroy, having formerly attempted it in vain. S. Aubin alarmed to hear the
expedition generally cried down as rash and unadvised, and all France confident
it would come to nothing, began to be afraid for the Marquess D'Osseyra. He had
not the patience to wait information, by the Public News, what was become of
the Marquess; but pushed on by a Love, to which no difficulty was insuperable,
rid Post to Charleroy, pretending the cause of his Journey to be only a Desire
of Honor, natural to the French Gentry: Every Horseman he met by the way he
fancied might be a Courier to carry News of the defeat of the Confederates. But
when he came to the Army, he found the Confederates had been so wise to save
him the fright his Love might have put him to for danger to the Marquess. They
had, upon the approach of the King's Army, raised the Siege, as the best of
their Game. The Confederates having made a very good Retreat, S. Aubin saw
there was no cause of further Fear on their Account, the Marquess D'Osseyra
being safe; but he could not find in his Heart to return for Paris, without
giving the Marquess notice: He was so pleased with being so near the Man he
loved best of any living, that he resolved to stay in Flanders: And having
engaged himself in the beginning of the Campain to spend some time at
Valenciennes, at Mariana's Fathers, he took that occasion to continue nearer
the Marquess: And considering it would be difficult hearing from him at
Valenciennes, where Count Magalotti the Governor was very strict to prevent
intelligence with the Enemy, he made sure beforehand of a Ligeois Lad, who
under pretense of carrying Victuals, went indifferently to both Armies; and was
admitted into the Spanish, as well as French Towns. The Ligeois having promised
to serve him faithfully, he went into Valenciennes, and sent the Boy into the
Spanish Army with this Letter.

YOur Enterprise of Charleroy put me in such a Fright, that I could not wait
the Success in quiet: How could I be at rest, when I was to expect every Hour
Designs against you? Wherever I went, judge what Condition I was in, who
could not wish the Glory of my Country, without giving an allarm to my Love;
nor pray for your Prosperity, without breach of my Allegiance: Make me amends
for the Trouble you have caused me, by letting me hear often from you at
Valenciennes, where I resolve to stay and see what will become of you.


When the Ligeois came to the Confederate Army to deliver the Letter, he found
all in disorder there, by misunderstanding between the Generals; one blaming
the other for the miscarriage of the Business of Charleroy. He was told the
Spaniards were withdrawn, and that the Marquess D'Osseyra, Commanded a Body a
part about Ghent: The Ligeois found him there, and having delivered the Letter,
the Marquess rewarded him so, that he had cause to wish he might have more such
Letters to carry, and soon after sent him back with this Answer.

I Am extremely obliged to you for the Fright you were in, though it be the
greatest harm our Army has done. We are so used to ill Success, we are not at
all moved at it: Yet I should be heartily sorry for it, but that I am persuaded
you make a difference between me and others; and believe, did I act a part, I
would alarm you oftener. But why should our Billets still speak of War, which
ought to be full of Sweetness and Tenderness? Do you know our Business is grown
Public, and that there is a Book Printed, Entitled, The Heroine Musqueteer?
Since we are made the Subject of Romances, let us make an end as soon as we can,
and enjoy the Fruits of our Love, without diverting the Public any longer at
our Cost.


This Letter was delivered S. Aubin at Valenciennes, where he was received by
Mariana's Parents with Demonstrations of very great joy, and Evidences of a
sincere kindness. They flattered themselves still with the hopes of having him
their Son-in-Law; and being confirmed in this opinion, by his return, they made
him very welcome, and gave him the best entertainment they could. Only Mariana
appeared troubled, at the Sight of S. Aubin; An Italian Captain in Magalotte's
Regiment, had, by his subtle insinuations, got that advantage over the
simplicity of the honest Hemyn, that she told him all that had passed between
her and S. Aubin; and the design of her Parents to make her his Wife,
notwithstanding his great indifference for her. The Italian pretending himself
very much concerned for her, used all his endeavors to undeceive her Thoughts
of that chimerical Marriage, assuring her, S. Aubin who apparently was a Person
of Quality, had no Thoughts of marrying her, having not as much as Writ her a
Line since he left her: I know, adds he, the French well enough, they engage
themselves with Women only for divertisement, Ambition and thirst of Glory are
their predominant Passion: But it is no small Prejudice to a fair Lady so lovely
as you are, to be exposed to the slights of a presumptuous Youngster, who,
perhaps, makes sport in his Country with the obliging Offers your Parents have
made him.

Mariana having been frequently discouraged thus, found it no hard matter to
forget S. Aubin: And the Captain finding her so well disposed, failed not to
offer her his Service, and to make her sensible of the great Desire he had to
merit her good Opinion. It Is no wonder a young Maid, who fancied all Men as shy
as S. Aubin, should be taken at last with the Assiduity of a smooth tongued,
and cunning Italian. Love, that you may be loved, is a maxim seldom fails, and
whether it were that the Captain was in love with Mariana, or pretend'd it
only, she was quickly comforted for the absence of S. Aubin by the care this
Italian took to entertain her with frequent Discourses of the passion he had
for her, and the indifference of S. Aubin: when he returned to Valenciennes she
had disposed of her affection, and all her Parents cares to the Frenchman were
but so many pieces of mortification to Mariana, who complained of them to the
Captain. But when she reflected on her obligations to him, and the Pleasure of
being beholding to so handsome a Gentleman, her sense of gratitude could not
but reproach her for loving another. She acquainted the Italian with her
reflections, who alarmed at the Discourse, made use of all the interest his
subtilties gained in the credulous Girl: And considering he might never have so
good an opportunity of making his Fortune, he was so fearful S. Aubin's
presence might revive Mariana's former inclinations, and so loath to lose what
he thought himself almost master of, that he made use of such means to make
sure of Mariana, it was not in her Parents Power to dispose of her to another.
He forgot neither promise nor oath, and pressed her so hard, that she thought
it but reasonable to grant him the highest favor his Love could expect: her
Mother reproached her for entertaining the Captain so constantly, and slighting
S. Aubin. But her Mothers Discourse and S. Aubin's cold Civilities were merely
thrown away upon her, who had received such effectual proof of the Captains
kindness: S. Aubin was so taken up with writing Letters to the Marquess
D'Osseyra, and so pleased with reading his answers, that it is no wonder he
concerned not himself much with other Peoples Business. Mariana having improved
her Wit by conversing with the Italian, advised him to get acquaintance with S.
Aubin, as an infallible means to be welcome to her Parents, by Reason of the
esteem and kindness they had for that Frenchman. Another Man would have
scrupled seeing a Rival so dangerous as S. Aubin, but an Italian has an
absolute command of his Passion: The Captain dissembling the hatred he had for
S. Aubin on Mariana's account, did him all the civilities imaginable, of which
the Italians never are Niggards; S. Aubin as courteously returned them. The
cunning Italian easily had the advantage of the Frenchman, that in a short time
they were intimate Friends: and the Captain, to discover S. Aubins designs upon
Mariana, frequently made her the subject of their Discourse. S. Aubin frankly
declared he had an esteem for her. The Captain willing to try her further, and
know whether he loved her, replied cunningly, that few are satisfied with a
bare esteem of a young Lady of Mariana's Qualities: I can go no further, says
S. Aubin, I have endeavored to disabuse her Parents; and should be very sorry
they should, for hopes which can never take effect, let slip the opportunities
of settling their Daughter. The Italian well satisfied with an answer so
agreeable to his desires, concluded from S. Aubin's Discourse, he was very well
born, and thought not of matching into an inferior family, which made him ever
after make his Court to S. Aubin with extraordinary deference.

Mariana's Father was every day more and more charmed with S. Aubin's Behavior
and Carriage, and heartily sorry to see him so little concerned for his
Daughter. The Italian frequented the House under pretense of seeing S. Aubin.
Mariana's Father taking him to be a discreet Man, and one that had an interest
in S. Aubin, whom he visited so often, took an occasion to tell him how much
his family was engaged to S. Aubin, and that he designed to have him his
Son-in-law, though he seemed not very fond of the alliance. The Captain glad of
this confidence, resolved to make good use of it, he presently fell to giving
him Counsel, and offered to speak of the Business to the Frenchman, which the
Father accepted of with a great deal of Pleasure. The Italian being now become
Mediator in the affair, consulted Mariana what answer he should return her
Father from S. Aubin, and amused the good Man with delays and put-offs to gain
time for a favorable occasion, for Mariana to declare to her Parents the
necessity she was under of being married to the Captain. Lovers once Fortunate,
flatter themselves with hopes they shall continue so still: But a Cruel
accident, which is so troblesome to Married Women, so terrible to Maids, and
sometimes fatal to Widows, was like to have broken all the Measures these
Lovers had taken. Mariana found her self troubled with qualms, and with fitts,
occasioned by the familiarities of the Italian, so that she thought it high
time to make her Parents acquainted with it: and believing her Mother more
tender and compassionate (in such cases especially) she confessed ingenuously
the condition she was in, and was so far from complaining of him who had caused
it, that she extold his merit in very passionate to terms; praying her to keep
the Business private, her Lover who had promised her marriage, having important
Reasons to conceal it for some time. The Mother thinking she spoke of S. Aubin,
was so far from blaming her Daughter, that she excused the matter, and promised
to speak of it to her Father, that order might be taken to have them privately
married. The honest Fleming was so glad of the news of a Marriage he so
passionatly wished for, that he presently sent for a Notary to draw the
Marriage-settlement, wherein he gave his Daughter very great advantages in
Favor of her pretended Husband that was to be: The two Lovers had signed, and
the Father had the Pen in hand for the same purpose, but missing S. Aubin's
name in the contract; he told the Notary, he had observed on the like
occasions, that the parties to be married first writ their Names, and others
aftewards to make good the contract as Parents or Relations, to render it
authentic as Witnesses: Having so said, he gave the Notary the Pen, which put
Mariana into a terrible fright, and all the Wit the Italian had taught her was
little enough to help her out: she told her Father S. Aubin was the Name of a
Place, but that the Name he found in the instrument was that of his Family.
This convinced the Father that he took the Pen again and signed the Deed. Being
one of the most considerable Burgesses of the Town, and willing to pay respect
to the Governor, he prayed the Captain who stood by, and past for S. Aubin's
good Friend, to accompany the Notary to Count Magalotts, and desire his leave
for the Marriage: The Governor having been possessed of the thing by the
Captain, and glad an Officer of merit had found an occasion to make his
Fortune, readily gave his consent, and agreed the Ceremony should be performed
that evening in his Chapel. Mariana had the Wit to order her Business so well,
that her Parents went not to the Chapel, but relied on an Aunt of hers she had
gained: This was done with such speed, that S. Aubin was married in the
imaginations of Mariana's Parents before ever he heard of it. The Mother gave
so strict a Charge to all her Family, to keep the matter private, that every
one thought himself sole confident of the intrigue: while the Ceremonies were a
doing, S. Aubin withdrew to his ordinary retirement. A Maid who opened him the
door, desirous to insinuate her self into his Favor, whom she looked upon as
her new Master, wished him joy: The Father seeing him enter, and thinking that
out of respect to him he was loath to appear to him, till he had repaired his
Daughters Honor, embraced him with great transports of Joy. Mariana's Mother
having spied her imaginary Son-in-law, would not give her Husband time to
speak, but took him about the neck, calling him her dear Son. S. Aubin, who
understood not the meaning of their troublesome caresses, thought them mad. As
he was going to answer their impertinent Discourse, a Friend of the Family, who
alone was made privy to the Business, prevented him by giving him Joy: never
was Man more perplexed than S. Aubin. He prayed them seriously to be undeceived
once for all, since for very substantial reasons it was not in his Power to
marry their Daughter. The Mother angry at so unexpected a Declaration, replied,
that since those Reasons had not been strong enough to keep him from
dishonouring her Daughter, they were too weak to dispense with his marrying
her; adding, if he did it not, she would punish their infamy by strangling them
both with her own Hands: The quarrel increased, and S. Aubin was in Danger of
being ill used, had not the Governor come in with the new-marryed couple. This
looks so like the last scene of a Comedy, that the Reader will scarce believe
it. But I pretend not authority over Men's Opinions, I allow every one Liberty
to think what he pleases. My Memoirs tell me Mariana fell at her Parents Feet,
and presented them her Husband, whom they were obliged to receive, the Marriage
having been celebrated with all the formality usual, and Mariana in a very
hopeful Condition to make them Grandsires in a short time. At last they were
all satisfied, the Italian that he had got a good Fortune, Mariana, that she
was Married to whom she loved; and S. Aubin, that he was delivered from her
Parents persecutions.

But the Mind of Man is never Content, and the Italian, (like others ingenious
in tormenting themselves) though he saw himself Master, by his Marriage, of a
considerable Fortune, and far beyond his Hopes; comparing the Plentifulness of
his present Fortune, with those former Wants all his Industry was scarce able
to preserve him from, he had a Crotchet in his Pate; there was something more
than ordinary in the matter, that a Gentleman of Bergamo, no otherwise
considerable than for a Company of Foot which he had gained by the ordinary
means, should marry a rich Heiress, unless there were some secret Reasons for
it. In a word, his good Fortune had so refined his Fancy, that he passed the
same Judgment of his Wife most Men do, whose Wives suffer them beforehand to
know what they should have been ignorant of till after the Wedding, and
imagined Mariana had been as kind to some other as to him. Of all he could
think of, S. Aubin appeared the most likely to be the Man: Having considered it
well, he applauded himself secretly for his Penetration, and was confirmed in
his Opinion that he had but S. Aubin's Leavings, and was beholden for his
Settlement to Mariana's being with Child; who, not daring to let her Parents
know it, resolved to be married to him, when S. Aubin had refused her: He
doubted not but they had long held Correspondence, and continued it; and loath
to be any longer their Cully, resolved to observe their Motions. S. Aubin who
had formerly avoided being alone with Mariana, that she might not have occasion
to think he loved her, was often in her Company after she was Married; the
Reason for absenting himself being now over, and her Conversation more witty
than formerly; so that having reasonable good Company at Home, he thought he
might well save himself the Trouble of taking it abroad. S. Aubin's Assiduity
with Mariana, gave the Captain new umbrage: He durst not yet complain of it to
Mariana, or forbid her his company: his Jealousy the while represented the
most innocent Actions as criminal. He was the more troubled to see most of the
French Gentry in Flanders going for Paris, when S. Aubin, who probably had no
great Business at Valenciennes, said not a Word of returning for France, for
which he could not imagine any cause, but Correspondence with his Wife: He
watched them so narrowly, that he quickly perceived S. Aubin often employed the
Ligeois into the Country, and at his return quitted all Business to speak with
him. The Captain's suspicions made him fearful of every Shadow: He was very
desirous to know what Business the Ligeois was sent about, and gave order to an
Italian Footboy, a very trusty Fellow, to hide himself in S. Aubin's Chamber,
and hearken diligently what the Ligeois said. The Footboy did as he was
Commanded, and reported to his Master that the Ligeois said not a Word, but
gave S. Aubin a Letter which he read, very attentively, and sighed often in
reading it. The Captain, well acquainted with Love-tricks, was so possessed with
Jealousy, that he presently fancied the Letters were his Wife's, who perhaps
had some Confident the Town who conveyed them to the Ligeois. This suspicion,
how ill-grounded soever, gave our Italian no small disturbance. He resolved to
find out the bottom of the Business; and, with the help of the Footboy, found
the means one Day to draw the Ligeois into a Chamber of the House, somewhat
remote from S. Aubin's, or any other Lodgingroom: Having locked him up there,
he threatened to run him presently through, if he would not tell him truly
whence the Letters came he carried S. Aubin so often: The Ligeois not knowing
what Relation S. Aubin had to the Marquess, but judging by the good usage of
the one, and liberality of the other, that the Business was Moment, was very
loath to answer him; understanding how dangerous a matter it is to hold
Correspondence with an Enemy, especially in a Place of War. The Trouble the
Ligeois appeared in heightened the Italian's Curiosity, that he repeated his
threats, and put himself in a posture to execute them. The Ligeois affrighted
at it, prorms'd to tell him all, if he would but save his Life: The Italian
promised it, and the Wretch made him acquainted with the Correspondence between
S. Aubin and the Marquess D'Osseyra. The Captain surpised at the News, made no
doubt but they held intelligence against the State, and was glad at Heart for
so favorable an occasion to be revenged of S. Aubin, under a pretense of Zeal
for the King's Service. The smallest things are of consequence in matters of
this nature, so that notwithstanding his promise to the contrary, he made no
scruple of securing the Ligeois, the Maxims of Italy having taught him he was
not obliged to be a Slave to his Word: He advertised the Governor; who, having
questioned the Ligeois, sent an Officer, with fifty Soldiers, to arrest S.
Aubin, who had received notice the Ligeois was a Prisoner; and though he knew
not the Reason, yet he apprehended he might have let fall something in
discourse about the Letters he brought him: and that they might not be seen, he
burnt them; but it went so much against the grain, and he did it so slowly,
that he was busy about this cruel Sacrifice, when the Officer sent to take him
entered his Chamber, and after a sorry Complement or two led him into Prison.
The Officer failed not to give the Governor an account what he found in S.
Aubin's Chamber, and what a sight of Letters there was in the Fire. This last
Cicumstance made every one think him Criminal, and that he had burnt the
Letters to prevent their being made use of as Evidence against him. This
Business made a great noise, and, as it is usual on such occasions for every one
to add something to the Report, this raised the News that passed then current,
of a great Plot discovered at Valenciennes. The Ligeois was examined very
strictly, and so frightened with the Tortures they threatened to put him to, that
he confessed all he knew, and a great deal more: His frequent Journeys to the
Spanish Army, the Money received from a General of the Enemies, and the burning
of the Letters were evidences so clear, in the opinion of the Public, that no
doubt was made both the Wretches would shortly suffer. S. Aubin's good Mien,
and Curiosity, gained him Compassion from all that saw him: Every one pitied,
but none durst excuse him, for fear of being brought in as accessory to so
ticklish a Crime. He was the while under extreme perplexity in Prison, every
thing seemed to fall out cross: His stay at Valenciennes was looked upon as
mysterious, especially after he had declared he had no design to Marry Mariana.
It was hard to justify himself without confessing his Sex, which he could
scarce find in his Heart to do. Being examined, he defended himself with saying
he had written to the Marquess D' Osseyra as his particular Friend; but that
his Letters had nothing in them that related to the King, or the State. The
Judges were not satisfied with his answer, and perhaps would have condemned
him, had not the Governor interposed his Authority, at the request of some
Ladies, to have the judgment suspended till he might receive orders from the
Court.

As they seized what was in S. Aubin's Chamber, an Officer belonging to
Governor had the Curiosity to read some Books found there. Among the rest, he
read the Heroine Musqueteer, where he saw the Names of the Marquess D'Osseyra
and S. Aubin so often repeated, that he fancied S. Aubin the Prisoner might be
the same with S. Aubin Christina. He told the Governor, and showed him the
Book. The Governor read it with Pleasure, and having, amongst S. Aubin's
things, found a very tender Letter of the Marquess D'Osseyra's, perhaps the
only one had escaped the Fire, he was fully persuaded S. Aubin was the Heroine
Musqueteer, but was willing to be further assured of it. He sent for the
Prisoner, showed him the Letter, and told him he doubted not but that which
appeared only a Letter of kindness, was a Cipher to cover some matter of State.
S. Aubin showed him so many Reasons to the contrary, that the Governor
believed him incapable of holding intelligence; but demanded of him a Letter to
the Marquess D' Osseyra, to forbid further Correspondence. This Proposal put S.
Aubin to the groan; and not able to give a good Reason for refusing to write
so, he appeared so disordered, that he thought it might be justly taken for a
clear conviction of his Crime, yet this Trouble justified him more than all his
Eloquence: For the Governor imputing it to his love, discovered him to be
Christiana, and no longer criminal. The Business was hushed up, and S. Aubin
set at liberty. The whole Town was glad of it, and especially Mariana's
Parents, who still had kindness for him, and had been afraid to lose him, the
Italian had taken such care to inform them daily of some new Circumstance of
his Crime.

While S. Aubin was in Prison, the Captain, who made account to have his
revenge of S. Aubin in the punishment the State would inflict on him, could not
forbear telling his Wife something of it, and at the same time reproaching her
with her falseness. A Reproach a Woman truly virtuous is most sensible of: And
the Husband who uses such language to his Wife, does but raise in her a desire
to be revenged of an unjust suspicion by real disloyalty, when she sees him
make so slight account of the reservation she values her self upon: Mariana,
who no otherwise knew of any disloyalty but by her Husbands Discourse, and
could reproach her self for nothing but having been too credulous, was so
touched to the quick with her Husbands ingratitude, that she resolved to punish
him for his Jealousy; it was long ere her resentment mastered her Virtue,
being unresolved whom to make choice of to assist her in her revenge: But when
S. Aubin was set at liberty, she fixed her choice on him; and looking on him as
an Instrument very fit for her turn, she used him more obligingly than usual:
Every Day she resolved to make him acquainted with her design, but when they
were together she had not the power to do it, flattering her self perhaps he
would guess at it. After vain expectation he would save her the confusion a
complement of that Nature would put her in, she acquainted him at length with
the injustice of her Husband, but had not the Power to say all she intended,
shame stopped her mouth; and S. Aubin contented himself with blaming the Italian,
without making any offer of his Service to flatter her hopes.

Mariana not discouraged at this, added, a Man of his Humor deserved to have a
Wife that would be revenged of him. S. Aubin replied coldly, it was an honest
Woman's part to think more of her Duty to her self than her Husband. This would
be sufficient to keep her from any act of disloyalty, and for his part he
little valued a Woman who was reserved on no other account but that of her
Husband. Mariana who expected S. Aubin would have offered to go halves in the
revenge she designed, was extremely surpised to hear him preach honesty to
her. And not able longer to endure the vexation it gave her, retired into her
Chamber, to weep it out there.

It Is natural to desire what appears difficult to obtain. S. Aubins resistance
heightened Marianas passion: to justify the discretion of her Lover she fancied
he answered her thus, only to please her, who he knew was no Lover of very free
discourse: I should have explained my self better, says she, how else should a
Man I have always used hardly perceive a sudden change so much to his
advantage. With that she resolved to speak more plainly; having observed her
time to make a new trial, she told him she had reflected on what he had said to
her of honest Women's Duty to themselves, but found those Reasons too weak to
resist the motions of a predominate passion. I cannot endure my Husband, and
the desire I have to be revenged of a Man who makes so ill acknowledgment of
what I have done for him, makes me forget all I would have regarded on another
occasion: And since I am extremely concerned to make to make choice of a
discreet Man, I have pitched upon you: she stopped there, thinking she had said
enough: S. Aubin, who at first understood not what revenge she intended,
thought she would have made away her Husband, and abhorring so violent a
design, blamed her extremely, telling her, a Wife must bear much with her
Husband, that the happiest marriages are attended with trouble; and that if all
Wives who are not satisfied with their Husbands should take such violent
Resolutions, no Man would dare Marry; adding, he would willingly adventure his
Life against any one had offended her, but that he Thought it not the part of a
wise Man to meddle between Husband and Wife. And leaving Mariana (in the
disorder you may imagine) he thought fit to acquaint her Parents with the
passages, and to take Measures with them to prevent further inconvenience; but
he had the Discretion to tell them no more than that they would do well to
prevent disorders might arise out of some small difference between the Italian
and his Wife, for he perceived they were both too much disposed to quarrel: S.
Aubin at their request took it upon him to speak to the Captain, and advised
them the mean time to calm Mariana; he found out the Italian, and having told
him he had something of Consequence to acquaint him with, he made him a long
Discourse of the extravagant Humors of most Women, and the unhappiness of
Husbands, who have not the Art of complying with their weaknesses, insuating,
it was a wife Man's part to prevent Noise, and over handsomely the extravagance
of an humoursome Woman; the Italian not knowing what the Discourse tended to;
took it worse from S. Aubin than he would from any Man, fancying he intended to
insult over him, by reproaching him with the easiness of his Wife. Being a Man
of Courage, he had not the patience to endure the Affront, but laid his hand on
his Sword, without giving S. Aubin time to finish the Discourse. S. Aubin stood
upon his guard, and defended himself, but they were parted without advantage on
either side.

Mariana's Parents tired themselves with preaching to her to live in Peace with
her Husband, when a Servant brings them News of a Duel between S. Aubin and the
Italian, which surpised them all, though on different Accounts: The
Father-in-law believed his Son had ill taken the good Offices S. Aubin would
have done him, and so occasioned the quarrel: Mariana applying all to her Love,
fancied S. Aubin had a generosity refined to that extremity, that he pretended
himself unconcerned for her, that he might be in a condition the better to
vindicate her. But the revenge she expected was of another Nature, such as she
intended to share in the Pleasure of it with him who took it. The Captain
arriving, complained to Mariana's Father of the injury he pretended done him by
S. Aubin, and told him he would no longer endure the insolence of that
Frenchman, who abused the respect they had for him. The Father heard his
Complaints with Attention, and was surpised at the News of an Intrigue between
his Daughter and S. Aubin, which might be likely enough: The Governor being
told of the Quarrel, sent for the Captain, who confidently told him the Reasons
he had to draw upon S. Aubin. The Governor not able to forbear laughing at a
Jealousy so ill grounded, brought the Captain to himself, by telling him S.
Aubin was a Woman.

S. Aubin perceiving the secret he was so careful to conceal, was grown
public, left Valenciennes, and went to Mons, being about five Leagues off,
giving out he was an English Gentleman, related to the House Crouy: The Duke of
Arschot who was Governor, received him very kindly: and as distrustful as he
was of Strangers in a Garrison of that Importance, he could not believe a young
Gentleman of so good a Mien capable of any ill Design. A Walloon Colonel, who
had served in England, was very civil to him; and the Morrow after his arrival
invited him to Supper. S. Aubin was no sooner come into the Colonels House,
but he saluted his Wife, she was a Lady too well qualified to be capable of
ingratitude, and having been with her Husband at Cambray when it was taken, she
presently knew S. Aubin to be the Marshall Luxembourgs Aid de Camp, who had
complemented the Ladies there from his General; she was extremely glad to see
him, and to have that occasion to express her acknowledgment of his civilities:
She fancied her Husband, to please her with the surprise, had brought him in as
an Englishman; and she, to be even with her Husband, asked S. Aubin (as if she
had not known him) what News from England. S. Aubin, not perceiving himself
discovered, answered very naturally, and like a Man of that Country, affecting
to speak broken French, and giving so exact an account of Affairs, that the
Collonel's Wife thought her self mistaken, in taking him to be S. Aubin: She
excused her self for it, and her Husband made her mistake the Subject of his
Raillery all Supper-time. S. Aubin having dexterously escaped discovery here,
resolved not to appear before the Duchess of Arschot, knowing she had great
Relations at Brussels, and would not fail to let her Friends know of it. He
gave the Marquess D' Osseyra notice of his being at Mons by this Letter.

THE Difficulties I found in receiving News of you, and giving you an Account
of my self, made me resolve to come hither. Your Campaign is at an end, and I
am in a Town you have no suspicion of: Consult your Love, and tell me what I
shall do to keep within the Rules of Decency. I will wait your Answer before I
appear at the Duchess of Arschots, that I may not expose my self to the Noise
may be thereby occasioned; And you shall find, under the Name of S. Aubin,

Your Christina.


S. Aubin having sent this Letter to Brussels, by a trusty Messenger, resolved
to wait an Answer in his Chamber, but was deceived: For the Collonel's Wife
having visited the Duchess of Arschot, for want of other Discourse, told her of
the English Gentleman, who had supped the Night before at her House, and how
she mistook him for a French Gentleman she had seen at Cambray: Having added a
great deal about his Wit and good Mien, she raised in the Duchess a desire to
see him. The Colonel undertook to bring him to her, found him in his Chamber,
and having magnified the good Service his Wife had done, in giving the Duchess
a Character of his good Qualities, he offered to bring him to the Duchess. S.
Aubin, vexed at his officiousness, excused himself with saying his Head ak'd.
The Colonel, who expected not a Refusal, and had engaged to bring him, pressed
him to go along, assuring him he should not stay a Moment. S. Aubin was
perplexed, being loath to see the Duchess before he had an Answer to his Letter,
and not well able to get rid of the Collonel's importunity, he prayed him to
allow him a little time of rest, and he would go with him in the Evening. The
Colonel went away well satisfied with the promise, and S. Aubin continued
unresolved what to do. Having thought well of the matter, and knowing the
Duchess a Generous Person, he chose rather to see her privately, and be known
to her; than to expose himself publicly to the surprise his disguise might
occasion. He left his Chamber before the Colonel returned, and being got to
the Duchesses, sent her Word there was a Stranger had Business of Consequence
with her, and desired private Audience: The Duchess went presently into another
Room, where S. Aubin was soon after admitted. As soon as S. Aubin appeared, the
Duchess at first Sight knew who it was; and without allowing her time to speak,
kindly embraced her, expressing much joy to see her. S. Aubin gave her a brief
Account of Affairs, and the design brought him thither; and thinking it better
to appear to the Marquess D'Osseyra in Maids Habit, prayed the Duchess
admittance once more into her Family; which the Duchess readily granted. All
things agreed on, the Gentleman made as if he withdrew; and presently after
returned by another Door the Duchess ordered to be opened on purpose. S. Aubin
had provided a Suit of Woman's Clothes at Paris, and having quickly shifted the
Habit and Name of S. Aubin, into that of Christina, the Duchess produced her as
a Gentlewoman of Lille, who was come to spend some time with her. It is the
Prerogative of Great Ones to be believed without examination of Particulars by
Inferiors; and Christina was taken by all, for what the Duchess declared her
to be. The Duke of Arschot was the first deceived: The Colonel in the mean
time returned to S. Aubin's Lodging, where he was told the Gentleman was gone.
Reflecting then on what had passed at Table, he made no doubt but the pretended
Englishman was the Frenchman his Wife had seen at Cambray. He was sorry he had
been so credulous, and resolved not to appear at the Governor's, for fear of
being asked News of the Stranger. The Duchess, willing to divert her self with
the Adventure, sent for the Colonel and told him, that being his Friend, she
took that occasion to let him know the Duke was much surpised to hear he held
Correspondence with the Enemy, and had entetain'd at his House, at Supper the
last Night, a French Spy, though his Wife knew him to be an Aid de Camp of the
Duke of Luxemburg's. The good Colonel, astonished at the Discourse, prayed the
Duchess to continue his Protectoress; assuring her, by all that is sacred, he
was innocent, and had taken that young Gentleman to be an Englishman. The
Duchess, pretending her self satisfied, promised to clear him.

The Duchess of Arschot, fearing to draw trouble on her self, writ to one of
her Friends at Brussels, desiring Advice how to govern her self, as to
Christina; and whether the Spaniards would not take it ill she entertained a
French-woman. The Duchess de Villa Hermosa saw the Letter, and she told her
Husband of it. The Marquess D' Osseyra was in the mean time gone to Mons, in
search of S. Aubin; but could have no Account what was become of him. The
Colonel informed of the Marquess's Arrival, waited on him to tender his
Service; but finding him troubled S. Aubin was gone, he thought they had
discovered some Plot, and made haste away for fear of being apprehended as
having had a Hand in it. The Marquess could not, with decency, be long at Mons
without visiting the Duke and Duchess of Arschot: He went to their House, and
was received with all the respect due to his Birth and Merit. The Duchess, who
guessed the cause of his coming, perceiving, by the distraction appearing in
his Countenance, the trouble he was in, told him they had that Day surpised a
French Spy, drawing a Map of the Town; and that she had much ado to prevail
with her Husband not to cause him to be hanged up immediately. The Marquess
full of fear for S. Aubin, asked her, with much trouble, what was become of the
Criminal You may question him if you please, says the Duchess, for he is yet in
my Chamber; and I am sure you will be for giving him his Life: Having passed in
another Apartment, There is the Criminal, says the Duchess, showing him
Christina. The Reader may well think they embraced one another e're she could
make an end of her Complement. Christina, charming as she was, appeared much
more so to the Marquess. They were both so well satisfied at the sight of each
other, after so many cross Accidents, that they continued some time looking one
upon another, not able to speak a Word to express their joy. They failed not
afterward to say all the kind things two Lovers are capable of on such an
occasion. The Marquess thanked the Duchess for the pleasant Cheat put upon him,
and confessed he was come with a Design to Marry his dear Mistress, and prayed
her the Ceremony of it might be performed at her House. The Duchess, not
expecting so sudden a Rosolution, could not handsomely refuse him; but desired
time to think on it, and to receive an Answer from Brussels; adding, he would do
well to send a Courrier to the Bishop for a License. Christina saying she
thought that very necessary, and desired it might be so; the Marquess sent away
a Gentleman express to the Bishop, and charged him to dispatch that Affair with
all expedition. The two Lovers, with a pleasing Impatience, expected the return
of the Courrier, and rejoiced the while to see their Constancy so near being
Crowned with mutual Enjoyment. The Marquess was persuaded Christina's Thoughts
were altogether Heroic, that she loved none beside him, and was above the
weaknesses commonly incident to those of her Sex. How odd soever it might
appear, that a Man of his Quality should Marry a Maid that had run through so
many different Adventures, his Love, and the knowledge he had of the Virtues of
his Mistress, prevailed with him above all other considerations. Christina, who
had not on any other occasion been sensible of Love, but yielded her self to
the sole Merit and perseverance of the Marquess, was extreme glad to see her
Troubles so near an end, and her self upon the point of being united to the
only Man of the World, who had the secret to please her, and she thought worthy
of her affections: But this Joy was short-lived, and the satisfaction they had
to be together some hours, seemed granted them only to heighten the grief that
was quickly to succeed upon their Absence from each other, with small hopes of
ever seeing one another again.

The Duchess of Benavidez, who, after the taking of Cambray, was returned into
Spain, and could not Pardon the Marquess D'Osseyra his insensibility, had
informed his Mother of the Passion he had for Christina, and had given her so
ill-favored a Description of that poor Maids Disguises and Adventures, that
the Mother was persuaded her Son was bewitched: And attributing his Passion to
something supernatural, she prayed Don John of Austria (who had a respect for
her, having long Known her at Arragon,) to obtain an Order from the King, to
the Governor of the Low Countries, to obstruct the Marriage of the Marquess
with Christina; and (if need were) to interpose the King's Authority to prevent
it. The Order was sent into Flanders, as strict as the Marcioness could wish
it, and the Duke de Villa Hermosa, very zealous for the Service of his Prince,
and desirous to demonstrate an exact Conformity to the Orders of the Court, and
repair, by performing what was in his Power, the misfortune he had to lose many
Places it was not in his power to defend better than he had done; being
advertised, by the Duchess of Arschot's Letter, of Christina's arrival at Mons,
presently sent thither the Captain of his Guatds, with the King's Order
addressed to the Duke of Arschot, declaring he must be answerable to the King
to have Christina forthcoming. And being told the Maquess D' Osseyra was gone
from Brussels, he presently thought him gone for Mons; which obliged him to
dispatch a Courrier thither, to tell the Marquess he must presently attend him.
The Courier arrived as soon as the King's Order; and the Marquess (from whom
the Duke concealed the Order he received) believed the French intended to
attacque Brussels; and went away in all haste, having taken leave of Christina,
and recommended her earnestly to the Duchess. When the Marquess came to
Brussels, he was extremely surpised when the Governor showed him the Order
from Spain, and prayed him not to stir out of Town; for if he did, he must
interpose his Authority to hinder him. The Marquess was upon the point of
returning for Mons in spite of the Governor's Orders, when a Letter was
brought him from the Duchess of Arschot, acquainting him she was much troubled
a Higher Power had put it out of hers to express her respects for him in the
Person of his Mistress, who was now in a Covent, where she should be used very
civily: but was not to be spoke with by any but the Abbess of the Place, the
Order from Spain being positive in that Particular. This was a deadly blow to a
Man in Love, as the Marquess; but it must be born with, and he must be content
to write into Spain to endeavor to obtain a Revocation of the Order. Several
Persons of the highest Quality writ in Favor of Christina, giving her the
Character of an extraordinary Person; and that her Virtue, and excellent
Qualities, deserved to be used with particular Respect. The good Offices
intended the Marquess, by Letters so much to the advantage of his Mistress, had
an effect quite contrary to his Friends expectation. The King of Spain having
been told of her, and scarce believing what was repoted of her, expressed a
great desire to see so rare a Person: And having asked if it were not possible
to have her brought into Spain, Don John of Austria promised she should. It
being Don John's Custom to make the King acquainted with the greatest Affairs
of Europe, by way of Divertisement; as in the beginning of his Ministry he made
him desirous to learn to write, by showing him a Letter from the Duke of Savoy,
all of the Handwriting of that young Prince; and assuring his Majesty he might,
if he pleased, do as much in three Months. The King thought well of it, and
learnt to write. Order was sent to the Governor of the Low Countries, to
Embarque Christina to be conveyed into Spain: the Duke de Villa Hermosa,
willing to save the Marquess D' Osseyra the Trouble the removing his Mistress
to such a distance might occasion him, kept this Order very private. When
Christina was told she must go a Shipboard, she was at Death's-door;
especially when she heard she was to go into Spain, and the Marquess to stay in
Flanders, with so little hopes of ever seeing her more. These Reflections made
her forget she had ever been S. Aubin, and yield her self wholly to the
Sentiments of Christina; her Love drawing Tears from her in abundance, which
the fear of Death was never able to force from her. She took Shipping at
Ostend, in a Vessel fitted, and armed on purpose to convey her for Spain. She
was recommended with so much care to the Officers of the Ship, that they
thought her a Princess of some Sovereign Family, which the Spaniards had stolen
away for Reasons of State. The Gentry of that Nation are great adorers of
Women, and those in the Ship used her with that respect, that helped her to
bear her misfortunes more patiently, a Woman, what condition soever she is in,
being still sensible of the deference expressed for her. An Officer in the Ship
(whether Lieutenant, or Ensign, I know not) possessed with an opinion of
Christina's Highness, and having perhaps read in Don Quixot, that the first
Duty of a Cavalier is to succor Ladies in distress, observing Christina one
Day all bloated with crying, watched an opportunity to speak to her in private,
and told her, if she was so averse against going to Spain, as her tears and her
sighs gave him cause to believe, she might signify her pleasure to him, who
would bring her where she desired, or set fire of the Ship. Christina, well
acquainted with the extravagance of the Spaniards, in what concerns Ladies,
doubted not but he spoke in good earnest; but looking on his Proposal as
impracticable, she thanked him, pretending she would not consent to it, for
fear of exposing a Gentleman of so much bravery to so certain danger. Who ever
knows the humor of the Spaniards, will easily believe such an answer, from a
fair Lady, was more than sufficient to oblige this Officer to undertake
impossibilities for her sake: He conjured her to employ him in her service,
assuring her he would endeavor to answer the good opinion she had of his
worth. Christina, unwilling to act any thing rashly, advised him to consider a
little of the matter; and because they could not, without suspicion, discourse
long together, she prayed him to put in writing the means he thought proper to
bring about his design by: The Officer promised it. As he was drawing up his
Memorial, two Vessels of Tripoly attacked the Spanish Ship: I will not trouble
the Reader with a tedious Relation of the Sea Fight, but acquaint him only that
Christina, choosing rather to go into Spain, where she might hope to see the
Marquess D' Osseyra once more, than to fall into the Turks Hands, did
extraordinary Actions in the Fight; and having observed a Soldier, who scarce
knew how to handle his Arms, took them out of his Hands, and made so good use
of them, that she contributed very much to the shameful Retreat the Turks were
forced to make.

When all was quiet again in the Ship, the Captain and Officers, who all their
Life had been under the Vulgar error, that a Woman is incapable of Actions of
Valor, were astonished at Christina's dexterity and courage. They Complemented
her for it, but having not in their Language Terms sufficiently expressive of
their admiration, they expressed it by looking on her without speaking a Word.
The Spaniards are great Bouncers, much given to Hyperboles, one called her the
Queen of Amazones, another said she was an Angel descended from Heaven for
their Aid. They were so well satisfied with the Miracles she had done (for so
they called them) that had she taken her advantage of the favorable
disposition they were then in, she might have easily persuaded them to land her
in France: But she had a very staid Wit, not apt to be led with Fancies, so
that she never thought of it. In the mean time the Officer, who had offered her
his Service, being confirmed in the Fancy he had of her high Birth, by the
Actions he had lately seen, took a new Resolution to set her at liberty; and
blindly, following his fancy, drew up an extravagant Project, suitable to the
Capacity of a Man bred very meanly. It was divided into Articles too ridiculous
to be inserted. The substance was,

That he would steal Christina, by killing the Sentinel at her Cabin Door; and
because this could not be done without noise, he pretended he had provided
against it, by a hole he had made in the Magazin of Powder, at which he would
discharge a small Gun, set fire of the Powder-Room, and blow up the Vessel, as
soon as they were got away, to a convenient distance, in the Longboat. The
only Reward he desired for this brave Action, was to be sent to London with the
Character of Ambassador from the Princess, to desire his Majesty of England's
Protection. He was so pleased with the Fancy of his Project, that one Day he
told Christina she would without fail be at liberty in few Days, all things
being near ready, and presented her the Paper; Read it, says he, and you will
find I have taken my Measures very right. Christina, who had already no great
opinion of his Wit, received his Memorial, imagining he might write with more
judgment than he spoke. The extravagances of the Spaniard would at another time
have made her excellent sport: But now she pitty'd his folly, telling him,
coldly, her mind was altered, and that she was very desirous to see the Court
of Spain. Any Man, but a Spaniard, would have been offended at the slight; but
what ever happens, a Spaniard finds Fuel in it to feed the Fire of his Vanity:
He replied, she could not do better than go see the Grandeur of the Spanish
Court, which, in his opinion, was the most Majestic of the Universe.

The Ship this while drew near the Coast of Spain, and Christina, not
forgetting she was still further and further from the Marquess D'Osseyra,
afflicted her self every Day so much the more. As soon as they landed, the
Master of the Vessel took Post to carry the Duke de Villa Hermosa's dispatches
to Court. When he arrived there, they asked him a hundred several Questions
about Christina. He spoke much in commendation of her Beauty, but when he came
to the Particulars of the Engagement with the Vessels of Tripoli, he extolled
to the Skies, the valor and courage of our Heroine. This appeared so strange,
in a Country where Women spend their time in an excessive softness, and are
generally fearful, that all who heard the News, spoke of Christina with great
admiration. He who first gave the King an account of her, and occasioned his
desire to see her, failed not to acquaint him with what the Captain said of
her: The King was willing to hear the Captain himself, and sent for him. The
King's presence, and the desire to please him, inspired Eloquence into the
Captain, who gave his Majesty an account of the Fight, and particularly of what
Christina had done; which he displayed with such advantage, it heightened the
King's desire to see her. A Coach of the King's was immediately sent away, to
bring her with more convenience, and expedition to Court; where, by the
diligence of the Person employed to attend her, Christina arrived in very few
Days.

THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE FEMALE WARRIER. The Fourth and Last Part.
CHristina being arrived at Madrid, was much troubled to find every one there
so earnestly desirous to see her: The Countess of Benavidez had given so
strange an account of her, and the Captain of the Vessel, in which she was
transported into Spain, was so careful in publishing her Action against the
Corsaires, (to which the People added so many fabulous Circumstances) that her
valor was generally attributed to a supernatural Principle. Some confidently
affirmed she was a Witch; but this ridiculous report vanished as soon as she
appeared at Court, where she answered exactly all the Questions Don John of
Austria asked her in the Kings presence. She had the good Fortune to see
whatever she spoke was pleasing and well taken; to which her Modesty, good
Mien, and speaking Spanish so well, did very much contribute: The Court was
well satisfied with her Discourse, and the Prince Don John of Austria assured
her she should be well used, and treated with respect: When she was retired,
the King, and the Prince his Brother, spoke much to her advantage: The
Courtiers, as well out of a natural inclination the Spaniards have to speak
always in favor of Ladies, as of custom, to approve whatever the King likes,
highly applauded his Majesty's sentiments. They made particular Observations
and Remarks on all that appeared charming in Christina, and discovered such
excellency of Wit in expressions dropped casually from her, that the King was
persuaded they had done her wrong who had censured her conduct; and of all
those Gentlemen who waited on his Majesty, there was not one but could have
wished himself the place of the Marquess d' Osseyra in her favor: Don John
gave order she should have Lodging and Diet at the Kings charge: These
distinguishing Favors, and the obliging character given her by those who knew
her, made several Ladies, of the highest Quality, very desirous to see her.
It Is not to be expected they should have, for one of their Sex, the
complaisance of Gentlemen, who, taken at first sight with the splendor of a
beautiful Lady, observe not her defects, or at least pass over and excuse them:
Women, on the contrary, overlook, or (at best) take very slight notice of any
thing that appears pleasing and agreeable in another, and apply themselves with
diligence to magnify and blazon all her imperfections, and whatever they
believe displeasing or unhandsome. As soon as the Ladies had seen Christina,
they blamed their weak judgments who had cried up her beauty, and endeavored
to make them sensible of several defects in it, though all the World is not yet
of these Ladies Opinion in the case: The Countess de Benavidez, perceiving the
presence of Christina would deface the ill impressions she had given of her,
endeavored to prepossess the Courtiers to her disadvantage: But being
frustrated on that side, and looking on the Ladies as better disposed to serve
her design, who are usually pleased to hear any thing to the prejudice of one
of their Sex, who has gained the reputation of eminent; she spoke of Christina
with that scorn and contempt, that several of the Ladies were unwilling to
appear in the same Room with her. Notwithstanding the diligence of the
Countess, and the discourse of the Ladies of her Cabal, the young Gentlemen of
the Court liked Christina very well: But the Count Talara, first Gentleman of
his Catholic Majesty's Bedchamber, no longer able to stifle the Flame kindled
in his affections, frequented her company, and omitted nothing to make her
sensible he was in love with her. Christina, perceiving it, did all that could
be expected from a virtuous Lady to disabuse him, and used all the Discourses
and Arguments a Woman, who would discourage a Lover, and had no desire to be
loved, could invent on that occasion: The Count de Talara, not discouraged by
her severities, continued to love and wait upon her wherever she was to be
seen, being not of the opinion of that experienced Lover, who said it was in a
Woman's power, to deterr any from loving her, by a cold entertainment, and at
two or three several times telling them drily she was not pleased with the
address. Christina having followed this maxim, and several others for curing
the Count, thought it in vain to discourage him any more, but resolved (without
giving her self the trouble of undeceiving him further) so to order her
actions, and shape the conduct of her Life, as not to give him cause of the
least hope of success: The Count attributing Christina's slights to some
particular aversion he apprehended she might have against him, fancied she was
otherwise inclined, and being a Person inferior to none, in handsomness,
quality, or wit, was troubled extremely with this imagination: To satisfy
himself in this particular, he made some Persons, who now and then visited
Christina, acquainted with his passion, and prayed them not to see her any
more. The Gentlemen of Spain have that deference and respect one for another,
that a request of this kind is not extraordinary there: Christina very
carefully avoided all occasions of being alone with the Count, and went
frequently to Court to entertain his Majesty with an account of passages in
Flanders. And having one Day expressed a great desire to see the Escurial, to
know whether that famous House answered the reputation it had in Europe; the
King was glad there was any thing in Spain could move the curiosity of a Person
who had seen so many varieties, and prayed two Ladies of the Court to bear her
company thither, to show her the magnificence of that Palace, and the rare
devises in several Apartments there, which Philip the second put so great a
value upon: Order was given the Ladies should be sumptuously treated there:
Count Talara, having heard of it, would fain have been one of the company, but
was indispensably obliged by the Duty of his Place to attend the Kings Person,
and as things then stood in the Court of Spain, there was no absenting himself
without manifest hazard of his Fortune. As he was thinking of a Person he might
confide in, to speak in his Favor to Christina on this occasion, news was
brought him that the high Steward of the Kings Household, who was his Kinsman
and Friend, was newly returned from the Army in Catalonia, where he had a
command; the Count gave him a visit, and having confessed he was desperately in
love with an excellent strange Lady, who was to be on the morrow at the
Escurial, with several other Ladies; he conjured him to make use of the
Privilege of his Place, in going to the entertainment, where it would be in
his power to do him good offices with hia Mistress, under pretense of taking
care of the Ladies. A Gentleman never refuses an employment of this nature, and
this Friend of the Counts, readily accepting the charge he gave him, promised
to acquit himself well of it. He failed not to go the next Day to the Escurial,
where, having given the necessary orders, he went into a Gallery the Ladies
were walking in; who, having notice of his arrival, advanced to receive him,
believing he had taken this Journey merely out of respect to them: He had
scarce begun to pass a Complement of civility upon them, but having cast his
Eyes on Christina, he stood still as a Statue: The Ladies were astonished,
especially Christina, who fixing her Eye earnestly on him, knew him to be Don
Philip de Palafox, of whom I spoke in my first Volume, as the Person who passed
the Pyrenees to steal her away. Christina cried out, frightened to see her self
so near a Person who had been deeply in love with her, and one whom she thought
she had highly offended. Don Philip had not heard of Christina since he went
into the Army in Catalonia, whence he returned but once to Court, to take his
Oath of High-Steward of the Household, the Place being void by the Death of the
Marquess Darizza his Father; so that 'twas no wonder he was surpised at so
unexpected a sight of a Person who had been so dear to him, and by her
insensibility had made him resolve to go into the Army: Those who have had any
experience in Love, will easily agree, the sight, after long absence, of a
Person we have tenderly loved and never prevailed with, cannot but cause
extraordinary emotions in the Heart of a Lover. All Men are apt to flatter
themselves in their passions, and Don Palafox, not able to imagine what strange
Fortune should bring Christina (a French-woman) into Spain, when the Two Crowns
were so deeply engaged in War, presently fancied she had repented her ill usage
of him, and probably was returned into Spain in search of him. And continuing
to interpret all things to his advantage, he thought the slights Count Talara
complained of, and the loud cry her late astonishment, at first sight of him,
had forced from her, effects of her passion for him. Being full of these
fancies, he said a thousand extravagances; and Christina was so surpised, she
answered not a Word: The Ladies who stood by, taking notice of the
astonishment, on either side, helped to bring them to themselves again; and
finding Christina much disordered by the presence of Don Philip, they prayed
him to withdraw, which he could not deny them; yet hoped the disorder he saw
Christina in boded him much good. He was no sooner gone, but Christina,
observing that the Ladies were in pain to know the cause of her trouble, yet so
discreet as to forbear asking her, acquainted them with what had past in her
Country, and whatever else had any relation to her concern with Don Philip:
This lessened their wonder at her astonishment, and was easily believed by
them, who were well acquainted with the headstrong humor of that Gentleman.

Don Philip the while considered the Accident he had newly met with, and being
naturally vain, flattered himself with an Opinion Christina was in Love with
him. It was a pretty while ere he came to a Resolution whether to return to the
Ladies, or retire to save Christina the Confusion he feared his Presence would
put her in before the Company: After much Debate it was carried for the
Retirement, in Confidence his Mistress would thank him for his Discretion, and
esteem him the better for it. Count Talara, impatient to hear the Success of his
Friend's Journey, had given Order he should have notice as soon as Palafox
arrived: And going to his House soon after his Arrival, he asked him, with much
Concern, what News of his Mistress: You have a Rival, answered Don Philip, who
has long been in Love with the fair French-woman, and he is a Gentleman I have
a great Interest in, and my very good Friend. Know you not, replied the Count,
thinking he meant the Marquess d'Osseyra, that the King has explained himself
in that particular, and declared, He will not consent to their Marriage: You
surprise me, says Don Philip, (not comprehending the Count's meaning,) I did
not think the Court so well informed of the Affair. A Kinsman of Don Philip's
coming in, interrupted their Discourse, and prevented farther Explication: The
Count took his Leave, and Don Pallafox remained very unquiet at the News he had
newly told: Going to the King on the morrow, he found Christina there, giving
His Majesty an Account of every thing worthy Observation at the Escurial: They
asked if she thought it a better House than Versailles; there is no proportion
between them, says Christina, Versailles being more considerable for the
Waters, and delicate Gardens about it, than the magnificence of the Buildings,
which are neat and convenient, but not stately; but the Escurial is a Palace of
very large Extent.

Don Philip pretending he knew not this strange Lady, asked those who stood by,
who she was, while she spoke to the King: They told him what they had heard of
the Marquess d'Osseyra's Passion, the Fights she had been in, in Flanders, and,
in a word, all those Stories the Public had added to the truth of her
Adventures. The King being gone to Counsel, Christina retired, and Don Philip
gave her his Hand to bring her to her Apartment, which she would not refuse
him, for fear of notice being taken of it in so public a place: As soon as he
came where he might speak to her in private, he assured her he had always loved
her; and that if he had been guilty of Disrespect in endeavoring to steal her,
she ought to pardon it, as an Effect of the Excess of his Passion, his
Intentions having been always very good. Christina willing to disabuse him,
told him, his Explications were to no purpose, since she had disposed of her
Heart to another, and waited only a favorable Opportunity to complain to the
King of the Injustice of her Enemies, and to entreat his Majesty's Protection,
if she should marry the Marquess d'Osseyra; otherwise, that she might have
liberty to spend her Life in a Convent. With that she burst out into Tears, at
the Thought of the Marquess; which Don Philip seeing, (that he might not
afflict her more by Discourse he perceived troublesome to her) went away, but
was so much concerned for her, that he made it his business to be better
instructed in the Particulars of her Affairs.

Having remembered himself that the Countess de Benavidez had resided long in
Flanders, he gave her a Visit, and falling insensibly into Discourse of
Christina: The Countess gave him a Description of her, much like that she had
formerly given the Marchioness d' Osseyra, and many others; insinuating, that
all her Disguises were the Effects of a Criminal Passion; which Don Philip was
so far persuaded of, that he repented he had ever loved her: Most Men are
disposed to believe what they hear reported of the ill Conduct of Women, and
the gross Error of most Strangers, especially Spaniards, in the hard Censure
they pass of the Liberty Women enjoy in France, did not a little contribute to
confirm Don Philip in the Sentiments the Countess had inspired him with. He
thanked her for her Information, and having that Evening met with Count Talara,
as the King was going to Bed, he told him he would cure him of the Passion he
had for Christina, assuring him he knew by a very good Hand, she was unworthy
the Affection of a Person of Honor: The King having that Instant called the
Count upon Business belonging to his Place, he had not the time to answer Don
Philip; and presently after, every body withdrew: The Count, by this Privilege
of first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, was to lie there that Night: The Passion
he had for Christina, made him muse all Night of Don Philip's Discourse; at
last, reproaching himself for having endured Language so much to the
Disadvantage of a Person he Loved, he thought himself obliged, as a Gentleman,
to demand Satisfaction, and got up with a Resolution to fight Don Philip,
though Duels are forbidden in Spain: But the Prince dispensing very much with
the severity of the Edicts, they are not observed there as exactly as in
France, so that Gentlemen fight Duels there on very slight occasions. Count
Talara having written a Billet to Don Philip, he delivered it to one of his
Servants, a Navarrois, in whom he placed great confidence, commanding him to
carry it to Don Philip: Challenges being out of fashion in France, I have
inserted the form of this, translated Word for Word, being as follows.

Whoever dares speak to the disadvantage of Christina, lies: She is of
unquestionable Virtue; and he cannot be a Man of Honor, who judges otherwise
of her: If you are of a contrary Opinion, let me find you at one a Clock after
Midnight, at the Toledo-Gate, where you shall receive the punishment due for
the wrong judgment you have past of her.


The Count recommended this Billet so often, and with so strict a charge to the
Boy, that it gave him the curiosity to know what it contained. He was much
surpised at the reading it, and having been born near Christina, and heard so
many extraordinary things of her, he had a kind of inclination for her, and
thought he might do her some Service in letting her see a Billet she was so
much concerned in; and slipped privately into her Lodging to show it her:
Christina having given him some Fruits of her acknowledgment, charged him to
carry it safe to Don Philip, and acquaint her with his answer, telling him,
(the better to engage him to it) it was of very great consequence to her.

Don Philip, having received the Billet, was extremely offended with the
outrageous Language the Count had made use of, and told the Boy it required no
answer, but he would give his Master an answer at the place appointed. The
Navarrois gave Christina an account, and then his Master: While the Count was
fitting himself to appear at the assignation, Christina was in Tears,
unresolved what to do. She considered, that as things were carried, this Duel
must needs produce very ill effects, since the Relations of both the Gentlemen,
would infallibly join with the Marchioness d' Osseyra, to ruin her, and
perhaps prevail with the Court to take some violent resolutions against her.
She was sensible likewise the Marquess d' Osseyra would be extremely
displeased, to hear she had been concerned in so public a manner, and in a
business of such noise in the Face of all Spain: A Woman, how small soever a
share she has in a Quarrel happened on her account, being sure to suffer by
it; the public (which judges of things by appearances, without examining the
truth) being always ready to blame her: Having made these reflections, she
resolved to prevent their fighting; she had scarce formed the design, but she
repented it, reproaching her self for being so little sensible of her
reputation, boldly and securely wronged by Don Philip. With that she gave her
self up wholly to what her Anger, her Courage, and desire of Revenge suggested
to her, and with the help of a French Merchant, got her a Suit of Man's Clothes,
a Sword, and a Perruke. About an hour before the time of the assignation, she
cunningly gave it out, the Count Talara was to fight a Duel; without mentioning
Don Philip: This was enough to alarm the Counts Friends, who arrested him in
his House. Christina in the mean time went to the place of Rendezvous, and
having spied Don Philip, though the Night began to grow very dark, she attacked
him so briskly, that she gave Don Philip a desperate Cut, which he had
certainly revenged, had he not been instantly hemmed in by five or six Men, who
seized both the Combatants. Count Talara's Boy, who loved his Master well, and
feared the success of the Duel, had given notice of it to a Gentleman who was
both their Friends, and having got together some other, ran with them to the
Gate of Toledo as they begun to fight: They had put out their Flambeaus for
fear of discovery, and 'twas so dark, they could not discern one Person from
another, but hastily seized on them; and having put them into several Coaches,
carried them to Don John's Apartment, that the Prince, who is extremely beloved
by the Nobility, might take up the matter. But the Wound Don Philip had
received, obliged them to take him to a Chirurgions, who (perhaps to heighten
the value of the Cure) presently said it was very dangerous, but that he would
warrant the Cure. One of those who had parted them was already got to Don John
to advertise him of the business; and as he began to give him an account of the
Particulars, he spied Count Talara standing very quiet in Don John's Chamber:
He was so disordered, to see there a Man he thought he had left in his Friends
Hands in another Place, that it was not in his Power to continue his discourse.
The Prince, observing the astonishment of the Man, told him he had sent for the
Count, that he might be informed of the Affair, and that he would take care
there should be no Swords drawn. Don Philip is mortally wounded, says the
Gentleman, and we thought it had been by Count Talara. They were all surpised
at this, especially when told, that he that wounded Don Philip was in a Coach
at the Prince's Gate. As they were under the impatience to know who it was,
Christina and her Company entered the Chamber. Every one wondered to see a
young Man of so good a Mien. Christina addressing her self to Don John,
informed him what had obliged her to disguise her self; and the course she had
taken for staying the Count, that she might revenge, in Person, the injurious
discourse of Don Philip: Her resolution was commended by all, and her Courage
admired. The Prince, to divert his Majesty with the sight of this disguise, led
her into his Majesty's Chamber; telling him, as he entered, he was come to beg
his Majesty's Pardon to be granted that Criminal, who had wounded one of the
bravest Men in his Kingdom. The King fixing his Eyes on Christina, presently
knew her, and thought the discourse of the Prince, his Brother, had no relation
to Christina: But when he was informed of what had happened, he blamed Don
Philip extremely, for drawing that misfortune on himself, and assured Christina
of his Protection. Don Philip being soon after almost cured of his wound, Don
John made him and the Count embrace one another, and obliged Don Philip to ask
Christina pardon. He was so ashamed to have been wounded by a Woman, that he
left the Court, and acccompany'd his Brother into Cicily, where he was to take
Possession of the Archbishopric of Palermo.

While matters went thus in Spain, the Marquess D'Osseyra was in Flanders,
where the Duchess of Arschot, who had a design to have him Married to a
beautiful young Lady her Relation, amused him continually, pretending to send
him every day some News of Christina, whom the Marquess thought still in the
Convent, so careful had they been to conceal from him her Voyage into Spain. He
fancied the long silence of his Mistress an effect of her Modesty, as knowing
her Letters were to pass through the hands of the Duchess; and he expected
every hour to receive License to return into Spain, where he designed to beg
his Majesty's permission to Marry whom he pleased. Christina was alarmed with
continual fears the Marquess had forgotten her, having heard nothing of him
since she left Flanders. The late Duel had occasioned a thousand new Tales of
her, in a Court where they are possessed with an opinion Women are good for
nothing but matters of Love, not a Person but was infinitely desirous to see
her; so that she could not stir a foot but she found her self compassed with a
Throng of People, which made her resolve to beg his Majesty's leave to go into
a Convent.

An Illustrious Princess, who owes her Birth to Italy, had her Education in
France, and by I know not what Freaks of Fortune is now in Spain, having heard
various Reports of Christina's Conduct, had the Curiosity to inquire strictly
into it; and to be satisfied of the truth of her Adventures, writ for that
purpose into France, and the Low Countries. Soon after she receceiv'd Letters
which confirmed the judgment she had formerly given in her favor, and assured
her, Christina's disguise was a pure effect of a Martial inclination she had a
little too eagerly pursued. This Princess, who by her own experience knew a
Woman may, without prejudice to her Virtue, love Traveling, Hunting, and
several other Exercises, commonly looked upon as proper only for Men, prayed
his Majesty he would be pleased she might take Christina into her House. The
King was content, and Christina accepted the offer with the greater
acknowledgment, as being upon the point of entering into a Convent, where she
expected vexation enough from the Reflections of the Nuns, who though little
acquainted with the World, might have waggery and malice sufficient to torment
her. It Is hard to express whether the Princess was more satisfied with the good
Humor and Complaisance of our Heroine, or she with the goodness and
obligingness of her Protectoress: They agreed so well in their tempers, they
quickly came to have an entire confidence in one another, and mutually imparted
their most important Secrets. Christina having one day declared she was
troubled there were Books published of her Adventures. You have no reason to be
troubled at that, says the Princess; it is my Fortune too, with this difference,
that those which concern you are true Relations of what has happened to you;
whereas I have not had a hand in any thing they have written of me, though the
Writers have had the malice to interlard their Relations with Circumstances so
probable, many take them for true. Christina observing the Princess concerned,
advised her to publish an account of her Life, to disown all others, and
discover their falsities; and gave so many reasons for it, that the Princess
(who is a Lady of great wit) applied her self to the writing it on the Morrow.
Her first design was to write it in French, as a Language spoken in most Courts
of Europe; but having considered there are few understand it in Spain, where
she was concerned to clear her self, she published her Memoirs in Spanish, and
some Copies of it have been transmitted into France.

The Princess lodged at Madrid, with a Lady of the highest Quality, and a
Relation of the Prince her Husband. This Lady was a Widow, and one who more
than any other, blamed the least liberties Women take; saying there was little
difference between a Woman really faulty, and one that is but suspected; the
Reputation of a Woman being so delicate, that a mere suspicion, however ill
grounded, may ruin it. The Princess had often, but in vain, endeavored to
convince her of her error, and persuade her that a Woman may be so virtuous as
to have nothing to reproach her self with; but it is not in a Woman's power to
stop the Mouths of her Enemies, from venting Stories, and Tales of her; which
is too common in the World. The Widows severity was proof to all reasons. The
Princess was discoursing one Evening to Christina, the foolish and obstinate
conceitedness of this Woman, and what difficulty there was in dealing with a
Person wedded to so inconvenient and unjust an opinion, and that she was
troubled she was obliged in decency to see her so often. Christina, who studied
to divert the Princess, promised her to Act a Part which should undeceive the
Widow by her own experience: She was fully informed of all that passed at the
Widows, and had observed she was very short-sighted: She was a Catalonian by
Birth, and would be thought to descend from the Ancient Counts of Barcelona.
Whenever a Person of Quality of that Province came to Court, she would be very
angry, and think him ill-bred, if she came not to do her homage. Christina
knowing all this, put on a Gentleman's Habit; and having taken order that if any
came to the Gate, answer should be made, the Widow was not to be seen that day:
She gave her a visit under the name of Don Artal de Cardona, newly arrived from
Catalonia. The Widow, who was somewhat superannuated, being much pleased a
Gentleman so handsome and well born should give her a visit, and speak so much
in praise of her Family, (for Christina had attacqu'd her weak side) she gave
Christina the kindest reception imaginable: Their discourse was long, and
before parting the Widow prayed Don Artal de Cardona to do her the Honor to
see her again often: Don Artal promised it, and withdrew, and gave the Princess
an account of the success of the first visit. She admired the Wit and Address
of Christina, and prayed her not to omit any thing to make the Widow in Love.
The Princess having visited her the same day, she could not forbear falling
presently into Discourse of the handsome Catalonian, and relate several
Particulars to his advantage, being liberal of her Praises, and extolling his
Wit and good Mien; adding, she knew him from a Child, and that then he promised
great matters.

Two Days after, the pretended Don Artal went to see the Lady again, and
knowing very well what Praises please a Woman best, especially one who is
precise, and stands much on her Honesty, he fell a commending her Virtue and
Conduct, and by little and little slipped insensibly into the Subject of her
Beauty. Discourses of this kind never displease a Woman, especially a Widow,
whose Condition, Age, and Pretenses to Virtue oblige her to live retired. She
heard all with Delight, and the Concern she began to feel in her self for this
Gentleman, engaging her to eye him closer, and more attentively than before, he
appeared so handsome, she thought she had never seen any Man so lovely. A Woman
in Years being more coming than others, at the third Visit she was desperately
in Love with him. Christina gave the Princess an exact Account of all, who not
comprehending Christina's Design to abuse the poor Widow thus, asked her one
day what she proposed to her self by it: I will convince her, says Christina,
how virtuous soever a Woman is, it may be accounted a piece of Merit in her to
resist the Attacks of a Man of good Mien, and some Indulgence is due to those
who are every day exposed to Temptation.

Christina sometimes waited on the Princess to the Widows, because they lodged
in her House, and took great Care to alter her Voice in discoursing with them.
Being with her, she had the Waggery to ask the Widow the Name of that handsome
Gentleman she saw now and then enter her Apartment. The Widow, tickled with the
Praises Christina gave a Man she had a Kindness for, told her a long Story of
his Birth, Estate, and many other Circumstances; adding, he was her Kinsman,
which was the reason she allowed of his frequent Visits. Christina applauding
all she said, found she had discovered the Secret to please her: And not
satisfied with playing upon her under the Name and Disguise of Don Artal, would
needs be her Confident; which she found no hard matter to attain, by continuing
her Commendations of Don Artal: As soon as she had shifted. Don Artal's Habit,
she would presently run into the Widow's Chamber, to tell her she had seen him
pass by, and that it was plain he was in Love. The Widow deceived by a
Discourse that flattered her Desires, and fearing Christina might think Don
Artal was in Love with another, and not with her, revealed to her at last what
she thought to have concealed from all the World, and imparted the Secret of
her Love for Don Artal; desiring Christina's advice; who answered, that in
matters of that nature she had best consult her own heart, and consider the
bent of her Affections; but that if any Passion were excusable in a Woman, it
must certainly be that she entertained for a handsome Man: Christina could not
say this without blushing, and her Heart having reproached her for having been
so free in her Discourse, she took her leave.

The desire we have to prevail for something we aim at, engages us often in
more Discourse than is necessary; and it is sometimes very dangerous to be
eloquent. The Widow, reflecting on all Christina had said in praise of Don
Artal, (which yet fell far short of what she thought he deserved) concluded,
from Christina's Discourse, she did not dislike the Catalonian: And being
through her Age more inclined to Jealousy, she resolved to put a trick upon
Christina, by pretending all she said to her was only to discover what she
thought of Don Artal. The next visit she gave her, Christina began (as she had
used) to speak of Don Artal: The Widow interrupted her, telling her she might
do well to change the Discourse; adding, very seriously, she loved not the
company of Persons so coming: She spoke this with such an Air of modesty, it
might have deceived the most judicious. Poor Christina found her self
disordered by so unexpected an answer, and her own Virtue causing her to
approve of the Widows discourse, she went away much troubled and perplexed, not
having the confidence to answer a discourse that reflected on her modesty. When
she came to the Princess, she complained of her misfortune in very lamentable
expressions, as if the most innocent actions still turned to her disadvantage.
The Princess, who was very discerning, and very much mistrusted those Women who
are over careful of outward appearances, told her, she had run too hastily into
the Snare, and that possibly the Widow did but pay her in her own Coin.
Christina, who had been frighted at this Adventure, took courage at the
judicious Discourse of the Princess, and resolving to know the truth, put on
her Man's Habit. The Widow the while applauded her self for the gold success of
her Plot, in ridding her of so dangerous a Rival: She expected, with
impatience, her Cardona; resolving, for the future, to take her advantage of
the eagerness of his addresses: As soon as he came in, she gave him the usual
reception; caressing him in the highest manner imaginable, with design to
inspire boldness into him. And as closely as she adhered to her Virtue, her
Love made her that Day express a little forwardness, which Don Artal seemed not
to understand. The Widow, who had a great opinion of his Wit, wondered to see
him so dull; and was confounded at his changing his Discourse, and falling upon
the Subject of her high Birth, in terms which would have been pleasing enough
to the Vanity of the Lady, had she not been that day under a strong influence
of the Planet of Love, which for the time had the Ascendant of her Heart; and
Don Artal very well knew it, though he had the malice not to take notice of it.
She did all she could to make him reassume the former discourse, and he as
carefully avoided it, magnifying the brave Actions of one of her Ancestors, who
had signalized himself in driving away the Moors out of Granada. But she was
then indisposed for War, and expected a Language less Martial, and more tender.
Don Artal soon after took his leave, and the Widow remained very ill satisfied
with his bashfulness. The Princess, sensible of the distraction she was under,
thought it would be a Pleasure to her, to have the liberty of musing alone of
her imaginary Lover: and having learnt of Christina all the Particulars of the
last Scene, she observed how careful most Women, especially the precise, are to
salve up the appearances, not much regarding the essential part, if they may
but cheat the World, and be esteemed Persons of a severe Life, and strictly
Virtuous: while those who converse much with the World, making small account of
some little liberties they take without scruple, are not safe from obloquy and
censure, though really provided of a great stock of Virtue; while the others
enjoy their Amors privately, and triumph in public for the applause this
counterfeit reservedness procures them. In truth, said the Princess, those of
our Sex are very unhappy in being obliged, besides the satisfaction due to
their Conscience, to satisfy the World, which is always disposed to believe
the worst of us. It Is certain, replied Christina, we cannot always blame them,
there being Women of all Characters who by their ill Conduct draw upon
themselves very heard Censures, and too often very deservedly; though it must
be agreed the Example of one guilty Woman, gives occasion for condemning an
hundred innocent.

The Spaniards, though they hate the memory of the Moors and Sarazens expelled
Granada, Murcia, and Leon, by Ferdinand and Isabella, yet they retain to this
Day several of their Customs; particularly, their Gallantries, their
Bull-sports, and darting the Cane on Horseback, Divertisements the Court of
Spain is very much taken with, where Opera's are not known, and their Comedies
(for the most part) ill. It was then a time of great rejoicing at Madrid; not
for the taking of a Town, but to celebrate the Birth of their Monarch. The
Princess was invited to see the Sports, and took Christina along with her. I
shall not give you here a Description of these Sports which prove mortal to
many, who think their Valor consists in daring a Bull, letting fly at him with
their Darts, and then retiring with much skill and agility, though it
frequently happens the Bull is too quick for these Gallants, tosses them in the
Air, and gores them with his Horns; which sometimes dispatches them into
another World, and generally maims them in this. This piece of fool-hardiness
were excusable in ordinary People, who are drawn to it by Custom, and applause
of the Populace; but cannot be too much blamed in young Gentlemen of the best
Quality, who hazard their Life to so little purpose, in fighting with Beasts as
they do in Spain: where you may see them bravely mounted with a Dart in their
Hand, expecting, in the middle of a Piazza, the coming of a Bull madded by the
People; and though he come at them with a fierceness capable to astonish the
highest courage, they bravely attacque him, and pierce him so dexterously with
their Lance, that sometimes they run him quite through the Body: But you may
also see the Bull sometimes unhorse them, to the extreme peril of the Rider,
and terrrible fright of the Ladies. This Solemnity where this Princess and
Christina attended, was like others of the kind, where the fortunate rashness
of those who came off well was applauded, and the tragical miscarriage of
others lamented. The Morrow after these bloody Sports, the Cavaliers run
Courses on Horseback, and dart the Cane as they run; which is done in this
manner. They appear at the Barriere, with a Headpiece and light Armor, made
(one would think) of Steel polished white; and have commonly some Devise of
gallantry, or some Motto on otheir Shields, and a multitude of Ribbands of the
color best pleases theier Mistresses. Christina had seen several of these
Courses, and having in the Armies performed the most violent Exercises, she
thought this not very difficult, where all she had to do was to spur her Horse,
and let fly a Cane with dexterity. She told the Princess she would gladly run a
Career, and ask the Widow for a Devise, the better to assure her of her
Passion. The Princess thought her in jest; but our Heroine telling her see
doubted not but to come of well, the Princess undertook to provide her fit
Equipage; and Christina, under the name of Don Artal of Cardona, went to the
Widow for a Devise, letting her know she would run a Course for love of her,
since other young People did it for their Mistresses, only he desired her she
would give him a fitting Devise. The Reader may expect one of those witty ones
so usual in Spain, but a Woman of her humor orders her Life quite otherwise
than the rest of her Sex: One so precise being no less careful to conceal, than
an airy vain Coquet to make known she is Courted: The Widow refused to give Don
Artal a Devise, telling him, she was not of those Women's humor, who judge of
their Servants love by the Color of their Ribbands. I rely not, adds she, on
such slight appearances, too often deceitful, I must have better proof of your
Passion, to persuade me it is real: (The truth is, she expected such proof as
Christina could not give:) If you loved me, as you pretend you would rather
stay with me while they are darting the Canes, and would be more willing to
give me proof of your loVe in my Chamber, than in a public place: what is done
there generally serving only for matter of discourse to the Spectators. Don
Artal assured her he loved her passionately, and thought to have given her an
Evidence of his esteem of her, in carrying her Colors and Devise at the
Course, being ready to do any thing she could desire to convince her of his
love. Were your love as real and sincere as you would make me believe, would
you put me upon the necessity of appearing so forward, and not guess at part of
what is expected from you? Don Artal returning no answer, to a Discourse so
easy to understand, the Widow was so ashamed she had spoken so freely, and,
with all, unsuccessfully, that she turned about presently and locked her self
in her Closet, for fear her Tears should betray her. Being there alone, she
gave vent to a torrent of Tears despair forced her to; considering with her
self, that having lived several Years retired Mm Company, and free from those
Passions young Widows are usually troubled with, (for at six and forty Years of
Age she counted her self of their number) she had the misfortune to be taken
with the addresses of a hare-brain'd young Fellow, who perhaps designed only to
fool her: The next moment she consulted her Glass, which telling her she had
Charms enough left still to procure love, she attributed Don Artal's
reservedness, to the tenderness of his Years and want of experience: She was so
pleased with this fancy, and thought it so reasonable, that she could no longer
doubt but the timerousness of her Lover, was a pure effect of his small
acquaintance with the World, being newly arrived from Barcellona, where he had
not used to see Persons of her Quality and Birth; besides, she knew young
Country Gentlemen have such Chymerical Idea's of Ladies of Quality;, that they
think it enough to honor and admire them without daring to push on their
Passion any further. While the Widow was thus deep in meditation, Christina,
sufficiently ashamed at what she had heard, went back to the Princess, whom she
found busy about her Equipage for the Course, not doubting in the least but
the Widow had given the Devise: But when Christina informed the Princess of her
answer, (though her modesty made her leave out several particulars) the
Princess could not forbear laughing, especially when told by Christina she
durst go no more to the Widows, for fear of being put out of Countenance, and
quite shamed by her forwardness.

On the Morrow the Princess and Christina were in a Balcony, near the King, to
see the Courses. As soon as the Gentlemen appeared, all Eyes were fixed to
observe their Devices: Count Talara, as he passed under the Ladies Balcony, put
off his Headpiece, making them a very low Reverence: His Motto was, Quiero
mucho, y espero poco; that is, My Love is great, and my Hope small. That
concerns you, says the Princess to Christina: It put her to the Blush, and the
King observing it, had the Curiosity to enquire the Reason: The Princess, very
glad of an occasion to divert him, gave him her Sense of Count Talara's Motto;
and added, that Christina could, if she pleased, perform Career as well as the
best of those where to run. The King saying he did not think it, the Princess
conjured Christina to make use of the Equipage (she had provided) for one
Course at least. The young Monarch expressed so earnest a Desire to see how
well Christina would come off, there was no denying him, and the Princess,
their Request. That less notice might be taken, she pretended her self not
well, and withdrew. Her next Care was for a Motto somewhat answerable to Count
Talara's; which, being very witty, she was not long to seek. She caused these
words to be written on her Shield, No ay que amar, y me nos que esperar de
quien tienne duenno: It Is in vain to love, much more to expect Good from him
who is already engaged. Christina, having set all things in as good Order as
the shortness of the time would permit; appeared boldly at the Barrier, and
called for Canes, but was troubled with an Accident she had not foreseen: The
Order was, That the Cavaliers who presented themselves for the Course, should
tell their Names, and make themselves known to the Officers appointed to
Register them, to prevent Disorder usual on such occasions. Our Heroine, loath
to Undergo that Law, was denied the Canes: The King, who had his Eye upon her,
perceiving her in Disorder on that account, ordered his Brother Don John to let
them know it was his Majesty's Pleasure that Gentleman should be dispensed with
from telling his Name, or showing his Face. The King's Pleasure was no sooner
known, but Canes were delivered her: And her refusing to submit to the Rules of
the Course, and the King's Dispensation, gave cause to believe 'twas an
extraordinary Person not willing to be known. This drew all Eyes upon her,
every one guessing who it should be. Great notice was taken of the Motto: Count
Talara, observing the Opposition between it and his, desired with Impatience to
run a Course against this unknown Person, who managed his Horse very well: But
it was not probable Christina should be as skilful at handling and darting the
Cane, as the Spaniards, who are used to that Exercise from their Youth: And
it is certain our Heroine had run a great Risque of being unhors'd, had not Don
John, foreseeing what might follow, given Count Talara a private hint the
Stranger (he was to encounter with), was Christina. You may easily guess the
Effect this Intimation had on the Amorous Count, who was confirmed in the Truth
of it by the Motto he had observed on her Shield: He could not at first find in
his Heart to run against Christina; but having thought better of it, he put
himself in a Posture. The Count, who had already run several Courses, with
Advantage, against the most expert in the Sport, meeting the Stranger,
pretended himself disordered and unready when he should have darted his Cane:
Christina, without losing a moments time, threw hers; which the Count appeared
so stunned with, that he fell off his Horse: Christina was so confounded at the
loud Acclamations of the People, (who judge of things by Appearance, without
examining the truth) she knew not whether she had got the better or the worse,
till she was presented with a Rose of Diamonds, the Prize appointed the
Conqueror. Our Heroine, pleased with her Success, retired, loath to hazard in
another Course the Reputation she had gained by this.

Count Talara, having had a sore fall, was carried home to be blooded, which
was much to the advantage of Christina's Reputation. The Count being known to
be very expert at that Sport, the whole Court sent to see how he did. And the
Princess made Christina sensible of the Obligation put upon her by the Count,
who had fallen off his Horse of purpose, like a true Spanish Gallant, and
advised her to send one to inquire of his Health: Christina, with some
difficulty, consented to it. The Count, ravished with joy at the Complement,
answered him who was sent, that his fall did not much trouble him, but he had a
Wound would not be quickly cured. It vexed Christina she had given the occasion
for such an answer, fearing the Count would pretend to some advantages for the
Obligation he had put upon her. The Princess bid her set her Heart at rest, and
oblige the Widow with the Rose of Diamonds she had gained at the Course.
Christina, though fearful to engage further with so forward a Woman, complied
however with the desires of the Princess: She shifted her self into her Habit
of Don Artal, and presently went to the Widows Apartment, where she found her
very much disordered.

She was so precise she would not appear at the Sports, but knowing Don Artal
would be there, and being much concerned what became of him, she had sent a
trusty Person of purpose to observe how things went, and bring her exact
information: He brought her the Names of all those who were Registered for the
Course, but not his, for whose sake alone she had the curiosity to read all the
rest: She was much concerned at the missing him, a Woman ever passionately
wishing the Glory of her Lover. Her Spy told her there was a Gentleman appeared
Incognito, and had refused to tell his Name; and that the King, to prevent
disorder, had dispensed with the formality; and that this unknown Person had
unhors'd the famous Count Talara, and retired with a Rose of Diamonds of very
great value. The Widow wished with all her Heart, this Unknown might be no
other but Don Artal; but then thought she, how should a Youth, and such a
Novice in Love, be too hard for a Gentleman of so much skill and experience:
with that Don Artal enters the Chamber; she presently asked him what news of
the Course, and why he had not been there. I was unwilling to appear, answers
he, without your Devise; and since you refused it me, I had no Mind to show my
self where you would not be. I knew you had not appeared there, said the Widow,
though the good opinion I had of you made me hope you might be that illustrious
Unknown, who so eminently signalized himself, and carried the Prize; at least
my heart gave me none better deserved it than you: but I see our Hearts often
deceive us. You are not deceived in that, Madam, says Don Artal; and see here
(adds he, presenting her with the Rose of Diamonds) the Mark you may know that
unknown Person by, who has had the good Fortune to deserve your esteem. The
Widow, surpised at a Present so glorious and unexpected, received it very
gladly, and embraced the occasion, so luckily given her, to present her Servant
with a String of Diamonds of very great value, praying him to keep it as a
Pledge of her Love. Don Artal, for fear of angring her, durst not refuse it;
but finding she began to fall again into very passionate expressions, he
pretended business of have, and withdrew; having promised to return on the
Morrow, at an hour she appointed. Christina having shown the Diamonds to the
Princess, who understood Jewels very well, was amazed to hear they were worth
fifteen thousand Crowns. This excessive Liberality fully convincing them of the
violence of her Passion, Christina had compassion on her, and told the Princess
she would disabuse her: The Princess having sufficiently diverted her self with
the Intrigue, and thinking the Widow had punishment enough, said nothing
against it. On the Morrow, at the hour the Widow had appointed, Christina sent
her back her Diamonds, with this Letter.

IT IS time to disabuse you, Madam; the Don Artal you love, is a Man in
appearance, but really one of your Sex: I am in good earnest, and unwilling to
take the advantage of your Liberality, being incapable to satisfy your Love.
You need not fear me; I am well acquainted with the Nature of our Sex, and know
it a hard matter to resist temptations; but I pity those who have not the Power
to do it: be you less Consorious for the futur, and never fear my discretion.


The Widow, who expected Don Artal, had not forgot any thing that might the
better set off the weak Charms of a Woman of her age: She thought the Present
he had made her, the Day before, a good Omen, and that she had reason to expect
something better at the Assignation. She tasted beforehand a thousand
imaginary Pleasures, and began to think long while her Lover arrived; when, lo,
a Letter is brought her. The String of Diamonds presently alarmed her: and
having read the two first Lines, she scarce held up from swounding; her
surprise was so great, she fancied her self not well awake. Having finished
reading her Letter, and reflecting on the Beauty, and other Circumstances of
her pretended Lover, she believed all true that was written. She was not a
little taken with her Generosity, in sending back her Diamonds; and out of a
greatness of Soul, incidient to Persons well born, which ordinary People are
not acquainted with, or the love she still retained for the Memory of Don
Artal, she had the Generosity to send back the Diamonds to Christina, with a
Letter.

THough you have deserved Reproach for having deceived me, I cannot hate that
in a Maid which I loved in the counterfeit Don Artal. Rest satisfied with the
advantage you have had over me, and receive again the Present I made you: Yours
to me shall be ever dear, and in high esteem with me. I desire, if you think
fit, your acquaintance; and am not in the least indisposed to be your Friend.
And I must declare my weakness is such, I cannot mistrust a Person I have once
loved.


Christina having received this Letter, carried it to the Princess, telling her
she was much troubled with this String of Diamonds, and very scrupulous of
keeping a Present so considerable. The Princess having read the Letter, advised
her to keep the Present, and think no more of the matter; and would not permit
her to be further acquainted with the Widow, (as Christina designed) knowing
she would owe Christina a spite, for the discovery she had made of her.

News was then received in Spain of the taking of St. Gislain, by the French;
which very much alarmed the Court of Spain, who thought the rigor of the
season (it being December) would hate hindered, or delayed at least, the
Conquest of the Place. The Spaniards vented their rage upon the poor French
living in Spain, without sparing those who had been thirty years Naturalized.
They seized their Goods, banished their Persons, and exercised upon them all
sorts of violence: Which is no new thing in that Country; for as often as the
French take a Town, burn a Ship, or obtain a Victory, the Spaniards seize all
the Goods of the French who Trade in their Towns. Judge you then how many
Pressures they are exposed to under the Reign of Lewis the Great: This commonly
ends in a great Tax laid upon them, after payment of which they let them alone
for some time; but upon the next loss they have, the Persecution begins afresh,
which happens so often, that many have been forced to withdraw and quit the
Country. A Merchant of Bearn of Christina's acquaintance, and one she was
obliged to, found himself under this Storm raised against the French upon the
taking of St. Gislain. Christina protected him openly, having spoken in his
favor to Don John of Austria, and represented to him the injustice done those
poor People, who settle there, relying upon their Letters of Naturalization,
and with great labor and industry supply the Natural laziness of the
Spaniards, furnishing them with a thousand Conveniences they would never know
but for the French. The Prince, at her entreaty, caused restitution to be made
this Merchant of all that had been taken from him, and promisd to use the rest
favorably. This got our Heroine very great applause; but the hatred those of
Spain naturally bear all Strangers, made them attribute the favor she had
obtained to something supernatural: Which occasioned the reviving the
ridiculous Report formerly gone about, of her being a Witch, and that with the
help of her Art she could effect what she pleased. After so many extraordinary
matters published of her, it is no wonder the dull and sottish People gave
credit to this Report, while the Court laughd'd at it, and the Princess made
sport of it with Christina. But her Enemies would not lose the advantage of so
favorable a Disposition of the people. The Marchioness d' Osseyra and the
Countess of Benavidez durst not open their Mouths against her, since the
Princess had taken her into her protection; but the favor Don John had granted
her, awaked the hatred of the one, and the jealousy of the other, lest the
Court should at last consent to her being Married to the Marquess d' Osseyra.
This made them resolve to use all their endeavors to foment the opinion of her
being a Witch. Having learnt that Christina was that unknown Person, who had
unhors'd Count Talara, almost without touching him; they took care to spread
abroad this Circumstance, and others, to confirm the people in their error.
Their Artifice was so great, and their Emissares so diligent, that several
people of good sense, deceived by a number of probable Circumstances, gave
credit to this extravagant Report. That was not all; for, cloaking their malice
with a false zeal for Religion, they exhibited an information against Christina
in the Inquisition.

The Inquisition is so formidable a Court, that the name of an Inquisitor makes
them in Spain tremble, the severe punishments inflicted by that Tribunal on
Jews, Moors, and Heretics there, having gained it a high Reputation. The wiser
sort speak of it with, respect, the loose hate the name on it, and the people
generally have it in veneration. As soon as any Man is informed against in that
Court, not a Courtier has the boldness to say a word his favor, for fear of
being brought in as an accessory, as they commonly are who are of a different
Religion. The Kings Authority is of no force at all there; and there is not one
President can be shown, where the Catholic Kings have intermedled with any
Affair the Inquisition had taken Cognizance of.

The people are so afraid of them, that when I was in Spain I was assured, that
the Court being met one Afternoon, some of the Inquisitors stood at a Window
which looked into a rich Burghers Garden, where was a Pear Tree full of
excellent Fruit. One of them had a mind to some of those Pears, and sent his
Man to desire some of them; but the Gardener having refused to give him any,
the Inquisitor dispatched a Familiar (that is an Usher of the Inquisition) to
tell the owner of the Garden the Inquisitor would speak with him: The poor Man
was so frighted, he was scarce able to go to him; but recovered himself again,
being told they desired only a Plate of his Pears: The Burgher promised to send
it, and was glad he came off so. As soon as he got home he sent the Inquisitors
all the Pears on the Tree; and to prevent being so frighted again, cut down the
Pear tree.

To return to Christina, the Inquisitors having received the Information,
caused her to be arrested; and, (which was worse) left her in Prison a
Fortnight before she was examined: 'Twas in favor to her Sex she was
interrogated then, it being ordinary with them to keep a Man a Prisoner six, or
twelve Months before he be examined. However the Princess, though advised to
the contrary, labored privately for her, but to no purpose, it being not in
her power to discover the particulars of her Charge. Our Heroine, who had no
reason to fear the Inquisition, upon the account of Religion, being Orthodox as
her Judges, was troubled at the noise she knew this business would make; not
doubting but it would come to the Marquess d'Osseyra's Ears, and that this, and
her former misfortunes, would create in him an aversion against her, the
disasters she had met with, though innocent, being enough to draw upon her the
slight of a Person of Quality: Her business the while looked very ill. The
Widow I have spoken of, having heard the news, and considering her having
carried away the Prize, at the Course, from Count Talara, made no doubt but she
was a Witch; and reflecting on what had passed between them two, when she took
her for Don Artal, she was in horror at the danger she had exposed her self to,
by Conversing with a Person, who, by the assistance of the Devil, could appear
in what Form she pleased; and was ready to make her complaint to the Princess,
for bringing such a one into her House; and would have done it, but for shame
of discovering her weakness: Yet, being scrupulous of concealing so aggravating
a Circumstance against the Criminal, she went to the chief Inquisitor, and told
him, that to discharge her Conscience, she came to inform him what had happened
to her with that Woman in Prison, who had several times appeared to her in the
shape of a young Gentleman of Catalonia, called Don Artal de Cardona; but she
took care not to tell him the other particulars of the Intrigue, choosing rather
to lose her Diamonds, than to make it known she had presented Christina with
them, as a mark of her Love. The chief Inquisitor, out of respect to the Widows
quality, dispensed with her in several formalities, taking only her Hand to the
Depositions, which was one of the strongest Evidences in the Case. It is
incredible what a noise this business made in Spain, where they could hardly
believe a Maid could, without the-help of Magic, do Actions so extraordinary,
and so much above her Sex. It was the general discourse, and they expected
every day a solemn Judgment and Sentence, suitable to the Learning and
Integrity of those worthy, and able Persons, who sit on that Bench. The people
had already set the day of her Execution, and, I believe, hired Windows to
stand in to see it, Some among them, to color the better their losses in the
Low Countries, said there was no reason to wonder at them, since this Woman had
bewitched all their Generals. The Princess was amazed at the ridiculous stories
she heard every day of the unfortunate Christina: The more she justified her,
the more they condemned her; and the least good Office done for her, was very
ill taken by the People, The very Court was troubled with it, the greater part
not knowing what to think on it, the rest suspending their judgments till the
Inquisitors should pass sentence: The first Examination was wholly spent in
formalities. The Inquisitors were surpised at her confidence, and to see so
little appearance of fear in her looks. This made the Reverend Judges believe
she trusted much to her Art, or was innocent. Two days after she was Examined
again; the first question was, what Charms she had made use of to take the
shape of Don Artal de Cardona? She answered, none other, but what people of Wit
make use of to amuse Fools: She told them at large, that the great severity, or
hypocrisy, of the Widow, made her desire to put a trick upon her, by visiting
her under the name of Don Artal: The knowledge she had that Lady could not see
very well having encouraged her resolution for that divertisement, in order to
the rendering her less Censorious for the future. Then she was asked, how she
could, with such a slight Cane, un horse Count Talara? She answered, He had
notice beforehand, she was to run a Course, and that his fall was rather an
effect of the Spanish Gallantry, than any Charms of hers. She was then
questioned what made her disguise her self so often, and in Habits so
different? She answered, that, having from a Child had a strong inclination for
Arms, the death of her Parents had given her the opportunity of following that
noble Employment? In a word, her answers were so modest, and pertinent, that
the Inquisitors, being choice Men, and well seen in business, were persuaded of
her innocence. And, which is most to be admired, the Archbishop of Saragosa,
who was one of the Inquisitors, and the most prejudiced against her, knew her
to be the same he had formerly seen in the Convent of Ursulines at Saragosa;
and had occasioned the reprimands he gave the Nuns, upon his mistaking her to
be a Man: He told the other Inquisitors the story, and from a severe Judge,
became her Protector, and Friend.

As terrible as the Inquisition is in Spain, it cannot fright Love. Count
Talara, extremely concerned for the Imprisonment of our Heroine, being told by
the Princess, the strongest proof Christina's Enemies made use of to destroy
her, was the advantage she had of him in the Course, was so troubled to hear so
ill-use made of his Gallantry, that he put himself voluntarily into the
Inquisition, and desired his Process should be made, declaring himself
accessory to the Crimes of Christina. The Inquisitors were astonished to see how
easily he rendered himself Prisoner, and the People failed not to say, the
Witch had by her Art forced him to it. The Count was examined, and his answer
was found to agree with Christina's. The Inquisitors would have set him at
liberty, which he refused to accept till our Heroine had hers: Which was
granted her on the Morrow, to the wonderful astonishment of all Fools: Count
Talara was so troubled he had, though innocently, occasioned her persecution,
he never durst see her more.

Christina had the fate of most people in trouble, every one strove to make her
believe how much they were concerned for her, (now the danger was over.) The
whole Court Complemented her upon her delivery, and the King had the goodness
to tell her, he was glad to hear she had cleared her self with such credit. The
Widow (fearing Christina, to be revenged, would publish the Passion she had
expressed for the pretended Don Artal) Courted her friendship, and assured her
she had never spoken against her, but to clear her Conscience, Christina had
the goodness to pardon her, and they lived thenceforwards very good friends.

Christina in the mean time was very much troubled she had no news of the
Marquess d' Osseyra; sometimes she was afraid he had forgot her, the next
moment she rejected that thought as injurious to the fidelity of her Lover, and
in the end remained so perplexed she knew not what to think. The Princess, who
had great kindness for her, perceiving her more pensive, and melancholy, than
ordinary, did all in her power to divert her, and bring her into humor: She
told her all the silly stories the people made of her Black Art, and gave her a
hundred witty Jests on that account. Christina said she was not surpised at
it, having from her Chamber in the Prison heard the discourses of other
Prisoners, of the horrible Crimes she was accused of. Since you heard their
discourse, it is not possible, replied the Princess, but you must be well
acquainted with their affairs, it being commonly a comfort to one in Misery to
relate and declare a Misfortune; and the ordinlry entertainment of Prisoners,
is to tell one another by what Mischance they came thither. I confess, said
Christina, I have hearkened to them sometimes, with a great deal of attention;
but most of those who are Prisoners in the Inquisition, being charged with
impiety, or some other Crime relating to Religion, they are very mistrustful,
every one taking his Fellow for a Spy, or a Trepan: Yet I remember I often
heard the Complaints of a Soldier, who blamed extremely the Ingratitude of his
Country, in retaining him Prisoner in the Inquisition, for Actions which would
have been highly rewarded in a well-governed State.

He boasted of great Services he had done his Catholic Majesty in Flanders;
where, perceiving the Spanish Regiments grow thin, he married a Wife at Conde,
by whom he had two Boys: But the Place being afterward taken by his most
Christian Majesty, he was made a Prisoner of War, and never knew more what
became of his Wife. Upon exchange of Prisoners he was not long after set at
liberty, and was in Garrison at Air, where he married another Wife; but that
Place having also been taken afterward by the French, he was carried to
Cambray, where he thought himself secure: There he marrried a Third Wife, which
began to rejoice his Heart with her fruitfulness, when that Place also was
taken by the most Christian King in Person; that at length, being tired with
the War, and fearing his Person fatal to the Places he entered, he quitted
Flanders, leaving several brave Boys there, who would in time make good
Soldiers for the King, and was returned to Madrid: He added, that he passed
homeward through France, and observed that Kingdom to be so full of People, and
the Villages so near one another, that he thought he had traveled two hundred
Leagues all in one Town, which appeared to him very extraordinary, who had been
used to travel five and twenty, or thirty Leagues in Spain, without seeing a
House, unless it were some pitiful Venta, or sorry Inn: And having considered
with himself that the misfortune of Spain proceeded from its being so desert,
he was willing, what in him lay, to repair that defect, by marrying again: But
two of the Wives he had left in Flanders having followed him to Madrid, and
found him at home with his Wife, it angered them so grievously, that they had
recourse to Justice, and charged him with several other misdemeanors and
impieties: that the Inquisition taking Cognizance of his Crimes had clapped him
up in Prison, and kept him there, though in all he had done, he had no other
end but the Service of his King, and glory of his Country. The Princess could
not forbear laughing at Christina's Relation, which gave her so true a
Character of a Spaniard; it being certain there is nothing so conceitedly
haughty, as a Spanish Soldier at his return into Spain, from the Army in
Flanders: he thinks himself the only Man that has preserved the State, and
that now he may be allowed to follow his inclinations, and take his Pleasure
without punishment, or control

As soon as our Heroine was alone, she fell into her former fit of melancholy,
as if she had presaged what was a driving on against her in Flanders.

The Marquess D'Osseyra knew nothing of his Mistress being gone into Spain, but
thought her still in the Covent at Mons; the Duchess of Arschot having taken
care to keep him in that error, by writing often to him under pretense of
sending him news of Christina: She advised him still not to be too hasty, and a
little patience would certainly make him happy. But the Duchess had other
designs: the interest of her Family, and her particular dependences on Spain,
made her resolve to have her Niece married to a Gentleman of that Nation. This
Niece of hers had not yet appeared abroad, but was bred in a Convent; all the
knowledge they had of her, was that she was very handsome, and a very
considerable Fortune. The Quality and Merit of the Marquess D'Osseyra, made the
Duchess think him a fit Match for her Niece. In order to this, she was willing
to endeavor curing him of his passion for Christina, being fully persuaded the
Beauty, the Birth and Estate of her Niece, would be sufficient to accomplish
her design within a short time after her appearing at Court. But having
observed by the Marquesses Letters, the constancy of his affection for
Christina, the Duchess despaired of success, and respited the sending her Niece
to Brussels, for fear her Charms should have, upon some less interess'd Person,
the effect she desired they should work on the Marquess alone. About that time
it was French took S. Gislain: the Duchess fearing, from the situation of the
Place, Mons in the Spring might have the like Forune, which would break all her
Measures, and make it too late to execute her design; she resolved to go to
Brussels to communicate her intentions to the Duchess de Villa Hermosa, who was
very well pleased with the zeal she expressed for the Spaniards. Diverse means
were proposed to assure the success of the Marriage, but all appearing
uncertain, or dilatory, they parted without coming to any resolution. The
Marquess D'Osseyra went every Day to see the Duchess d' Arscot, who, very
desirous to penetrate his sentiments, after a great deal of Discourse, by the
by, advertised him, as his Friend, that Christina had in confidence acquainted
her with her design of making her self a Nun; but if it should be so, he might
be otherwise provided of a Mistress, to supply the loss of this. The Marquess
was much alarmed at Christina's resolution, and entreated the Duchess to give
it all the Obstruction she could, which she promised very frankly. Having given
the Duchess de Villa Hermosa an account of this Discourse, she found her no
less than her self at a loss what course to take: But at last, seeing
themselves straightened in time, the report of his Christian Majesty leaving
Paris in few Days being spread all about, they agreed that the Duchess should
advise the Marquess to steal his Mistress out of the Covent, and marry her as
soon as he could get her out. They thought this a very probable way to effect
the Design, because the Duchess might easily deceive him, in substituting her
Niece in the Place of Christina. The Duchess of Arscot would not hear of it, as
a thing unworthy a Person of her Quality to use any Artifice to make a Spaniard
marry her Niece; but at length her ambition, and the flatteries of the Duchess
de Villa Hermosa, prevailed with her to reject all these considerations; not
doubting, with her dextrous address, she might trap the Marquess; and that the
Beauty of her Niece, and respect due to her Birth, would stop his complaining
of a Cheat put upon him so much to his advantage. Soon after this delicate
Project, the Marquess came to the Duchess of Arscot's: The ordinary expressions
of civility were scarce over, but she told him, with some concern, that Word
was sent her from Mons, Christina was every Day more and more resolved to take
the Nuns Habit, and that she durst no longer undertake, but she would suddenly
do it. The Marquess answered her, it would break his Heart; and conjured her
not to forsake him, but use all her interest with Christina to divert her from
this resolution. To what purpose, says the Duchess; for neither the King, nor
your Relations will ever give way to your marrying a Stranger that has no
Fortune, is but of mean Birth, and (as virtuous as I take her for) has
occasioned very different judgments of her: To disabuse you, it is my opinion
you should no longer oppose her design of turning Nun, it will be more for your
Reputation than you are aware of, and this Action alone will justify all the
rest of her Life. The Marquess confessed she had Reason of her side, but that
the violence of his Love would not let him yield to it; that he would make
himself happy to his own satisfaction, without troubling himself what others
thought of it, as being not of their judgment who think a Man's happiness
depends on the opinion others have of it. Since you are of that Mind, says the
Duchess, I will let you see how true a Friend I am to you, in doing you a Piece
of Service more considerable than you could have hoped for, and such as shall
make you happy all the Days of your Life. The Marquess assured her he should
ever acknowledge her Favors, and promised to do whatever she advised him to.
You must then, replys the Duchess, steal her out of the Covent, and I will
undertake she shall consent to it; for her desire of turning Nun proceeds only
from her fear that you have forgot her. And as all Women are very sensible of
being slighted, she is glad of amusing the World, by giving out she will spend
her Life in a Cloister, though it be in truth only to save her Credit, in case
you should not love her: And that you may be no longer exposed to the Freaks of
Fortune, or the Violences of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, my Almoner shall marry
you in my Chapel, as soon as you have got her out of the Covent. The Marquess,
overjoyed at a Project that so pleasingly flattered his Passion, threw himself
at her Feet, not having the Power to answer her a word, but his dumb Eloquence
expressed his Mind clearly enough: They agreed how all things should be
carried, and the Duchess on the Morrow went for Mons, to dispose things for
Execution of the Design.

She told her Niece she had made Choice of a Husband for her, with whom she
should have abundant Cause to be satisfied; but that there were invincible
Reasons to oblige her to permit her self to be stolen out of the Covent, and
be married without Ceremony; adding, she was not to be surpised at it, as
being all for her Advantage. The young Lady, who in the whole Course of her
Breeding had been taught to pay the Duchess very great Respects, submitted her
self wholly to her Pleasure. The Duchess having made sure of her Niece, and all
others she had use of, writ to the Marquess d'Osseyra, to let him know all was
in readiness; and that he had no more to do but come the next Night to Mons,
with two of his trustiest Domestics, and that he might come to her House,
where she would tell him how the business should be managed. The Marquess, who
waited with Impatience for News from the Duchess, failed not to set out the
Hour she appointed. He arrived at Mons, and went to the Duchesses, as had been
agreed on. You see, says she, what I expose my self to for your sake: But that
you may not be blamed for this Action, I think it very fit you should write to
the Duke de Villa Hermosa, to let him know you are married; and entreat him,
that since it is a done thing, that he will write into Spain, in your Favor,
that the Court may agree to it: I will take care your Letter shall be delivered
him, and send him word the same time, I have had no hand in your business. The
Marquess consented to all she desired, but had his Head so full of Love, he
would never have been able to finish his Letter without the Duchesses help, who
made him write what she pleased, without naming Christina, with design to take
her advantage by that Letter to justify her self to the World, as if the
Marquess had indeavou'd to steal away her Niece, and that he might be forced to
marry her, if the business in Hand should unexpectedly miscarry.

All things thus ordered, she forgot not any thing that might heighten the
Beauty of her Niece. It was no hard matter to set off a young Lady, whom Nature
had made very handsome and amiable: The Duchess having visited her a little
before Night, gave her new instructions for her dress, and deportment, and
returned very well satisfied with her Charms. She appointed her to be at the
Covent Garden Gate, with a Maid who was of the Plot, and to follow the
Gentleman who came in search of them: She charged her by any means not to
speak, to cover her self with a great Vail, and not show her Face, till the
Priest had finished the Ceremony; telling her, it was no more than in decency
was requisite, to satisfy the Gentleman, and the Company, of her modesty. The
Duchess being returned home, told the Marquess all thing were ordered as he
could wish. At last, the Night so much desired by the Marquess, and perhaps by
the Lady as earnestly longed for, was come; the amorous Spaniard, full of good
intentions, and led by his passion, entered the Garden through a Door, of which
they had given him a Key for the purpose. He found there two Persons veiled,
one whereof was about the height of Christina: Having approached, with a
respect not free from fear, he took her by the Hand, and led her to the
Duchesses with the haste you may imagine. They went straight to the Chapel,
where the Priest waited their coming: The Marquess fell presently at the Feet
of her he thought his Mistress, to thank her for her goodness, and began to say
such things as love inspires a Man in his condition withal: But the Duchess
hastened the Priest to do his Office, and said to the Marquess, he was not to
lose time in Fruitless Discourse, to keep his Mistress from the Pleasure she
proposed to her self, in being at liberty to look upon him, without wronging
her modesty. The Marquess having his Head full of the thoughts of Christina,
fancied he saw her, without showing her Face: He was satisfied with a Kiss of
her Hand, fell on his Knees, and was married. The Ceremony was scarce ended,
but the Marquess cried out, he was the Happiest Man alive, since it was not in
the Power of his Enemies to prevent his being united to the most amiable Person
in the World. Yes, and more happy than you are aware of, replys the Duchess
throwing off the Brides Vail, since in marrying you to my Niece, who might be
the Darling of the best Man on Earth, I have married you to a Lady of great
Birth, and a considerable Fortune. The Marquess was so troubled at the
Discourse of the Duchess, and the surprising Beauty of her Niece, that for some
time he stood mute. Your Relations, and Friends, have agreed to this Marriage,
continues the Duchess; and nothing but a Merit equal to yours could have
prevailed with me to have a Hand in a Trick of this kind, to make you happy
against your will. The Marquess was so agitated with different motions, he
could not answer a Word, needing all the respect those of his Nation have for
Persons of the best Quality, to keep him from breaking out into outrage against
the Duchess. She was about to speak to him of the advantages of this Affair.
Madam, says the Marquess, interrupting her, I pray insult not over my grief;
for I know not whether I shall be able to take it at your Hands. This was but
one of those expressions of sorrow and regret he let fall, which forced Tears
from the new Marchioness, who had not any Hand in her Aunts Cheat, and expected
Complements from her Husband of a very different Nature. The Marquess moved at
her Tears, and wounded to the Heart with his own Sorrows, went into another
Room, and would have left the House with a Resolution to go whithersoever
despair would lead him: But the Duchess, who fearing the Noise this Business
might make, had the Foresight, and Care, to make sure of an Order from the Duke
de Villa Hermosa to arrest the Marquess; had it put in execution, by Persons
who waited at the Gate for that purpose. He was so disordered, he scarce knew
he was arrested. An Officer, his Friend, whom the Duchess sent for to speak
with him, endeavored to persuade him to be satisfied, but without effect. The
Marquess passed all the Night in very great disquiet: the morrow the Duke de
Villa Hermosa arrived at Mons, where he had long Discourse with the Marquess; I
know not the particulars, but it is probable he showed him the advantages of
this Marriage, and the necessity lay upon him to make no more stir about the
Business: which if he did, he would be laughed at, and provoke the Court, his
Friends, and the Duchesses Family all against him. The Marquess convinced with
these Reasons, and seeing there was no Remedy, submitted to the advice of the
Duke de Villa Hermosa; and thought it best to return to his Wife, and beg her
Pardon for what was past. But she would not hear him, being resolved to pay him
in the Coin she had received from him, and avoid his company who had so much
slighted her. The Duchess found all her Authority over her Niece, little enough
to retain her: She would not afford an Ear to any thing could be said for him,
who had expressed himself sorry he had married her.

A beautiful Lady has great Advantages, her Complaints are moving, her
Reproaches wound to the quick, and her Tears find Compassion in the stoniest
Heart. The Marquess, who had approached his Lady with a great deal of
Indifference, was so sensible of her Complaints, her Reproaches and Tears, that
he fell on his Knees, protesting the Crime she thought him guilty of, a pure
effect of his Astonishment; and that if she would vouchsafe him the hearing, he
could easily clear himself. She cast her Eyes upon him, without answering a
Word; her Looks, and the Difficulty she made of being appeased, heightened in
the Marquess the Desire of Reconciliation: He made her so many Pretestations,
and assured her he would love her eternally, that at last she yielded to the
Instances of the Duchess, or rather the Oaths of the Marquess; But upon
Condition he would give her a true Account what had occasioned him to express
himself troubled for having married her, and to absent himself as he had done.
The Marquess promised it, but whether he kept his Word I know not, having not
been able to learn the Particulars of the Account he gave her, which lasted all
Night; but it is very likely she was very well satisfied, having never
complained of it since: The Marquess about a Week after brought her to
Brussels, and to justify himself to those who were acquainted with his Passion
for Christina, said, It was not in his Power to resist the Decrees of Heaven,
where his Marriage had been appointed many Ages ago.

Though Christina had not heard of this Marriage, the News of it having not yet
reached Spain; it is certain her Heart misgave her some Ill was toward her,
which cast her frequently into Melancholy the Princess had much ado to persuade
her from, by telling her she was not to afflict her self beforehand, by
fancying she foresaw the unfaithfulness of her Lover. Christina confessed her
self to blame for it, but could not help it.

Hearing the English Envoy was returning for London, she acquainted the
Princess with the great Desire she had to lay hold on that accasion to leave
Spain, and go to the Marquess d'Osseyra. The Princess gave many good Reasons to
divert her from this Resolution, but in vain; Christina acknowledging the force
of her Reasons, but that it was not in her Power to yield to them, and that she
should certainly have the Displeasure to see her die with Despair, if she
opposed her Design any longer. Loath as the Princess was to part with our
Heroine, she was however forced to let her go, to prevent the mortal Effects of
her Despair: She gave her a Letter of Recommendation to the Envoy, entreating
his Care of that young Spanish Gontleman, being a Person of Quality and Merit,
and very desirous to go with him into England. The Princess gave her several
other Letters, in her favor, addressed to Persons in good Credit in the Court
of His Majesty of Great Britain. Christina having resumed her Man's Habit, and
the Day of her Departure hired a Spanish Footboy, overtook the Envoy two Days
Journey from Madrid, not having ventured to go out of Town with him, for fear
of being staid, if discovered. The Envoy received her very courteously, easily
believing the good Character the Princess gave in her Letter to him of young
Montalban (as she called him) who confirmed by his Mien, and Discourse, the
good Opinion the Envoy had of him at first Sight.

Montalban was so pleased with the thought the should shortly have a better
opportunity of informing himself truly of the state of his Love Concerns, that
he appeared very cheerful and ayery, which the Envoy was much taken with, but
could not let him know it for want of skill in the Spanish Language, which he
could not speak, though he understood it very well. Montalban pretended he had
no other Language, but that he had a small insight in the French, yet not so
much as to speak it. The Envoy, who had been bred in France, was glad of that,
and from thenceforth spoke to him always in French, which Montalban answered in
Spanish. He maintained this Character very well, till one Day the Envoy
observing him in a deep Study, asked him if he had left a Mistress behind him
at Madrid. Montalban having his Head full of Love, and surpised with the
Question, answered him in French, He had not a Mistress in the World; and
continued speaking in that Language, till he perceived the Envoy astonished at
it: Whereupon, making use of that readiness of Wit which had done him so good
Service on former occasions, and few Women want, he fell a laughing at the
Envoy's Surprise, and prayed him, in Spanish, to tell him truly if he had
spoken good French. The Envoy assured him, a natural Frenchman could not have
spoke better. In troth, replies Montalban, I thought the Princess had but
jested, when, having taught me those three or four words, she told me I
pronounced them very well: I will apply my self to learn French, as soon as I
come to London. You will infallibly attain it, says the Envoy, you are so
naturally fitted for it. Our Heroine having, by her Wit, retrieved the Fault
her Distraction made her fall into, avoided carefully all occasions of letting
him perceive she could speak French, the better to maintain the part she
designed to act in England. Being arrived at London, Montalban delivered a
Letter from the Princess, to the Marquess Bargamanero, Envoy extraordinary from
Spain. The Marquess being an Italian born, doubted not but the young Spaniard
was very well descended, as the Princess had signified by her Letter: He used
him with all the civility imaginable, praying him to accept of an Apartment in
his House; for, besides the respect due to the recommendation of the Princess,
an Italian, or Flemming, employed in the King of Spain's Service, is glad of
any occasion to oblige a natural Spaniard, to take off the jealousy and
umbrage they have of Strangers employed in Affairs of that Crown. Montalban
would not lodge at the Marquesses, but Dined there every Day, and went often to
Court with him, where he was kindly received by those who espoused the interest
of Spain: this was of incredible advantage to the Spaniard, the English who
were used to see those of that Nation haughty and huffish, admiring the
civility and good Mien of Montalban. But he could not be satisfied with the
Care the Marquess took to divert him, nor the civilities he received from
several English Courtiers, such was his impatience to know how things went in
Flanders: He asked every one, what News from thence, and was told of the
Preparations made for the Campaign, the provident Care of the Spanish Governor
for the Places most in danger to be attacked, and many other particulars
Montalban was not concerned in, nor cared for: But not a Word of the Marquess
D'Osseyra, nor durst he enquire after him, in particular, lest his Countenance
should betray him, and discover the Reason of his Curiosity that way. His Heart
misgave him still, and continued the alarms and presages of ill success to his
Love, which so haunted his Thoughts he could not relish any Pleasure, though
frequently invited to partake of it. Sometimes he resolved for Brussels, to
know how things stood; the next moment he discovered Reasons to divert him from
that design. Tormented with this inquietude, and not able to resolve what
course to take, but inclining to continue in an uncertainty, which left him
some poor hopes of the constancy of the Marquess D'Osseyra, rather than hazard
the discovery of a truth which might plunge him in despair. As he was at Dinner
at the Spanish Envoys, a Gentleman of Flanders, newly arrived from Brussels,
came in to salute the Marquess Borgamanero, and delivered him Letters from the
Low Countries. The Marquess having known the Gentleman by Name, received him
very civilly, and made him sit at Table with him. When the Flemming had drank
the Healths of all the Beauties of Brussels, his Tongue began to run, and he
gave them several Pieces of choice News from Flanders, adding some Gallantries
of the Spanish Generals the Winter past; and, interrupting himself, now that I
am fallen upon the Discourse of Gallantry, Have you not heard, says he, of the
officious Cheat put upon the Marquess D'Osseyra, to cure him of the violent
Passion he had for a French-woman. Had any one then observed Montalban's
Countenance, he might have easily discovered the Trouble he was in: But they
were all attentive to the Flemmish Gentleman's Discourse, who told them, the
Duchess of Arschot, by Agreement with the Duke de Villa Hermosa, on pretense of
Favoring the Marquess De Osseyra's Marriage with the French-woman, had married
her Niece to him. Oh Heavens, cried Christina, no more minding the Name, or
Nation she pretended to, and fell off of her Stool. The Company thought it some
Disease, or Infirmity, and every one strove to help her, attributing the
Exclamation to the violence of the Distemper, and not dreaming in the least of
the true Cause of the Acident. The Envoy of Spain was the most alarmed at it,
fearing, in a time where poysonings are so ordinary, it might be thought this
Spanish Gentleman had been poisoned at his House.

Could one have died of violent grief, I am persuaded our Heroine had taken her
leave of this World, upon hearing the Gentleman's News: but a Death of that kind
happens not in our Age, and she, by the Marquesses Care, recovered her strength
pretty well, and was carried into her Chamber, where, intending to give free
vent to those passions the ill news had occasioned, she had the dexterity to
get rid of the importunate Care of those who accompanied her, by telling them
she was often subject to Infirmities of that kind, and had learnt by experience
that rest was the only, and infallible Cure. As soon as she was alone, she
burst out into Tears, and her Fancy, to her further Torment, represented to her
a Thousand unpleasant things to increase her grief, which was swelled to that
height the most cruel Death would have been welcome. After much debate with her
self, she thought it fit for her to return into her Country, and spend there
the rest of her Days in a Cloister, her Virtue suggesting to her she was
obliged to make the World this Amends for all the innocent scandals she had
given it.

Upon the News of the Accident at the Spanish Envoys, the pretended Montalban
was visited by several Persons of the best Quality: The Gentleman, who had
brought the News of the Marquess D'Osseyra's being married, thought himself
obliged in civility to give him a visit. Christina (or, if you will, Montalban)
was a-bed when this Gentleman came to his Lodging: Montalban gave order he
should come in, and the ordinary civilities being over, told him he was sorry
his Infirmity had deprived him of hearing the particulars of the Marquess
D'Osseyra's Marriage: The Gentleman offered to make him the Relation; Montalban
answering, he would much oblige him in it, the Gentleman acquainted him with
all the Circumstances of the Affair, without perceiving the change it produced
in our Heroine's Countenance, who had (to prevent his discovery) drawn her
Bed-Curtain that she might not be seen. The Flemming being retired, Christina
fell again into Tears, yet without any murmuring against the Marquess
D'Osseyra, whom she could not accuse of infidelity. As strongly as she labored
to confirm her Resolution of going into a Monastery, she found within her no
small reluctance against the putting it in execution: so hard a Task was it to
disengage her self from the inclinations she had for a Person she had loved so
entirely, and esteemed so worthy of her affection: After much struggling and
striving with her self, she resolved to send him a Letter, which was written as
follows.

I Shall never believe any one can dye of grief, since I have survived the sad
News of your Marriage, attended with such Circumstances as make me despair,
without leaving me the Liberty to complain of you: Was it not enough to lose
you, but I must, with the Loss, have the cruel and doleful Satisfaction to know
I lost you against your Will? Had you been ungrateful for the affection I bore
you, the consideration of your unfaithfulness would have, in some Measure,
allayed my sense of the loss of you: But while I adore you, and you love me,
another enjoys you. Pardon the Trouble my grief forces me to give you, in
bidding you adieu for ever. When you know how easily I part with the World, you
will be sensible I continued in it thus long only for your sake; and since you
cannot be mine any longer, I shall quickly take leave of it with very little
concern.


Christina having heard that the Spanish Envoy sent a Gentleman with Letters
into Flanders, desired him to deliver this to the Marquess D'Osseyra, and tell
him, the Party who sent it expected not his answer. Our Heroine having written
this Letter, found her self somewhat better at ease; she weighed the design she
had of entering a Covent, and found it in truth a course of Life wholly
unsuitable to her Humor: She considered how many made their Lives unhappy by
embracing a Profession out of despair, or to Please their Friends, or for other
like Reasons contrary to their Inclinations: She chose rather to seek out an
opportunity to perish gloriously in the Wars, than to languish many Years in an
unhappy condition, not doubting but the thoughts of her beloved Marquess would
Haunt her in the most private retirements. This made her throw off the relics
of weakness her Sex had left her, and having heard that his Majesty of France
had opened the Campaign by the Conquest of Ghent, she continued her disguise,
and went into the Army with two or three English Volunteers, who went to learn
the Rudiments of War under that great Master. The Town of Ypers being besieged
about that time, our Heroine, to avoid meeting with those who might probably
know her, during her long abode formerly there, consulted rather the motions of
despair, than endeavored to signalize her self by Actions of extraordinary
valor: She mingled her self one Day with a Detachment of the Regiments of the
King's Household, who with Sword in Hand took a Half Moon, where Christina
received a Musket Shot, and was carried to her Tent. The Chyrurgeons, less
Complaisant in the Army than elsewhere, judged her Wound mortal: The English,
who came with her from London, and still thought the pretended Gentleman a
Spaniard, fancied he had received the Wound by endeavoring to put himself into
the Spanish Service, by getting into the Town: This made them acquaint the
Marquess de Conflans with what had past. He was Governor of the Place, and
having Captitulated that very Day to surrender it, the English let him know
there was in the Camp, a young Gentleman, a Spaniard, called Montalban, who was
wounded with a Musquetshot, by endeavoring to get into the Town. The Marquess,
well acquainted with the name, thought he might be one of the Noble Family of
Montalban, the Head whereof is the now Duke of Uceda, and dispatched a Colonel
of the Garrison to enquire of his Health, and see if he were in a condition to
be carried to Brussels. The English accompany d the Colonel, and told our
Heroine they had informed the Governor of Ypres of his Quality, and Hurt; and
that he had sent thither this Colonel, to know if he would be carried to
Brussels. Christina, amazed at the Discourse, was pleased however at so good an
occasion of going to Brussels, in hopes to see the Marquess D' Osseyra before
she died: She confirmed them in their error, and having answered the
Collonel's civilities, as well as the condition she was in would permit her,
she prayed him to tell the Marquess of Conflans, he would do him a singular
Favor to convey him to Brussels, which was accordingly done. Soon after her
Arrival there, the Marquess of Conflans informed the Court, he had brought
thither a young Gentleman of Spain, who was lately come out of England to throw
himself into Ypres, but was unfortunately prevented by a Musket Shot, received
as he was endeavoring to get into the Town. The Persons of the greatest
Quality at Brussels, fearing to incommode Montalban with their visits, sent to
enquire of his Health: But he fell into a Fever, and no hopes of Cure. All
those about him wondered at the Care he took to enquire who the were who sent
to know how he did, which proceeded from the desire the supposed Montalban had
to hear the Marquess D' Osseyra named for one. At last he was told that this
Marquess, being newly returned from Bruges, had sent a Gentleman to enquire of
his Health. Montalban was so glad of it, that those who attended him observed a
vaisible Change in his looks: Having fetched two or three sighs, he said, he
should be very glad to see the Marquess, having something of Consequence to
Communicate to him. The Marquess being informed of it, ran to him immediately,
fancying him to be a Gentleman of the House of Montalban, who had been of his
acquaintance in Spain. As the Marquess entered the Room, they told him the
Gentleman was speechless. The Marquess went hastily up to the Bed, and looking
steadfastly on the Person that lay there, knew her to be his Christina, a dying:
She reached forth her Arm, and taking him by the Hand, made him sensible of the
satisfaction she had, to see him before she died. The tragic Spectacle so
affected the Marquess, he was ready to fall down dead for Sorrow: He continued
many Days retired in a religious House, and incapable of comfort for being the
cause of our Heroine's Death, he resolved to quit that Country where a hundred
Objects would every Day represent to his memory, the Death of Christina: He
made use of his Friends to procure him Employment elsewhere, and in a short
time after received Orders from Spain to go and Command in Biscay.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard: Where Gentlemen and Ladies may be furnished with all sorts of
Histories, Novels and Plays. Newly Published,
A Collection of Novels, viz. The Secret History of the Earl of Essex and Queen
Elizabeth. The Happy Slave. And, The Double Cuckold. To which is added, The Art
of Pleasing in Conversation. By the Famous Cardinal Richlieu. Price 5 s.

The History of Polybius the Megalopolitan; containing a General Account of the
Transactaons of the whole World, but principally of the Roman People, during
the First and Second Punick Wars. Translated by Sir H. Sheers, and Mr. Dryden.
In Three Volumes: The Third Volume never before Printed.

Familiar Letters: Written by John late Earl of Rochester, to the honorable
Henry Savile, Esquire; and other Persons of Quality; With Love Letters, written by
the late Ingenious Mr. Tho. Otway, Sir George Etheridge, and the late Duke of
Buckingham.

A Discourse upon the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays: With some
Consideration on the Occurrences of Human Life. By Tim. Nourse, Gent.

The Whole Works of that excellent Practical Physician Dr. Thomas Sydenham.
Wherein not only the History and Cures of acute Diseases are treated of after a
new and accurate Method; but also the safest and shortest way of curing most
Chronical Diseases: Translated from the Original Latin, by J. Pechy, M. D. of
the College of Physicians.

Essays upon several Important Subjects. By Sir Tho. Pope Blunt, Baronet. Price
3 s.

Love Letters, writ by a Nun to a Cavalier. With the Cavalier's Answers.

A Treatise of Education, especially of Young Gentlemen. In Two Parts. By
Obadiah Walker, D. D. The Sixth Edition, Enlarged.

De Re Poetica; or, Remarks upon Poetry. With a Character of the Poets both
Ancient and Modern. By Sir Tho. Pope Blount. Quarto.

Examen Poeticum Duplex sive Musarum Anglicanarum Delectus Alter, cui
subjicitur Epigrammatum seu Poematum Minorum Specimen Novum. By Mr. Addison,
Mr. Friend, Mr. Wallis, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Stepney, etc.

A Mathematical Companion, or the Description and Use of a new Sliding Rule, by
which many Uuseful and Necessary Questions in Arithmetic, Military Orders,
Interests, Trigonometry, Planometry, Sterenometry, Geography, Astronomy,
Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, Dyalling, may be speedily resolved without
the Help of Pen or Compasses. By William Hunt, Philomath.

An Italian Voyage, or a complete Journey through Italy. In Two Parts. With the
Character of the People, and Description of the chief Towns, Churches,
Monesteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villa's, Gardens, Pictures, Statues and
Antiquities; as also, of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all
the Princes; with Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassel, Gent. The
Second Edition. With large Additions, by a Modern Hand.

The Family Physician; being a choice Collection of approved and experienced
Remedies, to cure all Diseases incident to Human Bodies, useful in Families,
and serviceable to Country People. By George Hartman Chemist, Servant to Sir
Kenelm Digby till he died.

A General Treatise of the Diseases of Infants and Children, collected from the
most Eminent Practical Authors. By John Pechy, of the College of Physicians.

A Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul, by way of Dialogue. By Dr.
Charlton. 4to.

A Plurality of Worlds. Translated from the French by Mr. Glanvile.

Dialogues of the Dead. Translated from the French.

The Essays of Michael Seigneur de Montaigne, in three Volumes in Octavo.
Faithfully Translated by Charles Cotton, Esquire;

A Vindication of two late Comedies, viz. The Relapse; or, Virtue in Danger.
And, The Provoked Wife. By the Author of those Plays.

INCOGNITA: OR, LOVE AND DUTY RECONCILED. A NOVEL.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

INCOGNITA: OR, LOVE and DUTY RECONCILED.
AUrelian was the only Son to a Principal Gentleman of Florence. The Indulgence
of his Father prompted, and his Wealth enabled him, to bestow a generous
Education upon him, whom, he now began to look upon as the Type of himself; an
Impression he had made in the Gayety and Vigor of his Youth, before the Rust
of Age had debilitated and obscured the Splendour of the Original: He was
sensible, That he ought not to be sparing in the Adornment of him, if he had
Resolution to beautify his own Momory. Indeed Don Fabio (for so was the Old
Gentleman called) has been observed to have fixed his Eyes upon Aurelian, when
much Company has been at Table, and have wept through Earnestness of Intention,
if nothing happened to divert the Object; whether it were for regret, at the
Recollection of his former self, or for the Joy he conceived in being, as it
were, revived in the Person of his Son, I never took upon me to enquire, but
supposed it might be sometimes one, and sometimes both together.

Aurelian, at the Age of Eighteen Years, wanted nothing (but a Beard) that the
most accomplished Cavalier in Florence could pretend to: he had been Educated
from Twelve Years old at Siena, where it seems his Father kept a Receiver,
having a large Income from the Rents of several Houses in that Town. Don Fabio
gave his Servant Orders, That Aurelian should not be stinted in his Expenses,
when he came up to Years of Discretion. By which means he was enabled, not only
to keep Company with, but also to confer many Obligations upon Strangers of
Quality, and Gentlemen who traveled from other Countries into Italy, of which
Siena never wanted store, being a Town most delightfully Situate, upon a Noble
Hill, and very well suiting with Strangers at first, by reason of the
agreeableness and purity of the Air: There also is the quaintness and delicacy
of the Italian Tongue most likely to be learned, there being many public
Professors of it in that place, and indeed the very Vulgar of Siena do express
themselves with an easiness and sweetness surprising, and even grateful to
their Ears who understand not the Language.

Here Aurelian contracted an acquaintance with Persons of Worth of several
Countries, but among the rest an intimacy with a Gentleman of Quality of Spain,
and Nephew to the Archbishop of Toledo, who had so wrought himself into the
Affections of Aurelian, through a Conformity of Temper, an Equality in Years,
and something of resemblance in Feature and Proportion, that he looked upon him
as his second self. Hippolito, on the other hand, was not ungrateful in return
of Friendship, but thought himself either alone or in ill Company, if Aurelian
were absent: but his Uncle having sent him to travel, under the Conduct of a
Governor, and the two Years which limited his stay at Siena being expired, he
was put in mind of his departure.

His Friend grew melancholy at the News, but considering that Hippolito had
never seen Florence, he easily prevailed with him to make his first Journey
thither, whither he would accompany him, and perhaps prevail with his Father to
do the like throughout his Travels.

They accordingly set out, but not being able easily to reach Florence the same
Night, they rested a League or two short, at a Villa of the great Duke's called
Poggio Imperiale, where they were informed by some of his Highness's Servants,
That the Nuptials of Donna Catharina (near Kinswoman to the great Duke) and Don
Ferdinand de Rovori, were to be solemnized the next day, and that extraordinary
Preparations had been making for some time past, to illustrate the Solemnity
with Balls and Masks, and other Divertisements; that a Tilting had been
proclaimed, and to that purpose Scaffolds erected around the Spacious Court,
before the Church Di Sante Croce, where were usually seen all Cavalcades and
Shows, performed by Assemblies of the Young Nobility: That all Mechanics and
Tradesmen were forbidden to work, or expose any Goods to Sale for the space of
three days; during which time all Persons should be entertained at the Great
Duke's Cost; and public Provision was to be made for the setting forth and
furnishing a multitude of Tables, with Entertainment for all Comers and Goers,
and several Houses appointed for that use in all Streets.

This Account alarmed the Spirits of our Young Travelers, and they were
overjoyed at the prospect of Pleasures they foresaw. Aurelian could not contain
the satisfaction he conceived in the welcome Fortune had prepared for his dear
Hippolito. In short, they both remembered so much of the pleasing Relation had
been made them, that they forgot to sleep, and were up as soon as it was light,
pounding at poor Signior Claudio's Door (so was Hippolito's Governor called)
to rouse him, that no time might be lost till they were arrived at Florence,
where they would furnish themselves with Disguises and other Accoutrements
necessary for the Prosecution of their Design of sharing in the public
Merriment; the rather were they for going so early, because Aurelian did not
think fit to publish his being in Town for a time, lest his Father knowing of
it, might give some restraint to that loose they designed themselves.

Before Sun rise they entered Florence at Porta Romana, attended only by two
Servants, the rest being left behind to avoid notice; but, alas! they needed
not to have used half that caution; for early as it was, the Streets were
crowded with all sorts of People passing to and fro, and every Man employed in
something relating to the Diversions to come; so that no notice was taken of
any body; a Marquess and his Train might have passed by as unregarded as a
single Fachin or Cobbler. Not a Window in the Streets but echoed the tuning of a
Lute or thrumming of a Gitarr: for by the way, the Inhabitants of Florence are
strangely addicted to the love of Music, insomuch that scarce their Children
can go, before they can scratch some Instrument or other. It was no unpleasing
Spectacle to our Cavaliers (who, seeing they were not observed, resolved to
make Observations) to behold the Diversity of Figures and Postures of many of
these Musicians. Here you should have an affected Vallet, who, Mimick'd the
Behavior of his Master, leaning carelessly against the Window, with his Head on
one side, in a languishing Posture, whining, in a low, mournful Voice, some
dismal Complaint; while, from his sympathizing Theorbo, issued a Base no less
doleful to the Hearers. In Opposition to him was set up perhaps a Cobbler, with
the wretched Skeleton of a Gitarr, battered and waxed together by his own
Industry, and who with three Strings out of Tune, and his own tearing hoarse
Voice, would rack attention from the Neigbourhood, to the great affliction of
many more moderate Practitioners, who, no doubt, were full as desirous to be
heard. By this time Aurelian's Servant had taken a Lodging, and was retuned to
give his Master an Account of it. The Cavaliers grown weary of that ridiculous
Entertainment, which was diverting at first sight, retired whither the Lacquey
conducted them; who, according to their Directions, had sought out one of the
most obscure Streets in the City. All that day, to the evening, was spent in
sending from one Brokers Shop to another, to furnish them with Habits, since
they had not time to make any new.

There was, it happened, but one to be got Rich enough to please our young
Gentlemen, so many were taken up upon this occasion. While they were in Dispute
and Complementing one another, ( Aurelian protesting that Hippolito should wear
it, and he, on 'tother hand, forswearing it as bitterly) a Servant of
Hippolito's came up and ended the Controversy; telling them, That he had met
below with the Vallet de Chamber of a Gentleman, who was one of the greatest
Gallants about the Town, but was at this time in such a condition he could not
possibly be at the Entertainment; whereupon the Vallet had designed to dress
himself up in his Master's Apparel, and try his talent at Court; which he
hearing, told him he would inform him how he might bestow the Habit for some
time much more to his profit, if not to his pleasure, so acquainted him with
the occasion his Master had for it. Hippolito sent for the Fellow up, who was
not so fond of his design as not to be bought off it, but upon having his own
demand granted for the use of it, brought it; it was very Rich, and upon trial,
as fit for Hippolito as if it had been made for him. The Ceremony was performed
in the Morning, in the great Dome, with all magnificence correspondent to the
wealth of the great Duke, and the esteem he had for the Noble Pair. The next
Morning was to be a Tilting, and the same Night a Masquing Ball at Court, To
omit the Description of the universal Joy, (that had diffused it self through
all the Conduits of Wine, which conveyed it in large measures to the People)
and only relate those effects of it which concern our present Adventurers. You
must know, that about the fall of the Evening, and at that time when the
Aequilibrium of Day and Night, for some time, holds the Air in a gloomy
suspense between an unwillingness to leave the light, and a natural impulse
into the Dominion of darkness. About this time our Hero's, shall I say, sallied
or slunk out of their Lodgings, and steered toward the great Palace, whither,
before they were arrived, such a prodigious number of Torches were on fire,
that the day, by help of these Auxiliary Forces, seemed to continue its
Dominion; the Owls and Bats apprehending their mistake, in counting the hours,
retired again to a convenient darkness; for Madam Night was no more to be seen
than she was to be heard; and the Chemists were of Opinion, That her fuliginous
Damps rarefy'd by the abundance of Flame, were evaporated.

Now the Reader I suppose to be upon Thorns at this and the like impertinent
Digressions, but let him alone and he will come to himself; at which time I think
fit to acquaint him, that when I degress, I am at that time writing to please
my self; when I continue the Thread of the Story, I write to please him;
supposing him a reasonable Man, I conclude him satisfied to allow me this
liberty, and so I proceed.

If our Cavaliers were dazzled at the splendor they beheld without doors, what
surprise, think you, must they be in, when entering the Palace they found even
the lights there to be but so many foils to the bright eyes that flashed upon
'em at every turn!

A more glorious Troop no occasion ever assembled; all the fair of Florence,
with the most accomplished Caviliers, were present; and however Nature had been
partial in bestowing on some better Faces than others, Art was alike indulgent
to all, and industriously supplied those Defects she had left, giving some
Addition also to her greatest Excellencies. Every body appeared well shaped, as
it is to be supposed, none who were conscious to themselves of any visible
Deformity would presume to come thither. Their Apparel was equally glorious,
though each differing in fancy. In short, our Strangers were so well bred, as
to conclude from these apparent Perfections, that there was not a Masque which
did not at least hide the Face of a Cherubim. Perhaps the Ladies were not
behind hand in return of a favorable Opinion of them: for they were both well
dressed, and had something inexpressibly pleasing in their Air and Mien,
different from other People, and indeed differing from one another. They
fansy'd that while they stood together they were more particularly taken notice
of than any in the Room, and being unwilling to be taken for Strangers, which
they thought they were, by reason of some whispering they observed near them.
They agreed upon an hour of meeting after the Company should be broke up, and
so seperately mingled with the thickest of the Assembly. Aurelian had fixed his
eye upon a Lady whom he had observed to have been a considerable time in close
whisper with another Woman; he expected with great impatience the result of
that private Conference, that he might have an opportunity of engaging the Lady
whose Person was so agreeable to him. At last he perceived they were broke off,
and the 'tother Lady seemed to have taken her leave. He had taken no small
pains in the mean time to put himself in a posture to accost the Lady, which,
no droubt, he had happily performed, had he not been interrupted; but scarce
had he acquitted himself of a preliminary Bow (and which, I have heard him say,
was the lowest that ever he made) and had just opened his Lips to deliver
himself of a small Complement, which, nevertheless he was very big with, when
he unluckily miscarried, by the interposal of the same Lady, whose departure
not long before, he had so zealously prayed for: but, as Providence would have
it, there was only some very small matter forgot, which was recovered in a
short whisper. The Coast being again cleared, he took heart and bore up and,
striking sail, repeated his Cemony to the Lady; who, having obligingly returned
it, he accosted her in these or the like words:

If I do not usurp a privilege reserved for some one more happy in your
acquaintance, may I presume, Madam, to entreat (for a while) the favor of your
Conversation, at least till the arrival of whom you expect, provided you are
not tired of me before; for then upon the least intimation of uneasiness, I
will not fail of doing my self the violence to withdraw for your release. The
Lady made him answer, she did not expect any body; by which he might imagine
her Conversation not of value to be bespoke, and to afford it him, were but
farther to convince him to her own cost. He replied, She had already said
enough to convince him of something he heartily wished might not be to his cost
in the end. She pretended not to understand him, but told him, If he already
found himself grieved with her Conversation, he would have sufficient reason to
repent the rashness of his first Demand before they had ended: for that now she
intended to hold discourse with hrm, on purpose to punish his unadvisedness, in
presuming upon a Person whose Dress and Mien might not (may be) be disagreeable
to have wit. I must confess (replied Aurelian) my self guilty of a Presumption,
and willingly submit to the punishment you intend: and though it be an
aggravation of a Crime to persevere in its justification, yet I cannot help
defending an Opinion in which now I am more confirmed, that probable
conjectures may be made of the ingenious Disposition of the Mind, from the
fancy and choice of Apparel. The humor I grant ye, (said the Lady) or
constitution of the Person, whether melancholic or brisk; but I should hardly
pass my censure upon so slight an indication of Wit: for there is your brisk
fool as well as your brisk man of sense, and so of the melancholic. I confess
it is possible a fool may reveal himself by his Dress, in wearing something
extravagantly singular and ridiculous, or in preposterous suiting of Colors;
but a Decency of Habit (which is all that Men of best sense pretend to) may be
acquired by custom and example, without putting the Person to a superfluous
expense of Wit for the contrivance; and though there should be occasion for it,
few are so unfortunate in their Relations and Acquaintance not to have some
Friend capable of giving them advice, if they are not too ignorantly conceited
to ask it. Aurelian was so pleased with the easiness and smartness of her
Expostulation, that he forgot to make a reply, when she seemed to expect it;
but being a Woman of a quick Apprehension, and justly sensible of her own
Perfections, she soon perceived he did not grudge his attention. However she
had a mind to put it upon him to turn the discourse, so went on upon the same
Subject. Siginor (said she) I have been looking round me, and by your Maxim I
cannot discover one fool in the Company; for they are all well dressed. This was
spoken with an Air of Rallery that awakened the Cavalier, who immediately made
answer: It Is true, Madam, we see there may be as much variety of good fancies
as of faces, yet there may be many of both kinds borrowed and adulterate if
inquired into; and as you are pleased to observe the invention may be Foreign
to the Person who puts it in practice; and as good an Opinion as I have of an
agreeable Dress, I should be loath to answer for the Wit of all about us. I
believe you, (says the Lady) and hope you are convinced of your error, since
you must allow it impossible to tell who of all this Assembly did or did not
make choice of their Apparel. Not all, (said Aurelian) there is an ungainness
in some which betrays them. Look ye there (says he) pointing to a Lady who
stood playing with the Tassels of her Girdle, I dare answer for that Lady
though she be very well dressed, it is more than she knows. His fair unknown
could not forbear laughing at his particular distinction, and freely told him,
he had indeed light upon one who knew as little as any body in the Room, her
self excepted. Ah! Madam, (replied Aurelian) you know every thing in the World
but your own Perfections, and you only know not those, because it is the top of
Perfection not to know them. How! (replied the Lady) I thought it had been the
extremity of knowledge to know ones self. Aurelian had a little over-strain'd
himself in that Complement, and I am of Opinion would have been puzzled to have
brought himself off readily; but by good fortune the Music came into the Room,
and gave him an opportunity to seem to decline an answer, because the company
prepared to dance: he only told her he was too mean a Conquest for her Wit, who
was already a Slave to the Charms of her Person. She thanked him for his
Complement, and briskly told him she ought to have made him a return in praise
of his Wit, but she hoped he was a Man more happy than to be dissatisfied with
any of his own Endowments; and if it were so, that he had not a just Opinion of
himself, she knew her self incapable of saying any thing to beget one. Aurelian
did not know well what to make of this last reply; for he always abhorred any
thing that was conceited, with which this seemed to reproach him. But however
modest he had been heretofore in his own thoughts, yet never was he so
distrustful of his good behavior as now, being rallied so by a Person whom he
took to be of judgment: Yet he resolved to take no notice, but with an Air
unconcerned and full of good humor entreated her to Dance with him; She
promised him to Dance with no body else, nor I believe had she inclination; for
notwithstanding her tartness, she was upon equal terms with him as to the
liking of each others Person and Humor, and only gave those little hints to
try his Temper; there being certainly no greater sign of folly and ill
breeding, than to grow serious and concerned at any thing spoken in the
rallery; for his part, he was strangely and insensibly fallen in love with her
Shape, Wit and Air; which, together with a white Hand, he had seen (perhaps not
accidentally) were enough to have subdued a more stubborn Heart than ever he
was master of; and for her Face, which he had not seen, he bestowed upon her
the best his Imagination could furnish him with. I should by right now describe
her Dress, which was extremely agreeable and rich, but it is possible I might
err in some material Pin or other, in the sticking of which may be the whole
grace of the Drapery depended. Well, they danced several times together, and no
less to the satisfaction of the whole Company, than of themselves; for at the
end of each Dance, some public Note of Applause or other was given to the
graceful Couple.

Aurelian was amazed, that among all that danced or stood in view he could not
see Hippolito; but concluding that he had met with some pleasing Conversation,
and was withdrawn to some retired part of the Room, he forbore his search till
the mirth of that Night should be over, and the Company ready to break up,
where we will leave him for a while, to see what became of his adventurous
Friend.

Hippolito, a little after he had parted with Aurelian, was got among a knot of
Ladies and Cavaliers, who were looking upon a large Gold Cup set with Jewels,
in which his Royal Highness had drank to the Prosperity of the new married
Couple at Dinner, and which aftewards he presented to his Cousin Donna
Catharina. He, among the rest, was very intent, admiring the richness,
workmanship and beauty of the Cup, when a Lady came behind him, and pulling him
by the Elbow, made a sign she would speak with him; Hippolito, who knew himself
an utter Stranger to Florence, and every body in it, immediately guessed she
had mistaken him for her acquaintance, as indeed it happened; however he
resolved not to discover himself till he should be assured of it; having
followed her into a set Window remote from Company, she addressed her self to
him in this manner: Signior Don Lorenzo (said she) I am overjoyed to see you
are so speedily recovered of your Wounds, which by report were much more
dangerous than to have suffered your coming abroad so soon; but I must accuse
you of great indiscretion, in appearing in a Habit which so many must needs
remember you to have worn upon the like occasion not long ago, I mean at the
Marriage of Don Cynthio with your Sister Atalante; I do assure you, you were
known by it, both to Juliana and my self who was so far concerned for you, as
to desire me to tell you, that her Brother Don Fabritio (who saw you when you
came in with another Gentleman) had eyed you very narrowly, and is since gone
out of the Room, she knows not upon what design; however she would have you,
for your own sake, be advised and circumspect when you depart this place, lest
you should be set upon unawares; you know the hatred Don Frabitio has born you
ever since you had the fortune to kill his Kinsman in a Duel: Here she paused
as if expecting his reply; but Hippolito was so confounded, that he stood mute,
and contemplating the hazard he had ignorantly brought himself into, forgot his
design of informing the Lady of her mistake. She finding he made her no Answer,
went on. I perceive (continued she) you are in some surprise at what I have
related, and may be, are doubtful of the Truth; but I thought you had been
better acquainted with your Cousin Leonora's Voice, than to have forgot it so
soon: Yet in Complaisance to your ill Memory, I will put you past doubt, by
showing you my Face; with that she pulled off her Mask, and discovered to
Hippolito (now more amazed than ever) the most Angelick Face that he had ever
beheld. He was just about to have made her some Answer, when, clapping on her
Mask again without giving him time, she happily for him pursued her Discourse.
(For it is odds but he had made some discovery of himself in the surprise he was
in.) Having taken him familiarly by the Hand, now she had made her self known
to him, Cousin Lorenzo (added she) you may perhaps have taken it unkindly,
that, during the time of your indisposition, by reason of your Wounds, I have
not been to visit you; I do assure you it was not for want of any Inclination I
had both to see and serve you to my power; but you are well acquainted with the
Severity of my Father, whom you know how lately you have disobliged. I am
mighty glad that I have met with you here, where I have had an Opportunity to
tell you what so much concerns your Safety, which I am afraid you will not find
in Florence; considering the great Power Don Fabritio and his Father, the
Marquess of Viterbo, have in this City. I have another thing to inform you of,
That whereas Don Fabio had interested himself in your Cause, in Opposition to
the Marquess of Viterbo, by reason of the long Animosity between them, all
hopes of his Countenance and Assistance are defeated: For there has been a
Proposal of Reconciliation made to both Houses, and it is said it will be
confirmed (as most such ancient Quarrels are at last) by the Marriage of
Juliana the Marquess's Daughter, with Aurelian, Son to Don Fabian: to which
effect the old Gentleman sent 'tother Day to Siena, where Aurelian has been
Educated, to hasten his coming to Town; but the Messenger returning this
Morning, brought word, That the same day he arrived at Siena, Aurelian had set
out for Florence, in Company with a young Spanish Nobleman, his intimate
Friend, so it is believed they are both in Town, and not unlikely in this Room
in Masquerade.

Hippolito could not forbear smiling to himself, at these last words. For ever
since the naming of Don Fabio he had been very attentive; but before, his
Thoughts were wholly taken up with the Beauty of the Face he had seen, and from
the time she had taken him by the Hand, a successive warmth and chillness had
played about his Heart, and surpised him with an unusual Transport. He was in
a hundred Minds, whether he should make her sensible of her Error or no; but
considering he could expect no farther Conference with her after he should
discover himself, and that as yet he knew not of her place of abode, he
resolved to humor the mistake a little further. Having her still by the Hand,
which he squeezed somewhat more eargerly than is usual for Cousins to do, in a
low and undistinguishable Voice, he let her know how much he held himself
obliged to her, and avoiding as many words as handsomely he could, at the same
time, entreated her to give him her Advice, toward the management of himself in
this Affair. Leonora, who never from the beginning had entertained the least
Scruple of distrust, imagined he spoke faintly, as not being yet perfectly
recovered in his strength; and withal considering that the heat of the Room, by
reason of the Crowd, might be uneasy to a Person in his Condition; she kindly
told him, That if he were as inclinable to dispense with the remainder of that
Nights Diversion as she was, and had no other engagement upon him, by her
consent, they should both steal out of the Assembly, and go to her House, where
they might with more freedom discourse about a business of that importance, and
where he might take something to refresh himself if he were (as she conceived
him to be) indisposed with his long standing. Judge you whether the Proposal
were acceptable to Hippolito or no; he had been ruminating with himself how to
bring something like this about, and had almost despaired of it; when of a
sudden he found the success of his design had prevented his own endeavors. He
told his Cousin in the same key as before, That he was unwilling to be the
occasion of her Divorce from so much good Company; but for his own part, he was
afraid he had presumed too much upon his recovery in coming abroad so soon, and
that he found himself so unwell, he feared he should be quickly forced to
retire. Leonora stayed not to make him any other reply, only tipp'd him upon
the Arm, and bid him follow her at a convenient distance to avoid Observation.

Whoever had seen the Joy that was in Hippolito's Countenance, and the
Sprightliness with which he followed his Beautiful Conductress, would scarce
have taken him for a Person grieved with uncured Wounds. She led him down a
back pair of Stairs, into one of the Palace Gardens which had a Door opening
into the Piazza, not far from where Don Mario her Father lived. They had little
discourse by the way, which gave Hippolito time to consider of the best way of
discovering himself. A thousand things came into his Head in a minute, yet
nothing that pleased him: and after so many Contrivances as he had formed for
the discovery of himself, he found it more rational for him not to reveal
himself at all that Night, since he could not foresee what effect the surprise
would have, she must needs be in, at the appearance of a Stranger, whom she had
never seen before, yet whom she had treated so familiarly. He knew Women were
apt to shriek or swoon upon such Occasions, and should she happen to do either,
he might be at a loss how to bring himself off. He thought he might easily
pretend to be indisposed somewhat more than ordinary, and so make an excuse to
go to his own Lodging. It came into his Head too, that under pretense of giving
her an account of his Health, he might enquire of her the means how a Letter
might be conveyed to her the next morning, wherein he might inform her gently
of her mistake, and insinuate something of that Passion he had conceived, which
he was sure he could not have opportunity to speak of if he bluntly revealed
himself. He had just resolved upon this Method, as they were come to the great
Gates of the Court, when Leonora stopping to let him go in before her, he of a
sudden fetched his Breath violently, as if some stitch or twinging smart had
just then assaulted him. She enquired the matter of him, and advised him to
make haste into the House that he might sit down and rest him. He told her he
found himself so ill, that he judged it more convenient for him to go home
while he was in a condition to move, for he feared if he should once settle
himself to rest, he might not be able to stir. She was much troubled, and would
have had a Chair made ready and Servants to carry him home; but he made answer,
he would not have any of her Fathers Servants know of his being abroad, and
that just now he had an interval of ease, which he hoped would continue till he
made a shift to reach his own Lodgings. Yet if she pleased to inform him how he
might give an account of himself the next morning, in a line or two, he would
not fail to give her the thanks due to her great kindness; and withal, would
let her know something which would not a little surprise her, though now he had
not time to acquaint her with it. She showed him a little Window at the corner
of the House, where one should wait to receive his Letter, and was just taking
her leave of him, when seeing him search hastily in his Pocket, she asked him
if he missed any thing; he told her he thought a Wound which was not thoroughly
healed bled a little, and that he had lost his Handkerchief. His design took;
for she immediately gave him hers: which indeed accordingly he applied to the
only Wound he was then grieved with; which though it went quite through his
Heart, yet thank God was not Mortal. He was not a little rejoiced at his good
Fortune in getting so early a Favor from his Mistress, and notwithstanding the
violence he did himself to personate a sick Man, he could not forbear giving
some Symptoms of an extraordinary content; and telling her that he did not
doubt to receive a considerable Proportion of ease from the Application of what
had so often kissed her fair Hand. Leonora, who did not suspect the Compliment,
told him she should be heartily glad if that, or any thing in her power, might
contribute to his recovery; and wishing him well home, went into her House, as
much troubled for her Cousin as he was joyful for his Mistress.

Hippolito as soon as she was gone in, began to make his Remarks about the
House, walking round the great Court, viewing the Gardens and all the Passages
leading to that side of the Piazza. Having sufficiently informed himself, with
a Heart full of Love, and a Head full of Stratagem, he walked toward his
Lodging, impatient till the arrival of Aurelian, that he might give himself
vent. In which interim, let me take the liberty to digress a little, and tell
the Reader something which I do not doubt he has apprehended himself long ago,
if he be not the dullest Reader in the World; yet only for order sake, let me
tell him I say, That a young Gentleman (Cousin to the aforesaid Don Fabritio)
happened one night to have some words at a Gameing House with one Lorenzo,
which created a Quarrel of fatal Consequence to the former, who was killed upon
the Spot, and likely to be so to the latter, who was very desperately wounded.

Fabritio being much concerned for his Kinsman, vowed Revenge (according to the
ancient and laudable Custom of Italy) upon Lorenzo, if he survived; or, in case
of his Death, (if it should happen to anticipate that, much more swinging Death
which he had in store for him) upon his next of Kin, and so to descend Lineally
like an English Estate, to all the Heirs Males of his Family. This same
Fabritio had indeed (as Leonora told Hippolito) taken particular notice of him
from his first Entrance into the Room, and was so far doubtful as to go out
immediately himself, and make enquiry concerning Lorenzo, but was quickly
informed of the greatness of his Error, in believing a Man to be abroad, who
was so ill of his Wounds, that they now despaired of his Recovery; and
thereupon returned to the Ball very well satisfied, but not before Leonora and
Hippolito were departed.

So, Reader, having now discharged my Conscience of a small Discovery which I
thought my self obliged to make to thee, I proceed to tell thee, that our
Friend Aurelian had by this time danced himself into a Net, which he neither
could, nor which is worse, desired to untangle.

His Soul was charmed to the Movement of her Body; an Air so graceful, so
sweet, so easy and so great, he had never seen. She had something of Majesty
in her, which appeared to be born with her; and though it struck an Awe into
the Beholders, yet was it sweetened with a Familiarity of Behavior, which
rendered it agreeable to every Body. The Grandeur of her Mien was not stiff,
but unstudied and unforced, mixed with a simplicity; free, yet not loose nor
affected. If the former seemed to condescend, the latter seemed to aspire; and
both to unite in the Center of Perfection. Every turn she gave in Dancing
snatched Aurelian into a Rapture, and he had like to have been out two or three
times with following his Eyes, which she led about as Slaves to her Heels.

As soon as they had done dancing, he began to complain of his want of Breath
and Lungs, to speak sufficiently in her Commendation: She smilingly told him,
he did ill to dance so much then: Yet in Consideration of the pains he had
taken more than ordinary upon her account, she would bate him a great deal of
Complement, but with this Proviso, That he was to discover to her who he was.
Aurelian was unwilling for the present to own himself to be really the Man he
was; when a sudden thought came into his Head to take upon him the Name and
Character of Hippolito, who he was sure was not known in Florence. He
thereupon, after a little pause, pretended to recall himself in this manner:
Madam, it is no small demonstration of the entire Resignation which I have made
of my Heart to your Chains, since the secrets of it are no longer in my power.
I confess I only took Florence in my way, not designing any longer Residence,
than should be requisite to inform the Curiosity of a Traveller, of the
rareties of the Place. Whether Happiness or Misery will be the Consequence of
that Curiosity, I am yet in fear, and submit to your Determination; but sure I
am, not to depart Florence till you have made me the most miserable Man in it,
and refuse me the fatal Kindness of Dying at your Feet. I am by Birth a
Spaniard, of the City of Toledo; my name Hippolito di Saviolina: I was
yesterday a Man free, as Nature made the first; to day I am fallen into a
Captivity, which must continue with my Life, and which, it is in your power, to
make much dearer to me. Thus in obedience to your Commands, and contrary to my
Resolution of remaining unknown in this place, I have informed you, Madam, what
I am; what I shall be, I desire to know from you; at least, I hope, the free
discovery I have made of my self, will encourage you to trust me with the
knowledge of your Person.

Here a low bow, and a deep sigh, put an end to his Discourse, and signified
his Expectation of her Reply, which was to this purpose -- (But I had forgot to
tell you, That Aurelian kept off his Mask from the time that he told her he was
of Spain, till the period of his Relation.) Had I thought (said she) that my
Curiosity would have brought me in debt, I should certainly have forborne it; or
at least have agreed with you before hand about the rate of your discovery,
then I had not brought my self to the Inconveniency of being censured, either
of too much easiness or reservedness; but to avoid, as much as I can, the
extremity of either, I am resolved but to discover my self in part, and will
endeavor to give you as little occasion as I can, either to boast of, or
ridicule the Behavior of the Women of Florence in your Travels.

Aurelian interrupted her, and swore very solemnly (and the more heartily I
believe, because he then indeed spoke truth) that he would make Florence the
place of his abode, whatever concerns he had elsewhere. She advised him to be
cautious how he swore to his Expressions of Gallantry; and farther told him she
now hoped she should make him a return to all the Fine Things he had said,
since she gave him his choice whether he would know whom she was, or see her
Face.

Aurelian who was really in Love, and in whom Consideration would have been a
Crime, greedily embraced the latter, since she assured him at that time he
should not know both. Well, what followed? Why, she pulled off her Mask, and
appeared to him at once in the Glory of Beauty. But who can tell the
astonishment Aurelian felt? He was for a time senseless; Admiration had
suppressed his Speech, and his Eyes were entangled in Light. In short, to be
made sensible of his condition, we must conceive some Idea of what he beheld,
which is not to be imagined till seen, nor then to be expressed. Now see the
impertinence and conceitedness of an Author, who will have a fling at a
Description, which he has Prefaced with an impossibility. One might have seen
something in her Composition resembling the Formation of Epicurus his World, as
if every Attome of Beauty had concurred to unite an excellency. Had that
curious Painter lived in her days, he might have avoided his painful search,
when he collected from the choicest pieces the most choice Features, and by a
due Disposition and Judicious Symmetry of those exquisite parts, made one whole
and perfect Venus. Nature seemed here to have played the Plagiary, and to have
molded into Substance the most refined Thoughts of inspired Poets. Her Eyes
diffused Rays comfortable as warmth, and piercing as the Light; they would have
worked a passage through the straightest Pores, and with a delicious heat, have
played about the most obdurate Frozen Heart, until 'twere melted down to Love.
Such Majesty and Affability were in her Looks; so alluring, yet commanding was
her Presence, that it mingled Awe with Love; kindling a Flame which trembled to
aspire. She had danced much, which together with her being close masked, gave
her a tincture of Carnation more than ordinary. But Aurelian (from whom I had
every tittle of her Description) fancied he saw a little Nest of Cupids break
from the Tresses of her Hair, and every one officiously betake himself to his
task. Some fanned with their downy Wings, her glowing Cheeks; while others
brushed the balmy Dew from off her Face, leaving alone a heavenly Moisture
blubbing on her Lips, on which they drank and revell'd for their pains: Nay, so
particular were their allotments in her Service, that Aurelian was very
positive a young Cupid who was but just Pen-feather'd, employed his naked
Quills to pick her Teeth. And a thousand other things his transport represented
to him, which none but Lovers who have experience of such Visions will believe.

As soon as he awaked and found his Speech come to him, he employed it to this
effect:

It Is enough that I have seen a Divinity -- Nothing but Mercy can inhabit these
Perfections -- Their utmost rigor brings a Death preferable to any Life, but
what they give -- Use me, Madam, as you please; for by your fair self, I cannot
think a Bliss beyond what now I feel -- You Wound with Pleasure, and if you
Kill it must be with Transport -- Ah! Yet methinks to live -- O Heaven! to have
Life pronounced by those Blessed Lips -- Did they not inspire where they
command, it were an immediate Death of Joy.

Aurelian was growing a little too loud with his Admiration, had she not just
then interrupted him, by clapping on her Masque, and telling him they should be
observed, if he proceeded in his Extravagance; and withal, that his Passion was
too sudden to be real, and too violent to be lasting. He replied, Indeed it
might not be very lasting, (with a submissive mournful Voice) but it would
continue during his Life. That it was sudden, he denied, for she had raised it
by degrees from his first sight of her, by a continued discovery of Charms, in
her Mien and Conversation, till she thought fit to set Fire to the Train she
had laid, by the Lightning of her Face; and then he could not help it, if he
were blown up.

He begged her to believe the Sincerity of his Passion, at least to enjoin him
something, which might tend to the Convincing of her Incredulity. She said, she
should find a time to make some Trials of him; but for the first, she charged
him not to follow or observe her, after the Dissolution of the Assembly. He
promised to obey, and entreated her to tell him but her Name, that he might
have Recourse to that in his Affliction for her Absence, if he were able to
survive it. She desired him to live by all means; and if he must have a Name to
play with, to call her Incognita, till he were better informed.

The Company breaking up, she took her leave, and at his earnest Entreaty, gave
him a short Vision of her Face; which, then dressed in an obliging smile caused
another fit of Transport, which lasted till she was gone out of Sight. Aurelian
gathered up his Spirits, and walked slowly toward his Lodging, never
remembering that he had lost Hippolito, till upon turning the Corner of a
Street, he heard a noise of Fighting; and coming near, saw a Man make a
vigorous Defense against two, who pressed violently upon him. He then thought
of Hippolito, and fancying he saw the glimmering of Diamond Buttons, such as
Hippolito had upon the Sleeves of his Habit, immediately drew to his
Assistance; and with that Eagerness and Resolution, that the Assailants,
finding their unmanly odds defeated, took to their Heels. The Person rescued by
the Generous Help of Aurelian, came toward him; but as he would have stopped to
have saluted him, dropped, fainting at his feet. Aurelian, now he was so near
him, perceived plainly Hippolito's Habit, and stepped hastily to take him up.
Just as some of the Guards (who were going the Rounds, apprehensive of such
Disorders in an Universal Merriment) came up to him with Lights, and had taken
Prisoners the Two Men, whom they met with their Swords drawn; when looking in
the Face of the Wounded Man, he found it was not Hippolito, but his Governor
Claudio, in the Habit he had worn at the Ball. He was extremely surpised, as
were the Prisoners, who confessed their Design to have been upon Lorenzo;
grounding their Mistake upon the Habit which was known to have been his. They
were Two Men who formerly had been Servants to him, whom Lorenzo had
unfortunately slain.

They made a shift to bring Claudio to himself; and part of the Guard carrying
off the Prisoners, whom Aurelian desired they would secure, the rest
accompanied him bearing Claudio in their Arms to his Lodging. He had not
patience to forbear asking for Hippolito by the Way; whom Claudio assured him,
he had left safe in his Chamber, above Two Hours since. That his coming Home so
long before the Divertisements were ended, and Undressing himself, had given
him the Unhappy Curiosity, to put on his Habit, and go to the Palace; in his
Return from whence, he was set upon in the Manner he found him, which if he
recovered, he must own his Life indebted to his timely Assistance.

Being come to the House, they carried him to his Bed, and having sent for
Surgeons, Aurelian rewarded and dismissed the Guard. He stayed the dressing of
Claudio's Wounds, which were many, though they hoped none Mortal: and leaving
him to his Rest, went to give Hippolito an Account of what had happened, whom
he found with a Table before him, leaning upon both his Elbows, his Face
covered with his Hands, and so motionless, that Aurelian concluded he was
asleep; seeing several Papers lie before him, half written and blotted out
again, he thought to steal softly to the Table, and discover what he had been
employed about. Just as he reached forth his Hand to take up one of the Papers,
Hippolito started up so on the sudden, as surpised Aurelian, and made him
leap back; Hippolito, on the other hand, not supposing that any Body had been
near him, was so disordered with the Appearance of a Man at his Elbow, (whom
his Amazement did not permit him to distinguish) that he leaped hastily to his
Sword, and in turning him about, overthrew the Stand and Candles. Here were
they both left in the Dark, Hippolito groping about with his Sword, and
thrusting at every Chair that he felt oppose him. Aurelian was scarce come to
himself, when thinking to step back toward the Door that he might inform his
Friend of his Mistake, without exposing himself to his blind Fury; Hippolito
heard him stir, and made a full thrust with such Violence, that the Hilt of the
Sword meeting with Aurelian's Breast beat him down, and Hippolito a top of him,
as a Servant alarmed with the noise, came into the Chamber with a Light. The
Fellow trembled, and thought they were both Dead, till Hippolito raising
himself, to see whom he had got under him, swoon'd away upon the discovery of
his Friend. But such was the extraordinary Care of Providence in directing the
Sword, that it only past under his Arm, giving no Wound to Aurelian, but a
little Bruise between his Shoulder and Breast with the Hilt. He got up, scarce
recovered of his Fright, and by the help of the Servant, laid Hippolito upon
the Bed; who when he was come to himself could hardly be persuaded, that his
Friend was before him and alive, till he showed him his Breast, where was
nothing of a Wound. Hippolito begged his Pardon a Thousand Times, and cursed
himself as often, who was so near to committing the most Execrable Act of
Amicide.

They dismissed the Fellow, and with many Embraces, congratulated their
fortunate Delivery from the Mischief which came so near them each blaming
himself as the Occasion: Aurelian accusing his own unadvisedness in stealing
upon Hippolito; Hippolito blaming his own temerity and weakness, in being so
easily frighted to Disorder; and last of all, his blindness, in not knowing his
dearest Friend. But there he gave a Sigh, and passionately taking Aurelian by
the Hand, cried, Ah! my Friend; Love is indeed blind, when it would not suffer
me to see you -- There arose another Sigh; a Sympathy seized Aurelian
immediately: (For, by the Way, sighing is as catching among Lovers, as yawning
among the Vulger.) Beside hearing the Name of Love, made him fetch such a Sigh,
that Hippolito's were but Fly-blows in Comparison, that was answered with all
the Might Hippolito had, Aurelian plied him close till they were both out of
Breath.

Thus not a Word passed, though each wondered why the the other sighed, at last
concluded it to be only Complaisance to one another.

Aurelian broke the Silence, by telling him the Misfortune of his Governor.
Hippolito rejoiced as at the luckiest Accident which could have befallen him.
Aurelian wondered at his unseasonable Mirth, and demanded the Cause of it; he
answered, It would necessitate his longer Stay in Florence, and for ought he
knew be the Means of bringing a happy Period to his Amor.

His Friend thought him to be little better than a Madman, when he perceived
him of a sudden snatch out of his Bosom a Handkerchief, which having kissed
with a great deal of Ardour, he took Aurelian by the Hand, and smiling at the
Surprise he saw him in:

Your Florentine Cupid is certainly (said he) the most Expert in the World. I
have since I saw you beheld the most Beautiful of Women. I am fallen desperately
in Love with her, and those Papers which you see so blotted and scattered, are
but so many Essays which I have made to the Declaration of my Passion. And this
Handkerchief which I so zealously Caress, is the Inestimable Token which I have
to make my self known to her. O Leonora! (continued he) how have thou stamped
thine Image on my Soul! How much dearer am I to my self, since I have had thy
Heavenly Form in keeping! Now, my Aurelian, I am worth thee; my exalted Love
has Dignified me, and raised me far above thy poor former Despicable Hippolito.

Aurelian seeing the Rapture he was in, thought it in vain to expect a settled
Relation of the Adventure, so was reaching to the Table for foam of the Papers,
but Hippolito told him, If he would have a little patience he would acquaint
him with the whole Matter; and thereupon told him Word for Word how he was
mistaken for Lorenzo, and his Management of himself. Aurelian commended his
Prudence, in not discovering himself; and told him, If he could spare so much
time from the Contemplation of his Mistress, he would inform him of an
Adventure, though not so Accidental, yet of as great Concern to his own future
Happiness. So related all that had happened to him with his Beautiful Incognita.

Having ended the Story, they began to consisider of the Means they were to use
toward a Review of their Mistresses. Aurelian was Confounded at the Difficulty
he conceived on his Part. He understoood from Hippolito's Adventure, that his
Father knew of his being in Town, whom he must unavoidably Disoblige if he yet
concealed himself, and Disobey if he came into his Sight; for he had already
entertained an Aversion for Juliana, in apprehension of her being Imposed on
him. His Incognita was rooted in his Heart, yet could he not Comfort himself
with any Hopes when he should see her: He knew not where she lived, and she had
made him no Promise of a second Conference. Then did he repent his
inconsiderate Choice, in preferring the momentary Vision of her Face, to a
certain Intelligence of her Person. Every thought that succeeded distracted
him, and all the Hopes he could presume upon, were within compass of the Two
Days Merriment yet to come; for which Space he hoped he might excuse his
remaining concealed to his Father.

Hippolito on the other side (though Aurelian thought him in a much better Way)
was no less afflicted for himself. The Difficulties which he saw in his
Friend's Circumstances, put him upon finding out-a great many more in his own,
than really there were. But what terrified him most of all, was his being an
utter Stranger to Leonora; she had not the least knowledge of him but through
mistake; and consequently could form no Idea of him to his Advantage. He looked
upon it as an unlucky thought in Aurelian to take upon him his Name, since
possibly the Two Ladies were acquainted; and should they communicate to each
other their Adventures, they might both reasonably suffer in their Opinions,
and be thought guilty of Falshoood, since it would appear to them as One Person
pretending to Two. Aurelian told him, there was but one Remedy for that, which
was for Hippolito, in the same Manner that he had done, to make use of his
Name, when he writ to Leonora, and use what Arguments he could to persuade her
to Secrecy, least his Father should know of the Reason which kept him concealed
in Town. And it was likely, though perhaps she might not immediately entertain
his Passion, yet she would out of Generosity conceal, what was hidden only for
her sake.

Well this was concluded on, after a great many other Reasons used on either
Side, in favor of the Contrivance; they at last argued themselves into a
Belief, that Fortune had befriended them with a better Plot, than their regular
Thinking could have contrived. So soon had they convinced themselves, in what
they were willing to believe.

Aurelian laid himself down to rest, that is, upon the Bed; for he was a better
Lover than to pretend to sleep that Night, while Hippolito set himself again to
frame his Letter designed for Leonora. He writ several, at last pitched upon
one, and very probably the worst, as you may guess when you read it in its
proper Place.

It was break of Day when the Servant, who had been employed all the foregoing
Day in procuring Accoutrements for the Two Cavaliers, to appear in at the
Tilting, came into the Room, and told them all the Young Gentlemen in the Town
were trying their Equipage, and preparing to be early in the Lists. They made
themselves ready with all Expedition at the Alarm: and Hippolito having made a
Visit to his Governor, dispatched a Messenger with the Letter and Directions
to Leonora. At the Signal agreed upon the Casement was opened and a String let
down, to which the Bearer having fastened the Letter, saw it drawn up, and
returned. It were avain attempt to describe Leonora's Surprise, when she read
the Superscription. -- The Unfortunate Aurelian, to the Beautiful Leonora --
After she was a little recovered from her Amaze, she recollected to her self
all the Passages between her and her supposed Cousin, and immediately concluded
him to be Aurelian. Then several little Circumstances which she thought might
have been sufficient to have convinced her, represented themselves to her; and
she was in a strange Uneasiness to think of her free Carriage to a Stranger.

She was once in a Mind to have burned the Letter, or to have stayed for an
Opportunity to send it again. But she was a Woman, and her Curiosity opposed it
self to all thoughts of that Nature: at length with a firm Resolution, she
opened it, and found Word for Word, what is underwritten.

The LETTER.
Madam,
IF your fair Eyes, upon the breaking up of this, meet with somewhat too quick
a Surprise, make thence, I beseech you, some reflection upon the Condition I
must needs have been in, at the sudden Appearance of that Sun of Beauty, which
at once shone so full upon my Soul. I could not immediately disengage my self
from that Maze of Charms, to let you know how unworthy a Captive your Eyes had
made through mistake. Sure, Madam, you cannot but remember my Disorder, of
which your Innocent (Innocent, though perhaps to me Fatal) Error made a
Charitable (but wide) Construction. Your Tongue pursued the Victory of your
Eyes, and you did not give me time to rally my poor Disordered Senses, so as to
make a tolerable Retreat. Pardon, Madam, the Continuation of the Deceit, and
call it not so, that I appeared to be other than my self; for Heaven knows I
was not then my self, nor am I now my own. You told me something that concerned
me nearly, as to a Marriage my Father designed me, and much more nearly in
being told by you. For Heaven's sake, disclose not to any Body your Knowledge
of me, that I may not be forced to an immediate Act of Disobedience; for if my
future Services and inviolate Love, cannot recommend me to your Favor, I shall
find more comfort in the cold Embraces of a Grave, than in the Arms of the
never so much admired (but by me dreaded) Juliana. Think, Madam, of those
severe Cicumstances I lie under; and withal I beg you, think it is in your
Power, and only in your Power, to make them happy as my Wishes, or much more
miserable than I am able to imagine. That dear, inestimable (though undesign'd)
Favor which I received from you, shall this Day distinguish me from the Crowd
of your Admirers; that which I really applied to my inward bleeding Wound, the
welcome Wound which you have made, and which, unless from you, does wish no
Cure; then pardon and have pity on, O Adored Leonora, him, who is yours by
Creation as he is Heaven's, though never so unworthy. Have pity on

Your Aurelian.


She read the Letter over and over, then flung it by, then read it again; the
Novelty of the Adventure made her repeat her Curiosity, and take more than
ordinary Pains to understand it. At last her Familiarity with the Expressions
grew to an Intimacy, and what she at first permitted she now began to like. She
thought there was something in it a little more serious, than to be barely
Gallantry. She wondered at her own Blindness, and fancied she could remember
something of a more becoming Air in the Stranger than was usual to Lorenzo.
This thought was parent to another of the same kind, till a long Chain
successively had Birth, and every one somewhat more than other, in Favor of
the supposed Aurelian. She reflected upon his Discretion, in deferring the
Discovery of himself, till a little time had, as it were, weaned her from her
persuasion, and by removing her farther from her Mistake, had prepared her for
a full and determinate Convincement. She thought his Behavior, in personating
a Sick Man so readily, upon the first hint was not amiss, and smiled to think
of his Excuse to procure her Handkerchief; and last of all, his sifting out the
Means to write to her, which he had done with that Modesty and Respect, she
could not tell how to find fault with it.

She had proceeded thus far in a maze of Thought, when she started to find her
self so lost to her Reason, and would have trod back again that path of
deluding Fancy; accusing her self of Fondness, and inconsiderate Easiness, in
giving Credit to the Letter of a Person whose Face she never saw, and whose
first Acquaintance with her was a Treachery, and he who could so readily
deliver his Tongue of a Lie upon a Surprise, was scarce to be trusted when he
had sufficient Time allowed him to beget a Fiction, and Means to perfect the
Birth.

How did she know this to be Aurelian, if he were? Nay farther, put it to the
Extremity, What if she should upon farther Conversation with him proceed to
Love him? What Hopes were there for her? Or how could she consent to Marry a
Man already Destined for another Woman? nay, a Woman that was her Friend, whose
Marrying with him was to complete the happy Reconciliation of Two Noble
Families, and which might prevent the Effusion of much Blood likely to be shed
in that Quarrel: Besides, she should incurr share of the Guilt, which he would
draw upon him by Disobedience to his Father, whom she was sure would not be
consenting to it.

It Is strange now, but all Accounts agree, that just here Leonora, who had run
like a violent Stream against Aurelian hitherto, now retorted with as much
precipitation in his Favor. I could never get any Body to give me a
satisfactory Reason, for her sudden and dextrous Change of Opinion just at that
stop; which made me conclude she could not help it; and that Nature boiled over
in her at that time when it had so fair an Opportunity to show it self: For
Leonora it seems was a Woman Beautiful, and otherwise of an excellent
Disposition; but in the Bottom a very Woman. This last Objection, this
Opportunity of persuading Man to Disobedience, determined the Matter in Favor
of Aurelian, more than all his Excellencies and Qualifications, take him as
Aurelian, or Hippolito, or both together.

Well, the Spirit of Contradiction and of Eve was strong in her; and she was in
a fair Way to Love Aurelian, for she liked him already; that it was Aurelian
she no longer doubted, for had it been a Villain, who had only taken his Name
upon him for any ill Designs, he would never have slipped so favorable an
Opportunity as when they were alone, and in the Night coming through the Garden
and broad Space before the Piazza. In short, thus much he resolved, at least to
conceal the Knowledge she had of him, as he had entreated her in his Letter,
and to make particular Remarks of his Behavior that Day in the Lists, which
should it happen to Charm her with an absolute liking of his Person, she
resolved to dress her self to the best Advantage, and mustering up all her
Graces, out of pure Revenge to kill him down right.

I would not have the Reader now be impertinent, and look upon this to be
force, or a whim of the Author's, that a Woman should proceed so far in her
Approbation of a Man whom she never saw, that it is impossible, therefore
ridiculous to suppose it. Let me tell such a Critic, that he knows nothing of
the Sex, if he does not know that a Woman may be taken with the Character and
Description of a Man, when general and extraordinary, that she may be
prepossessed with an agreeable Idea of his Person and Conversation; and though
she cannot imagine his real Features, or manner of Wit, yet she has a general
Notion of what is called a fine Gentleman, and is prepared to like such a one
who does not disagree with that Character. Aurelian, as he bore a fair
Character, so was he extremely deserving to make it good, which otherways might
have been to his prejudice; for oftentimes, through an imprudent Indulgence to
our Friends merit, we give so large a Description of his excellencies, that
People make more room in their Expectation, than the Intrinsic worth of the
Man will fill, which renders him so much the more despicable as there is
emptyness to spare. It Is certain, though the Women seldom find that out; for
though they do not see so much in a Man as was promised, yet they will be so
kind to imagine he has some hidden excellencies which time may discover to
them, so are content to allow him a considerable share of their esteem, and
take him into Favor upon Tick. Aurelian as he had good Credit, so he had a
good Stock to support it, and his Person was a good promising Security for the
payment of any Obligation he could lie under to the Fair Sex. Hippolito, who at
this time was our Aurelian, did not at all lessen him in appearing for him: So
that although Leonora was indeed mistaken, she could not be said to be much in
the wrong. I could find in my Heart to beg the Reader's pardon for this
Digression, if I thought he would be sensible of the Civility; for I promise
him, I do not intend to do it again throughout the Story, though I make never
so many, and though he take them never so ill. But because I began this upon a
bare Supposition of his Impertinence, which might be somewhat impertinent in me
to suppose I do, and hope to make him amends by telling him, that by the time
Leonora was dressed, several Ladies of her acquaintance came to accompany her
to the place designed for the Tilting, where we will leave them drinking
Chocholate till it is time for them to go.

Our Cavaliers had by good Fortune provided themselves of two curious Suits of
light Armor, finely enammelled and gilt. Hippolito had sent to Poggio
Imperiale for a couple of fine led Horses which he had left there with the rest
of his Train at his entrance into Florence. Mounted on these and every way well
Equipt, they took their way, attended only by two Lacqueys, toward the Church
di Santa Croce, before which they were to perform their Exercises of Chivalry.
Hippolito wore upon his Helm a large Plume of Crimson Feathers, in the midst of
which was artificially placed Leonora's Handkerchief. His Armor was gilt, and
enammell'd with Green and Crimson. Aurelian was not so happy as to wear any
token to recommend him to the notice of his Mistress, so had only a Plume of
Sky-colour and White Feathers, suitable to his Armor, which was Silver
enammelled with Azure. I shall not describe the Habits of any other Cavaliers,
or of the Ladies; let it suffice to tell the Reader they were all very Fine and
very Glorious, and let him dress them in what is most agreeable to his own
Fancy.

Our Gallants entered the Lists, and having made their Obeisance to his
Highness, turned round to salute and view the Company. The Scaffold was
circular, so that there was no end of the Delightful Prospect. It seemed a
Glory of Beauty which shone around the admiring Beholders. Our Lovers soon
perceived the Stars which were to Rule their Destiny, which sparkled a Luster
beyond all the Inferior Constellations, and seemed like two Suns to distribute
Light to all the Planets in that Heavenly Sphere. Leonora knew her Slave by his
Badge, and blushed till the Lillies and Roses in her Cheeks had resemblance to
the Plume of Crimson and White Handkerchief in Hippolito's Chrest. He made her
a low Bow, and reined his Horse back with an extraordinary Grace, into a
respectful Retreat. Aurelian saw his Angel, his beautiful Incognita, and had no
other way to make himself known to her, but by saluting and bowing to her after
the Spanish Mode; she guessed him by it to be her new Servant Hippolito, and
signified her Apprehension, by making him a more particular and obliging
return, than to any of the Cavaliers who had saluted her before.

The Exercise that was to be performed was in general a running at the Ring;
and afterward two Cavaliers undertook to defend the Beauty of Donna Catharina,
against all who would not allow her Pre-eminence of their Mistresses. This
thing was only designed for Show and Form, none presuming that any Body would
put so great an Affront upon the Bride and Duke's Kinswoman, as to dispute her
Pretentions to the first place in the Court of Venus. But here our Cavaliers
were under a Mistake; for seeing a large Shield carried before two Knights,
with a Lady painted upon it; not knowing who, but reading the Inscription which
was (in large Gold Letters) Above the Insolence of Competition. They thought
themselves obliged, especially in the Presence of their Mistresses, to
vindicate their Beauty; and were just spurring on to engage the Champions, when
a Gentleman stopping them, told them their Mistake, that it was the Picture of
Donna Catharina, and a particular Honor done to her by his Highness's
Commands, and not to be disputed. Upon this they would have returned to their
Post, much concerned for their Mistake; but notice being taken by Don Ferdinand
of some Show of Opposition that was made, he would have begged leave of the
Duke, to have maintained his Lady's Honor against those Cavaliers; but the
Duke would by no means permit it. They were arguing about it when one of them
came up, before whom the Shield was born, and demanded his Highness's
Permission, to inform those Gentlemen better of their Mistake, by giving them
the Foyl. By the Intercession of Don Ferdinand, leave was given them; whereupon
a Civil Challenge was sent to the two Strangers, informing them of their Error,
and withal telling them they must either maintain it by force of Arms, or make
a public Acknowledgment by riding Bare-headed before the Picture once round
the Lists. The Stranger-Cavaliers remonstrated to the Duke how sensible they
were of their Error; and though they would not justify it, yet they could not
decline the Combat, being pressed to it beyond an honorable Refusal. To the
Bride they sent a Complement, wherein, having first begged her Pardon for not
knowing her Picture, they gave her to understand, that now they were not about
to dispute her undoubted Right to the Crown of Beauty, but the Honor of being
her Champions was the Prize they sought for, which they thought themselves as
able to maintain as any other Pretenders. Wherefore they prayed her, that if
Fortune so far befriended their Endeavors as to make them Victors, that they
might receive no other Reward, but to be crowned with the Titles of their
Adversaries, and be ever after esteemed as her most humble Servants. The Excuse
was so handsomely designed, and much better expressed than it is here, that it
took effect. The Duke, Don Ferdinand and his Lady, were so well satisfied with
it as to grant their Request.

While the running at the Ring lasted, our Cavaliers alternately bore away
great share of the Honor. That Sport ended, Marshals were appointed for the
Field, and every thing in great Form settled for the Combat. The Cavaliers were
all in good earnest, but Orders were given to bring 'em blunted Lances, and to
forbid the drawing of a Sword upon pain of his Highness's Displeasure. The
Trumpets sounded, and they began their Course. The Ladies Hearts, particularly
the Incognita and Leonora's, beat time to the Horses Hoofs, and Hope and Fear
made a mock Fight within their tender Breast, each wishing and doubting Success
where she liked: But as the generality of their Prayers were for the graceful
Strangers, they accordingly succeeded. Aurelian's Adversary was unhorsed in the
first Encounter, and Hippolito's lost both his Stirrops and dropped his Lance to
save himself. The Honor of the Field was immediately granted to them, and
Donna Catherina sent them both Favors, which she prayed them to wear as her
Knights. The Crowd breaking up, our Cavaliers made a shift to steal off
unmarked, save by the watchful Leonora and Incognita, whose Eyes were never off
from their respective Servants. There was enquiry made for them, but to no
purpose; for they, to prevent their being discovered, had prepared another
House, distant from their Lodging, where a Servant attended to disarm them, and
another carried back their Horses to the Villa, while they walked unsuspected
to their Lodging; but Incognita had given Command to a Page to dog 'em till the
Evening, at a distance, and bring her word where they were latest housed.

While several Conjectures passed among the Company, who were all gone to
Dinner at the Palace, who those Cavaliers should be, Don Fabio thought himself
the only Man able to guess; for he knew for certain that his Son and Hippolito
were both in Town, as was well enough pleased with his humor of remaining
Incognito till the Diversions should be over, believing then that the surprise
of his Discovery would add much to the Gallantry he had shown in Masquerade;
but hearing the extraordinary liking that every body expressed, and in a
particular manner, the great Duke himself, to the Persons and Behavior of the
unknown Cavaliers, the Old Gentleman could not forbear the Vanity to tell his
Highness, that he believed he had an interest in one of the Gentlemen, whom he
was pleased to honor with so favorable a Character; and told him what reason
he had to believe the one to be his Son, and the other a Spanish Nobleman, his
Friend.

This discovery having thus got vent, was diffused like Air; every body sucked
it in, and let it out again with their Breath to the next they met withal; and
in half an hours time it was talked of in the House where our Adventurers were
lodged. Aurelian was stark mad at the News, and knew what search would be
immediately made for him. Hippolito, had he not been desperately in Love, would
certainly have taken Horse and rid out of Town just then; for he could make no
longer doubt of being discovered, and he was afraid of the just Exceptions
Leonora might make to a Person who had now deceived her twice. Well, we will
leave them both fretting and contriving to no purpose, to look about and see
what was done at the Palace, where their doom was determined much quicker than
they imagined.

Dinner ended, the Duke retired with some chosen Friends to a Glass of Wine;
among whom were the Marquess of Viterbo and Don Fabio. His Highness was no
Stranger to the long Fewd that had been between the two Families, and also
understood what Overtures of Reconciliation had been lately made, with the
Proposals of Marriage between Aurelian and the Marquess's Daughter. Having
waited till the Wine had taken the effect proposed, and the Company were raised
to an uncommon pitch of Cheerfulness, which he also encouraged by an Example of
Freedom and good Humor, he took an Opportunity of rallying the two grave
Signiors into an Accommodation: That was seconded with the Praises of the Young
Couple, and the whole Company joined in a large Encomium upon the Graces of
Aurelian, and the the Beauties of Juliana. The old Fellows were tickled with
Delight to hear their Darlings so admired, which the Duke perceiving, out of a
Principle of Generosity and Friendship, urged the present Consummation of the
Marriage; telling them there was yet one Day of public Rejoicing to come, and
how glad he should be to have it improved by so acceptable an Alliance; and
what an Honor it would be to have his Cousin's Marriage attended by the
Conjunction of so extraordinary a Pair, the performance of which Ceremony would
crown the Joy that was then in Agitation, and make the last Day vie for equal
Glory and Happiness with the first. In short, by the Complaisant and Persuasive
Authority of the Duke, the Dons were wrought into a Compliance, and accordingly
embraced and shook Hands upon the matter. This News was dispersed like the
former, and Don Fabio gave Orders for the enquiring out his Son's Lodgings,
that the Marquess and he might make him a Visit, as soon as he had acquainted
Juliana with his purpose, that she might prepare her self. He found her very
cheerful with Donna Catherina, and several other Ladies: Whereupon the Old
Gentleman, pretty well warmed with the Dukes good Fellowship, told her aloud,
He was come to Crown their Mirth with another Wedding; that his Highness had
been pleased to provide a Husband for his Daughter, and he would have her
provide her self to receive him to morrow. All the Company at first, as well as
Juliana her self, thought he had rallied, till the Duke coming in confirmed the
serious part of his Discourse. Juliana was confounded at the Haste that was
imposed on her, and desired a little time to consider what she was about. But
the Marquess told her, She should have all the rest of her Life to consider in;
that Aurelian should come and consider with her in the Morning, if she pleased;
but in the mean time, he advised her to go home and call her Maids to Counsel.

Juliana took her leave of the Company very gravely, as if not much delighted
with her Father's Raillery. Leonora happened to be by, and heard all that
passed; she was ready to swoon, and found her self seized with a more violent
Passion than ever for Aurelian: Now upon her apprehensions of losing him, her
active fancy had brought him before her with all the advantages imaginable, and
though she had before found great tenderness in her Inclination toward him, yet
was she somewhat surprised to find she really loved him. She was so uneasy at
what she had heard, that she thought it convenient to steal out of the
presence, and retire to her Closet, to bemoan her unhappy helpless Condition.

Our Two Cavalier-Lovers had racked their Invention till it was quite disabled,
and could not make discovery of one Contrivance more for their Relief. Both sat
silent, each depending upon his Friend, and still expecting when the other should
speak. Night came upon them while they sat thus thoughtless, or rather drowned
in Thought; but a Servant bringing Lights into the Room awakened them: And
Hippolito's Speech, ushered by a profound Sigh, broke Silence.

Well! (said he) what must we do, Aurelian? We must suffer, replied Aurelian
faintly. When immediately raising his Voice, he cried out, Oh ye unequal
Powers, why do ye urge us to desire what ye doom us to forbear; give us a Will
to choose, then curb us with a Duty to restrain that Choice! Cruel Father, Will
nothing else suffice! Am I to be the Sacrifice to expiate your Offenses past;
past ere I was born? Were I to lose my Life, I Would gladly Seal your Reconcilement
with my Blood. But Oh my Soul is free; you have no Title to my Immortal Being,
that has Existence independent of your Power; and must I lose my Love, the
Extract of that Being, the Joy, Light, Life, and Darling of my Soul? No, I Will
own my Flame, and plead my Title too. -- But hold, wretched Aurelian, hold,
whither does thy Passion hurry thee? Alas! the cruel fair Incognita Loves thee
not! She knows not of thy Love! If she did, what Merit have thou to pretend? --
Only Love. -- Excess of Love. And all the World has that. All that have seen
her. Yet I had only seen her once, and in that once I loved above the World;
nay, loved beyond my self, such vigorous Flame, so strong, so quick she darted
at my Breast; it must rebound, and by Reflection, warm her self. Ah! welcome
Thought, lovely deluding Fancy, hang still upon my Soul, let me but think, that
once she Loves, and perish my Despair.

Here a sudden stop gave a Period also to Hippolito's Expectation, and he
hoped now that his Friend had given his Passion so free a vent, he might
recollect and bethink himself of what was convenient to be done; but Aurelian,
as if he had mustered up all his Spirits purely to acquit himself of that
passionate Harangue, stood mute and insensible like an Alarm Clock, that had
spent all its force in one violent Emotion. Hippolito shook him by the Arm to
rouse him from his Lithargy, when his Lacquey coming into the Room, out of
Breath, told him there was a Coach just stopped at the Door, but he did not
take time to see who came in it. Aurelian, concluded immediately it was his
Father in quest of him; and without saying any more to Hippolito, than that he
was Ruined if discovered, took his Sword and slipped down a back pair of Stairs
into the Garden, from whence he conveyed himself into the Street. Hippolito had
not bethought himself what to do, before he perceived a Lady come into the
Chamber close veiled, and make toward him. At the first appearance of a Woman,
his Imagination flattered him with a Thought of Leonora; but that was quickly
over upon nearer Approach to the Lady, who had much the Advantage in Stature of
his Mistress. He very civilly accosted her, and asked, if he were the Person to
whom the Honor of that Visit was intended. She said, her Business was with Don
Hippolito di Saviolina, to whom she had Matter of Concern to import, and which
required haste. He had like to have told her, That he was the Man, but by good
Chance reflecting upon his Friend's Adventure, who had taken his name, he made
Answer, that he believed Don Hippolito not far off, and if she had a Moment's
Patience he would enquire for him.

He went out, leaving the Lady in the Room, and made search all round the House
and Garden for Aurelian, but to no purpose. The Lady, impatient of his long
stay, took a Pen and Ink and some Paper which she found upon the Table, and had
just made an End of her Letter, when hearing a Noise of more than one coming up
Stairs, she concluded his Friend had found him, and that her Letter would be to
no purpose, so tore it in pieces, which she repented; when turning about, she
found her mistake, and beheld Don Fobio and the Marquess of Viterbo just
entering at the Door. She gave a Shriek at the Surprise of their Appearance,
which much troubled the Old Gentlemen, and made them retire in Confusion* for
putting a Gentlewoman into such a Fright. The Marquess thinking they had been
misinformed, or had mistaken the Lodgings, came forward again, and made an
Apology to the Lady for their Error; but she making no reply, walked directly
by him down Stairs and went into her Coach, which hurried her away as speedily
as the Horses were able to draw.

The Dons were at a loss what to think, when, Hippolito coming into the Room to
give the Lady an Account of his Errant, was no less astonished to find she was
departed, and had left Two Old Signiors in her stead. He knew Don Fabio's Face,
for Aurelian had shown him his Father at the Tilting; but being confident he
was not known to him, he ventured to ask him concerning a Lady whom just now he
had left in that Chamber. Don Fabio told him, she was just gone down, and
doubted they had been Guilty of a Mistake, in coming to enquire for a Couple of
Gentlemen whom they were informed were Lodged in that House; he begged his
Pardon if he had any Relation to that Lady, and desired to know if he could
give them any Account of the Persons they sought for. Hippolito made answer, He
was a Stranger in the Place, and only a Servant to that Lady whom they had
disturbed, and whom he must go and seek out. And in this Perplexity he left
them going again in search of Aurelian, to inform him of what had passed.

The Old Gentlemen at last meeting with a Servant of the House, were directed
to Signior Claudio's Chamber, where they were no sooner entered, but Aurelian
came into the House. A Servant who had skulk'd for him by Hippolito's Order,
followed him up into the Chamber, and told him who was with Claudio then making
Enquiry for him. He thought that to be no Place for him, since Claudio must
needs discover all the Truth to his Father; wherefore he left Directions with
the Servant, where Hippolito should meet him in the Morning. As he was going
out of the Room he espied a torn Paper, which the Lady had thrown upon the
Floor: The first piece he took up had Incognita written upon it; the sight of
which so Alarmed him, he scarce knew what he was about; but hearing a Noise of
a Door opening over Head, with as much Care as was consistent with the haste he
was then in, he gathered up the scattered pieces of Paper, and betook himself
to a Ramble.

Coming by a Light which hung at the Corner of a Street, he joined the torn
Papers and collected thus much, that his Incognita had Written the Note, and
earnestly desired him (if there were any reality in what he pretended to her)
to meet her at Twelve a Clock that Night at a Convent Gate; but unluckily the
Bit of Paper which should have mentioned what Convent, was broken off and lost.

Here was a large Subject for Aurelian's Passion, which he did not spare to
pour forth in Abundance of Curses on his Stars. So earnest was he in the
Contemplation of his Misfortunes, that he walked on unwittingly; till at length
a Silence (and such as was only to be found in that part of the Town, whither
his unguided Steps had carried him) surpised his Attention. I say, a profound
Silence rouzed him from his Thought; and a clap of Thunder could have done no
more.

Now because it is possible this at some time or other may happen to be read by
some Malicious or Ignorant Person, (no Reflection upon the present Reader) who
will not admit, or does not understand that Silence should make a Man start;
and have the same Effect, in provoking his Attention, with its opposite Noise;
I will illustrate this Matter, to such a diminutive Critic, by a Parallel
instance of Light; which though it does chiefly entertain the Eyes, and is
indeed the prime Object of the Sight, yet should it immediately cease, to have
a Man left in the Dark by a sudden deficiency of it, would make him stare with
his Eyes, and though he could not see, endeavor to look about him. Why just
thus did it fare with our Adventurer; who seeming to have wandered both into the
Dominions of Silence and of Night, began to have some tender for his own
Safety, and would willingly have groped his Way back again; when he heard a
Voice, as from a Person whose Breath had been stopped by some forcible
Oppression, and just then, by a violent Effort, was broke through the
Restraint. -- Yet -- Yet -- (again replied the Voice, still struggling for
Air,) Forbear -- and I Will forgive what is past -- I have done nothing yet that
needs a Pardon, (says another) and what is to come, will admit of none.

Here the Person who seemed to be Oppressed, made several Attempts to speak,
but they were only inarticulate Sounds, being all interrupted and choked in
their Passage.

Aurelian was sufficiently astonished, an^ would have crept nearer to the Place
whence he guessed the Voice to come; but he was got among the Ruins of an Old
Monastery, and could not stir so silently; but some loose Stones he met with
made a rumbling. The Noise alarmed both Parties; and as it gave Comfort to the
one, it so Terrified the the other, that he could not hinder the Oppressed from
calling for help. Aurelian fancied it was a Woman's Voice, and immediately
drawing his Sword demanded what was the Matter; he was answered with the
Appearance of a Man, who had opened a Dark Lanthorn which he had by him, and
came toward him with a Pistol in his Hand ready cocked.

Aurelian seeing the irresistible advantage his Adversary had over him, would
fain have retired; and, by the greatest Providence in the World, going
backwards fell down over some loose Stones that lay in his Way, just in that
Instant of Time when the Villain fired his Pistol, who seeing him fall,
concluded he had Shot him. The Cries of the afflicted Person were redoubled at
the Tragical Sight, which made the Murderer, drawing a Poniard, to threaten
him, that the next Murmur should be his last. Aurelian, who was scarce assured
that he was unhurt, got softly up; and coming near enough to perceive the
Violence that was used to stop the Injured Man's Mouth; (for now he saw plainly
it was a Man) cried out, -- Turn, Villain, and look upon thy Death -- The
Fellow amazed at the Voice, turned about to have snatched up the Lanthorn from
the Ground either to have given Light only to himself, or to have put out the
Candle, that he might have made his Escape; but which of the Two he designed,
no Body could tell but himself: And if the Reader have a Curiosity to know, he
must blame Aurelian; who thinking there could be no foul Play offered to such a
Villain, ran him immediately through the Heart, so that he dropped down Dead at
his Feet, without speaking a Word. He would have seen who the Person was he had
thus happily delivered, but the Dead Body had fallen upon the Lanthorn, which
put out the Candle: However, coming up toward him, he asked him how he did, and
bid him be of good Heart; he was answered with nothing but Prayers, Blessings
and Thanks, called a Thousand Deliverers, good Genius's and Guardian Angels.
And the Rescued would certainly have gone upon his Knees to have worshipped
him, had he not been bound Hand and Foot; which Aurelian understanding, groped
for the Knots, and either untied them or cut them asunder; but it is more
probable the latter, because more expeditious.

They took little heed what became of the Body which they left behind them, and
Aurelian was conducted from out the Ruins by the Hand of him he had delivered.
By a faint light issuing from the just rising Moon, he could discern that it
was a Youth; but coming into a more frequented part of the Town, where several
Lights were hung out, he was amazed at the extreme Beauty which appeared in his
Face, though a little pale and disordered with his late fright. Aurelian longed
to hear the Story of so odd an adventure, and entreated his Charge to tell it
him by the way; but he desired him to forbear till they were come into some
House or other, where he might rest and recover his tired Spirits, for yet he
was so faint he was unable to look up. Aurelian thought these last words were
delivered in a Voice, whose accent was not new to him. That thought made him
look earnestly in the Youth's Face, which he now was sure he had somewhere seen
before, and thereupon asked him if he had never been at Siena! That Question
made the young Gentleman look up, and something of a Joy appeared in his
Countenance, which yet he endeavored to smother; so praying Aurelian to
conduct him to his Lodging, he promised him that as soon as they should come
thither, he would acquaint him with any thing he desired to know. Aurelian
would rather have gone any where else than to his own Lodging; but being so
very late, he was at a loss, and so forced to be contented.

As soon as they were come into his Chamber, and that Lights were brought them,
and the Servant dismissed, the paleness which so visibly before had usurped the
sweet Countenance of the afflicted Youth vanished, and gave place to a more
lively Flood of Crimson, which with a modest heat glowed freshly on his Cheeks.
Aurelian waited with a pleasing Admiration the discovery promised him, when the
Youth still struggling with his Resolution, with a timorous haste, pulled off a
Peruke which had concealed the most beautiful abundance of Hair that ever
graced-one Female Head; those dishevelled spreading Tresses, as at first they
made a discovery of, so at last they served for a veil to the modest lovely
blushes of the fair Incognita; for she it was and none other. But Oh! the
inexpressible, inconceivable joy and amazement of Aurelian! As soon as he durst
venture to think, he concluded it to be all Vision, and never doubted so much
of any thing in his Life as if his being then awake. But she taking him by the
Hand, and desiring him to sit down by her, partly convinced him of the reality
of her presence.

This is the second time, Don Hippolito, (said she to him) that I have been
here this Night. What the occasion was of my seeking you out, and how by
miracle you preserved me, would add too much to the surprise I perceive you to
be already in should I tell you: Nor will I make any further discovery, till I
know what censure you pass upon the confidence which I have put in you, and the
strange Circumstances in which you find me at this time. I am sensible they are
such, that I shall not blame your severest Conjectures; but I hope to convince
you, when you shall hear what I have to say in justification of my Virtue.

Justification! (cried Aurelian) what Infidel dares doubt it! -- Then kneeling
down, and taking her Hand, Ah Madam (says he) would Heaven would no other ways
look upon, than I behold your Perfections -- Wrong not your Creature with a
Thought, he can be guilty of that horrid Impiety as once to doubt your Virtue.
-- Heaven! (cried he, starting up) am I so really blessed to see you once
again! May I trust my Sight? -- Or does my fancy now only more strongly work?
-- For still I did preserve your Image in my Heart, and you were ever present
to my dearest Thoughts. --

Enough Hippolito, enough of Rapture (said she) you cannot much accuse me of
Ingratitude; for you see I have not been unmindful of you; but moderate your
Joy till I have told you my Condition, and if for my sake you are raised to
this Delight, it is not of a long continuance. --

At that (as Aurelian tells the Story) a Sigh diffused a mournful sweetness
through the Air, and liquid grief fell gently from her Eyes, triumphant sadness
sat upon her Brow, and even sorrow seemed delighted with the Conquest he had
made. See what a change Aurelian felt! His heart bled Tears, and trembled in
his Breast; Sighs struggling for a vent had choacked each others passage up:
His Floods of Joys were all suppressed; cold doubts and fears had chilled 'em
with a sudden Frost, and he was troubled to excess; yet knew not why. Well, the
Learned say it was Sympathy; and I am always of the Opinion with the Learned,
if they speak first.

After a World of Condoleance had passed between them, he prevailed with her to
tell him her Story. So having put all her Sighs into one great Sigh, she
discharged her self of 'em all at once, and formed the Relation you are just
about to Read.

Having been in my Infancy Contracted to a Man I could never endure, and now by
my Parents being likely to be forced to Marry him, is in short, the great
occasion of my grief. I fansy'd (continued she) something so Generous in your
Countenance, and uncommon in your Behavior, while you were diverting your
self, and rallying me with Expressions of Gallantry, at the Ball as induced me
to hold Conference with you. I now freely confessed to you, out of design, That
if things should happen as I then feared, and as now they are come to pass, I
might rely upon your Assistance in a matter of Concern; and in which I would
sooner choose to depend upon a generous Stranger, than any Acquaintance I have.
What Mirth and Freedom I then put on, were, I can assure you, far distant from
my Heart; but I did violence to my self out of Complaisance to your Temper. --
I knew you at the Tilting, and wished you might come off as you did; though I
do not doubt, but you would have had as good Success had it been opposite to my
Inclinations. -- Not to detain you by too tedious a Relation, every day my
Friends urged me to the Match they had agreed upon for me, before I was capable
of Consenting; at last their importunities grew to that degree, that I found I
must either consent, which would make me miserable, or be miserable by
perpetually enduring to be baited by my Father, Brother, and other Relations. I
resolved yesterday, on a sudden, to give firm Faith to the Opinion I had
conceived of you; and accordingly came in the Evening to request your
assistance, in delivering me from my Tormentors, by a safe and private
conveyance of me to a Monastery about four Leagues hence, where I have an Aunt
who will receive me, and is the only Relation I have averse to the Match. I was
surprised at the appearance of some Company I did not expect at your Lodgings;
which made me in haste tear a Paper which I had written to you with Directions
where to find me, and get speedily away in my Coach to an old Servant's House,
whom I acquainted with my purpose: By my Order she provided me of this Habit
which I now wear; I ventured to trust my self with her Brother, and resolved to
go under his Conduct to the Monastery; he proved to be a Villain, and
pretending to take me a short and private way to the place where he was to take
up a Hackney Coach (for that which I came in was broke somewhere or other, with
the haste it made to carry me from your Lodging) led me into an old ruined
Monastery, where it pleased Heaven, by what Accident I know not, to direct you.
I need not tell you how you saved my Life and my Honor by revenging me with
the Death of my Persidious Guide. This is the sum of my present Condition,
bating the apprehensions I am in of being taken by some of my Relations, and
forced to a thing so quite contrary to my Inclinations.

Aurelian was confounded at the Relation she had made, and began to fear his
own Estate to be more desperate than ever he had imagined. He made her a very
Passionate and Eloquent Speech in behalf of himself (much better than I intend
to insert here) and expressed a mighty concern that she should look upon his
ardent Affection to be only Rallery or Gallantry. He was very free of his Oaths
to confirm the Truth of what he pretended, nor I believe did she doubt it, or
at least was unwilling so to do: For I would Caution the the Reader by the bye,
nor to believe every word which she told him, not that admirable sorrow which
she counterfeited to be accurately true. It was indeed truth so cunningly
intermingled with Fiction, that it required no less Wit and Presence of Mind
than she was endowed with so to acquit her self on the sudden. She had
entrusted her self indeed with a Fellow who proved a Villain, to conduct her to
a Monastery; but one which was in the Town, and where she intended only to lie
concealed for his sake; as the Reader shall understand ere long: For we have
another Discovery to make to him, if he have not found it out of himself
already.

After Aurelian had said what he was able upon the Subject in hand, with a
mournful tone and dejected look, he demanded his Doom. She asked him if he
would endeavor to convey her to the Monastery she had told him of; Your
commands, Madam, (replied he) are Sacred to me; and were they to lay down my
Life I would obey them. With that he would have gone out of the Room, to have
given order for his Horses to be got ready immediately; but with a Countenance
so full of sorrow as moved Compassion in the tender hearted Incognita. Stay a
little Don Hippolito (said she) I fear I shall not be able to undergo the
Fatigue of a Journey, this Night. -- Stay and give me your Advice how I shall
conceal my self if I continue to morrow in this Town. Aurelian could have
satisfied her she was not then in a place to avoid discovery: But he must also
have told her then the reason of it, viz. whom he was, and who were in quest of
him, which he did not think convenient to declare till necessity should urge
him; for he feared least her knowledge of those-designs which were in agitation
between him and Juliana, might deter her more from giving her consent. At last
he resolved to try his utmost persuasions to gain her, and told her
accordingly, he was afraid she would be disturbed there in the Morning, and he
knew no other way (if she had not as great an aversion for him as the Man whom
she now endeavored to avoid) than by making him happy to make her self secure.
He demonstrated to her, that the disobligation to her Parents would be greater
by going to a Monastery, since it was only to avoid a choice which they had
made for her, and which she could not have so just a pretense to do till she
had made one for her self.

A World of other Arguments he used, which she contradicted as long as she was
able, or at least willing. At last she told him, she would consult her Pillow,
and in the Morning conclude what was fit to be done. He thought it convenient
to leave her to her rest, and having locked her up in his Room, went himself to
repose upon a Pallat by Signior Claudio.

In the mean time, it may be convenient to enquire what became of Hippolito. He
had wandered much in pursuit of Aurelian, though Leonora equally took up his
Thoughts; He was reflecting upon the oddness and extravagance of his
Circumstances, the Continuation of which had doubtless created in him a great
uneasiness, when it was interrupted with the noise of opening the Gates of the
Convent of St. Lawrence, whither he was arrived sooner than he thought for,
being the place Aurelian had appointed by the Lacquey to meet him in. He
wondered to see the Gates opened at so unseasonable an hour, and went to
enquire the reason of it from them who were employed; but they proved to be
Novices, and made him signs to go in, where he might meet with some body
allowed to answer hm. He found the Religious Men all up, and Tapers lighting
every where: at last he followed a Friar who was going into the Garden, and
asking him the cause of these Preparations, he was answered, That they were
entreated to pray for the Soul of a Cavalier, who was just departing or
departed this Life, and whom upon farther talk with him, he found to be the
same Lorenzo so often mentioned. Don Mario, it seems Uncle to Lorenzo and
Father to Leonora, had a private Door out of the Garden, belonging to his House
into that of the Convent, which Door this Father was now a going to open, that
he and his Family might come and offer up their Oraisons for the Soul of their
Kinsman. Hippolito having informed himself of as much as he could ask without
suspicion, took his leave of the Friar, not a little joyful at the Hopes he had
by such unexpected Means, of seeing his Beautiful Leonora: As soon as he was
got at convenient Distance from the Friar, (who it is like thought he had
returned into the Convent to his Devotion) he returned back through a close
Walk which led him with a little Compass, to the same private Door, where just
before he had left the Friar, who now he saw was gone, and the Door open.

He went into Don Mario's Garden, and walked round with much Caution and
Circumspection; for the Moon was then about to rise, and had already diffused a
glimmering Light, sufficient to distinguish a Man from a Tree. By Computation
now (which is a very remarkable Circumstance) Hippolito entered this Garden near
upon the same Instant, when Aurelian wandered into the Old Monastery and found
his Incognita in Distress. He was pretty well acquainted with the Platform, and
Sight of the Garden; for he had formerly surveyed the Outside, and knew what
part to make to if he should be surpised and driven to a precipitate Escape.
He took his Stand behind a well-grown Bush of Myrtle, which, should the Moon
shine brighter than was required, had the Advantage to be shaded by the
Indulgent Boughs of an ancient Bay Tree. He was delighted with the Choice he
had made, for he found a Hallow in the Myrtle, as if purposely contrived for
the Reception of one Person, who might undiscovered perceive all about him. He
looked upon it as a good Omen, that the Tree Consecrated to Venus was so
propitious to him in his Amorous Distress. The Consideration of that, together
with the Obligation he lay under to the Muses, for sheltering him also with so
large a Crown of Bays, had like to have set him a Rhyming.

He was, to tell the Truth, naturally addicted to Madrigal, and we should
undoubtedly have had a small desert of Numbers to have picked and Criticiz'd
upon, had he not been interrupted just upon his Delivery; nay, after the
Preliminary Sigh had made Way for his Utterance. But so was his Fortune, Don
Mario was coming toward the Door at that very nick of Time, where he met with
a Priest just out of Breath, who told him that Lorenzo was just breathing his
last, and desired to know if he would come and take his final Leave before they
were to administer the Extreme Unction. Don Mario, who had been at some
Difference with his Nephew, now thought it his Duty to be Reconciled to him; so
calling to Leonora, who was coming after him, he bid her go to her Devotions in
the Chapel, and told her where he was going.

He went on with the Priest, while Hippolito saw Leonora come forward, only
accompanied by her Woman. She was in an undress, and by reason of a Melancholy
visible in her Face, more Careless than usual in her Attire, which he thought
added as much as was possible to the abundance of her Charms. He had not much
Time to Contemplate this Beauteous Vision, for she soon passed into the Garden
of the Convent, leaving him Confounded with Love, Admiration, Joy, Hope, Fear,
and all the Train of Passions, which seize upon Men in his Condition, all at
once. He was so teazed with this Variety of Torment, that he never missed the
Two Hours that had slipped away during his Automachy and Intestine Conflict.
Leonora's Return settled his Spirits, at least united them, and he had now no
other Thought but how he should present himself before her. When she calling
her Woman, bid her bolt the Garden Door on the Inside, that she might not be
Surpised by her Father, if he returned through the Convent; which done, she
ordered her to bring down her Lute, and leave her to her self in the Garden.

All this Hippolito saw and heard to his inexpressible Content, yet had he much
to do to smother his Joy, and hinder it from taking a Vent, which would have
ruined the only Opportunity of his Life. Leonora withdrew into an Arbor so
near him, that he could distinctly hear her if she Played or Sung: Having tuned
her Lute, with a Voice soft as the Breath of Angels, she sung to it this
following Air:

I.
Ah! Whither, whither shall I fly,
A poor unhappy Maid;
To hopeless Love and Misery
By my own Heart betrayed?
Not by Alexis Eyes undone,
Nor by his Charming Faithless Tongue,
Or any Practiced Art;
Such real Ills may hope a Cure,
But the sad Pains which I endure
Proceed from fansied Smart.
II.
'Twas Fancy gave Alexis Charms,
Ere I beheld his Face:
Kind Fancy (then) could fold our Arms,
And form a soft Embrace.
But since I Have seen the real Swain,
And tried to fancy him again,
I Am by my Fancy taught,
Though it is a Bliss no Tongue can tell,
To have Alexis, yet it is Hell
To have him but in Thought.
The Song ended grieved Hippolito that it was so soon ended; and in the Ecstacy
he was then rapt, I believe he would have been satisfied to have expired with
it. He could not help Flattering himself, (though at the same Time he checked
his own Vanity) that he was the Person meant in the Song. While he was
indulging which thought, to his happy Astonishment, he heard it encouraged by
these Words:

Unhappy Leonora (said she) how is thy poor unwary Heart misled? Whither am I
come? The false deluding Lights of an imaginary Flame have led me, a poor
benighted Victim, to a real Fire. I burn and am consumed with hopeless Love;
those Beams, in whose soft temperate Warmth I wantoned heretofore, now flash
Destruction to my Soul; my treacherous greedy Eyes have sucked the glaring
Light, they have united all its Rays, and, like a Burning-glass, conveyed the
pointed Meteor to my Heart -- Ah! Aurelian how quickly have thou conquered, and
how quickly must thou forsake. -- Oh happy (to me unfortunately Happy) Juliana!
-- I am to be the Subject of thy Triumph -- To thee Aurelian comes laden with
the Tribute of my Heart, and glories in the Oblation of his broken Vows. --
What then, is Aurelian False! -- False! alas, I know not what I say: How can he
be False, or True, or any thing to me? What Promises did he e're make or I
receive? Sure I dream, or I am mad, and fancy it to be Love: Foolish Girl,
recall thy banished Reason. Ah! would it were no more, would I could rave, sure
that would give me Ease, and rob me of the Sense of Pain; at least, among my
wandering Thoughts, I should at some time light upon Aurelian, and fancy him to
be mine; kind Madness would flatter my poor feeble Wishes, and sometimes tell
me Aurelian is not lost -- not irrecoverably -- nor for ever lost.

Hippolito could hear no more, he had not room for half his Transport. When
Leonora perceived a Man coming toward her, she fell a trembling, and could not
speak. Hippolito approached with Reverence, as to a Sacred Shrine; when coming
near enough to see her Consternation, he fell upon his Knees.

Behold, O Adored Leonora (said he) your ravished Aurelian, behold at your Feet
the happiest of Men; be not disturbed at my Appearance, but think that Heaven
conducted me to hear my Bliss pronounced by that dear Mouth alone, whose Breath
could fill me with new Life.

Here he would have come nearer, but Leonora (scarce come to her self) was
getting up in haste to have gone away: he caught her hand, and with all the
Endearments of Love and Transport pressed her stay; she was a long time in
great Confusion, at last, with many Blushes, she entreated him to let her go
where she might hide her Head, and not Expose her Shame before his Eyes, since
his Ears had been sufficient Witnesses of her Crime. He begged Pardon for his
Treachery in over-hearing, and confessed it to be a Crime he had now repeated.
With a thousand Submissions, Entreaties, Prayers, Praises, Blessings, and
passionate Expressions, he wrought upon her to stay and hear him. Here
Hippolito made use of his Rhetoric, and it proved prevailing. 'Twere tedious
to tell the many ingenious Arguments he used, with all her Nice Distinctions
and Objections. In short, he convinced her of his Passion, represented to her
the necessity they were under, of being speedy in their Resolves: That his
Father (for still he was Aurelian) would undoubtedly find him in the Morning,
and then it would be too late to repent. She, on the other Hand, knew it was in
vain to deny a Passion, which he had heard her so frankly own; (and no doubt
was very glad 'twas past and done;) besides apprehending the Danger of Delay,
and having some little Jealousies and Fears of what Effect might be produced
between the Commands of the Father, and the Beauties of Juliana; after some
decent Denials, she consented to be conducted by him through the Garden into
the Convent, where she would prevail with her Confessor to Marry them. He was a
scrupulous Old Father whom they had to deal withal, insomuch that ere they had
persuaded him, Don Mario was returned by the way of his own House, where
missing his Daughter, and her Woman not being able to give any farther Account
of her, than that she left her in the Garden, he concluded she was gone again
to her Devotions; and indeed he found her in the Chapel upon her Knees with
Hippolito in her Hand, receiving the Father's Benediction upon Conclusion of
the Ceremony.

It would have asked a very skilful Hand, to have depicted to the Life, the
Faces of these Three Persons, at Don Mario's Appearance. He that has seen some
admirable Piece of Transmutation by a Gorgon's Head, may form to himself the
most probable Idea of the Prototype. The Old Gentleman was himself in a sort of
a Wood, to find his Daughter with a Young Fellow and a Priest, but as yet he
did not know the worst, till Hippolito and Leonora came, and kneeling at his
Feet, begged his Forgiveness and Blessing as his Son and Daughter. Don Mario,
instead of that, fell into a most violent Passion, and would undoubtedly have
committed some extravagant Action, had he not been restrained, more by the
Sanctity of the Place, than the Persuasions of all the Religious, who were now
come about him. Leonora stirred not off her Knees all this time, but continued
begging of him that he would hear her.

Ah! Ungrateful and Undutiful Wretch, (cried he) how have thou requited all my
Care and Tenderness of thee? Now when I might have expected some return of
Comfort, to throw thy self away upon an unknown Person, and, for ought I know,
a Villain; to me I Am sure he is a Villain, who has robbed me of my Treasure, my
Darling Joy, and all the Future Happiness of my Life prevented. Go -- go, thou
now-to-be-forgotten Leonora, go and enjoy thy unprosperous Choice; you who
wanted not a Father's Counsel, cannot need, or else will slight his Blessing.

These last Words were spoken with so much Passion and fatal Concern, that
Leonora, moved with Excess of Grief, fainted at his Feet, just as she had
caught hold to embrace his Knees. The Old Man would have shook her off, but
Compassion and Fatherly Affection came upon him in the midst of his Resolve,
and melted him into Tears; he Embraced his Daughter in his Arms, and wept over
her, while they endeavored to restore her Senses.

Hippolito was in such Concern he could not speak, but was busily employed in
rubbing and chafing her Temples; when she opening her Eyes laid hold of his
Arm, and cried out -- Oh my Aurelian -- how unhappy have you made me! With that
she had again like to have fainted away, but he shook her in his Arms, and
begged Don Mario to have some pity on his Daughter, since by his Severity she
was reduced to that Condition. The Old Man hearing his Daughter name Aurelian,
was a little revived, and began to hope Things were in a pretty good Condition,
he was persuaded to comfort her; and having brought her wholly to her self, was
content to hear her Excuse, and in a little time was so far wrought upon as to
beg Hippolito's Pardon for the Ill Opinion he had conceived of him, and not
long after gave his Consent.

The Night was spent this Conflict, and it was now clear Day, when Don Mario
Conducting his new Son and Daughter through the Garden, was met by some
Servants of the Marquess of Viterbo, who had been enquiring for Donna Leonora,
to know if Juliana had lately been with her; for that she was missing from her
Father's House, and no conjectures could be made of what might become of her.
Don Mario and Leonora were surprised at the News, for he knew well enough of
the Match that was designed for Juliana; and having enquired where the Marquess
was, it was told him, That he was gone with Don Fabio and Fabritio toward
Aurelian's Lodgings. Don Mario having assured the Servants that Juliana had not
been there, dismissed them, and advised with his Son and Daughter how they
should undeceive the Marquess and Don Fabio in their Expectations of Aurelian.
Hippolito could oftentimes scarce forbear smiling at the old Man's Contrivances
who was most deceived himself; he at length advised them to go all down
together to his Lodging, where he would present himself before his Father, and
ingeniously confess to him the truth, and he did not question his approving of
his Choice.

This was agreed to, and the Coach made ready. While they were upon their way,
Hippolito prayed heartily that his Friend Aurelian might be at the Lodging, to
satisfy Don Mario and Leonora of his Circumstances and Quality, when he should
be obliged to discover himself. His Petitions were granted; for Don Fabio had
beset the House long before his Son was up or Incognita awake.

Upon the arrival of Don Mario and Hippolito, they heard a great Noise and
Hubbub above Stairs, which Don Mario concluded was occasioned by their not
finding Aurelian, whom he thought he could give the best account of: So that it
was not in Hippolito's power to dissuade him from going up before to prepare
his Father to receive and forgive him. While Hippolito and Leonora were left in
the Coach at the Door, he made himself known to her, and begged her pardon a
thousand times for continuing the deceit. She was under some concern at first
to find she was still mistaken; but his Behavior, and the Reasons he gave,
soon reconciled him to her; his Person was altogether as agreeable, his Estate
and Quality not at all inferior to Aurelian's; in the mean time, the true
Aurelian who had seen his Father, begged leave of him to withdraw for a moment;
in which time he went into the Chamber where his Incognita was dressing her
self, by his design, in a Woman's Apparel, while he was consulting with her how
they should break the matter to his Father; it happened that Don Mario came up
Stairs where the Marquess and Don Fabio were; they undoubtedly concluded him
Mad, to hear him making Apologies and Excuses for Aurelian, whom he told them
if they would promise to forgive he would present before them immediately. The
Marquess asked him if his Daughter had lain with Leonora that Night; he
answered him with another question in behalf of Aurelian. In short, they could
not understand one another, but each thought 'tother beside himself. Don Mario
was so concerned that they would not believe him, that he ran down Stairs and
came to the Door out of Breath, desiring Hippolito that he would come into the
House quickly, for that he could not persuade his Father but that he had
already seen and spoke to him. Hippolito by that understood that Aurelian was
in the House; so taking Leonora by the Hand, he followed Don Mario, who led him
up into the Dining Room, where they found Aurelian upon his Knees, begging his
Father to forgive him, that he could not agree to the Choice he had made for
him, since he had already disposed of himself, and that before he understood
the designs he had for him, which was the reason that he had hitherto concealed
himself. Don Fabio knew not how to answer him, but looked upon the Marquess,
and the Marquess upon him, as if the Cement had been cooled which was to have
united their Families.

All was silent, and Don Mario for his part took it to be all Conjuration; he
was coming forward to present Hippolito to them, when Aurelian spying his
Friend, started from his Knees and ran to embrace him -- My dear Hippolito
(said he) what happpy chance has brought you hither, just at my Necessity?
Hippolito pointed to Don Mario and Leonora, and told him upon what terms he
came. Don Mario was ready to run mad, hearing him called Hippolito, and went
again to examine his Daughter. While she was informing him of the truth, the
Marquess's Servants returned with the melancholy News that his Daughter was no
where to be found. While the Marquess and Don Fabritio were wondering at, and
lamenting the Misfortune of her loss, Hippolito came toward Don Fabio and
interceded for his Son, since the Lady perhaps had withdrawn her self out of an
Aversion to the Match. Don Fabio, though very much incensed, yet forgot not the
Respect due to Hippolito's Quality; and by his Persuasion spoke to Aurelian,
though with a stern Look and angry Voice, and asked him where he had disposed
the cause of his Disobedience, if he were worthy to see her or no; Aurelian
made answer, That he desired no more than for him to see her; and he did not
doubt a Consequence of his Approbation and Forgiveness. -- Well (said Don
Fabio) you are very conceited of your own Discretion, let us see this Rarety.
While Aurelian was gone in for Incognita, the Marquess of Viterbo and Don
Fabritio were taking their leaves in great disorder for their loss and
disappointment; but Don Fabio entreated their stay a moment longer till the
return of his Son. Aurelian led Incognita into the Room veiled, who seeing some
Company there which he had not told her of, would have gone back again. But Don
Fabio came bluntly forwards, and ere she was aware, lifted up her Veil, and
beheld the Fair Incognita, differing nothing from Juliana, but in her Name.
This discovery was so extremely surprising and welcome, that either Joy or
Amazement had tied up the Tongues of the whole Company. Aurelian here was most
at a loss, for he knew not of his Happiness; and that which all along prevented
Juliana's confessing her self to him, was her knowing Hippolito (for whom she
took him) to be Aurelian's Friend, and she feared if he had known her, that he
would never have consented to have deprived him of her. Juliana was the first
that spoke, falling upon her Knees to her Father, who was not enough himself to
take her up. Don Fabio ran to her, and awakend the Marquess, who then embraced
her, but could not yet speak. Fabritio and Leonora strove who should first take
her in their Arms; for Aurelian he was out of his wits for Joy, and Juliana was
not much behind him, to see how happily their Loves and Duties were reconciled.
Don Fabio embraced his Son and forgave him. The Marquess and Fabritio gave
Juliana into his hands, he received the Blessing upon his Knees; all were
overjoyed, and Don Mario not a little proud at the discovery of his Son-in-Law,
whom Aurelian did not fail to set forth with all the ardent Zeal and Eloquence
of Friendship. Juliana and Leonora had pleasant Discourse about their unknown
and mistaken Rivalship, and it was the Subject of a great deal of Mirth to hear
Juliana relate the several Contrivances which she had to avoid Aurelian for the
sake of Hippolito.

Having diverted themselves with many Remarks upon the pleasing surprise, they
all thought it proper to attend upon the Great Duke that Morning at the Palace,
and to acquaint him with the Novelty of what had passed; while, by the way, the
two Young Couple entertained the Company with the Relation of several
Particulars of their Three Days Adventures.

FINIS.
THE PILGRIM. A Pleasant Piece of GALLANTRY.

Written in French By M. S. BREMOND.

Translated into English By P. BELON, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington, at the Dolphin and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard: And E. Rumball, at the Post House, Covent Garden, 1700.

THE PILGRIM. A NOVEL.
SINCE that the Spirit of Devotion has seized on the Knights-Errants of this
Age, there is scarce any thing else seen in the World. Of truth their Equipage
is somewhat different from that which their Predecessors formerly had; for in
lieu of a Lance and a Helmet, which they did wear in those days, now they have
a Palmers Staff, a Hat trimmed with Cockel-shells, and I know not what kind of
Rocket, instead of a Back and Breast, which indeed are not Iron and Lead proof;
but then they do not fatigate so much their Bearer, as those enchanted Armours
formerly did. That which they have retained of their ancient Custom, which
devotion it self could not persuade them to alter, is a little Miss, which
still sticks close to them, and for whose sake, sometime the Palmer's staff
does wagg, as the Lance did formerly. In short, what difference soever there is
betwixt that kind of Life, which they lead now adays in their Foot Travels, and
that formerly when they were continually bestriding their Palfreys, all things
well considered, it may be said that each condition has its agreements and its
Troubles, its sweets as well as its labors. For when all is said, it was no
small Toil to have so many Lances to break, and so many Enchantments to put to
an end. You doubtless may have read, how that when they were to pass over a
Bridge, or to get into a Castle, there still was some Giant or other to Combat,
or some Monster to overcome; but in these times, as things are now ordered, all
this is done with a Song.

No Maid, though near so stout, these latter years,
But becomes tame, when Palmer-staff appears:
Nor Buxom Hostess, but will wish and long,
When once she hears a jolly Pilgrim's Song.
Adventure for Adventure, it is certain that these new Knights condition is
well worth that of the Knights in former times. At least wise, it was made
Choice of, by a Person of a very good gusto, whom the leanness of the Purse, or
the excess of Devotion did not oblige to ramble up and down the World under
that Figure. This poor Pilgrim had but fifty or sixty thousand Livers yearly
Revenew; but here is the real cause of his Vocation.

Rome, formerly so renowed, has not degenerated of late so much in persons of
Wit, as in many other respects. It cannot be denied, but that the ways they now
have taken unto, tend somewhat more toward evil than formerly, and though it
still is the place in which the sanctity of the earth does reside, it is no
less a source of debauchery.

There has always been found in it diverse Accademies of great Wits, but in our
time none has made so much noise as that which was called of the Libertines;
not only by reason of those bold discourses which were held in it; but for
those terrible Satyrs which it sent forth against all persons without
exception. The Holy Father, to whose feet the first complaints against it were
humbly laid down, by those persons that were concerned in those Truths which
those Accademicks did publish, was obliged to send forth diverse Thundering
Excommunications against this Society. But they being but little daunted at the
Vaticans Arms, did but laugh and scoff at the Pope's just indignation; bringing
him, and the Cardinals also, into play, which is the only Crime, that is not to
be forgiven in Rome. Therefore it was no longer Saint Peter, that armed himself
with Thunderbolts for their destruction, but Saint Paul, who with the Sword in
hand, made a pursuit after those impious persons. There never was seen so many
sorts of persons combined together, as there was then, to destroy those
Libertines: Sergeants, Watchmen, Guards, Soldiers, Monks, Prelates, both on
foot and on Horseback, all were under Arms, and one would really have taken it
for a Crusado.

There were but few persons in Rome that had not some share in their Satyrs,
and half the City was already providing Faggots for them, so that it was high
time to sound the Retreat: Every one got away as well as he could, some
disguised after one manner, and some after another. Our Hero, who was one of
the most eminent amongst them, hid himself under the Habit of a Pilgrim; with
which, having got, without any Retinue, to Civita Vecchia, he took a Felouqua,
that carried him to Genoua.

His design was for France; but the opportunity of a Gally, which was going to
put off for Barcelona, where it was carrying a Spanish Lord, General Master de
Camp, of the Cavalry of the State of Millan, having made him change his
resolution, he embarked to make the same Voyage upon it.

There was a great number of Passengers on that Gally; and our Pilgrim, who,
besides the trouble of the Crowd, was not willing to be known, being yet so
near Italy, did accost the Captain, and with a Complement of few words, he slid
into his hand a Role of Pistols, to make him understand by his Liberality, and
his good Mien, that he was no common Pilgrim. The Captain therefore treated him
according as his Complement and his good Mien did deserve: for he gave him his
own Cabin, which was joining to that of the Spanish Don, and caused him to be
served by two Slaves during the whole Voyage.

The Wind was as favorable as could be, and they had not so soon hoised Sails,
but they lost the sight of Genoua. Prudence would not yet allow our Pilgrim to
be much seen, though they were already well off at Sea. He therefore resolved
not to stir forth out of his Chamber, till he were arrived at Barcelona, and to
divert himself in the mean time in reading of Books. This was an agreeable
employment to him, but it lasted not long; for the very next day, his reading
was interrupted by the charming Voice of a Woman that was in the General's
Chamber. He lent an Ear, and understood that she sung some Italian Aires. His
Curiosity did each moment increase, and being Charmed with the sweetness of the
Voice, he would willingly have seen that Person. He visited and searched the
Partition of the Cabin from one end to the other, to find out some Chink, but
the Boards were so well joynted, that it was labor in vain. In fine, at night
when the Captain, who used to eat with him, was come to see him, and to sup; he
set him on a Discourse concerning the Spanish Don, and having particularly made
inquiry concerning his Retinue and Family, he learned that it was the Marquess
of L. lately married at Milan, where he had espoused the Daughter of the Count
N. one of the most charming Persons in all Italy, of whom he was so jealous,
that there was but two old Women that served her, that had the liberty of
entering her Chamber; neither would he have her to be seen by any of his own
servants. Camille, so was the Pilgrim named, did on a sudden fall into a
profound silence, seriously reflecting on what the Captain did tell him, not
doubting but that the Voice that had charmed him did belong to the beautiful
Marchioness. This made him more earnest than ever to see her, and he was
already almost fallen in Love; he did eat little or nothing, during that meal,
and dying with impatiency to have the Captain gone, that he might, when alone,
make a new search after some means to pry into that Chamber. The very Idea
which he did frame to himself of that beautiful Lady, upon the Captain's words,
did inflame him with love, and the Jealousy of the Husband, which did detain
her in that Captivity, did already inspire him with such designs, as did
flatter him with some hopes of a good fortune. The Captain being at last gone,
he shuts the Cabin door, and with the Candle in his hand, searches and examines
every board one after another, above, beneath, on the right, on the left, all
over, but no hopes. He Torments himself, sweats, sighs, and almost in despair,
he would endeavor to make some hole, with an Iron he had found, when fortune
guided his eyes upon a knot in a board, which did answer just upon the Ladies
Bed, and that could be got out without much difficulty. Never was joy
comparable to his, he presently peeps through the hole, and sees the most
beautiful woman that ever was in the World, in a most manificent Undress, who
was at her Toylet undressing her self for bed. He could not see her but of one
side, and the hole being but small, he could but imperfectly discern such
Features, as were of power to have enchanted a Man much less prepossest than he
was; but he did see enough to accomplish his bondage, and yet think himself the
happiest Man in all the World. Nothing on earth could have drawn him from
thence; and he used no other Caution than the putting out of his Candle, for
fear of being discovered, and was preparing himself for a most charming
pleasure at her going in bed, when fickle Fortune, who had been so favorable
to him, did presently fill his heart with darkness; for the Marquess being
entered the Chamber to go to bed, went and hung his Cloak (an Ornament which the
Spanish Gravity will not allow to be quitted but rarely) upon that very place,
where was the little peephole; a most sorrowful Vail unto the Amorous Camille,
which caused a sad Eclipse betwixt his heart, and that most charming object.
His sorrow is easy to be imagined, yet he left not his post, but making use of
his Ears, where his Eyes could not reach, he heard certain discourses, which
did not please him less than what he had seen: They were little Jars between
the Husband and the Wife, which did speak the ill understanding that there was
between them; The Ladies complaints against the rigorous proceedings of her
Lord; and his reproaches on her Humor of Courtship. Our Pilgrim building on
this bottom greater and fairer hopes than ever, he did pass the best part of
the night, in framing to himself such Ideas, as afforded him as much content as
would to others, every charming reality: at last he must go to bed, for there
had not been any noise heard in the Chamber of two hours; but how can a person
sleep, that has his mind filled with what he had beheld that day? and what he
did hope to see the next morning, if fortune would have it, that the Jealous
Husband should rise before the Lady, and take the envious Cloak along with him?
that which troubled him most, was the wind, which still continuing favorable
would not let him long enjoy this Happiness: For it was probable that with such
a wind they would arrive the next day at Barcelona; which would put an end to
his adventure, except love, who is pleased with extraordinary things, should
favor him with some turn of fortune, of which he durst not much flatter
himself. The best part of the night he spent in thoughts, and yet in his
opinion passed it well, though he had had no sleep. So soon as he did see day
appear, he arose, but it was somewhat too early yet for persons that had no
such disquiet as he had in his mind. He fitted the knot to its hole, and had
the patience to wait a great while, incessantly harkening with a strange
anguish of mind, whether the Marquess was not stirring, which unfortunately to
him did not rise so soon that day, as he used to do; and when up, he walked in
his Chamber till he was advertised that they were in sight of Palamos. Then out
he went in his Spanish Decorum to behold that City. His Lady who was yet in
bed, and who had the same Curiosity, got out of it in a pretty kind of
disorder, to run to the Window. Then it was that our good Pilgrim had that
happy sight which he had so much desired, for in that haste in which the Lady
had risen, she showed him such things as were able to inchant the Gods. He was
not contented with this, but transported with ardor and love, he also went to
his Chamber window, which was very near unto that in which the Marchioness was;
and but half showing himself, lest any one should see him, he made her a
Reverence much more amorous than profound, looking on her with eyes that did
speak some part of those things which he felt in his Soul. The beautiful
Marchioness (who according to the genius of the Italian Ladies, was very expert
in that Language) was at first surpised to see so near her a Man with so good
a mien; but after she had looked about, to see if any body did observe her, she
did very obligingly answer his Salute. Our amorous Pilgrim would gladly have
had this Language of the Eyes changed into an entertainment of the mouth, but
it was too much to be feared, that they would have been heard. And the Lady who
did fear to be surpised by her Guardians, or Husband, durst not make any
longer stay at the Window. Camille, who did follow her every where with his
Eyes and Heart, did retire presently also to his former Port, where he did
behold the Marchioness, who was got to bed again, who not imagining, to be
observed, lay in such a posture, by reason of the great heat of the Season, as
was capable to kill a man with Love. Neck, Breast, Arms, Feet, Legs; in fine,
all the most Beatiful and Charming things in the World, were exposed at the
mercy of our Pilgrim's Eyes, who at this sight did quickly lose the rest of his
liberty.

Presently after, her Women came in to dress her, and Camille, who had received
as much as he wanted, ritired, for Fear that amongst so many Eyes, there might
be some that may light accidentally upon his Peep-hole, which would spoil all.
Imagining also, that in so great a Bustle of Women he should have but an
imperfect View of the Lady.

Never any Man so pleased as he, if his good Fortune had lasted but some time
longer; but they still approached nearer Barcellona, and consequently of that
moment, which was to part 'em, and that would peradventure make him lose for
ever the sight of what he so passionately loved: Good Gods! would he frequently
cry out sighing, some Blasts of a contrary Wind! His Prayers were not heard;
Time pressed upon them, and finally there must be a resolution taken to speak out
some way, whereby he might be understood; he found some Paper, Pen and Ink, and
without further Delay, he wrote some Italian Verses to this purpose.

When by a too Rigorous Fate,
Most Beauteous Lady, your cursed Mate
Shall force you, through his jealous Rage,
To free your self; I dare engage,
By a certain Amorous Art,
When just y're ready to depart,
To have a Pilgrim wait at hand,
In Obedience to your Command.
Having finished his Verses, he waited till he saw no body in the Ladies
Chamber, and having rolled up the Paper, he put it through the hole, which
heing just in the Ladies sight, could not fail of drawing her Eyes upon it. She
was at first surpised at the Novelty thereof, which caused her to blush
extremely, not doubting but it was exposed there by that Cavalier which she had
seen at the Window, and whose good Mien had raised in her a great Curiosity to
know what he was: But when she reflected on those advantages, which he might
have made use of by means of that hole, during the freedom which she had taken
all the time she had been in that Cabin, it wanted but little, that an Anger
mixed with Bashfulness, did not produce some kind of Hatred against a Man, of
whom she had so little Knowledge. She was strangely busied in her Thoughts, and
knew not what to resolve; mean time the Paper which she saw to wag continually,
giving her an extreme desire to see what it might be, and fearing on the other
hand that somebody would come into the Cabin, her Anger and Scruples were
forced to give place her Curiosity; she approached, took the Note, looked
through the hole, and did see a Pilgrim, whose good Mien did somewhat appease
her; she presently withdrew, and having seated her self again upon her Bed, she
unfolded the Paper with a Mind strangely taken up with this Adventure. In such
a Condition as she was at that time, evil-intreated by an Husband, which she
had never loved, and who prepared himself to make her suffer new Afflictions in
a Country, where Women are yet greater Slaves than in that, from whence she
came, nothing could be offered, that could bring her more Content, than that
which the Pilgrim did write. Till then she had not been a moment without
wishing, that the Vessel might split upon the Coast, or that it might fall into
the Hands of the Turk, rather than arrive in Spain; and never ceased her Tears,
since she had seen Land. And yet when the Heavens grant her her desires in a
more favorable manner than she had required, and when she despaired of making
Shipwreck, or falling into the Pirates Hands, being almost at the Gates of
Barcellona, she tremblingly looks upon the Succor which is offered her, she
staggers in her Resolution, she loses her Courage, and fears to employ a Man,
that has nothing in his Person, but what assures, and gives her to understand,
that he is a gallant Person. Of truth she was not long in those Irresolutions,
having cast her sight upon Spain, and made some reflections upon the unhappy
Life which she was going to lead there, she presently resolved to give her self
up to the Conduct of a Person, that seemed to be sent to her by Heaven for that
purpose. She would willingly have signified so much to him; but it was long
since all that belonged to writing was forbid her, and one of her Women being
come into her Cabin, neither could she come near unto the little Hole, in which
seeing the generous Pilgrim's Eye to glitter; she contented her self in giving
him to understand, with such signs as the Italians are very expert in, that she
did very much like and approve of the Tender of his Services, and that he
should not be unhappy, if he could take her out of that deplorable Condition,
to which she was reduced. At last Camille, who stood most attentively,
examining even the very least twinkling of an Eye, did interpret it after this
manner; and it may be imagined, that the Pilgrim's apprehension might very well
reach as far, as the Ladies dumb Discourse. Never was Lover so pleased with
himself as he. He would not have changed his Fortune for a Monarch's Diadem,
no, not for the Pope's Triple Crown. The least Look, a kind Gesture, or some
favorable Sign, did afford him more Content, than the whole Empire of the
World would give unto the most ambitious of Kings.

This pretty sport lasted till they were ready to enter into the Port of
Barcelona, when the Lady being left a moment alone drew near unto him, and told
him, in a low Voice, that she had apprehended what he had writ, that she
believed him a Man of honorable Principles, and even something more than what
he appeared to be under that Pilgrim's Habit; and that if he could deliver her
from the Tyranny of a Jealous Husband, and were a person that would receive
some recompense for so great a service, she did assure him, that he should have
cause to be satisfied, for having performed so generous an Action. And not
giving him time to reply, fearing incessantly to be surpised, she desired him
to find out some means, by which she might write or speak to him, when arrived
at Barcelona, and ending with these words, she put through the hole one of her
Fingers, on which she had a very fair Diamond, with which she would have
presented him; but Camille having kissed a thousand times that delicate Finger,
did not think of taking the Ring: so that she let it fall expressly. But the
Pilgrim was so transported with Love and Pleasure, that he took no notice of
it: And the Marquess being just come in to tell his wife, that it was time to
prepare her self to Land, she withdrew, to Camille's great sorrow, who some
moments after went out of his Chamber, to behold the beautiful Marchioness, and
to be seen by her.

Our Pilgrim, who had not appeared during all the Voyage, and had embarked
himself in the Night time, did surprise every body at his appearance upon the
Deck; every one guessing by his Air, his Gate, and those Accoutrements which
he had under his Pilgrim's Weeds, that he was nothing less than what he
appeared to be. The Marquess and his Lady, who came forth of their Cabin a
moment after, found him upon the Deck leaning on his Staff, holding his Hat
with Shells under his Arm, in a certain Posture as did presently draw their
Eyes upon him, though with different Thoughts. The Marchioness had a Manto upon
her Head after the Spanish Fashion, which did cover her whole Face; so that
Camille had but the Pleasure of admiring her fine Shape, and the charming Air
of her whole Composure, and that too by stealth, for fear of creating new
Jealousies in the Husband, who had his Eyes incessantly fixed upon him,
beholding him, as a Bird of evil Presage; for he was of Opinion, that the whole
World had a Mind to his Wife. At last he came near unto him, and made him some
Questions, to find if he were not deceived in his Distrust. As they were
discoursing together, and that the Spanish Don's fears did still increase more
and more, to hear a Pilgrim reason with so much wit as this did appear to have;
the Captain of the Vessel came up to Camille, and with a Reverence that did
out-pass what was due to an ordinary Pilgrim, he asked him if he had not lost a
Ring, showing him at the same time, that which the Marchioness had let fall
from her finger, and told him that he had just then found it in his Chamber;
Camille, who had not the least thought of the favor, which the Marchioness had
intended him, answered him no, and that it did not belong unto him; but the
Marquess having presently known it, did most terribly blush, and God knows with
what fury his Soul was instantly possessed! yet he dissembled all, and chose
rather to lose the Ring, than to divulge his shame, in owning it to be his
Wives. He left the unfortunate Pilgrim, for presently his first suspicions had
fallen on him again, and retiring into his Chamber, caused the Marchioness to
be called, with such a cold Air, as did disguise the rage and violence of
diverse passions, which then possessed him; he inquired of her, what she had
done with her Diamond. The poor distressed Lady, more pale than Death, fearing
that she had been betrayed by the Pilgrim, answered him in a stammering voice,
that she believed she had lost it. Then did the Jealous Husband, giving a full
vent unto his fury, let himself be carried away to such violent actions as were
very unworthy a person of his quality. Camille who knew not the reason, why the
Marquess and his Lady were retired, strangely surpised at the noise he heard,
run to his Cabin to learn what might be the occasion; there he beheld the
lovely Marchioness leaning upon her bed, and her unworthy Husband, in a great
fury, walking in the Room, and giving her all manner of ill Language. Nothing
could more grieve his Soul, than that sad Spectacle: he was a thousand times in
a resolution to go in to them, to revenge such Tears as did rend his heart in
pieces, the which to prevent he would have given his life. Nothing but the
consideration of the loss of the Marchioness, which he foresaw would be
infallible, if he should proceed so far in his resentments, did prevent him. He
would gladly have known the cause of this Quarrel, not believing that he had
given any such occasion to the Marquess, who being somewhat more cool, was
going to inform him of all things, by those reproaches that he had begun to
make to his Wife; when he had notice given him, that the Governor of
Barcelona, who was his near Kinsman, was coming in person to receive him, and
that his Skiff was already got near to the Vessel; upon which, laying aside the
rest of his anger against some other time, he left his Wife in the Cabin, that
she might have some time to recollect her self, and went forth to meet the
Governor. The desolate Marchioness in this Affliction, greater than can be
expressed, for having been thus villanously betrayed by a person, for whom she
had at first sight conceived a great esteem, was framing within her self most
strong resolutions, never more to confide so lightly in persons that she did
not know, and as she was going forth she espied the Pilgrim looking through the
hole. Ah! Traitor, said she to him, did I present you with that Diamond, but to
ruin me by it? Go, I shall be revenged if I can; and without staying for an
answer, she followed her Husband. Camille, who was afflicted even to death, to
be called Traitor, by that person that he would have least betrayed of all the
world, was a while like a man possessed with sorrow, despair and amazement.
Traitor! Traitor! did he repeat twice or thrice over, what Treason can I have
committed against her? I that have not known her but one day, and that would
sacrifice a thousand lives to do her service. With this he let himself drop
upon a Bench, and reflecting on that which the Marchioness had reproached him
concerning a Diamond, and then on the Ring which the Captain would have given
him before the Marquess, believing that it was his; it came in his mind, that
he had seen such a one on the Marchioness finger, and thus little by little
unravelling this cruel Mystery, he easily did perceive that he was the only
cause of all that evil. In what despair did he fall on the sudden? but not to
lose time in superfluous exclamations, he went to the Captain, and did engage
him to return him that Ring; then presently running to the other end of the
Ship, he found that the Governor was newly arrived, and that he was embracing
with the Marquess. He takes the opportunity of those Ceremonies, to restore to
the Marchioness her Ring, but as he approaches her, she flys, and thus they
both went round the Deck. Camille, who perceived this her disdain, was forced
at last to show her the Diamond, to let her know it was to restore it, that he
would approach her. But the Marchioness did understand it otherwise, and
believing that this Pilgrim was of intelligence with her Husband, who doubtless
had given him that Ring as a reward of his Treachery, she imagain'd that he
sought how to bring her into further trouble: She was also cruelly vexed that
he had the confidence to show it her, as glorying in it; and raising her Manto
a little, she looked upon him with the eyes of a Woman that was infinitely
angry at his insolency. At which our unhappy Lover apprehending that she would
not receive it, stood still looking upon her, with a sad and afflicted
Countenance, which was the only thing capable of justifying him at that
present. But when the heart is prepossessed with any thing, the impression of
it is not so soon wiped off. The Marchioness could not see any thing in this
business, but what did accuse the Pilgrim of a most palpable Treason, or at
least of an indiscretion, of which a person, as he seemed to be in her eyes,
was not capable of: yet she could not but feel something within her self, which
seemed to speak him less guilty than he appeared; and yet knew not why, and she
was troubled, that so accomplished a person, and who did appear to her so
worthy, could submit to do so base an action.

These Civilities at last being ended, which on such occasions are commonly
somewhat long among the Spaniards, the Marquess and his Lady entered into the
Governor's Boat to go to Shore. And Camille in that of the Captains, which he
gave him, and which he made to follow close that of the Governor's. They
arrived almost at the same time upon the Mole, where they met with the
Governor's Lady, accompanied with diverse Ladies and Gentlemen of the Country,
who waited for the Marchioness to Complement her: Camille would gladly have
found out some means to speak a word to her in the Crowd, before he should be
wholly deprived of the sight of her; but there was no likelihood of approaching
her in the Dress he was in, especially in such a Concourse. He did see her take
Coach with the other Ladies, and having followed them to the Palace, where the
Marquess was to reside with the Governor, he went to seek out some Lodgings
for himself.

He passed the whole Night in Sighs and Regrets, the ordinary Comfort of
desolate Lovers, seeking within his Mind after something that might make his
innocence appear to the Object of his love, and justify himself of a Crime
which he would not have committed against the last of Women. He durst not hope
for so much Happiness as to speak to her, imagining that in the opinion she had
of him, she would not make one step toward it; but he did not believe it
wholly impossible, that by contriving intreagues upon intreagues, he might get
a Letter safely delivered to her. He knew that in those kind of things, the
surest way was to act Personally, and not trust to others. Therefore he tried
whether with a little good management of his own, and without any other
assistance, he could compass this business. In Spain, as in Italy, the Churches
are the chiefest Places where Lovers repair to seek their Mistresses: and thus
abusing of those things, which are most holy, they go to commit great Crimes in
Places that are appointed where to ask Pardon for committing them. Camille, who
was not ignorant of the Spanish Bigotry, did imagine that the Marquess would
not fail to go with his Wife that Morning to hear Mass, to give God thanks for
their happy Voyage, and that it would be a fit Place to deliver her a Note, if
Fortune or Love would never so little Favor his design. This resolution being
taken, he entreated his Host, who was an Italian, to get him conducted by some
Person to the Chapel of the Palace, if there was any, or to that Church, which
the Governor was used to frequent: he was served as he desired, and brought to
the Palace, where he did see a most sumptuous Chapel, and in it the
Governor's Wife, who was hearing Mass, and who seeing him enter, was much
surpised with his good Mien, such as was not very ordinarily found in
Pilgrims: But the Marquess and his Lady had passed the Night too ill to rise so
early. There had been nothing but reproaches, complaints, menances, and
quarrels between them, which having lasted almost till Day, were followed on
both sides with Hatred, and Heart-burnings, which had kept them long from
sleep. The Marquess, and reason good, would be satisfied how his Wife had
conveyed that Diamond into that Chamber where the Captain had found it, and
what she intended by it: Whether it was not for that Pilgrim, who she doubtless
did know, and who did follow her under that disguise. The Lady finding that he
was no better informed of the business, took Courage, stood upon her own
defense, cried out, spoke, and threatened, as loud as her Husband. The only
regret she had was for having treated so severely that Pilgrim, whom she
believed was not so guilty as she had thought him, and who had expressed a design
to serve her in a handsome manner; not that she did wholly excuse his
imprudence in letting that Ring be seen by her Husband, but she did believe
that there might be some ill fortune in it, but no ill design; and thereupon
did chide her self for having so soon condemned a Person who had so generously
offered himself to free her from that miserable condition she lived in, not
thinking ever to find again so fair an occasion; for she hardly had any hopes
of ever seeing him more, after such a piece of Injustice as she had done him.

The Night being passed in this manner, they did not rise, but just to sit at
table; where the Governor and his Lady did wait for them to dine: The Company
had scarce begun to eat, when Donna Barbara d' Ayamonte, so was named the
Governor's Wife, did begin a Discourse of a young Pilgrim which she had seen
at Mass, there being no quality in his Person that she had not taken special
notice of, and did not praise extremely; further saying, being of a more free
humor than the Custom of the Country did commonly allow, that she had very
much wished he had approached nearer her, that she might have asked him of what
Country he was, not doubting but that there were some considerable Adventure in
that kind of life, that a Man so well made as he was, did lead about the World,
under the Notion of a Pilgrim. The Viceroy, who was very gallant, and who
having not the Disease incident to Spanish Husbands, had always given a modest
Liberty unto his Wife, who began not to be altogether so young, and had never
been over-handsom, did play upon her very much about the Pilgrim, and set all
the Company in a good Humor, except the Marquess, who at the very Name of
Pilgrim had taken upon him a Melancholy Mien; and not doubting but it was the
very Blade who had been to seek after his Wife in that Chapel. He was almost
stark mad to see his Wife well pleased with what the Governor did say, and he
looked upon her as if he would devour her with his Eyes: The Marchioness, who
did observe all those Grimaces, did not much concern her self with them; on the
contrary, she did laugh at 'em more and more, being certain that what Donna
Barbara said to that Pilgrim's advantage, did give the Marquess as much of
Trouble, as it afforded her of Pleasure.

Camille was at the Chapel the next Morning again, but as unsuccessful as the
first time, not finding there what he sought after. Donna Barbara, who had
extremely desired to see him once more, did no sooner cast her Eyes upon him,
but she showed him unto the Governor, who had so much Complaisance for his
Wife, as to have him called so soon as Mass was ended. The Governor made him
diverse Questions, to which he answered with so good a Grace, and so much Wit,
that he was much taken with him as well as his Wife. He bid him come and see
him, and that in the Condition he was, if he wanted any thing he might have
recourse unto him. After the Pilgrim had given him to understand he was above
Want, he thanked him for the favor he did him in giving him leave to wait upon
him, of which he would make use; after this he retired, giving them
sufficiently to understand by all that he had said, as well as by his Carriage,
and the fine Air of his Person, that he understood Courtship, even after the
best manner. The Governor was much pleased at it, and did no sooner see the
Marquess and his Lady, but he mentioned his Wives Pilgrim unto them, for so he
called him, and promised likewise that they should see him. The Marquess, who
had not yet taken any notice that he knew him, did imagine that it would be
needless to conceal his knowledge of him any longer, and almost dead for fear
this Traitor should come to the Palace, if he used not some Stratagem to put it
off; he drew aside the Governor, and told him that he knew not of what Pilgrim
he did speak, but that if it was a certain Rascal who was come in the same
Vessel with him from Genoua, and concealed himself all the time that he had
been at Sea, he did declare to him, that he was the most dangerous and most
wicked Person in all Italy; that he had known him upon the Vessel, and had
spoken to him; that he was a Bandite of Genoua, who had been above a Year
Prisoner in the Castle of Milan, whence at last he had made his escape, after
he had been convinced of having been employed as a Spy by the Enemies of that
State: That doubtless he came into Spain upon some such like designs, and that
for his part, if he were in a place where he had any Authority, he would
certainly secure him, and detain him in a Dungeon, till he had confessed what
he came for into Spain under that disguise, or that at the least he would send
him back to Italy. All this he spoke to him as an Advice of great consequence
which he ought not to despise. The Governor did hearken to him with a great
amazement, not being able to quit very easily the good Opinion which he had
conceived, for the Pilgrim, who appeared to him nothing less than what the
Marquess would make him to be. Might you not, my Lord, said he twice unto him,
mistake your self? And do you knom him well? For he qualifies himself a Roman,
and I can assure you that he has not the accent of Genoua, and that a Man who
had so much Wit as this seems to have, had not need to take upon him the Employ
of a Spy. If he is so as you represent him, said the Marquess, it cannot be the
same Person; and I advise you once more, continued he, raising of his Voice,
that you take good notice of him; for I know what he has done in more than one
place; and upon that, to make good what he had said before, he invented two or
three stories, such as his Jealous humor did suggest unto him; unto which the
Governor had much to do to give Credit. Mean time, as he could not give a
guess at the Interest which did make the Marquess speak this; he did believe it
part of the Duty of his Office, not wholly to neglect his advice, and after he
had expressed how much he was obliged to him for it, he told him, that he
believed that this Pilgrim would come to see him that Day, that he would
examine him, and then he should know what he had to do.

Camille who knew nothing of those good Services which were rendered him at the
Palace, was transported with joy to have advanced his business so far with the
Governor, as to be invited by him to give him a Visit, which would give him
the most favorable access in the World at his Palace, whereby he might have
the opportunity to see, perhaps to speak, or at least to write unto the
beauteous Marchioness. He already dies with Impatiency, that the fit hour to
render that Visit in, is not come yet. At last he goes to the Palace, where the
Governor made him a no less gracious reception than he had done in the morning
at the Chapel. He examines, he questions, and entertains him on diverse things,
and finds not the least sign in him of what he was accused; on the contrary, a
great Fond of Honor, the judgment of a Person of Quality, and his Conversation
so charming, that he was amazed how the Marquess could entertain such a thought
of him, if this was that Person which he had seen, and had entain'd in
discourse on the Ship. Mean time, the Duty of his Charge, requiring that he
should proceed further; after he had spoken, during some time, of things in
general, he came to particulars, and asked him by way of raillery, if it were a
Spirit of Devotion, or some secret Design which he might have in Spain, that
had made him undertake to travel thither under that Pilgrims Habit: Camille
answered him smileingly, That there was more of a Caprichio than of a Design in
his disguise; but that knowing the Charity that the Spaniards had for all those
that did vow themselves to S. Jaques, he had taken in hand a Palmers staff to
serve him as a Pass. The Governor replied, That he knew well he had no
occasion of any such aid, and then, putting on a more serious Countenance, he
added, that there had been very ill Reports made of him, which he could not
attribute but to his disguise, that therefore he did advise him to take an
Apparel more suitable to a Person of Quality, as he did believe he was, and
that if he had no business in Barcelona, that he should quit that City so soon
as he could: That he would allow him three Days to end his business in, during
which time he would do well not to let himself be seen, and less about the
Palace than in any other Place: That he would have him believe it was with an
extreme regret that he acted thus; and that if he could have given credit but
to part of those things which had been spoken against him, he had been obliged
to treat him with much more severity than he did: That if he wanted money, or
any thing else, to retire himself from thence, he should but name it, and he
should be furnished with all things necessary, but that absolutely he could not
dispense from giving him that order. Camille, amazed and confounded at once
with the Governor's Bounties, and with so cruel and unexpected a blow, after
he had told the Governor that he was the most unhappy of all Men to have given
an occasion for such evil impressions, which he could attribute but to his ill
Fortune; he did return him thanks for all those Favous which he had received
from him, assuring him, that since he was pleased to give him three Days time
longer before his departure from Barcelona, he would employ them to such a use
as should not give to any Person the least cause of complaint, or of any
suspicion as to his conduct; and in this manner he took leave of the Governor.

No Man more disconsolate than Camille, to find himself on such a sudden fallen
from all those amorous hopes which he had too soon conceived, and what was
worst of all, to be obliged to quit the City within three Days; a short time
for a Lover; at least if he could but once have spoken or Writ to the
Marchioness, and taken her off of those so disadvantagious resentments which
she had for him, and that he might but hope to take his leave of her; but he is
banished from the Palace without daring to approach it: That was too severe: a
Lover may promise such things, but it is to be feared that he will not observe
them. It is rare to betray ones self; and it was not to be expected that
Camille, who loved more than all the Men in the World, should be in this point
more exact than others; so that after he had a long time afflicted himself on
this unhappy condition of the affairs of his Heart, a despair seized him; he
resolves to dye rather than depart after that manner. An Adventure so happily
begun, was not to be concluded after such a manner, and it came in his Head
that peradventure he should not be so unhappy as he did imagine.

He did not know what Reason the Governor might have to use him thus, at the
very time that he did overcome him with such Honor and Bounty as out-passed
what such a Figure as he represented might expect: There was great likelihood
that all this came from the Marquess, who upon the Jealousy which he had
conceived of him on the account of the Ring, would not be wanting in employing
all his Interest with the Governor to make him quit the City. But he did not
know whether the Governor himself was not tainted with that Disease, by reason
that his Wife had showed him so much kindness before him that Morning in the
Chapel; so that he had been concerned at it himself, and the Governor had
looked upon her twice or thrice earnestly, so as to let her understand that so
much eagerness did not very well please him. That which did the more confirm
him in that Opinion, was the forbidding of him to approach near the Palace; so
that he held it already for certain, that the Reasons of State and Policy which
that Lord had made use of to be rid of him, were but the mere Effects of a
jealous Temper: He was fully resolved to give him satisfaction in that Point
without any trouble to himself; for besides that he was already prepossessed
with a too beautiful Object, too have the least Thought on any other Woman,
Donna Barbara was not the most charming of the World in his Eyes, and the
Governor had not hazarded much in trusting her with him.

Part of the Night having been employed in making all those Reflections,
without being able to decide positively, if his Unhappiness did proceed from
the Governor's or the Marquesses Jealousy; he did pass the remnant of it on
the means to write to the Marchioness, because that the time pressed if he were
obliged to obey the Governor's Orders. He knew that in Spain the Friars are
the ordinary Confidents of the gallant Intrigues, by reason of their free
access into all Houses, as a Privilege annexed unto all Persons of their
Character. He thought that if he could make an Acquaintance with him that
officiated in the Governor's Chapel, he could not doubt of a good Success in
his Design; for, as to the gaining of him, that was a thing that did not much
trouble him. He had learned in Italy, that those Friars who resist the Devil
would be tempted with Money; he mentioned, this in the Morning to his Host, who
told him, That he did very well know that worthy Chaplain, and that he would
bring him to dine with him, if he desired it. To begin that way with a Monk is
to hold the right course; the Match is concluded, the Dinner's ready, and the
Reverend Father comes with a fresh-coloured face, like a good Jacobin as he
was. In Spain those Persons do not set forth the Poverty of the Country;
abundance of Beads, but little Penitence serves their turn: They sit at Table,
they eat and drink a little better than in the Refectory: Monsieur, the
Pilgrim, plays his part, and the Reverend Father much better his. Friendship
from the one to the other, Healths and Complements, assurances of Services and
the finest tenderness in the World flew about; Drink but once with those
Reverend Fathers, and it is an established Acquaintance even to the next World;
and if you have no need of their Service, at least you shall have a share in
their Prayers whether you will or not. Camille did not yet much trouble himself
to have Prayers said for his Soul; he having ocasion to make use of Father
Andrew, thus was he named, more as to this World then for the next; at the end
of the Dinner they fell into a Discourse concerning the Governor's Court. He
found that the Father was perfectly well instructed in all things; that he
lodged in the Palace; that he had as great a Power there as any Chaplain could
have, and that finally he could better than any Person in the World, render him
that piece of Service which he desired; he gave a true bias to the business,
takes the good Father aside, and tells him, that having taken that Habit which
he did see him wear through a Vow, which he had made to S. Jago; he knew that
he was obliged to make some charitable deeds, to cause Prayers to be said in
his behalf, and that he did not believe that he could put his charity into
better Hands than his; whereupon he drew out of his Pocket a Purse of Pistols,
of which he gave fifty unto the Reverend Father, who returned him Courtesy upon
Courtesy, mumbling a quantity of words one upon another by way of Thanksgiving
and Prayers, of which he scarce did understand the sense, so much did the
Rapture that he was in by this magnificent charity transport him beyond himself.

This step being made, which was the most essential in the whole business. Now
Father, said Camille, might I obtain a Favor of you? Alas, Sir, replied Father
Andrew with much earnestness, what would not any one do for you. I do believe
you, continued the Pilgrim, to be an honest and a good Man, and therefore I
hope, that in declaring this to you in way of Confession, I run no hazard, and
that you will serve me therein if it lies in your Power. You know, continued
he, that within these two or three Days there is come into the Palace a certain
Lady from Italy, who is called the Marchioness of C. I have some business with
her, and cannot get to speak to her, because of her Husband who is very
jealous. Jealous, replied Father Andrew, yea more than any Man in the World. So
that I would willingly have a Letter delivered unto her, continued Camille, and
I believe that there is no hurt in that. Alas, not in the least, replied the
scrupulous Father, and you need do no more than to give it me. I do promise
you, upon the faith of a good Religious, as I am, that you shall have an Answer
before you go to Bed. If it prove so, said Camille, there are fifty Pistols
more for Charities. I tell you, replied zealous Father Andrew, that you shall
have it, for you are too charitable, and too honest a Man not to have your
Prayers and Vows granted in Heaven. This Agreement being made, and there being
no further occasion of Requests or Promises between them, they altered their
Discourse; and Father Andrew, who was as earnest to go earn the other fifty
Pistols, as Camille was to see the Answer which the Marchioness would make him,
ended here his Visit, and having the Letter, he went to labor to bring about
so pious a design.

The business was not so easy as he imagined, for the Marquess, who understood
such things better than any Friar of them all, and who had no great Faith in
their Girdle, was continually present during the Visit that this came to give
to his Wife; so that the good Father Andrew did begin to despair of getting the
other fifty Pistols that Night, when by good Fortune the Governor came in,
toward whom the Marquess advancing to receive him, he gave an occasion to this
new Mercury to accomplish his Message, in sliding very dexterously the Letter
into the Marchioness's hand, who looking upon him, did understand by some signs
he made, that it was something of great moment to her, and which it was not
requisite that her Husband should see. She withdrew her self into another
Chamber, as if she would give a free liberty to these Gentlemen's
Entertainments, and having opened the Letter, she found it thus.

IN that Despair, Madam, in which those unjust Distrusts which you have had of
me, has plunged me, I defer not to seek all the means in the World to Write to
you, to offer you once again my Services. You tax of Treachery a Man which
would rather perish a thousand times than have so much as the least Thought of
displeasing you. When you will know me better, you will learn that I am not of
so mean a Rank as to commit any Unworthiness. I know what is due to Ladies; but
more than that I know what I feel for you within my Bosom, and there is no fear
of falling in that Duty which is supported by Love. If your Ring has caused
some Disorders, at the worst you may attribute it to some Misfortune, but not
to any Fault of mine. It fell from your fair Hand without my Knowledge, and the
Captain of the Galley who did find it, thinking it was mine, did bring it to me
before the Marquess. This is the Truth, Madam, of that Adventure: If you are
satisfied with this justifying of my self, as it appears to me you should, and
that you continue still in the same Resolutions you once had, make use of a
Person who offers you not his Life and Fortunes only, but who dies with Love
for you. It is time to think on it, for I have but three Days to stay in this
City, the Governor having given me Orders, I know not for what Reasons, to be
gone after that time. I could however find out some means to continue longer
here, if you did desire it. What will not a Lover do for the Object of his
Love? I wait your Orders on this. The Religious, who shall deliver you this
Letter, is a Person I have wholly engaged in my Concerns, and in whom you may
confide: Be confident, Madam, that nothing shall be forgotten to render me
worthy of your Esteem, and that there is no Person that is with more Respect
and Passion, than I am, wholly yours.

Camille of V.


The Marchioness, who when opening the Letter, had had some thoughts that it
might come from her Pilgrim, was ravished with joy at the reading of it, and
finding that she had not deceived her self, and in learning the whole story of
the Ring. But that which charmed her most, were those tender and passionate
Sentiments which he expressed for her, judging well by the manner of his
writing, as also by the Air of his Person, that he must be some person of
Quality. All that esteem which she had for him at first sight, did now
redouble; he had offered himself unto her with so good a Grace; he had given
her to understand in so ingenious a manner the design which he had to serve
her, that that alone was capable to seize the heart of a beautiful young Woman,
that sought after that which was offered to her in so gallant a manner. It is
true, that her first distrusts had somewhat cooled her desires; but besides
that she could condemn him never wholly in her thoughts, she had at last in
some measure better informed her self, by what she had heard from her Husband,
and the wrong which she conceived she had done the Pilgrim on that account, had
served but to render him the more worthy of her esteem: In fine, all things
else, besides the Governor and his Lady, having contributed in making her a
thousand times regret the not having made better use of the good intentions of
so worthy a person. This Letter in bringing he^ the joy that she received by
hearing from him, did wholly dispose her to entertain such thoughts of him as
he was worthy of. She would gladly have made him an Answer, but as it has been
said before, the use of writing was not only forbid her as a Capital Crime, but
wholly out of her Power. Mean time, as Love is extreme ingenious, and that it
appears more in such occasions than in any others, she bethought her self to
write with a Bodkin, upon an Orange which she had these words, Be-this night at
Eleven of the Clock under my Window, and you shall have my Answer; after which
she returned into the Chamber, where was the Governor with the Marquess, and
Father Andrew, who would not be gone from thence without some Answer to his
Letter, after he had performed the most difficult part, which was the delivery
of it. The Marchioness did look upon him, and showing him the Orange which she
set upon the Window, she made him signs to take it, and that it was all that
she had to give him. Father Andrew, who was a most intelligent Friar, gently
takes it up, and lifting up his Cowl, he made a most humble Reverence unto
those Gentlemen, and so retired, to the Marquess his great satisfaction, who
was not contented in mind till he did see him out of his Apartment.

Our devout Postilion, but half pleased with his Message, for receiving an
Orange for his Answer, was returning musing to the Pilgrim, who staid for him
at his Lodgings in great perplexity; he did believe that the good Father had
failed of his design, seeing him coming with a somewhat mortified Countenance.
Well Father, said he, the Marchioness is no more visible to you than she is to
others, and doubtless that you have not spoken to her. I not speak to her!
replied Father Andrew, as if angry at the wrong was offered him, and who dares
refuse that to a Director of twenty years standing, Confessor to the Lady
Governess, and Chaplain to my Lord Governor, and a worthy Son of St. Dominick.
Good God! add he, raising his voice, and where would you have us to be, in
Barbary? No, no Sir Pilgrim, continued he, while Camille was endeavoring to
make his Excuses with Postures and Grimaces, I have seen, I have spoken, I have
delivered your Letter, it has been read, but for an Answer, I have but this
Orange to deliver to you, which he drew out of his Sleeve, and truly you must
needs be very unhappy to have no better success in this business, for I always
go through with all that I undertake, to the great satisfaction of those that
employ me. After that Camille had let him know that he was extremely satisfied
with what he had done, he took the Orange, examined it a little better than
Father Andrew had done, whose concern was not so great, and presently he
discovered the whole Mystery, after which taking no further notice, he put it
in his Pocket, in the room of fifty Pistols which he took from thence, which
the good Father was scrupulous to take, saying, that in Conscience he could
not, and that at the most he would have but half, because he had done but half
what he had promised. Yet at last, to oblige so generous a Pilgrim, he was
persuaded to take the whole, desiring him not to spare him in any thing that he
should have occasion for him, and upon that he went his way.

Camille, more full of joy than would be a Lover that had received an effectual
rendezvous, did wait with strange impatiency the hour of that Assignation which
was appointed him: Prudence would not let him approach the Palace in his
Pilgrims Habit, after what the Governor had said to him, but the fear that he
had lest the Marchioness should not know him from her Window in another dress,
or that she durst not trust to another, he being by that better distinguished
from all other persons, he resolved not to change his Apparel; so that being
gone out at a fit hour, he found hlmself just at eleven before the Palace.
Father Andrew had pretty well informed him on which side was the Marchionesses
Appartment, and that her Windows did answer upon the Sea; so that he could not
mistake. He gets under them, and perceiving some light in them, he goes behind
a Pillar till the Marchioness should appear and make him some sign. In such
businesses time seems long, every moment lengthens; and it seemed to Camille,
who had his Eyes fastened to those Windows, that he had already waited a long
time, when at last he did see a Lady appear, and as he imagined, it could be
none but the Marchioness: He immediately steps out of his lurking place and
showed himself. He was presently known by the Shells and other gaudy things
which Pilgrims usually wear on their Hats, which glittered in those bright
Nights that are common in those Countries in the Summer Season; and soon after
the Window was shut again. He thought that it was not yet time, but a quarter
of an hour after he saw a little door opened, whence there came forth an
ancient Duenna, who called him, and made him go in, saying, in a low Voice,
that all that day they had been concerned for him, that he had been sought for
all over the Town, and that they had but just espied him from the Window; he
was advised to be discreet and wise, and that he should be the happiest of all
Men. And hereupon taking him by the hand, she led him without light through an
obscure way till they were come into a low room very like that of some old
waiting Woman, in a corner of which there was a Lamp burning, there being
nothing else in it but a Bed, and that none of the best, two Flag-Chairs, and a
Trunk, which it is probable did serve for a Wardrobe. She busily told him that
he should stay a little, and that when all things should be ready to receive
him, she would fetch him. Happy Camille, not daring to make the least noise,
all transported with joy and acknowledgments, did only kiss twice or thrice her
hand, making her signs that she might be gone, and that he would stay there
till she came again: upon this the Duenna, who knew with what impatiency she
was expected back, that the result of her Commission might be known, did get up
a Ladder which was in the Room, and went into the Chamber over it through a
Trap-door, to give an accout of what she had done.

To conceive well the condition that the Amorous Camille was in at that time,
one should Love as much as he did. He was sensible that the Marchioness did
show him more favor than ever he could have hoped for, and that when he
thought his business desperate, on the sudden he did find himself upon the very
moment of being the happiest of all men. These reflections raised his Thoughts
and Idea's, representing to himself the beauteous Marchioness, some time after
one manner, sometime after another, who told him this, to which he answered;
that thus relishing beforehand such charming pleasures, that nothing but the
reality of what he did imagine could afford him greater; so long as the heat of
his Amorous ravings could afford him any matter of entertainment, time did not
seem long to him; and setting aside some little impatiences which from time to
time did seize on him, he did spend passably well some moments in that dull
Chamber; but when it began to be long before the old Woman did return, and that
he had begun to fear some back stroke of Fortune or of Love, his Fancy
representing to him every moment some misfortune or other, he felt no longer
any thing of the former sweets. He had almost been two hours dancing
Attendance, and had already gone above a thousand times about the Chamber,
which he had visited, to divert himself from one end to the other, there not
being a Rag, or Clowt, Shell of red, Pot of Pomatum, with which that Trunk was
filled, which had not passed through his hands, and wherein he had not thrust
his Nose. He already did no longer hope for any thing of what he had promised
to himself, and was very fearful of passing the Night upon that Trunk; for as
to the Bed, he feared too much the smell and Society of it, when at last he did
see the Trap-door lifted up, and the Duenna to appear, who made him signs to
come up; Presently he re-assumes his joy, and in two or three steps flies up to
the Trap-door; he beholds a magnificent Chamber, enlightened but with one
single Flambeau, which was placed upon the Table. The Duenna made him a sign
that he should go to the Wall-side of the Bed, he advances with redoubling joys
of Love which he could hardly contain in his heart, and drawing near to the Bed
where lay the Lady with the Curtains drawn, he cast himself upon his Knees
before her, who received him with no less passion. At the first onset there
was nothing but Trasports and Tendernesses on both parts, sighs on this part,
sighs on the other. Ah Madam, cried out Camille twice or thrice in a
languishing accent, what Graces, what Favors do I receive at present from you?
He was not able to say any more in the joy he had. Mean time the old Duenna,
who had no more business there, went out of the Chamber to keep Centry for fear
of a surprisal. The Lady, who had seen sufficiently this languishing Lover,
kneeling, being impatient that he should rise to an higher degree of Fortune,
having no time to lose, desired him with a sigh to arise and sit down by her;
that the Governor was playing with the Marquess, and that it would not be long
before he would be coming. Camille, surprised with this discourse, and to hear
so good Spanish spoken by a Lady of his Country who was not likely to
understand it so well, opens his Eyes, discerns through the Curtains some other
Features than those of the Marchioness, and in lieu of her he finds the
Governors Wife, whose Cornets, Ribbons, Curls, and all the other Adjustments
with which she had bedecked her self as a new Bride, had at first sight
deceived him through the aid of the small light that came into the Bed; what a
change did this mistake produce in him? His Joy and Transports are presently
changed into a dull silence, he looks up toward Heaven as if it had been the
Author of his mishap, and at the same time turning his Head another way, in
lieu of rising, as the Lady did bid him, he lets himself drop upon the Bed,
with his Head leaning on his Arms, as if he would hide the Confusion that he
was in through that piece of Treachery which Love had lately played him. The
Lady, much troubled to see him in this posture, after such a Tender and
Passionate beginning, enquires what he aileth, and whether he finds himself
ill? He makes no Answer, she takes him by the Arm, draws him toward her, and
finds him to be grown cold and indifferent, which surprises and frets her.
Never were persons more pusled; she repeats her Caresses, and entreats him to
tell her what he has found in her that should on the sudden disgust him. She
sees that he sighs, but it is for sorrow, and not out of Love. At last he rises
and entreats of her that he may retire. Retire! replied she, with trembling a
Voice, and can you leave me in this manner? Ah! how unhappy am I? continued
she, holding an Handkerchief before her Eyes to hide the Confusion that she was
in, and to receive some Tears which she could not retain. What, added she, must
I see myself thus slighted by a person to whom I have abandoned my Life and
Honor! And finding that neither her Tears, nor any thing else that she could
say to him, of most tender, did move him, and that he still did persist in the
design of retiring, Ungrateful man, said she to him with a sorrow mixed with
fury, carry not thy cruelty so far, for thou would abandon me to all that
rage can make a Person of my Quality and Courage do, when she finds her self
treated as thou usest me. Speak, draw near, and at least tell me something that
may allay the effects of thy contempt. The Governor is not far from hence, and
if thou obligest me to make some noise thou art lost.

Who ever else had been in Camille's room, had peradventure more Complaisance
for a Lady, who though none of the handsomest, might well deserve somewhat less
of Rigor to be shown to her, that does never become a young Man; but yet again
when one is prepossessed with such a strong Passion as he was, and that in lieu
of a charming Beauty which has been long expected and thought to be in
possession, an Object is met with which was not sought after, it becomes the
more hateful, and the Heart being grieved at such a Deceit, it takes up quite
contrary Thoughts to the former, and it is very difficult to reclaim it.
However Camille, who looked upon himself as a Prisoner in the Power of a
transported Woman who could really ruin him, did at last make use of his
Prudence; he did not drive her to the extremity, and thinking on some more
handsome put off than that of a Disgust, he was preparing himself to make her
some Excuses upon a Faintness of Heart which had seized on him, when the Duenna
came in great haste to tell them, that the Game was at an end, and the
Governor coming; so that all that Donna Barbara could do, was to embrace once
more that insensible Lover, which in that very moment did force some
Expressions of Kindness to comfort her a little, seeing himself upon the point
of being rid of her. If you will not, said she, put into Despair a Person that
has so much Passion as I have for you, render your self to morrow at the same
Hour where I did see you this Night. She had no time to say more to him,
because that she heard the Governor coming; so that the Duenna had but just
time sufficient to open the Trap-door, and go out with Camille, and that with
such precipitation, that her Coats being between as she let it down again, and
the Ladder which was not very fast, having slid from under them by their hasty
motion in getting off, the Pilgrim fell with his Breech to the Ground, and the
old Woman remained hung in the Air by her Coats, which was the pleasantest
sight that could be. She durst not make any noise, for fear of being heard by
the Governor; and she was making sign to the Pilgrim to help her to get loose;
but notwithstanding the cross adventure which he had so lately had, and that in
which she had shear'd with the Duenna, he did break out into such a laughter at
the dangling of her Legs, that he was a long time not being able to rise. He
would gladly have left her in that posture to be revenged of the cruel message
which she had lately delivered to him, by which he had lost the Rendezvous
which he had from the Marchioness, and perhaps the opportunity of ever having
another; but having occasion for this old Woman to convey him from thence, he
was obliged much against his will to assist her; yet it was not without
considering of her very exactly, before and behind, and laughing heartily at
her, which made the Duenna storm at him, and promise him to revenge her self if
ever he came again. Camille did not trouble himself at her Threats, being very
sorry to have been catched once there. Being led out, he passed once again
before the Windows of the Marchionesses Chamber, but could see no more light
there, and small hopes of having any till day; yet he walked under them for
some time, sighing, thinking and complaing of Love, and of that hard fate which
had so untowardly thrown him into the Arms of an homely Woman; yet in the midst
of all these regrets, the pleasant Reflections which he did make upon his
mistake on the transports of the Governess, and on the Duenna's Adventure, did
somewhat divert him. But it was time to go to Bed, not to sleep; for that is not
for Lovers, but to think what he should do to repair that Nights miscarriage.

So soon as it was Day he sent too seek after the most dear Father Andrew, from
whom he kept secret what had befallen him with the Governor's Wife; it not
becoming a well-bred Man to divulge such things; he only told him that he was
the most unfortunate of all Men, and that if he did not take pity of him, his
despair would not let him live twenty four hours. The obliging Father Andrew,
impatient to learn in what he could serve him, imagining that it would not be
unrewarded, did conjure him not to despair, but to be persuaded, that if his
happiness did depend on him only, he would make him the most happy Person in
the World. After this sincere and true protestation, Camille told him, that if
he would have him obliged to him of his life, which was much more than of his
good Fortune, he must that day deliver a Letter to the Marchioness, and
endeavor by all means possible to bring him an Answer: That he would
acknowledge his kindness so as that he should have cause to be contented, and
not repine at the little pains he should take for him. Alas, fie, Sir, pray
have no such thought, said the Father, smilingly interrupting him. You know
that we are in this World but to serve one another, and I do not believe there
is any one that takes more delight in obliging Persons than I do. Give me that
Letter, added he, and only pray to God that I may find the Marchioness alone,
and I promise to return you such an Answer as you would desire; but be the
Marquess there or not, I will not return without bringing you news from the
Marchioness, and deliver your Letter unto her; and without more Words, he takes
leave of him, and goes to set the Irons in the Fire.

The Marchioness had been all Night in no less trouble than Camille; she had in
the Evening feigned her self somewhat ill, that she might stay in her Chamber,
and not lose the opportunity of the Appointment which she had made to the
Pilgrim, but that pretended Indisposition had not had the effect which she
expected; for the Governor and his Lady, being come to keep her Company, did
pass the greatest part of the Night with her, the Governor at play with the
Marquess, and Donna Barbara in Discourse with her; so that she never durst draw
near to the Window, for fear of giving them any Distrust in case the Pilgrim
should appear and be seen; as indeed it happened unto the Governor's Wife,
which had presently known him, and made use of the occasion as has been
related. And the Marchioness was no sooner quit of the Lady, but she went also
to the Window, but there was no Pilgrim there, she looked every way, and waited
for him with the the greatest Impatiency and Trouble imaginable, fearing that
he might have been weary with waiting so long. The Game being ended at last,
and the jealous Marquess, who had twice or thrice observed with what assiduity
his sick Wife did stay at the Window, had played with a very distracted mind,
every moment turning his head toward her, as if he feared some Gallant should
get up that way; so that the Governor was no sooner got out of the Chamber,
but that he went himself to see what was the matter, he looked out, and after
he had been some time there, not seeing any thing, he shut the Window with a
great deal of caution.

The beautiful Marchioness was in such a melancholy for having failed the
Pilgrim, that she could have no rest all that night. Her Husband who did not
always sleep, when he seemed so to do, and who had fancied that certainly his
Wife had had some evil design that Evening, was more than ever confirmed in
that Opinion, when he heard her from time to time to vent most violent sighs.
There needed no great matter to puzzle his Brains; and this wicked Pilgrim did
so run in his mind since the Adventure of the Diamond, that he had no other
Dreams every Night but of Palmer staves, Cockle shell Hats, and the like, which
made him be in a continual fear; he would come every day at Mass in the
Palace-Chappel where he had no business; he did insinuate himself into the
Governor's Favor, to render him a Visit; wherefore all this, thought he, if
it were not on my Wifes account? who, as indisposed as she was, did watch two
or three hours at the Window to see him pass by. Thus did he reason within
himself; if by laying his hand on her left side he could have made her declare
in her sleep all that she had in her Heart; Oh, what a Triumph that had been
for him! but he had already a thousand times made trial of that secret without
advantage. After this he lay reproaching of himself for having continued so
long at play, while he should have been minding his business; for, said he to
himself, with a Sex so perfideous as that is, let a poor Man forget himself but
one moment, and he is liable to receive during that time the greatest Affront
that can ever happen to him. Having passed the best part of the Night in
tormenting himself after this manner, he got up in the Morning, his Head so
filled with the thoughts of this Pilgrim, that he fancied to see him in every
Person that came into the Chamber. Father Andrew, who was one of the first that
came to visit him, though he dissembled never so much, approaching him in a
Saint-like posture, with a wry Neck, his hands in his great Sleeves, and a down
look, he was received by the Marquess rather worse than the Day before. For
after he had showed him a Mien cold enough to freeze the fiery heat of the most
Zealot of all Intreagues, he heard him speak during more than an hour that they
walked together in the Hall, without affording him any other answer than yea or
nay, with which Father Andrew grew at last weary, and finding that he could not
get him by any means to enter into a Conversation, he took the liberty to ask
him how the Lady Marchioness did, and whether he should not have the honor to
give her the good morrow. No, Father, replied the Marquess, very coldly, she is
not very well, and you will excuse her for this time. Heaven! how sorry am I at
it? replied the good Father, it is at such times, as when we are visited, that
we stand in most need of a wise Directors Consolations; and with your liking,
my Lord, added he, seeing that Heaven has sent me as it were on purpose, I
will have her asked, if without disturbing I could not speak some Words of
Consolation unto her. You will certainly disquiet her, Father, did he reply.
But if she had occasion to confess her self, continued the ghostly Director.
She is not yet so ill, answered the Marquess, and it is not eight Days since
she was at Confession. It is no matter, went on the Father, going toward the
Marchionesses Chamber, one knows not what may happen. She sleeps, said the
other, detaining him, and this is not fit time. How? does she so? said the
zealous Father, then I will wait till she awakens, and you -- Father, without
any more ado, said the Jealous Lord, interrupting of him somewhat roughly, his
patience being at an end, I tell you, that here is no need of you, and that you
will oblige me, not to come here again till you are sent for. Sir, it is not
usual to treat a Man of my Orders in such a manner, replied Father Andrew,
without being daunted, in speaking to me so roughly, you offend a whole Order,
that might -- I should offend the Pope, and the whole Church, said the angry
Marquess interrupting him, with a longing desire to break the Friars bald Pate,
if the Pope and the Church would see my Wife against my Will: and saying this
he left his Reverence, and withdrew himself into his Wifes Chamber, and shut
the Door after him.

The poor Father Andrew extremely confused and vexed at the Marquess his
Bruitishness, retired very pensive, but fully resolved to find some way of
Revenge; thinking himself unworthy of his Monkish Character, if he did not make
him wear a pair of Fair ones. He returned to the Pilgrim with a most sorrowful
Countenance, and in giving him an account of the manner that that Brute had
used him (for so he qualified the Marquess) he did sufficiently express his
Resentments, protesting, that were it not for the Habit he wore, he would have
made him that which he feared so much to be. That excess of Cholar made Camille
to laugh, maugre all the Discontent he was in at his Embassy's ill Success. He
entreated the Father to rely on him as to the point Revenge, only desiring his
Assistance to bring it about. That I fully resolve, answered Father Andrew, and
though it should cost me the Hundred Pistols that I have received from you, I
must and will speak to the Marchioness this very day, and give you an account
of this Letter. Camille, who was not ignorant of those Confraters Subtilties,
very much rejoicing to see him take such a Resolution, told him, to animate him
the more, that in case those Hundred Pistols were employed in his Service, he
should meet with another hundred at his return, and more too, if he had
occasion for them. Liberality is one of the most advantageous and surest
Qualities of a Lover. Most commonly it stands in the place of Merit, and
persuades much better* That which Love cannot do in a long time, Money will
perform some time in a moment. Father Andrew, in whom a coveteous humor did
predominate above all other things, did find himself engaged by so powerful an
Interest to serve so brave a Pilgrim as not to omit, setting on work all that
he knew of subtilty and intreague. Vengeance and hope of a new Present were too
strongly joined together to fail; upon such good security he would have
undertaken the most difficult things in the World. He goes to Donna Barbara,
whose Confessor he was, as we have already said, so that he knew the very Soul
of her; he counterfeits a troubled Mind, that he might be asked what it was
that disquieted him. The Lady falls in his Trap, she entreats and presses him
diverse times to tell her what was the matter; and at last he informs her, that
the Marquess is jealous of the Governor; and that having been in his apartment
to visit the Marchioness, who he had heard was fallen ill, he had used him not
as a Confessor, or his Excellencies Chaplain; but as a Messenger concerned in
the Governors Amors, not giving him the liberty to see her. Signora Donna
Barbara, according to the usual custom of Women, who will be themselves jealous
of their Husbands, but will not suffer others to be so, did take in great
disdain the Marquess his distrusts, not thinking her selfless worthy than his
Wife. Thus being carried away with those first transports, she did speak with
so much scorn of the Husbands extravagancy, and the Wifes want of Merit, that
she gave occasion to Father Andrew to descant upon that Theme also, and say to
her, all that could incense her and make her of his Party. Nay, since it is so,
said Donna Barbara, and that this Lord is so apt to see Visions, only because
my Husband is more civil, and better understands what is due to Ladies than he,
he shall be made jealous in good earnest, and we will make our selves some
sport with him. If you will serve me in it, Father Andrew, added she, smiling,
we shall both revenge our selves most pleasantly. Father Andrew, who desired
nothing more, made answer that he was ready to obey her, in all that she would
be pleased to command him; and upon that she told him that she would think on
it, and did bid him come again to her toward the Evening a little before
Supper, of which he failed not, and Donna Barbara found him in her Chamber
waiting for her; she laughed so soon as she saw him, and asked him, if he could
act very well a Gallants part; for he should see that Night the Marchioness in
such a Garb; at this, Father Andrew, taking upon him to assume a good Mien, was
willing to let the Lady see, that he had not quite forgot what he had formerly
been, and what he yet could be upon occasion: At which postures Donna Barbara
laughing outright, she sent him to one of her Husbands Valet de Chamber, to
whom she had before given order to fit him Cap-ape, like a Gentleman, and she
told Father Andrew, that when he should be ready, he should go into the Garden,
and keep himself in the Grotto of the Nayades, where she should meet him with
the Marchioness. Father Andrew o're-joy'd with a design so favorable to his
desires, did shout with joy at so pretty a design, and did much applaud the
Ladies ingenuity. Go and prepare your self to act your part well, said the
Marchioness; for now that the Governor is not here, doubtless the Marquess
will accompany us into the Garden, which will furnish us no doubt with some
further divertisement, and you with a fit occasion of revenge. But Madam,
replied Father Andrew, who had no mind that the conclusion of the Play should
light on him, I would not have this Lord to mistake himself; for I know how
furious he is, and you can testify, Madam, that I have no hand in this,
further then to obey your commands: Go, replied she, and fear not any thing
where I shall be.

Upon this Father Andrew goes to the Valet de Chamber, who did take care to
accommodate him; and Donna Barbara having supped, she went as she used to do
every Evening, to walk in the Garden with the Marchioness, where the Marquess
did not fail to accompany them. But because the Governor was not there, the
Spanish Custom not permitting him to entertain the Ladies, for fear of giving
Jealousy, he went to walk in another place of the Garden, however still having
his Eyes on them, for fear of some surprise. Madam, said Donna Barbara to the
Marchioness, so soon as they were by themselves, to show you that I am a Woman
of the most frank Nature in the World, I must tell you that it is twenty years
since I first knew a Man, for whom I have a very great esteem, and whom I
cannot forbear seeing once a Day, and in a Word, from whom I reserve no
secrets, so that I entrust him with my greatest as well as smallest Concerns;
yet this Man does not so soon desire to see you, but that without weighing mine
own interests, I offer to be his assistant, I must confess, replied the
Marchioness, that the example is not common; and that such an action from any
one but you, Madam, would very much surprise me, but one endowed with such
charming qualities as you have, may hazard something more than ordinary,
especially being near such a mean beauty as mine is. Madam, I do not tell you
this, replied the Governor's Lady, to invite you to flatter me, or to contend
of beauty with you; on the contrary you see the sacrifice which I make you, of
a Man whose Heart you deserve to possess much more than I do, and unto whose
vows I humbly entreat you to hearken: And I, Madam, replied the Marchioness,
who shall ev^^ yield unto you in all things, except in complaisance and
generosity of Heart, I conjure you not to speak to me in the least of that
Person, and to dispense with me from seeing him: That cannot be, replied Donna
Barbara, for I have engaged it should be otherwise, and we are too near him to
get off again. As she ended these Words, and not above two or three steps from
the Grotto of the Nayades, they saw come forth a Cavalier in a magnificent
dress, which did as much surprise the Marchioness, as all that Donna Barbara
ha^ newly said unto her. She would presently have retired, fearing it was some
trick put upon her; but the Governors Lady stopped her. Good Madam, said the
Marchioness, permit me to retire I beseech you, or I shall have cause to
complain of you. But Donna Barbara had no sooner seen Father Andrew's Figure,
but she burst out into such a laughter as would not give her leave to answer
her. At which the Marchioness strangely confounded, believing that she was
certainly played upon, would by all means be gone, not intending to be an
object to the divertisement of the Governors Lady. On the other hand Father
Andrew did make most ridiculous postures in imitation of a Gallant Air, and did
speak such pleasant things to the Marchioness to undeceive her, and oblige her
to stay, that Donna Barbara was even spent with laughing, and the Marchioness
began to be angry in good earnest, not designing to answer, or so much as turn
her Eyes toward the Cavalier; who seeing that Donna Barbara could detain her
no longer, was at last constrained to ask her if she knew no longer Father
Andrew. Never was a confusion equal to that of the Marchioness, who at the Name
of Father Andrew having cast her Eyes upon him, did presently know him, and was
for sometime so disordered within her self, that she knew not what to say, not
knowing to what purpose Donna Barbara had brought her that Friar, without he
had entrusted her with what had passed between her and the Pilgrim: but she was
presently undeceived as to that; for the Governors Lady, who thought that she
had sufficiently laughed at the Marchioness's cost, not willing to let her
remain any longer in the disorder that she seemed to be in, did relate unto her
how that all this Comedy had been invented merely to revenge her self of her
Husbands jealousy, who would not allow that any one should see her: And as she
was thus speaking, Father Andrew, who was upon the watch, and who not without
cause was more in fear than any body else, did a far off espy the Marquess, who
was advancing toward them with a round pace: Upon which he was alarmed, and
would fain have been a going; but Donna Barbara did embolden him again, and
advised them both to go into the Grotto, while she would go meet the Marquess,
to undeceive him; but that the opportunity was too fair not to thoroughly
revenge her self by it. The Marchioness, who would willingly have given half
her life to speak with Father Andrew, was so surprised with joy, at the
opportunity which Donna Barbara gave her of it, that she thought of nothing but
to make good use of that happy moment.

The Marquess had all along kept the Avenue, having walked before the
Garden-gate to observe those that should go in or out; when having cast his
eyes on that side that the Ladies were, he had seen certain feathers appear,
which had most terribly affrighted him; and quite out of breath at the sight of
that Vision, he was running as fast as he could that way, to see what it was,
and know whether his eyes deceived him or not: But Donna Barbara meeting him,
did detain him, and enquired whether he went so fast: Leave me, Madam, said he,
with so great a perplexity that he could scarce speak, for Heavens sake let me
go, for I have seen all, and your company is too dangerous for my Wife. Why?
replied she, what is it you fear? She is with my Husband, who we have found hid
in the Grotto of the Nyades. How? She is with your Husband, replied the
Marquess more astonished than ever, and you can have the patience, Madam, to
leave them alone thus? What, replied she, you would have me be there as a Property?
That is not my humor; and if Monsieur the Governor, who as you know has ever
been wanton enough, will play me foul play, I shall sooner forgive him for
making choice of so pretty a Lady as is the Marchioness, than if he should make
use of some other less deserving: And I find, replied the Marquess in a fury,
that what you now say, is the most terrible thing in the World, and that an
honest Woman ought to give Poison to a Husband that should have the least
thought of such a thing. In speaking thus, he was so distracted, that he knew
not what to do: He would go two or three steps forwards, and then as many back,
dragging Donna Barbara after him, who still had hold of him, and had much to do
to follow him: Will you not then, said she to him, go and see what they do,
seeing you are resistless. No, Madam, answered he roughly, retiring back, for I
have seen but too much already; and since that the Rights of Hospitality are
violated here, and that under the pretense of Parentage a Man of my Quality is
dishonored, I must have a recourse to those that can do me Justice in this
case, and I will perish rather than not be righted. He did speak those Words
with such a transport, and so loud, that Father Andrew, who was not far from
thence, having heard him, thought that he was just upon him, which made him
gallop away as fast as he could to the Backdoor, of which Donna Barbara had
given him the Key.

The Marquess was going back to the Palace wholly transported with fury,
revolving a thousand designs of vengeance in his Mind against this treacherous
Kinsman the Governor: When he was scarce got to the first Gallery which
answered into the Garden, where he met him with some Officers. How great his
surprise was, is easy to be imagined; and seeing him come up to him with a
cheerful smiling countenance, he stood looking on him without saying one Word.
The Governor more surprised, than he himself, at his behavior, and to see him
so pale and wan, did ask him what he ailed: What, my Lord, said the Marquess,
did I not see you but even now in the Garden speaking to my Wife, near the
Grotto of the Nayades? No assuredly, replied the Governor, for I have been
ever since morning in the Arcenal, to hasten the fitting out of some Vessels
for Sicily, and I am but just come in. The jealous Marquess had no sooner heard
this, but that the fumes of his passion confounding his senses more than ever,
he returned into the Garden almost distracted, where the Governor, who did see
him so transported, did follow him, pressing him several times to declare what
he ailed, and where he was going, without being able to get one Word from him,
till they had found the Ladies that were walking and laughing still at the
Adventure, against whom he vented part of his rage, running down his Wife with
such ill language, in which Donna Barbara's Honor was not a little concerned.
The Governor did hear all that without one Word speaking, being in an extreme
impatiency to learn the cause of all those transports: But the Ladies, who
continued laughing at the Marquesses fury, did increase it much at the
Governors amazement, unto whom, when the jealous Man was retired, they gave an
account of all that had passed.

Mean time the furious Marquess was extremely perplexed, to guess who that
Cavalier should be that he had seen with his Wife in the Garden, there being no
likelihood that it should be the Governor: So that after he had sufficiently
tormented himself on that Theme, he having always his imagination filled with
the Pilgrim, and that he could think of no other Person on whom he might more
certainly lay his Conjectures, he concluded that it was he, and that Sennora
Donna Barbara, who had always taken that Traitors part, had had him secretly
conveyed into the Garden, there to entertain his Wife. There was but little
Ground for all that, and it was very unlikely that a Lady, as was the
Governors Wife, should stoop so low: But of what strange Idea's is not a
jealous Man's fancy capable? He did confirm himself so well in that Opinion,
through a thousand false reasonings which he made upon it, that he no longer
doubted it so, that he took the resolution to rid himself of a Man so fatal to
his quiet as was that Person: Yet some checks of Conscience, (for Spaniards
have it very tender,) making him to reflect with some scruples on an act in
which a Christian Soul was concerned, he did conclude to examine the business a
little better first: And thereupon he was framing a design most infallible, to
inform himself of the whole truth; which was, to disguise himself like a
Pilgrim, as he might easily do in a Country where there are Shops full of such
Garments to sell, and then to walk under his own Chamber-window, where his Wife
would not fail to appear, as she had done the Night before, and so be
trepanned: This being resolved upon, as has been said, and perceiving the Night
to draw near, so that he had no time to lose, if he would get all things ready
before the Marchioness should be returned from her walk, he sent one of his
Servants to fetch him a Pilgrims Habit; and having placed two other of his
Servants over against his Chamber to keep Centry, if occasion were, and to give
him an account of all things, he withdrew himself, expecting the return of his
Servant.

Father Andrew, who through the impatiency he was in to carry those good news
to the Pilgrim, which he had to tell him, together with the fear that the
Marquess had put him in, had not had time to go and shift himself, but was
running as fast as he could toward his most Dear's Lodgings with that Hat
laden with Feathers, which sometimes flapt of one side of his Head, and
sometimes hung on the other: Besides the Peruque which did infinitely annoy
him, and made him sweat more than ever had done two Cowls made of Serge; but
above all, the Belt, which was so long, that the Sword dragged on the ground,
being forced to carry it in one hand, and to hold his Hat with the other. He
did cross in this dress the best part of the City, not without frequently
looking behind him, to see if some body did follow him, still fearing the
Marquess his anger, though he was far enough: At last he came to the Pilgrims
Lodging, who unfortunately was not at home. This makes him mad, he must find
him out; that which he has to say to him is of too great a consequence to be
omitted; it cannot be deferred, and there is not a moment to be lost: He runs
to and fro, here and there, knowing that his steps would be very well rewarded,
and that thereby his zeal would the more appear, but no Pilgrim to be found. He
had been seeking of him two hours, and was ready to return the second time to
his Lodgings, but first he would go round the Palace, not being far from
thence, to see if he might not be staid there; when passing under the Windows
of the Marquess his Apartment, he saw a Pilgrim walking, and that seemed to
come toward him. It was somewhat dark, and he believed that he should hardly
know him; therefore running toward him to embrace him, You have given me, said
he, a great deal of trouble this day; you see in what an Equipage I am still,
but you shall never know in what dangers I have hazarded my life for your sake.
In a word, continued he in a low voice, the beauteous Marchioness is yours, and
this very Night, if you can get a Ladder of Ropes, she will follow you
wheresoever you shall please to lead her: I have a Letter of hers to give you,
in which you will see more; but let us from hence. As Father Andrew was talking
after this manner, he perceived a certain piece of Iron to glitter, with which
the Pilgrim was going to reward him after an ill manner for his good services,
if he had not happily escaped the blow, by suddenly recollecting himself,
seeing his error, and running away; yet not so quickly, but that he left the
Hat, Feathers, and Peruque in the others hands, who thought to hold him fast by
them: Ah! thou Villain, cried he, is it thus that thou performest thy Religious
Vows? Thou infamous Hypocrite, Have thou taken upon thee a Religious Habit, but
for the more secure debauching another man's Wife? Father Andrew, who had not
been so surprised at the shining of the Dagger, as he was at the hearing of the
Marquess his voice, did set all his strength in his heels, and little minding
the Sermon which was preached to him, he left not running till he was come to
the Pilgrims House. The Marquess, who was not so good a Footman, left running
after him, being well satisfied with having found out the bottom of the Plot,
especially the Marchionesses good intentions. He was only vexed that had been
too hasty, else he might have had the Letter also, which had been the way to
have convinced her so home, that she should have had nothing to say for her
self: Yet he did not wholly despair of performing it, in continuing to act the
Pilgrims part, and walking under the Windows of her Apartment: He was scarce
returned thither, but the Duenna of Donna Barbara, who had ever since morning
prepared as severe a Revenge for Camille as could be imagined, failed not to
let fall upon the Marquess his Head, from a third story, a whole deluge of
filth, with which he was covered all over. Oh Heavens! must I receive this
affront too, said he, lifting up his Head, to see from whence that Present
came, to fill up my measure of misfortunes? And without staying to make
needless complaints, and not being able to endure the horrible stink with which
he was perfumed, he went back to the Palace to shift himself, and in the same
time gave such Orders, so that the Conspiracy should not take effect; but as he
was going into that Chamber in which he was to leave all his Equipage, the
Governor, who with his Wife was accompanying the Marchioness, did espy him;
and having judged by his countenance that it was some body that would hide
himself, he did ask of him who carred the Flambeau, who it was; who made him
Answer, that he thought it was the Marquess: At which they all fell to laugh;
and Donna Barbara, who sought by all means to make him stark mad, did oblige
his Lady, who was very indifferent, and the Governor, who out of complaisance
did follow them, to go with her into that Chamber where they found him, having
still the Hat and Peruque of that most wicked Father Andrew in one hand, and
the Palmers staff in the other; but their presence was to him the most grievous
of all affictions, not thinking that they had seen him. They ail gazed upon him
with such an amazement, as at first hindered them from speaking, not only by
reason of his disguise, which was sufficient to surprise them, but to see in
what a pickle he had been laid, from head to foot, which did oblige them all to
hold their Noses, no body daring to ask him the reason of all that, seeing him
to be in no humor of satisfying their curiosity. But at last great shouts of
laughter having succeeded all on a sudden, to their surprisal and silence, the
Governor, who was a very civil Gentleman, did desire his Wife and the
Marchioness to retire, that they mght not augment his Confusion, or rather the
rage that the Marquess was in, and give their people occasion to laugh at him.
So he only remained with him, and looking on him with compassion, My Lord, said
he, what would you have the World to think of you? Let it think what it will;
but still it is my opinion, that it is permitted every body to mind their own
business; and, if possibly, to prevent being betrayed: Betrayed, replied the
Governor, and where then are these Traitors? Where they are! replied the
Marquess in his turn, over all the Earth, and with you, more than in any place
of the World. In a word, your Wife, and your Apostate Chaplain, who is the most
wicked of all Traitors: But do you not see, replied the Governor, that all is
but in jest, to make mirth; and that my Wife, and that good Father -- How? a
sport to laugh at, said the Marquess in a fury, interrupting him, when my
Honor and Life are concerned in it? Yes, my Life, I say, for one cannot take
the one from me without the other; when Letters are carried, and that my Wife
is to be stolen away: But who, replied the Governor, who is to take her away?
Who? replied the other, your honest Pilgrim, with that precious Father Andrew,
through the assistance, I will not say of whom, for I my self am ashamed of it.
Heavens! is it possible, said the Governor, that you should abuse your self in
this manner? Yea, yea, I do abuse my self, replied he in a scornful tone, and
this Hat and Peruque were not part of Father Andrew 's Equipage, who has been
this night to speak with my Wife through the assistance of yours: That which
you now say, is true, replied the Governor, Father Andrew has been so idle as
to please my Wife, in disguising himself like a Cavalier, and she made him go
into the Garden to laugh at him, with the Marchioness; you should have laughed
also, and not fumed at is as you have done: Yea, I must confess, I am mightily
in the wrong, replied the Marquess in the same tone still, and I was to have
laughed at it; or rather, if you please, I should have been my Wifes Confident
to have carried the Letters which she writ to the Pilgrim, and have saved the
good Father Andrew that labor* These are your counsels, Monsieur the
Governor, and I thank you most kindly for them. But -- the Governor would
have answered him; But, said he presently again, interrupting of him, I beseech
you to leave me in quiet, and let every one govern himself according to his own
maxims; it suffices that I am obliged to you, and to my Lady Governess, for all
that could happen to me in this world of most cruel.

While they were thus entertaining one another, the Marquess had rid himself of
the Pilgrims Weeds, he immediately did run to his Apartment, confiding no more
in Donna Barbara, than in Father Andrew, and presently he set his head to the
Window, to see if the Ladder was not yet ready. The Governor, who would not
leave him till he had informed him better, was endeavoring with the best
reasons that he could find, to reclaim him: Believe me, said he to him, my dear
Cousin, that Pilgrim, of whom you speak, has no share in this Evenings Rallery;
and I am very certain, that Father Andrew, does not so much as know him. Good
God! replied the Marquess, crying out as if possessed, Father Andrew, that
Villain, from whom I have just now learned all, who is carrying of a Letter
from my Wife to that Pilgrim, and who is to give him notice that he need but
bring a Ladder this night to get to her out at the Window, and that she will
follow him wheresoever he pleases, does not know that Traitor? All this did
seem so ridiculous unto the Governor, and to Donna Barbara, that in lieu of
adding Faith unto it, they did believe that he was crack-brain'd; and they were
consulting between them, what they should do to prevent this distemper from
growing worse. As for the Marchioness, she was retired into a Closet, so soon
as she had seen the Marquess come, under pretense of not exposing her self unto
the rage of a jealous Madman; but the truth was, because she was so strangely
perplexed, not knowing what had happened unto Father Andrew, whose Hat and
Peruque she had seen in her Husbands Hands; above all things, fearing that some
mishap was come to her Letter. The Governor did think, that if he should cause
the Pilgrim to be secured, so that the Marquess should have nothing further to
fear from him, that that might compose his Brains. Donna Barbara did highly
approve of this Proposition; and her advice was, as every body thinks most on
their own Interest, that it would not be amiss to detain him Prisoner in one of
the Towers of the Palace, that the Marquess might rest the more secure; and
that on the other hand, this poor Pilgrim, whom they thought not guilty, should
be the better treated. This being so concluded, it was proposed to the
Marquess, who was already gathering his people together, to be on the defense,
in case of an Escalade, and who protested that there should be Night and Day a
Guard in his Chamber, and that his Wife should not stir forth of it till this
cursed Pilgrim were seized, and that he had seen him have Irons at his Feet.
They promised him, that things should be performed according to his Desires:
And the Governor sent immediately to fetch a Lieutenant of the Guard, to whom
he gave Orders before the Marquess, to instantly go with twelve Musketeers,
and seek all about the City after an Italian Pilgrim, which he described unto
him; that he should not return without him but should confine him in the Red
Tower of the Palace. Mean time Father Andrew was come to Camille so out of
Breath, that he was a considerable time before he could say any thing to him,
more than by Signs and Grimaces, which did as much amaze the Pilgrim, as the
Equipage that he was in did make him laugh; Good God! Sir, said Father Andrew
to him, with his Eyes staring, what hazards have I run through this day for
your sake? I have seen my self at the last moment of living, and it was well
for me that I had a quick eye, and a nimble foot, I had been a dead Man else,
and killed, past all redemption, by the enraged Marquess his hand. Camille
having enquired how, after he had taken a little Breath, he related all that
had happened to him that Evening, in such passionate terms, and such pleasant
gestures, especially at the Adventure of the Dagger, which was doubtless the
most pleasant passage of all the Relation, that Camille, as vexed as he was at
his giddy mistake, whose evil consequences he did very well foresee, could not
forbear laughing, seeing him imitate at once both the Marquesses and his own
part, how he had lifted the Dagger up against him, and how he had shunned the
blow, still concluding that his business had been done, if he had not made
quick use both of his Eyes and Legs. Camille, who was much more impatient to
see the Marchionesses Letter, than to hear every particular of that story,
having asked for it, he opened it, and read these words.

APpearances have deceived me, Sir, and you must blame them for my over hasty
condemning of you. I can further say, that in despite of them, I have rendered
you more Justice than I could reasonably have done; and that at the very
instant that I called you Traitor, there was something which wisper'd unto me,
it could not be possible, that a Person who appeared so Worthy, and so
Generous, could be capable of committing so base an Action. I was beginning to
renounce that injustice which I thought I did you, when I received your Letter;
and I am not more obliged to you for those generous offers, which you continue
to make me, than in having wholly confirmed me in the opinion that I had of
you: For proof whereof, I declare to you, that besides the manner that you seem
to be concerned at my ill Fortune, which would ever oblige me to have a great
esteem for you, I have found such qualities in you, as usually make the tenders
of some persons services more acceptably received, than those of some others;
and that it will not be difficult for me to wholly confide in you. Let us make
good use of time and opportunity, for I know not whether I shall ever have it
so fair again; and if you can provide this very night a Ladder to get me down
with from the Window, I shall be ready to follow you. Farewell: Do you act so,
as to get Fortune of your side, and I Will engage to you on the account of Love.

The March. of L. C.


While Camille was reading this Letter with transports of joy and love, he did
tremble on the other side, when he did think on the hazards that it had run of
falling into the Marquess his Hands, which would have been the absolute ruin
of the Marchioness: He did shrewdly guess, though Father Andrew had not told
him, that his imprudence had made him discover something of the secret; that
after such a fatal Encounter there was nothing to be hoped for in their late
design; and that the jealous Lord would certainly be upon his guard: He was
distracted at it, which yet he durst not wholly express to the Father, for fear
of putting him out of humor, perceiving very well, that which way soever the
business should go, he should still have occasion for him. As they were
reasoning together on the ways they should take, to know if there were any
hopes of executing their Enterprise, without danger of being discovered or
known, they saw an Officer come into the Chamber, who, followed by six
Musketeers, gave the Pilgrim to understand, that he had an Order from the
Governor to secure him, and did in a civil way desire him to surrender
himself, because that besides his having of six Musketeers more at Hand, it
had been expressly commanded him to use him civilly; and that he should be very
sorry to be obliged to use violent Hands. All those kind expressions did not
hinder our Hero, who believed himself lost, and who was not a Person to be
tamely taken, to set himself in a Posture of Defense, with a Dagger in his
Hand, the only Weapon that he had then near him; so that maugre their great
number, he sold them his liberty at a dear rate, having wounded three or four
of the Soldiers; who having spared him at first, were at last so netled at the
sight of their blood, that they were making at him, without any further regard
unto the Governors Orders of favoring him. Father Andrew, who had never been
in such a Fray, whether being animated thereunto by the example of the Pilgrims
generous resistance, or that the Cavaliers dress he was in, of which he had
lost nothing but the Hat and Peruque, did infuse courage in him; he played the
Devil amongst them; and did so well second the Valiant Camille, that the
Lieutenant had occasion for the other six Soldiers, which he called to his
assistance. They were forced at last to yield to the greater number: Father
Andrew was the first taken, and the most ill treated, having not been spared,
as had been the Pilgrim; there had rained upon his back and head, which was
naked, a whole deluge of blows of Garabines, and flats of Swords; he crying out
as one that was sufficiently beaten; Ah! you Villains, is it thus that you
treat poor Father Andrew, the Governors Chaplain, and Religious Priest of the
Order of S. Dominick? Ye are all Excommunicated, and I Excommunicate* you for
ever if you do not hold. At the name of Father Andrew, rather than at the noise
of the Excommunication, there was a Truce of blows; and at the same time the
Pilgrim having been seized, they were both had to the Palace, though there was
Order but for Camille, because of the resistance that Father Andrew had made,
upon whom the Soldiers had been more severe, as it did very well appear, they
having discharged the greatest part of their anger upon him, so that he could
but difficultly move. He was thus very well rewarded for all his Messages:
Fortune does not always favor us in all Places; and her ordinary vicissitudes
are in making cross Events to succeed the fairest beginnings.

The Pilgrim was lodged in the Red Tower, and his Companion was had before the
Governor, to know what should be done with him. Father Andrew would have
willingly redeemed himself from so shameful a Scene, with the hundred Pistols
which he had received: And for certain, how great soever the Governors
surprise was to see him in so strange a dress, and to lean that he was found
with the Pilgrim, he could not forbear laughing, in spite of the serious
countenance which he had took upon him, to see him in so sad a pickle with that
new garment, which had been extremely disordered in the Battle. Donna Barbara,
who was gone to Bed, and could not persuade her self that it was her Ghostly
Father, did rise to see him, and was yet more supris'd than had been the
Governor, but did not laugh, having a greater interest in it than her Husband,
not doubting after this, but that all which the Marquess had said concerning
the Intrigues between the Marchioness and the Pilgrim were real truths. All her
anger was presently turned against Father Andrew, not only for his serving her
Rival, but because he had made her a party, having caused her to act a part
very unworthy of her, and most cruel to her Heart. She took no notice of it
before her Husband, but was resolved to treat him the next morning as he
deserved. The Governor, who thought the Friar had been sufficiently punished
for all his follies, caused him to be released, and presently sent Word to the
Marquess, that the Pilgrim was secured: This was a great satisfaction to him:
yet he did not sleep the better for it, but had all night long Visions of
Palmer Staves, Hats with Shells, and such like things, against which his Mind
could not yet be well settled, though the cause of all those Terrors of his was
in Prison.

The unfortunate Camille, overwhelmed with Vexations and Despair in that
Prison, was much troubled about the Cause that should move the Governor to
have him thus apprehended in the Nightime, and after such Kindnesses which he
had showed him: the time which he had allowed him in Barcelona was not yet
expired, and on the Marquess his account he did not believe there was any
reason to use that extremity toward him; and it was much more probable, as he
could not doubt it, that the Governor had dived into his Wife's Folly; and
that the same Reasons which obliged him to forbid him the Court, and not to
remain above three Days in the City, had incited him also to cast him into
Prison. These Considerations made him exclaim against his too rigorous Fate,
that thus did load him with Troubles, through the Love of a Woman whom he could
not fancy, when he was just upon the point of being the most happy of all Men
with her that he adored. This Thought, with the little Inclinanation he had for
the Governor's Wife, did not not a little contribute to make him absolutely
hate her.

Donna Barbara had not that Night her Mind less filled with Sorrow and Care for
her Lover: She had scarce seen him, but she had loved him with so violent a
Passion, which did every moment increase, and the sole Idea of that Pilgrim did
so transport her, that there was not any thing which she would not perform to
gain his Affections. Mean time she learns that he loves another, and concludes
that the Repulses, or at least the Indifferency that he had shown to her the
Night before, did all proceed from thence; and that when he came to her, it was
with an Intention to have met with the Marchioness, as it had afterward
appeared by his Surprise. These were cruel Reflections for a Woman that loves
with such a Passion as she did the Pilgrim, and yet they were not powerful
enough to cure her; and in the midst of all the Sorrow she had, to find her
Affections run so far in favor of an ungrateful Person, which would triumph
over them before her Rival, she did sigh and earnestly wish that Day were come,
that she might find out some way of seeing him. Father Andrew was now the only
Object of her Anger, as if he had been the Cause of all her Misfortunes: She
wished that he would guess the Concerns which she had for the Pilgrim; and that
in lieu of serving him toward the Marchioness, he would discover to her all
that which had passed between those two Lovers, that she might break all their
Measures; that is, she desired that which was impossible. This is commonly the
odd Composure of Mind of such Persons as are possessed with so violent a
Passion: Mean time she was preparing very severe Mortifications for the good
Father, the least of which was to send him back to his Monastery.

The Morning, which affords Counsel on the things which have been concluded in
the Night, and frequently with Advantage, did cause the Governess to go quite
another way to work than what she had designed: She sent to seek after Father
Father Andrew so soon as she was up; but the good Father who had not rested
well that Night, though not tormented with Love as she had been, was yet in
Bed, and caused his Excuses to be made to Madam the Governess, that through some
Defluxions which had that Night troubled him, and from which he was not yet
quite free, he could not come so soon to wait upon her. Donna Barbara, to whom
Love would afford no rest, being impatient to see and speak with the Father,
went her self unto his Chamber, under the Veil of an Act of Charity, and to
learn what was her Father Confessor's Distemper: Father Andrew, who expected
not this Honor, was much surpised at the sight of her; and after some
Questions which she made him on the Condition of his Distemper, the true Cause
of which he would never tell her, the Lady taking upon her a more serious Air,
began to make him a Fraternal Remonstrancy, that with so little regard to his
Religious Decorum, he was become the Confident of a mean Pilgrim, and had made
her also instrumental in the Intrigue, and the Fop of a Woman, that would take
no small advantage of it; adding, that the Governor had resented it very much,
and would have sent him back to his Convent, had she not opposed it, and
endeavored to excuse him. Father Andrew, most humble and contrite, at those
Lessons which Donna Barbara made him, did return her Thanks for all the good
Offices which she had rendered him toward the Governor, protesting that he had
not acted any thing in all that, but what was in pure Zeal of serving his
Neighbor, not imagining there was any evil in it, that otherwise for certain
he had not done it; and that for his part, he had rather die, than entertain
the least Thought of displeasing her. The passionate Lady, who designed to make
her advantage from the Fathers Faults, would not be satisfied with his excuses,
seeming very unwilling to pardon him without he endeavored to gain her Favor
by some other means: She would first learn from him all that had passed between
those two Lovers; the Father, who had not entered very far into Camille's
concerns, did endeavor to satisfy her as well as he could, in giving her a
sincere and faithful Account of that little which he knew of their Amors. But
she was not satisfied with that neither; and she made him diverse other
questions, to which he answered according to his Memoirs, which did not extend
very far. You do not believe then, said the Governess to him, after she had
been some time silent, that it is long since this Pilgrim has been acquainted
with the Marchioness, nor that he is much in love with her? As to Love, Madam,
answered he, not knowing what interest the Lady had in all these enquiries, I
cannot say but that he does very much love her, but I know that their
acquaintance is but new; that they have scarce had one opportunity to discourse
one another; and finally, that all their intelligence has yet gone no further
than to a design of delivering the Marchioness out of her Husbands tyrannical
jealousy. Donna Barbara took a little courage at Father Andrew's Relation, and
as an unresolved Person, who had a thousand designs in her Head that perplexed
her, frequently beginning diverse discourses, and suddenly breaking them off,
without finishing of any, she at last told him, that she was concerned for that
young Man, whom the Marquess was resolved to ruin; and that the Governor
would hardly have power to save him. Father Andrew, who had a real affection
for the Pilgrim, was much concerned at the News, and began to intercede for him
to Donna Barbara, telling her, that he was the most honest, civil, and generous
Pilgrim in the whole World, that it were a thousand pityes to take away his
life, and that his death would draw some mischief upon her Family, because it
had never heard, that any Man that had once Vowed himself to S. Jago, had ever
been hanged. Donna Barbara being somewhat persuaded with the good Fathers
reasons, did promise to concern her self further for him, but yet that she
would have the Pilgrim to entreat her to it himself, that he might know to whom
he were obliged; so that she would have him go to the Pilgrim, and give him an
account of his affairs. That he should be sure to represent the danger he was
yet in greater than it was, and that he should insensibly give him to
understand, that there was no Person, but she that could save him.

Father Andrew having been further instructed in all things, and yet not able
to dive into the business, was very well pleased however to see her so well
disposed to serve his dear Pilgrim, knowing well what power she had over the
Governors Spirit, he returned her thanks before hand for the kindness that she
showed in the behalf of a Stranger, who she would find, when she should know
him, worthy of her care. Donna Barbara, who valued not his Complement, did
press him to make haste, telling him, that she would stay for his Answer in her
Chamber; and he promised her to be within a moment at the Prison: There he
found the Pilgrim much dejected and cast down, and embracing him with a great
tenderness; Courage, Sir, said he, I hope that you shall not die: That I shall
not die, said Camille, am I then so near being condemned? No, but I fear,
replied Father Andrew, that you may be so if you have not some Body to
solicit for you; for the Marquess does not only accuse you of having
endeavored forcibly to take away his Wife from him, but that you would have
murdered him also: And what proof is there of all this? replied Camille. I know
not, said the Father, but I believe that you will be condemned, whatever the
proofs may be, if you do not apply your self to the protection of some Person
of sufficient power to save you. Camille, who pitied him to hear him reason so
simply, did only tell him, that if he had no body but the Marquess to fear, he
did not believe that he stood in want of any Persons protection. Father Andrew
having once again endeavored to represent the danger greater to him than he
did imagine it, the Pilgrim asked him, Where he had learned all that: To which
he answered, From a Lady that had a great power at Court, and good intentions
toward him: In a Word, that he had it from the Governors Lady. From the
Governors Lady! replied Camille; well Father, I have so little inclination to
be her Debtor, that I had rather die than be obliged to her for my life: And
carry her back that answer, continued he, if it is she that has sent you here
on that Errand; tell her beside, that death will never come so soon as I desire
it. Father Andrew astonished at this high Spirit, did endeavor to reclaim him
a little, and inquired of him, what reason he had to refuse, in the sad
condition he was, such marks of affection, as would have filled with honor and
joy any other Person than he? I have nothing further to say to you on that
account, said he, and peradventure I have more cause of complaint of the
Governor's Wife, than of returning her thanks; But that is not the business:
Go back to her, Father, and tell her, that if I must die, I am resolved, but no
lowness on my part. Father Andrew, who had not comprehended any thing of the
Governesses design, could yet less unravel what reasons the Pilgrim had to
slight so much her obliging offers, as to choose to die, rather than so much as
entreat her. He could not conceive that there was any particular acquaintance
between them; and yet he did believe, that the odd way, after which they both
acted, was not without some kind of Mystery, which did speak something more,
than from such Persons as did not know one another. His Brains not diving
further into this mystery, he left no time to unravel all that Intrigue, and
returned unto Donna Barbara, to whom he gave an account of the Commission which
she had given him; and if he did not relate to her wholly with what scorn the
Pilgrim had received the offers of her protection, he however told her enough
to make her understand the small esteem he had of her: What? he will die then,
said she, with an Emotion which she had much to do to conceal: Yes, Madam,
replied the Father, rather than be obliged to any one for his life: Perhaps,
Madam, because he does not believe that he deserves death: Ah! cruel! she then
cried out, not being able to suppress her sighs any longer, it is not that
which makes him answer after this manner, but the extreme passion which he has
for the Marchioness, and the aversion which he feels for all other Women: It is
not with you, Father, that I must constrain my self any longer, continued she
blushing; and seeing that you already know all the weaknesses of my Soul,
therefore it would be useless to conceal this from you: This Pilgrim has some
secret Art to Charm Women with: Since the first day that I saw him, and that he
cast his eyes on me, I have felt for him such things as are not naturally felt
for ordinary Persons; and whatsoever I have opposed against it, to remove him
from my mind, I have been daily more and more possessed with it; I know that I
do ill, but I have no power to resist him, and find that the more my passion
should be opposed, the more it would break forth: I will try what time can do;
mean time, Father, if you have any consideration for me, you will have pity of
the condition I am in, and will endeavor to qualify in some measure the
torment that I endure, for none can do it better than you. Father Andrew
overjoyed at this her confiding in him, which gave him so fair a return upon
Donna Barbara, did make her also a gentle and short Remonstrancy, as in Duty
bound, and did represent to her the consequences of those kind of Engagements,
the sorrow that they are commonly accompanied with, and the public shame when
once they broke forth: all this was delivered very mildly, and still with store
of Howevers, which did sweeten the bitterness of the Remonstrancy, which was
none of the severest. And at last finding that there was no hopes of diswading
her that way, (neither had he much mind to do it) he shifted into another
discourse, as an Indulgent Director should do, and told her in a languishing
and devout tone, That seeing the Spiritual Remedies had no power over her, she
was to make use of those that were Natural, and of two Evils shun the worst,
which was the scandal, in which she must of necessity have fallen, if the
Heavens had not inspired her to address her self to a Person so discreet as he
was, she knowing what zeal he had for her Service. Do but repose your self on
my cares, Madam, continued he, and since that the chiefest business is to make
you to be beloved, know that I have some secrets as powerful in that point as
are the Pilgrims; and that before he sleeps, he shall sigh for you. That last
word made Donna Barbara sigh, who languishingly looking upon the Father
Consolator; How much you promise me in a short time, Father, said she to him,
to do this, he must first forget an Object with which he is too much possessed,
and for which he has doubtless left his Country, and be moved with the like
thought for me: So great a change, continued she, is not done in one Day: No,
no! do but make him lose all hopes of ever seeing the Marchioness, and in the
pressing danger of his Life, as you may represent it to him, make him see how
much better it would be for him to turn his affections toward me; for he
already knows I love him, and that it is his own fault if he is not happy.
Father Andrew having been sufficiently instructed in all things, to acquit
himself of that Employ, as a zealous and expert Trustee, he promised Donna
Barbara not to forget any thing: And so parting each with his particular
Idea's, they both went to labor to bring about their design.

The Marquess and the Marchioness had passed the Night as a Husband and Wife
could do, when they are of so bad Intelligence as those two were. The Governor
had engaged the jealous Marquess, before they had parted, to sacrifice to his
Request all the Resentments that he might have against his Wife; and had had a
Promise from the Marchioness, never to have any Design against her Husbands
Honor and Interests. Thus a certain kind of Reconciliation having been made
upon this, he had left them both in a passable good Resolution of living
Friendly together. All this was good in the outward Appearance, but the inward
Parts are not so soon cured; and as the Marquess could but very hardly forgive
his Wife the treasonable Trick she would have played him, his Wife did not
despair of finding out some other Pilgrims, if this should fail her. Here were
two Persons very strangely intention'd, and that might lie long enough
together, and yet have no true Peace between them. Neither was there any thing
else all Night, but Maundrings on the Husband's side, and Sighs on that of the
Wife, which lasted till Morning. A pitiful Society! A sad Alliance, which is
but too often met withal in this wicked Age! It is not without Cause therefore,
that the Mode of Unmarrying has been found out of late.

The Governor's Wife, who was impatient to speak with the Marquess, had
ordered a Page to wait all the Morning at his Chamber Door, to tell him, when
he was up, that she had something to impart to him. It was very late before he
came to her, with a sad and melancholy Countenance, partly through the ill
Night which he had passed, and the little reason that he had to be satisfied
with Donna Barbara's Proceedings; as for her part, expecting no better, she was
not surpised at it, and without further minding of it, she told him, that she
knew the Cause, which he thought he had to be angry with her, but that she
protested to him, that she did not know any thing of Father Andrew's late
Design, in which her Honor had not been as much concerned as his, she not
being of Quality nor Honor to serve any one in such amorous Intrigues; that
she did not only intend to have that insolent Monk punished for it, but that
she expected that the Marchioness should also make her some acknowledgment
thereupon; and driving her Resentments further yet, she added, That it was a
thing very unworthy a Person of Quality, that had married a Marquess, who had
been honored with so many brave Employs, and descended of one of the prime
Families of that Kingdom, to abandon her self in that manner to the Love of a
Pilgrim, of a Beggar, which she had rather follow than her own Husband.
Finally, she set her self up in so fine a Mode of Invectives, that the
Marquess, who did believe her to be angry in earnest, had much to do to appease
her. He did ask her a thousand times Pardon for his Wife, acknowledging that
she did not deserve to be allied to a Person of such Honor and Quality as she
was; that it was his Misfortune, and he the more to be pitied: The Conclusion
of all this was, That Donna Barbara did advise the Marquess to convey his Wife
to some solitary place, and learn her to be wise: But the Marquess, who was
tainted with that Weakness incident to all Jealous Husbands, that cannot part
with their Wives, though never so many Reasons to incite them to it, was not at
first of her Opinion, and thought it more reasonable to remove the principal
Cause of all those Disorders, the Pilgrim, which the Governor could do no less
than banish him out of the Kingdom, if he would not condemn him to die; as such
Attempts, as that wicked Persons were, did deserve. Donna Barbara, who was
concerned in all this, did as little approve of the Marquess's Designs, showing
him, that besides those Forms that were to be observed in doing Justice, which
would not permit the Governor to banish a Man without being first examined, it
were more proper to leave him for some time in Prison, to punish him for his
Insolency; and that there were besides certain Reasons as to the Decency and
Policy of the business, which required some other kind of Usage, because that
this Banishment would seem less Punishment, than a Pretense, whereby to be rid
of a Person which he feared, and of whom he were jealous; and that however it
would be an easy matter for this Pilgrim to go into the Kingdom of Valencia,
or in that of Aragon, and there cause him the same Troubles, as he had done in
Catalonia.

The Marquess, who was not one of the best Head-pieces in the World, was
yielding to Donna Barbara's Reasons; who added this besides, that when the
Marchioness should be informed of the Pilgrim's Liberty, she would not despair
to see him again, and that the surest way to cure her of that Fancy, was to
take from her all possible Hopes of ever seeing him more, by removing her from
him so soon as possible he could, so that she might never more hear him
mentioned. The Marquess being now wholly convinced, did resolve to be gone the
very next Day, and in order to it, he went to seek the Governor, to inform him
of his resolution, who did endeavor to dissuade him from it, but all in vain,
for he did not confide much in him neither, by reason of his Indulgency toward
the Pilgrim.

Donna Barbara was of opinion, that she had very much advanced her business, in
having persuaded this jealous Man to leave Barcelona, flattering her self with
the thoughts that the Marchioness, whom she did look upon as the sole Obstacle
to her desires, being once distanced from her Lover, she would find it no
longer so difficult to be beloved by him. To wholly deceive her in that
Opinion, there needed no more but Father Andrew, who after he had but very
fruitlesly discoursed the Pilgrim on these Instructions, that the Lady had
given him, would not quite put her into despair, in informing her of the little
esteem that this Lover had for her; for then he would himself have lost those
advantages which he did hope to gain by his cares, as also the honor of
continuing longer in the Office of the Governesses Confident. He therefore gave
her hopes that the Pilgrim would not always prove insensible toward her, that
he had found him much altered since those fine things which he had told him
concerning her, and that if she would be patient but a little, she should find
him, if not quite so passionate as she deserved, yet at the least very penitent
for having slighted her favors, and sufficiently softened to give her
satisfaction.

As there is nothing that more easily makes impressions in our Minds than those
things which please us, and which we desire, Father Andrew did not say one Word
to that Passionate Lady which did not give her infinite content, though under
doubtful appearances; the good Father, who did discern it in her Eyes, did
continually add some new thing unto the amorous Narrative. So that Donna
Barbara, being impatient to see the effects of Father Andrew's rare secrets,
did resolve to go in a Disguise to the Prison, to be a Witness unto their
Discourses, and to relish the whole Pleasure of them.

This proposition did startle the Reverend Father, well knowing that she should
hear nothing there, but what would be contrary to those hopes which he had
given her. He opposed himself as much as he could to that Design, setting
before her the evident danger unto which she should expose her self; which
besides would not have a good effect on the Pilgrim's Mind, of which she was to
manage well the value, if she would be beloved of him in good earnest; but all
those Reasons, and many more which he told her to draw himself out of the
Briars, were not of force to remove her from that design. They were of no value
with a Woman, whose Soul was filled with fiery transports. Father, I know, said
she, not giving ear to half what he said, all that you can say to me, and I
should know what I had to do in this Case, if, in the condition I am, I were
capable of some Reflections or Reasons. But when one loves, as I do, nothing
but the desires of the Heart are hearkened unto; and it would be fruitless to
endeavor the dissuading me from it; for I can follow no other Counsel; and
without any further reasoning on the case, since it is my business, and that
you are willing to serve me in it, I desire you to get me in readiness against
Night, one of your Novices Garments, and not to trouble your self any farther
in the business, for though I should but see this Pilgrim, I shall be extremely
recompensed for the pains I shall have taken. Father Andrew seeing that there
was no hopes of making her change her resolution, did promise to perform
whatsoever she should desire, though he foresaw the danger that there was for
them both in it. But Friars in all businesses have always a back door open to
get out at. He went to his Convent, where he soon fitted himself with a Novices
Habit, about the Ladies stature, which he had conveyed into the Palace. When
the hour was come, Donna Barbara failed not to go to his Chamber, to prepare
her self for the Masquerade, with as much earnestness as Father Andrew was
backwards; but he was forced to resolve upon it, and for that time to officiate
to the Lady, who was not very well acquainted with that Jacobin Equipage in the
Place of a Valet de Chamber; during his Employ he had here and there some
little pleasures, and his new Office, giving him somewhat more of Liberty than
that of a Spiritual Director would afford him, he made good use of it; for it
is customary with Monks to make an advantage of all things, and this, who was a
most perfect one, did make pretty good use of his Rights, in putting that Gown
and Frock on the Sennora Barbara, of whom he made the prittyest little Friar
that ever was in the Novitiat; if all this was without Temptaion I shall not
tell. Finally, all being ready, they went out of the Chamber, and marched on
without noise or light toward the red Tower, and with so good fortune as to
meet with no Person in the Palace that did speak to them. Camille's restraint
being not so extraordinary strict, Father Andrew had leave, through Donna
Barbara's Order, to see him at what hour he pleased; so that it was not
difficult for them to get in; they found the Pilgrim lying on his Bed, reading
in a Book, a kind of Consolation in his Afflictions. Well, Father, said he to
the Confessor, so soon as he saw him appear, have you no better News for me,
than those which you have brought me hitherto? and shall I have Justice done
me, or must I dye in this Prison? I have already told you, Sir, replied he,
making him sign that there was a Novice after him, of whom they should be wary,
it lies in you to go out of it, and to be the happiest of all Men. Happy! After
what manner? (replied Camille, who thought there was no great danger in
speaking before a young Brother) in imploring the assistance of a Person that
is peradventure the sole cause of all my Evil? Of a Woman -- Yea! but of such a
Woman, interrupted the Father, still making sign, that has a great esteem and
affection for you, that knows your worth, and that doubtless deserves that you
should consider her not as your Enemy, or the cause of your misfortune, toward
which she has never contributed, but as a Lady that concerns her self in your
affairs, and that would inform you what an interest she has in them. I know
more on that subject, Father, replied the Pilgrim, who did not comprehend to
what purpose those signs were made, than you can tell me, and in a word, if you
would oblige me, never speak more of her to me. To which Father Andrew, who was
in a violent sweat to hear him speak in that manner, replied, But this Morning,
Sir, you were not in this Mind, and I found you in my Opinion, more full of
acknowledgments toward a Person, that you cannot hate without ingratitude. You
deceive you self, Father, replied Camille, who was wondering at the Fathers
Discourse, as much as at his signs, I am no Changling, and what I tell you now,
I did both think and say in the Morning; you know that I love, and though my
Heart should be capable of Perfidiousness, it -- there he made a stop,
perceiving that the little Novice, that was drawn nearer them, did look
steadfastly in his Face, with a Countenance that did amaze him. Go on thou cruel
one, said the little Brother to him, and declare that I should deserve nothing,
though I should act all that can be imagined for thee. Camille, who would never
have known Donna Barbara under such a Dress, did fall into the greatest
amazement in the World, when he heard her voice. He could scarce believe his
own Eyes, examining her from Head to Foot. Yes, look, said she, and see what
Love makes me do for thee, maugre all thy scorns? what I have done hitherto is
very inconsiderable, but I come now to conclude my ruin for the most ungrateful
of all Men. Alas, Madam, replied Camille, it is me that you ruin, and that you
render miserable. How miserable? speak, replied she, can thou complain but of
being too much beloved? is there any Person of worth in the World that would
say so much of the meanest of Women? thou troublest thy self about my cares,
thou think that it would be a shame to thee to be obliged to me for thy
life, and preferrest thy Prison to Liberty, only because that it is offered
thee by me. The passionate and winning manner that the amorous Donna Barbara
did use in her reproaches to her Pilgrim, certainly there was no Heart but what
would be somewhat moved at it, and Camille, whose Heart was not wholly
insensible, was touched with compassion, and did endeavor to excuse himself,
on the respect which he owed to the Governor, to whom he would not for the
World, have given so great a cause of complaint, after the great Civilities
which he had received from him. The Governor? (replied Donna Barbara,) pitiful
considerations, and seeing that I pass them by, thou should not scruple to do
the same: But rather say, and never seek after specious pretenses, that to my
grief thou came into these parts, with a Heart filled with another Object:
That it is the Marchioness that renders useless, and even odious to thee, all
my Cares, my Kindnesses, and all things else, that I would do for thee. When
thou do own it to me, I shall do thy Heart justice; but then add to it, that
I might have been agreeable to thee, if thou had seen me first; and that when
ever thou shall loose all hopes of possessing her, thou will remember with what
a Passion I love thee, and give thy self wholly to me. Other Women would not be
contented with this small request; there are but few that would love thee at
that rate: But I will make thee sensible, how far the excess of a real Passion
will extend. Camille, had never found himself in so great a confusion: He could
not refuse some complaisances, at least, to a Lady so transported with Love, as
she was for him; and he had need to qualify his disdain, to give her some
answer suitable to her passionate Discourses; yet nothing did more contribute
to those kindnesses which he expressed to her, as the desire which he had to be
rid of her, incessantly fearing that she should be supriz'd with him in that
disguise, and that this visit should come to the Governor's knowledge, which
would make an end of ruining him, he could not forbear expressing his sense of
it to the Lady, entreating her to have patience, till he had recovered his
liberty, and that then there would be less danger for either of them, and they
might have the satisfaction of seeing one another the longer. But she being
incapable of any reason, did reproach him all his fears; which she, being
wholly taken up with her passion, could not entertain. Yet at last to let him
see that she did love him to that excess, as to deprive her self of what was
most pleasing to her, which was to see him, she left him, and at her going, she
did force from him some kindnesses, which either real, or fictitious, did
however extremely consolate her.

Father Andrew, who had seen this visit concluded far better than he expected,
did receive by it, almost as much of satisfaction as Donna Barbara had, and did
much glory in it, and did congratulate her of her happy Success; to which he
thought he had not a little contributed. They both went out of the Tower,
entertaining themselves with the merits and fine Qualities of this Pilgrim,
which were thought to be such extraordinary ones, that she would needs have him
to be some Prince in a disguise; seeing nothing but what was great and
extraordinary in all his Actions. The good Father, who knew how much it would
please her to extend himself upon the Pilgrim's praises, did ever outdo her at
that sport, and the earnestness they were both in, did so transport them, that
without considering they were in the Enemies Territories, they did speak so
loud, that any body might hear them: So that being come near to some steps,
which were to be acsended, Donna Barbara, who knew not so well the way in the
dark, as Father Andrew did, did bid him lend her his Hand to help her up the
steps. The Father, who went first, turned back; but when he would have taken
her by the hand, he found it already seized on, and that somebody else did do
her that Office. Upon this, such a fear did seize on him, as it would have done
on many others; that without speaking one word, he stole away into his Chamber,
as fast, and with as little noise, as he could: Where I believe he Barricadoed
himself up, and, I believe, had but an ill Night of it. Donna Barbara hearing
some body walk so near them, did softly ask of the Father, who she thought she
had by the hand, what that was. But this Father would make no answer, it being
the Marquess, who returning from giving the last orders for his departure, was
waiting there for his Flambeau, that was blown out, and which was gone, to be
lighted again. Donna Barbara presaging no good from that silence, did inquire
of the pretended Father the reason of it; and was thinking to retire, fearing
some surprisal, just as the Flambeau appeared; by whose light having perceived,
that it was not Father Andrew that did hold her by the hand, she made a great
outcry, and presently got away, leaving one of her Gloves behind her, not
having had time to discern who it was. But she was perfeectly known by the
Marquess, who had had leisure to hear her discourse with Father Andrew, which
gave no small cause of reflection to our Jealous, who since the Morning had
thought her the most virtuous Wife in all Spain: And the Governor the happiest
of all Men, because he could take his rest in quiet. The Dress she was in, did
surprise him more than all the rest, he who was a professed Bigot, and who did
perceive to what use were put such holy things. He concluded, that Father
Andrew must of necessity be made one in all those sports, on whom he did
already look as on one of Lucifer's black Instruments, sent into the World to
corrupt all Womankind. He could easily guess, by what he had heard them say,
that they were newly come from visiting the Pilgrim; and that thought did
somewhat comfort him; for in this World there is nothing like having Companions
in our afflictions, which makes them not seem so weighty to us. He had a great
itching immediately to give the Governor an account of this Adventure; but
because he knew him to be extremely prepossest with a good opinion of his Wife,
and that he should have to do with a bold and high spirited Lady, he feared
that a Glove might not be sufficient proof, wherewith to persuade the Husband,
that he was in his predicament, or to convince the Lady of being concerned in a
gallant Intrigue. And that consequently he should but cause some disorder, and
draw upon himself all the evil of that Intrigue. So that he took the resolution
of being silent, and returned to his own Apartment, reflecting often within
himself, how little Women were to be trusted, and that some did make Horns to
others, who had his own House full of them. Upon this he caressed his Wife with
a better heart than he had done in a long time; and as he knew that nothing
could work a greater effect on the minds of Female kind, than Jealousy would,
he could not forbear giving her an account of the pleasant Rencounter which he
had had. The Marchioness would have had much to do to have believed it,
thinking it some effect of his jealous mind, to make her hate the Pilgrim, if
he had not assured her, that he had seen them both come out of the Tower; if he
had not repeated to her the same Discourses, which had passed between Father
Andrew and the Lady, and finally if he had not shown her the Ladies own Glove,
which had been left in his hands. Of truth, after that last proof she had no
more to say, and the sincerity with which she see him speak to her, knowing him
perfectly well, did make as great an impression in her mind as all the rest
did; so that she began to feel within her self more hatred for that perfidious
Man, and more Jealousy against her Rival, than she could have thought to have
had upon so slender a subject. The Marquess, who, though his Wife was silent,
did easily see in her Eyes, and perceive by her very silence, that he had
compassed his ends, and animated her with almost as much Hatred against Donna
Barbara, as he had been against his Wife: He further did inform her, how
excellently that fair Lady had acted the Virtuous Woman's part with him that
Morning, having flown very high against her Conduct, even to the giving him
such Counsels as he would not follow; which confirmed the Marchionesses rage
against them both, though he would not let her know what those Advices were: So
that what with Jealousy, and what with Resentments, she was all Night in
little kind of rages, which would let her take but very little rest, wishing
with great impatiency for day, that she might be gone, having no other desires
left, than to remove from a place, where she could be of no other use than a
property to her Rival, to whom that Traitor the Pilgrim had doubtless
discovered all their secret Intrigue.

The Marquess who had not changed his design, though he had found out, that
another had as well as his Wife a Months mind to the Pilgrim, knowing well,
that in all those kind of things, others Examples do rather authorize than
deter, was the first rising in the Palace, to have all his Retinue in a
readiness to march, and continue his Voyage toward Madrid, where he was going.
The Governor and his Lady did rise also to wait upon them out of Town; but the
first thing that Donna Barbara did, so soon as her Husband went out of the
Chamber, was to send after Father Andrew, to enquire of him who that Man was
that affrighted the Father, who was possessed with the same curiosity, having
spent all the Night in a strange restlesness, lest it should be the Governor,
was very glad to hear the contrary by Donna Barbara's Message. He had no more
to say to this point than she had, only that he was certain he had not been
seen. Donna Barbara, who was not a Woman to be frighted with so small a matter,
did trouble her self no further as to what might happen from this business,
knowing well how to get out of it, and that she would make that Person pass for
ridicule, that would accuse her of any such thing; she sent back Father Andrew
to his Chamber, and took the way that led her to the Marchioness, to acquit her
self of those Ceremonies used in such cases, not knowing how to dispense her
self from them, though she had no great inclination to go. She entered her
Chamber with a cold and indifferent Countenance, and found the Marchioness
making an end of prepareing her self for the Journey, and who afforded her as
indifferent a reception; they were both for some time in that humor, not
speaking a word to one another, till that Donna Barbara, who thought that she
had the only cause of Complaint, did break that silence, and told her, that she
was much amazed at the reception which she did afford her that Morning. The
Marchioness did answer her coldly, that there were certain days of Vexation,
when a Person was very unfit for any thing, and that she would have her to be
the Judge of it, who appeared not to be in a better humor her self. I might
have hoped however, Madam, replied the Governess, who was not satisfied with
that excuse, that after so much Complaisance as I had for you in the Garden
this Evening, which was so favorable to your Designs, you might have afforded
me a better reception: But I perceive the business; you would have them that
concern themselves for you to be responsible of the ill success that your
desires have had. You being the Person, Madam, replied the Marchioness, who did
give the first motion to that Masquerade, which you had not invented but for
your own diversion; I wonder, that after you had made me the Property in it,
you should yet demand of me some acknowledgment. Yes, Madam, replied Donna
Barbara, with a forced smile, if there had been no more in the case, but you
know that if you have been my Property, I have been your Gull. The worse for
you, Madam, replied the Marchioness. Yes, the worse indeed, replied the other,
but do you know, added she with a little transport, not being able to contain
her Passion any longer, that I am very unfit to be employed in such kind of
Commerce. I am willing to believe it, Madam, replied the Marchioness, still
with the same coldness, but it is my Opinion, that no Person should be vexed
for rendering such Services to others, of which they themselves stand in need. I
need such Services! replied she. Who knows, Madam, replied the Marchioness, you
are a Woman as I am, and one cannot -- Ah! one can be assured, said she, still
fretting more and more, that if I am a Wife, it is without such weaknesses as
dishonor an Husband. It is true, replied the Marchioness, who could forbear no
longer from revenging her self of that reproach, that it is very honorable for
a Woman to go at midnight to visit Prisoners, such a one too, as upon whose
account you would have me disgraced, though I had never spoken to him.
Prisoners! replied Donna Barbara, in an accent very different from the former.
Yes, Madam, continued the Rival, Prisoners, but I must confess that is an act
of Charity, which performed at such an hour, and under a Religious Habit, is of
so great a Merit before God and Man, that it gives a person a due right of
slandring all others. Donna Barbara, whose quick and nimble wit had never
wanted a repartee to all that was said to her, did remain now strangely
confounded, so that she only said that she understood her not. How! do you not
understand me, replied the Marchioness, who was resolved to give it her home,
stay a moment, and I will fetch you a certain thing that shall expound to you
more clearly what I say to you, and shall let you see, that it is from good
hands that I have it. She meant the Glove, which she went to seek for in a
Closet that was in her Chamber. The Marquess, who had heard all that fine
Dialogue, without meddling with the Dispute, employing himself about something
else, was very much pleased that his Wife had given her such a severe repulse,
and she had never done any thing in the World that had pleased him so much as
to have humbled that Lady, who was the proudest Woman in the World. He could
have wished, to complete his joy, that the Governor had been present, who came
just in the time that the Marchioness was returning with Donna Barbara's Glove.
Here, Madam, said she, giving it her, judge by that Token whether I am well
informed of the Adventure. The poor Lady was so cast down with different
thoughts, both at the sight of that Glove, and at her Husband's unlucky arrival
to make an end of ruining her, that she retired, not being able to speak one
word more. The Governor, who did see her go so out of Countenance, and with a
great flushing all over her Face, which did sufficiently express the
disturbance that was in her Soul, did enquire of the Marquess, the matter with
her; he told him that he must enquire of the Marchioness, and she said, that he
must ask the Marquess: thus shifting him from the one to the other, without any
other satisfaction. The Governor was not very well contented with this, and he
would have gone to seek after his Wife, to know of her what occasion she had to
separate her self after that manner from the Marchioness, had they not been on
the point of going; he therefore deferred his Information till his return,
believing that at the most it could be but some Woman's Quarrel, and knowing the
humor of his, he did suppose that she might have undertaken to make some
Remonstrances to the Marchioness about the Pilgrim, which the other had not
taken kindly; and therefore he did not trouble himself any further about it.
They all got into the Coaches, and drove on toward Saragossa, through which
the Marquess would pass going for Madrid. The Governor had had a design to
acompany them a Journeys way from Barcelona, but that certain Words which the
Marchioness had let fall by the way concerning Donna Barbara and the Pilgrim,
which did bear double sense, did give him more cause to think than was
expected, and was the occasion that he returned home that Night. No great store
of discretion can be expected from Women in such cases, and there never was one
yet that did spare her Rival, when she could ruin her. Donna Barbara, was
passing away some very scurvey particles of time, as may be imagined after the
late Encounter that she had had with the Marchioness, who doubtless would not
forbear, as she imagined, informing the Governor thoroughly of it: So that she
was in strange disquiets, till she did see him go along with them, guessing by
that, that he was not over angry with her; seeing he did not desist
accompanying them, as he had designed it. After this she began to Breath and
Rejoice that she had driven away the Marchioness from Barcelona, and remained
in sole possession of her Lover; she presently sent to seek after her most dear
Confident, to whom she did relate what had passed between her and the
Marchioness. Not conceiving from whom she could have had all that Information,
except it were the Marquess that had surprised them at the going out of the
Tower. Father Andrew did fear very much for himself, in case this business
should be known, not doubting but the share he had in it, would make him fall
heavily under the Governor's Anger, and made to bear the whole Burden. Donna
Barbara did endeavor to encourage him, telling him that he knew a way how to
prevent all the harms which might befall them; that they had two days to think
of it, seeing that the Governor was not to return till the next Day, but that
the Pilgrim was to be disposed to assent to it, in presenting to him the danger
that their lives would be in if they should stay till the Governor returned;
and that of necessity they must make their escape that Night, and get into
France, where they should not fear to want for any thing, because she would
carry along with her a sufficient quantity of Jewels, to shelter them all from
it. Father Andrew, who would willingly be always the farthest from blows, did
highly approve of this Advice, and he did not believe that the Pilgrim would
make any difficulty of following them, seeing that besides his liberty, which
by that means he did recover, he could not but imagine that there was much more
for him to fear than for them. They therefore did conclude, that without a
further delay they would go to him, and inform him in what a condition things
were, and see whether the proposition would please him. Donna Barbara had put
up her Friars Habit in one of her Closets, whence they took it out, and the
Father was again employed in the same Office as the Night before. After which
they went to the Pilgrim, who was not a little surprised to see Donna Barbara
return in the same Disguise at that time of the Day. He could not forbear from
expressing his trouble at it, and she without hearkening unto him, said, that
she came to inform him of two things; the first of them she doubted not but
would very much afflict him, which was, that the Marchioness was gone to remain
in some uninhabited Place, where she was led by her Husband, that she might
never more be seen by any Body but him. The other was, that before the Ladies
departure, she had told the Governor of her going to see him the last Night,
in a Friars Habit, as she had learned it of the Marquess, which had met her,
and Father Andrew, as they were going out of the Tower, from whose Hands she
had much to do to escape, with leaving one of her Gloves with him, which the
Marchioness had shown to the Governor for Confirmation of what she had said;
so that he might easily see what was to be done: That, as for her part, she was
fully resolved to do whatsover he pleased, provided that he would take care of
his own life, which was that which she held most dear. Though Camille had
prepared himself in order to his separation from the Marchioness, imagining
that they would be gone before he was got out of Prison; yet the news of it
gave him a mortal Wound as to what the Governess said; besides, he did not add
much Faith to it, and if he could have believed it, it had only afflicted him a
little for the fear he would have had, that the beauteous Marchioness had
believed he had contributed something toward that Visit; but apprehended
nothing at all on the Marquess's account, in reference to his Life, of which he
was very careless at that time. Donna Barbara, who perceived that he continued
silent, which made her think that he was thinking of what he should resolve
concerning what she had proposed to him, did press him to give his answer; it
was time to fix upon something, and to prepare for a flight, if he thought fit
to save himself from the evil effects of the Governor's Fury, who being a
Person very sensible of things of that Nature, he would be highly exasperated.
Camille, who did presently perceive which way the Ladies Designs did tend, and
who had chosen to dye rather than to be troubled with her, did answer her very
coldly, that he had acted nothing against the Governor, which might draw his
anger so severely upon him, and that if he had been so unhappy as so to do,
however he would not involve her in his Misery, and so to render her more
guilty than she really was. Donna Barbara struck to the Heart with so cold an
answer, as much as a passionate Woman as she was could be, concealing her cruel
rage, did tell him all that the Wit of a Woman could invent of most persuading
to engage him to yield to the proposition which she did make him, even in mere
pity to her self, whom she had lost through the violent passion which she had
for him; adding to those tender expressions such Tears and Sighs as did tear
some also from Father Andrew's Bosom, who did declare of her side, with his
Eyes full of Tears, to persuade this insensible Man to seek after his own
liberty, which they did offer him, and to shun that Death which would be
inevitable, if he should stay the Governor's return; but the heard-heartd, or
rather prudent Camille, who was not of so easy a Nature as was the Reverend
Father, and that perceived better than he did, on which side lay the greatest
danger, did easily defend himself against all those Attempts; of which Donna
Barbara being sensible, did then endeavor to make him apprehend all that a
passionate and despised Woman could imagine of most cruel and wicked, to ruin
him with; and finding that all those threatenings did not move him neither, in
that height of passion she drew from under her Friars Gown a Stilleto, with a
design to plunge it into her own Bosom, and if the Pilgrim had not been nimble
in staying of her Arm, and after that he had much to do to force that Weapon
out of her Hands. Father Andrew, who had been strangely affrighted at the
Attempt, was on his Knees, entreating the transported Lady not to kill her
self, and the Pilgrim to have Compassion of her, who at last was moved, not at
his Request, nor at her furious Rage, which had rather exasperated him, seeing
that all this did tend to make him miserable, but unto those Considerations
which he had, that to shun one evil he should create to himself diverse others,
if he should drive that Woman into a despair: Therefore to reclaim her a
little, he entreated her to deliver up that Dagger to him, and that he would do
all that she should desire. She did not part with it but on that condition, and
breathing a little, Ungrateful, said she, that stays till I cause my own Death,
before thou would grant me my Life. I know not, Madam, whether the way that
we are going to take, will not bring you sooner to your end, than the abiding
here. No certainly, answered she, for the Governor being not in Town, I have
the means to draw you from hence without the least danger; at the Port there
are some Felouca's in readiness to carry us to France, and I take with me that
which shall secure you from want and misery, except you reckon it a misery to
have in your Company a Woman that loves you with such a passion as I do.
Camille did make her no Answer, to give her leave to think all that she
pleased, his design being to get out of Prison, since it was to be so, whether
he would or no, to shun greater evils, and not to humor the Amorous Capricio's
of a Woman, for whom he had never had the least inclination. However, things
were ordered as if he had resolved to content her; and the Lady was so
transported with joy at it, that she already thought her self out of Barcelona
with her dear Gallant. The Governess and the good Father Andrew took leave of
the Pilgrim to go order their businesses, and prepare for their departure,
which was to be at Eleven at Night. The Father had all the outward Commissions
in his charge, which were to hire the Felouca, to buy in Provisions, and all
other things necessary for a Voyage. And the Lady took upon her the care of all
inward business, and to prevent all obstruction of their flight: Finally, all
things having been well regulated on her part, and Father Andrew having taken
such care as nothing should be wanting on his side, when the hour was come they
went to the Tower, where the Lady entered, being wholly transported with joy,
and running immediately into her dear Pilgrim's Chamber, Come you must rise,
said she, seeing him lie upon the Bed with the Curtains drawn, for it is time
to be going, and we are Masters as well of the Prison as of the Palace; and
finding that he neither answered nor moved, she believed that he was asleep,
therefore she drew open the Curtains to pull and awaken him, but when she
perceived the Governor, who arose, it did set her on a sudden into such an
amazement as may be imagined; which did so surprise her, that after she had
made an extreme outcry, which affrighted Father Andrew, who thought as little
as she did, to find the Governor there, she fell down backwards in a swoun.
This Lord, more careful of his Honor than of his Wife, whose humor he had
known long, and fearing more the divulging of the business, than the effects
thereof, having well conceived by all that the Marchioness had told him, that
some things were acted within his Doors, which did not go well, he had thought
that it would not be prudence in him to lie from home: He had been witness of
the good will which his Wife had expressed for the Pilgrim, and making good use
of the Marchionesses advice, had in a handsome manner taken leave of the
Marquess, not showing them the least sign of distubance, and was returned to
Barcelona on a full gallop, where he came in the dark, judging that if there
was any business in hand, his Wife would take the opportunity of his Absence.
Wisemen have always some fore-sights of the mischief that may befall them, and
there are many in the World that would not have such weights upon their
Foreheads, if they were as well inspired as he was. Our Governor therefore
being come into the City, had quitted his Horse at the Arcenal, where having
left his people also, he took one of his Servants Cloaks, went into the Palace,
and from thence into the Tower, without being known by any body. There he spoke
with him that had the Pilgrim in charge, who being none of Donna Barbara's
Intelligence, did confess that he had let Father Andrew come to the Prisoner by
the Lady Governesses Orders, who the first time had come to see him singly, but
afterward accompanied with a little Friar of the same Order, and that the last
Night they had been long together. There needed no more for a Man of
understanding, as was the Governor, to unravel this Mystery, and to guess who
had been Father Andrew's Companion in that Visit, who was not used to go
accompanied in the Palace, and who had less occasion to do so in going to visit
that Prisoner. He needed no further insight in the business. He sent the Jailer
to the Port to hire a Felouca, who a moment after returned to tell him, that
there was but one, who had been retained by a Friar of S. Dominick's Order, who
was to be gone that Night at Eleven. This News did almost distract him, not
doubting any longer but that his Wife was resolved to be gone with this
Pilgrim, or at least to help him to escape. This Spanish Flemne, who did abound
in him, did at last gain the upper hand over diverse desperate Resolutions which
he had taken, and which he had been upon the very point of Executing upon his
own Lady, rather than against an unfortunate stranger, who was not to be
responsible of his Wifes follies; he took the Resolutions therefore to break
their measures without noise, and to oblige Donna Barbara to become wise by
reason. He sent the Jailer to the Pilgrim to get him out of the Prison, and
conduct him to that Felouca, which Father Andrew had hired, with express Orders
from himself unto the Watermen to be gone immediately, on pain of Imprisonment;
and a Charge to the Pilgrim, of never returning to Barcelona, on pain of Death.
This was accordingly Executed, with the greater satisfaction to Camille, who
had no business in that City, and who was happily going out of Prison, and
quitted of that cruel Torment, in which he should have been with the Governess.

The Jailer having acquitted himself of all his Commissions, the Governor had
laid himself in the Pilgrim's place, charging the Jailer, not to tell of his
being out of Prison, and to let any in, that came to see him. Thus had the
Governor carried on the business; his Wifes accident did somewhat mitigate his
wrath, and made him lose the opportunity of seizing Father Andrew, who he had
resolved should have been kept in Prison for some time, in recompense of all
the good and pious Offices which he had rendered to his Wife, none deserving it
better than he had done. But in a Retreat, Father Andrew was always one of the
first, setting all his safety in his heels; so that he was already gone far,
when the Governor was thinking to detain him. There was no more to do, but to
take care of the Lady, who he was forced to lead himself into her Apartment,
after she was a little recovered of her Swoun. How that breach was made up, I
know not; for my Memoirs fail me there, but it is probable that the Governor's
Resentments lasted no longer than did his Ladies Passion, who was not long
before she was engaged in a new Gallantry with a Cavalier, less cruel than our
Pilgrim.

FINIS.
THE PILGRIM. The Second Part.

Written by P. BELON, Gent. Translator of the First Part, And Dedicated to the
Duchess of ALBEMARLE.



LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard; and
E. Rumball, at the Post House in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1700.

THE PILGRIM. The Second Part.
IT was about break of Day when our Pilgrim, impatient to be on the Territories
of France, gets up to look about him, and to enquire what progress the Vessel
had already made in their Journey; for so long as he was on that fickle Element
he thought himself unsafe, not knowing what new turn of Fortune might overtake
him, and bring him back to visit his late melancholic Lodgings: Besides his
happy and unexpected deliverance from a double Slavery, did appear to him so
like a Dream, that he did still remain in some apprehensions of carrying along
with him the worst of his afflictions. This made him to enquire of the Master
of the Vessel, what other company there was with him: The Master told him, that
there was none besides a Friar of St. Dominick's Order, and a Woman: A Woman?
replied Camille, being strangely surpised; then am I as miserable as ever, and
find that I must never hope for any end to my misfortunes. Had you Orders,
continued he, to take in any other person besides my self? Sir, replied the
Master the Father who hired it last night, did agree with me for the
transporting of himself, and two other porsons, and your self, the Father and
that Woman make up that number, neither durst take any more into my Bark,
because of the Governor's strict Orders, that I should immediately depart Our
Pilgrim was so much troubled at what the Master had said, that holding down his
Head, his Hat drawn over his Face, his Arms across, leaning on his Staff, with
his Eyes fixed on the Deck, he stood as mute, as if he had been struck with
Thunder; but while he appeared so like a Statue outwardly, his Heart was
agitated within with such a Confusion of thoughts, as were the cause of his
representing so odd a Figure. Sometime he was thinking, what could be the
reason that the wise Governor should give such strict Charge to the Mariners
for his immediate departure, and yet be so negligent in securing of his Wife
from getting into the Felouqua with him: Then again it did very much surprise
him, that Donna Barbara should change her mind as to her disguise, and hazard
her self in Woman's Apparel; but then it came to his thoughts, that it was
peradventure for her better security, in case her Husband had been informed of
the dress which she had designed to go in; and so by remaining in woman's
Apparel, had cheated him the second time. By and by, again, his mind would be
busied in making out, whether Father Andrew, and Donna Barbara were got into
the Vessel, in order to go along with him, or that they believing him still a
Prisoner in the red Tower, they had come thither to shelter themselves from the
Governor's present rage, and so had abandoned him to the furious passions that
a jealous man, of the Power and Authority that the Governor was, could employ
in order to his ruin. If so, then of consequence, those orders that had been
given to the Master as from the Governor, he did conclude to be of their own
fabric, to hasten the departure of the Vessel, for fear of a surprisal. These,
and many other confused notions possessing his whole imagination, he remained
unresolved, not knowing what to conclude on: Once he was for discovering unto
the Master, who that Friar and that Woman were, which he had taken into his
Vessel, and so persuade him he would do the Governor a singular piece of
Service, in carrying them back to Barcellona: But he thought that it would be
very difficult for him to prevail with the Master, against the Governor's
positive Orders. Besides, if it should prove, that the two Passengers that were
with him should not be the Father and the Governess, it would be a great
disadvantage to himself to be carried back; he did believe that it was very
unlikely, that at that time of the Night, and at such a Critical moment, any
other Friar and Woman than them, could come so pat to embark themselves in that
very Vessel that had been hired for them. This at last made him conclude, that
the good Father and the Governor's Wife were in the Felouqua with him, yet
that peradventure they might not know of his being there, which set him upon
the design of concealing himself, that he might get on shore without their
knowledge of his being there. In this last resolution, he goes to the Master,
and having dropped some Pistols into his hand, he whispered to him that for some
particular reasons he would lie concealed from the knowledge of those two
Persons that were with him, that therefore he would be conveyed where he might
remain unseen, till the rest were landed, and then that he would come to shore
himself. The Master having returned his thanks, took Camille by the hand, and
having conducted him into a little hole like a Cabin, he left him with an
assurance that there he might lie as secure as he pleased.

The Wind was so favorable, as in a short time to convey them in view of
Narbona, at which the Master of the Vessel cried out aloud, that all might take
notice of it; that who had a mind to go toshore, should begin to prepare for
it. At these glad tidings, Father Andrew, who had lain all the while as still
as a Dor-mouse, rises and goes to the Governess, telling her, that if she
pleased to look forth, she might behold their wished for Harbor; but receiving
no answer, he retired, concluding her asleep, after her long Fatigue, and great
Disasters. He gets upon the Deck and accosts the Master in this manner; Are you
sure, said he, that that is Narbona? pointing at the City, and in the French
Dominions: Yes, replied the Master; at which good news, the Fryar's countenance
was changed from melancholy, to as serene, as was the Weather. In the opinion,
that Donna Barbara was not come away empty handed, he begins to build strange
Castles in the Air, in his imagination, making already a prise of her and of
her Treasure; now that he did find himself out of the Governor's reach, and
past being controlled by the abandoned Pilgrim, in that height of thoughts, he
has not Patience to remain any longer mewed up within the narrow compass of a
Boat, which made him to return unto the Lady, and entreat her to arise, and
prepare to go to shore, but having no answer yet, he employs his hands, where
the darkness of the place did deprive him of the use of his Eyes, and finding
that the Lady was not concerned at his touch, he adventures further, and meets
with her face, which finding warm and breathing, he descends lower with the
same hand, where finding her Breasts, he made bold with them. This free access,
without the least repulse, did so embolden our jolly Friar, that he did venture
to convey his other hand lower, when on the sudden, he received a severe
rebuke, accompanied with a thundering voice, and presently getting off of the
Bed, she went to that little light that came in by the Door. The good Father,
who had not been a little surpised at the strangeness of the accident,
believing that he had mistaken one place for another, was making toward the
Door to retrieve his way, when he was seized by the Arm, which put him to a
stand, but had you seen in what a dreadful fear the poor Father was, when
lifting up his Head, he espied a Face as black as any that ever came from the
Affrican shore; which looking upon him with a pair of staring Eyes, cried out
in the same tone as before, pressing his hand, you would never have forgot it.

You may easily imagine that the good Father Andrew at this Apparition, was not
in any great humor of making long compliments, on the contrary, he was so
desirous to be gone from that black Companion, that running hastily out, he
struck his Head with such a force against the Door frame, as did cast him
backwards flat on his back in a swoon. The Moorish Woman seeing him lie
speechless on the floor, weltring in his blood, did stoop to him, and setting
up her voice, to call for help as well as she could, and to bemoan the poor
Father; she began to howl much after the manner of the Irish at their Funerals.
At this hideous noise the Master run to learn what was the matter, which having
seen, he presently went to Camille and told him that the Father was fallen
backwards dead, he knew not by what accident, and that there was no body with
him, besides the Moorish Woman, which he had brought along with him the last
night. Camille learning by this, that Donna Barbara was not there, went to see
what was the matter; he found the poor Father, as the Master had told him, in a
very sad pickle: He caused him to be taken up and brought in a Chair upon the
Deck, in the open Air; and presently after that the good Father had drank a
little Wine, which was given him, he began to look about him, while Camille was
gone to see who that Woman might be. He was not long before he learned of her,
that she was Donna Barbara's Slave; who having engaged to be ready to go along
with her Lady, and thinking the hour at hand; she had got to the appointed Post
on the Port, whence in the obscurity of the Night she had been led into the
Vessel, where she thought that her Lady was before disposed of.

While that this account had been given at one end of the Felouqua, Father
Andrew at the other end having perceived the Mariners flocking about him, he
presently fancied that they were Men sent by the Governor's orders to dispatch
him, in that belief, the very apprehension of Death, though he seemed half dead
already, did make him cry out, that he was innocent, that he knew not where was
Donna Barbara Day amonte, the Governor of Barcellona's Wife, and that if they
killed him, they would murder a harmless man, a Religious man, and one of the
Order of St. Dominick, who was a Father Confessor also, for which Crime they
should one day severely answer: Look, look, continued he, speaking to those who
were about him, whether you can find any such person here? Neither did I ever
design the setting of the Pilgrim at liberty, for he was yet in the red Tower,
when I went from Barcellona, he was thus going on pleading for life, when those
men that were about him staring on him, were called away, and Camille appearing
presently to him, he was by that set into a greater fright than ever, which he
showed by endeavoring to get away: Camille took him by the hand, and told him
that he needed not to fear, because there was no person near him that would do
him any injury, that he should take his word for it, whom he knew to be his
friend: By this time the poor Father Andrew having with much ado lifted up his
Eyes, and perceived Camille; and are you here, Sir, said he, and all alone too,
then do I breath again; with that he fetched a deep sigh, after which he thus
continued; and I do begin to believe that all that has lately happened unto me,
has been mere delusion, and a temptation of the Devil; then lifting his hand to
his head, which pained him; yet there must be something real in the case,
continued he, or how should I feel all this smart else? And above all things, I
wonder most how the Devil did put that black fantasme into my hand in the dark,
in lieu of the Governess? Camille finding that he would presently fall into a
melancholy passion, if not diverted, desired him to rest satisfied, and that
he would give him a true account of all, so soon as he should be got on shore,
and that his hurts were dressed: Why, am I wounded then, said the good Father
again, with a great emotion of Spirit: Yes, replied Camille, but not by those
means which you fancy, but rest your self contented, rely upon me, and all
things shall be well again, and you shall have but the hurt on it, without any
further ill consequence: Then Camille commanded some Persons that were by, to
carry him to shore, which being done, he was dressed and put in a Bed, and
Camille and the poor Father did remain at Narbona, till he was perfectly cured
of his broken head.

The next day the Vessel returned to Barcellona, whither the Moorish Woman was
conveyed back, according to Camille's orders, where you are to know, that the
Governor had with much patience, and secrecy, conveyed his half-dead Wife into
her Chamber, where he had left her to recover her self, while he went out to
order some of his Servants to seek every place in the Palace for Father Andrew,
and to bring him immediately along with them, pretending that his Wife being
fallen desperately ill on the sudden, she had occasion for him: The
Governor's design in this, was to catch Father Andrew before he were gone, and
to bring him to severe punishment, after he should have vented his passion in
words upon him and the Governess, and yet so order the matter, as that the true
cause of all these disorders should be concealed from his Servants knowledge,
and that he might give his Wife time sufficient to recollect her self, that she
and her Factor might with more patience hear what he should say to them, he did
retire into another Chamber, where he expected that the Friar should be brought
to him, not doubting but that he should be found somewhere about the Palace, he
having caused all the Gates to be shut up, so soon as he had discovered their
designs: But he reckoned without his Host, the Bird was flown, so that having
waited a long time, after which his Servants being returned without their prey,
he designed to return to his Wife and give her her lesson. But mean time, she
having been informed that her Husband had sent for her Agent, and judging that
it was to bring them together, to let sly his revenge upon them both at once;
she had retired into those lodgings, which were lately the Marchionesses, where
she had locked her self up, sending back that Woman that had gone with her, to
tell her Husband where she was retired, to observe his motions, and to give her
an account of his proceedings against Father Andrew, that by them she might
take her measures, and judge of his designs against her self. The Governor
missing of his Wife, asked where she was, and having been told that she had
removed her felf into the Marchionesses late lodgings, where she had locked her
self up, with a design to lie there that night; he troubled himself no further
about it, but went to Bed, reserving the Schooling of her against the next day.

Donna Barbara being alone in that Chamber, had too many things in her head to
think of sleep; she intended to employ her time better, in contriving which way
to defeat her Husband's designs of railing at her; she had too high a Spirit,
calmly to bear his injuries and reproaches, and she was resolved one way or
other to prevent his Fury. She had opened the Window, to let in the cool Air of
the Night, to refresh her freted Heart; and she was looking out, when casting
her eyes toward the shore, she did perceive, as well as the light of the Moon,
which then began to rise* would permit her at that distance, a person that was
coming from the Sea shore toward the Palace, who being drawn nearer, did
appear to her in a Pilgrims Habit. It came presently into her head, that it
might be Camille, who being got out of Prison, and not believing what she had
told him of the Marchioness's absence, was come under that Window, in hopes to
see the Marchioness, or to learn by some means or other, which fortune might
produce in his favor, whether the Lady was gone, or still in her old quarters.
Donna Barbara did further imagine, that the Pilgrim not daring to return to his
old lodings, or be too busy in enquiring elsewhere, for fear of being retaken,
and worse used than at first, he had thought it his best course to come there
himself, for information; having prepossest her self with this conceit, as all
persons are apt to believe that which they most desire, she dropped down one of
her Gloves, that it might cause him to look up and take notice of the signs
that she did make him to have him stay a while The thing succeeded as she had
desired, for after the Pilgrim had taken up the Glove, and found by its strong
perfume, that it did not belong to an ordinary hand, he lifted up his head, and
perceived some body that did make him signs, as if they would have him to stay
a little, after which they withdrew.

This Person who had taken up the Glove, bebeing a Pilgrim that was newly come
to shore, and was going in Pilgrimage to St. Jago, having no other business at
Barcellona, but to seek for a lodging for that night, and to proceed on his
journey forwards the next morning, was willing to wait and see what the success
of this would be, therefore he stayed there, walking up and down till Donna
Barbara having writ her mind, and conveyed it into the other Glove, she
likewise did drop it before him. He presently took it up, finds the paper in
it, which he takes out, unfolds, and reads, as well as he could; but some
clouds at that instant obscuring the Air, so that he could not make an end, he
looks up, but finds that the Person was retired, and the Window shut. Now this
Pilgrim being one of those persons, that like the generality of those foot
Travelers, was light enough of Money in ready Cash, but who are as well
provided and stored with Jests, Songs, and merry Tales as our Country Fiddlers,
fitted to all sorts of humors and conditions, which amongst those kind of
persons are as good as so many Bills of exchange, payable at first sight; for
through the Authority of those Letters of Credit, and some little pretty Agnus
Dei's, little Crosses, Chaplets, Medals, and the like Toys, they pass every
where, and make bold to seek for Lodgings, and all other conveniences, in all
places, in all companies and at all times. He thus qualified hasten^ (...) the
City, and being made somewhat (...) than ordinarily, by this late adventure, he
confidently knocks at a House door, where he saw a Candle, where being admitted
and got to a light, he pulls the paper out of his Pocket, and read in it as
follows.

In spite of all my Enemies Contrivances, Plots, and Designs, I have kept my
Station: If you continue in the generous design of freeing me from the cruel
Tyranny of a Jealous Husband: This next night between one and two repair here
again, and bring a long with you a Ladder of Ropes, by the help of which,
maugre all my Guardians Circumspections, and Donna Barbara 's Intelligences,
you shall receive into your protection the Marchioness of, etc.

And a little beneath, by way of Postscript, was writ.

Excuse my bad writing through the want of light: Get in readiness a Felouqua
against that time, which may carry us to some Sea Port of France. You need not
to fear the Charges; for I shall bring that along with me, that shall be
sufficient to defray all, and put us beyond want.

At every period of this Letter, the Pilgrim would make a pawse, then read it
over again; but when he came to the Postscript, where mention was made of
sufficiency to defray the Charges, and to put them beyond want, he did read
that place twenty times over, and having looked once again on the word
Marchioness, all those little distrusts and jealousies, which had possessed him
during the reading of the Letter, did vanish into Air, and as if the word
Marchioness had filled him with another Spirit than his own, he did resolve
within himself to act that person's part, for whom he was taken; thus he
resolved to take opportunity by the foretop, and not to part with her till he
had built his own Fortune. To encourage himself in this resolution, he calls
for the best that the house would afford, enquires if there were not a
Marchioness that lay in the Palace, who had a Jealous Husband: He is answered
that there was such a one, but that it was reported that her Husband was gone
with her the morning before; The news of the Marquis, and of his Ladies absence
did make him build the stronger upon that bottom, in lieu of deterring him, so
that he longed till the time was come to get off the Lady.

To that purpose, as soon as it was convenient to stir forth, he pays his
reckoning, and goes out to hire a Felouqua, to provide a Ladder of Ropes, with
all other necessaries for the Voyage, which all his little stock would but just
reach to; but while he was busy about this, a small scruple arose in his mind,
which was, that doubtless the right Person intended to be employed by the
Marchioness, could be no less than some person of quality, which made him fear,
that when the Lady should discover his Pilgrims weeds, she might find out her
mistake, retire before he had her sure, and so leave him at all the Cost and
Charges, to his utter ruin: This consideration was of weight; but he knew no
other way to remedy it, than in pretending, that he made use of that Habit to
be disguised, and that through its favorable aspect, they might pass with more
safety into the Felouqua. This, with the prospect which he had of making his
Fortune, did cause him to push on, and to venture at all, leaving the success
to the disposal of Fortune, who commonly assists the bold. With this last
resolution he continues his designs, and gets all things in readiness against
the appointed hour; which being come, out goes our Pilgrim, and gets under the
Window whence he had received the first Summons; he was not long there before
he heard it open, and presently after a Cord was let down, at which he having
fastened the Ladder of Ropes, it was presently pulled up again, and not long
after Donna Barbara came down by it, close mufled up, least that the Pilgrim
should find out her deceit; she did no sooner touch ground, but telling him in
a disguised tone, that there was no time to lose, for fear of a pursuit, she
pulled him along by the Arm, not giving time to answer, which pleased him very
well, who was as willing as she was to keep silence, so that they both hastened
to the Vessel, in equal fears of being discovered by one another: So soon as
they were come to the Felouqua, the Master disposed of them severally, as the
Lady desired, and presently they put off to Sea, making all the Sails they
could for Narbona.

Mean time the Governor, who had through his Wife's Importunities granted her
two days retirement, only in order to plague her the more severely afterward,
did not so much as once offer to disturb her, during the whole time of the
Truce; but the term being expired, his patience was at an end also: And having
sent diverse of his Sarvants ^^e after another to have the Door opened to him,
though to no effect; he went thither himself, where having diverse times called
and knocked at the Chamber door to as little purpose, he caused it to be broke
open, and his anger being exasperated by his Wife's resistance, he presently
rushes into the Chamber, searches all Chambers for her, runs from one place to
another, peeps in every hole and corner, but finds nothing but a Paper that lay
upon the Table, in which there was writ; that she being not able to endure the
affronts and reproaches, with which he had threatened her, he could not take it
ill, that she had absented her self for some time, only till his anger was
over, and that he had alter d his resolutions; for she could not imagine, that
her endeavoring to release an innocent distressed Gentleman, was such a Crime
as deserved so severe an usage, as he designed her. Though he was a Person that
naturally had a great power over his passions, yet seeing himself over-reached
by a Woman, he fell into such a rage, that storming, and threatening all the
Servants, as being accessaries to her flight, they at last went their ways and
left him alone to vent his anger at leisure.

After the first transports were over, he began more calmly to consider with
himself, what he had best to do, and what course to take to retrieve this
fugitive Woman. Being vexed with himself for having expressed so much passion
before his Servants, and published so much of his concerns; but as to that,
there was no remedy, and all that was to be done now, was how to get his Wife
home again; but first how and where to meet with her. This he knew not how to
go about, having not the least knowledge of the course that she had stear'd, he
resolves a thousand things in his mind, and as often defeats them again with
new considerations, not knowing on which to pitch: Sometimes he is for one
expedient, then presently again he lays that by, and he takes up another;
sometimes he is of opinion that it is the wicked Father Andrew that has
assisted his Wife in her escape, at other times he is of opinion, that it is
the Pilgrim, who not obeying his order, had lain lurking thereabout to
accomplish this wicked business, then sometimes he was in the belief, that they
both had a hand in the Plot: Thus being perplexed with diverse uncertainties,
not knowing what course to take, he goes to the Window which had been left
open, where he finds some certain marks of his Wife's escape that way, there he
sets himself down, and after a long debate within himself, he concludes that
his Wife, imagining that the Pilgrim had followed the Marchioness to Saragossa,
she had made what haste she could with the Friars assistance, to go after him,
and to gain him for her self, before that he had time to renew his friendship
with the Marchioness. Amongst a thousand conceptions finding this the most
probable; he resolves for Saragossa immediately; but receiving that day some
orders, which required his presence for three days at Barcellonna, he was
forced to obey, and defer his pursuit till that business was over.

Mean time our Travelers are come to Anchor before Narbona, the Master gives
them notice of it; the Pilgrim appears first upon the Deck, trembling at the
very thoughts of approaching and discovering his deceit to the Lady: He had
been there some time, when one came to him to tell him, that the Lady would
have him come to her, in her Cabin. The Pilgrim with much perplexity and
disorder did obey the Commands.

Donna Barbara, had made the place as obscure as she could, to prevent a
surprizal, desiring to discover her self to Camille little by little, and to
obtain his pardon for the change that she had put upon him; after which she
would endeavor to gain his affections. The Pilgrim comes in, and with much ado
feeling out the Bed that the Lady lay on; he throws himself on his knees by the
Bed side, and was going to ask pardon for his presumption; when Donna Barbara
did interrupt him in this manner, Sir, there is no Woman in the World who
having received so great a favor as I have lately from you, but would
acknowledge her self infinitely obliged unto your generous assistance for it;
yet, Sir, the case is such at present, that I must attribute the cause of my
present liberty, more to my good Fortune, than to your endeavors, when I look
upon all that you have lately done, as intended to some other person than my
self. Madam, replied the Pilgrim, I am come to acknowledge my Crime, and most
humbly beg your pardon, for having been so bold, as to take upon me the
performance of that which was designed for a worthier hand, than that of a
miserable Pilgrim; and I do own my self so unworthy that honor, that I must
wholly attribute to my good Fortune that happiness, which another more worthy
might deservedly challenge from his own merits. You cannot be wanting in that,
replied Donna Barbara, except it be that your Cruelty does drown with
ingratitude, all those advantages and excellencies that the Heavens have so
profusely showred upon you; and in that lies my misery, that while you are
endeavoring to oblige another, you set forth your unkindness to me, and are
persuading me to believe, how ready and willing you are to serve others, while
I am to be left unregarded, or that if you chance to do me some kind Office, it
is against your will, and by mere accident. Madam, replied the Pilgrim, since
it has pleased the Fates to make me by accident that instrument of your safety,
which your judicious choice had designed unto another, be pleased to allow of
their determination, and to aceept of my most humble Services, in order to your
future designs. This unexpected answer did so surprise Donna Barbara, that she
remained for some time without answering, which gave the Pilgrim time to add; I
am the more excusable, Madam, in having undertaken nothing but what I had your
commands for, under your own hand, wherein reading your resolutions, and
fearing that my receiving of your orders might probably disappoint those
persons for whom they were meant, by which you would lose that opportunity
which might never be recovered again. I thought that I could do no less than
supply that place, which I have done, but in order to serve you; Madam, if you
think fit to make any further use of me, I am ready to obey you in what else
you will be pleased to command me, but if my unworthiness does invite you to
cast me off, let me but have the happiness to accomplish the residue of my
Pilgrimage under the favorable assistance, and recommendation of your
illustrious Name; and I shall rest contented with the honor of having served
you once, and shall ever add some words in my petitions to St. Jago, for a
blessing on all your designs. This great fall from the Pilgrims first
expressions, did fully confirm Donna Barbara, that she had been mistaken in the
Person, but however the satisfaction which she had of being out of her Husbands
reach, with the hopes she had of meeting with the right Pilgrim at Saragossa,
did make her rest satisfied for the present, and to give him this answer: I
must confess that I should not so willingly nor so easily have trusted my self
in the hands of a Person so absolute a stranger to me as you are, had I had my
choice; but seeing that it has so happened, and that you are willing to serve me
further, I will make use of you in sending you to shore, to get the best and
readlest convenience that can be had to carry me to Saragossa, where I would
have you to accompany me, and there I shall return you thanks proportionable to
the services which you shall have rendered me, mean time, take this, continued
she, giving him a handful of Pistols to defray the Charges, and so soon as you
have provided all things for the Journey, come and fetch me hence.

The Pilgrim received Donna Barbara's orders with much earnestness, and her
Gold with as much greediness; and having assured her that he would make all the
haste possible, he went to shore, where he provided all things necessary for
her conveyance to the place that she desired, and returned to her again at the
close of the Evening, giving her an account of what he had done; presently
after the Master of the Vessel was paid for his freight, and Donna Barbara was
conducted to shore by the Pilgrim, from whence they were conveyed incessantly
to Saragossa. At the last days journey she sent her new servant before to
provide her some Lodgings as private as possible, in some by place of the City,
to which she would go in the evening, that she might not be seen. Which he did
with such diligence, that he came back again, and met her two or three miles
distance from the City, whence in the Evening he led her to her lodgings

So soon as Donna Barbara found her self to have no further occasion of the
Pilgrim, she gave him a very considerable gratuity for his Services, and
returning him thanks, she sent him away.

Our Pilgrim being flushed with what he had received for his four or five days
Services, went to seek for a lodging for himself; he had quickly found one at a
public House, where he met also with some of his Countrymen, with whom having
made acquaintance, they supped together at the Pilgrims cost, who would treat
them; and after Supper, they fell a drinking so hard, that they were all in
their Altitudes, especially our Pilgrim, who being puffed up with the honor
which he had received in serving a Marchioness, and in that gallant manner too,
besides the thought which came into his head, of the great reward which he had
received for it; that nothing would serve his turn at last, but the
Marchioness's Health, which he began with a full brimmer; which Health he
obliged the company to pledge, twice over; one amongst them being somewhat more
peevish than the rest, had not so much Complaisance, as to do it without
grumbling; and amongst the rest of his mutterings, he said, why must we drink
twice over a Woman's Health, whose name we know not? Nay, nor I neither, replied
the Pilgrim; but thus much I will tell you, to invite you to it; that she is
young, beautiful, wise, and as generous as a Princess: and pulling his Purse
out of his Pocket, and shaking it: here are golden witnesses of what I say,
with part of which I intend to defray all your Charges here, Gentlemen,
continued he, and therefore pray fall too, and spare not: After two or three
Cups more round the Table, at the request of the company, he gave them an
account of his coming acquainted with her, and assisting of her in makng her
escape from a jealous Husband, and how he had waited on her to Saragossa.

At last they drank so long, that they were all past drinking, and it was so
late, that the Master of the House came and desired the Company to get to their
Beds, if they could find them, for that Night, telling them that the next day
would be long enough for them to sing the Second part to the same Tune, if they
pleased: With that our brave Pilgrim having discharged the reckoning, was led
into his Chamber, and put to Bed, and the rest of the Company did the like.

The next morning one of the Marquesses Servants coming to that House to visit
one that had lately been his fellow Servant, he is informed of a certain
Pilgrim newly come from Barcellon^a, who had talked much of a Marchioness, and
that he had drank her Health, with some of his own Country men, till they were
past drinking for that bout. The Fellow hearing this, without any further
inquiry into the Business, concluding within himself, that it was the same
Pilgrim that they had left in prison at Barcellona, he immediately returns home
with this news to his Master, assuring him that the Pilgrim by some means or
other being got out of Prison at Barcellona, was come thither. There needed no
more to set our Jealous Marquess on the fret; he presently tells the Fellow
that he had so great a confidence in him, that he would leave the management of
that business to him, not doubting but he would faithfully serve him in it:
Which was to get that Pilgrim to be put in Prison, to that purpose he writes a
Note to a Justice who was something akin to him, to have the business done out
of hand, letting him know that it was a great Malefactor who had broke out of
Prison at Barcellona, where he was detain d for horrid Crimes, and was come
into that City under the disguise of a Pilgrim: He immediately sent his Servant
about it, assuring him that he would consider his care and diligence in the
business; and gave him a special charge to see him cast in Prison, and loaded
with Irons, with a strict order that no body should be admitted to speak with
him: Presently after the poor Pilgrim was taken out of his Bed with his Clothes
half on and half off, and dragged to Prison like a Dog, after the cruel manner
which they usually do in that Country, where he remained a close Prisoner.

While things were in this posture at the City of Saragossa, Camille, little
dreaming how he was used there, was recovering of Father Andrew at Narbona,
that they might in diligence overtake the Marquess at Saragossa, where he hoped
he would make some little stay; and finding that the good Father was in a
Condition to begin the Journey, and as willing to serve him as ever, to which
purpose Camille had given him to understand that he was a Person capable of
protecting him from all dangers, and of requiting him very bountifully. They
set forwards toward Saragossa, where being arrived, it was their lot to Inn at
the very house, whence the Pilgrim had been taken out.

The next morning after their arrival, Father Andrew was enquiring of his host
whether he knew not of a certain Marquess and Marchioness that were lately come
into that City from Barcellona? The Host made answer, that there was a
Merchioness, or Marquess, or something of that quality, that was lately come
from Barcellona, who lived very privately, not far from thence, which he had
heard of by he could not remember whom: Presently the good Father runs to
Camille, and acquaints him of the discovery which he had already made, at which
they both concluded by several circumstances, that it must of necessity be the
beautiful Marchioness, who it was probable was kept up so privately by her
Husband. The next thing was how to get her informed of their being come to
Saragossa, with the same design of serving her, as they had, expressed at
Barcellona; there lay the difficulty, which could not be removed but by a more
particular Information of the place, and situation of her Lodgings. To this
purpose the Landlord is called up, and employed to go and learn exactly where
those persons lay, and presently after returns with full Information; upon
which Camille and the Father take their measures. They having debated and
concluded on something: Father Andrew is sent to go take private Lodgings near
that place, but as he goes down Stairs he meets with his Host whom he takes
along with him, to show him the House wherein the Marchioness lay. The Father
having taken good notice of it, sends back mine Host, and takes Lodgings close
by it; after which returning to Camille, he gave him an account of what he had
done, and presently they caused their goods to be removed. They being in their
new Lodging; the next thing which was thought on was, that Father Andrew should
insinuate himself into the Company of the Marquess his Landlord, to learn of
him how things were; that was presently done, and in a short time the good
Father was informed, that he did not know what persons lived in his House, nor
how many they were; that he had never seen any of them, but one Maid Servant;
that if they were such great persons, as had been reported, they had doubtless
for some great reason and design left their retinue behind them, and lived
extraordinarily retired, never stirring out of their Chamber, where all their
necessaries were brought to them by that only Maid: The Father having been thus
far informed, enquired, if it were not possible to have a Letter delivered unto
the Marchioness, unknown to her Husband? He was answered, that he did not know
whether there was a Husband or no in the case, and did believe that if she had
one he was not with her at that time. With that a Maid going by, here is their
Servant, continued he, I will call her to you, and she shall inform you her
self of that better than I can. He called the Maid, who being come, Father
Andrew inquired of her, whether the Marquess was with his Lady, and if it were
not possible to give her a Letter without his knowledge, to which all the
answer that he could get was, that she was not yet so weary of her place, as to
lose it, that she liked it so well, as to have no desire to part with it to
another; that she knew well enough what she had to do, and that he should mind
his own business, and not go about to get her place from her; and having said
this, she went away, with a great deal of indignation. The good Father found by
this small Trial, that no good was to be expected that way, he therefore
bethought himself of another expedient, and with fair words and promises did
require of the Master of the House that he would lend him the Key of his Garden
door, that at night he might get into it, where he made no question but by some
means or other, he would find out some way to let the Lady know of his being
there, which she would be very glad to hear. The Landlord making some doubts at
it, pretending that he might by that means lose his Lodgers, the ingenious
Father did presently remove those scruples, in dropping in his hand a Pistol or
two, which put the Key of the Garden door into his possession. The good Father
would willingly have been fully informed, whether the Marquess was with his
Wife or not; but after diverse attempts, and to no purpose, he went home, being
being persuaded by diverse circumstances that he was absent.

Being returned home, he informed Camille of all that he had done, telling him
that it were his own fault, if he got not the Lady immediately, while her
Husband was absent. How do you know that he is absent? replied Camille. As for
my part I am not very well assured that this is the right Marchioness, and I
fear least you may mistake in this, as when you took the Moor for Donna
Barbara. To which Father Andrew said, give me leave to tell you some
circumstances, and to put some consequences into your head, and then judge
whether it can be any other person than the Marchioness. They are lately come
hither from Barcellona, where they are very private; as to their being with no
other Servant than one single Maid, thus I make it out; the Marquess having it
is probable some business, which called him from hence, and fearing, least in
his absence you should clear your self to the Governor of Barcellona so as to
be released presently after, and that you might follow after him, he to conceal
his Wife from your knowledge, had left his retinue at some small distance from
the City; and to make the less noise, had brought his Wife in the night, only
accompanied with her two Guardian Women, and that serving Maid who was to
attend them, with charge never to stir forth of her Chamber till his return,
after which he might return to his Servants, and take them along with him. This
is the best way that he could take in such a case, replied Camille, I must
confess, were he forced upon some such extraordinary occasion, to have left his
Wife behind him; but I fear that nothing could persuade him to do so: Yes,
replied Father Andrew, for some few days, having such ^rusty Guardians to watch
over her, and having ^ewd her up so close, as no body but himself could find
her again, at least in his thought; Besides, why may she not be fallen sick? At
least not so well, as to be carried, with so much haste as his business might
require? and so be forced to leave her behind? All these are conjectures and
probabilities: It may, and it may not be so, replied Camille, and neither you
nor I can inform our selves better: Well, put the case we are in the right,
what is next to be done, continued Camille? This replied the Friar; you must
have a Letter in readiness for her; you must besides make some kind of Song or
Verses, which you may Sing at night under her Window, in which you must give
her to understand, in covered terms, that you are here in order to receive her
commands: The consequence of this, replied Camille, will be, that we shall
alarm her Guardians, who will reward us with the same presents as the Marquess
received at Barcellona; and that at the Marquess his return, they will inform
him of the business, and so our design will be lost, and all hopes of setting
on foot any other by our discovery. To this I answer, replied the Father, that
you must not mention any thing that can be understood, but by the Marchioness
her self; that though the Guardians are awakned, we shall find some way to
convey the Letter privately to the Marchioness, and that we shall after that,
through her own assistance, get her off before the Marquess his return. Well,
replied Camille, it is but the venturing of a suit of Clothes, and my Theorbo,
I will give you the satisfaction of going with you at night, and to that
purpose I will go about the Letter and the Verses.

At night Camille, and Father Andrew came to the Garden door of the
Marchionesses Lodgings, the Father goes to open it, but after he had fumbled a
good while without success, they were forced to leave the Key in the Lock, and
to get into the Garden over the Wall, where Camille began to tune his
Instrument at a distance, which done, he afterward drew nearer and Sang: He
had not proceeded far, when the House door, that came into the Garden, was
suddenly thrust open; at which, Camille step't aside behind a Statue, presently
came out running with their Swords in hand, three persons, very furiously,
which made the good Father to make toward the place that he had come in at,
where by the advantage of a Terrace walk, he nimbly got over the Wall into a
back Street, and from thence immediately home. The pursuers finding the Garden
door locked; they sought up and down the Garden after their prey, which gave
time to Camille to remove his Station; he was passing cross the walk, close by
the door of the House; when a Woman taking him by the hand, come follow me,
said she, I will put you out at the Street Door, and go along with you; though
I am not so well provided now, as I would have been, had you but stayed till to
morrow night; with that she led him out by the Street door, where she thus
continued to speak. It fell out very ill, that my Brothers should be so
unluckily awakned by the singing at the next Neighbors, under the new comers
window, as I imagine: I hope, Alphonso, that you are, and will be sensible of
what I do for you; How that I abandon all other interests, to follow you; and
now that I have put my self into your hands, even before you could expect it,
and when you did intend nothing more than a private visit to me, I hope that
you will deal generously by me, and faithfully perform all your vows and
protestations to me; in order to which I desire you to convey me presently to
your own house, or any where else, if you think us not safe there from my
Brothers search after us, and there to Marry me out of hand; that being once
done, you may claim me as your own, which will very much allay that
prosecution, which otherwise we might expect with all the severity imaginable
from my incensed Brothers. Having said this, she made a pause, as expecting his
answer. Which having not, what is the matter, continued she, that you answer me
not? Do you think me too forward in this Juncture, or do you relent in your
affections? saying this, she held back Camille, who was still going a round
pace, he knew not where; I will be satisfied continued she, before I go a step
further. Camille then seeing a necessity of undeceiving that person, he led her
toward the middle of the Street, where there was a little more light, and
lifting up his head, he gave her time and opportunity to see her mistake, by
looking in his Face. So soon as she saw Camille, making a great shriek, she
endeavored to snatch her hand out of his, and would have gone from him; when
Camille, finding that it was time for him to speak, said, Madam, be not so
affrighted as you are; but assure your self that you are fallen into the hands
of a Gentleman, who though a stranger in these parts, will serve and protect
you with his Life, from any danger whatsoever; be pleased but to recollect your
self a little, continued he, finding that she did still endeavor to get away;
and cast not your self into unnecessary inconveniences by your needless
apprehensions; do but command me, let me but know what is most expedient that I
should do for you at present, and you will find, that I shall obey with all the
respects and diligence imaginable. These words being delivered by Camille, with
an accent and grace, which did speak him what he was, did somewhat settle again
the trembling Lady, who took the boldness to say, Sir, if in my late misfortune
I have had so much happiness as to fall into the hands of a Gentleman, that
will not make use of the advantages that my mistake and the darkness of the
Night has given him; show your self such, and immediately bring me back to that
place, where I first did meet with you. That were not to serve you, replied
Camille, but rather to prostitute you to your Enemy's Fury. Therefore, rather
inform me, Madam, where I may convey you into the hands of that person, for
whom you took me, who without question will gladly receive you into his
protection. If I am so happy, replied the Lady, as to have met with so generous
a person; I shall be obliged to return my thanks to Heaven, for having sent me,
in such an extremity, so favorable an assistance, which I might not have
expected from those of my own Nation, had I been so unfortunate as to have
fallen in any of their Hands, with all these disadvantages. You lose time,
Madam, replied Camille, and know not how soon you may be overtaken and
surpised; I have already declared to you, that I am not of this Nation, and I
add to it, that though my lodgings are not far from this place, I neither know
where I am at present, nor which way to retrieve them, and did I know, I should
not go about to do it, till I had left you safe, where you desire to be;
therefore I once more humbly entreat you, Madam, to guide me where you would
have me to conduct you: You see, continued Camille, that day begins to break,
and should you be found at this time of the night in the open Streets with a
man, you may guess at the dangerous consequences. I know not where to go,
replied the Lady, for I am ignorant of Don Alphonso's House, therefore I must
entreat you to lead me any where, till I have the opportunity to send to him to
come to me. Camille was going to reply, when he perceived a man coming in haste
toward them, who said, Sir, if you are a Gentleman, pray assist me against the
odds that my Enemies have over me; at this the Gentlewoman knowing by his voice
that it was her Friend: Oh! my Alphonso, cried she, running toward him: Here
is a Gentleman continued she, looking on Camille, that the Heavens have sent on
purpose to assist us. This did somewhat calm the jealous Spaniard. Who began to
look sourly upon that person, whom he had found in private with his Mistress;
but presently the Ladies Brothers coming up, with their Swords drawn, they
cried here he is, which interrupted their further discourse, by falling upon
Alphonso, which made Camille to draw likewise, and to assist the weakest side.

The clashing of the Swords did presently call some of the watch to them,
before any hurt was done, which made every one shift for himself; by good
fortune the Watch following the three Brothers, they gave time to the others to
get off. But they not finding the Lady where they had left her, nor no where
there abouts, they went to search a little further, where Camille found himself
just before his own door, meeting there with Father Andrew, who had the Lady by
the hand; he being impatient at Camille's absence had gone out with a design to
seek after him, and passing by just when they where fighting, and perceiving a
Lady standing by, much affrighted, taking her to be the Marchioness, he had led
her toward his Lodgings, and she being so surpised at the sight of her
Brothers, had given her hand to the first comer, without considering who it
was. They were all very glad to meet so luckily in that place: Alphonso told
Camille, that he was infinitely obliged to him for his generous assistance,
without which he must doubtless have fallen under the disadvantage of his Enemies
Swords. Sir, replied Camille, this is no place to use compliments in, and I
judge it dangerous for you both to appear any more in the Streets this Night,
while your Brothers are yet in the pursuit of you. Neither would it be safe for
us to retire to my House yet, said Alphonso: You say right, answered Camille,
therefore if you please to accept of what accommodation my Lodgings and the
house will afford, you shall find there a hearty welcome, where you may remain
safe, and as private as you please, till you have the leisure and convenience
to retire your self where else you shall think fit. Alphonso having returned
Camille humble thanks, turning to the Lady, Madam, said he, since it is
dangerous in having you any further this night, least that you should fall
again into the hands of your Brothers, if you please, we will be further
engaged unto this gallant person, in accepting of his kind offers; at which the
Lady made answer, I am willing to accept of this Gentleman's Civilities; but it
shall be upon condition that you shall presently send for a Priest to Marry us,
replied the Lady; and you, Sir, continued she, addressing her self to Camille,
you shall engage to me before I enter, that you will do me the favor to give
me to this Gentleman; he knows what a considerable Fortune I bring along with
me, in spite of my Brothers, able to re-establish his broken Fortune; and when
once my Brothers know that I am his by Marriage, they will lay aside their
anger, and desist any further prosecutions. Camille and Don Alphonso having
promised that she should have all the setisfaction that she should require;
they went up Stairs, where, while the Priest was sent for, and a Chamber
getting ready for them, Camille gave them the best entertainment that he could;
and an account of his Amors, and of the cause of all the disorders of that
Night through the Song, which he had applied in a wrong place. After this,
Alphonso and Camille renewed their Compliments, with assurances of services on
either side, and so they contracted a Friendship, which proved more durable
than is usual between a Spaniard and an Italian; after a while the Priest being
come, they were Married, and when they retired into that Chamber that had been
fitted for them, where Camille having conducted them, he took his leave and
left them, to go to his own Bed, and presently after Father Andrew did the like.

The next morning the good Father, who was always diligent in such affairs,
goes to the Marquess his Landlord again, and telling him he had been
disappointed by entangling the Key with other things in his Pocket, which
pulling out, he had dropped and could not find again: That he desired him to
get another made; and giving the man a double Pistol, to stop all replies and
put offs, here is to pay for it, continued he, I shall come again in the
Evening, therefore pray let it be ready against then: The Landlord was going to
reply with a sour Face, as if he did not like it, and had no mind to get
another Key: But the cunning Father perceiving it: It may be that it will cost
more. You Are in the right, continued he, and giving him another Pistol, if that
will not do, I will bring you more when I come to fetch it; at this the
Landlord being overcome, he did promise him to get a Key ready against Evening.

By that time that Father Andrew was returned, Alphonso and his Lady were
visited by Camille, they desired him to let them have a Messenger to send to
Alphonso's House for some of his Servants to come to him; is was done
accordingly; and Alphonso having writ some Letters to some of his particular
Friends, inviting them to come and accompany him and his Bride home; he sent
one of his own Servants with them, and sent another home, to give order that
all things should be got in a readiness fit to receive him and his Friends; not
long after, there came diverse of the new married couples Friends to offer their
Services: To whom Don Alphonso and his Lady returning thanks, they both
recommended to their Friendship, Camille, and after the first usual compliments
were over, Alphonso and his Bride, went, accompanied with a considerable number
of Friends and Servants, in diverse Coaches unto Don Alphonso's House, where
Camille and the good Father Andrew did attend them also; and toward the
Evening, after they had been Magnificently treated, considering the little time
to prepare things in; having taken leave of the company in general, they
returned home to prepare for the night expedition.

While Father Andrew was gone for the new Key, Camille employed himself in
fitting anew his Theorbo, which had been disordered in the late rancounter; it
was not long before the diligent Father returned, and a little after, it being
time, they went out on the second adventure. They soon did light on the right
door, which Father Andrew, for fear of any further mistakes, had marked with a
piece of Chalk. Being entered and having shut the door upon them, for fear of
any surprise from without; Camille having tuned his Instrument, he Sung to it
as follows.

Cloris, before your conquering Eyes,
Had made my Heart your Sacrifice,
Your Charming Voice had led the way;
Seraphick sounds piercing my ravished Ear,
Enter my yielding soul with full Carrear,
And forced me Loves Laws to obey:
So that when on your beauties I once gazed,
Resolute and amazed;
I then decreed,
To serve you, Cloris, with a winged speed.
My Heart subjected to your Laws,
Endeavored soon to gain applause,
In his dispatch to break your Chains;
Beat off your Shackles, and all could be found,
In which your jealous Tyrant kept you bound,
So set an end to all your pains.
But while to free you I was wholly bent,
To Prison I was sent;
In which I lay,
Until I heard he had forced you away.
There having been tempted to break
Those vows, I had made for your sake,
I was released, I knew not how;
Thence here I Am come, where learning you are freed,
While I envy the hand, I bless the deed,
And now to your commands I bow,
Expecting a decree to fall or stand,
From your Impartial Hand;
I wish the Fates
May make your heart and mind my Advocates.
No sooner had Camille ended his Song, but he was informed from the Window that
it was understood, and that he should the next Day about Evening come the same
way, where there should a Servant wait on purpose to admit him, after this the
Window was shut, and Camille with Father Andrew retired with all the
satisfaction imaginable.

Camille was very impatient till the hour was come to render the visit to the
beautiful Marchioness. He could not sleep all night for thinking on it, which
made him pass it in framing a thousand agreeable Ideas in his fancy, about the
Charming entertainment; and he was in such a Rapture all the day following at
the thoughts of the pleasures, which he was e're long to enjoy, that he could
neither eat nor drink, being so wholly possessed with those joys, which he
already did relish in his imagination. At last did come the happy hour, he
flies unto his bliss, being at the Garden door, where he leaves Father Andrew
to return home, he is met by a Servant Maid, who does conduct him to the
Camber, his passion is raised to such a height, at each step that he makes
toward it, that he endeavors to suppress it with the apprehensions of some
reverse of Fortune, for fear that his excess should transport him beyond
himself; he arrives at last to the Chamber door, he enters, he perceives the
Lady in an obscure place at the further end of the Chamber, he runs toward
her, flings himself at her feet, and with a voice that expressed the transports
of his Soul, he says, Madam, what honor do I receive in this your gracious
condescension to my humble desires? My Soul is so transported at the singular
favors which I now enjoy from your extreme bounty, that I want words to
express my resentments; let therefore my silence, my respects, and my most
humble submission, speak to you what my Tongue cannot utter. Beautiful
Marchioness, behold at your Feet, continued he, a person so wholly possessed with
admiration at your perfections, that it preserves a heart from the reach of the
rest of your whole sex, to offer it pure and wholly at the shrine of your
adorable beauty. I do acknowledge, that I am most unworthy of the least of your
favor, Madam, when I consider that -- Here he was interrupted by the Ladies
rising from her seat, who stepping toward the light, did look upon Camille
with an eye full of indignation and revenge, which made Camille presently
perceive his error, and that all that he had said, had been addressed to Donna
Barbara Dayamonte, in lieu of the Marchioness. He rises, and being struck dumb,
he remains as motionless as a Statue, which gave time to Donna Barbara to
express her resentments after this manner. Thou the most ungrateful, and the
unworthiest of all men; have I abandoned my honor to the censure of the whole
world? have I forsaken an Husband, and all other interests, to come after thee?
and is it thus that thou requitest me? I will be revenged: and since that I
cannot by any means imaginable enjoy thy Life, I will be the Author of thy
Death: Yes, Traitor, I will immediately send for the Marquess, whom thou have
so abused, that in my presence he may take a full revenge of thee, that my Eyes
and my Heart may have the satisfaction of seeing thee perish before me. With
that she commands aloud that the door should be locked without side, which was
presently done within Camille's hearing, after which she continued to vent her
rage against him, with such passionate words, that poor Camille was never so
amazed at any thing in all his Life, and of truth it did concern him; he found
himself in the power, and at the mercy of an incensed woman, who doubtless
would give a full scope to all her resentments, and satisfy her splenetick
revenge at his cost; there was no retreating; to offer to make his way back by
force, were to oblige her the sooner to call for help; amongst which the
Marquess would not be forgot: To remain there without giving her some kind of
satisfaction, were but to exasperate her the more. After diverse debates within
himself, concerning what he should do, he resolves to appease her in some
measure with kind words, fair promises, and humble submissions, thereby to
regain his liberty. In this design he approches the Bed whereon she had thrown
her self, and bowing down: Madam, said he, I must confess that my surprizal has
been so great to find you here, when I thought you to be at Barcellona, that I
am not yet able thoroughly to recollect my self; and I find that some time must
be allowed me for it, which I humbly beg for, mean time all that I have to say
for my self, is, that believing that you had been so fully prevented by your
Husband in your designs, and I having received orders from him never to return
to Barcellona upon pain of Death, this had made me wholly give over all future
hopes of ever having the happiness of seeing you again; and on the other hand,
had brought me here in pursuit of the Marchioness, to renew with her my former
affections, and if -- Here Donna Barbara interrupted him, saying: But here I
am, where in spite of all oppositions, contemning all dangers, and treading
all other considerations under feet; I am come in pursuit of the most
ungrateful of men; but if I must perish, I will first break your measures, and
have the satisfaction to see my Rival deprived of all hopes of possessing that
which is refused unto my affections. Madam, replied, Camille, I am sensible of
the infinite obligations that I owe you; and if you but please to allow me some
small time to wean my self from any further thoughts on the Marchioness, I
shall acknowledge what you have done for me, with all the respects and
gratitude imaginable; and if you will have so much bounty, as to attribute my
former actions unto the excess of a blind passion, which made me pay to
another, that which was with more Justice due to you, I shall for the future
address my vows here only, and limit my happiness within the compass of that
esteem which you are pleased to express for me; though so unworthy of that
happiness. At this turn, Donna Barbara looked up, and holding forth her hand,
he took it, and kissed it; he found that she would have him to help her up by
it, which he did; after which, they having had some further discourses, in
order to a more ample reconciliation, and better understanding for the future,
she released her Prisoner, upon condition, that he should daily visit her, the
same way as he had done that Evening, until they were resolved upon some
course, to free themselves absolutely from all the Governor's pursuits, and to
get out of his power. All which Camille having promised to perform, he took his
leave of her, and returned home.

Father Andrew, very impatient to learn what success Camille had had, did no
sooner see him, but with a cheerful countenance, he inquired how the
Marchioness had entertained him; but when Camille had informed him of the
mistake, the good Father's looks did so visibly change, that no body would have
took him for the same man; yet after some little pawse that the amazement had
caused; Well, Sir, said he, what is done cannot be helped, but to prevent
further troubles, let us make what diligence we can to find out the right
Marchioness, and to see what may be done with her, before you are obliged to
pay any further respects to Donna Barbara, to that purpose I will visit all the
Churches in the City, but I will find out the Marquess, or at least meet with
some body that will inform me of him: This being concluded on, they went to
Supper, and from thence to Bed, where Camille had full leisure to reflect on
the oddness of this last adventure, and of the means to prevent further
incoveniences, for which he thought no way better than a quick dispatch, in
getting the Marchioness at liberty.

In the morning Father Andrew goes to the great Church, where after some time
he sees the Marquess come in; he waits behind a Pillar, till he had finished
his devotions, and then traces him home, and now what is to be done, but to
return to Camille, and give him an account of the discovery, and consult
together, how to inform speedily the Marchioness of their being at Saragossa,
because that otherways Donna Barbara's expectations from Camille might spoil
all, if not answered according to her desires. After some time spent in
debates, it is concluded that the good Father should be disguised like one of
those women which go from House to House in those Countries, selling of Women's
little Trinkets; for there, they have not the great convenience of three
Exchanges, to pick and choose in, least they should make choice of such ware, as
their Husbands would be very unwilling to pay for. No sooner concluded but
executed, and while the one is dressing up like a very neat old Woman, to which
the withered beardless Face, did not a little contribute, the other was writing
a Note which was to be secretly conveyed to the Marchioness. The Father it
fitted with all necessaries, the Note is conveyed very smooth into a Glove, and
the brisk old Woman, being in a perfect readiness, goes to the Marquess House:
She meets with a Servant, of whom she inquires if she can be admitted with her
Ware to the Marchioness. I have such choice of curious things, said she, as I
am sure will please her very well. At this time she is not to be spoken with,
replied the Servant. That is, because that she knows not what excellent things
I bring, replied the old Woman: but if she did, I should not be here so long
without being called in; I tell you, replied the Servant, that she is now
busy, that the Marquess is at present with her, in her Chamber, and that
therefore you must come again some other time. At the word Marquess the good
old Woman was willing to be satisfied, to return, and to let the business alone
till some other time, when that bugbear were not in the way. In this resolution
she begins to retire, when the Marquess coming by from his Wife's Chamber, he
inquires what that Woman would have. It was now time to put on a good Face,
nothing but the height of confidence with a good courage can carry off the old
Woman, therefore she briskly answers; that she was come to show the Marchioness
some choice things, which she hoped would please her, that if he pleased to
order that she might be admitted, she was confident, that she should give the
Lady full content. The Marquess, who ever since the Pilgrim's last seizure, had
been somewhat more complaisant to the Marchioness than before, had a mind to
give his Wife some little present, out of this Woman's store; he therefore
turning back again, said, Come follow me: At the word, follow, our old Woman
did look upon her plot as been utterly spoiled, and was resolved not so much as
once to mention the Gloves wherein lay the Letter, nor to let them be seen. The
Marquess enters his Wife's Chamber, and tells her that he had brought her a
woman with some things, of which he would have her make choice. The
Marchioness, who was then somewhat out of humor, at the news of the Pilgrim's
second imprisonment, told him that she needed nothing for the present, and that
she should call some other time: The old Woman, who thought there could be
nothing done so long as the troublesome Marquess was present, was very willing
to retire, fearing very much a discovery; but the Marquess holding her back,
said, Nay, but I have a mind to present you with something; and taking the
Woman by the arm, he pulls her to the Table, and shuts the door of the Chamber,
bidding her lay open her Ware: The old Woman would have given all her Shop,
Clothes, and a finger to boot, had she been quit for that, to have been in
Camille's Chamber, but all the wishes in the world will not do, she was got in
too far to retire; and now she must make something of it, or be lost for ever;
In this extremity she displays her Merchandise; the Marquess presently ransacks
in it, and bids his Wife to choose what she liked best: She with a great
indifferency, merely to please him, takes what comes next to her hand, the
Marquess not pleased at it, does encourage her to look on all, and take what
she liked best; and with that tosses and tumbles the whole pack from top to
bottom: The old Woman had her Eye continually upon the tell-tale Glove, and
still as it came uppermost, was very diligent to change its Station, and remove
it a form lower; but at last the Marquess Eyes it, and finding it to his mind,
takes hold of it at one end, while the old Woman presently seizes on the other,
the Marquess pulls it, the old Woman holds it fast, and to get it again out of
the Marquess his hands, she gives him the other Glove, telling him, that that
which he had, had some fault in it, which should be mended if the other did
fit, which she would try; with that the Marquess lets go his hold, and is so
officious, that he will pull himself the other Glove on his Wife's hand, mean
time the old Woman fumbles about the other, not daring to venture the pulling
out of the paper, for fear of the Marquess's prying Eyes. The Marquess having
pulled on that Glove, which fitted and looked very well, he asks for the other;
the old Woman having no other way left to get off, presently takes the
Marchionesses hand, to pull it on her self, the Marquess will have the office
on 't, she persists in her will, and gets it on the Marchionesses hand, do the
Marquess what he could to oppose her; saying that she was ashamed to stand
still and see the Marquess thus take her work out of her hand, which obliged
the Marquess to desist, though grumblingly, and displeased at the over diligent
old Woman's opposition; she mean time pulls on the Glove, though not with so
much diligence and neatness, as had the Marquess, she busying her self at the
same time, in pressing the Marchionesses Elbow with her hand, and guiding her
Fingers to the Paper; the Marquess stood looking on with the greatest
impatiency in the World, having not power to desist any longer from showing his
dexterity, and abhorring the old Woman's bungling, just as the Marchioness was
sensible that there was something more than ordinary in that Glove, the
Marquess takes the old Woman by the arm, and very angrily he turns her away, to
take her employment from her; at which the Marchioness giving a shriek, Cried,
You have strained my Wrist; with that, holding her other hand with her
Hankerchief over her Glove and Wrist, she put by the over officious Marquess,
telling him that she would not have it touched till the anguish was over. This
put the Marquess quite out of humor, who fell a grumbling at the old Woman,
while that his Wife having bid one of her Servants to carry those things which
she had chosen, into her Closet, she followed her to lay them up; so soon as
the Woman had laid them down, she sent her back for to know what they came to,
and to ask of the Woman if she had not some Essences, mean time she takes out
the Paper in which she read.

Your Pilgrims Agent, here demands,
That you would send him your commands.
And having found a short piece of Black-lead Pencel, in one of the Fingers, so
soon as she had sent the Woman of another errand, while her Husband was paying
the old Woman, she writ on the other side of the paper,

This Night, in the Garden, under my Closet Window; and having conveyed it into
the Glove again, she unripp'd some seams between the Fingers, and gave it the
old Woman, telling her, that she should get it mended; the Marquess was going
to lay hands on it again, but the old Woman being too nimble for him, thrust it
into her pack amongst her other things, saying, that she would bring it again
sometime that day, or the next (...) farthest, and taking leave she was going
off, when the Marquess seizing her by the Hand, and pulling her back again, did
give her and his Wife a fresh allarm, but it lasted not long; for the busy
Marquess did soon put them out of it, in bidding the old Woman to leave the
money which she had received for the Gloves, till she came again, the money
being readily rendered by the good Woman, she presently went her way, with an
assurance of returning again with the Glove mended to their likeing.

The good Father Andrew being got off thus, with flying Colors, was so puffed
up with good success, that he thought nothing could be above his achievement,
he was so prepossest with that good opinion of himself, that going out of the
Chamber, in lieu of taking his leave after the manner of the Matrons, he was
for bowing forwards with his hands a cross, in a Fryar-like Salutation; but
rectifying himself, before notice was taken, he got off with credit, and was
not long before he returned to Camille; where in giving him a full account of
his good success, he was not wanting in expressing the Marquess's
over-diligence, and to trumpet forth his own praises in his dexterous avoiding
of all the Husband's troublesome pryings into the mysterious part of the late
contrivance; and giving the Glove to Camille, he found in it what the
Marchioness had writ.

Business being brought to that pass with the Marchioness, Camille's next care
was to pacify still more and more Donna Barbara, and so prevent her from
spoiling his designs, which she might easily do, but with one word writing to
the Marquess; if she had but the least suspicion imaginable of Camille's,
correspondency with her Rival. This made him, so soon as it was Evening, to
render her a visit. She received it very kindly, and they were entered upon a
very amorous entertainment, when the Maid came running into the Chamber, and as
well as her fright and have would permit her, she told them, that there was a
Person of quality at the Street-door, that was setting a Guard upon it; after
that he had done the same at the backdoor, with a charge to let no body go out
of the house, on what account soever, without his further orders. Presently
people were heard to come up stairs, which made her to run out of the Chamber
again, and to lock the door after her; one asked aloud which was the Chamber,
which being told, and finding it shut, it was broke open; yet not so suddenly,
but that Donna Barbara, had time to convey Camille into her Closet, where he
resting on his knees and hands, she spread a Carpet over him, and gently
seating her self upon him, as on a stool, in that posture she waited (with the
Closet door open, that she might the sooner be perceived) till those persons
were entered her Chamber.

The Door being broken down, in rushes the Governor of Barcellona: After he
had left two Servants to guard the Chamber door, with a strict charge to let no
body go out of it. So soon as the Governor had espied his Wife, he cried out,
Oh! are you there, Madam? I must find out your Minion also, if he is here, that
I may pay him my respects: This said, he searched all over the Chamber and
Closet, flinging the Bed and Bedding all over the Room, and leaving not one
hole or corner unvisited, not so much as a Window, or the Chimney escaping him;
but having not found what he sought after, he returns to his Wife, and taking
her off of her seat: Come, Madam, since I am so unfortunate not to meet with
your devout Pilgrim, give me leave in his absence to supply his office, and to
lead you into some place more secure, than you find this to be: With that he
leads her out, giving a special care to the Servants to watch the Door till his
return, and to let no body in; then he conveys her into a Coach, and from
thence into a Nunnery, where he left her in the Care of the Abbess, who was a
Kinswoman of his Wifes.

He was returning to his Wifes Lodgings, to pack up all that she had left
there, when he espied the Marquess that stood at his Gardens back Door, they
would willingly have shunned one another, but not being able to avoid their
approaches, they were forced to Salute: The Marquess was very much surpised to
see the Governor of Barcellona at Saragossa, where, when he came first
himself, he did not design to stay above five or six days, only to view the
City. The Marquess having given the Governor, an account of his Wifes Health,
and enquired of his and his Ladies, the Governor gave him a brief account of
her late escape from him, which had made him to seek after her there, where he
had found her, but not the wicked Pilgrim, who he verily believed had debauched
her; at which the Marquess smiling, made answer, that he had done that work for
him three days since, and that he had sent him to Prison, where he was safe
enough. They finding themselves Companions in the same affliction, though there
were great odds; and that their Wive's zealous devotions to the holy Pilgrim,
could not be-allay'd so easily, the Marquess was invited by the Covernour, to
go with him to his Wife's late Lodgings, where he was to return, that they
might pass away the residue of the Evening together, and consult how to rescue
their Wives, for the future, from that Devilish Pilgrims temptations. The
Governor did prevail, and took Coach to that purpose.

The Governor returned with the Marquess to his Wife's Lodgings. They were not
long before they fell into a very serious discourse of their Wives; and amongst
other things, the Marquess was saying, that if ever that Pilgrim should get out
of Prison again, he would certainly be the ruin of them both, to their own
shame and confusion: That therefore they were so to order the business, as to
have him condemned and executed, which would be a certain way to be for ever
rid of him; all this was in the hearing of Camille, with diverse other things
and contrivances, in which they did spend a considerable time.

Mean while, diligent Father Andrew, who was always upon the watch, having had
an account of all that had passed, and not hearing a word mentioned of Camille,
who was not returned to his Lodgings, he concluded that he had hid himself in
Donna Barbara's Chamber, whence he durst not adventure forth, so long as the
Governor should be there; he ponders within himself, what he had best to do
for his deliverance, before the time of the Night were come, that they were to
repair under the Marchionesses Window in the Garden; he returns to his Lodgings
the better to contrive the business. A little after there came a Messenger from
the Prison, with a Letter directed to the Marchioness, without a name, lodging
in such a Street. When the Marquess had caused the Pilgrim to be committed, he
had given charge, that in case the Prisoner should desire Pen and Ink, that it
should be granted to him, but that whatsoever he should write to be sent forth,
should be immediately brought to him: This had been done accordingly; but the
Messenger being at the Marquess's House, had been sent here after him. The
Marquess having received it, opened it, and read as follows.

Madam,
WHen I was first committed, I made no doubt but that you would take some care
for my immediate release; the want of which makes me now trouble you with these
lines, to let you know, that notwithstanding the late favors that you were
pleased to bestow on me, I am become one of the most miserable Creatures
imaginable; for though through your generous bounty, I have wherewith to keep
me from present want, yet the loss of my Liberty is such a Misery, as cannot be
expressed. Seeing that it was in your Service that I got this affliction, I
humbly entreat you to endeavor forthwith my Enlargement, and to take me from
suffering under those sad effects of your Jealous Husband's too severe hand,
without which I shall quickly be in my Grave, by which means you will lose the
most humblest of your Servants.


This Letter being read, the Marquess and the Governor could not but admire at
once, both the simplicity and impudence of this Pilgrim; yet the Governor did
take notice, that this was not writ in such a style as the Pilgrim used to
express himself when he was at Barcellona. The Marquess made answer, That it
was probable his imprisonment, and the thwarting of his designs, without hopes
of redress, had rendered him so melancholic as to discompose his mind. While
they were thus spending their Verdict and descanting on the Pilgrims Letter,
there was another brought to the Marquess, which having opened, he read as
follows.

My Lord,
THere is a Friar of St. Dominicks Order here, who is very importunate to speak
with the Pilgrim, and will not be denied; notwithstanding his Character, I
would not admit him to the Prisoner without your order: I have inquired his
name, which he was very unwilling to discover; yet in hopes to speak with the
Pilgrim, he has told me that he is called Father Andrew, he is very pressing,
and I shall keep him here in discourse and hope, till I hear your answer, which
you will be pleased to send back by this Messenger to me.


This last Letter did so surprise them both, that looking on one another, they
remained mute; at last the Governor said, that they ought not to let slip so
fair an opportunity, of punishing their Wive's diligent Mercury. No, no, reply
d the Marquess, that would be a great oversight, I will immediately go to the
Prison and have him seized on, and I will along with you, said the Governor;
for I long to see how strangely he will be surpised at the sight of us: Thus
you see, replied the Marquess, that the wicked seek their own ruin, and bring
themselves to receive the punishment due to their offenses. Well, replied the
Governor, now is the time to secure both these wicked men, that they shall
never more be in any Capacity of debauching our Wives. Let Us be going, replied
the Marquess, and lose no time, for fear he be gone before we come, and that we
lose this fair opportunity of seizing him: with that they did immediately take
Coach to the other end of the City, where was the Prison.

They were no sooner got out of the House, but the politic Father Andrew, of
whose contrivance the Letter was, came in, he goes up Stairs, and having ask d
which was the Chamber that belonged to the Governor of Barcellona; it was
showed him by one of the Guards, he draws near it, and is repulsed, and told,
that no body was to go in there: I know, replied the subtle Father, that your
Orders are to let no body in, but you are not hindered from letting any Person
go out, especially when I am sent on purpose by the Governor for them. There
is no body there, replied one of the Servants; It were strange indeed, replied
the Father, then they are gone out before I came for them, and yet I have made
what haste I could from the Governor and the Marquess; I came here directly,
and have not met by the way that Person that I come for: But I lose time, and
the business presses. Signiour Camille, continued he with a loud Voice, you
must leave off your watching, for he that you wait for has been a Prisoner
these three days, and you must immediately go along with me to the Governor,
that stays for you; come forth and I will deliver you my Errand punctually:
This was spoken with so much confidence by the Friar, that the Servants
presently opened the Door, and forth came Camille; Now, Sir, continued Father
Andrew, I must tell you that there is one Father Andrew at the Prison, that
would speak with the Pilgrim Prisoner; the Governor was going to seize on him,
but he has better considered on it, and therefore has sent me for you, that you
should go first, and bring him certain word, whether it be that Person that he
means, or not, whom he says you know very well. This did the good Father speak
with so much readiness, that Camille himself was startled at it; and the
Servants having heard the Governor and the Marquess discourse of it, before
they went forth, they made no scruple in the least to let him go: Camille and
the Friar got home to their Lodgings, where they had leisure to recollect
themselves, to laugh at their Cullies Credulities, and to prepare against the
time of going under the Marchionesses Window.

Mean time the Governor and the Marquess are carried with all the diligence
possible unto the Prison, contriving all the way how to punish this wicked and
most abominable Friar; at last they get thither, and presently inquire of the
Keeper where was the Friar. What Friar do you mean, replied the Keeper? Father
Andrew, Father Andrew, replied the Marquess hastily; I hope you have not let
him go, continued he? Never talk of that, said the Governor, where is he,
where is he? What have you done with him? said the Marquess. The Keeper amazed
at their earnest inquiries, stood staring sometime on one, sometime on the
other, without saying a word. Pray, says the Governor to him, convey us where
he is, and if you can, so as that we may see him without discovering our
selves: Nay, it were much better, now I think on it, said the Marquess, to place
us so as that we might hear him discourse with the Pilgrim, and not be seen.
Doubtless, replied the Governor, but we should make some notable discoveries,
and therefore go let him into the Pilgrim, while we stay here till you come
back to lead us where we may hear them. Let it be as of your own accord, said
the Marquess, and be quick, for I long to hear what new piece of Villainy they
are consulting of; at this they both pausing a while, wondering that the Keeper
did not stir, he had time to say, I assure you, My Lord, that you have both so
surpised me, I know not what to think, much less what to say; neither do I
scarce know where, or who I am; I have heard you all this while, speak of a
Friar and a Pilgrim, but I know no more what you mean by it, than the Man in
the Moon. Then rubbing of his Eyes, and yawning, Let me see, continued he, am I
asleep still, or do I wake? Though I was sleeping when you came, certainly I am
now awake, or how should I stand thus else, continued he strutting, and speak
thus to you; nay, see and hear you too? And yet I do protest to you, that I
know nothing at all of any Friars being here: At this the Marquess showed him
the Letter, and said, did you not send me this Letter, about half an hour
since? Who I, send a Letter, replied the Keeper? I was then dreaming of other
things, I can assure you, continued he; and I have neither writ, sent, or so
much as thought of a Letter, this day, except that which I sent you from the
Pilgrim a while since; then looking on the Letter, which the Marquess had given
him; neither is this my hand writing, alas! I could never write a quarter so
well: This the Keepers story, made the Marquess and the Governor, in their
turn to be mute, and look on one another; they concluded that this had been
some trick of their Wives, not without some designs: As for mine, said the
Governor, she is at present safe enough from doing any mischief of that
nature: And mine, said the Marquess, has not had a Pen and Ink since I have
Married her, except the Devil has supplied her with one of late; I rather
believe, that it is that cursed Friar himself, that has thus shamed us: But to
what purpose, replied the Governor? To nothing that is good, you may be
certain, answered the Marquess; and for my part I will hasten home, where I
think my presence more necessary than here; with that they took leave of one
another, and went each to their own home.

So soon as the Governor was returned, he inquired of his Servants who had
been there, they answered him, no body, but the little ancient Gentleman whom
he had sent to fetch the other Gentleman, that had been left in the Chamber to
watch for the Pilgrim. How, said the Governor, a man left in the Chamber to
watch for the Pilgrim? How? said the Governor, a man left in the Chamber, and
now gone out, while you two stand at the Door and permit it? With that drawing
his Sword, You Villains, continued he, I Will be the death of you both; how many
were there to force him from you? What resistance have you made? And if you
were overpowered, show me your wounds? Where is the blood that you have
spilled in making opposition? At these high words, both the poor Fellows,
falling on their knees, gave him an exact account of the whole passage, and
with tears in their Eyes, asked him pardon for their Error. The Governor
presently entered the Chamber, and while he was considering where this person
could be hid, he was thinking also who it should be; at last, he concluded that
there was some great mistake in the business, and did believe that the Marquess
had lighted on the wrong Pilgrim, who he had secured, while the damned right
one had been hid in his Wives Chamber, whence his special agent, that wicked
Father Andrew, had got him out by framing of that Letter: This did set him in
such a rage, that he would not so much as give the Marquess an account of his
thoughts, which he concluded to be certain; but the next morning early he went
to the Monastery, whence having taken out his Wife, he returned with her to
Barcellona, where he used her as he pleased.

The Marquess, all this while, had not been wanting in diligently inquiring of
all the Servants, who had been there, and examing of the two Guardian Women, so
tormenting them, that one of them named Zora, being tired out with his
frivolous repeated questions, and fretting at his unreasonable threatening of
them, for letting his Wife have the convenience of writing, she knowing her
self innocent, did at last tell the Marquess, that there was no Hell, like
living with a Man so strangely jealous as he was, which did set the Marquess in
such a fury, that he struck her, which made her run into the Marchionesses
Chamber with Tears in her Eyes: The Marchioness asked what was the matter, to
which Zora answered; That, Madam, which in a short time shall turn to your
advantage. The Marchioness who had designed to sit up till the Marquess was
returned, least that he going his usual rounds before going to Bed, should meet
with the Letter, which his Wife did intend for Camille; hearing that the
Marquess was coming to Bed, she went and dropped the Letter, so retiring, she
put her self in Bed; while the Marquess was undressing he did nothing but
grumble, fret, and threaten, in a word, the false Letter had set him quite out
of humor.

The hour come, which was about the darkest part of the Night, Camille got over
the Wall with the active Father Andrew into the Garden; for though the good
Father had no great business there, yet he loved so well the sport, that
Camille could not prevail with him to stay at home: They were not got half way
the walk, which led from the Garden Door to the House, when Father Andrew,
whose Eyes were always upon the watch, did perceive something that moved at the
other end; this put him to a stand, and made him take Camille by the arm, and
hold him back: Stay, said he, I think I see some body that is waiting for us,
let us retire while we can, for fear of a surprise: Camille looking earnestly
also, said, I do see something move, but it is not tall enough to be a man, and
I rather believe that it is some Dog, which though not so dangerous, may, I
fear discover us, and spoil our design. Father Andrew was for a retreat, and
Camille was leaving the broad Walk, and striking into the lesser Allies to go
round by the Wall side to discover what it were, without being perceived; but
the good Father having no inclination to venture any further, said, that he was
sure it was no Dog, and that he would stay under the next Tree, while Camille
should go make the discovery. Camille agreed to it, and went by the Wall side
till he came near enough to distinguish that it was a Monkey that had broke
lose from some of the Neighborhood, who having found the Letter that the
Marchioness had thrown there, he had torn it open, and was playing with it.
Camille was glad that it was no worse, yet knew not which way to go about to
get the Letter from that little unlucky Creature; he was still drawing nearer
to him, when the Monkey did perceive him, which made him chatter so fast and so
loud, all the while tearing of the Letter, that Camille thought there was no
time to lose, therefore he suddenly rushed upon the Monkey, who being too
nimble for him, did run away, squeeking so loud that the Marquess being alarmed
at it, did presently get to the Window, with a Pistol in his hand, and
perceiving Camille, who was very busy in gathering up the pieces of Paper,
that the Monkey had scattered, he discharged it at him, but to no effect.

Father Andrew, at the noise of the Pistol, did run as fast as he could toward
the place where they had left the Ladder of Ropes hanging, by which they had
got over, but meeting by chance with the Monkey, which he took for a Man, his
fears magnifying all objects, he ran counter, and knowing no better way,
finding himself near a high Tree, he presently climbs to the top of it, where
he hid himself amongst the thickest of the Leaved Branches.

Camille having gathered all that he could find of the Pieces of Paper, made
what haste he could toward the place of retreat, and not seeing Father Andrew,
as he passed by, he concluded that he was gone, which made him to follow after.
By this the Marquess and his Servants were got into the Garden, with Guns,
Pistols, Swords, and other Weapons, they search every Bush, Hedge, and Corner,
but find no body, the Marquess sees a piece of Paper lying upon the ground, he
takes it up, and puts it into his Pocket to peruse some other time; he was too
busy then, neither had he light enough to do it. Some run to the back Gate,
which is found shut, they perceive some Mortar and Stones newly dropped from
the Wall which made them conclude that they were Thieves gone that way out, so
that they were all returning in.

As the Marquess was passing under a Tree, he was hit on the Hat with a piece
of withered Branch, at which he presently looks up, and perceives something to
move; he rejoices within himself already, that he had found the Robbers of his
Honor, and commands some of his Servants to get up, and fetch them down, dead
or alive. While he was pondering what Torments and Racks he should make them
endure, some of the Servants being got up, they heard a strange chattering, for
the Monky who had caused the dried bough to fall, finding himself pursued so
close, made such a noise as presently gave to understand to his pursuers the
Nature of the Beast. But the Marquess's distrustful Nature, making him suspect
that it might be some Counterfeit, he commanded his Servants to pursue and take
him. The unlucky nimble Creature, having no other way to avoid his pursuers, he
leaps from the Tree he was on to the next, where sat the most distressed Father
Andrew, whom the foolish Creature taking to be one of his Enemies, he began to
squeek and chatter more than ever: Those that were upon the abandoned Tree
having given notice of their Preys removal; the Marquess sent some up the other
Tree, on which both the delinquents were retreated; one of the climbers went so
high after this little troublesome Animal, that he perceived a certain pair of
Legs, that did not belong unto so small a Beast as a Monkey. The poor Father
now perceiving that he was discovered past all hopes of Redemption, was
recommending his case to all the He and She Saints, besides the Eleven thousand
Virgins; when his fierce Enemy cried, Oh! have I found you out? I Will fetch you
down presently: This dreadful threatening did set him into such an horror and
fear, that it caused him to drop down something, which his anguish would not
let him retain any longer, just in the nick of time when the fellow was gaping
and looking up; which did light so full upon his Face, that it stopped his Mouth
from telling any more tales for that bout; and blinded him so, that going to
clear his Eyes with his Hands, he was so unfortunate as to let go his hold,
which made him fall to the ground, whence he was carried away speechless. This
sad accident put an end to the Chase; for the Marquess thinking that there was
too much mischief done already, in the pursuit of a Monkey, did give order to
all his Servants to retreat, and let the Beast alone, which they presently
obeyed, taking the dead along with them.

Father Andrew having overheard the sad accident, that had been the cause of
his sad and safe deliverance; after he had returned thanks to all his
Advocates, (though he thought his own industry very instrumental in it, which
made him ever after, to rely very much on his own merits) finding the Coast
clear, he comes down the Tree, and goes toward the place, by which he had come
in, whereon he was looking very melancholic, having no hopes of getting out of
the Garden, when he perceives a head peeping over the Wall: at the first his
fears were going to make him to run to his old post again; but presently
recollecting himself, he thought that it could not be any one of the House;
because that whoever did look over the Wall, must be in the Street: A little
after he perceived it was Camille; who having not found him at home, was
returned with the Ladder of Ropes to get him off, if he was not taken. The poor
Father did presently get over, and without speaking on^ word, he run as fast as
he could to his Lodgings, where he gave Camille a full account of the whole
adventure, while he was fitting every bit of Paper to its right place, which
having done, he read it as follows.

THE news of your double deliverance, has been no less welcome to me, than the
knowledge of your continuing in the generous resolution of assisting a poor
afflicted Woman, wherein you express so much Charity, as sets you right in my
Opinion, in spite of all that had been laid to your charge; some new Visions
which my Husband has had, since the industrious old Woman was here, has so
changed that fortunate good humor that he was in then, into a furious malice
against me; that by some words which the excess of his passion drives forth, I
have some Jealousies that he may attempt something on my Life, or at least
remove me very speedily, where I shall be miserably mewed up for the rest of my
days, without any future hopes of a deliverance; I have no way to divert this
sudden and dangerous storm from falling on me, but by sheltring my self under
the pretense of a fit of sickness, which may retard his designs, till you have
leisure and convenience to work my Liberty. I wish you could find a way to play
the Physician as well as I shall act the Patients part, then I should hope that
my freedom were at hand, and then you might with justice expect from me a
reward suitable to your Signal Services, which could be no less, than all that I
am able to dispose of, without any prejudice to my honor and to virtue.
Endeavor to --


When Camille came to that word, Endeavor, which intimated, by the abrupt
breaking off, that there was something wanting of the Letter; which he having
left behind, had doubtless fallen into the Marquess his hands; that joy, which
had been screwed up almost to an excess, by every Character of the Letter, was
instantly dashed to pieces, at the want of that small piece of Paper, which he
fancied did contain great matters, and of such weight peradventure, as might
enlighten the Marquess to the great prejudice, if not total ruin of the whole
design: while he was thus left in the dark, he gave to that word a thousand
interpretaons, all of very dangerous consequences. He called himself a thousand
fools, for leaving any pieces of Paper behind him; he as many times cursed that
mischievous Creature, that had been the cause of it, and as often he called
himself unhappy and miserable; but all this would not bring the wanting piece
of Paper to the rest; and that which added much to his sorrow, was the coldness
which he found in Father Andrew, as to any further attempts in his behalf; the
very thoughts of the late dangers, in which he had so lately been engaged, did
make him die with very fear; not knowing but that the piece of Paper that was
wanting, might inform the Marquess of the mystery of the Glove; so that Camille
had much ado to buoy him up in that Sea of fears and perplexities, wherein the
dejected Father was almost overwhelmed; yet after that Camille had read the
Letter, and assured him, that there could be no such sense attributed to that
word, representing to him, the caution with which the Marchioness did always
accompany all her actions, and the utter ruin of all his hopes, if he should
relent, and be heartless; but when he understood what advantages and preferment
Camille did promise him, if the business were once accomplished, with the
Golden earnest which Camille did instantly give him in hand of it; he was quite
vanquished, his hard-heartedness did vanish with his fears, so that he promised
not to forsake so bountiful a Friend, in time of need; No, said he, it shall
never be said, that Father Andrew did once undertake an amorous intriegue, and
left it off before it was accomplished, especially acting for a Patron of
power, and willingness to protect me from all troubles and inconveniences; with
that, calling for a glass of Wine to cheer up his Spirits, and stay his
stomach, till breakfast was ready, he drank to Camille, a Health to the
beautiful Marchioness, and to their good success; Camille was not backwards in
giving him all the encouragements that he could imagine; a little after,
breakfast was up, and they having eaten, drank, and discoursed merrily, they
laid themselves to rest, till it was time to return with the Glove.

Mean time the Marquess was possessed with a more violent rage than ever. The
Fellow that was carried in dead, after the administering of some Cordials and
bleedings, coming to himself again, had declared, that he had seen a Man on the
very uppermost branches of that Tree, off of which he had fallen, who casting
something in his Eyes, while he was looking up, had caused him to let go his
hold, which was the occasion of his fall, just when he was giving notice of his
discovery. The Marquess had presently sent diverse Servants to search every Tree
in the Garden, while he himself visited all the underwoods; all to no purpose,
the Featherless Bird being flown long before; so that being returned to his
Wife's Chamber, he had given a full vent unto his fury, with such threatenings,
which tended to the giving her of a Spanish Fig, that there were causes to fear
some such sad effect, at some time or other. This did strike such a terror in
the Marchioness's mind, that she had no occasion to counterfeit, for she fell
into a fever, though not very violent. Then she took a full resolution, in
order to save her own life, to make use of the Pilgrim's offers; though she had
once been in the mind to refuse them, fearing that he should expect, as a
reward, that which she could not, nor ought not to give.

This sudden illness of the Marchioness, did make the Marquess, so soon as the
fury of his passion was over, to send for a Physician, by the solicitation of
Zora, which were joined to her Ladies desires; yet with so much discretion,
that the Marquess took no further notice of it. A Servant was going for a
Doctor, when at the Street-Door he met with the old peddling Woman, who was
come to bring back the Glove. Who desired to have it delivered to the
Marchioness; the Servant answered, that it could not be now, because that she
was fallen very ill of a sudden of a Fever, and that he was sent to seek for a
Doctor; but that being a Stranger, he knew not where to go. Alas! a-well-a-day,
said the old Woman, I am heartily sorry for it, and she has been so good a
Customer to me, that I will bring you to the most eminent Doctor in Town; but
he is a great Humourist, and a Man of very few words; and you must let me alone
to persuade him to go. The Fellow, glad of the opportunity, goes with the brisk
old Woman, who returns to Camille, and leaving the Fellow below, while she goes
up to persuade the famous Doctor; she runs up to Camille, and informs him of
the business, then presently going down to the Servant, she told him, that he
should return home, and tell them, that a Doctor would be with them immediately;
and withal give him the Glove to deliver to some of the Marchioness's Women,
with which the Fellow returned home, very well contented.

Father Andrew having thus acted the second part of the old Woman, he returns
up to Camille, very glad that he had quitted his hands of that dangerous Glove;
he presently advises Camille to write his mind, that he might give it to the
Marchioness, while he felt her Pulse, and that he would go to some Jew-broker,
and hire what was necessary to make a Doctor of Camille; Camille presently
falls a writing, and Father Andrew goes, and in a trice eturns again, with all
things fitting, Camille havng written these few lines.

Part of your Letter was lost, I fear your Husband has found it; I am come to
receive new orders, all delays for the future will be of dangerous
consequences, therefore conclude on something against I visit you next, and I
shall act accordingly.


He inserted in them these following lines.

Beauty, Madam, is not purely Ornamental, it has its other lustres and
advantages likewise, which speak its celestial origin, and renders it as as
admirable, as it is Divine; as its powerful influences, which do produce such
wonderful effects do daily verify. With what eagerness has it made the greatest
Conquerours, in all Ages, to prostrate themselves before it, and to lay their
Trophies at the Feet of her Altars, leaving all their concerns unregarded, to
give themselves wholly up to the admiration of its excellency? With what
precipitation have the greatest Monarchs descended from their Thrones, to pay
homage unto its Imperial Greatness? No Rank, Quality, or Condition, escapes its
power, Madam. The Priests have desisted addressing their vows and Pray-to their
neglected Deities, to offer at her Shrine, their Incense and Adoration. And the
Grave Philosophers have laid aside their numerous Volumes, to give themselves
up wholly unto the Contemplation of its Causes, and Effects; while the whole
Creation stands in an amazement at the Glory thereof. Heroes will readily
change their Swords for Palmers Staves; Kings and Emperors will Convert their
Scepters into Shepherds Hooks; Priests will turn their Bloody Sacrifices, and
Enthusiastic Raptures, into fragrant Offerings, and melodious Lays: Sour
Philosophers, will neglect their more crabbed part of Learning to Dream of
Elizuim Fields; all Conditions will forget their Interests, and transform
themselves into all manner of Forms, to render themselves agreeable, and
obsequiosly subservient to its Commands.

It is true, Madam, that like unto other Divinities, Beauty does make use of
secondary Causes, to work those wonderful Effects. But it chiefly employs Love,
that powerful Agent, wherewith it fills all Hearts with such a Divine Flame, as
inspires and incites those whose Bosoms are warmed with it, to perform the
greatest actions: For, without it, Madam, whoever did attain to more than
common things? But when once a Heart is quickened by that subtle Fire, what
dangerous Enterprises, what difficult Attempts, and what intricate Designs are
there, which are not undertaken with as much celerity, and eagerness, as they
are performed with vigor and good success.

No wonder, Madam, if some Sparks of that Celestial Fire, having alighted upon
my prepared Heart, they have filled it with a most passionate desire to become
a votary unto the Altars of your excellent Beauty, to the exclusion of all
other Terrestial devotion. Deign therefore, Madam, to accept of the Offerings
which I make unto you of it, and be pleased to reward, in due time, it is
fidelity and perseverance, with some grains of reciprocal affection.


These lines which were both a Panegyric to Beauty, and a declaration of Love,
did raise such a tender vail of tincture over all the Lillies of the
Marchioness's Cheeks, as did almost termine into blushes, when she read them;
she guest at what the Pilgrim did aim, which at all other times would have
caused her to break all further correspondency with him, but as things stood
then, not knowing how to mend her self for the present, she was glad of any
opportunity, and to employ all sorts of Instruments; leaving to her self the
management of the consequences hereafter.

Camille was instantly fitted, while the good Father accoutres himself to
personate the Mule driver. They were just got ready, when news was brought up,
that the Marquess his Servant was come again for the Doctor: They go
immediately, the Servant leads the Van, our new vamp'd Doctor is in the Main,
and Father Andrew brings up the Rear; they come to the Marquess his Door, the
Doctor alights from his grave Beast, and is conducted up into the Lady's
Chamber, which was made so dark, because that the light did offend her Eyes,
and caused her Head to ache, that the Doctor was forced to be conducted to the
Bedside, by one of her Women; there he feels her Pulse, gives her the Letter,
and making as if he asked her some private questions, he steals a kiss from her
Hand, and another from her Lips, after which he retires at some little distance
from the Bed side; after which the Marquess, who had stood all the while near
the Window, came and accosted the Doctor, inquiring of him, how he found his
Patient, and what hopes there was; to which he made no other answer, than that
he would quickly go and prescribe for her; and that when she had taken what he
would send, he would be better able to give him an account; with that the
Marquess gives him his Fee, and away goes our Doctor.

The Marquess returning into his Wives Chamber from conducting the Doctor, he
is met by Zora, who tells him that the Marchioness would sleep, which made him
retire, and take along with him the other Woman, that their chat might not
disturb her rest.

Zora being left single with her Lady in her Chamber, she asks how she does,
and the Marchioness finding her self something better than she had been, told
her so, after which Zora falls down on her knees by the Bedside, and with
tears in her Eyes, she began to speak thus unto her Lady.

Madam, you may suspect, and with much Reason and Justice, that whatsoever I
shall say to you, may be to your prejudice, and with a design to entrap you,
and make you more miserable yet, than you are; and of truth I must needs
confess, that when I consider with what exactness I have observed and executed
your Husbands orders, even with that severity, which was beyond his
expectation, in which I have shown my self most inhumane toward one of my own
Sex though far above me in merits, and all sorts of respects; I then despair of
ever prevailing with you, to add faith to what I shall say. Therefore, Madam, I
must be forced to make use of something more than my bare words and relation,
to convince you of the sincerity of my present intentions: Yet thus much I have
to say for my self; that all the cruel severity that I have ever exercised
against you, has never proceeded from any particular aversion, hatred, or
prejudice, that I could have against your person, but from mere interest and
greediness of profit, which made me think, that the more severe I should
express my self against you, the better I should be rewarded by him that had
employed me; I was a poor miserable Creature ready to perish for want, when the
Marquess took me into his service, to be one of the instruments of his cruelty
toward you; and finding the comforts of a full Table, warm covering, and other
refreshments, besides the hopes of laying up something against my old age,
which is coming on very fast, and then reflecting with horror, on my late and
miserable condition; the apprehensions and dread of returning unto that woeful
state again, and the obligations which I thought that I owed unto my
Benefactor, were the true promoters of all the sorrows, troubles, and
afflictions which you have since sustained through my means, But, Madam,
continued she, there is no heart, though never so hard and cruel, but at some
time or other will relent, and give way to some sparks of compassion: since our
arrival at Saragossa, I have had now and then some remorse and pity of your
condition, which has sometime made me wish, that it were my Fortune to get a
livelihood by any other means, than such as did appear to me to be against all
the Rules of Humanity and Religion. This has made me to reflect upon the
severity, which you have met with on all hands (excepting Heaven, who has
plentifully recompensed you in all the accomplishments of the body and mind.)
First from your Parents, as I have been informed, who contrary to your
inclinations, did force you to marry a Person, whom you had declared you hated,
and for whom you could never have any Love; but on the contrary, that you
looked upon him as the greatest of your Enemies. Then, Madam, when I added to
this, that cruel Tyranny, that your jealous Husbands humor has caused him to
exercise over you, without the least occasion imaginable, since the very first
moment that he could call you his, and the exemplary patience, with which you
have endured all his unkindnesses: These things have made me diverse times wish
that you were freed from all that slavery in which you languish. But when
lately, as I was looking out of the Window, I did see that Pilgrim, who for
your sake has suffered so much already, to be dragged and haled to Prison, with
as little compassion, as it had been a Dog, it came within my thoughts, that if
this poor Gentleman did suffer so much for your sake, only for endeavoring to
free you from that misery you groan under; what did I deserve, that was one of
the unworthy instruments of your afflictions. Yet, Madam, this is not all; that
which has concluded this through Reformation in me, are those Words that your
Husband does frequently let fall in his passions of late; which speak as if he
would attempt something against your Life: Those indeed reached to my very
Heart. These things, Madam, have made me enter into some serious considerations
within my self, from them I am come to reflections, and those have brought me
to a firm resolution, rather to perish, than to live through so unworthy means
as I do at present; and to prefer your liberty and content, unto that prospect
which I had of making my Fortune, by continu- to be your Keeper: Not without
hopes, Madam, that if you should get out of your Bondage, through my
assistance, you would consider my Services, and make up my losses another way.
And now, Madam, to confirm what I have said, and convince you, that it proceeds
from a due sense of your miseries, which has produced a perfect and sincere
repentance in me; be pleased to look on this Paper: With that she gave the
Marchioness that Paper, which the Marquess had taken up in the Garden; telling
her that the Marquess, pulling out his Handkerchief, had dropped it, and that
she having taken it up, looked on it, and found it did so much concern her, she
kept it to give it her, notwithstanding the great inquiries and search which
the Marquess had made after it, she having flatly denied to him, that she had
seen any. The Marchioness having taken it, reads as follows.

-- The Doctor, as you have formerly the Pilgrim, give me an account of your
resolutions, by the counterfeit old Woman, when she brings me the Glove, who
was so excellently disguised, that I did not know the good Father Andrew, till
he had given me some signs of it.


That was enough to let the Marchioness know, that this was the latter part of
her Letter to the Pilgrim, which she had dropped out of her Window. This did
fully confirm her, that Zora was a true Convert, which did give her very great
satisfaction, but when she thought that her Husband had seen it, by which he
would discover the whole Plot, she visibly changed color, and was yielding to
her sorrow, when Zora told her that she should be cheerful, and hope the best;
for by the Marquess his silence, and not inquiring after the old Woman,
mentioned in that Paper, it is, Madam, eontinued she, an argument that he has
not read it, he would be so impatient otherwise to be revenged of Father
Andrew, whom he mortally hates, that he could not have forborne inquiring after
the old Woman an hundred times over; and besides, Madam, presently after he had
let fall the Paper, he seemed much troubled, and was looking up and down for
it; which makes me eonclude, that he has not read it. The confusion that he was
in at first, by the fall of the man from the Tree, having certainly put it out
of his Head, and when he had lost it then he thought of it again. But what
confirms me most of all, is, that when the Glove was given to my fellow
Servant, she was met by the Marquess, who only looking on it, did return it her
again, without speaking one word more, than asking whether the Woman was paid
for it.

That indeed is significant then said the Marchioness: and now Zora, I find
that I may breathe again; I believe your Conversion to be sincere and real; and
I do assure you, that you shall have no cause to repent it; but on the contrary
the sooner you serve me in my designs, of freeing my self from that slavery in
which I live, under continual apprehensions of losing my life, and perpetual
rereproaches and affronts without cause, the sooner you will feel the effects
of my bounty, which I assure you shall extend to the making you happy the
residue of your days. I wanted but a Woman to assist me in my resolutions; and
now I have thee, I shall willingly embrace the succor and assistance which the
Pilgrim does offer me. I did fear, before, to fall alone into the hands of a
young man, who was an absolute Stranger to me, and might peradventure take all
the advantages that could be against me, and expect such rewards as virtue
would forbid me to give: but now I will first make my own terms, and oblige him
to put me into those hands that I shall think fit; for my design being not to
wholly abandon my Husband, but to retire from his passions, till by some
Friends, a better understanding is wrought between us, and so return to him
again; if my deliverer should require more of me than my honor would permit me
to allow of, I should let him know his mistake; and this I have some reasons to
fear from his carriage in his late visit, under the habit of a Physician. Here
Zora did reiterate her Protestations, assuring the Marchioness that she needed
but to command, and she should find how readily she would obey, even with the
hazard of her Life. I am satisfied, continued the Marchioness, and to confirm
it to you, prepare your self to follow the Doctor, so soon as he shall return,
for I will send you after him with a Letter, in which I will declare my mind to
him, and make my own conditions, before I put my self into his hands, and you
shall bring me back a full and positive answer. Zora told the Marchioness, that
she would presently ask the Marquess leave to go forth, to see a Kinswoman of
hers, that lived in Town, and that under that pretense she would wait on the
Doctor. This being concluded on, the Marchioness bid her go call in her fellow
Servant to stay by her, while she should go get her Pen, Ink, and Paper, and
convey it into her Closet, where she would go and write the Letter to the
Pilgrim, under pretense of going to her devotions; Zora being gone, and the
other Woman come in her place, the Marchioness laid her self upon her Bed again
not so much to sleep, as to reflect upon Camille's boldness.

She feared that that Person who had the confidence to kiss her, so soon as he
came near her, while her Husband and her Guardians were in the Chamber, would
attempt more if he should once have her in his possession, and without company,
and her apprehensions did so increase, the more she did think on it, that
without that assistance which she did expect from the Convert Zora she had not
so much as writ to the Pilgrim further, than just to let him know that her mind
was altered, and therefore had no further occasion of his assistance, but she
thought that through Zora's aid she might so order things, as to continue
Mistress of her self, though got from her Husband by the Pilgrim's help,
especially making her conditions with him beforehand; therefore so soon as
Zora was returned, and had made her signs, that the writing tools were in a
readiness, the Marchioness pretending to go to her Prayers, did lock her self
up in her Closet, where she wrote the Pilgrim.

She had but just ended her Letter, when the Woman knocked at her Closet Door,
and told her that the Doctor had sent something for her to take. She presently
came out, saying that she was much better than she had been in the morning, and
that she hoped the worst was past for that present; but that however she would
take something for two or three days to prevent a return; and therefore desired
that the Doctor should come again at Night to give her a visit.

Father Andrew who was now the Doctors man, gave the Marchioness a Bottle of
Julep, and a Paper in which was written how she was to take it, and told the
Marchioness, that his Master had commanded him to assure her he would give her
a visit at night, to learn how her remedy did agree with her. The Marchioness
having something to say to the Doctors Man, she sent the Woman out of the
Chamber of an errand, bidding her send in her fellow Servant in the mean time;
the Woman was no sooner gone out, and the other come in, but the Marchioness
told the good Father that Zora was become one of them, that she would send her
to the Pilgrim with a Letter before he should come to her at night, to inform
him of some matters, that therefore he should presently tell her where their
Lodgings were. The Father had but just informed her, when the Marquess was
heard coming to the Chamber Door, which made them to change their discourse:
the Marquess entered, and seeing the Doctors Man, and the Julep Bottle standing
upon the Table: What, said he, is this what the Doctor has ordered for my Wife
to take? and what direction has she? Father Andrew who was more fearful of
being known by his voice, than by being seen, because that so soon as they had
heard the Marquess coming they had drawn the Window Curtains, and gone to the
darkest part of the room, he was wiping his face, in lieu of answering, which
made the Marchioness, who guest at the cause of his silence, to answer that he
had given her directions; Let Us see them, said the Marquess; It was only by
word of Mouth, replied the Marchioness. I am of opinion, said the Marquess,
that my Wife should be blooded, and that it should have been the first thing
should have been done; I am sure she wants it, her blood is hot enough, too hot
I have reason to fear. The Marchioness not taking the least notice of what the
Marquess had said, made answer that she would have the man return presently to
his Master, and desire him to come again so soon as he could, and then that
they should consult about it. With this the Doctor's man, very glad of this
message, scraped a Leg, and did not stay to be bid once again; presently the
Woman that the Marchioness had sent out came in, and told the Marquess, that
there was somebody without, that would speak with him: This made him go see
who it was; mean time, the Marchioness under pretense to go make an end of her
Devotions, returned into her Closet, where having opened the Papers of
Directions, she found writ as follows.

Madam, I have had the advice of some able Physicians, and through their
Prescripts, I have got this cooling pleasant Julep: Which if you please you may
make use of, or else dispose of it other ways. I fear very much, that we lose
that time which, peradventure, we may never recover again: therefore send me
word, what you have resolved upon, and what it is I must do for your Service.
If you have not now the opportunity of sending me your mind, get it ready writ
against I come at night to visit you, I choose the darkness for fear of some
discoveries.


In this Paper there was another, which the Marchioness did hastily unfold, for
fear of being interruped, and in it she found written as follows.

TEll, me not beauteous Cloris, tell not me,
Of the strict Guards on the Hesperian Tree,
The brave adventuring at the tempting Fruit,
Is when the Dragon is most watchful to it;
And dangers, Cloris, in what I adore,
Whets my ambition and I dare the more;
By what sweet Stealths did I hastily sip
Celestial Nectar from your Hand and Lip,
While he that might even surfeit with those Blisses,
Never knew the quintessence of such soft kisses,
Kisses, which made my heart so fiercely glow,
That 'twill not cool again, till quenched in Snow,
That blood warm Snow, which on your Bosom lies
Unthaw'd, though fallen so near those Suns your Eyes;
Then over your beauties I would careless stray,
In those Meanders even lose my way:
For if it were my hap so lost to be,
Where is that Mortal would not envy me?
These Verses did sensibly touch the Marchioness: Camille's confident action
had already raised a passion in her to his disadvantage. But that his glorying
in it, and the publishing of his future intentions, did make her to repent the
confidence which she had reposed in an absolute Stranger, and to begin to hate
that person, for whom she had so lately had an esteem; she tore in pieces the
Letter which she had written to Camille, thinking though it was reserved enough
that it had not that severity in it, as she ought to make use of, to defeat
such presumptuous designs. Yet when she considered again, that without his
assistance she must continue to live miserable; and peradventure all her life
time without any hopes of relief, if she let slip this opportunity: she knew
not what to resolve; on the one hand, she adventured her self into the power of
a wild young man, who might make use of all the advantages that his fortune and
opportunity would give him, having no assistance against the unruliness of his
passions but what a poor silly Woman, as Zora was, could afford her; neither
did know but that she might easily be corrupted by Money, that had been once
before won by the same Allurements to become her Tormenter. On the other hand,
she had no other hopes of escape, nor no other prospect of getting for some
time out of the way of her incensed Husbands rage. She could not promise to her
self any other help but what she might expect from his assistance, which if not
so generous, and so disinteressed as she took it to be at first, was without
choice, and to be accepted of, or lose all hopes of future release: In these
perplexities, having for some time remaind bandying to and fro in her self a
thousand designs, she at last resolves to break all his measures, and to
disappoint him beforehand of the expect^tion of all other rewards, which he
might promise himself beyond what a modest grateful acknowledgement would
afford him, with the concurrency of her Purse. In this resolution she put Pen
to Paper, and writ her mind to him as follows.

Your late rashness, in taking those advantages, which at that time I could not
oppose, did something startle that confidence which I had reposed on your
assistance, which till then I had taken to be disinteressed and generous; but
your latter boasting in a vain ostentation, and presumptuous Declaration, of
what you would do, when I were once within your Power, has turned that good
Opinion which I had of you, into an aversion of all manner of aid, that can
come from so dangerous a Person as you seem to be: You strangely have mistaken
my intentions, which were but to withdraw my self for some time from the
dangerous effects of a Jealous Husbands ill grounded suspicions, till his
present furious passions were over, and that some accommodations had been made
to my future advantage. In this yours, or any other worthy persons succor, had
been most acceptable to me, had it been grounded upon honorable Principles. I
cannot attribute the timely discovery, which you have made of the contrary, but
unto the kind Heavens, who have been so careful in the preservation of my
honor, as to force you to this declaration of your ill intentions, which makes
me choose rather to venture my Life under the rage of an incensed Man, than my
honor under the power of a Person that threatens it beforehand, and at this
distance. Yet Life is sweet, and since that I ought to endeavor its
preservation, after those threatenings which have lately been given out against
it. If you will consent to these following Articles; on those conditions, I
shall accept of your assistance.

You shall engage in this business some Person of Quality of my Sex, in whose
hands you shall resign me and my Servant, so soon as I am in your Power; but if
your small acquaintance here will not afford it you, you shall convey me into a
Monastery of Women, in this City, where you shall leave me in the Custody of
the Lady Abbess.

You shall never make any mention of Love, without particular leave, or any
other reward for your Services, than may be expected from my Purse; but leave
me the sole Judge and Recompencer of your merits in my Esteem, Friendship, and
Affections, and to dispose of my favors as I shall think fit. Neither shall
you importune me with unseasonable and frequent visits, but by permission
likewise.

That at any time that I shall desire it, you shall readily and freely return
me back to my Husband, where you shall leave me.

That you shall take a Solemn Oath to perform punctually all these things,
without any equivocation, or Mental reservation: Except hereafter, at any time,
I dispense you from any particular Article thereof, by my express Order.

On these conditions, I shall accept of your offers, and reassume that good
Opinion which I once had of you.

The Bearer of this to you, is one of my Guardians, who is converted and become
sensible of the wrongs which I suffer: I would have you to trust her with all
our secrets; to consult with her, give her your Oath, and acquaint her with
your resolutions, I have cause to believe her true, therefore receive her into
our Designs.


The Marchioness having written this Letter, gave it secretly to Zora, who was
not long before she went with it unto Camille's Lodgings; where you may imagine
that she was joyfully received, Zora gave Camille the Letter, with an account
of her Conversion, and full resolution to assist them with her life, in the
freeing of the Marchioness from that slavery, under which she lived. Camille
having, according to his accustomed generosity, filled both Zora's hands with
Gold, he told her that it was but an earnest of what he intended for her, so
soon as the Marchioness were set at liberty; he read the Letter, which he had
no sooner done, but that he kissed it, and said, I do declare here to you both,
in the presence of Heaven, that I will exactly perform, and obey every
particular Article, and the whole that is enjoined to me in this Paper, by the
most beautiful Marchioness, so help me Goodness. Of this Declaration and
Promise, I do entreat you to inform the Marchioness. After this they were
contriving of some ways to get the Marchioness off; Camille was for getting of
her out at the Window in the Night time; but that was not found to be
convenient by Zora, who best knew how the Marquess did use to behave himself at
Nights, how diligently he did watch so soon as it was but a little darkish; so
that though she should have the opportunity to assist them at some time in her
fellow Guardians absence; yet it would be very difficult to escape the Marquess
his diligence. Father Andrew, in his turn, did propose some other expedients,
against which Camille objected. At last Zora said, that if they would but give
her that Nights time to consider of it, she made no question that by morning
she would, with her Ladies assistance, find out some way better than they had
yet proposed. You do not know, continued she, how ready our Sex is in
contriving of intrigues? it is in a manner natural unto us, we need but to lay
aside other concerns for a while; and in that time, though never so short, our
own inclinations will prompt us to amorous designs; I have one in my Head
already, which I could tell you presently, but I will take a little longer time
to digest it into better order than it is yet, and besides, I am unwilling to
propose any thing of that nature to you, without the Marchioness's consent. I
will therefore return to her, that I may get some convenient time to acquaint
her with it, and to have her advice and addition of contrivance, against you
come to give her a visit in the Evening. Camille approving of her discretion,
dismissed her, desiring her to be faithful and active, and that he would be
careful to gratify her, in an ample manner.

It was not long before that Zora got home, where she met with the Marquess,
who told her that he was glad to see her so diligent, and that seeing she had
been so, she should have his consent another time to go out; that he was sorry
for what his passion had made him do; but continue faithful to your trust,
added he, and I shall make you amends for it: at these words the cunning Gipsy
fell into Tears, and said, that she had deserved a better usage from him, in
her watchful care over her charge, and that there were many Women, that would
revenge themselves of such a wrong; but that she was such a low Spirited Fool,
that had not so much courage as a Worm, who would turn again when it was trod on,
though to little purpose; that she had no other way of satisfying her self, but
with taking a Dose of that drowsy Medicine Patience; then carrying her
Handkerchief to her Eyes, she seemed to be very much troubled; at which the
Marquess, pulling out of his Pocket a piece of Gold, he gave it her, saying,
Here, Zora, take this, and assure thy self, that for the future I shall be more
kind to thee, if thou will continue faithful to me; for I assure thee, that I
confide more in thee, than in thy fellow Guardian, of whom of late, I have no
good opinion. Well, Sir, answered Zora, since that you are so kind, and have a
better opinion of me than of my Companion, it shall not be without cause;
therefore prepare your self to hear of some discoveries from me e're long; but
then you must give me the opportunity, to be some time in private with my Lady
this Evening, that I may sift her: Yes, that thou shall, as long as thou will,
replied the Marquess, I will take order my self, to have thy fellow Servant
employed another way at that time. Well, Sir, replied Zora, and to begin to be
sincere with you, I must tell you that my Lady has a Black lead Pencil, which I
have not known of before this morning. How! replied the the Marquess, a Black
lead Pencil? And in the name of the Devil, how came she by it? That I know not,
replied Zora, except my fellow Servant has helped her to it. I do observe that
of late they are very great together; though not before me, for I never come
into the Chamber, but I find them talking, and so soon as they see me, they are
as mute as Statues. Oh Heavens! cried out the Marquess, for certain thou have
overheard some of their discourses; prithee good Zora tell me what thou have
heard: Truly nothing very significant, answered she, only here and there a
word, for they speak very low: and the Marchioness is as afraid of me, and
hates me as much as she loves my Fellow: But good now tell me some of those
words that thou have heard, continued the Marquess: what I can remember now, is
that they talked of a Letter lost, or torn, I know not well which, and of
Friars, Pilgrims, and -- Hold, hold, cried the Marquess, interrupting her, what
did thou name a Pilgrim? Yes, Sir, that word Pilgrim is very frequent in
their Mouths: O! the Devil, Hell, and Confusion! a Pilgrim? Why has the Devil
nothing else to do, besides possessing of Women, than to multiply Pilgrims, or
to slit one in several pieces? It is most certainly, I see it now, that that
Damnable Pilgrim, your treacherous Fellow, and the Devil himself are in league,
and hold a correspondency with that wicked Woman my Wife, notwithstanding all
my cares, the Woman's preciseness, the Pilgrim's imprisonment, and the Devil's
employ about debauching of other Women also. In good time have thou discovered
this to me, for which I shall reward thee most bountifully; one day more of
their hellish intrigues, and they had left us behind, for overtaking them
again: Then after a little pause: It must be so continued he, did thou not
^ame a Friar also? I think that I have heard them mention a certain Father,
replied Zora; Andrew, cried out the Marquess; I know not, said Zora, if the
Friar is the Father, or whether they are two distinct Persons; but if you will
have the curiosity to hearken your self to their discourses, I will so place
you, that you shall over hear some words, though they speak never so low; I
wish thou could do that, replied the Marquess, though I believe thee already;
yet that would strangely strengthen my belief, and the good opinion that I have
of thee; and should I once hear that that Woman should speak one word to my
Wife, but tending toward kindness, I would immediately turn her away: That I
would not advise you to do, replied Zora, till you were very certain that she
is false to you; what greater proof could I have of it, replied the Marquess,
than to be an Eye and Ear-witness to the business: Well I long to hear their
close discourses; that, Sir, you must not expect to do, said Zora, till in the
Evening after I have had some discourse with my Lady. Well, said the Marquess,
go, go, get thee to her, and sift her through Lawn; I will call away that
Gipsy, that thou may have the more opportunity to do it, go thou in, and send
her out to me, and saying this, he pushed her gently from him toward the
Marchioness's Chamber door.

The subtle Zora was no sooner come into the Ladies Chamber, but sent the other
out, telling her that the Marquess had something to say to her; and having shut
the Door, she gave the Marchioness an account of all that had passed between
the three Confederates, and how freely Camille had promised to obey her
commands, to the very least circumstance; to which she added this short
Encomium. I must needs tell you, Madam, that in my opinion he is a Person of
Quality and Honor, who though under a disguise cannot but show it in all his
actions; for he is doubtless, the most accomplished Gentleman in the whole
World, having in him in a high measure, all that can be desired for perfecting
of the most exact Cavalier imaginable; his courteous carriage, his obliging
expressions, comely presence, and his generous liberality, of which here is a
fair and ample demonstration, (showing the Gold that Camille had given her)
will make me think the time a thousand Years, till I see you free from your
Husbands jealous Tyranny, and under the safe Guard of so worthy a Person. From
this discourse she fell to speak of the Marquess, and gave the Marchioness an
exact account of what had passed between him and her self, and how bravely she
had cox'd him. And now, Madam, I am come, continued she, by his order to sift
you; but if you please to take a little of my advice, we will give my Fellow a
remove, punish your Husbands unreasonable Jealousy, and you shall have a very
Comical Revenge, all which shall tend to make a clearer way unto your
deliverance. I have engaged you, Madam, continued she, in a business, which if
but well managed will do all this and more: Prithee let us hear it, Zora,
replied the Marchioness? Why thus, Madam, said Zora, so soon as I am gone out,
and my Fellow Servant come in, I would have you to get into your Closet with
her, and there engage her into some discourse concerning Pilgrims, Friars,
Fathers, Letters, Jealousy, Liberty, and the like. For I have promised your
Husband, so to place him that he shall-over hear those private discourses,
which I have told him you frequently have with her, when I am out of the way;
and I have picked out your Closet Window for his stand: by this means he will
be so incensed against my Fellow Servant, that no question but he will
immediately turn her away, which will give us much more liberty and opportunity
than we have, to act and accomplish our designs. This pleased the Marchioness
very well, who said, but how shall I bring out those words to any purpose, so
that he nor she may not perceive the design? Madam, answered Zora, I will leave
you to consider of it, you that have so much wit and industrey, will presently
find out some expedient for it; be pleased but to give me your black-lead Pen,
which I promised to present your Husband with, and I am gone: The Marchioness
gave her the Pencil, of which she had no longer need, since that she had been
furnished with other writing Tools, and Zora went to give it to the Marquess.

Zora was no sooner out of the Marchioness's Chamber, but that the other Woman
was in, who found the Marchioness lain on her Bed: Zora went to the Marquess,
who received her with great demonstration of a longing desire, to learn what
she had to say to him, and what new discoveries she had made: Well, said he to
her, what news do thou bring me, and what success have thou had? The
Marchioness is so out of humor, replied Zora, because that I broke the
discourse which they had began in my absence, and which was not endeed when I
came into her Chamber, that do what I could, I have not been able to make her
enter into discourse. I have began to speak of diverse things, one after
another, thinking to engage her into talk, but after two or three words, she
lets it fall, so that I have lost my labor for this Evening; but she will not
be long silent, now that she has that Person with her, with whom she may freely
discourse, and lay open her heart; she will quickly regain the time that she
thinks to have lost with me, though she feigned to me that she had a mind to
sleep. Without doubt, said the Marquess, she will be very eager to be at it
with her Jewel, and now I warrant you that she is full of news to tell her,
therefore that I may lose no time, I would have thee to place me where I may
hear as much as I can possible of what they say: Sir, replied Zora, they
usually retire into the Closet, when they intend any private discourses,
therefore no place more fit for you, than the Closet Window in the Garden, it
is but standing upon something, and that will raise you to a sufficient height;
I will go and fit things ready for you to stand on, and come to you again: That
will do very well, replied the Marquess, and I like that place the better too,
because that there I shall not be interrupted by any of the Servants, for I
will lock my self up in the Garden, where through the obscurity of the Night,
none shall see me. That will do very well, answered Zora: With that she went to
prepare the Stage, on which the Marquess was to act the Eve-droppers part.

Zora scarce got out, but that the Marquess, who was very unwilling to lose one
word of his Wifes discourse with her Guardian, went immediately to his Chamber
door, to try if he could hear any thing from thence; but because that the
Marchioness was not yet prepared, she remaining still on her Bed silent, the
Marquess returned to his Chamber again to expect Zora; she mean time was busy
in fitting of things, but more earnest in contriving some way to punish this
jealous Man. She was not long before she returned, being ready to fit him on
all accounts. She acquainted him with it, telling him that she had been forced
to make use of an old Water-Tub that lay useless in a corner of the Garden,
over which she had placed some Boards and a Stool over them, that it would be
something difficult for him to get up alone, but that once up, he might stand
firm enough, that he should give her the Key of the back door into the Garden,
and that She would meet him that way. The Marquess had such a longing desire to
be at the sport, that he liked every thing that she did propose, he therefore
sent her away with the Key of the back door, while he himself went the fore way
into the Garden, where he locked himself in.

Zora mean time sends a Person whom she trusted to Camille's Lodgings with a
Note to give him notice, that if he would have some pastime, he should
immediately repair to the back door of the Marquess's Garden, where she would
wait for him, and where the Marquess was going to act a very pleasant Scene, as
she had ordered things. For she had fastened a Cord to one of the Boards over
the Tub, which having conveyed on the other side of an Hedge, where she was to
lie in wait; so soon as he would have heard enough to have made him mad, to
conclude the Comedy, she designed to pull that Cord, and of necessity the
Marquess must have fallen, that just upon that Camille should appear and make
an end of affrighting him, so that he should not know what had happened, nor how,
or by what means; but the Marquess's impatiency, and Camille's absence from
home, for he had then come forth in order to visit the Marchioness, did prevent
her; for so soon as the Marquess was got into the Garden, he could not forbear
endeavoring to get up of himself; he thought that each moment that he past
without listening, was so many lost sentences; and what did he know, but that
which would give him the greater light in their mysteries, would be the first
spoken, and that the rest would be but indifferent discourse; he goes presently
to work, and endeavors Doctor like to mount the Stage of himself, and without
the assistance of his merry Andrew; but wanting something to raise him a little
from the ground, to facilitate his first steps, which were something high, and
finding nothing more convenient than a roling Stone that was at hand; de draws
it where he would have it, he sets one of his Feet upon it, and the other upon
the Board that was over the Tub, which had in it some Water; he had but one
step more to make, which was upon the Stool, and having nothing to get hold of
to assist him, there he was at a stand, what he should do, but presently
fancying that he did hear them talk; he endeavors to get up by leaning against
the Wall, he pushes hard, and so hard at last, that the Board underneath the
Stool slipping aside, the Stool fell into the Tub, but he being very nimble
escapes it, and lighting on the roling Stone with violence, it yielded
forwards, which threw him back, with his Head forwards into the middle of the
Stool which was in the Tub of Water. There lay the poor Marquess with his Head
in the stinking muddy Water, up to the Shoulders, and they and his Arms so
pinion d in the Stool, that he could not help himself, but of necessity must
have been smothered in that filthy Bath. He endeavored to cry out for help,
but instead of that, he did make the most hideous noise that could be imagine d,
for his bubbling in the Water, whence he forced himself to cry out, and the
sound of the Tub, though not very deep, did render such a strange sound, that
nothing can be compared to it, but the roaring of a Bull, that had a hole in
his Windpipe. The noise, in fine, was so great, that it caused all the Windows
of the Neighborhood to be opened, and the darkness hiding the Object from
their Eyes, they all asked one another what was the matter; but at last the
noise growing less and less, as his Strength and Spirits did decay, every body
retired, and shut their Windows again.

The poor Marquess was in this condition just giving up the Ghost, when Zora
came to him, who presently, though strangely surpised and affrighted, did with
much ado pull the Stool out of the Tub, and the Marquess with it, who having
laid on the ground, there he remained dead; she was upon the point of running
away by the back Door to give her Lady notice of it, but she fancied that he
breathed a little; this made her change her mind, and she was for some time in
a Balance, whether she should assist him and save his Life, or let him go, and
carry along with him all the Marchioness*s troubles, so put an end to all their
Plots; but at last good Nature partly prevailing, and the desires that she had
in making more sport, and being further employed, besides, the Rewards that she
did expect, and not knowing to what consequences this his sudden Death might
draw; she stooped to him, and did so chafe, rub and handle him, that as he lay
with his back across the Roling Stone, his Head hanging down, he at last
vomitted up a large quantity of that nasty stinking Water, which he had
swallowed most plentifully, which was followed with a great groan and a little
after with a Jesu Maria: This did so encourage the industrious Zora, that with
the continuance of her most favorable assistance; the poor man having emptied
his Stomach of more of his Evening draught, he came to himself as to sit up;
she inquired how he did, and how he happened by this accident, but he was so weak
with drinking, so sore with struggling, and so hoarse with endeavoring to be
heard, that he only told her, by being too hasty; and a while after, bidding
her to lead him up to her own Chamber in private, he after that remained silent.

Zora having lifted him up upon his Legs, and taken out of his Pocket the Key
of the Garden-door, she led him under the Arm without light into her Chamber,
where she laid him upon the Bed; he had no sooner been let go upon it, but that
he fell a giving up the residue of the raw Candle, and calling for a little
Wine, he fainted away. He was presently supplied with some, which brought him
to himself again; he gave her his hand, that she might help him to sit up,
after which be gave her a short account of his disaster; which he concluded
with a great demonstration of sorrow for having failed of hearing his Wife's
Dialogue with her fellow Servant. I do not blame thee in the least Zora,
continued he, for what has happened to me, but acknowledge it my own fault; on
the contrary, I confess, that without thy timely Assistance I must have
perished, for which good office I will kindly reward thee; I am in a very sad
pickle, help to shift me, that I may go to my Wife; for though I should be glad
to lie from her this Night, that she might not have the least distrust of my
misfortune, at which she would make her self sport, I durst not trust her
alone, especially with that wicked Woman, while thou should be busied about
me. Sir, you do very well, replied Zora, to lie with her, and you cannot be too
wary, for the Marchioness might do in a quarter of an hours time, that which
you could never undo again; when you are in Bed with her, then she is secure,
and so long as you have but one of your hands over her, you may sleep in
safety: Thou say very true, replied the Marquess, therefore fetch me what I
want, and as thou passest by, step into her Chamber, and see what they are
doing. Zora went out, and presently returned, telling him that now his Wife was
as pleasant as mirth could make her, they are laughing at the relation which
they have had of the hideous noise that was heard in the Garden, and of the
several reports that are given of it, some say that it was a surpised Lover by
a jealous Husband, or some jealous Coxcomb caught in his own trap; at which
the Marchioness adds, that she wished they were all so served. Yea, that I dare
say she would, replied the Marquess; no matter how 'twere censured: Oh! the
Plague of Women! continued he, of handsome Women! Well, if she makes me once
desperate, I shall lodge her far and safe enough from her Minion, and from the
whole World besides. She is mine now, continued he, far from her fond
Relations, and within the reach of my revenge, and -- He was going on in that
strain, when Zora interrupted him in this manner: I cannot blame your
resentments, they are but just and reasonable; for now that she is your Wife,
she should have no Eyes, but to look on you, no Ears but to hearken after your
commands, no Mouth, but to applaud them, nor no other parts, but wherewith to
execute them; and in my opinion, a Wife that does otherways, and so forgets her
self, as to have the least thought imaginable for another Man than her Husband,
ought to be used accordingly. I would it her live, continued she, but it should
be such a life, so remote from all Conversation, that she should forget the
very shape of all men but that of her Husband. Woman, said the Marquess with a
transport, thou have won my heart; in thus speaking the very Soul of truth, and
I shall ever like thee the better for it. No, I will not meddle with her Life,
though of late I have had such thoughts; but I will before I am two days older
remove her into a place where she shall be sequestered from the whole World, but
my self, and one or two Women at the most, to give her her necessaries. I hope,
Sir, replied Zora, that you will continue me in your Service, and that I shall
be one of those two that shall attend her: why do thou doubt it, replied the
Marquess! yes, that thou shall, and were it not that it were too toylsome to
thee, thou should be sole Governess of her; but however, for those good
Services that thou have rendered me, and those which I yet expect from thee,
though I shall give thee an aid, thou shall have a full and absolute power over
all but me; I will declare it to be my will, and then who shall dare to control
it. Zora returned him humble thanks, with a profound reverence, and saying,
Sir, give me leave to go see what they are doing: She went out of the Chamber,
it was not long before she returned, telling the Marquess, that now there was
an Opportunity for him to hear them in Discourse, for she had heard them at it,
as she went into the Chamber, that on the sudden they had been very silent, and
that no doubt but they would be at it again by this time: the cunning Zora had
been in the Chamber, of truth, and had given the Marchioness that sign, of
which they had before agreed together, at which the Marchioness was to begin
her Story: The greedy Marquess did need no more to spur him on, but as if there
had been no such matter as that of the Tub in the case: my Hat, my Sword, and
Cloak, said he, and I am gone, I would not lose one word of theirs, not for all
the ease imaginable: A word, replied Zora, why you must not expect to hear one
in ten, but however that will suffice to give you an account of the matter of
their discourse, at which the Marquess returning no answer, went muffled up to
his Wives Chamber door, where after a while he heard as follows.

The Marchioness lying on the Bed had called her Woman to her, and had told her
in a manner, as if newly awakned by Zora's coming into the Chamber, and as
being affrighted, that she was very much out of order, and disturbed with a
strange Dream which she had had, or rather a Vision, said she, for I have so
perfect an Idea still remaining of what I have lately seen in my Dream, that I
cannot well recollect my self, to know whether I was sleeping or waking. I
fancy that I see yet all the Persons before me; here stood one, there another,
at this side of the Bed was another, another was in this Chair. The one had
such Clothes on, the other was dressed like a Religious man, one like a Cavalier,
and one in a disguise like a Hermit, Pilgrim, or some such thing, and there was
a Woman also; and amongst all these Persons there was a Monster loose in my
Chamber, whose Head was very large, with a full Forehead, no Horns on it
naturally, but it would order his Wings, that they would lie over its forehead
much like Horns, and was pleased to wear them so; his Eyes were very piercing,
even to see things that none else could perceive, and the further remote that
Objects were, the bigger they appeared to it: Its Ears were very large and
open, so that it could hear the least Whisper; Its Mouth was but small, out of
which issued forth a stinking breath, that did offend all that it came near,
and it darted out of it a Tongue that would wound all those that it touched.
The Marquess was come to the Door, when the Marchioness was about this part of
the Story, and she spoke so low, that he could hear but here and there a word,
of which he could make nothing; she was going on in this manner, This Monster
would often make toward me, as if to devour me, and would show his Teeth, but
did not bite; but his Tongue was more to be feared, than his Teeth, and always
as he made at me, he would be hindered by some of those that stood by me; and
when he would make toward any body else, I would give them notice of it: Then
I thought that he would make at me again, with more fury than before, so that
he was sometimes, ready to swallow me up; at which the Religious man would
pray, and use such Exorcisms as the Church has ordained against evil Spirits,
while that the disguised Person would strike at him, with a Sword which he had
concealed under his Clothes, not to hurt him, but to affright him with the
splendor of it; but then the Woman would stay his Arm, and when at any time
this disguised Person would offer to step between me and the Monster, when it
came to offend me, she would interpose again, betwixt him and me, so that I
could not see him. At last I thought that the Monster had something thrown upon
its Head that was nasty and filthy, which did so torment it, together with the
Persons present, that it cast forth a great quantity of Foam and Smoke, which
did very much offend all that were present, but particularly me, and the
disguised Person, because that we stood near one another, and most in his way,
and that he aimed most at us two: Then I thought that on the sudden it turned
toward the Cavalier, who to shun him, fell upon the disguised Person, so that
he did wedge him in a Chair so fast, that he could not move out of it, till
after some time, that the Woman took him by the Hand, and helped him out; but I
thought that while the disguised Person was so fast, that the Monster came to
me, and took me on his horned Wings to carry me away, when I was awakned by
Zora's coming in: This was my Dream, continued the Marchioness, was it not a
frightful one? At this the Woman remained silent, only smiling to her self,
which made the Marchioness to say, What do you laugh at it? No, Madam, answered
the Woman, but I cannot be so much frighted at it, as you are; and when your
disturbance is over, no question but you will smile at it also, especially if
you would take but a little pains to apply this Dream to some of your own
concerns. What can it concern me, replied the Marchioness? You will quickly
comprehend it, Madam, said the Woman, if you please but to reflect a little
upon it. I am too much troubled at the remembrance of it, replied the
Marchioness, and cannot find in me that calmness of Spirits, which is required
in the explication of such Dreams. In my Opinion, Madam, then said the Woman,
it is so easy, that you cannot but fall of your self upon the sense of your
Dream, and as silly as I am, I would undertake to give you the meaning of it,
from what I have sometimes heard your Husband say to you, when he has been in a
passion, but that I know my distance. The Marchioness having brought her to
this that she would have her, she called to her louder than before, saying, I
give thee free liberty to say what thou will; and I do assure thee beforehand
that I shall not take any thing ill, that thou shall say, but on the contrary,
be very well pleased at it; and I have a most longing desire to hear thee,
therefore be free, go on, speak boldly and loud, that I may hear thee
perfectly. In obedience to your commands, Madam, then said the Woman, I must
tell you, that I have heard often a learned man say, that frequently the cause
of such Dreams as yours is, is when the mind being filled with certain Ideas of
such things as are of nearest concerns to us, our imagination works upon those
things which disturb us even in our sleep: This is the reason, Madam, I think
that your fancy has represented to you, in a Dream, though under some disguise,
those things which most possess your thoughts when awake. This is very well
begun, said the Marchioness, and I prithee go on, and speak louder yet; I have
frequently seen the Marquess, Madam, continued the Woman, in a passion against
your self, against a certain Pilgrim, whom he says is some disguised Person,
and against the Governor of Barcellona and his Lady, for taking that Pilgrims
part, and why may not out of these things be collected matter sufficient for
your Dream, Madam? I like what thou say so well, replied the Marchioness,
that I would have thee to particularize it. Well, Madam, replied the Woman, who
was proud of her Office, and of being applauded, since that it is your Pleasure
I should, thus I think it may be made out.

That Person that seems to be a Religious man is Father Andrew. How! let me
hear that again, said the Marchioness, and speak a little louder, who is it
say thou, Father Andrew answered the Woman, raising her voice; very well,
said the Marchioness, proceed. That Person, continued the Woman, that appeared
to you like a Cavalier, is the Governor of Barcellona: who through the
Monsters instigation did cast the disguised Person, who represents the Pilgrim,
into the Chair: who is that? said the Marchioness: The Pilgrim, Madam, who was
put in Prison: This is very well, said the Marchioness, prithee go on; and who
was the Woman? Donna Barbara, Donna Barbara, Madam, continued the Woman: All
this is very just all this while: But then, who is represented by the Monster,
said the Marchioness. That, Madam, replied the Woman, must be some body, whose
passions are monstrous, and -- here the Marchioness finding her to Stagger a
little, to encourage her, said, What thou have done for me, in the interpreting
of my Dream, has given much ease to my troubled Spirits, for which I will be
bountiful to thee, and if thou can but give me as true an account of the
Monster as thou have done of the rest, it will give me full satisfaction: I
hope, Madam, replied the Woman, after she had thanked the Marchioness, that you
will dispense me from speaking more plainly: and there she stopped again; at
which the Marchioness called to her to come nearer, and gave her some Gold,
which had such an influence over her Spirits and Tongue, that she had no sooner
felt the weight of it in the palm of her hand, but that she said, Well, Madam,
since you will have it so, and that you promise not to be angry with me; I will
tell you, that your Husband, Madam, was represented, by the Monster, How Is
that? said the Marchioness, seeming very well pleased at it, my Husband? Yes,
Madam, your Husband's the Monster, said the Woman: That Is very right in truth,
said the Marchioness, his furious passions, bitter expressions, severe
threatenings, curses, railings, jealousies, prying into all my actions, and
listening, and lurking up and down like a Spy, does deserve no better, than to
be termed Monstrous, and Beastly, and that he should be served as he was at
Barcellona. I must confess, Madam, replied the Woman, who was willing to say
something to the Marchioness for her Gold, that he is somewhat too distrustful
and jealous, and that on the condition that it would change his humor, I could
wish that he was served so again, or as that Person was, that we heard to roar
so strangely, a while since, which People do judge to be some Eve dropper
caught in a Trap.

At these words the Marquess not being able to contain himself any longer,
rushed into the Chamber. I thank you, Madam, said he to his Wife, for your kind
wishes; and you, housewife, said he to the Woman, you shall immediately go
where you may talk of Governors, Father Andrews, Pilgrims, yes, and of
Monsters too, continued he, taking her by the Arm, and stinging her out of the
Chamber, thou shall not lie under my roof this night; and having called Zora to
stay with his Wife, he presently went out of the Chamber after the Woman.

Zora, being entered, did shut the Door, and came with a cheerful countenance
up to the Marchioness, who received her as joyfully: I think said she, that we
have given him enough on it, to put him out of the humor of harkening this good
while. I believe that you have touched him to the quick, Madam, replied Zora,
he is in such a passion; but I would not trust him however; for it is so
natural to him, or at least he has got such an habit of harkening, that he can
no more leave it, than any of his other vices. But now let me know the reason
of this change of Station, said the Marchioness: That, Madam, replied Zora, is
as Comical a Story, as you have heard, with that she told the Marchioness the
Tale of the Tub, which did exceedingly please her; who in her turn acquainted
Zora of her feigned Dream, and that Camille had visited her that Evening, in
her absence, but that her fellow Servant had watched him so narrowly, that he
had not had the opportunity of speaking one word in private; therefore,
continued she, you must make some excuse or other to morrow to go out, that you
may meet with him, and positively conclude amongst you, of some immediate
course of freeing me; for now this man is so nettled, that he will not stay any
longer, but will have me away, and Heaven knows where, and how he will dispose
of me. Madam, replied Zora, your fears are not groundless; for he has declared
so much to me; and I fear that should he remove you from hence, we should lose
all hopes of releasing you; but we shall find some way to save him that labor,
so soon as I meet with the Pilgrim, and Father Andrew, which shall be to morrow
in the Forenoon: Your Husband, Madam, has been sorely bruised, continued she,
and though his Curiosity, and his Passion will not let him feel it at present,
doubtless but tomorrow morning he will be sore and but of Order, as to be
willing to keep his Bed some time longer than ordinary; I will take that
opportunity to go to them, and if he should want me before I return, it will be
your care to excuse me, under pretense of having employed me about some
business: That care I will take upon me, replied the Marchioness, be you but
diligent as to the rest; for I very much fear the consequences of his removing
me from hence: You will do well, Madam, said Zora, to go to Bed, to avoid your
Husbands railing, which he will forbear to Night, if he thinks you asleep when
he comes to Bed, and that he may lie the longer in the morning, to exercise
your patience with his railing. The hopes that I have, Zora, replied the
Marchioness, of being e're long freed from all his unsufferable extravagances,
will make me to endure it, with an exemplary patience. With this the
Marchioness went to Bed, where she was but just laid, when the Marquess came in
full stored with Reproaches and Injuries; but Zora whispering to him, that she
was now asleep and that he had better stay till morning, and then read her a
Lecture: after he had grumbled some few words between his Teeth, he told Zora
that he was not very well, and so he presently went to Bed.

In the morning he made diverse attempts, of discharging his Choler with a whole
volly of rude expressions upon his Lady, but she as often did shun the brunt by
feigning her self asleep; yet at last, he was grown so full of his Venom, that
he must vent it, or burst; he therefore began to thunder such a peal in her
Ears, that she was forced to make some replies in her own defense: amongst the
rest, What is it you would have, said the Marchioness, what cause or reason
have you to use me thus, continually? What is happened to you of late? And what
have I done, to cause you to treat me as you do? I wonder with what Confidence
you can ask these questions, replied the Marquess; it is nothing with you then,
it seems, to be reviling and abusing of your Husband during an hour or two,
with his Servant? And to wish him any thing that tends to his dishonor? That
Person replied the Marchioness, (who was resolved to give it him home) that is
so little careful of his honor, as to prostitute it to the appetite of every
unruly passion, need not fear that a few words from an injured Woman should
prejudice it: Neither shall they, replied the Marquess, for that honor, as
prostitute as you speak it, is, and shall be above your reach, and I hope to
keep it so; but in the mean time, it ill becomes you to control your Husbands
actions, to bespatter them with your scurrilous Tongue, and to wish that some
ill Fortune might attend them, while that they are in order to preserve that
honor, which you so much endeavor to destroy. That which you call the
destroying of your Honor, replied the Marchioness, is rather a desire of its
preservation, if it were rightly understood; it is that interest that I should
have in it, were it not rendered unworthy of me by those base, low, and obscene
ways, with which you pretend to preserve it; that makes me desire it should not
be so vilified, but that it should shine in its full luster, without the least
Eclipse of a low, or cloudy Action, to hide its brightness. Whatsoever I do,
replied the Marquess, is to preserve my Honor from that darkness, which you
would cast over it, being in all respects less dangerous; I think it reasonable
to prefer some small momentary Eclipses, to that horror of Eternal Darkness
which you would cast upon it. I could wish, replied the Marchioness, that you
would let me know, what you mean by that Eternal Darkness, that I would cast
upon your honor? Reflect but on your own actions, replied the Marquess, and
you will not be long without the knowledge of it. If to desire the same liberty
as other Persons enjoy, replied the Marchioness; nay, if to endeavor to attain
to it, is a crime of such a nature, as to blemish your honor so irreparably,
as you mention, I freely declare unto you, that I shall ever be guilty of the
same error. And I do declare to you, answered the Marquess, that I will break
your measures within these three days, if it is possible, by conveying you to
such a place, where you shall not be affrighted at the sight of new Faces; in a
word, Madam, I will set my honor in safety, by securing of you, who does
endeavor with the utmost of your power to destroy it: And I will commit my
self, replied the Marchioness, unto the protection of Heaven, and so do your
worst; and after this, she turned her from the Marquess, who would fain have
gone on in this wrangling discourse, but finding that he, could not get one
word more from her, do what he could; after some little time having called for
Zora, and she not coming, he did rise of himself, but did not stir out of the
Chamber, being obliged to supply the absent Guardians places.

It was then about ten of the Clock, the evil consequences of his late disaster
having obliged him to lie longer in Bed than usually, he was looking out of the
Window, when he was diverted by a little Dog of the Marchioness's, who was
playing with some Papers upon the Floor, which Papers he had met with under her
Pillow; the Marquess did presently deprive the poor Dog from that delight which
he took, in tumbling them about; and having looked upon them: Yes, Madam, said
he to his Wife, these are some of those means which you use, in order to
preserve my honor; then looking on them, both in Verse and Prose, continued
he, all this you call but the endeavoring to attain unto the same liberty
which other Persons enjoy, and these are some of those small errors that you
will ever be guilty of. The Marchioness fretted at the Heart, did not answer
one word: Shall I read them to you, they will doubtless please you much better,
than whatsoever I can say to you; with that he began to read, but presently
Zora coming in, Oh! Zora, continued he, my Wife's little Dog, more kind than
her self, or Woman, has made me partaker of some curious pieces, which I would
not for any thing but that I had seen, for I am a great admirer of such
excellent things; you shall hear them: then he began again to read those
Papers, which were those that Camille had presented to the Marchioness, are not
these very fine things, continued he, after he had read some of them; here is
mention made of Kisses, on Hands and Lips too, full of Nectar; nay, the very
quintessence was extracted from them: no doubt, Madam, continued he, addressing
himself to his Wife, that you did your part also, and that you and your Minion,
did spread inside Lips, and traffick'd liquorish Tongues, in order to those
extractions here mentioned; to all this the Marchioness did not answer one
word, which made Zora, that durst not be too forward neither in excusing her
Lady, say, but where did this Dog get them? Where had he them? Where has he
been? Where has he been? said the Marquess; Where had he them? In your
Mistresses Bosom, that is the Caskenet in which she preserves such precious
Jewels: Has not the Dog been out of the Chamber this Morning? said Zora. No,
no, answered the Marquess, he needed not to go so far for them, they were
nearer at hand, I can assure you: Then he continued reading the rest of the
Papers, after which he fell into this raging fit. And is it come to that? Is it
impossible for me to make use of any thing whatsoever, but that it must turn to
this Damnable Pilgrim's advantage? And must you be sick, continued he, speaking
to his Wife, only to give him the opportunity of visiting you, under the notion
of a Doctor? and to apply such Lip-Salve for your Cure? Is it impossible then,
to find out such a place as is able to contain him, with all the assistance
that Chains, Bolts, Shackles, Bars, and Stone Walls can afford? But that
notwithstanding all my Cares, my watchful Cares, I must learn that he quenches
his lascivious heats in your Bosom? Well, what cannot be done one way, shall
be done the other. Thou shame of thy Sex, continued he, take leave of the whole
world, for I protest by all that is sacred, to sequester thee from it, with all
the diligence that I can possibly use; But first I will have my full revenge on
this incarnate Devil, I will tear his heart out of his body before you; yes, I
will present you with it, you shall enjoy it. Then walking very fast about the
Chamber, and sometimes stopping on the sudden, sometime running hastily out of
the Chamber, then presently in again; in fine, showing a thousand
irresolutions, with which his mind was agitated at once: at last he stood stock
still in the middle of the Room, holding the Papers with one Hand, and biting
the Nails of the other; after some time he came out of his serious thoughts
again, and thus he spoke, Zora: Do you not move from hence till my return; I
will first go to the Prison, and know how it comes to pass that this Prisoner
is released; I shall not be long, stir not upon your Life, then going toward
the Chamber Door, he suddenly turns back again, saying: No, I will send for the
Jailer here; I will not stir from hence, till I have my revenge fully
accomplished. Zora, continued he, call some Servants up quickly, dispatch: Zora
went out, and presently returned, with Servants after her: The Marquess calls
one in, and sends him to the Jailer to come immediately to him, and to bring
along with him the Prisoner; that Servant being gone about it, he calls
another, and sends to fetch the Doctor to his Wife, who was very ill on the
sudden, telling him that he should bring him with him immediately, for his Wife
was very ill, and could not live long; but the Fellow telling him that he knew
not where the Doctor lived: the Marquess in a passion, bid him call one that
knew; the Fellow goes forth, and returns presently, saying, that there was but
one that knew where he lived, and that he had sent him to the Prison. All these
little obstacles did still inrage the Marquess the more; but being resolved to
clear all doubts, and take his full revenge, he tells Zora, that she must go
and fetch the Doctor, not considering whether she knew where he lived, telling
her that he would watch there himself till her return: Zora being very glad of
the employ, that she might prevent all mischiefs, by her giving Camille notice
of the discovery; was going forth, when the Marquess cried, yet hold,
peradventure that he is but the Pilgrim's Agent, made use of to convey the
Papers and secret Messages; and it is on the immediate cause of all my
troubles, that my revenge must fall with that severity; then after a little
pause: Yet go, continued he, for these Papers speak plain enough, that the two
Characters belong but to one Person; but what then, were they gone, and
sacrificed to my resentments, are there not more Men? And is not my Honor
still in the same danger, so long as that Woman is Breathing? She must -- she
shall -- then after another pause, breaking off his discourse by snatches, as
if what he would say were too, cruel to be spoken aloud: Zora, said he, stay,
no, go, and get this Robber of my Honor to come and receive his due reward; I
shall look him more carefully in the Face, than I did in the dark, when I had
no suspicion: go continued he; and send me somebody here mean time: Zora very
glad of the employ, did presently go, for fear that he should once again change
his resolutions, and she sent some more of the Servants to him. The enraged
Marquess commanded two of them to stand at the Chamber Door, and not to move
from thence upon pain of immediate Death, till he returned, nor to let his Wife
go out, if she should attempt it, and not being contented with that, he took
the Key along with him; he presently ran into his Closet, out of which having
taken a brace of Pistols, and a long Stilletto, he presently returned again; he
then gave order to two Servants to stand at the Street-Door, charging them,
that so soon as they should see the Doctor come into the House, they should
shut him in, and not let him go out again, till he gave them order; two more
Servants he placed at his Wife's Chamber door, with order to shut it so soon as
the Doctor should be come in; and two more he set in his Wife's Closet,
charging them to be ready to come into the Chamber with their Swords drawn, so
soon as he should give the word; having thus placed his Centuries, he walked up
and down the Chamber, after so strange a manner, with such strange actions, and
muttering to himself strange things, that it might easily be guest at the fury
which did possess his Soul.

Mean time the poor Marchioness, who had not spoken one word all this time,
thinking that it would be to no purpose to make any excuses, lay agitated with
diverse horrid fears; the least of which haing been sufficient to have broken
any heart, less fortified with innocence and courage than hers. Sometime she
did reflect on what her Husbands passions had forced out of his Mouth, which
threatened no less than her Life; at other times she feared, having observed
with what readiness Zora was gone to fetch Camille, lest that she being
affrighted with his rage, should bring him along with her; and sometimes too
she feared, lest he should come of his own accord, before that Zora should come
to him to give him notice of the imminent danger; and in a word, she feared
more for him, than for her self; with a thousand such fears her mind was
possessed, when on a sudden she heard a great out cry in the House; the
Marquess, who heard it likewise, did send one to know what was the matter, who
presently returned with those two that had been placed at the Street-door, who
were bleeding, they told the Marquess, that the Doctor had entered the Door,
but that as they were shutting it after him, he distrusting something, it had
made him to retire, but they opposing him, he had snatched a Sword out of their
hands, and with it forced his way through them, into the Street again; at this
relation the Marquess tore his Hairs, and drawing his Sword, had certainly run
it through him that stood nearest him, had he not diligently escaped it, which
furious action did make the rest also to stand also at a further distance. I
want words to express, all that the height of the greatest rage imaginable, did
make the Marquess to say and act, therefore I shall pass it by; to tell you,
that while he was in the midst of his fury, Zora came into the Chamber; she
having missed of Camille, had left her message with Father Andrew, with an
account of all that had passed, in as few words as she could, that she might
hasten back to prevent Camille's getting into the Marquess's House, who was
gone forth in order to go there, after that he had called at Don Alphonso's;
but she coming near home, had learned what had happened, by a Servant that was
running for a Chiruregon to dress those that Camille had wounded; all this was
very well she thought, but for fear that the Marquess being disappointed of his
revenge on the Pilgrim, should in his passion discharge it all on his Wife: So
soon as she was entered, she made signs unto the Marquess, as if she had
something to say to him in private, he presently sent the Servants out and went
into the Closet, where Zora followed him, after she had thrown a piece of Paper
unto the Marchioness, in which was written: Fear nothing. She told the
Marquess, that though she had failed of the Pilgrim, she had met with a Person
as dangerous as he, and that was Father Andrew, that finding a Door shut she
had looked through the Key hole, and there she had seen and heard the Friar,
who with half a dozen more were contriving to take the Marchioness away by
force at a Night, or upon the Road, when ever he should offer to remove her;
that she understood that they had made many Friends in that City that were as
willing as able, to serve the Pilgrim in that wicked design; and that therefore
he was to lay his passion aside, and think what he had best to do, to prevent
their designs. Do, said the Marquess, in as great a fury as ever, I will help
them in it, they shall have her, I will bestow her upon her Minion, my self,
I Will only keep her Heart to my self, and they shall share her Carcass amongst
them; then presently after a little pause, fetching a great sigh, from the
bottom of his Heart, but why should I design so foolishly, this would be to
serve them according to their own desires, the Pilgrim has had her Heart long
since, and it is only for her body that all this is; here he made another
pause, which gave time to Zora to say, Sir, there is no time to lose, spend it
not therefore in vain reflections; once more let me persuade you to lay aside
all passion, and to think of what is to be done to secure the Marchioness from
all their attempts: I have thought on it, replied the Marquess hastily, she
shall dye, and then there is an end of all, of all my miseries at once, yea, and
of me and all: Heavens forbid, said Zora, Pray, Sir, -- What would thou have
me to do then? replied the Marquess, interrupting her in a milder tone? I will
tell you, Sir, replied Zora, give out to your Servants immediately, that you
will be gone from this City in the Morning early, that all things should be got
ready to that purpose with all the Ostentation that may be, that the noise of
it may be spread about the Town, especially about the Confederates Quarters, so
that they may know of it, and provide for the taking of the Marchioness on the
Road; mean time let a Litter be got in private, wherein the Marchioness should
be conveyed in the dead of the Night, by force if she makes resistance; I shall
take care to prevent her from making any noise, or getting out, and let the
Litter be driven quite another way, than it should have been given out that you
intended to go, while that ye follow with your Mule; no doubt but this will
deceive the Pilgrim and his Friends, who certainly will be upon the Road that
way that you have given out you would go to intercept the Marchioness, mean
time she will have been conveyed to some other place of safety. This, Sir,
continued she, I have been thinking of, as I came home; the apprehensions of
some sudden attempt, having set me upon it; for now that your Enemies are
strong and powerful, when they find that you stir not from hence, they will
attempt any thing even here, and Heaven knows what they may not do, having the
Marchioness always ready to assist them. And now, Sir, I leave to your prudence
to judge, whether what I have proposed, is not reasonable, and the products of
an Heart that is wholly devoted to your Service. My Dear, and Faithful, Zora,
replied the Marquess, I can never thank thee sufficiently for the cares which
thouh ast in my concerns, and I shall never forget it; I find all that thou
have said to be very good, and to proceed from a faithful Heart, but I will, or
rather we will with deliberation, Methodise it so that our design shall not be
capable of failing. I am of opinion therefore, as you have discreetly proposed,
that a Litter should this day be got in readiness, but I would have it to be
conveyed a little way out of Town toward the place that I intend to go to,
which is Tolledo, so privately that no notice may be taken of it, and in the
Evening I will take thy Mistress and thy self in a Coach, and we will be
carried thither, where you two shall get into the Litter, and I will follow
upon my Mule, none of the Servants knowing of this but one that I dare confide
in, who shall be busied with the rest of his Fellows in geting all things ready
for to be going in the morning, to some other place that I shall appoint them
to meet me at: by these means we shall get a considerable way in our Journey,
before any notice is taken of it, and the Villains will be frustrated of their
expectation to morrow, when they set upon my empty Coach, and my Men, and the
further to deceive them, my Servants shall tell them that we did not design to
stir forth till the Evening, though we had sent them before, for this will make
them to desist any further pursuit at that time, in hopes of meeting with us at
Night. This is such a way, replied Zora, as would be infallible, of getting
your Wife safe from hence, if we could but be provided with a Litter and Mule
drivers to attend it without noise. There Is the stress of the whole business,
replied the Marquess, neither know I whom to trust as to that; and I believe
that I must go about it my self. I would not have you to leave the Marchioness
one moment, replied Zora, you have so affrighted all your Servants, that none
dares to appear before you, but she that would adventure a thousand Lives to
serve you; what do I know but that at this very present there is some
correspondency, between your Wife and her Confederates? Sold they attempt any
thing in your absence, either by the Garden, to get her out of the Window, she
being as ready to go, as they to receive her, who should oppose them? where
would be any aid? I should quickly be dispatched, and then the booty would be
their own; therefore I think it very necessary for you to remain by her, till
we all three are going in the Evening: That which thou have said is very true,
said the Marquess; but then how shall we get this Litter and Men conveyed
secretly another way out of Town, than we must seem to go? Let that be my care,
Sir, said Zora, I have some acquaintance here in Town, that shall do that
business for us, I will go instantly to set them about it; but stay, replied
the Marquess, till I have been in my Closet to fetch out some writings, and
then I will not move from her Chamber till thy return. After this, the Marquess
went out of the Chamber to his Closet, which gave time to Zora, to tell the
Marchioness, that she should fear nothing, that she had appeased her Husband
for the present, and that that Night should be the last of her misery; that she
would inform their Friends of all the business before she returned, take their
advice likewise, and of all make an absolute conclusion, which she would bring
her back in writing, that she might know what part she had to act, and not be
surprised; this did Zora deliver with such a cheerful countenance, kissing the
Marchioness's Hand, that she was very much comforted by it: Zora was after that
advising her Lady to rise, and pack up all her Jewels and other things of value
by themselves, when the Marquess returned into the Chamber, to whom Zora said,
I have been persuading, my Lady to rise, and to prepare for her Journey, but
she will not believe that she has need to make such haste. No! replied the
Marquess; yet she may be certain that she shall not lie one Night longer in
this place; therefore let her rise, and pack up her things her self, if she
will, for I have other employs for you, and now go about what I have sent you
to do: Zora presently went about her business; the Marquess employed himself
about making up and examining of Accounts, while the Marchioness went into her
Closet, where she employed her self in disposing of her Jewels privately about
her, with other things of concerns, and stuffing up of those Boxes and Cases,
that they were usually carried in, with other things of little or no value:
Thus the Marquess in the Chamber, having continually one Eye on the Closet
Window, and the Marchioness in the Closet, did remain till Zora returned,
without speaking one word to one another, to the Ladies great satisfaction.

Zora was not long before she got to Camille's, whom she informed of what she
had done, and that the Marchioness had a knowledge of it: She likewise gave him
an account of his fair escape, which he had made out of the Marquess's House,
while that the Marquess had sent her on purpose to bring him to his inevitable
Death. How that he had sworn to tear his Heart out of his Body, and to give it
to her: he need not put himself to that trouble replied Camille, I have long
since saved him that labor, in presenting it my self to her, in a condition to
do her more Service, and therefore more acceptable. Let us lose no time now,
said Father Andrew, and let it not be said, that this Woman has done all her
self, but let us act our parts likewise. Then Zora told them, that there was to
be got out of hand a Litter, Mules, and Mule drivers, that were to be conveyed
very privately, at some small distance from the City, at a place which she
named. That shall be my charge, replied the good Father, and let me alone to
deceive that wicked Father Andrew, and that abominable Pilgrim; and be certain,
that within three hours at farthest it shall be at the place appointed: Yes,
but where will you find trusty men to attend it? replied Zora: Are not here
two, answered the brisk Friar? how many would you have? And for their fidelity
to us, I will engage for the one if you will engage for the other, continued
he, addressing himself to Camille; that will do very well, replied Camille, and
my task shall be to discharge the House, to provide good Horses, and to crave
the assistance of my worthy Friend Alphonso, of his Lady, and of his House and
Servants, to receive us and our Prize, when we have it. Another thing is to be
thought on also, said Father Andrew, which is, to convey something between the
Marquess's Mules Feet and her Shoes, that she may fall down right lame within
a little while after that he shall be got upon her, which will cause him to
stay behind, while we diligently go on with the Litter. Better and better
still, said Camille, I see that we shall bring it to something at last. This
will do, said Zora, and I think that we need no further to consult about it.
No, no, replied Father Andrew, and therefore I am gone to get the Litter and
all things belonigng to it: And if you please, Sir, said Zora to Camille, to
write down the result of our consultation, I will instantly return and give it
the Marchioness, and tell the Marquess, that within these two hours there will
be a Litter in readiness, at the place that he has appointed. That I Will engage
for, said Father Andrew, and away went he: Camille having writ the Note of
advice, did give it to Zora, who returned home with it, and Camille having
discharged the House, went to his Friend Alphonso, who he did very easily
engage and his Lady likewise, to serve him in that business, she highly
praising his resolution, of putting the Marchioness into her hands, when that
she were at his whole disposal; and Camille having told them the time and place
that they should meet them on the Road, where Alphonso assured him he would not
fail to be exactly; he returned home, to wait for Father Andrew's return, which
was presently after, with a Litter, in which there were two Suits of Clothes,
to dress himself and Camille in, like Mule-drivers. He bid one of the Persons
that were come along with him, to follow him up stairs, where he should receive
his Money; so soon as he came into the Chamber, he called upon Camille to pay
the Money, which he had agreed for, Camille did readily do it, and went into
the Litter to the place appointed, where Father Andrew followed; they were no
sooner got thither, but they sent back the Mule-drivers, and accoutred
themselves in those Clothes which the Father had brought, which made a couple
of excellent Varlets of them, in which posture they waited for the Marquess's
coming.

While these things had been transacting abroad, the Marquess had been
examining the Pilgrim, which the Jailer had brought to him according to his
Orders; at the very sight of him, he found him not to be that Pilgrim which he
meant, and at last having found his mistake, and the cause of it, through his
examining of every circumstance, he discharged the follow, giving him a piece
of Money for to make him amends for the wrong which he had done him, with which
he went his way very well satisfied, that he had got his liberty at last, with
a good sum of Money.

Mean time Zora was returned home, where she had some opportunity, during the
Marquess's examination of the Pilgrim, to give the Marchioness the Note, and a
full account of all their proceedings, the Marchioness was very well pleased
with what Zora did tell her, whereby diverse scruples which had risen in her
mind, were removed: presently after the Marquess came into the Chamber, and
Zora told him, that there would be a Litter at the time and place appointed,
with which he seemed very well satisfied: The rest of that day the Marquess did
spend in giving his last orders to his Servants, and to get those things
together which he intended for his present uses.

Having dispatched all other businesses, he returned to his Wife's Chamber,
where he bid his Wife and Zora to prepare to be going within an hour, it being
already toward the Evening. This made Zora to bussel about, and to fit the
Marchioness in a traveling posture; at last, the Coach which the Marquess had
appointed came to the Door, which made him to call upon his Wife once again; he
led her to it, where he placed her, after which, he and Zora went in it; it was
dark, and he had so muffled up both his Wife and Zora in Cloaks, that no body
could well discern, if they were men or women; in a short time after they came
to the place, where the Litter was waiting for them, and his Mule likewise,
which he had sent before, whose Feet had been stuffed, by the two new Mule
drivers, with things more uneasy, than she could well endure. So soon as the
Marquess did see the Litter, and having hastily placed his Wife in it, and Zora
by her, he made it up himself, and bidding the Mule-drivers go on, he got upon
his Mule and followed.

They had not gone far before the Marquess's Mule began to halt, but he put her
on still, till at last she could, or would not go any further; he did what he
could to force her to it, but all in vain, for at last she fairly laid her self
down, which obliged the Marquess to alight, and call after the Mule-drivers to
stay, but they impatient to be at that place where they were expected by
Alphonso, and his Lady, they went on the faster, he run after crying as loud as
he could for them to stay, but the uncivil Mule-drivers, did not so much as
once look back; on the contrary the louder he called, and the faster he did
run, the faster they drove, till they came to a turning, where they met with
their Friends; presently was the Marchioness taken out of the Litter by
Camille, and led to Alphonso's Coach, where resigning her into his Ladies
Hands: Thus, Madam, said he, do I part with you, according to your desires, and
my promise, into the Hand of this most worthy Lady; and now, Madam, you are at
your own disposal; there was no time for longer Compliments, the Marchioness
only said: Now I find that you are truly generous, and that I have not deceived
my self: Camille gave her not time to say more, for he presently put off his
disguise, and having got a Horse, he and Alphonso did ride by the Coach side,
while it carried the two Ladies, Zora, and Father Andrew, another way into the
City again, where they all got into Alphonso's House by the back Door.

Mean time the poor Marquess did continue his hallowing and calling after the
Mule-drivers, though he had long since lost the sight of them, and did trudge
as he could after them; but the Gallants were gone with their Booty long before
he did overtake the empty Litter, which the Mules (being left at their own
disposal) had carried to a little by-place, close by the great Road, where they
were biting upon a little Grass, which they had met with; so that when he came
up wearied and almost spent, he presently looked into it, but finding no body
there, nor any where thereabouts, he fairly entered it to rest himself, never
minding where the Mules did carry him; and they having eaten that little of
Grass that they had met with, they went on, as by chance they had turned
themselves, which proved to be the ready way back to the City.

The poor Marquess being thus carried, he knew not whither, nor did he care to
know, with a very flow pace: He had both time and convenience, to reflect on
all his misfortunes, and especially on the greatest of all, the loss of his
Wife; concluding with himself, that the whole world did consent to his
miseries. What to do, which way to go, or what to resolve upon, he knew not;
therefore letting the Mules go which way they pleased, he began to consider
with himself, what was the reason that he was so unfortunate above all other
men: amongst many things which came to his Fancy on this account, the great
severity with which he had used his Wife, by giving too much scope unto his
passions, did not a little perplex him, which might be the cause that she had
hearkened after any designs that had been proposed to her, of freeing her self
from it, which otherwise peradventure she had refused: No, no, then would he
say again, I must not charge my self with a fault that is wholly hers; those
most lascivious papers which I did see so lately, by mere accident, do but too
well express her inclinations; yet she did not write them, continued he; then
after a little pause, but she received them, and gave them harbor in her own
Bed; and it is consequently to be believed, that she owned them, approved of
them, and gave a silent consent to all the ill that was contained in them: At
this reflection he made a great sigh, and remained a while silent, after which,
he again broke out in this manner: But when I first had her, and that she did
yet enjoy some moments of liberty, I could never tax nor accuse her of any the
least correspondency imaginable with any man; neither could I with all the
exactest inquisition that I could possibly use, learn that she ever had any
public, or private and particular converse with any Person; so that this
Pilgrim which now possesses her, is perhaps known to her but of late, and by
mere accident, and she perceiving him to be a man of good mien and parts; why
might not she wish that he might know of her hard restraint, and desire that he
might relieve her out of it; and where is that man that would refuse her; she
in all this may have aimed but at liberty; and notwithstanding what hopes
soever he may build upon, as he expressed in his writing: She might have nobler
thoughts, and such as might defeat all his ill designs: Yea, but those Kisses,
would he say again, in a little passion, those lascivious Kisses might have
been stolen from her, continued he, as answering himself, and I think that they
were so mentioned, and if stolen from her as well as from me, why should I think
that she did approve of it, or consented to the stealth? Thus was he canvassing
the case to himself, willing in some measure to take upon himself the cause of
his Wife's leaving of him, when on the sudden, a noise which he heard, did
cause him to look out of the Litter, at which the Mules did stop, this made him
to alight, and presently he perceived that he was not far from his late House,
where his Servants were still, he therefore finding that that noise which he
had heard, was termining into a quarrel, and that there were Swords already
drawn, and being not in a humor to mind such things, at that time especially,
he made what haste he could toward his Door; but as he came forth of the
Litter, he perceived some scattered Papers in it, which he had the curiosity to
take up, and having given a blow to one of the Mules, they went on, while he
got into his House, where he was received with as much wonder as
unexpectedness, by all his Servants. He presently caused what they had
displaced in his Chamber, in order to transportation, to be laid in order
again, and having forbid any of them to ask him any questions, he went to Bed,
where he read those Papers which he had found in the Litter.

The one of them was that Letter which the Marchioness had torn, not thinking
it severe enough to rebuke Camille's insolence, in kissing of her; at which the
Marquess seemed as well pleased, as if he had been in hopes of getting his Wife
again. The other were indifferent things, yet with something or other still in
them, which spoke more a desire of being freed from Slavery, than of Love:
these loose Papers were, it was likely, scattered in the hastily getting out of
the Litter, at the time of the seizing on the Marchioness; but such as they
were, they did so confirm him in those thoughts which he inclined to have of
his Wife's honesty, that taking hold thereon, he did lay the whole cause of his
miscarriage upon himself; this with his late mischance of the Tub, and his
over-heating himself in running after the Litter, together with the trouble of
Spirit which he had upon him, for obliging, and in a manner, forcing his Wife
to that extremity of leaving him, did presently cast him into a violent Fever,
to which a remorce of having diverse times had a design of poisoning of her, did
not a little contribute.

Of truth the Marchioness was not so much to blame as some Persons might
imagine, if all the circumstances of her late action was weighed with an equal
hand, in the Scale of reason: She was young, and endowed with excellent parts
of the mind; she had been forced by her Parents into the arms of a Person for
whom she had a natural aversion against his Person, as well as against that
morose, crabbed, and jealous Nature, which had always been predominant in him,
that even before Marriage he had made her sensible of some of its ill effects,
and had given out such words within her hearing, as did sufficiently express
how he would use her, when once she was his Wife; she had ever since that found
and felt the sad effect of those Menaces, without the least cause given by her
to be so ill treated; it was a very hard Fate, for her thus to be sequestered
from all conversation, though never so modest and innocent, to be buried alive
in the Arms of a Person that she so perfectly loathed, and that far from
endeavoring to gain her affection, did use her so barbarously, that it daily
did increase her aversion against him. All that she had done was but to free
her self from that intolerable slavery under which she lived most miserably,
and whatsoever her deliverer did promise, or propose to himself, as a reward
for his Services; she knew what was fit for her to give, not to prove
ungrateful, and what to retain, not to be counted vicious: It is true, that she
had thrown her self into the Power of an amorous young man, whom peradventure
nothing would satisfy, but what she ^as not to give, but then she had not the
opportunity to pick and choose: Camille was the only Person that had proffered
his aid, to free her from her misery; if she refused this, she knew not wheher
the Heavens would be so kind to her again, as to send her any other
opportunity; she was gong to b made yet more miserable than ever, by that
severe restraint that her too cruel Husband was going to put her under, as he
had often given out he would, nay, her Life had often been threatened, though at
a distance; in all these conditions she could not hope to find any relief but
in Death; she was sequestered from all her Friends and Relations, carried away
into a strange Country, where she had no body to make her complaints unto. In
the midst of all these afflictions, Camille seemed to her, as sent from Heaven
to be her deliverer; he was a Gentleman, so all his actions did speak him, he
might for ought that she knew be virtuously given as soon as vicious, or at
least virtue might have so much ascendant over him, that with a modest
resistance against any inordinate desires, she might assist that virtue to get
the upperhand in him. That in case he should prove otherways, she would
endeavor to get out of his power, by the assistance of some Religious Persons,
or by giving private notice of it to her Relations, that in the mean time she
would stave him off with fair promises and delays, and finally if all that
would not do, she was resolved to sacrifice her Virtue to Death, rather than
her body to his lascivious Embraces.

It were with these and diverse other considerations of the like Nature, that
were backed with that l^st resolution of dying rather than yielding, that the
Marchioness had cast her self into the Arms of Camille's protection, which she
did soon put into prac^ice; for the next morning, Don Alphonso and h^s Lady
going to see how Camille did, after the first Compliments were over, he did beg
of her before her Husband, that she would endeavor to prevail so with the
Marchioness as that he might but see her. She immediately went about it, and
was not long before she returned with leave for him to come to her, where he
might stay so long as she were by, to which he presently consenting, he went
with her to the Marchioness's Chamber, he was no sooner at the Door, but that
he run, and casting himself at her Feet, he said: Madam, I am come to offer you
an heart more busied with an earnest ambition of serving you further yet, than
possessed with the thoughts of receiving any recompense for his former Services:
Yet, Madam, not so wholly insensible of the happiness, which he might receive
from you, if you would but allow him some place in your esteem, as not humbly
to sue for it. Sir, replied the Marchioness, making some motion which expressed
her desire that he should rise, I cannot be so insensible, of that generous
assistance which I have received from you, as not to resent it with all the
gratitude that my bosom can be capable of, and it is so lately that I have
felt the advantage of it, that I cannot so soon forget it. I do acknowledge,
Sir, before this Lady here, continued she, that I am infinitely obliged to you
for what you have lately done in my concerns, for proof whereof, I do confess
that I owe you all that my abilities in the present condition I am, and that my
honor can permit me to give you; besides this, I being of a Disposition, as
will not permit me to remain long in peace with my self while that virtue lies
unrewarded: I gladly received, and entertained your request of seeing me, that
I might have the opportunity of giving you some small Tokens of my gratitude,
till my good Fortune does enable me to further reach the merits of your
singular Services to me; be pleased therefore to accept of all that little
which I have in my own disposing at present, till Time and Fortune do further
enable me to suit my rewards more proportionable to your deserts. Camille was
going to answer, when she thus went on, taking hold of the middle of a Toylet
that was upon a Table near her: Here, Sir, is all I have, it is small,
considering what I owe you, I doubt not but that a Person that has acted so
generously as you have done, will be contented with the good will, where the
Power cannot extend any further, with that she lifted off the Toylet which she
held in her hand, and discovered to Camille's Eyes, a parcel of Jewels of great
value. Camille had no sooner cast his Eyes upon them, but turning his Face from
them, with an air that did express a contemning of such trifles. You have a
design to mock me, Madam, said he, with an emotion which expressed his dislike,
in pretending to gratify me, while you offer me this parcel of Jewels, and at
the same time you reserve to your self that inestimable Gem, your heart, which
might set me in possession of those Mines of Treasures which discover their
Luster over your Face, and -- he was going on, when the Marchioness did thus
interrupt him: Sir, you have very soon forgot the promises which you made to my
Servant here, and doubtless that you were thinking of something else while you
made them; yet I am happy in that you have observed so much of them as has
invited you to put me into the hands of so worthy a Lady as this is, and in a
place where I need not fear any thing beyond words; yet give me leave to tell
you that they surprise me much; but however, Sir, I am extremely sorry, that I
cannot gratify you out of my own store, and that you covet that which I was
forced long ago to part with to another, though I must confess absolutely against
my will; but however now it is no more mine, and though this Bosom, pointing
at her Breast, is still the Caskanet, wherein it is kept; there is such a
strong Guard set upon it by Virtue, as can never be forced but with the loss of
my Life, till the right owner of it, though he is never so unworthy, loses his
property in it by death. If that were all, Madam, said Camille, his Life were
not so considerable, that he should be loath to lose it, or any one fear the
taking of it away, which would be but like removing a Stone out of the way that
would lead to the possession of that precious Jewel: This did Camille say in a
tone that expressed much disorder in his mind, of which the Marchioness taking
notice: That were the way, said she, to cast so dark a Cloud over it, and the
rash undertaker of so foul a deed, as would eternally darken its luster, and
hide for ever from my Eyes that Person, that should so unworthily attempt it,
or should they offer the least violence to deprive me of it, I should look upon
them, as on the worst of men; and I would certainly sacrifice my Life for its
preservation. This did the Marchioness speak with so much resolution and
boldness, that Camille was at a stand, not knowing what he should say. Which
gave the Marchioness leisure to continue in this manner. But I can distinguish
between what is spoken in raillery, and by way of common discourse, from that
which might proceed from the Heart, and I have better thoughts of my deliverer,
neither can it enter in my imagination, that a Person that has so frankly
served me, should harbor in his Breast such mean and unworthy designs, while
he contemns those things which might have taken with any mercenary, and low
Spirited Persons. But I am confident, continued she, that you are above those
trifles, and that like all other brave Souls, yours expects its reward from
that virtue, which set it on those brave actions, which cannot be recompensed,
but by that same virtue, which first did move it to the performance. Here
Camille being overcome by the Marchioness's generous expressions, and looking
upon those designs with which he had approached her, as gross and foul Earthy
exhalations, which if not dispersed from his mind, by those refulgent Rays,
which the brightness of the Marchioness's brave example did cast upon him,
would hinder him from appearing with the like luster, and from moving in the
same Sphere of Virtue that she did; he therefore, wholly changing his mind, and
first designs, as scorning to be outdone by a Woman, did immediately cast from
himself all lascivious desires, and low thoughts, to give a full and entire
possession of his Soul to Virtue, which made him answer the Marchioness in this
manner.

That Virtue, Madam, which shines with so much luster through all your actions,
were more than sufficient, were I any other ways inclined, to work perfect
reformation in me. It appears so great, so glorious, and so amiable in you,
that nothing but that can be said to surpass all those other blessings of body
and mind, that the Heavens have shower d upon you with a prodigal hand, which
moves an emulation in all generous Spirits; hence-forward, Madam, continued he,
I bid adieu to all the little Sallies and Gayeties of inordinate Youth, to wait
with patience at your Feet, for what the Heavens will be pleased to set apart
for me; only this, Madam, I humbly crave of you, that if ever there be hopes, I
may stand the fairest in your affections; he will outlive your patience, Sir,
replied the Marchioness; then turning her Head aside to hide some blushes,
which what she was going to say did spread over her Face: at least I fear so,
continued she, with a sigh, after a little pause: Oh! Madam, what a Cordial
have you administered to my fainting heart? replied Camille, say but once more,
Madam, that you have that esteem for me, as to allow of your Hearts good Wishes
in my behalf, and I protest by all that is sacred, never to endeavor my
happiness by any sinister means; I shall with an exemplary patience wait for
what my Stars and your fair self have decreed for me, and employ all that time
that shall run betwixt this moment and then, in admiring your Beauties, in
setting forth your praises, and in obeying your Commands, with all the fervor,
zeal, and diligence, that a Heart so possessed with the admiration of your
Virtues, as mine is, can be capable of. And I must tell you, replied the
Marchioness, that so long as you bring that temper along with you, you shall be
welcome to my heart, in which you may claim as a great share, as Virtue and
Honor can allow you. This Crowns that Victory, Madam, answered Camille, which
I have lately obtained over my passions, and that honor which I receive of
being the first in your esteem, is so far beyond all that I shall ever merit,
that I can desire no more than the permission to seal the protestation which I
here make to be eternally yours, (with that the Marchioness gave him her Hand
to kiss) upon this white Author of my happiness, continued he, till I have
leave to taste of that Nectar which flows on your Lips. That you once took,
said the Marchioness, when I was not in a condition to forbid it, which I have
you know forgiven you, and I will not refuse so insignificant a thing however
you esteem it, when you sue so modestly for it, but stop there, and let the
bounds of your desires be limited within this compass, till it shall please the
Heavens to enlarge them; After this Camille kissed her Lip, and was going to
return her thanks with an assurance of his moderation, when Father Andrew
entered the Chamber as brisk as could be, saying, Madam, give me my News-gift
before I tell you the best news that you have heard since your deliverance.
That I will good Father, replied the Marchioness, for I own my self already
much indebted to you; with that she took up a fair Diamond-Ring which lay upon
the Table, and taking out of her Pocket a Purse of Gold, Sir, said she in a low
voice to Camille, giving him the Ring, accept of this pledge of my Friendship,
and wear it for my sake; then turning to Father Andrew; and you good Father,
continued she, receive this small reward of your Services, until I am in a
better capacity to acknowledge them: saying this, she gave him the purse of
Gold. The good Father having received the golden blessing with an humble bow,
he thus began his Story.

I am but just now returned from the City, where after diverse inquiries, I have
learned that the Marquess your Huband, Madam, was returned to his Lodgings
before day, that he had been taken so violently ill of a Fever, that all the
Physicians of the Town that are about him had given him for dead;
notwithstanding the frequent repetitions of bleeding, and all the other means
that their Art can use upon him; his Fever increasing so violently that he
says himself that he is a dead Man: This made me go to a Religious Father of my
acquaintance here, where having fitted my self with a Religious Habit, I
desired him to accompany me to the Marquess, where I prayed him to mix amongst
his comforts some gentle touches of his hard usage of you, with some admonition
to make you amends at his Death. But when we came there, I standing a little
aside, lest my presence should distract his thoughts, I found him already
disposed as I would have him, he was saying to his Kinsman the Justice that is
with him, that he was very sensible of the wrongs which he had done his Wife,
that he wished that he could but once again see her before he died, to ask her
pardon for it; that for proof that this reconciliation to his Wife was sincere,
he declared, after some few Legacies and some gifts to the Church to pray for
his soul, he would leave his dear Wife sole Heir of his Estate. This news made
the Marchioness to go immediately to her Husband, who did no sooner perceive
her, but he took her by the hand, and did a Thousand times ask her pardon for
his ill treating of her, and after he had ratified the Will which he had made,
since Father Andrew's absence, and which was in his Kinsmans hands, having
called for it, and given it to her in the presence of all, he presently after
gave up the Ghost. The Marchioness after this, leaving directions with her
Husbands Kinsman concerning what she would have done, leaving to his management
all the concerns in that City; as also the care of her Husband's Transportation
and Burial in his own Country, according to his desires, amongst his Ancestors;
she return d to Alphonso's House, where being fatigated and late in the Night,
she went to Bed.

The next morning after that she was up and ready to receive a visit, Camille
came to her to renew his suit, summoning her of her promises; to which she made
answer, that she would do him Justice; after which Don Alphonso, his Lady,
Father Andrew, and Zora, being present, she declared before them all, that she
received Signior Camille for her Husband, she gave him her hand in assurance of
it, and further said, that so soon as she had paid those formalities which were
due to the dead, she would confirm it by marriage. Camille full of Joy did
return her all the thanks imaginable; the whole company did applaud her choice,
and wished them both all Joy and Happiness.

After that all the ceremonies of the Funeral were over, and that the
Marchioness had sent her late Husband's Kinsman to take possession in her name
of what he had left her, she began, through Camille's incessant importunities,
to think on Marriage: In short, within the compass of some Months they were
Married, to both their contents, after which they having returned infinite
thanks to Don Alphonso and his Lady, and given them some presents, as also to
the Justice who had been their Friend: they took leave of all, and returned
into Italy, taking along with them, the good Father Andrew, and Zora, where
they were both provided for during their lives very plentifully; and Camille
having made his peace with the Church, he enjoyed his Marchioness with great
pleasure and content.

FINIS.

