The Spirit OF THE PHANATIQVES DISSECTED. AND The solemn League and Covenant
solemnly discussed in 30 Queries.

By William Collinne, Gent.

Printed for F. Wallis. 1660.

THE PHANATIQUES dissected.
I.

WHether the two Millions and odd sum of moneys borrowed by the late long
Parliament will ever be repayed to the right owners thereof.

II.

Whether Lilly the Astrologer by all his rules of Astrology can calculate the
time when the same shall be repaied?

III.

Whether Lilly ought to be trsted in this calculation, since he varies as much
in his calculations of the fuccesses of the late perfidious King of Sweden, as
in his impudent reports of young Richard (our small reigning late Protector?

IV.

Whether Lilly spoke not truth at unawares, when he in his Almanac said, about
this time the King of Sweden should have some considerable loss, he now having
lost his life?

V.

Whether Lilly will call him any longer the victorious King of Sweden; since he
has met with one which hand to hand has overcome him?

VI.

Whether the Kings of Poland and Denmark have not as much cause to rejoice at
the Death of the King of Sweden, as we of the kingdom of England, of the death
of that Devil (seeming Saint) Oliver.

VII.

Whether the solemn League and Covenant can be said to be performed in (it is
being barely new shown to the world) without Charles Stuart (eldest Son to
the late King) be restored to the inheritance of the Crown, according to these
words in the Covenant, (Viz.) The Honor and Happiness of the Kings Majesty and
his posterity?

VIII.

Whether if this be not performed, it can be said any other, but that the
Covenant is a mere collusion to the people, and a sworn for-sworn Covenant?

IX.

Whether any of these Members of Parliament, (commonly called and known by the
name of the ^UMP) ought to have any Vote in any succes^^^ Pa^liament, they all
(according to the solemn League and Covenant) being guilty of most notorious
perjury?

X.

Whether upon this new change DUN has not good cause to be merry, his work (in
all probability) being like to go forward a pace this next Spring?

XI.

Whether it be not Tichbourn and Iretons best policy to speak to Dun before
hand to use them as kindly as they have done others, (that is, to show them no
more mercy then they showed to the late Kings Majesty, in (craving) and passing
the unjust sentence of death against him?

XII.

Whether that saying in the Scripture, he that digs a pit for another, shall
fall into it himself, be not sufficiently verified.

XIII.

Whether Tho. M^wcomb his speaking of the great prejudice of the reformed cause
throughout Christendom (by the death of the King of Sweden, that perfidious
Prince) mean not the Reformation of the (pretended) Good old Cause, by reason
he and Oliver were so great Machivillians.

XV.

Whether T. and I. ars^^s makes nor buttons, or whether they may not be reputed
to stand like quaking puddings?

XVI.

Whether T. and I. had not better have studied Honesty then so much Divinity,
since they are become of (any or) no Religion at all?

XVII.

Whether they that were never true to any trust (as T. and I.) ought ever to be
trusted again?

XVIII.

Whether Alderman Atkins his sitting in the Parliament House, may not properly
be compared to a chip in a mess of pottage?

XIX.

Whether the Godfathers and Godmothers of Praise God Barebone, are not like
most godfathers and godmothers, that is, to promise much and perform little, or
whether they are not sufficiently deserving to be called neglective, in seeing
and suffering him to be brought up in such Heretical opinions, that in all his
actions he rather blasphemes then praises God?

XX.

Whether it may not be supposed, and finally concluded, that vain Sir Harry,
prodigious Sir Arthur, purjured Oliver, (if alive) unchaste Harry, the cheating
Lord Mounson, and the long winded Speaker, (my namesake in letters W. L.) with
the rest of the RUMP, would non willingly go to the Pope for a dispensation of
all their villainies?

XXI.

Whether honest men have not good cause to wish they would all go thither and
never return, since they never bred any thing but disturbances in our State,
and that the pope being the grand incendiary of those persons, to foment our
distractions, he ought not to take his own children home to his own Church, and
afterward send them to Purgatory, there to repent at leisure for their
villainies?

XXII.

Whether I. M. his ready and easy way to establish a Commonwealth without
re-admitting of Kingship (which Tho. Newcomb mentions in his advertisements and
paraphrastical book of Thursday the 8th. instant) be not borrowed in copy from
the States of Holland, or whether such a fool as the Author deserve not to be
sent to Bridewell for pretending so much good to his Country and dare not show
his name to his Libell?

XXIII.

Whether his new frame of a Commonwealth without re-admitting of Kingship,
together with that fool Harringtons, ought not to be sent to terra incognita
or, Sir Th. Moors Utopia, together with the Authors themselves to frame a free
State there.

XXIV.

Whether any ingenious person can choose but laugh at these fools assertions
and pretense of maintaining such a rediculous thing as a free State, since in
12 years time we have found by experience, the Nation never was more Quiet,
then when governed by a single person?

XXV.

Whether Fleetwood and those Members of Parliament the RUMP, ought not to have
blow coats given to each one of them lac't with yellow lace as a Livery due and
fit for their ambitious foolery?

XXVI.

Whether Overtons fifth Monarchy be not quite extinct?

XXVII.

Whether the poor Prisoners can ever expect to have an Act for their release so
long as Will. Lenthal be Speaker of any Parliament, he making it a point and
Article of his Religion and faith, that rather then break his Brother Sir Ioh.
by such a dissection, ten thousand souls should perish?

XXVII.

Whether Lenthal the Speaker (having let so many blood) ought not now to be let
blood himself, for fear the superfluity of blood cause him to be more bloody,
or that the 400 and odd thousand pounds he put in his pocket upon Gentlemen's
compositions for their estates at five pound a man, ought not to be borrowed of
him, and go toward the payment of the public debts of the Nation?

XXIX.

Whether the next Parliament (now to be summoned) can properly be called a Free
Parliament, if tied to restrictions or Qualifications?

XXX.

Whether Lilly ought not to have notice of all these Quries, and go a
Star-gazing after they are all resolved, and then compile a new Almanac of
truths for the year ensuing, lest if he judge before hand, he be as much
erroniously mistaken as heretofore?

FINIS.

