THE Great Question In the Case of the ABSOLUTION OF Sir John Friend and Sir
William Parkens, Which will be insisted on at the Trial of the Absolvers it is
presumed will be, whether the giving them Absolution at the place of Execution,
was a Lawful, or Unlawful Act.
That it was a Lawful Act, appears to me from the following Considerations;

1. FOR a Minister of the Church of England to give Absolution to a dying
Penitent, if he humbly and heartily desire it, is a lawful Act, as appears by
the Rubric in the Office for the Visitation of the Sick; which is not only
confirmed by, but a part of the Act of Uniformity. 2. There being no particular
Office appointed in the Liturgy for Persons to be Executed (whose Souls are as
precious, and as much to be taken care of, as the Souls of those who dye in
their Beds) that for the Visitation of the Sick, which by parity of Reason is
farely applicable to the case of Persons to be Executed, who are to be
considered as dying Men must be used, or none at all in their Case; unless the
Ministers officiating is left to the liberty of Extemporary Effusions, which
rather become a Calvinistical Elder, than a Presbiter of the Church of England.
And why is it not as justifiable to use the Office for the Visitation of the
Sick in the Case of Persons to be Executed as to use the Prayer in that Office
Publicly in Churches in behalf of the Sick, which are appointed by the Rubric
to be used in the sick Persons Chamber; for which only necessity, and a defect
in the Liturgy is pleaded? 3. The Circumstances of time and place and Ceremony
being entirely left by the Rubric (where there is neither Command nor
Prohibition concerning them) to the discretion and choice of the Ministers
Absolving, and the Penitent to be Absolved; how could it be Criminal in the
Absolvers of Sir J. F. and Sir W. P. to give them Absolution with Imposition of
Hands at the place of Execution, which they desired as a comfortable Support
under the Terrors of Death, as a Viaticum in their Passage to Eternity? 4. It Is
entirely left to the Absolving Minister to judge of the Spiritual state of his
Penitent, whether he be duly qualified, or not, to receive Absolution. -- Vid
Rubric, ut supra. 5. The Ministers Absolving is to rest Satisfied with an
Account of the general Repentance of the Person to be Absolved, who is not
obliged to make a particular and special Confession of his Sins to the
Absolver, unless he feel his Conscience troubled with any weighty matter; as
appears by the Rubric, ut supra. To affirm the contrary, is to plead for
Auricular Confession, as it is taught and practiced in the Church of Rome. 6. If
the Person to be Absolved makes a special voluntary Confession of his Sins, the
Absolver is bound by the Canon to conceal it, and keep it a Secret from all the
World. Vid. 113. Can. If it be Objected that in case of a Treasonable
Conspiracy which the Penitent confesses, the Absolver is not bound to conceal
it, it may be answered, that in the Case of Sir J. F. and Sir W. P. there was
no treasonable Conspiracy so pretended or laid to their charge, but what was
discovered and made public, and which they were Convicted of. 7. Suppose, that
after the Death of the Absolved Penitent, who dies in his Bed by the Visitation
of God, a Paper should be published under his own Hand (which the Absolver knew
nothing of) whereby it appears that he was Guilty of Heresy in the Church, and
Treason in the State, and that he justified both the one and the other: Shall
this affect the Absolver, and make him a Criminal in giving Absolvtion? If not,
then, with Submission, neither could the Paper left by Sir J. F. and W. P. with
the Sheriff, and afterward published, which the Absolvers were altogether
Strangers to, any ways affect the said Absolvers, or render them Criminals in
giving them Absolution. 8. Suppose that Sir J. F. and Sir W. P. had left no
Paper with the Sheriff, and none had been published after their Death; it is
presumed then that the Absolvers would not have been Qestioned, or Censured for
giving them Absolution. 9. Nay farther, suppose that Sir J. F. and Sir W. P.
had left a Paper with the Sheriff, which he had afterward published,
acknowledging their Guilt, and signifying their Repentance as to that
particular Crime which they were Convicted of; then it is presumed that the
Absolution would have been so far from being Censured for giving them
Absolution, that it would have be generally agreed to be a Charitable, regular
and lawful Act. And if it was in it self a lawful Act at the time of the
Performance of it, no subsequent Act or Circumstance whatsoever, which the
Absolvers were Strangers to, would make it unlawful. Nothing could make it
unlawful a part post, which was a lawful Act a part ante. But if it was in it
self an unlawful Act at the time of the performance of it, no subsequent Act
or Circumstance whatsoever; how grateful soever to the Government, as in the
before mentioned instance, could make it lawful.
FINIS

