Collections of Notes Taken at the KINGS Trial, at Westminster Hall, On
Tuesday last, Janua. 23. 1648.
Also a paper of Instructions intercepted, coming from Scotland, to the Scots
Commissioners, concerning the KING.
THe Court being met on Tuesday the 23 of January 1648. Proclamation was made,

Hoyes, etc.

All manner of persons, that were by the last Court adjoined to attend this
Court, draw near, and give your attendance: All manner of persons are strictly
charged to keep silence upon pain of imprisonment.

Then the Commissioners were called over 72. this day sat, and answered to
their names.

There was (instead of the Kings Arms) set over this high Court of Justice,
The kingdoms Arms; which is a red Cross in a white field.

Then the Court sent Sergeant Dendy to bid those that had charge of the King,
to bring him to the Bar, and returning, the Sergeant took the Mace, and met
him at the Stairs going to the Court, and the King being come to the Bar, he
looked about him, and viewed the Galleries, which were full of people.

The King was this day and the day before in black; And this day his
countenance was very sad; proclamation was made,

Hoyes, etc.

This Court does strictly charge and command all manner of persons to keep
silence, whilst the great affairs of the Commonwealth are in hearing, upon
pain of imprisonment. And the Captain of the Guard is to take into his
custody all such persons as shall make any disturbance to the proceedings of
this Court.

Then Mr. Cook (one of the counsel against the King, who is) Solicitor
General, moved the Court to this effect. That this was the third time that the
prisoner was brought before them, that they had showed him great favor,
Declaring, that he did on Saturday last, in behalf of the Commons of England,
exhibit and give into this court, a charge of High Treason, and other high
crimes, and misdemeanors against him, whereof he did accuse him in the name of
the Parliament and people of England, and the charge was read unto him, and his
answer required; that he would then give no answer, but instead of answering,
did there dispute the authority of this high Court. That he did humbly move on
Monday, that the prisoner might be desired to make a positive answer, either by
way of confession, or negation, which if he shall refuse to do, that the
matter of charge might be taken pro confesso, and the Court would proceed
according to Justice. But he did still dispute your power, contemning the
authority of this high Court, erected by the Commons of England in Parliament
assembled, though he be a prisoner at the Bar, accused of Treason, the
highest treason that ever was, That a King of England, who was entrusted with
the Government of the kingdom, to violate the Laws of the ^and, and yet to
dispute against your power, in defiance of the Parliament, it is very high and
a great contempt.

He did also declare that the day before the King was pleased to put in a
demurrer, which was over ruled by the Court; And the Jurisdiction of the Court
not to be disipated,

I do now desire the Court to proceed to justice against him. And that if a
Prisoner will not put in his Answer, it is to be taken pro confesso, it has
been done by Decrees: But this Court has hitherto showed him favor, in
delaying to proceed to sentence. As for the proof of the Charge against him,
there is enough upon Record by the Parliament: And yet if that will not
satisfy, they have many witnesses to make it good: And therefore the Solicitor
general did humbly move, (and not only himself, but much innocent blood that
has been spilt) that justice may be speedily done upon him.

Then the Lord Presedent told the King, that he had heard what was said and
moved, declaring his condition, and what has been done; and required of the
King that yet he would give obedience to the Court, and acknowledge the House
in them, or from the Supreme Court from which they have their Authority; that
if he would yet answer he might be heard: But that the Court (if he did
proceed in his obstinacy) would proceed to justice against him. And the^ they
did then expect a possitive Answer. That in plain English, the Court expected
that he should answer to the charge against him, either guilty or not guilty.

The King then made a narrative of the Treaty, which he says was so near
concluded, from which he was taken away, and brought prisoner hither: That he
is charged with the breach of his Treaty, for proceeding contrary to Law. And
yet that he is pressed to put in his Answer to this Court, whose Authority he
approves not.

That he cannot submit to it, saying, that it was a new way contrary to the
Laws of the kingdom. And the King said, that that was the thing he stood
upon; but as for the charge, to answer it, he did not weigh it of a rush: And
he despised the Authority of the Court again.

The Lord President told the king that he was answered to other things of that
nature the last day, But he went on and would not acknowledge the jurisdicton
of the Court then. But that the Court did now expect his possitive answer to
the charge, declaring to the king, that he was not to issue out to any other
dispute, until he had first given in his possitive answer to the charge. And
he did further declare to the king that these were the final commands of the
Court, who did require his positive answer now.

The king then spoke again, pleading his relation to the people of England,
whom he was set to rule over. And that it was hard for him that is their king
to be made exemplary, or in such a case to acknowledge the power of that Court
to try him, which he knew no president for, to make him examplary. And that he
did not know how to do it, and urged further the liberties of the People, and
the ancient Laws of the Kingdom. And that if they would give him time, which
he pleaded for, he would show them reasons why he did it.

And then argued his being a prisoner, and the engagement of the public faith
of the Kingdom, in which he went very high.

But the Lord President told the King that he must interrupt him, and that that
language was ill taken.

The King desired to be heard on in what he was saying.

The Lord president told him, that he must hear the Court who require his
possitive Answer, And that they do not crave it of him, but require it. Then
the Clerk read a paper to the King as follows.

Charles Stuart King of England, you are here accused in the behalf of the
people of England of high treason, and other high crimes. The Court do require
you to give in your possitive answer to the same.

To this the King argued that he had done nothing against the privileges of
the Kingdom, And that he was not satisfied of their authority to require this
of him. And that his intentions was always good to the Kingdom.

The Lord President answered the King, That he had been three times before
them, And still in opposition to the Court. And as for his intentions, he has
showed them (the Lord President told him) by his actions, that he had written
them in bloody characters.

Then the King would have gone on pleading against the authority of the Court,
and would not give any satisfaction by giving an answer to his Charge as was
desired.

Therefore the Lord President told the King that he was not to be heard further
therein. And declared to the King how he had stood in contempt against the
power of the Court, And that the Court will not be so affronted: That they
will proceed according to Justice and not regard the person of any.

And so the Lord President did further declare also, that he should find that
he is before a Court of Justice.

Then the King was commanded to be taken away.

After which Proclamation was made.

Ho yes, etc. All manner of persons, that now have appeared, and have further
to do in this Court, are to depart hence to the Painted Chamber, to which place
this Court does adjourne, and intends to adjourn it self to this place to
morrow morning.

After which the Crier by order concluded saying.

God bless the Kingdom of ENGLAND. Instructions intercepted from Scotland, to
their Commissioners now in England.
1. TO use in your Applications the salve mentioned in your Letter, that it
seem not to import the approbation of any violence used against the
Parliament, or any Member thereof.

2 That you have your Addresses to such Lords and Commons as are our friends,
and well affected, and the honest Party.

3. That your Applications be so concise that they give no occasion of offense.

4. That nothing proceed from you justifying the Kings proceedings.

5. Nothing in approbation of the late Engagement.

6. Nothing which may import a breach, or give, or be a ground of new War.

7. That they would delay to meddle with the Kings Person according to their
several promises and Declarations at Newcastle and Holdenby.

8. If they proceed and pronounce sentence against the King, that you enter
your dissent and protest, that this Kingdom may be free of the miseries which
inevitably will follow thereon (without offering in your Reasons) that Princes
are exempt from Trial and Justice.

9. That none in this Parliament had or has had any hand in the proceedings of
the Army against the King and Members of Parliament.

10 If they proceed, then to show the calamities that will follow, and how
grievous it will be to the Kingdom, considering his delivering at Newcastle.

12. If the Paper called the Peoples Agreement shall be passed and shall import
any thing anent the procesing of the Prince to the changing of the fundamental
government of the Kingdom that you enter your dissent.

12. That you shall alter these Instructions, or manner your trust therein, by
the advice of our friends there,

13 To prosecute your last Instructions anent the Covenant and against
Toleration.

14 To show that the Kings last Concessions are insatisfactory to us in point
of Religion.

Imprimatur

Jan. 23. 1648. Theodore Jennings.

FINIS.
London Printed by Robert Ibbi^son in Smithfield nea^ the Queens head Tavern,
1648.


