Collections of Notes Taken at the KINGS Trial, at Westminster Hall, On
Saturday last, Janua. 20. 1648.

AND THE Charge of High Treason Read against the KING.

With the several Speeches made by the King, the Lord President, and the
Council which exhibited the Charge against Him.

Which Notes were taken by H. WALKER, who was present at the Trial that day.

January 20. 1648.

Imprimatur THEODORE JENNINGS.

LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1648.

Collections of Notes, Taken at the Kings Trial at Westminster Hall, On
Saturday last, January 20. 1648.
Colonel Fox led twenty Gentlemen with half pikes that were brought from the
^ower, from the painted Chamber, to the place prepared for the High Court of
Justice in Westminster Hall, and then the Ushers, Messengers, and Crier of the
Court went all bare.

After them, Colonel Humphreys with the sword, and Sergeant Dendy with the
Mace, came before the Lord President; and after him, all the Members of the
Court that were then present, who took their places upon the Benches. And
Proclamation was made, and Westminster hall gate set open.

Ho yes, ho yes, ho yes: All manner of persons that have any thing to do in
this Court, come in and give your attendance.

Ho yes, Every man keep silence upon pain of imprisonment, and hear the
Commission of this Court read, which is authorized by an Act of the Commons of
England in Parliament assembled.

The Commission was then read, and 68. which were the Commissioners of the
Court then present, answere^ to their names.

After the Commission was read, Sergeant Dendy was sent with the Mace, with ten
of the Gentlemen, with the half pikes to fetch the King into the Court, and
immediately they returned ushering the King (his attendance with him to the
Court) to the place, where a chair, and a little Table was set for the King,
at the Bar, before the Court.

Then the Lord President made a Speech to the King, under the name of Charles
Stuart King of England, letting him know that the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled are sensible of the many Subjects that have been slain;
and that they are resolved to make inquisition for this blood, other means
having failed, they have erected this Court,

Then the Counsel exhibited the Charge against the King, who as he was
offering it to the Court, the King lapped on the shoulder with a wand which he
had in his hand, bidding him to stay, but the Counsel proceeded. And declared
thus to the Court, that he did in the name of the Parliament and Commons of
England, exhibit a charge of High Treason, and other High crimes and
misdemeanors against Charles Stuart King of England, then present before the
Court

The King again lapped him with his stick, and bad him hold.

The Lord President of the Court then spoke thus:

Sir, This Court commands the Char^e against you to be read, and then you may
be heard what you have to say. Then the Charge was read, all being bare, but
only the Commissioners of the Court, and the King, who sat in his chair at
the bar.

The charge, consisted chief on the late war, and many thousands that have
been slain by Traiterous leavying war against the Parliament, and was present
at the several fights at York, Nottingham, Edgehill, in Kenton-field,
Branford, Oxford shire, Gloucester, Newbery, Leceister, Nazeby, and other
places, where he caused thousands of his good Subjects to be slain, and
foreign forces to come over, and gave Commissions under his hand and seal to
murder his good Subjects. And since again caused war in Kent, Surrey, Essex and
other places, caused enemies to come in by sea, fire, and civil hostility
against his people, whereby much innocent blood has been spilt, houses burnt,
places wasted, and Commissions granted to Act with the Irish Rebels, whereby
the said Charles Stuart has been the occasion, author, and continuer of this
civil war, by which much blood has been spilt, And rapine and outrages on
his good Subjects committed. And that they do proceed against such a Tyrant,
Traitor, and Murderer, as shall be agreeable to justice.

These are some heads of the Charge then read by the Clerk against him.

Then the Lord President sitting in his chair spoke, declaring to the King,
That now he had heard the Charge read against him, the Court expected his
answer.

The King then stood up and spak, denying the authority of the Court. And
affirming that he was to give Answer to no power, but the supreme power above.
And several other things in this nature was spoken by the King, to all which
the Lord President made, full and excellent answers. And still answers and
replies were made on each side.

The sum of the Speeches were thus, 1. The King required to know by what
Authority they lat there to try him? Answer was made by authority of the
Parliament of England, And that if he had marked what was read he might have
understood that before. Then the king said, they had not a lawful authority,
and that he saw none of his Lords there. The Lord President told him that they
sat by the authority of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled who had
chosen him to be their King, and to whom he must give an account. The King
denied that he was chosen by the people, But that he had it by inheritance,
and said that it has been heriditary above a thousand years. And the King
said that if they did not show a more lawful authority for their sitting
there, he would not give them any answer. The Lord President told the King,
That he had been told several times, that their sitting is by authority of
Parliament, And that if he will not give them an answer, the Court knows how to
proceed against him. The King said that if he did know that they were
warranted by the word of God, the Scriptures, that he would deliver his
Answer, but else he will give no Answer. The Lord President told him that if
he would give no further answer, the Court knew how to proceed legally against
him. And in the mean time those that brought him thither, should take charge of
him back again. Then the King pleaced an appeal to the God of Heaven, and
that he was entrusted with the Government of the Kingdom, and pleaded the
liberties of the people, saying, that it is as great a sin to lay down that
power wherewith he was entrusted, as to commit a crime, saying, that if he
knew the authority of the Court to be lawful, he would give his answer.

Then the Soldiers and the people cried out Justice, Justice, Justice. The
King turned about thereat, and looked toward them, but said nothing to them.

The Lord Presid^nt having fully declared the power of the Court, advertised
the King, how well satisfied they are of their authority, and the lawfullnesse
thereof, and bad him to consider further of it against Monday next. For if he
will give no answer, they must proceed legally against him. The King then made
a short speech, but still not owning the power of the Court. After which the
Lord President told the King that the Court had heard him what he had said. And
then the King was carried back to Sir Tho. Cottons. After which Proclamation
was made

Ho yes, Ho yes, Ho yes, All manner of persons that have any thing more to do
at this Court, ye are to depart at this time, And this Court does adjourn it
self until Monday morning next, at 9 of the clock to meet in the Painted
Chamber, and from thence hither again. FINIS.

