Colonel MORGANS LETTER Concerning his taking the strong Garrison of
Kildrummie from the Highlanders in Scotland: With his Letter and Summons sent
to Major Drumond, Major Drumonds Answer thereunto; And the true Copy of the
Articles concluded on between them: And the Names of the Hostages delivered for
the performance thereof.

ALSO, The Highlanders falling down again into the Lowlands, threatening Fire
and Sword to all that refuse to join with them.

And a great Fight at Dunkill, the taking of Captain Thomson, and Col: Ramsies
Lieutenant, and 200 more prisoners, one hundred and fifty Horse, and General
Glencarns and the Earl of Kenmores Ammunition, Arms, Bagg and Baggage. And the
blowing up of a strong Castle with Gunpowder.

By J. Hill Secretary to Colonel Morgan Commander in Chief of the English
Forces in the North of Scotland.

LONDON: Printed by F: Neile in Aldersgatestreet. 1654.

A Letter from Coll: Morgans Quartere in the North of Scotland, with the taking
of the Garrison of Kildrumain, and the Articles of Agreement betwixt Coll:
Morgan, and Major Drummond.
SIR,
I Thought good to acquaint you that Coll: Thomas Morgan Commander in chief of
the Forces in the North of Scotland, understanding of the enemies approach
within 24 miles of this Town, he drew forth a bout 1100 horse, dragoons, and
foot, and upon the 9 instant after a very hard march, met with the Forces under
the command of Glencarn, and Kenmore, about the number of 1400 horse and foot:
where after a short dispute upon most base ground, he put them to a retreat,
and forced them to a very strong pass, which 40 resolute men might have kept
against (...), yet so cowed were the enemy, that in a short time providence
ordered it so, that we recovered the Pass, and in time put them to the rout,
pursued them through such invincible Hills, (as were the truth of them related
would be imagined incredible) which never English men marched over before that
time: there was about 120 of the enemy slain, 17 taken Prisoners, about 80
horse, most of their Arms, all their Ammunition, Bag, and Baggage, all which
the Lord was pleased to carry on with great facility to us, for there was not
so much as one man of ours wounded, and we had only 2 Horses slain: there was
indeed one of Captain Merimons Troop shot through the head by one of his fellow
soldiers accidentally before the Engagement, the next day having intelligence
that the enemy had possessed a strong house called Kildrummy, where the Earl of
Mar dwelt, who afterward prerended he was surprised by the Enemy, yet so just
are Scotchmen that now they begin to appear in their colors, they through our
lenity being grown to such a height, as that they m^ke good they o^d charecter,
Turks and Scots coequal: We marched thither, and summoned it, an account you
may have in the annexed passages betwixt the commander in chief, and the
Governor, as also the Articles for the surrender: after the said Garrison was
reduced, we marched to our Winter Quarters to this Town, where we was welcomed
with News from Johnstons, that Coll: Daniel with a considerable party out of
Johnstons, and Dundee, resolved to make an attempt upon Dunkel, being informed
that there was a considerable party of the enemies horse in that Town, and that
Athol, and Forbus had settled a garrison of about 60 persons in an old House in
that place and victualled it for two months: upon Wednesday being the 15
instant by break of day Col Daniels forlorns fell into Dunkel with their Scours,
having a quarter of and ^ower too short of suprizing the Town; And for their
escape they were beholding to the nearness of the Hills; yet as quick as they
were we took 40 of their Horses, and after ^ hou^ and a half won the House,
gaining room after room, in which time they were reduced to yield upon terms
for life, their number with those that were taken belonging to their Horse, is
about 1^0 an^ 40^ killed besides what is wounded, the enemy looking on, Go^
Daniel blew up the house, and carried the prisoners to Johnston. Upon Friday
night last 17 Inst. there was one Cap: Thompson, and Lieut: Col: Ra^s^es
Lieutenant came down with 5 or 6 more into the Lowlands to plunder horses, and
Lieut: Hellen Lieut. to Major Bramston having intelligence thereof marched
forth with 7 more Dragoons with him, out of the Garrison of Thornston, and
after he had pursued them ten miles through the hills, chanced to catch them
about 5 a clock in the morning, killed one of them, and brought the rest
prisoners to Dunotter Castle.

Sir, these blows are very seasonable, for the Enemy were very high, and
threatened all with fire and sword, that would not join with them, I am apt to
believe that the peace with the Dutch will vanis^ like smok, though
notwithstanding these Bushes they give out high language, and say that they
resolve to gain their credit. I hope to hear from you, and remain,

27 Febr. 1653. Your affectionate Nepher, J. H.

Coll: Morgans Summ^ns to the Governor of Kildrummie.
SIR,
THe command of the Forces in the North of Scotland being committed to my
conduct, I thought good to signify that yesterday meeting the Forces commanded
by the Lord Glencarn, it pleased God that we dispersed, and totally Rou^ed them,
and understanding that you had possessed the house of Kildrummie, to the great
disturbance of the peace of this Nation, I marched hither, and do strictly
summon you upon sight hereof to deliver unto me the said house of Kildrummie,
with all the Arms, and Ammunition therein for the use of his Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and in case
you yield obedience hereunto, I shall give you liberty to go to your own homes,
and live at peace you engaging that you will act nothing prejudicial to the
English Army, but on the contrary, if there happen the least effusion of blood
unto any under my command, then expect no mercy. Your answer I expect within
half an hour, and remain,

For Major William Dammond Officer in chief within the House of Kildrummy.
Yours as I find you, Tho: Morgan.

Major Drummonds Answer.
SIR,
I Received yours, and find your propositions very hard without order from my
Lord General, always Sir, if you will be pleased to suffer me to send one to
my Lord General, and upon his return we shall render the house if they come not
again Monday at night for our relief, we shall march with our horse and arms to
any part of the Kings Army in Scotland, and withal the place be made useles for
any garrison, and for the effusion of blood we take God to witness, yours shall
be the fault: no further but

Kildrummie 23 Febr: 1654. For Col. Morgan Commander of the English Forces.
Yours as time shall produce, Will. Drummond.

SIR, I have considered your Answer, and cannot grant your desires, yet so
tender am I of shed^ing of blood in case you be not satisfied with the terms I
offered, if you please to send 1 or 2 Officers fully authorized to treat in
order to your sudden surrender, I shall rather deal honorable, then use
cruelty, I expect your answer by this Bearer, and am

For Major Drummond Officer in chief in the House of Kildrumie.
Yours as occasion shall serve, Tho: Morgan.

SIR, I have received yours, and am as loath to shed blood at this time as any
shall be, Sir, I thought you would have suffered me to have sent to my L. Gen:
because I being put here by him, and on such a sudden to surrender, I believe
no man of honor but might esteem me the basest of men, but however for the
matter of Treaty, if you please to send down to the gate one or two, I shall
wait on them there to hear your will; no more but that I am

For Coll. Morgan commander in chief of the English Forces in the North of
Scotland.
Yours to meeting, W: Drummond.

SIr, according to your intimation I have sent Lieut. Coll: Simmons, and Major
Knight to treat, in order to your sudden surrender of the House of Kildrummie,
and what ever they conclude, shall be made good by me

For Major William Drummond Officer in chief within the House of Kildrummy.
Tho: Morgan.

The Commissioners could not agree, so that the Treaty broak, but the next
morning Drummond sent his Drum with this following Letter.

SIR, I thought good to show you that it is but a short time betwixt Monday,
and Thursday, and because we have bedding, and some other things which we
brought from the Country people, and did engage to give them back at our
leaving the place, before which time we can hardly get done, if you Sir, think
this fit, let us meet, and condescend on Articles, and to such time I rest

Kildrummie 12 Febr: 1653/4. For Col: Morgan Commander in chief of the English
Forces in the North. These. Yours as occasion offers, Will. Drummond.

SIr, I perceive that you still persist in your delays, but this may suffice
you that I shall not afford you any longer time to march then too morrow at 10 a
clock, and because your redelivery of the Countries Goods shall not cause you
to Dispute: in case those whom I send to treat, and conclude, and you agree, I
shall give you liberty to leave one behind, to see the Goods disposed on
according to your engagement, who shall have free liberty to act accordingly; I
expect your immediate answer, and remain

For Major Drummond Commander in chief within the House of Kildrummie.
Yours if you be your own, Tho: Morgan.

SIr, I received yours, and if we agree on Articles I shall march to morrow by
10 a clock, so expecting those who^ you, send to treat at the place where we
met last night, where I shall attend them. I rest Sir,

Kildrummie 12 Febr. 1653/4. For Coll. Morgan Commander in chief of the English
forces in the North. These. Yours as before.

Upon which these ensuing Articles were agreed upon, and Corner Barhom was sent
into the house as Hostage on our part, and Corner G^rdon, Kenmores Cornet was
delivered as Hostage for the House.

Articles agreed upon for the surrender of the House of Kildrumie this 26 Feb:
1653/4 betwixt Lieut: Coll. Simmons, and Major Knight on the behalf of the
English Forces.

And Major W: Drummond Governor of the foresaid House, and Cap: Matthew
Hambleton, on the behalf of the Scotch forces.

1. That the said Governor is to march with all the forces in the said House,
Arms, Ammunition, Bagg, and Baggage to morrow morning by ten a clock to the
nearest place where any of the Scotch Forces are, without molestation, and to
have a Pass to that purpose from Colonel Morgan, unto whom he is to surrender
the said House without any demolition, for the use of his Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

2. That the said Governor shall have liberty to leave an Officer to dispose of
the Country goods which are in the said House, either belonging to the Earl of
Mar, or any other.

3. That the said Governor shall march ten miles a day, with the party under
under his command, except the first day, till they come at the forces, and are
not to molest or trouble any of the Forces belonging to his Highness the Lord
Protector upon their march, upon any account whatsoever; for the performance
whereof, each Subscribed.

POSTSCRIPT.
NOw I shall take the boldness to acquaint you, that in case the Castle had not
been delivered that day, neither our horse nor foot had been able to have
continued there one night longer, the season of the year not permitting it;
Neither were we able to do any good upon the House without battering guns which
could not have come to us in a weeks time, so that after serious Debate at a
Council of War, it was concluded better to allow honorable terms to them, then
with dishonor to leave it, having been before it three nights.

FINIS.

