VINDICIAE MINISTERII EVANGELICI REVINDICATAE: OR THE PREACHER (pretendedly)
Sent, Sent back again, TO Bring a better Account Who Sent Him, and learn his
ERRAND: By way of REPLY, To a late BOOK (in the Defense of Gifted Brethrens
Preaching) Published by Mr. John Martin of Edgefield in Norfolk, Mr. Samuel
Petto of Sandcroft in Suffolk, Mr. Frederick Woodale of Woodbridge in Suffolk:
So far as any thing in their Book pretends to Answer a Book published, 1651.

CALLED Vindiciae Ministerii Evangelici; WITH A Reply also to the Epistle
prefixed to the said BOOK, called, The Preacher Sent.

By John Collinges B.D. and Pastor of the Church in Stephens Parish in Norwich.

London, Printed by S. G. for Richard Tomlins, at the sign of the Sun and Bible
near Pye-Corner, 1658.

To my Reverend and much Honored Brethren, the Authors of the late Book,
called, The Preacher Sent.
Dearly beloved Brethren,
I Have seriously perused your Epistle directed to those professing the Order
of Church Fellowship, and Government, called Presbyterian, of which number I
must own my Self to be one (though the least of all the Servants of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who walk in that way) together with your Book to which it is
prefixed; and must profess my self, as to several particulars in either of
them, very much unsatisfied, both as to the truth of the Notions you contend
for, and to the mediums by which you endeavor to establish them; putting
therefore away all wrath, prejudice, or bitterness, as in the following sheets
I have endeavored to show you your mistakes, as to the matter of your Book, so
I shall in this Epistle do the like, as to what is contained in your Epistle:
In the mean time professing my self (to use your own expression) bound for
peace, as far as the shoes of the Gospel will carry me; and longing for that
dispensation (if it may be expected in this life) when all the Lords People
shall be blessed with One heart, and guided into one way, only desiring to
divide my zeal equally betwixt truth and peace, knowing that God is as much the
God of the one, as of the other.

I rejoice to see my dear and Reverend Brethren sensible of the great abuse of
that Liberty, for which they plead. I know our Brethren have not been such
Strangers in Israel, but they have seen and observed, that most of those
spurious notions, which in ^hese times of Blasphemy have been found in every
Street, and with an impudent forehead have called the holy Spirit of God
Father, and the lovely Virgin Truth mother, have been found lying at the door
of this Liberty, and have really been born in her house. That most of those sad
Earthquakes, which have rent the bowels of the Church, and overturned some
Churches of God, both in Holland, and in Old and New England, have been caused
by the wind of this Liberty, which they still endeavor to keep up. I know they
cannot but have heard the cries of many poor people in this County, who are fed
with these husks instead of bread, with the chaff of these exercises, instead
of the more substantial wheat of public Ordinances. And surely, if an Argument
from the blastings of Providence, or the general disrelish of judicious
Christians, be worth any thing, we have as good a plea as against any
licentious practice in the worship of God.

It was said once by a Learned Person in this Nation, that if a Book were
composed of all the English Sermons, preached by men of worth, containing the
choicest matter contained in them, which had been Preached within some few
years, he believed no Book in the world would be to be compared with it: I
believe our Brethren judge, that if all the Errors, Crudities, Nonsense,
impertinencies, blasphemies, self-contradictions, which (by virtue of the
exercise of this Liberty they plead for) have within these fifteen or sixteen
years last past, been vented in open Pulpits, were summed in one Book, the
Turkish Alcoran would scarce afford such a rapsody of error, nonsense,
blasphemy and impertinency. To give our Brethren a taste, I have a Letter still
by me, wrote by a gifted Brother, who took upon him to tell me, that he heard
me such a day, and I did not open my Text aright (my Text that day was, Ephesians. 2.
-- Aliens to the commonwealth of Israel.) He told me, if I had rightly opened
it, I must have told my people, 1. What the wealth of Israel was. 2. How it
came to be common. 3. How far forth it was common. With much more such
nonsensical stuff; and very teachy he was with me, that I had not fallen upon
his notions: if either this person had understood the Greek, or our Translation
had Translated (...) polity, all the jest had been spoiled, which probably he
would have made three Sermons upon.

I should have really thanked our Brethren, for acknowledging an abuse of this
Liberty, if I could have seen, 1. That any use of it (other than I had granted
them) were not an abuse of the greatest Ordinance of the Gospel.

2. Or if I could have seen that our Brethren could have fixed a rule of
regulation, it would have done something with me; but when you tell us, you
plead for none but such as are really gifted, and then tell us none have to do
to judge whether they be so or no, it is convenient the Church should, but if
they Preach without, it is no sin. To my apprehension ye do but complain of a
Flood-gate, that stands open too deep, when your selves put in a bar that it may
not shut down more close. It is true, the abuse of a thing plainly necessary by
a necessity of precept, is no argument to take away the use, but where no
precept is plain, the general miscarriage, and accursed consequences of it, are
a strong topic to prove it is not according to the will of God. And I hope our
Brethren upon second thoughts, will not judge any one Text quoted by them
plainly concluding the Case. All your Arguments run either from the use of
gifts, to the use of this gift (when as yet you will not allow all gifts to be
so exercised) nor any judgment to be made of the gift) or from examples where
there is no parity, as you will perceive by the following Discourse.

You rightly apprehend, that the singular notion you have entertained of a
Church is the (...) of this, and many other unhappy Controversies; you are
therefore pleased in your Epistle, to endeavor to make the light of your
notion concerning a Church to reflect upon our faces. You tell us,

That a Church is a particular company of Saints in mutual union for mutual
Fellowship in the means of worship appointed by Christ, Ep. Dedic.
for the glory of God, the edification of their own souls, and the good of
others. This you say is the only Church that is capable of Officers to be
immediately set in it, and over it.

That this is a Church we grant, but that only this Church is capable of
Officers we deny: I shall have liberty to enter my dissent, in examining the
six particulars you instance in for the explication of this description.

First, You say it is a company, that we grant, Ecclesia properly is nomen
multitudinis, one properly and strictly cannot be called a Church.

Secondly, You say it is a particular Company, and that there never was, nor
ever will be existing in rerum natura, any other than a particular company. I
must confess to my dear Brethren, that I cannot fathom their notion of
particular: we use to say, particularis is opposed both to universalis and
singularis, I suppose our Brethren here oppose it to Vniversalis. An universal
theme in Logic is that (as our Brethren know) which is apt to be predicated
naturally concerning many: I think Church is such a Theme. Thus much our
Brethren I am sure will grant, that their Congregations at London, Norwich,
Yarmouth, may each of them be called a Church. Now the Question is, whether all
these Churches may not be considered together, and called a Church: Or if you
will, Whether all the Churches of God upon the earth, may not by an universal
notion be called a Church, or is not called a Church in Scripture. You
acknowledge it in a reformed sense an universal company, but not an universal
Church, that is (as I suppose you mean) a body capable of Officers, otherwise
it were a strange thing that seven persons, who are visible Saints should be
called a Church, Mr. Hudsons Vindic. p. 31. ad. p. 40.
and seven hundred should not. If our Brethren will please to read what
Reverend Mr. Hudson has wrote, he will show them where the word Church is both
generally and indefinitely applied where it cannot be understood of particular
Churches, Acts 8.3. Gal. 1.13. Acts 26.11. Acts 9.31. compared together, Acts
12.1. Acts 2.47. 1 Cor. 10.32. Gal. 4.26. Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Cor. 12.28. All these
Texts will prove, that the Scripture has not restrained the notion of Church
to a particular Company so called.

But you will say, This is a Church not capable of Officers to be set in or
over it. Brethren, have you read what Mr. Hudson says, to prove Ministers
Officers to the Church Catholic? Do they not (when they Baptize) admit into
the Catholic Church; Page 232:
why else are not your Members baptized again, when they are translated from
the particular Church into which (according to this principle) alone they were
Baptized? Do they not by Excommunication cast out of the Catholic Church? Or
will our Brethren say, that a Church may lawfully admit to its Communion, a
Member which another Church has cut off from her Communion? Were the Apostles
(think our Brethren) Officers only to a particular Church? If to the Universal,
then there was an universal Church once existing, capable of Officers. Nor is
that irrefragable Text, 1 Cor. 12.28. (as our Brethren say) pressed to the
service of the Catholic Church. No, it comes as the Lords Voluntier willing to
engage for this Truth. You say Brethren, that what it is written, ver. 18. of
that chapter, God has set the Members every one in the body, does as much
prove a Catholic or universal Body, as God has set some in the Church, proves
a Catholic Universal Church. I know my Brethren aim at greater things than
quiblings about a word: that passage God has set the Members every one in the
body, together with ver. 12. and all the members of that one body, being many
are one body, will prove that the body is Totum integrale: So also says the
Apostle is Christ, i. e. the Church of Christ. If our Brethren will but grant
us this, That the Church is a Totum integrale, you must grant that a particular
Church is but a part of this Totum. If you say there is no other Totum called a
Church, but only the particular Church, I have proved the contrary, that the
term of Church is applied otherwise than to a particular Church. If you say,
this Church has no Officers, that Text, 1 Cor. 12.28. confutes you; neither
will your consequence follow, that because an universal body is not proved from
ver. 18. therefore an Universal Church is not proved from ver. 28. viz. from
the whole verse. If it had been said v. 18. God has set the members every one
in the body; and then the Text had made an enumeration of such members, some of
whose use and office was not confined to the service of that particular body,
but would serve any other particular bodies, as he does of Church Officers,
ver. 28. I hope it would have proved an Universal body. You tell us (Brethren)
you renounce the name and thing of an Universal or Catholic Church, you must
then renounce the Holy Scripture (witness the Texts before mentioned) and
renounce right reason, and renounce the most learned and judicious of your own
Brethren, who generally acknowledge, both the name and thing, only deny it to
be Organical: But you think, you have five Arguments will prove, that a
particular Church cannot be a part, but a Totum.

1. You say first, every part is in power incomplete; But every particular
Church has the power of a whole Church -- And may act in all Church work, not
as a part, but as a whole. I must deny your Minor (Brethren!) I hope you
account a power to meet in a Synod, and to consult (at least) a piece of Church
work, to which Gods word gives a power, Acts 15. and yet when you think of it
again, you will not say that a particular Church has a power alone to make a
Synod. We say the like for Ordination (except in cases of absolute necessity)
and for excommunication (where the Church is very small) there are that think
it is not a work fit for a particular Church. See Brethren what Reverend Mr.
Hudson says to all these in the Book before cited.

2. You tell us next, that every whole is really distinct from every part, and
from all its parts collectively considered, they are constituting, that is
constituted; but where that Church is which is really distinct from all
particular Churches, or wherefore it is you know not. This is Brethren such a
fallacy, as scarce deserves an answer; the body of a man is a whole, all his
members are parts; now when you have found out where that body is, which is
really distinct from all the members, and wherefore it is, you will have
answered your selves. The Nation of England is a whole, every Parish is a part,
find us where that Nation is, which is distinct really from all the Parishes
taken together. We use to make this a Maxim in Logic, Totum reipsa non
differt a partibus suis simul sumptis and unitis.
That a whole does not really differ from all its parts taken together and
united.

3. In the next place you tell us, there can be no visible universal Church,
because there is no universal visible meeting: and that the Greek word
translated Church (in all Civil and Sacred usage) signifies a meeting, in fieri
or facto esse. But you began to think that the invisible Church, are never like
to have such a meeting; and therefore (to salve it) you heal this wound in your
Argument (in my opinion) very slightly, when you say, it does meet invisibly
and in Spirit. If you will but grant us that Brethren, that the name of Church
in Scripture, is given to those that never locally meet, but it is sufficient
for them to be present in Spirit; you have by an unhappy heel, kicked down all
that good milk, which your Argument was giving down for the suckling of your
infant-notion of a Church. And yet the Scripture will enforce you to grant it,
it speaks of the Church of the firstborn. There is an universal meeting of the
Catholic visible Church, at the throne of Grace (before their great Pastor)
and in Spirit (as it is only possible for a Catholic Church to meet) whiles
they agree in the Profession of the same Truths and Ordinances. For the visible
Meeting which you mentioned at first, you have quitted your plea for the
visibility, to save the Church of the firstborn from Excommunication; and we
hope it will also save the Church Catholic, visible, from any hurt by this
Argument.

4. You go on (Brethren) and tell us, There are no distinct Officers for a
Catholic Visible Church: Ergo, there is no such Church. If you had expressed
the Major Proposition, I should have denied it; the assertion of a Church
Catholic visible (though we add Organical) does not imply there must be
distinct Officers for that Church; it is enough that the Officers of the
several particular Churches (which as parts constitute that whole) have power
to act as Officers in any of those parts, which united make up that whole: I am
not willing, but here necessity constrains me to tell my Reverend Brethren,
that this is no fair play, to pretend to dispute against the Presbyterian
notion of a Catholic Church, and to mention only the Antichristian, and
Prelatical Notion of it. Let any one read Mr. Hudsons Vindication, p. 129, 130,
131. and he will see we plead not for such an universal Church, as must needs
have a Pope for an universal Head, and Archbishops, Bishops, etc. for his
derivatives. But this we say, that the whole Church (all the particular
Churches in the world) make but one body of Christ; and as it is one (una) so
it is (unita) united in a Common Profession of the Gospel; and as there is this
union, and communion of members, so there is a communion of some Officers,
particularly Ministers, who may Preach as Christ's Ambassadors, by virtue of
Office, any where, and may any where Baptize, and Administer the Lords Supper,
upon occasion; and we say our Brethren in practice grant this; for the Pastor
of one of their Churches will give the Supper of the Lord to those, to whom he
is not in Office, as his particular Church, and this is a Common practice with
our Brethren; how consistent with our Brethrens principle let them judge: while
our Brethren say they do this by virtue of a Communion of Churches, they do but
blind the Common People with a dark notion, that signifies nothing: What mean
they by a Communion of Churches, if they do not mean this, that by the word of
God, one particular Church has a power to communicate in that Ordinance with
another? If they have so, there must be a Communion of Offices, as well as
Gifts, for the dispensing the Sacraments is acknowledged by our Brethren to be
an act of Office. If that it be not the will of God in his Word, that the
Officer of one Church, should do an act of Office in another Church, or to a
Member of another Church, it is not his will that in all things there should be
a communion of Churches. If this be his will, it is as much as we ask; for then
the Officer is not only an Officer to the particular Church, and the members of
it, but also to any particular Churches in the world, or to any of their
Members. We ask no more. This is the Catholic Organical Church we plead for.
Let our Brethren consider whether while they think this an Idol, and pretend to
abhor it, in the notion, they do not in practice bow down to it, and commit
Sacrilege.

5. You tell us in the last place (Brethren) That no Church is greater than
that Church which has power to determine, and hear offenses, Mat. 18.17. But
that is a particular Church. Ergo. You are sensible that your Minor is not
extra aleam controversiae, and you have taken as good care as you could, to
strengthen it, by saying, it cannot be meant of both; and to exclude the
Congregational Church, is unscriptural, irrational, absurd.

But I must crave leave to tell you, 1. That your whole Argument is nothing to
the Question; for it is not, whether be greater the Church Catholic, or the
Church particular; but whether there be any Church Catholic or no, greater or
less.

Object. But you will say, if there be any it must be greater.

Answ. Then I must examine your sense of the word Greater, whether you
understand it in respect of quantity or quality: If in respect of quantity,
number, etc. the Major is apparently false. If in respect of quality, as you
seem to hint by the term, having power, then your Argument is this,

There is no Church has a greater power, than that which has the power to
hear and determine offenses committed in the Churches:

But the particular Church has that power, Mat. 18.17. Ergo.

I will give you Brethren such another Argument, judge you whether it be good
or no, and if it be not, you must prove your own better.

There is no Court has a greater power than that which has the power to hear
and determine offenses in a Nation.

But the Sheriffs-Hundred-Court has a power to determine offenses. Ergo, that
is as great a Court as the Court of Common. Pleas.

You must therefore put in finally determine, and all offenses, in any part of
the Church, or else your Major is false, when you have mended that we will deny
your Minor, and tell you, that admit that Text, Mat. 18.17. should be meant of
a particular Church, yet it proves no such power, either finally to determine,
or all offenses, as well those betwixt Church and Church, as those betwixt
party and party, or party and Church. Neither can I divine the necessity you
would impose upon us of excluding the one or the other Church out of that Text,
(according to the nature of the offense) nor do I think your saying, that to
exclude the Congregational Church, viz. some Congregational Churches, is
unscriptural, irrational, absurd, amounts so much as to the ninety ninth part
of an Argument in the case. I think it is far more rational, and far less
absurd, to say that when a Member is to be cut off from all the Churches of God
in the earth, it should be done by a Church, made up of several Churches in
association and upon a Common consultation, and by a common act of many
Reverend and Judicious persons, then by seven persons, none of which possibly
has reason enough to judge truly of the merit of the cause. And in reason it
should seem more like to be the will of Christ, who is very tender of all his
peoples souls. Our Brethren know we could give them sad instances of particular
Churches, excommunicating their Godly and Reverend Pastors, who are
sufficiently known to have deserved no such things.

You tell us Brethren, that the Officers of Churches met together, are no true
Church. Zuinglius (you say) said some such thing, but it was in a case no more
like this, than chalk is like cheese: We are disputing now, whether the
Officers of particular Churches meeting together in a Synod, may not be called
a Church, they being sent to represent the particular Churches. We have a Rule
in Logic, Cui competit definitio convenit definitum. I therefore argue.

A Church say you, Is a particular Company of Saints in mutual union, for
mutual fellowship in the means of Worship appointed by Christ, for the glory of
God, the edification of their own souls, and the good of others.

But a justly-constituted Synod is such a Company -- Ergo, they are a Church.

1. They are a Company, one cannot make a Synod.

2. They are a particular Company, they are but a part of the Church, not every
individual; nor (say our Brethren) did ever any other company exist.

3. They are an holy Company, at least should, or may be so.

4. They are united, their consent to meet and sit together unites them, so
does the consent of the particular Churches sending them.

5. They are united unto fellowship in means of Worship, we will suppose them
while they are together, to meet together in one place on the Lords days to
hear, pray, receive Sacraments together, etc.

6. The end of this fellowship, is the glory of God, the edification of
themselves, and the whole Church, and the good of others.

So that in Answer to our Brethrens expression borrowed from Zuinglius in a
quite differing case, Representativant esse credo, veram non credo. I return,
Aut veram esse credo, aut falsam esse vestram credo definitionem: Either they
are a true Church, or your definition of a Church is not true.

Thirdly, you tell us, a Church must be an holy Company. I Answer.

1. So was not the (...) mentioned Acts 19.32, 42. But concerning the Church of
Christ, we grant it (sano sensu) upon some of your Arguments, which I think are
conclusive enough.

2. We say, God himself calls the whole Jewish Nation holy, Exodus 19.6. The
Apostle calls the seed of those Parents holy, where one of them was a believer,
1 Cor. 7. In this sense we grant every member of the Church must be holy,
separated from a Paganish conversation, and under an external Covenant with God.

3. We say, it is their duty to be holy by sanctification, this they are to
labor after. But we deny,

1. That they must necessarily be all real Saints, or no Church, and this our
Brethren will not own.

2. That a visibility of saving grace, is necessary to the constitution of a
Church in all the members of it.

1. Because our Brethren (we hope) will own the Infants of their members, to be
members, in whom is no such visibility.

2. Because special saving grace is a thing invisible, and of which we can make
no true judgment.

3. Because we find no ground in Scripture for it; we cannot see what
visibility of saving grace the Apostles could act by, who admitted three
thousand and five thousand in a day, Acts 2. Acts 4. more then their being
baptized upon their owning the Gospel.

Fourthly, our Brethren themselves say, that filthy matter may be found in a
Church constituted, which is not fit matter in the constitution: We look upon
the Companies of persons in our Parishes, as they have united themselves in
means of worship, Churches constituted, not to be constituted; and do not
understand (while the form, which does dare esse continues) how some decays in
the matter annihilates the Church, any more then the rottenness of some pieces
of Timber, yea though the major part of those pieces be hardly sound, makes the
house (while it stands and keeps the form) not to be an house.

But fifthly, we grant to our Brethren, that such as err in the fundamentals of
the Gospel, or are affectedly ignorant of them, or are guilty of leudness in
their lives, ought to be cast out of the Church, though we dare not determine
any single acts of wickedness inconsistent with grace, remembering the failings
of Lot, Noah, David, Solomon, and Peter; yet we say by virtue of the Command of
God (though they may have a root of grace) they ought to be admonished,
suspended, and excommunicated, and this for the glory of God, the honor of the
Church, and the good of their own souls, not because they have no saving grace,
or no visibility of it; for it may be we may have seen formerly so much of
them, as to make us of another mind.

We therefore grant you (brethren) that the visible Church, is the Kingdom of
Christ, the body of Christ, and yet there may be subjects of this Kingdom, who
give not due homage to him, members of this body, real members, and yet must be
cut off, branches in this Vine, and yet not bringing forth fruit, John 15.2.
You desire to know what reason we have to justify a practice of enquiring
after a truth of Grace, in order to the Communion in the Lords Supper, and yet
to blame you for such an enquiry in order to the Communion of Saints. The
Answer Brethren is very easy, Because we find, that a man should examine
himself before he eats of that Bread and drinks of that Cup: but we no where
find, Let a man examine himself, before he comes into the fellowship of the
Church; and we think the three thousand and five thousand had scarce any
leisure before their admission, to do it very thoroughly. But our Brethren know
no Rule they say, for an ordinary suspension of complete and owned Members of
the Body from the Sacrament. If you consult Beza's notes upon 2 Cor. 2.6. He
will show you plain Scripture for it; if the incestuous person had been
excommunicated, St. Paul needed not to have said, sufficient is the punishment
which is inflicted, for they had punished him as much as they could. Nor was
there any thing to be remitted. See Beza on the Text more fully. However our
Brethren (as I hear) ordinarily practice it, when a person is under admonition,
and the Church waiting to see the issue of it, we plead for it no further.

5. You tell us fifthly (Brethren) that a Church must be an united company; if
you had told us in what sense you understand united, we could better have told
you our minds (at least I could have better told you mine) concerning it.
People may be united by cohabitation, by common profession, by mutual consent,
this you seem to understand: this again may be either explicitly, by Covenant,
or implicitly, by a constant joining in the same practice which our Brethren
contend for, or whether they be indifferent in the thing I cannot tell: this
being premised Brethren, I conceive.

1. Every company called (...) cannot be said to be an united company, either
as to an union of judgment or practice: the rout, Acts 19. called by this name
were not.

2. Every Religious Company or Church of Christ (called by this name in
Scripture) were united, but neither by cohabitation, nor yet by consent to walk
together in the same individual Ordinances, but every such company must be an
united company as to profession of the same Doctrine, and acknowledging the
same specifical Ordinances of the Gospel; all the places I quoted out of Mr.
Hudson to prove the universal Church prove this.

3. There is no need that every particular Church (if not organized) and under
the exercise of Discipline, should be united, by consent as to practice, in the
same numerical Administrations; every particular company of the universal
Church may properly enough be called (...) without such a consent; you often
read of the Church in a particular house, Col. 4.15. Romans 16.5. Phil. 2. of
which no such thing can be proved.

4. Indeed it seems reasonable, that a particular Church, organized, and in
which Discipline ordinarily should be administered, should be a company united
by consent; for my own part I can allow you this, though I know some of my
Brethren will not.

5. That this Union must needs be by an explicit Covenant, or consent is
neither to be proved by one Text, nor yet by one sound reason, and to impose
this as necessary, is a mere humane invention, and not to be endured, because
there is not the least warrant in Gods word for it.

But lastly, we heartily wish, that for the putting of our Churches into order
upon clear grounds for the exercise of power, the members of our Churches would
submit to such an explicit consent. And we cannot but commend our
Worcestershire Brethren for endeavoring to bring their people to it, though we
suppose they will be tender of Excommunicating such, as seeing no command of
God for it, shall not think fit to submit to it: Thus far I can yield our
Brethren, that a particular Church is an united Company. And upon this
principle we plead for our Parocheall Societies to be true Churches, not (as
some would (ridiculously) fasten upon us) because they live within such local
limits, but because they are societies of baptized persons, who by a tacit, and
implicit consent, have united themselves, waiting upon God in the same
numerical Ordinances of instituted worship. And this Union holding, we say they
are to be looked upon as true Churches, although (as the Church of Corinth)
corrupted in some of their members, and therefore not to be separated from, nor
disowned as no Churches, but to be purged, and the old leaven put out, that
they may be a new lump.

5. For what our Brethren say in the fifth and sixth place, That they must be a
company united unto fellowship in means of worship appointed by Christ, and
this for the glory of God, etc. I freely grant, nay it may be I will grant
more, viz. that they must be a people, who either have elected or submitted to
the Officers of the Church for the Administration of the Ordinance of
Discipline.

But let it not offend my dear and reverend Brethren, if I tell them, I have
almost made my head ache, with studying the connection of a passage which you
have in the last page of your Epistle (save one) and do what I can, I
understand not how it relates to the former Discourse, or is brought in upon
any easier terms, then they say, The Fellow brought in Hercules, viz. by head
and shoulders; for undoubtedly) if it had been led by the conduct of sense or
reason, it would never have come there: The passage is this,

But we shall say no more of this, Our Brethren not being baptized into the
belief of the same truth, asserting Presbyterial Government to be from heaven,
although the confidence of our late Assembly could say no more but this: The
Scripture does hold forth, that many particular Congregations may be under one
Presbyterial Government. May be! they would have said, must be, had they seen
the stamp of Jus Divinum upon it.

I must profess my self (dear Brethren) to be so ignorant, that I can neither
understand the sense of this passage, either copulatively, or disjunctively;
will you give me leave to sift it a little? possibly (though it all looks like
chaff) some kernels of sense or truth may be found in it.

But we shall say no more of this (you say) Our Brethren not being Baptized
into the belief of the same Truth. Of this? of what? You had before been
speaking of the Papists, making their Decrees and humane inventions, equal with
the ten Commandments; and told us, you believe Revelations of new matter are
ceased, and that Christ has ceased from his work, etc. Now you tell us, you
shall say no more of this: your Brethren (viz. We of the Presbyterial
persuasion) not being baptized into the belief of the same truth, asserting
Presbyterial Government to be from heaven: what is this to the making of Church
Canons of equal authority with Gods word? Do any of us make them so? Or had our
Brethren a mind to make the world believe that of us which never entered into
our thoughts, nor was ever expressed by us in any of our Books. Does [the same
truth] relate only to what follows, that we are not all of a mind, as to the
Divine Right of Church Government: what needed our Brethren have added this in
this place, or what is the meaning of those words? [But we shall say no more of
this] and then adding the other as a reason. But let us see if there be more
truth in what follows, That the Presbyterians do not all believe that their
Government came from Heaven: They are foully to blame then, for I should think
Popery, as to Government, better than Presbytery, if I did not think
Presbytery came from heaven. But it is yet more wonderful (Brethren!) which
you tell us, that the Assembly did not so believe, yea, expressed as much; for
they only say, Many particular Congregations may be united; and you note, they
would have said must be, if they had so judged. Our Brethren have indeed said
in their terms no more then it may be, but they have also in the same place
proved that it was so, both in the Church of Jerusalem, and also in the Church
of Ephesus.

If they only say it may be, but prove it must be, I hope it is enough; our
Reverend Brethren loved to use soft words, and hard Arguments: But indeed they
could not well say it must be, for there might be but one particular Church in
a Nation, and then it was not necessary; but surely our Brethren would not have
said, it may be, if they had thought there was no particular or general ground
for it in Gods word, and surely, what has such a foundation in Gods word, is
jure Divino (not withstanding our Brethrens critical observation.) Our Brethren
of the Assembly do not say it may be, the sense of the Texts they quote to
prove it, yet you (Brethren) must remember you tell us so for some if not all
of your Texts for Election, where all you pretend to, is our sense may be the
sense; yet I hope you will say that Election is jure Divino. Our Brethren know
that they have pretended a Jus Divinum too for gifted men's preaching, and yet
for fear of their asking maintenance (and to avoid our Argument from thence)
tell us, they may preach occasionally, but will not say, They must preach
constantly.

In the last place Brethren, you fear we may be provoked against you, and
therefore you favor us with your Reasons, for engaging in this service, and
excuse for coming into it so late. A pit you say has been dug, and a long
time stood open, and diverse have fallen into it, and you come out in charity to
cover it. Whether you have indeed covered, or uncovered a Pit, Let every
judicious Christian judge, yea let the experiences of all the Churches of
Christ testify. I beseech my dear and reverend Brethren to lay their hands
upon their hearts, and consider whether they have not uncovered that pit, into
which some years since, many (supposed) Brethren in New England falling, sank,
and rose up no more to a visible repentance for their Errors and Blasphemies.
That pit, into which many Members of our Brethrens Churches in Holland fell,
and that sadly too. That pit into which many Members of their late Churches in
England, yea in Norfolk fell, and are come out Quakers, pleaders for the Jewish
Sabbath, for the power of Miracles (as not ceased) conferring (as they pretend)
the Holy Ghost, etc. That pit which the most learned, judicious, and godly-wise
Brethren, Pastors of our Brethrens Churches in England, will not endure to
stand open where they have to do; which the reverend Pastors of the Chu^ches in
New England dare not let stand open without a Teaching Elder present to watch
it. This pit our Brethren have endeavored again to uncover, and I hope it will
appear as vain an attempt as his who would needs rebuild Jericho (as to the
issue of the work, though not as to the punishment of the persons, whom I
desire to love and honor, for their work sake, though not for this works sake)
I could have heartily wished, my Brethren had left this Idol to plead for it
self, and I dare say, they might have done it without offending, one humble,
serious judicious Christian, (at least who is known to me)

I most humbly beseech my dear and Reverend Brethren, to hear the cries of many
sober judicious persons, lamenting the sad condition of the Parishes wherein
they live, which instead of able and godly Ministers, are served with none, but
such as mend their trading on the week day, by assuming this unbridled liberty
on the Sabbath, who are both obtruded upon them, and unable to speak the word
of God as they ought to speak; so that they are forced (in these days of
Reformation too) to go from Parish to Parish, to seek one who can speak to them
in the name of the Lord, or to whose preaching they can go in faith, and attend
upon it as a public Ordinance. Does not this Liberty dead the hearts of sober
men, as to acting in any Reformation, by casting out scandalous, ignorant, and
insufficient Ministers? While they see little more good from it, then casting
out one ignorant insufficient man, to make way for some others; or the casting
out one that would prophecy of wine and strong drink, to make way for others,
who shall prophecy the vain imaginations of their own hearts, or the errors of
Millenaries, Anti-Ministerial persons, and high flown Anabaptists; and who
would not judge, that if people must be under this sad destiny to have a snare
for their souls stand in their Pulpits, it had better be one that every one
knows, and would avoid, than one that is covered over with the hypocrisy of a
little hay or stubble, and is no less dangerous and more hard to be discovered
by vulgar eyes?

Dear Brethren! I beg your pardon, if in this case, the zeal of my God, his
House, People, Truths glory, has eaten me up, in this Cause in which I think
all of them are so deeply concerned, and sad experience has proved it.

As to your excuse, for coming so late into this Dis-service to the Church and
Truth of God, I have no reason to be troubled at it; as thinking you have at
last come too soon: And I am apt to believe the Rebukes of your own Conscience
might retard your expedition: I have endeavored to follow you with more speed,
observing it a piece of Wisdom of the GOD of Nature, to plant the Antidote
within view of the Poison. I can truly say that while you have a just Answer of
your Book (so far as I am concerned in it) I have the Answer of a good
Conscience, having spoken nothing on this Subject, but what I believe to be the
Truth of GOD. Nor have I willingly showed any passion.

So praying that those honest Hearts (of which I persuade my self you are all
possessed) may hereafter be found enditing a better matter. I commend you to
the LORD, and to the blessing of his Grace: Being

BRETHREN, Your Servant for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, John Collinges.
Chaplyfield-House in Norwich, Febr. 12. 1657.
To every Christian Reader.
Reader,
THere are three or four great Truths of God, the Tutelage of which, from their
enemies (at least in these parts) I have formerly undertaken, 1. The Divine
Ordinance of Gospel Preaching, in the administration of which, all who thought
themselves gifted men pleaded a right of intercommonage with those, who
according to Gospel-Rules are separated to that work: 2. The liberty of
Christians, from the observation of Holy Days. 3. The pure administration of
the holy Sacrament of the Supper: and 4. The Divine Right of Church Government
in the hands of Christ's proper Officers. My discourse concerning the first, I
have already once vindicated; what I said upon the second (to my knowledge)
none has yet answered; as to the two last, there has been something published
to the world, under pretense of answer. John Timson and Mr. Humfry have
pretended something by way of answer to the third: and Theoph. Brabourne to the
fourth. And now three Reverend Brethren have undertaken me the second time, in
the defense of the Preaching of gifted men's Preaching. I shall only give thee a
true account, why I have said nothing to the three other Answerers, nor have
any thoughts to do it. As for John Timson had he fallen upon me but with his
Cartwhip, I think I should have turned again, but falling so foully upon me with
his plow-staff (upon a maxim I have learned from some Gentlemen, that a Rapier
is no weapon fit to engage a Carter upon the Road) I thought it prudence to
runaway: Besides that, perceiving he had got the Art to answer himself by more
then one manifest contradiction; I thought it pity any one else should be put
to the trouble, especially considering, that after I had drawn seven or eight
sheets of an Answer, my Stationer assured me, he had not sold above one of his
Books, and it was pity by an Answer, to commend his Book to the worlds Enquiry
Mr. Humfry indeed discovers a reverend opinion of his Book, I suppose for the
Notion he in the main drives, not for his way of handling of it, which I think
scarce deserves such a character. As for Mr. Humfry, I perceived him sailing in
his last Book at a lower rate, and I was loath by an answer to serve him with a
wind, which might have tempted him to have spread his sails to their former
wideness (I remember the ill influence, learned Spanhemius his Answer to
Amiraldus had upon him to this purpose.) Besides that, I saw I must have
differed with him in more momentous matter then that of the Sacrament, if I had
given him a strist answer: and I was not willing to raise more dust of
Controversy then is already raised in the world. As for Theoph. Brabourne, as
I could find nothing in his Book besides error and nonsense: so I perceive
the world had no better opinion of it; the Stationer returning him his Printed
Copies for New-years-gifts for his Friends, because he could sell none of them,
or but exceeding few, and though I have often met the Books at my Friends
Houses, where he had given them, yet (that I know of) I never found any of them
made fit to read, or otherwise used than to kindle Tobacco. Besides that,
immediately after his publication of that Rapsody of impertinence, I saw some
Papers he had scattered up and down this City, to prove there were three
distinct Gods, and to the will of which of them he had calculated his Book I
could not tell. The GOD whom I serve is but one, he that can blaspheme the
Living GOD, may be excused for that crime toward his Truths and Servants, and
deserves not to be mentioned in a Christians mouth.

As for this last Book, called The Preacher Sent, I find it written by grave
and sober persons, with a good show of Argument (indeed as much as their Cause
would bear I think) and dictated by a sober composed and gentle Spirit, and the
concernment of the Book to be of exceeding Moment, especially in relation to
this County, which (I believe) has more of that sort of Preachers then any
three Counties in England have: I have therefore thought it worth the while to
examine their Book, so far as I am concerned in it; with what success (Reader)
thou must be Judge, and the Lord guide thee in Judgment, both as to this, and
every truth: So prays,

Thy Faithful Servant in the Lord Jesus, J. C.

The Printer to the Reader.
READER,
I Would desire thee (by reason of the Authors dwelling so far off that he
could not Correct his Book himself) that thou would mend with thy Pen the
Errors of the Press.

Farewell.
CHAP. I. Containing an answer to the three first Chapters of our Brethrens
Book, Concerning Preaching without Ordination. In which, the terms Minister,
Ministry, and Office are considered and explaned, and three Questions
discussed: 1. Whether gifted men not ordained can be called Ministers, and in
what sense. 2. Whether the Office of the Ministry be a relation to the work or
no. 3. Whether the Office of the Ministry be a relation to the Universal
Church; The Negative part of the first, The Affirmative part of the two latter
is defended; And whatsoever our Brethren have offered on the contrary is fully
answered and proved fallacies; their description of Office proved faulty, etc.

1. THat two of the Books lately Published, against the Preaching of persons
merely gifted, and for Ordination (as that which gives the call unto the work
of the Ministry) should (as our Brethren say) contain the substance of all the
rest, is no great wonder, considering that (I trust) they were all wrote by the
same Spirit, and (for the most part) made use of the same Scripture for the
Seeds of their Arguments: But that our Brethren should take my Vindiciae
ministerii Evangelioi to be one of them, either speaks their (too much) respect
for me; or their policy to magnify that Enemy whom they conceive they have
conquered.

2. For my Pamphlet; it was written seven years since, commanded (almost) to
the Press by an holy and eminent servant of God (now with God) Mr. Jeremy
Whitaker, who was with me, when I was writing; and arguing the need, or
expedience of such a Pamphlet, he told me he was of Augustine's mind, who would
have every body write against Pelagius. It was occasioned at first, by the
troublesomness of a gifted man (as himself judged) in communion with me, who
had a great ambition to be expounding Scripture; and (in a teach) because we
would not allow it, afterward left us, and joynd himself, with a
Congregational Church, who had no better opinion of his gifts than we had
before, and restrained his lust in that ambition too; and in a like teach, he
left them and turned Quaker. For the satisfaction of those Christians in
communion with me, upon the trouble given us by this person, I first (at
private meetings of Christians in communion with me) discoursed the things in
my Book; afterward Printed them. It pleased God so far to bless my endeavors,
that since that time, none of those committed to my charge have presumed to
attempt any such practice; and it has pleased God so far to give my Printed
Book success, that I think it has been twice Printed, and several persons
(some of quality) have returned me thanks, for my poor labors in it. And our
Brethren having singled me out for a combatant once more in this quarrel; I
shall endeavor to discharge the duty they have imposed upon me, and to do it
with the same moderation, and spirit of meekness, which they profess, and (for
ought I observe yet) have practiced.

3. Our Brethren in the first Chapter do two things. 1. They Open the term
Ministry. 2. The term Office. 3. They raise two Questions:

1. Whether the Office of the Ministry does correlate to the work, or to the
Church? If our Brethren would have been content, that it should have been in
its relation divided, we should not have opposed it: But affirming it is no
relate to the work, but only to the Church, I must profess my self dissatisfied.

2. Whether the Office of the Ministry does correlate to the Church Universal,
or only to the particular Church? Our Brethren say, Only to the particular
Church; If our Brethren would have been content with a division again, that the
Minister should be related to both, we should have granted it; or if our
Brethren had stated the question about the relation of a Minister to such a
Catholic Church, as had constant standing Catholic Officers, we know no such
Church, and should not have disputed de or pro non ente: But (as they state it)
I must profess my self also in this of another mind, viz. to believe that a
Minister is in Office to more than his particular Church: And therefore to
trial we must go.

In the opening of the term Ministry, Our Brethren tell us that Ministry stands
in opposition to Lordly domination, Mat. 20.25, 26, 27. that those who do acts
of ministration, are Ministers; that (...) and (...) and the words used in
Scripture to express Ministers and Ministry, are applied, in Scripture, to
others beside Ministers in Office: that their constant performing acts of
ministration, entituleth them to the denomination of Ministers; and their work
should be called Preaching, as we usually call them, Bruers, or Bakers, who
brew, or bake constantly; and therefore Christians should so call them. This is
the sum of what they have, p. 2. and 3. To all which, I shall crave leave to
answer. For this seems to be an old hedge of distinction, which who so breaks
the Serpent of Confusion will bite him

1. That the terms Minister, Ministry, and Office, are of various
interpretations both in civil, and sacred usage, is unquestionable. These terms
therefore falling into the questions, the explication, and limitation of them,
to the sense in which we understand them seems necessary. An accurate discourse
of a question, requires, that no signification of the terms in it be omitted in
the Explication. In plena tractatione, vocis distinctio nunquam est omittenda
(say Logicians.)

2. For the first term therefore [Minister] that it is a Latin word, none can
doubt, nor that in ordinary use it signifies no more that a Servant, one who
works for another as his Lord and Master; so called, either because he is to
his Master a manibus, an hand servant, quasi manister (as Perottus will have
it) or because he is less than his Master, quia minor in statione; (which is
Isiodore's notion, and preferred by learned Martinius.) In this notion the word
is frequently used by civil and profane Authors, Infimi homines ministros se
praebent, says Tully. l. 1. de Orat: and again, lib. de Amicitia, -- Libidinis
ministri, so Ovid -- illo dicunt Mactata Ministro
Corpora --


3. The holy Penmen of Scripture, (either moved, from the congruity of the
native signification of the word, or the notion of it accrewing by general
usage) have sometimes used it to signify one who is the Servant of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in the great work of Preaching the Gospel; at lest our
translators (interpreting what they wrote in another language) have done so.
The original words which they have so interpreted are (...); which are of as
various signification, and two of them (at least) as variously applied, by
those holy Penmen, as the word Minister is by other Authors.

The first word, (...).
(...) (which from (...) properly signifies, one who roweth in a Boat, or Ship,
under another, and thence any one who is servant to another) is used no less
than 24. or 25. times in the New Testament; and I think, but two of those Texts
can be interpreted of Preachers, they are Acts 26.16. 1 Cor. 24.1. In the first
Paul says, God raised him to be a Minister; in the latter, they are called
Ministers of Christ: for I cannot believe that the phrase, Lu. 1.2. can be
interpreted of Preaching Ministers (for I think they had no Text before that
time) but of some that were eye and eare-witnesses of Christ's words and
actions, and so were Servants to the holy Penmen, in communicating what they
saw, and heard, to them. There are indeed two other Texts, which some may
mistake into this sense, Lu. 4.20. Acts 13.5. In the first, it is said Christ
clozed up the Book, and gave it to the Minister; in the latter, John is called
the Minister of Paul and Barnabas. Those who write about the Jewish usages tell
us they had an Officer, belonging to the Temple (something I think akin to our
Parish Clerks) who was wont, to bring, and carry away the Book of the Law, to
or from the Priest or Levite, or other person that expounded. In all other
Texts of the New Testament, where the word (...) is used, Mat. 26.58. Mar.
14.54.
it signifies Civil Officers, either domestic, as Servants; or Politic state
Officers, such as jailers, pursevants, or the like; in which sense it is used
near 20. times in the New Testament.

The second Greek word is as Equivocal as the other; (...).
In its native force, it signifies no more than a servant, called so either
(...) (as some would have it) or which pleases Eustathius better, (...) (a
letter only changed according to the Jewish dialect.) It is in Scripture
applied to Christ, To. 15.8. and the Apostle (using this word) says of him, Is
he the Minister of sin? 2. To Magistrates, Romans 13.4. To ordinary Servants in a
Family, Matthew. 20.26.22.13.23.11. Mark 9.35.10.43. Jo. 2.5.9. To any ordinary
Christian in regard of his service to the Lord Jesus Christ, John 12.26. Phoebe
is called thus, To. 16.1. Deacons by Ossice, in the Church, have their name
from this word, and it is applied to express those Officers, Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8.12. It is also often applied to Ministers in Office to Preach the
Gospel. To Paul, and Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.5. To Tychicus, Ephesians. 6.21. Col. 4.7. To
Timothy, 1 These. 3.2. These again are called Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. Of
the New Covenant, 2 Cor. 3.6. Of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.15. Of Christ, 2 Cor.
11.33. Of the Church, 0.0.0.0. Our Brethren, p. 2. tell us, that (...) is often
applied to Saints no Officers. But as they have quoted only 2 Cor. 9.1. for
that: so they may consider, that no Preaching Saint, in Scripture, who was no
Officer, was ever so called; though if he had, it had not signified much as to
the present question; for any one that served but his Masters Table, was called
(...). And if our Brethren do only urge the common usage of the word, then they
do but play with an Equivocal term.

(...). What it signifies in Scripture.
The third word used is (...). The most restrained word of the three, both in
civil, and also in sacred writ: yet it is applied to the Civil Magistrate, Romans
13.6. To the Minister of the Gospel, Romans 15.16. to a public Person, but
ministering in a private manner, Phil. 2.25. To Angels, Heb. 1.7.14. To Christ
himself, Heb. 8.2. Some note, that it is always a title of public
performance, but Philip. 2.25. It is otherwise used. Yet there are that think,
that Epaphras was a Deacon by Office, and in that ministration to Paul so
acted; if any credit may be given to civil Authors, for the proper usage of
this word, it signifies, both a public office, and a sacred Service. So
Suidas and Scapula assure me; and the Etymology of the word as much: It is
true, in civil Authors, it is sometimes used otherwise, but Suidas says it is
abusively. I think, we may say there is this difference betwixt this word, and
the other; that whereas other words primarily signify, ordinary, private,
civil Service, this word ptimarily signifies sacred public Service; and in all
holy writ, is not applied to a private person; Sure I am, that Ecclesiastical
writers restrain it to such as are employed as public persons in sacred
Services.

5. But, though both Minister in the Latin, and (...), and (...) in the Greek,
and Minister in our English tongue, are equivocal terms; Yet we must cum vulgo
loqui, speak according to vulgar usage, not according to equivocal notions of
the word. Gifted men cannot in propriety of Speech be called Ministers.
We will grant to our Brethren, that the persons they plead for, may be called
Ministers, if they do but wait at their Masters Table, or be but
under-Commissioners to the State, or the like, though they should never Preach
(according to the signification of the words) but as the Church of God, has in
all late ages used the term Minister, we deny that any gifted Brother can or
may be called a Minister; we do not deny, but that every General of an army may
be called Imperator; and was so; but as the term has lately been used, and is
used, we deny he can be called an Emperor; we do not deny, but he that heaps
up Silver upon his trading, may be called Thesaurarius a Treasurer, but we deny
he can be called The City Treasurer; we do not say, but our Brethren though not
ordained, may be such Ministers as you read of, Luke 4. v. 20. and Acts 13.5.
but not such as you read of, 1 Cor. 4.1. Acts 26.16. And (by vulgar usage) such
only (for a long time) have been so called; to distinguish persons in office,
from such as only do acts of Service Civil, or Sacted. I must confess, I must
commend people, for keeping that term still as distinctive; if every one should
be called Sir John, or Sir Thomas such a one, in time, there would be no
difference betwixt a Knight, and a beggar, and names are given for distinction
sake. If one seeing the Mayor and Sheriffs of Norwich going with 8. or 10.
Officers, should say there goes the Mayor with ten Ministers, or seeing a dozen
Justices of Peace on the Bench, should say, there sit a dozen Ministers, people
would not understand what they said, and according to vulgar speech, it would
be a breach of the nineth Commandment; yet if our Brethrens Argument were good,
that gifted men should be called Ministers, because they are called (...), it
would justify that new dialect in other things as well as this. For
Magistrates are called Ministers, and Magistrates Officers are most ordinarily
in Scripture called (...). I am much against this removing of the Ancient
Landmarks, which the tongues of all men are so well acquainted with; and think
it a very ill design, which would produce nothing but confusion. Let our
Brethren give us one instance in Scripture, where a gifted man (not ordained)
is called a Minister of the Gospel; a Minister of Christ, etc. to say they are
called Ministers signifies not much. Preaching without ordination. p. 3.
Nor will a general course of acting, (as they would hint) entitle them to that
name. It is true, constant Brewing and Baking may give one the denomination of
a Brewer or Baker; for neither of them are titles of office. But suppose now a
Rebel should overcome his Prince, and for seven years together, exercise the
Acts of his place, he would not yet by bare acting, be entitled to the name of
a Prince or King. The Conclusion is, that Gifted men cannot in a strict and
proper sense, according to later ages restriction and constant usage of the
word Minister, be called Ministers; they may be called Speakers if you please.

Having hitherto considered the notation of the word Minister, and of the Greek
words so translated; Second Term, Ministry.
let me in the next place consider what the term Ministry imports. And this
also we shall find Homonymous.

1. Every one will conclude, that if (...), signify a Minister; (...), must
needs signify their service or ministration; and these are the words which the
Holy Ghost uses to express that in Scripture, which we translate Ministry, I
mean two of them, (...) and (...), the first only in Luke 1. to express
Zacharies service in the Temple, the latter very often, Ephesians. 4.12. Col. 4.17. 2 Timothy 4.5, etc.

And indeed I think, this is the most frequent usage of the term Ministry in
Scripture, to signify the work or service of those persons who are called
Ministers, Acts 1.17, 25. Acts 6.4.12.25.20.24.21.19. 2 Cor. 4.1.5.18. Ephesians.
4.12. Col. 4.17. 2 Timothy 4.5, 11. In all which Texts it is taken for the service
that the Ministers of the Gospel perform in Preaching, administering Sacraments,
etc. Twice for the Service of those Officers in the Church, who more strictly
are called Deacons, Romans 12.7. 1 Cor. 16.15. (though there be some question
upon that Text:) So Christ's execution of his Priestly Office is called a more
excellent Ministry. And the old service of the Priests and Levites, is called a
Ministry, Heb. 9.21. But in this sense, I take not Ministry in the Question:
yet if our Brethren contend for words, I can state the question so, viz.
Whether that work of the Ministry, which the Scripture mentions, eonsisting
in the Preaching of the Gospel, be the work of persons merely gifted.

2. But there is another usage of the word, which use at least has procured
it, according to which, we call the Ministry, A certain order of persons, set
apart according to the will of God, for the dispensing out of Public Gospel
Ordinances. In Analogy to the description of the High Priest, described Heb. 5.
v. 1. You may take the description thus. The Minister is one taken from amongst
men, and ordained for men in things pertaining to God, for the dispensation of
Public Ordinances; and ministerium is but a collective term, as we call the
company of Magistates, the Magistracy of a Nation; So we call the company of
Ministers, the Ministry. So Aretius, Bucanus, Vrsin, etc. So Martinius,
ministerium est ipse quoque minister. So Ravanella, Munus vel functio vocatur
ministerium, for which he quotes many Texts of Scripture; and so interprets
many of those I before cited; the 2 Cor. 6.3. and that in 1 Timothy 12. seem very
inclinable to this interpretation.

And here again, our Brethren seem to play with an equivocall term, when they
tell us, that the speaking of gifted Brethren may be called Ministry, for there
is ministration in their service; so there is too in their Servants waiting
upon them at their Tables; yet I hope, they will allow common people, not to
call the work of their Servants, waiting at their Trenchers, the Work of the
Ministry; which yet follows by the same argument. If our Brethren say, that the
gifted persons minister unto the Church, so does he that sweeps the Church; yet
his work is not the work of the Ministry, as we have learned to speak. If they
say, they minister unto Christ, Sub judice lis est; That question is yet to
dispute upon the Apostles maxim, His Servants you are whom you obey; and it is
still to be argued betwixt them and us, whether in their ministration, they
obey the commands of Jesus Christ, yea or no.

Third Term.
The third and last term is that of Office; A term as ambiguous as any other, it
comes from the Latin word Officium. He that will look that word in Martinius
his Lexicon Philologicum, will find at least eight significations of it. Our
Brethren of London, in their Jus divinum ministerii Evangelici, p. 3. have
given us a description of it, so far as to limit it from homonymie, and to give
the sense of it in the present question, which description, our other
dissenting Brethren have faithfully transcribed thus.

The Office of the Ministry is a spirtual relation to the whole employment of
the Ministry, in a person qualified, founded upon a special and regular call.
Our Brethren, p. 3. apprehend this to be faulty, and they declare their
dissent, and the grounds of it, because (as they rightly apprehend) much of the
controversy hangs upon this hinge.

They grant that Office is a relation with respect to an employment as its end.

But that it is a relation to the employment of the Ministry as its Correlate
they deny; the Church they say is the Correlate; and they say, the London
Ministers confess this, p. 151. where they say the Minister has a relation to
the Catholic, as well as to the particu-Church, so that they seem to
contradict themselves. This is the substance of what they say, p. 4. Whence
they propound to speak to two questions.

1. Whether Office be a relation, to the work of the Ministry, or to the
Church.

2. Whether Office has relation, to the Church universal, or to the particular
Church.

They are (both of them) very important questions. To the first of them our
Brethren speak, Chap. 1. where they undertake to prove, That the Office of the
Ministry, is not a Correlate to the work of the Ministry, But to the Church;
and this they endeavor by four Arguments.

That the Office of the Ministry does correlate to the persons toward whom it
is to be executed, is most freely on our parts confessed: But that it should be
no correlate to the work, is (I confess) such an absurdity in my ears, as will
offer too much injury (I think) to common sense. Officium est relatio personae,
ad certi operis necessariam effectionem. Martinii Lex. Philol. ad verbum
Officium.
Learned Martinius, (if this be an error) is in the same mistake with our
Brethren in London; he says in terminis, that an Office is the relation of a
person to the doing of a certain work. If I remember my Logic right, those
things are Relations, which either have their whole being in their respect to
another, or any other way referred to it; this I learned out of Aristotle,
Burgefdecius, etc. now Cui convenit definitio, ei convenit definitum, if the
definition of Relations will agree to the Office of the Ministry and the work,
they must be Relations, or else we understand not our Brethrens meaning. I then
thus argue for our Brethren of London (to maintain their skill in Logic.)

If the Office of the Ministry either has its whole being in relation to the
work, or be any other way referred to the work; Then the Office and employment
according to Logic are relations.

But the Office, and work of the Ministry, have at least one of these
references each to another. -- Ergo.

If our Brethren deny the Major, they deny the Logical description of
Relations; and so can build no arguments from the Canons of Logicians about
them.

If they say the Office neither has its whole being in the work, nor is any
other way related to it, I think they deny common sense.

The Correlate to any relation is that wherein the subject is terminated: But
the Office of the Ministry is terminated in the work; Therefore the work is its
Correlate. If our Brethren deny the Major, they again deny all Logic. If they
deny the minor, it is that which every one apprehends; and it is all one, as to
deny the Sun shines at noon day.

But our Brethren having brought us four Arguments, it is fit we should examine
them. For the first they say, the work cannot be a Correlate to the Office,
Because Relations cannot be separated; they are simul natura, take away one,
and you must take away the other: but the work of the Ministry, by the
sickness, death, imprisonment, or rejection of the Minister may cease; and yet
according to our principles, the office does not cease, a man is a Minister in
office, though he cannot do the work. Hence they observe, that whereas our
Brethren of London, thought that by fixing the relation between the work and
the office (because, a Minister may be separated from his Church) they had
secured the permanency of the office. These Brethren think, that they have
deeply fallen into the same pit, because the work may cease. This is the
substance of p. 5. which in form, is thus.

Relations and Correlations, exist and perish together.

But (according to your principle) so do not the office and work of the
Ministry. Therefore they are no relations. --

The major they say, is the Certain rule of Relations, (in Logic.)

The minor they prove, because we will not say, the office of the Ministry in a
man cease, when he is kept from doing his work by sickness, imprisonment,
banishment, rejection, etc. I answer,

1. They call the major, the Certain rule of Relations. But neither tell us of
what Relations, nor in what sense, Logicians understand that rule and reason
will enforce for the understanding. I will therefore tell them, we know our
Brethren are not to learn, that Relations are of two sorts. The first Logicians
call Relata secundum esse, real relations. Such, whose whole being (as
relations) lie in their relation; such are the Relations of Father and Son,
Husband and Wife, Master and Servant. The Father (as a Father) has no other
being, but in his relation to a Son, and so of the rest; this is called Relatio
praedicamentalis, of these Relations, their rule (rightly understood) is true.

2. But secondly, there are other Relations too, called in Logic, Relata
secundum dici, nominal relations, yet such as have a reality of Relation, but
not such a one, that all the being of the Relations (as such) is wrapped up in
their relation; this relation they call Relatio transcendentalis: As now,
Scibile and Scientia, A thing to be known, and the knowledge of this thing are
relations; and instanced in as such by most Logicians.

Yet neither the one, nor the other of these relations, have all their being in
their relations. Of these Relations, we say (and all say) the Rule is false,
and reason will enforce it. For example. This 20th of Jan. there is a knowledge
existent of the nature of an Eclypse, but the Eclypse which is the thing to be
known is not existent. The knowledge of the nature of thunder is existent: But
it does not thunder. So that our Brethrens Argument runs upon a supposition,
that we say, the office and the work are Relata secundum esse, Relations of the
first sort, but we are not of that mind; for we think, the whole essence of
office lies not in its Relation; But in that authority, wherewith the person
is clothed by his ordination, which holds when his person is restrained from
the exercise of it.

2. In eodem entitalis gradu vel ut Ens in actu, vel ut Ens in potestate.
Zabarel.
Secondly, says Zabarel, the Rule is true, that Relations exist and perish
together, as to the same degree of being. A man is not actually an Officer,
when he cannot do his Office, but the habit remains in him so long as there is
a possibility that he may one day do it. The Mayor of Norwich, is my Lord
Protectors Officer, for the Government of the City; and none in their sober
mind, but will say, he is Mayor, and the government of the City are related
each to other. Suppose the Mayor now sick, or in prison, is he not an officer,
because at present he cannot execute his Office? According to the first answer,
we deny the major; and by virtue of the second, we deny the minor. And we hope
our Brethren will deny the Conclusion.

Hence (Christian Reader) thou may see our Brethren deal not kindly with
thee, when they tell thee, As well may you affirm a man to be a Father, who
has no Son, nor child; or a man to be an husband, who has no wife, as you may
affirm a man to be a Minister, who has no employment. For these are relations
that widely differ from the Relation betwixt an officer and his work. A Father,
(as he is a Father) is a thing has no being without a child; and so cannot be:
but an officer, if at present he has no work, yet has (as an officer) an
authority and power to do such a work, when he has opportunity. I would fain
know of our Brethren, whether a man may not be in the office of a Colonel,
though at present, he has neither men to make up a Regiment, nor consequently
the government of them: It is his Commission makes him an Officer, and
authorizeth him to gather a Regiment, and execute his authority, as soon as he
has opportunity. Neither do we say, a man can be no officer, who has no
employment, but we say, a man may be an officer, who at present may want
opportunity to do what is his employment, and he is by his office authorized
unto. And now I suppose, every Reader will understand the weakness of our
Brethrens first Argument, which Logicians call a fallacy A dicto secundum quid,
ad dictum simpliciter: Their second Argument is in sum this.

Relations and Correlations exist together; but the office

The Reader will easily see the bottom of this Argument is the same Canon in
Logic, which was the foundation of the other Argument. We grant that the
office is a means, in order to the work as its end; and we say, that the office
must be before, the work. But we say, these are no such relations as must
necessarily be Simul Natura, and exist together; except they mean in eodem
entitatis gradu, and so sunt simul, they are together, though they do not exist
together; consider them as Entia in potestate, they are Simul Natura, and so it
is not necessary, that the means should be before the End; In short the very
same answer serves as before.



That which the Gospel owneth as the Correlate to the Ministers office, that is
the Correlate.

But the Gospel owns the Church, not the work, as Correlate to the office. --
Ergo.

The major we confess, but say there wants a word in it. That which [alone] the
Gospel owns, is the only Correlate.

The minor we deny, we confess that the Gospel owns the Church as a Correlate
to the office of the Ministry, Acts 20.27. But we say, it owns the work too,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. he gave some Apostles, -- some Pastors and Teachers. -- For the
work of the Ministry; and I hope, Ephesians. 4. is as much Gospel, as Acts 20.17. Our
Brethren say here again, That Officers are not related to the Employment of the
Ministry. Christian Reader, it must surely offend thy Ears, surely we would
not much desire such Officers. The truth is, they do Dividere componenda, which
is a fallacy in Logic. Officers are related to Church, and work too; and
except our Brethren had been guilty of too overweening a desire, to make the
world believe our Brethren at London were no Logicians, they would have
acknowledged it with half this stir.



If the names and titles given to Ministers in Scripture, be such as proclume
them relates, to the Church, not to the work, then they are so related.

But the names and titles given to Ministers in Scripture as do aloud proclaim
that officer and Church are relates, not officer and employment. -- Ergo.

To prove the minor they instance in the titles of Pastors, Teachers, etc.

1. To all which we answer, 1. That it is a feeble argumentation which is drawn
from names and titles, definitio nominis does only terminate the question quid
nominis, not the question quid rei; the definition of a name is not always
adequate to the definition of a thing, Notatio saepe est inadaequata, modo
latior, modo angusti^r (says the Logician.) But,

2. Except our Brethren will have their major understood universally, viz. All
the titles, and all the names, we conceive their Argument very faulty: for
because the name of the Mayor is a relate only to the Aldermen and City, it
does not follow, but that his title of Justice of the Peace, has the keeping
of the Peace, and the Statutes concerning Justices, for the Correlate; or but
that his title as the Deputy Lieutenant to the chief Magistrate, intimates him
to have the supreme Magistrate as his Correlate.

3. If our Brethren do say, that all their titles have the Church only as their
Correlate; we shall desire by the next to know, whether their title of (...)
and (...) Criers or Preachers, in the following Texts, have the Church only for
their Correlate, 1 Timothy 2.7. 2 Timothy 1.11. 2 Pet. 2 5. Romans 10.14. Philip. 1.15.
Nor will it serve our Brethrens turn, to say, that if the Question be asked, To
whom are they Officers? the answer must be, to the Church 1. For first the
answer may be most properly to Jesus Christ 2.
Suppose the question be asked, what is their office? for what work is the
office ordained? The answer must be, for the Preaching of the Gospel, for the
work of the Ministry. The truth is, The work is objectum quod, the Church is
objectum cui, Both the Church, and the employment are the Correlates to this
Relation, the Church are the Correlated persons, the work of the Ministry, is
the Correlated thing. So that our Brethren do but fancy a contradiction in our
Reverend Brethren of London; for both the Church, and the Employment are
Correlates.

Nay (under favor) not the Church alone, but every rational sublunary creature
is the Correlate of the office of the Ministry, as to Preaching. The office of
the Ministry was instituted, as well for the gathering of the Saints, as for
the edifying of them; as well for the perfecting of their number, as for the
perfecting of their graces. Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God, etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

We can never believe, that when the Church sends out one to Preach the Gospel
to heathens, that person Preaches only as a gifted Brother, but as an officer
of the Gospel: Nay more, God himself is the Correlate to this office; and
therefore they are called the Ministers of God; the Ministers of Christ; not
Elders of the Church only, or Ministers of the Church; they are Gods Ministers
in the Church, and the Ministers of the Gospel, in, and for the Church, and
world too. Let our Brethren show us but one Scripture, where a Preaching
Minister is called (...); or (...) or (...), The Minister of the Church. We can
show them many, where they are called the Ministers of Christ, of
righteousness, of the Gospel of Christ. Now it is a rule, Relata reciprocantur,
a Father is called the Father of such a Son, and the Son is called the Son of
such a Father. But I say, our Brethren speak no Scripture phrase, when they
call Ministers (i. e. Preaching Ministers) Ministers of such a Church; they are
the Ministers of God, and his Gospel in such a Church; and they have some
relation to the Church, but not a more relation than they have to the work;
they are called Ministers of the Gospel, and the Gospel is called their Gospel;
My Gospel, says Paul twice; here is a plain reciprocation; let them show us
the like, if they can, for their assertion; otherwise we hope, our Christian
friends will hardly be induced by such kind of argumentation as this is, to
believe the office of the Ministry is not related to the work of the Ministry,
but only to the persons whom the ministation does concern.

And I earnestly beseech our Brethren, that they would not endeavor to abuse
simple souls with these woeful fallacies, which have not (as you see) the
least foundation; either in Scripture, reason, or usage of any approved Authors.

In the mean time, we will grant them, that there is a relation betwixt the
office of the Ministry and the Church in which they execute their office.

But if we would grant our Brethren, that the office of the Ministry is a
Correlate, not to the work, but to the Church, I perceive this would not give
them satisfaction; unless we would also yield them, that it is a Correlate only
to a particular Church, In opposition, not only to the Church Catholic
invisible, viz. the whole number of the Elect scattered abroad; But to the
Church Catholic visible, in any notion. The Preacher sent chap. 2.
This they now come to assert Chap. 2. This indeed is the great Diana-Notion,
but we can by no means bow down unto it. And therefore, that is the next thing
we must bring to trial. Only before we do it, Give me leave to inform our
Brethren, in our notion of a Church; though I shall better do it, when I shall
return to answer their Epistle.

The word, which we translate Church, is (...); Coetus evocatus voce praeconis.
--
of which our Brethren can make no advantage, either from the Etymology, or
from the usage of it in Scripture; according to the first, it signifies no
more, than a company called out; it is both used by the Seventy interpreters,
to express the congregation of evil doers, Psalm. 26.5. And by the Evangelist
Luke, to express a rout, neither lawfully assembled, nor yet united, Acts
19.32. This word (in it self as unhallowed as any other) the penmen of
Scripture have indeed used to express the numbers, company, or Companies, of
those whom God has either called out of this world to heaven, Heb. 12 23. Or
out of the Paganish world to the profession of his gospel, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Or
out of a state of darkness into a marvelous light

Hence the Church in a sacred sense is usually distinguished into Invisible.
Visible.


The invisible Church is either Triumphant in heaven, or Militant here upon the
Earth.


The Visible Church is either Universal, or Particular.


By the Church universal, quatenus visible, we mean The whole number of people,
over the face of the Earth, called out of the Paganish world, to the owning of
the gospel of Christ; which being an integral Body, cons sting of homogeneous
members, or parts, each part bears the denomination of the whole; hence that
part of this body which is in a Nation, Province, parish, etc. is properly
called the Church of God, in such a Region, Nation, Province, parish, etc. Thus
Paul is said to persecute the Church, Acts. 8.3. Gal. 1.13. that is, all that
ownned the gospel, whether in Jerusalem, or in Damascus, or the strange Cities,
Acts 8. chap. 9. chap 26.11. all that called on Christ's name, whom he could
come near, Acts 9.14.

Now besides these more general distributions of a Church, the Church as
Visible, is capable of several states, from whence arise 3 other notions of it.

1. There is a more imperfect state of it as considered without Officers, this
Divines call an Entitive or Material Church, which is nothing else, but any
particular number, any part of that company before mentioned, who are found in
any Nation, Province, City, Parish, so called out of the paganish world,
agreeing in the profession of the Gospel. In this sense I allwaies thought,
that we and our brethren of the congregational persuasion had been agreed, that
there are National, Provincial, and Parochial Churches.

2. There is a second notion of the Church, resulting from the consideration of
this body, as having some set over it clothed with the authority of the Lord
Jesus Christ, authorized as his ambassadors to preach the Gospel, and to
Baptize, etc.

To open this notion a little. We consider, that it seemed good to the wisdom
of God, to commissionate certain persons to preach the gospel, that by it the
people of God might be gathered together in one; Hence Christ when he ascended
up on high, gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, these
were to lay the foundation, and then Prophets, these were to be Instrumental in
the building. And by the Apostles, he constituted Evangelists (who were as to
power) little less than Provincial Apostles, and by these Pastors and teachers:
Hence the Apostles created Evangelists, Philip, Timothy, Titus; and both the
Apostles, and these Evangelists, ordained Pastors, and Teachers, Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. by fasting, prayer and imposition of hands, and in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus (containing the standing rules, for the settling of Churchs,
in their permanent state) Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists being shortly to
cease) rules are given for the constitution of these officers to the end of the
world; now when in any place, God has called a people from Paganism to the
profession of his Gospel, and set over that people any of these persons set
apart for the preaching of the Gospel, we say there is in such a Nation,
Province, City, Parish, a Ministerial Church, which is a state of of the Church
more perfect than the former, and differing from it, we (I say) for distinction
sake) call it a Ministerial Church.

That is a Company of people called out of the Pagan world to an owning of the
Gospel of Christ, among whom also, are some clothed with the authority of Jesus
Christ, for the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments.
According to that commission, Go Preach and Baptize. Indeed as to the
administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in regard that none are to
be admitted to it but such as can examine themselves, and the steward of
Christ's mysteries must be faithful, in order to which, there must be an act of
Judgment pass upon the Receiver, which is jurisdiction; and Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is no where committed to a ^ingle person, it seems that in such a
Church (according to perfect rules) it cannot be administered, except there be
more than one officer, nay I think there should be some Ruling Elders or a
Ruling Elder at least concur in this judgment; yet Number making a Church, in
case Ruling Elders cannot be had, I conceive in case there be more than one
Teaching Elder in a Church (who also are ruling) or in case 2 or 3 such
particular churches can in such extraordinary cases unite, they may also
ordinarily administer that Ordinance. Nay farther, in such an extraordinary
case which is the present case of many in England this day, I think an
extraordinary power may be by one assumed, rather than people should want that
Ordinance, as in Hezekiah's passover, the Levites for every one not clean
killed the passover, which else had been against Gods order. 2 Chronicles. 30.17.
Exodus 12.3, 4, 5, 6.

3. But lastly, the most perfect notion of a particular Church, is when it is
perfectly Organized. A particular church considered in relation to the
Universal, is any ^^r^ of it, whether that in a Nation, Province, Parish, or
^he like, each of these is but a particular, because no more than a part of the
wh le. But we usually take particular in a more restrained notion, For that
part of this universal company which can, or may, or does, ordinarily meet
together in one place at the same numerical administrations; or who have by an
explicit or implicit consent chosen, or submitted to the same officers, as
those whom God has set over their souls, and this is a Church perfectly
Organized, and the most perfect notion of a particular Church. This Church
either without officers, or with, is the only Church our Brethren can see (we
hope the fault is in their eyes)

Now the question is, whether he that is a preaching Elder in such a particular
Church, or indeed, rather whether all the preaching Elders in all the
particular Churches in the world, have any farther relation, or be in any
office, to any but that particular company, over which they are (respectively)
more especially set, because they cannot watch over all, etc. We affirm they
have, and in this sense we assert, not only a Church Catholic Visible, but a
Church Catholic Visible Organical too. By which we mean not, (what our
brethren dream of) viz. An Universal visible society of Christians, actually
subjected to one or more Universal Pastors, or guides, from whom subordinates
must derive their office, and power, and with whom they must sometimes meet,
and communicate in some general sacred things, which may make them as the Jews
one Church, and which same general acts, or sacred services, can only be
performed by that Universal head, or those Universal officers. No Nor, that all
the whole Church should be subject to one Grand senate of officers erected and
constantly sitting: Mr. Hudson has in our names long since disowned this same
Abominable thing. Our Brethren indeed, dress up some in this dress to the
world, and show them for Presbyterians. But we defy their notion of a Church
Catholic in this sense; and say that it is but an odious representation,
nothing corresponding to our principles. Our Brethren do, or may know, we are
equally (with themselves) engaged, against Popes, Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, with all the rest of those Antichristian Derivatives; And learned Mr.
Hudson has long since told our Brethren, that by Church Catholic visible
Organical we mean no other than,

An habitual, Politico-Ecclesiastical society, body, flock, in one and the same
sheepfold of the Militant Church; in uniform subjection to the same Lord, the
same laws, united in the same Faith, and under the same Baptism, performing
the same worship* and service, Mr. Hudsons vindication, etc. p. 127. etc.
in kind, concerning which body we say, that although the members of it be
dispersed far and wide, and divided into several parts, places, societies, and
secondary combinations of vicinities, or Parishes, for actual, constant
enjoyment of Ordinances, (as particular Corporations, in a Kingdom are) yet
still, those Ordinances, administrations, admissions, ejections, have influence
upon and into the whole body, as it is a polity, and the members of any part,
indefinitely, may, of right communicate one with another, yea, any company of
Christians may, though every person so meeting (and that but occasionally) may
be of a several particular Church; and the Minister dispensing a particular
Pastor to none of them all: yea, though none of them all be fixed members to
any particular Congregation; nor the Minister dispensing fixed in any
particular congregation. And this by virtue of their general membership, and of
the habitual indefiniteness of the Ministers office, And the common donation of
the ordinances to Christ's whole visible Kingdom.

Ibid.
Now the truth is, there is no Civil Society, or Kingdom, that in every thing
correspondeth with this; but there use in the Kingdoms of the world to be some
general officers, and offices; And some officers inferior, and subordinate,
receiving from them power, and authority, by derivation, and subordination. And
the inferior are of less extent as to place, and power, than the superior. As
the Lord Chief Justice of England is above other inferior Justices.

And this is it (as Mr. Hudson has noted) which has made so many stumble at
the notion of a Church Catholic Organical; and upon this stone, our Brethren
have stumbled in their Epistle. First, making a man of Clouts; and then writing
over his head, This is the Presbyterians Catholic Church; and then crucifying
him with Arguments, which we are not concerned in.

But (as Mr. Hudson proceeds) as in other things Christ's Kingdom is not of
this world, nor like unto worldly polities, so neither in this: But every
Minister of the Church, in his particular place, serves the Church Catholic,
admitting of members into a general freedom in it; ejecting from general
communion with it; he prays publicly for the whole body; and manageth his
particular charge in reference to, and so as may stand with the good of the
whole body (of which his Congregation is but a member) The Ordinances there
administered, are the Ordinances given to the whole, not as a genus, (which is
but a notion and can have no Ordinances given to it) but as unto a spiritual
kind, of an habitual body, and Organical polity. As to a sort of men, so, and
so qualified, bound up in an union, and unity, of the same head, laws, seals,
worship, communion.

Thus had we discovered our minds, before our Brethren published this Boook;
and it had been fair for them, to have disputed against this, not to deceive
their Readers with fallacies, Ex ignoratione Elenchi, as Logicians speak;
disputing against what their adversaries do* not say. In this sense we say, the
office of the Ministry correlateth to the Universal Church. And what ever our
Brethren say, in practice they will own this; for,

1. I would fain know of our Brethren, whether one Church may according to
Gospel rules, receive into her bosom one whiom another Church has cast out?
if not, the officers that cast out do not only eject from the communion of that
particular Church, but of all particular Churches, and so consequently from the
universal Church, which is but a whole made up of those parts.

2. While our Brethren baptize into their particular Church, I wonder whether
they do not also Baptize into any other particular Church? if not, when any
person so baptized, is translated into another Church, why is he not again
Baptized? his relation to the former Church ceasing.

3. I would fain know with what consistency of principles, our Brethren say a
minister or pastor is in office only to a particular Church, and yet say, he
that is in office to this Church, may administer the Sacrament of the Supper to
the members of another Church? Oh but they do this (they tell us) by a
communion of Churches, by a communion of membership only, or of offices and
officers only; the first alone may give the member a right to take, but not the
officer a right to give, except there be also a mutual communication or
communion of offices and officers, and Acts of office.

4. Although these 2 or 3 Brethren some-where indeed say, that when the pastors
of our Brethrens churches preach out of their particular Church, they preach
but as gifted men, yet I am sure others of our Brethren, and those (to speak
modestly) no way inferior to our Brethren, will own no such thing: for who
should be then obliged to hear them, or who could go to hear them as to an
ordinance, a public ordinance of Christ, I am yet to learn. So that in
practice our brethren do every day own, what in words they deny. But to come
close to the question stated by our Brethren thus. p. 8.

What Church office has relation to? Preacher sent eap. 2. p. 8.
whether officers stand in relation to a particular Church only, or whether
they be officers of an universal Church. I observe our Brethren in the same
page altering their phrase, instead of saying, We deny office to be a correlate
to the Universal Church: they say, We deny Pastors and Teachers to be officers
of an Universal Church.

We hope our brethren have no design to play at so small a game with us, as
that must be which is only won by the homonomy of a term, however we will
endeavor to prevent it.

For those new terms Pastors, and Teachers, in ecclesiastical use they have
obtained a double signification.

1. In Scripture the terms are taken more largely for any such as have
authority to feed people with spiritual food, whether it be occasionally or
constantly, so pastors is to be understood Ephesians. 4.11. (the only place where it
is used in all the New Testament) so also Jer. 3.15. so Paul is called a
Teacher of the Gentiles, and 1 Timothy 2.7. so Teachers is used Isa. 30.20. and
Acts 13.1. 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. yea that term is used sometimes to express the
Private duties of private persons. Heb. 5.12.

2. By a modern usage these terms are used to express persons chosen or
accepted by particular churches for the work of the ministry amongst them, and
restrained to that sense (by what warrant I cannot tell.) If our Brethren state
the question in the latter sense concerning Pastors and Teachers qua tales, as
such, they have no adversaries, for he that is pastor, or teacher, of a
particular Church (as he is such a pastor or teacher) undoutedly has not the
Church universal for his correlate.

But our Brethren of the Province of London say truly, that a Regular Pastor
or Teacher of a particular Church, has (besides a particular relation to them
as their pastor and teacher, (which their election or submission to him or both
have made them) a relation also to the Church Universal, as he is the minister
of Jesus Christ, set apart and ordained for the preaching of the gospel, etc.
which he may do as an officer of Christ in any place of the world. We do not
say he is bound to do it in all places, that is impossible, nor to travel up
and down (as the Apostles were) for that work is ceased, at least as to those
places where people have received the gospel. But we say he may do it as
opportunity is offered. And we believe, that in case it were with us as it is
with our brethren in New England, The Church might by fasting and prayer and
imposition of hands, set apart some particular persons to the office of the
ministry, without a particular designation of them to this or that place, but
only designing them as the officers of Christ to preach the Gospel amongst the
Indians, and to baptize such as should receive the Gospel; and (though not by
their single Act as the Apostles) yet by the advice of the Church, and with
their assistance, these might ordain Elders in their Cities, and form them up
into complete Gospel order; yet the office of such would differ from that of
the Apostles, both in regard of their mission being more ordinary, and also in
regatd of their power being more limited.

These things being premised, let us consider our Brethrens Arguments: their
first reduced into form is this, "What the Gospel knows not, no Gospel
officers can be correlates unto. Of Preaching without ordination. cap. 2 p. 8.


"But the Gospel knows no Universal visible Political Church. Ergo



1. At the first dash, our Brethren here take away the subject, or at least the
suppositum of the question: The suppositum of the question is, That there is a
Church Particular and Universal. The question is to which of these the office
of the Ministry is related? They say to the Church Particular, we say to the
Church Universal: to prove their assertion they tell us there is no Church
Universal. This is foul disputing.

2. But secondly, The whole may be granted, and yet nothing proved by it: for
whether the Gospel knows a Church universal under a political form or no, is
not the question, it is enough if it knows a Church Universal under any notion.

3. Thirdly the minor is false, as Mr. Hudson abundantly proves: the Church
universal is in scripture set out under the notions of a political body; it is
called a Kingdom, a City, and Jews and Gentiles are called fellow-citizens; it
is called an Army terrible with Banners, Cant. 6.10. see Mr. Hudson more p.
133, 134, 135, etc. for it nothing concerns me as to the present question, as I
said before.

Their next and only argument is again drawn from the names and titles given
unto these officers, viz. Pastors, teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
Overseers, Acts. 20.28. 1 Timothy 3.2. Titus 1.7. Themselves form their argument
thus, or at least should have formed it thus.

That Church alone which is committed to ministers charge to feed, teach, and
oversee, is the Church to which the office of the ministry is a correlate.

But the universal Church is not that Church which is committed to a Minister
to feed, teach, and oversee, -- Ergo,

I am sure that the Argument must run thus, if it concludes the question, which
at present is not, whether a particular minister, but whether the office of the
ministry (residing in all ministers) be a correlate to the particular, or to
the Universal Church. And therefore our Brethren may see a fault in their
laying of their Argument if they will but compare it with the question stated
by themselves.

Now to the argument thus formed I answer, By denying both the propositions. I
deny that, That Church alone which is committed to a ministers charge to feed,
teach, and oversee is the Church to which the office of the ministry is a
correlate. For I suppose that our Brethren mean, which is more especially
committed to his charge, as pastor thereof, in a restrained sense; if they do
so, I say that Church alone is not correlate to his office, or to the office of
the ministry, because another Church, viz. the catholic Church, is also in
some sense committed to his charge, viz. so far as pro re nata (as occasion
serves) he may and ought to feed others besides that Church, yea such as are
of no Church, but may (for ought he knows) be members of the invisible Church
of Gods elect, and so his office does relate to them.

But secondly the Minor is apparently false, viz. That the particular Church is
that alone which is committed to a ministers eharge, to feed, teach, and
oversee. Go preach the gospel to every creature, is a commission which has put
all the reasonable world under the charge of the ministeral office. And
although (as our Brethren of London say right) that no minister is an Actual
Minister to the Universal Church, viz. in these two senses, 1 None can be here
and there and every where, thus the Spirit of God is only an Universal actual
teacher. Nor secondly is any Minister (set in a particular Church) bound, as
the Apostles, to an itinerant Execution of his office: yet our Brethren of
London do not say but that if three parts of this Nation were heathens, the
Church may by fasting and prayer and laying on of hands confer the office of
the Ministry upon some persons with a special designation of them as Christ's
officers to carry the Gospel to people all over the Nation; or over the world.
Neither do our Brethren of London say but that he who is a fixed minister in a
particular Church, wherever he preaches, preaches as an officer of Christ in
the work of the Gospel, whom people are bound to hear; nor do they say that he
who is a fixed minister in a particular Church may not by virtue of his
ministerial office (so far as his opportunity, strength, and finite nature
gives him leave) feed and teach by the word, and as a minister oversee any
others that are not members of his particular Church, Though indeed that be in
a more special manner committed to his trust, care, and oversight.

But I observe that our Brethrens argument, though put into the best form I
could, and cured of one fault, yet is sick of another; and indeed the Argument
should have run thus.

That Church, or those Churches alone which are committed to all ministers
respectively to feed, teach, and oversee, respectively are the Churches to
which the office of the ministry is a correlate. But those Churches are only
particular Churches. -- Ergo.

As they put it, there^s a great fallacy in it; for suppose this or that
particular Minister had no work appointed him by Jesus Christ to do, but only
in his particular Church, and so the office of the Ministry, as it resided in
that single man, were only a Correlate to his particular Church; Yet it would
not follow, That the office of the Ministry, as it resides in every particular
Minister in the world, had no other Correlate; for all the particular Churches
in the world, make up the universal Church.

Though the office of a Justice of Peace, as it resides in this, or that
particular person, is limited by his Commission to such a County, is only a
Correlate to the people of such a County: Yet surely the office of a Justice of
Peace, as it resides in the whole number of Justices of the Peace in England,
is a relation to the whole Nation as a Correlate, because the whole Nation is
made up of those Counties, and the office residing in some or other of them as
to every County, must needs relate to the whole. It is true, this is not all
which we assert; for we say, that in Gods Commonwealth, Ministers (though
ordinarily charged more especially as to some part with the feeding, care and
oversight of that part) yet as to some ministerial acts are authorized also, to
the whole, or to act in any part, not that they must act in all cases, but that
they may act, at lest in some cases. But there was enough said before to the
Argument; this only to fault the phrasing of it to impose a fallacy upon us.

I find nothing more in their 10, 11, 12, and 13. pages to prove their minor,
save only one Text, Acts 20.28. Where the Apostle speaking to the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus, bids them to take heed unto themselves, Nor is it granted,
that the Church of Ephesus was a particular Church. See the Assemblies Propos.
and Reasons, etc.
and unto all the flock of which Christ had made them overseers. This Text
indeed proves what none denies, viz. that every Minister is to take care of
every soul, over whom God has given him a special charge; but I cannot see how
this Text proves, that the people of the Church of Ephesus were those only to
whom the Ministers were set in relation. If God should say to a Minister (as in
effect he does in his word,) Take heed to every soul, in this Parish, which is
thy flock; would it follow, that he need not take heed to any other? The words
do not import that the Church of Ephesus were all the flock they were to feed;
but that it was their duto feed all them, as being more specially committed to
them. If the words indeed had been thus, The people of Ephesus are all the
flock of which God has given you any oversight, they had been something to our
Brethrens purpose: This is all our Brethren have argumentative in this case.
Let me now try in a few words, if I cannot by better Arguments prove that the
office of the Ministry relates not only to the particular Church, but to the
Catholic Church, viz. That they may do acts of office and authority, beyond
the bounds of that particular Church over which they are more especially set.

Those whom God has given for the edifying of the body

But God has given Pastors and Teachers, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. The minor is the letter of Scripture, the major I prove.

If the Universal Church be the body of Christ; and those who are given for the
edifying of it are related to it; Then those whom God has given for the
edifying of the body of Christ, are related to the Universal Church.

But the Universal Church is the body of Christ; and those who are of God given
for it, are related to it. -- Ergo.

The Consequence is unquestionable. The Assumption consists of two assertions;
one I suppose that none who knows the definition of relata, will deny, viz.
Those whom God has given for his Church are related to it. If any deny, That
the Universal Church is the Body of Christ (there meant) I prove it. Either the
Universal Church, or the particular Church is there meant. But not the
particular Church -- Ergo.

I prove the assumption. If Christ has but one mystical body, then particular
Churches (which are many) cannot be there meant.

But Christ has but one mystical body? I prove the minor.

If the Scripture speaks but of one mystical body of Christ, and says Christ
is not divided, then we ought not to assert that he has more bodies than one,
or that he is divided.

But the Scripture mentions but one body of Christ, and says Christ is not
divided, Ergo. Those who deny the minor must produce those Scriptures which
ascert Christ to have more than one body.

Besides, it is plain from this argument, that the Apostle speaks, in Ephesians. 4.
of the Universal Church. From this argument.

That Church for which God gave Apostles and Prophet for, he also gave pastors
and teachers for, Ephesians. 4.12.

But he gave Apostles and Prophets for the Catholic Church -- Ergo.

I think none will be so absurd as to say that Apostles and Prophets were given
for a particular Church: for then according to our Brethrens principles, their
work must have been terminated there.



Those whom God has commissioned to preach and Baptize all Nations, are not
related only to a particular Church, but to the Catholic Church, yea to the
whole world.

But God has commissionated his ministers to go preach and Baptize all
Nations. Ergo.

The major is Evident, for all Nations signifies more than a particular Church.
The minor only can be denied.

In proof of which we bring that known text, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and
teach all Nations -- etc. I am with you to the End of the world. If our
Brethren shall say this was a commission only to the Apostles, they shake hands
with Socinus, Smalcius, and Theophilus Nicolaides; who indeed tell us that the
Apostles were fundamentum Ecclesia, and could have no successors: and desert
all protestant writers, and are confuted by the promise annexed, for Christ
would not have promised a perpetual presence to a temporary employment. What
else our Brtheren say to this text, shall in due place be considered.

A third Argument I shall draw ab absurdo.

That opinion which discharges all people from a duty in attending upon the
word publicly preached by a Minister out of his particular Church, and makes
it impossible for any people (not of that Ministers Church) to go in faith to
hear any such Sermon, and makes it sinful for any Christian to receive the
Sacrament, otherwhere than in his own Church, or of his own pastor, and
discharges all people (save members of particular formed Churches) from
hearing the word publicly preached, and makes private reading equivalent to it
as to any institution, and denies public ordinances to any people but such as
are fixed members of particular Churches, that opinion is absurd, schismatical,
and false.

But this opinion that a Minister is only in office to his particular Church
does all this. -- Ergo

I presume our Brethren will easily grant the Major, I will prove the Minor. --
Ergo.

The proof of the Minor depends upon these two principles.

1. That the authority of him who preaches, is that which makes the action of
him that hears a duty. This is so rational that none can deny it; for sin is
the transgression of a law, and all duty must be an act of obedience to some
law natural, divine, positive or humane: now this is certain, that Gods law
has not commanded me to hear every one that speaks a good discourse, or
reads a chapter, he must be specially authorized to preach, or I shall not be
specially obliged to hear.

2. The second principle is this, That an act of office cannot be done by him
who is no officer. I think that none in their right wits will deny this; hence
I say these five absurdities will notoriously follow, from this principle.

1. That in all places where are no particular Churches formed, let who will
preach none are bound to come to hear, but they may all stay at home, and read
a good book if they please; for none there has any authority or is in office
to preach, and so none under an obligation to hear.

2. That if you divide England into an hundred parts, ninety-nine of them
cannot upon the Lords day wait upon any public Ordinance, which shall lie
under a more appointment of God to save their souls, than reading a chapter at
home does. The reason, is because no particular Churches are formed, and there
can be none in office. It is not the place, or company, but the person
administering, who makes the ordinance public.

3. Where there is a particular Church formed, it is true, the members are
bound to come on the Lords day and hear their officer, but for all others, if
they do stay at home and read a chapter, or a good book, they sin not: for he
that preaches has no more authority to preach to them, than they have to
preach at home one to another.

4. Suppose any should come to hear any man preach, if he be not a member of
his particular Church, he cannot come in faith, believing upon the account of
any precept or promise, that the word heard shall profit him; any more than if
he had staid at home, and heard his servant read a chapter: for he that
preaches stands in no office, is clothed with no more authority toward him. No
he is only in office to the members of his own Church.

5. If any pastor of any particular Church, at any time, upon any occasion
gives the Sacrament to any one person, who is not an actual member of his
Church, he sins against God, doing an act of office, to a person to whom he
is in no office, and has no authority. And I am mistaken if this would not
make the greatest schism ever yet heard of.

And now I beseech my dear and Reverend Brethren, to consider to what Athei^m
and confusion this one principle improved, would in a short time bring us. And
I am verily persuaded, that most of our Brethren of the Congregational
persuasion, are of another mind from these three in this point: for so wise,
and learned men can never (surely) think, that when at any time, they preach in
any place, or to any people saving to their particular respective Churches,
they preach but as gifted brethren, so that a weavers discourse who has spent
all his week in his loom, is under as much appointment of Gods, for the
salvation of souls, as theirs, is, yet this is a true conclusion from this
principle; up to which also our brethren cannot walk unless each of the
Churches keep so distinct, as never to have communion Each with other in any
act of public worship to be performed by an officer: which would
unquestionably be the highest schism in the world.

As for their third chapter, I might spare my pains in answering of it, for it
is but a conclusion from their premises, in the first, and second chapter, and
it is too much to deny the premises, and conclusion too. In this third chapter,
they give us the description of office, then endeavor to prove it, and lastly
draw two conclusions from it; their description is this.

Office is a spiritual Relation between a particular Church of Christ and a
person rightly qualified, Preaching without Ordination p. 14.
founded upon a special and regular call. 1 This definition offends two logic
rules (say we) which are these. Aristot. l. 6. top. cap. 5.


That all definitions should be adequate. That is, nothing must be in the
definition but what is in the thing defined Nor any thing omitted in the
definition which is essential-to the thing defined. A particular Church is not
necessary to one that is by office a minister of the Gospel (as I proved
before, yet that is put into the definition; secondly, Ordination which is
essential to a minister in office is omitted (unless out brethren will say it
is included in the notion of a person duly qualified, or in the notion of a
regular call, which I suppose our brethren will not grant.) Arist. top. l. 6. a
p 1.


2. A second rule is this, That the definition of a Genus should agree to every
species. The ministerial office is a Genus, here defined, but there are diverss
ministers (say we) that have no such particular Church, for we cannot think but
a minister may be set apart for the work, though at present he has no place:
the order of the Church in ordaining none Sine titulo (without a title to a
place) was no divine order, but prudential; to avoid the scandal of a Vagrant
Ministry, and therefore Hierom refused Ordination from Paulinus; because he
insisted upon the ordaining him to his particular Church: we grant that the
office of a pastor in strict sense, does relate to a particular Church, but not
the office of a pastor in a more large sense, and as it is used in Scripture,
both in Jeremy 3.15. and Ephesians. 4.13. Our Brethren expound their description.

For the Genus, we allow what they say. Office is a Relation. Their terms of
relation we deny, we say the particular Church is not the only correlate, but
the Universal Church is also a correlate to the office, yea and the work, yea
God himself, and all Nations (of which before.) Here Is nothing more to prove
than what I have already answered, besides that term Angel of the Church, used
Rev. 2.1.8, etc. To which I answer, that our Brethren know that sub Judice lis
est, it is very disputable whether a single person, or the Presbytery be meant
by that term. 2. But secondly it will be very hard for our Brethren to prove
those were particular Churches.

The efficient cause we allow to be the Lord, and the Church. But not the
flock, as our Brethren say. The Apostles ordained the Deacons, not the flock.
It was the prophets and teachers in the Church of Antioch, Acts 13. whom the
Spirit commanded to ordain Paul and Barnabas; Paul and the Presbytery ordained
Timothy, Acts. 6.
and Titus was to ordain ministers in Crete.

As to the formal cause, we cannot agree with our brethren, that a special
regular call is it (in the sense they understand (all), we say it is a
ministers Mission both internal and External, and the Apostle proves it, How
shall they preach except they be sent? that is, they cannot, Rom 10.10.
Now, Forma dat esse.

Our Brethren say The external call consists in Election and Acceptance, and
tell us this is proved by Acts 6.5. where they argue thus, If the Church should
choose a Deacon, much more their pastor. Our Brethrens argument is here a
comparatis, from the lesser to the greater, and they argue affirmatively, See
more as to these texts in ^^y last chap.
If the Church might choose the lesser officer, then they ought to choose the
greater. But this is false Logic, our brethren will easily see it in other
things: will these things follow? If a man can carry an hundred pound weight,
then much more a thousand. If a band of men have right to choose a Sergeant,
then much more a Colonel. Indeed negatively we may argue from the lesser to the
greater, but Aristotle and Ramus are both out if we may use this argumentation
in all cases affirmatively: those that can judge of the abilities of a Deacon
may not be fit to judge of the abilities of a Minister for the work of
preaching. Besides, did the peoples choice there make them officers? surely the
text says no such thing, the constitutive act is by the Apostles expressly
reserved to themselves, ver. 3. For their other Text Acts 14.23. (...), etc.
They do wrong to our translation which translates it ordained, not chose, as
our Brethren do. The word signifies to stretch out the hand; and by that sign
to choose, 2 Cor. 8.19. but not when it governs an accusative case says Stephen
(in verbo (...) as it does here: Not always, witness, Acts 10.41. Ecc
ldsiastical writers use it for ordaining,) and so it signifies (says Stephen)
when it governs an accusative case.

But allow it to signify choose, they were Paul and Barnabas that chose, not the
Church in our brethrens sense. Let any one one compare v. 20, 21, 22, 23, and
ell me of whom that word is predicated. So that both ^ur Brethrens texts fail,
with all that is built upon them in their book -- As to the final cause we
agree with our Brethren as to the general, That the work of the Ministry is the
End, and so far allow their proof, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. But wonder with what reason
our Brethren there say the particular Church is meant. I am sure the text says
no such thing, nor any thing like it: except they make Christ to have as many
bodies as there are in the world particular Churches.

Our Brethren from this doctrine fetch two Corollaries, or inferences. First.

That there is no difference betwixt that which makes a man a minister, p. 17.
1 Conc.
and a Minister to this or that Church: The second is this.

That the distinction betwixt preaching ex officio and ex dono, by office and
by gift, is founded on Scripture.

2 Conc.
As to the first, I have already proved the contrary, for it stands upon no
other foundation than the conceit that Office relates not to the work, but to
the Church: Nor to the Universal Church, but to the particular Church: which
foundations (I think) I have shaken so, that til they be repaired they will not
bear this super-structure.

As to the second, we allow it in two cases, first for Trial sake, for we have
a plain text for it in the case of Deacons, 1 Timothy: 3.10. and we may argue a
minori ad majus negative, If the lowest officer of the Church must be first
proved; then much more the higher officer, I mean ordinary officers, for
Apostles, etc. were not the same species of officers.

2. In cases of Necessity. In times of persecution where Ministers in office
cannot be had, which was the case, Acts 9. Necessity we say, has no law; In
such a case as I said before, the Levites killed the sacrifice, at Hezekiahs
passover, which else they ought not to have done. We say the Scripture
warrants no other preaching ex mero dono, by virtue of gifts only. Whether it
does or no is the issue to be tried betwixt us.

CHAP. 11. In which what our Brethren say, by way of Limitation or Explication
of the question, is summed up; their limitations of the subject are proved to
be of no value: their descants about the term preaching but a beating of the
air. Authoritative preaching described in three things differenced; from
precarious preaching and the question concerning the former fixed, and stated.
IT seems we are not yet agreed about the state of question: and therefore our
Brethren have taken a great deal of pains, from their 19 p. to their 30 to
state it for us. In which they distinguish both concerning the Subject, and the
Predicate. For the Subject, they tell us, it is not every Christian, but every
one that has gifts. 2. Not every one who thinks he has gifts, but who really
has, and de convenienti the Church should judge whether he has or no,
according to Acts 6.3. but for ought they know a man may lawfully preach
(especially in some cases) without such approbation. As to the Predicate. By
preaching they understand any publishing opening or applying gospel truths to
any persons for the uses and ends they serve to, be it in public, or in
private, to a Christian, or to an idolatrous assembly; thus they contend the
two words in the Greek translated preaching signify, Lu. 16.16. 1 Cor. 9.16.
Acts 13.32. Romans 20.15. Acts. 5.42. Acts. 8.35. Hence they find fault with our
Brethren of London their description of preaching, Jus divinum p. 77. and much
they say to them (who are doubtless of age to answer for themselves) etc. Our
Brethren distinguish concerning the term authoritatively, they say authority is
taken for a right, and lawful power, Lu. 20.2. Secondly, for majesty and
gravity, Mar. 1.22. Tit. 2 15. Thirdly, for office-power. In the last sense
they grant it, in the two first, they say gifted men may preach
authoritatively, this is the substance of what they say in many words. To all
which I answer.

1. As to what our Brethren say concerning the subject of the question (if I
mistake not) it amounts to no more than this, Every private Christian may not
preach, but every one that can or will may, for what should hinder him? who
shall be judges of his aptness to teach? shall the Church? but by what rule?
Secondly suppose he will not submit, shall the gifted man sin? no say our
Brethren. It is inexpedient and may have ill consequents, but for ought we know
it is lawful. So that it is every one that has a tongue to speak and a mind
to speak. Our Brethren tell us, the Church and no other judged of the abilities
of the Deacons Acts 6. But it was a Church filled with the extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Ghost, Acts 4.31. A Church of which the twelve Apostles were
members: In short, all the Church Christ had on the Earth at that time; and let
any reader be judge whether because such a Church were thought fit to judge of
Ministers or Deacons abilities; will it follow that every particular Church is?
so that our Brethren, by their limitations of the subject have not one jot
mended the matter.

2. Secondly for the predicate, we will easily grant to our Brethren, that the
Apostles and holy men in Scripture (wanting proper words) made use of words to
express the public duty of preaching which are used in many senses, and that
(...) signifies no more than to declare good tidings, and (...) signifies no
more than to cry as an herald, in their native signification.

And we will grant that gifted men may in some sense do both; who ever denied
to our Brethren, but that a private person might declare the glad tidings of
the Gospel to his neighbor, or to his child? But this is all but to play with
an Equivocal term, Our brethren may call this preaching if they please, and in
that sense their question is granted them, a M(...) ^te may in this sense
preach to his people, a Colone^ (...) ^is Regiment, etc. But our Brethren of
London justly restrained their question to Authoritative preaching, by which
that we may not quarrel about a strife of words, we mean, that Preaching which
is the ordinance of Jesus Christ, to be dispensed in the public assemblies of
his people, to which all people are bound in conscience to attend, and which
lies under the special appointment of Christ for the salvation of souls. If
our Brethren please they may take this more formal description.

Authoritative preaching, is an Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ under the
Gospel, to be dispensed in the public assemblies of people, by the Preachers
opening and applying of the word of God, which he has appointed, as the
ordinary means of faith and salvation, to which all people are in Conscience
bound to attend. Now the question is concerning the instituted administrator,
whether it be every one that has gifts, or only such as are ordained; we
contend for the latter, we say in this sense a gifted man cannot preach, nor
ought to undertake it in this notion. We say this is office-preaching, for none
can thus preach but who is in office. The Authority of this preacher does two
things. 1. It obliges him to preach. Woe to me (says Paul) if I do not preach
the Gospel. 2. It obliges people to hear; for the preacher is to that purpose
sent; we say then,

1 A gifted man may in public or private cry like an Herald with a loud and
roaring voice, and it may be Vox and praeterea nihil

2 He may as to the matter (...), speak of the good things of the Gospel,
either more publicly, or more privately -- But we say,

1. He may hold his peace too if he pleases, for who has required his service
at his hands? Christ has not by his Church said to him go and preach, much
less immediately said it.

2. He may preach, But he may preach to the walls too if people please; no soul
sins in neglecting to hear him; they may go if they please, but Gods word
requires them not to go, nor can any Magistrate with a good Conscience command
them to go, any more than he can command me to go to my neighbors house to
hear him read a chapter: nay if people spend the Lords days in hearing such,
when they may hear others, it is a sin unto their souls, as much as if they
should spend their time at home and read chapters; for his preaching is not
under so much appointment to save my soul, as my private reading is.

3. For other days men may go and hear them if they please (if no scandal be
in it, nor other circumstances make it unlawful) but they cannot go in faith
as to a public appointment of God, for the saving of their souls. On the
contrary, he that preaches authoritatively, 1. Is bound to preach, if God
gives him opportunity.

2. If upon the Lords days he preaches and people will not hear, he may shake
off the dust of his feet against them, and it shall be more tolerable in the
great day for Sidon than for that people.

3. People may and ought to go out to hear him in faith, Lu. 10.11, 12.
believing that his preaching is the public Ordinance of Christ for the saving
of their souls.

We say, and say again, that all the gifted men in the world cannot make one
such Sermon. And now our Brethren understand what we mean by authoritative
preaching; it is not so directly opposite to charitative preaching, as to
precarious preaching, in which the preacher may beg but cannot command either
auditory or attention.

If our Brethren have any thing to say to the question thus plainly stated, Let
them speak on; what ever else they speak to is plainly Ex ignoratione elenchi,
not knowing, or not willing to own what we understand by preaching.

And if this cannot be proved on our Brethrens part, I shall beseech those who
have power as civil officers, or particular persons, to send men to places, to
take heed whom they send, and that they would not lay people under evident
temptations to profane the Lords day, and put them upon some kind of necessity
to hear none but such, as the Lord never sent, never promised his presence
with, and such as they cannot go to hear in such a manner as it is the will of
God that people should hear, viz. looking upon the performance as the
appointment of Jesus Christ in order to their eternal Salvation. My soul aches
to think of the condition of many poor people in this county upon that account.
But not to digress.

Let us come in the next place, to consider what our Brethren have to prove
that gifted men may thus preach.

CHAP. III Containing an answer to our Brethrens book from p. 29. to p. 60. and
therein to their two first Arguments, for Non-ordained persons preaching,
wherein the necessity of a particular Churches Election, as antecedaneous to
Ordination, is examined, and denied, and disproved; the sense of 1 Pet. 4.10.
is enquired, and an answer given to what our Brethren urge from that text, and
their Agrument from it proved insufficient.
OUr Brethren in this Chapter urge two arguments, for the Preaching of gifted
persons without Ordination, p. 29. of their book to p. 60. Their first is his.
Preaching without Ordination a. p. 29. ad p 60.


If Election from a Church ought by Gospel order to precede Ordination of
Officers, then persons not ordained may ordinarily preach.

But such election ought by Gospel order to precede Ordination. -- Ergo.

Both propositions in this argument may safely be denied. They prove the
Consequence from the reasonableness that good experience should precede
Election, for they must be persuaded that he is gifted, and qualified, or they
cannot in faith Elect, now this persuasion cannot be wrought in them without a
man's frequent preaching, to give them this experience. This is the sum of p.
30. To which I answer.

1. Surposing that Election is necessary to precede Ordination, we deny that
ordinary preaching is necessary in order to Election. I know no need of any
preaching at all, but only to try his utterance; his soundness in the faith,
and other qualifications are better tried by ordinary converse than by many
Sermons. Those who chose the Deacons had not 6 months experience of them, as
is plain from the Chronology of the Scripture; twice or thrice preaching is
enough to try that single gift of utterance surely.

2. Secondly we deny the Minor, such Election, viz. the Election of a
particular Church is not necessary to precede Ordination, nor have our Brethren
a title of plain Scripture for it, they only quote, Acts 6. v. 5, 6. See more
Chapter 6. of this treatise.
To which I said enough before; but let me add, Do our Brethren think that the
election there was by the whole multitude? let any one in reason judge whether
8000 people and odd (for so many was the number at that time, and those of
different languages too, Acts 2.41. Acts 4.4. Acts 2.6.) can reasonably be
supposed (being also divided amongst themselves Acts 6.1.) to have agreed in
that choice; the Apostles indeed spoke to some (probably the most judicious of
them) to commend persons to them, whereas our Brethren say I grant, Ordination
is but Actus ultimus; he that looks the place [ Vindiciae ministerii p. 18.]
will see my sense. I say 1. In case he be pastor of a Church. 2. I say
examination, etc. must precede. Our Brethren here desire one text to prove
Ordination antecedent to, or without Election. On the contrary we want one
Scripture to prove Election necessary: we grant it indeed upon parity of
reason, for the Pastor of this or that Church, and judge it highly convenient,
but I must profess I see not one clear Scripture for it. Does Paul give any
such instructions to Timothy or Titus to be observed before their Ordinations?
If there was any, Acts 14.23. Paul and Barnabas made them; what election do we
read of upon the Ordination of Paul and Barnabas? Acts 13. Weigh these things
(Christian Reader) and judge how much this first argument is worth.

Our Brethrens second argument is this.

All that by Gospel commands are required to preach, they may and ought to
preach. But some men merely gifted are so required. Ergo. The Major we grant
the Minor we deny. They proceed.

"All that have preaching gifts, and graces, or are apt to teach, are required
by Gospel-commands to preach.

But some men merely gifted, not ordained, are apt to teach, etc. Ergo.

The Minor we grant, the Major we deny. Our Brethren instance in two texts to
prove it: the first (upon which they most enlarge) is 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. I will
crave leave to transcribe the 9. too.

v. 9. Use hospitality one to another without grudging.

v. 10. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to
another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.

v. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion
for ever. Amen.

Here our Brethren observe several things.

"1. That the text is to be meant of any spiritual gift.

"2. That v. 11. There is a particularizing of that special gift of speaking to
others for Edification in the things of Christ.

"They say p. 33. That the nature of the direction how to speak, and the
reference the 11. v. has to the 10. argue it is not common speaking here
meant, but some special gift of Scripture-interpretation, and so it is usually
carried by interpreters. And it follows the 10. v. so immediately, that it
must needs be an explication of it.

"3. There is a divine command to exercise such gift, "This commvnd is
universal. Every man.

This is the Sum of what they say. To all which I answer. 1. If it be not
plainly proved that the gift here is preaching parts, a spirituul gift, and
that spiritual gift, and 2. That the term every man must be understood in the
latitude. I say in case any of these fail, every one sees that our Brethrens
argument falls to the ground.

As to the first question then.

Quest. 1. What is meant by gift there.

The word is (...), which is used in the New Testament 16 times, (of which this
is one) the learned observe it is a word that is not to be found in any heathen
Author, so that from the Scripture alone we must understand the import of it,
where (as by comparing all the texts will most evidently appear) it signifies,

Any good thing which is freely given us of God; whether in a way of special
providence or common or special grace.

1. It is used to express gifts of special grace. Justification, Romans 5.15, 16.
Election, Romans 11.28. Eternal life. Any experiences which may be imparted for
Edification, Romans 1.11.

2. It is used to express extraordinary gifts, 1 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 12.28, 30.

3. To express any gifts common or special, 1 Cor. 1.7. 1 Cor. 12.4.

4. To express common gifts. The gift of continency, 1 Cor. 7.7. Paul's
deliverance from danger is called a gift, and expressed by this word, 1 Cor.
1.11.

5. To express office, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. as appears by the distribution, v. 7,
8. So 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. (for the imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery did not conferr other gifts ordinary or extraordinary) The question
is now, in which of these senses this word is to be taken, 1 Pet. 4.10.

It is plain that it cannot be meant of those gifts of God which we cannot
Minister to others, so that it cannot be understood of Election, as Romans 11.28.
nor of Justification, as Romans 5.15, 16. nor eternal Life, as Romans 6 23. These
are indeed Free-gifts, bestowed on the Elect, but not to be by them ministered
to others; but of any of the rest (except that 1 Cor. 7.7.) it may be
understood, that is,

1 Either of extraordinary gifts, such as those of healing, called by this
name, 1 Cor. 12.9, 29 30.

2. Or of Experiences of Gods goodness to us, in a way of common providence or
special grace, or of outward good things, or inward, which by our hand, or
tongue we may administer, as Romans 1.11. 1 Cor. 1.11.

3. Or of Acts of office, as Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.

4. Or of the gifts of knowledge and utterance or any other, 1 Cor. 1.7. 1 Cor.
12.4.

If it be to be understood here in any of three former senses, it will not
serve our brethrens turn; for extraordinary gifts are ceased: For telling one
another what God has done for us, or distributing to those in want, we allow
it to private persons. If by gift, Office is meant, then none but those in
office have received the gift.

As to the last, we grant that he who has received the gift of utterance and
knowledge, may impart it, and ought to do it in his place, and station, but this
may be done, by private conference, admonitions, exhortations, etc. But this
lies upon our Brethren to prove.

1. That the gift here meant, must needs be the gift of preaching in the
public Assemblies of people, and that they may do this without Ordination.

We have told them it may be understood,

1 Of Office. As any one has received any office, so let him minister in it,
as Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 4.14 2 Timothy 1.6.

Or of common gifts of providence. The good things relating to this life, 2 Cor
1 11. then it is a command for alms, according to the connection, v. 10, 11. Our
Brethren must show us good reason why it must be understood of spiritual gifts,
and this gift of preaching.

3 Or if he be understood of the gift of opening Scripture, it may be
understood of the extraordinary gifts of prophecy, or at least must be limited
to a due time place and manner. Or lastly, it may be understood by the gifts
called by this name, 1 Cor. 12.9, 28, 30. We do not say it can be understood of
all these, as our Brethren seem to hint out of a fondness to find a
contradiction in me: not of Alms, and office too, this is but a childish reply
of theirs in their first answer to my first objection. p. 35. of their book, it
is enough for us if it be understood of one of these. For if I understand any
thing of sense or reason, those who affirm this text to be a precept for the
exercise of preaching gifts (as our Brethren do) must prove either,

1. That that gift is specially meant here, or, Secondly

2. That the precept is general, and not to be limited to this or that gift,
but understood in the latitude of any gift to be improved for the good of
others.

Now which of these our Brethren will stand to by their answer, I cannot learn;
for one while they tell us the next words are Exegetical of the former, another
while they tell us Preaching is one of those gifts. But let them take which
they please. Is this then our Brethrens sense, That the import of that text is

That it is the duty of any one who has received any gift [that is any ability
to do good to his brother] should do it?

1. Why then p. 32, 33. do our Brethren come in with their [i. e. Spirituul
gift] by the same rule they restrain the text to spiritual gifts, we restrain
it to Office, as Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Timothy 4.16. Or to outward good things, the word
is so used in Scripture; the Context is as much for us as for our Brethren:
ver. 10. Use hospitality one to another, and that is out of question meant ver.
11. If any man minister, let him do it of the ability God gives.

Object. But this say our Brethren, is not the manifold grace of God; Charity
is but one Grace,

Answ. Though Charity be but one grace, yet there be manifold Free gifts of
God, by the distribution of which we may exercise Charity: The gift of Miracles
was but one gift, yet Heb. 2.4. you have (...), various or manifold miracles.
The body of lust is but one body of death, yet there are many lusts, 2 Timothy
3.6. A man may minister from the grace of charity, by giving money, meat,
clothes, etc. and every one of these is (...) a free gift of God to him.

2. If any one who has ability may dispense the gift, then gifted. Brethren
may administer Baptism, and the Lords Supper too (by virtue of this Text) for
there is no doubt but many of them have an ability to do all that which is to
be done materially in those acts; but this our Brethren will not allow: And
why? Because these are Acts of Office (say our Brethren) so say we is the
Preaching we contend about. Our Brethren may see by this, a necessity of
restraining this Text: Either as we contend,

1. To such Gifts as other Scriptures authorize them to administer: Or,

2. To an Administration of this Gift, according to due Gospel Order, which (we
say) cannot be without preceding Ordination.

Will our Brethren take the Second, and say, That an ability to Preach, is the
Gift here only meant: and this Text will warrant a Ministering of that gift
without any more ado? 1. Then we ask them by what authority they impose this
upon us; why may it not as well be expounded by the words immediately going
before, as those immediately following after? then the Gift is the good things
of this world: The sense of the coherence will not constrain this
interpretation, it makes as much for us, as it does for them, nay more.

2. For the next words limit him that speaks, to a speaking as the Oracles of
God; but he who never had the Oracles of God committed to him, is not like to
speak the word as the Oracles of God; he may speak the Oracles of God, but he
cannot speak them as the Oracles of God, because not sent by God.

3. Suppose we should allow this, that the Gift of opening and applying
Scripture is here meant, How does this Text prove, either a Liberty for, or a
duty to d^ this in public Assemblies? otherwise our Brethren know we allow it.

4. Lastly, to whom does Peter speak this? read chapter 1. v. 1. To the strangers
scattered through Asia, Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Bythinia. Our dispute is
not, what may be Lawfully done in the scattred state of the Church, where no
Ministers are at hand, but what may be done in ordinary Cases, to which this
Scripture speaks nothing (If it be so to be understood) we do not doubt but in
such a persecuted state of the Church, a private person Gifted may Preach, and
people ought to hear, as well as the Levites might kill the Paschal Lamb at
Hezekiahs passover: but (blessed be God) that is not our Case. Thus the Reader
may see how inconclusive our Brethrens Argument is from this Text, upon more
accounts than one.

Our Brethren have entered exceptions against two material things which we
insist upon, for the interpretation of this Text. 1. Against what we say, that
if this Text may be understood of the Gift of Preaching or Speaking, yet it may
be done privately.

2. Against what we say, That by Gift, very probably is meant Office.

Let us consider what our Brethren say to either of these.

They say first, that private exercising cannot satisfy this precept, nor can
this exercise be justly so limited. 1. Because as a Church member, he may
admonish and exhort severally, and then why not when they are met together?

2. Because a public Gift, cannot be fully improved in a private way: A man in
such a case hides his talent.

3. Public actings are not peculiar to Office, they say.

4. Charity binds men s^metimes to go out of their callings to help others.

Therefore our Brethren may sometimes step out of their Calling to Preach.

5. A man may lawfully choose it for his calling to preach. And then he goes
not out of his Calling.

6. "They have a Divine allowance, Heb. 10.25. therefore they go not out of
their Callings.

"This is the sum of what they say to the first, a p. 46. ad p. 56. To all
which I answer.

1. We will not contend with our Brethren, that it is unlawful for a private
gifted person to speak in the public Assemblies of the Church, provided it be
not on the Lords day, which ought to be spent in peoples attendance upon
public Ordinances, of which nature their Preaching cannot be: but we deny,
that any are bound to hear them, or that any can come to hear them as unto that
Ordinance of Preaching, which lies under the great appointment of God, to save
peoples souls. And we say, the Church of God has had no such custom.

As to the Second, We do not understand our Brethrens notion of a public Gift,
it may be taken in a double sense. 1. For a Gift which God has given to men,
willing them to use it publicly. 2. For a Gift which if used publicly might
be of public service. If our Brethren understand it in the first sense, we
deny any not ordained have any such public Gift: if (as they must) they
understand it in the latter sense, we say it may be so far improved as to free
men from sin, in not improving it, without public exercise: How many hundred
men in England, have gifts for the Magistracy, that might be of public use
(were they so employed) yet I hope our Brethren will not bring this Text, to
prove that they ought to administer Judgment publicly: Why? Because God has
required another Order, and a special regular Call for the exercise of those
public Gifts; and we say the like for the Ministry.

To the Third, We grant that all public a^^ings are not peculiar to Office;
but we say, the administration of public Ordinances, is peculiar to public
Officers; and t is scarce sense, to say a private person may administer ^
public Ordinance,

To the Fourth, we say, That we grant that Charity may bind men to go out of
their Callings to help another, and so Charity may bind a gifted man to
Preach, in case of necessity; but this is not Ordinary preaching, of which the
question is stated.

To the Fifth, We grant a private person may choose preaching for his Calling,
but his choosing of it does not make that his Calling: the Church, say our
Brethren, must choose him too, he must be ordained (say we.)

To the Sixth, Our Brethren say, they have a divine allowance, Heb. 10.25. But
to do what? Is it said to Preach publicly and ordinarily? But let our Brethren
prove that precept to be given to mere Gifted men; they indeed must not forsake
assembling together: but is it not enough if their Officers only exhort?
however our brethren make that Text a warrant for private meetings, and then it
is nothing to the question.

But to the Second, whereas we have told our Brethren, that by (...) probably
is meant Office, as in Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 1. They think it
cannot be so taken here, for these Reasons.

1. Because the Context cannot be so restrained; the Apostle exhorts to
sobriety, watchfulness unto prayer, ver. 7. to charity, ver. 8. to hospitality,
ver. 9. These exhortations concern private Christians, and the persons spoken
to verse 10. are the same.

2. The Apostle speaks indefinitely [a gift] now indefinite Propositions are
usually equipollent to universals (they say.)

3. The word (...) will not restrain it unto Office, because it is often used
otherwise; nor does the term Stewards limit it, nor the terms exhorting and
ministering.

4. "The exhortations to officers are given in the next Chapter, ver. 2, 3.

To all which I again answer.

1. We do not peremptorily determine that by (...) is meant Office there; it is
enough for us to say, it may be so; for our Brethren must prove it cannot, or
else they can prove no precept to their purpose from hence.

2. That by the term Office cannot be understood here, is not proved by any
thing our Brethren have said. The learned Authors of the Dutch Annotations
think Office is meant, ver. 11. Why may not the Apostle, after he had
dispatched his exhortations to some common duties, subjoyn this to Officers? he
does so Romans 12. and 2 Timothy 5. and what if he gives exhortations to Elders in
the next chapter? Can it therefore be concluded that none of the exhortations
in this chapter belong to them? How do our Brethren prove, that the persons
spoken to ver. 9. and spoken to ver. 11. ^elthe same individuals? and why may
not the gift then be the same too, and so neither office, nor gifts of this
nature meant?

3. Our brethren must not tell us, that indefinite propositions are most
usually equipollent to universals, because it is no Logic.

Their Logical Rule is this.

Indefinitae proposititiones interdum aequipollent universalibus, interdum
particularibus, Keckerman, Syst. Log. c. 5.
illis quide in materia necessaria, his vero in contingenti: nay with that
restriction (says Keckerman) it will not always hold true. A living creature
is not a man; turn this into an universal negative, No living creature is a
man, and it is false. Because therefore the Apostle speaks indefinitely, as
every one has received a gift, so let him minister; it does not follow he must
understand every gift; for what will our Brethren say to gifts of wisdom for
Government of Nations, Armies, etc. or to abilities to Baptize and administer
the Lords Supper? But to come to an issue.

I am very inclinable to understand the Text in the latitude, and to think this
the sense. As any man has received any communicable gift; so let him minister
it unto others, in that due way and order, and upon that regular Call, which
God in his word has required for those to exercise gifts that have them: If it
be a gift of Government (when God has called him to Magistracy) let him use
his gift; if it be a gift for opening and applying Scripture, for administering
Baptism or the Lords Supper, let him first be duly ordained, and set apart for
the work of the Ministry, and so let him use his Gift. When our Brethren have
said their utmost, this Text will prove no more that he who has a gift of
knowledge and utterance may forthwith Preach, than it will prove, that by the
authority of this Text, he who has a gift of wisdom may use it in the
Magistratical service, or that he who has a gift of knowledge, or zeal, may
administer the two Sacraments, merely by authority of his gifts, without any
more ado. And this is enough for their Fifth Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Containing a short Answer to the three latter Arguments brought by
our Brethren for Gifted men's Preaching, in their Sixth Chapter, from a
(pretended) promise annexed to it: The preaching of Apollo, and the scattered
Saints; and the prophesying, and Prophets mentioned in 1 Cor. chapter 12. chapter 14.

OUR Brethren in their Sixth Chapter, produce three Arguments, to prove the
Lawfulness of persons Preaching (if Gifted) though not Ordained. Their first is
this.

The Preacher sent, chap. 6.


That practice which has a Gospel Promise annexed, is warrantable.

But the Preaching of some such, has a Gospel Promise annexed:

Ergo.

The Major we grant, the Minor we deny. They prove it from Mat. 25.29.

For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance.

Let us put it into Form.

What the Gospel promises unto him that has a talent, i. e. that improves it,
That it promises to Gifted men's Preaching without Ordination. Here Is enough:
Let me have the same Liberty, and our Brethren will quickly see the vanity of
this Argument.

What the Gospel promises to him that has a talent, i. e. that improves his
talent; that it promises to every one that will (having a gift of wisdom and
justice) execute justice, though not any other way called to it than by his
gifts. But the Gospel promises, etc. Or thus.

What the Gospel promises to him that has a talent or ability, i. e. that by
practice improves it, that it promises to gifted persons that have ability to
baptize and administer the Supper, and will do it without any other authority
than what their gifts give them. Therefore gifted men, not Commissionated for
the Magistracy, nor ordained to the Ministry, may execute justice, and
administer Sacraments.

I believe my Lord Protector will hardly allow the first, and I think our
brethren will not allow the latter; and when our Brethren have found out a
distinction to help themselves, we hope it will help us. Our Brethren, page 63.
say plainly, they restrain not the Text to preaching Gifts. But they must do
it, or else our Arguments from it are as good as theirs: and if they do
restrain it, we shall hardly rest in their sense without good reason to
justify their restriction. And this is enough for their third Argument, to
which the same answer may be applied which was given before, to that drawn from
1 Pet. 4.10.

Let us see if they be more happy at a fourth.

Their fourth Argument is drawn from Gospel Presidents, thus formed. The
Preacher sent, or preaching without Ordination, p. 66.


What is holden forth by Gospel Presidents with Divine allowance may be
practiced. But the ordinary exercise of preaching Gifts in public Assemblies,
etc. Is so holden forth. Ergo.

I can neither allow the Major nor the Minor: I cannot allow the Major (in the
terms our Brethren have put it) for they might as well assume.

But Apostleship, or an universal inspection and government of all Churches, is
holden forth by Gospel Presidents, Paul and Peter. Therefore we may have Popes,
Archbishops, and Bishops. Or thus, But the Holy kiss, and anointing with oil,
are held forth by Gospel Presidents with divine allowance. Ergo, Mr. Tilham,
and Mr. Pooly are in the right.

If our Brethren understand the Major thus (I shall allow it.)

What is holden forth by Gospel Presidents, to be in ordinary Cases a standing
practice, may be lawfully practiced. Then we deny the Assumption, viz. That the
preaching of Gifted persons (in the sense before expressed) is by any Gospel
Presidents held forth as a standing practice to be continued in the Church of
Christ. Our Brethren prove it.

1. By the instance of Apollo, upon which they descant a p. 66. ad p. 73.

2. By the instance of the scattered Saints, Acts 8. and 11. upon which they
descant ad p. 88. It must be granted, that the Scriptures say, that Apollo
spoke, and taught diligently, Acts 11.24, 25. and that some of the scattered
brethren preached. But to answer all in short, Every understanding Reader will
grant, the Argument being ab exemplo pari, If these examples prove not (paria)
matches, the Argument falls to the ground: If either there were not a parity of
species, in their gifts, or in their acts, or not a parity, in the state of the
Church at that time, with that which is the present state of it; now we say,
that in some, if not in all these their argument from hence halteth.

be a parity in the species of their gifts: for I hope our brethren have no
design to put this fallacy upon their Readers; if those who were furnished with
the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, suited to the first plantation of
the Church, might preach, then those who have but very ordinary gifts,
according to the size of these times, and the opportunities of that little
leisure they could get from their Trades, may do the like; this were just such
an Argument, as if one should conclude, that because one who had the gifts of
healing, might go to a sick person, and anoint him with oil, and lay hands on
him, and pray, and by a faith of miracles, believe he should upon this recover;
therefore one may do so now: So that if it appear that Apollo, or those Acts 8.
or 11. had gifts of another species; either Office, or extraordinary gifts of
the Holy Ghost, which all grant to be now ceased, our brethrens Argument sinks.
Now let us examine the instances by this rule, According to which our brethren
have been told concerning Apollo.

1. That he is ranked with Paul and Peter, 1 Cor. 1.12. called a Minister, 1
Cor. 3.5.

2. That it is very probable his gifts were of another species, from that which
our gifted men now adays have; it is said he was mighty in the Scriptures.

Our brethren say nothing to this: but let those who say it prove it; but as I
take it they assert, and should prove; however we have proved, that he is
called a Minister, and ranked with Paul and Peter. But say our brethren, this
was afterward. A very little time it seems; for the Text says, he went soon
into Achaia; and in the first verse of the next chapter, he is reported in
Corinth. So that it is plain that he preached only in order to Office, that he
might be proved; in which case our brethren know we allow preaching ex dono.

But Secondly, for the scattered Christians, they have

1. That it is the opinion of some, these were some of the 70. whose
Office-gift was of another species, being an extraordinary Mission.

2. That the Sctipture says expressly of one of these, Philip, he was an
Evangelist, Acts 21.8. and he is the only Preacher named.

3. "That those were members of the Church of Jerusalem, some of the 8000. who
were filled with the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, and might speak the
word with boldness, Acts 4.31. If our brethren have any endued with gifts of
that species, God forbid we should deny them liberty; but we conceive them
ceased, and with them the strength of this Argument too.

Now what say our brethren to take off these Answers?

I shall not meddle with what they say to the first; it being an answer not to
be rested upon, and supernumerary. As to the second, they tell us p. 81. The
consequence is feeble, because one was an Officer: Ergo, all were. It is an
easy thing our brethren know to break a man's legs, and then say he is lame:
This Argument was not brought as demonstrative, Page 81.
but as a good topic; but the strength lay here, Every one of them whom the
Scripture names was an Officer; and therefore it is not probable any preached
but Officers, and what ever Office Philip was ordained to, Acts 6. certain it
is he was an Officer, and so our brethren grant. As to the last Answer (which
alone is sufficient) they have said nothing. So then upon this enquiry, our
brethrens Argument lies thus.

If Apollo who was soon after to be made an Officer of the Church at Corinth,
preached in order to Ordination, and some scattered Members of the Church of
Jerusalem, who had received the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost preached,
amongst whom (we think) there were some no Officers, then private persons, who
have but very ordinary gifts, and intend no such Ordination, may preach too. To
which we must crave leave to answer. -- Non sequitur.

But our Brethrens Argument is sick of more Non sequiturs than one. To proceed
therefore.

Secondly, In case there were no parity in their acts, If the scattered
Christians, wherever they became in private houses commended the Gospel to
people, then gifted men may in the public Assemblies of the Church, or any
people, perform that Ordinance of Christ called preaching. That were just such
an Argument as this. If John a Nokes may turn a servant out of communion with
his Family, then he may excommunicate him out of the Church. Our Brethren in
that Text, Acts 8. have found the word preach; but nothing to evidence it was
in public Assemblies, nor will Gods blessing their labors prove it; God may,
and often does bless private means when public cannot be had. The case was
otherwise indeed concerning Apollo, it is said, he preached in the Synagogues;
but so might any one, according to the corrupt state of the Jewish Church at
that time; and besides (as I said before) he was to be proved in order to
office, which our Brethren grant he afterward had.

But thirdly, There must be a parity in the State of the Church too, or else
their Argument will not hold: but It was an infant state, and is is a true
observation of Didoclavius, that many things may be lawful in the infancy of a
Church, which are not to be imitated nor induced in a settled Church. 2. It was
a persecuted State. This is indeed the best answer, and therefore our Brethren
spend most pains in trying to answer it, page 85, 86, 87, 88. Let us consider
what they say.

1. They grant that necessity may legitimate an action otherwise not lawful.

2. They say, though they were necessitated to traevel, yet they were not
necessitated to preach. What do our brethren think we mean by necessity? or how
comes necessity into the question, which is whether it be not lawful for
private persons to do something in a persecuted State of the Church, which is
not lawful in a settled state of it? But to take our Brethren at their own
rebound.

Necesse est quod nec esse aliter potest; there is a natural necessity, and
there is a moral necessity: We never thought this necessity was natural; and
yet against that our brethren argue. There is an absolute necessity, and an
hypothetical necessity. In short, we say, they might be under a manifold
necessity.

1. A necessity of the precept; they were filled with the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, and those extraordinary gifts might be attended with an extraordinary
praeceptive impression, Acts 4.31.

2. There was necessit as medii; there was no other ordinary means of salvation
for those people where they came, than that extraordinary course of theirs, the
Apostles being yet left at Jerusalem.

3. Upon this supposition, that it was the will of God his Gospel should at
that time be made known to those people, it was necessary; for there were no
others in office to do it.

Thirdly, Our Brethren question whether necessity can legitimate an action, in
it self unlawful: but grant, it may legitimate an action unlawful at this or
that time. Not to dispute the first, which yet we might by our Saviors
instance of the Shewbread taken by David, etc. The later part granted, is
enough for us, if our Brethren mean ingenuously: We do not say it is against
the light of nature to preach without Ordination.

But it is unlawful at such a time when the Church has plenty of Ministers,
and there is no need of their extraordinary actings, being calm and settled. Now
that which is unlawful at such and such a time, our Brethren grant necessity
may make lawful; we ask no more at their hands at this time. 3. Our Brethren
enquire when is there such a case of necessity? and conclude, when Ordination
cannot be had in Gods way. -- And they can find no lawful Ordination without
a preceding election to a particular Church: And therefore all Gifted men lie
under such a necessity. Let us put this loose discourse into form; It must be
thus:

If Gifted men may Preach in a case of necessity, and it be a case of necessity
when they cannot have Ordination in Gods way, and this cannot be till they be
chosen Officers to a particular Church, then till that time their Preaching is
justified by necessity. But, etc. Ergo.

But our brethren know, that although they say they cannot, yet we can see
regular Ordination, without a Call to a particular Church; we are at a loss to
know what election to a particular Church preceded the Ordination of Paul and
Barnabas, of Timothy, of any one preaching Elder in Scripture. -- Our Brethren
go on.

They that preach in such cases of necessity, are either officers, or no
officers. If no officers, then preaching is not a peculiar act of office; then
there is a difference betwixt Preaching by Office and by Gift. -- If they be
Officers, then Ordination is not essential to office: Then another Mission must
be found out besides Ordination; then Baptism is valid without Ordination, etc.

To answer to all this. Those who preach in such Cases of necessity, where
people can have no ordained Ministers to hear, may be said to, Preach by an
extraordinary authority, which the word of the Lord has in such cases given
them, which may be called a Mission, and they may be Officers, as to that time,
and state; yet it will not follow but in another state of the Church Ordination
is essential to an ordinary Minister, that is, to one who according to the Rule
of Christ in ordinary cases ought to preach. All this arguing is nothing to the
purpose: for our brethren are to prove, that Gifted men may ordinarily preach
in a tranquil, and settled state of the Church, where are Ministers Ordained
enough to supply the place, or at least to ordain and authorize them. Their
Argument a pari here, is no Argument, because of the disparity of the Churches
State. If our brethren can bring us any Texts out of the Epistles wrote to
settled Churches, requiring, commanding, or allowing such a practice for persons
not in office, nor furnished with extraordinary gifts to preach publicly, and
ordinarily, they say something; all this is no better than (...), or go round
about the bush, but never strike one blow at it.

I come therefore to their fifth Argument, p. 88.

All that are Prophets may publicly (they should have put in ordinarily too)
preach.

But some men [they should have said some such Gifted men as we have now] who
are not ordained Officers, are Prophets; Ergo.

If our Brethren will not allow my correction of their Propositions, I will
deny the Conclusion, because the question is not in it.

If they will allow my corrections, I deny their Assumption, and say, No such
Gifted men as now live (for whom our Brethren must plead) are Prophets.

They prove it, p. 89. All that have the gifts of prophecy, are Prophets.

But some such Gifted men as are now to be found have the gift of prophecy;
Ergo. The Major I grant; The Minor I deny.

Three things our Brethren undertake to prove; p. 90.

1. That prophecy is a Gift, not an Office. 2. That some have the gift of
prophecy, and that gift still continues. 3. That some persons not ordained
have it.
I shall only premise this, that I hope our Brethren understand by prophecy,
such prophecy as the Apostle speaks of in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, otherwise they deceive their Reader with an equivocal word; and
then I deny all three of their Positions, and shall proceed to examine their
proof of them.

1. That prophecy is a gift, not an office, they prove,

1. Because there is no Scripture-warrant to ordain prophets.

2. Because they cannot be ordained, till they be discerned to have the gift of
prophecy.

3. Because some have this gift, who are no officers. This last I deny, they
pretend to prove it hereafter.

As to the two first, our Brethren dispute ex ignoratione Elenchi, against what
none deny; who ever said those Prophets were ordinary Officers? We say they
were extraordinary Officers, who were furnished with an extraordinary Gift,
either to foretell things to come, or else to interpret Scripture by an
infallible Spirit, without the use of such means as we now must use; and being
thus furnished, were made Officers at that time by an immediate Mission, to
which Ordination was not necessary.

So then two things we insist upon. 1. That Prophets were extraordinary
Officers. 2. That their gift was an extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost. The
first is enough for this place: That they were officers, appears from 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Acts 13.1, 2. And that they were extraordinary, appears
in that they are set before Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and from their
extraordinary gifts, Acts 11.27, 28. 1 Cor. 12.9, 10, 11. and from 1 Cor.
14.26. from which text it is plain, that they spoke from revelation, this has
been told our Brethren both by our reverend Brethren of London, Jus Divinum,
page 97, 98. Vindiciae ministe^ii, p. 50, 51, etc.
and by my self. Now for our Brethren to argue against this, because they were
not ordained, is a pitiful Non sequitur; for none ever said Ordination was
necessary to the constitution of an Apostle, or any extraordinary Officer.

But our Brethren judge that they can prove, that prophesying was not an
office, but a gift, p. 90. And this they endeavor by two Arguments, p. 91.
etc. Their first Argument in form is this, If all who have the gift of
prophecy are Prophets, then prophecy is a gift, not an office.

But all who have the gift of prophecy are Prophets; Ergo.



We deny the Consequence, and say our Brethren have not proved it; for this it
all they say,

They must first have the gift before they can be made Prophets. We deny that.
God in the same moment clothed them with an extraordinary Authority, and
furnished them with an extraordinary gift. So he did Jeremy, Amos, and all the
Prophets of old. I wonder which of them could be said to have the Gift of
prophecy one moment before they were Prophets by Office too? this is still a
fallacy ab ignoratione Elenchi; to extraordinary Officers, no such thing was
needful.

Our brethrens second Argument is this, That which ought in duty, and might in
faith be coveted by every member of the Church in Corinth, was a gift only, not
an office.

But Prophesying might so be coveted; Ergo.



Before I give a direct answer to the Argument, I conceive prophesying (to
speak properly) to be neither a gift nor office, but an act by which either is
exercised, which act we say none could exercise, but he who had the gift for
it, and also the extraordinary authority which empowered him to it; and that
prophesying is in no sense to be called a gift, but as an office is a gift,
being constituted for the good of the Church, and an honor to them that have
it. But to speak to their Argument.

In the first place, I deny the Major. That which ought in those times to be
coveted, and might in faith have been coveted by every member of the Church of
Corinth, might be an extraordinary office. But say our Brethren.

The Lord had no where promised to make every member of the Church of Corinth a
Church officer, therefore it could not be an office. 1. Our Brethren did not
consider, that the same Argument will prove it was no gift, except they can
show us where the Lord had promised to give every member of the Church the gift
of prophecy, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Prophets? The Lord no where promised to
give all Christians a power to work miracles, or to speak with tongues, yet
surely, they might covet it, as it is plain from the next words, where though
prophesying be preferred before tongues, yet that is left upon record as one of
those gifts might be coveted.

2. God has no where promised that John a Styles should recover of his
sickness; does it therefore follow he cannot pray in Faith? We use to teach our
People, that our prayers for things not necessary to salvation, should be
prayed for with submission to Gods will, and the prayer is in Faith, while he
that prays believes, God will do that which is most good for him; so might
every member of the Church of Corinth pray for a gift, that he might be able to
prophecy; but he ought to regulate his desires with a submission to the will,
and wisdom of God; and doing so he might pray in faith, though there were no
such particular promise.

Object. But say our Brethren, this was impossible to be obtained, 1 Cor. 12.17.

If the whole body were an eye, where would hearing be?

If I should tell our Brethren here, To God nothing is impossible, they would
think I equivocated with them, yet it is the coin they have much used in
payment to me; but where lies the impossibility, in respect of Gods revealed
will? they instance in 1 Cor. 22.17. If the whole body were an eye, where would
hearing be?

That Text indeed proves, that all the Members of a particular Church, cannot
be officers to that Church (and we wish our Brethren would think of that Text,
who gave leave to any of their members to be tongues to speak the word, ears to
hear, and heads to govern, whiles they order all affairs by common suffrage)
But surely it will not follow, but that all those who are members in this
particular Church, may yet be in time Officers to other Churches, there is no
impossibility in this at all: yea and they ought to labor after such a
perfection.

Besides, universal holiness (our Brethren know) may and ought to be labored
for, yet it is not promised, nor can be attained.

We allow also that Text, to prove that all the Members of the universal
Church, should not be ordinary Officers.

But it does not prove an impossibility of their being extraordinary officers:
Much less does any thing they have said, prove that all Christians in that
Church, might not labor for such gifts as might make them fit to do an act of
office, when God should set them in such relations. Neither can I understand
the harshness of the sound, which our Brethren hint, page 92. That it should be
the duty of every private Christian to pray for such a proportion of gifts, as
(if God pleased so to employ him) he might also be able to interpret Scriptures
by an unerring Spirit, and speak with tongues, or be able to heal the sick,
provided his End were right in desiring. For these were peculiar favors that
God had promised by Joel, and was giving out in that Age. Surely what the
Apostle might wish for, them they might pray for: but 1 Cor. 14.5. I would that
you all spoke with tongues. They proceed to the proof of the Minor: viz.

That the prophesying spoken of, ought in duty, and might in faith be coveted
by every man in the Church of Corinth; this they prove from the terms, ye, and
all, v. 1. v. 5. To which I answer:

1. Having denied the Major, and made good our denial of it: I need not trouble
my self with denying this.

2. Our Brethren also know the term all does not include every individual
always. Are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12.29. Let us hear what they say to our
Arguments, to prove that these prophets were Officers.

1. We argued from two Texts of Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
Where they stand distinguished from the people, and enumerated amongst
officers, placed before Evangelists, and next to the Apostles. To this they
answer, p. 93, 94, 95.

1. "That priority of order is no infallible Argument.

2. "That some not Officers are enumerated, 1 Cor. 12.28. and prophecy is
called a gift, Romans 12.6.

3. Those texts might be meant of extraordinary Prophets, such as Acts 11.27,
28.

To all which I shall give a short answer.

1. We grant priority of order is no infallible Argumen, where there is any
other Scripture, or any sound reason to evince it no intention of the holy
Penmen, to express the Order; but we say our brethren have no such Text, nor
reason neither, and that the Apostle in that Text, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. seems to rank
Preaching Officers, according to their dignity, beginning with Apostles, then
reckoning Evangelists, Thirdly, Prophets, Fourthly, Pastors, Fifthly, Teachers:
And verse 12. To distinguish them from ordinary Saints, and the common Members
of the Body of Christ.

2. We say, there are none but Officers mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Nor any, 1
Cor. 12.28, 29. But such as were either officers, or gifted with extraordinary
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, from whence we conclude, That Prophets were either
extraordinary officers, or ordinary officers, or gifted with extraordinary
gifts (peculiar to that state of the Church.) Now it is indifferent to us (as
to the present controversy) of which it be understood; So our Brethren will
grant, that one of them must be meant, and so much that Text will evince. If
Gifted men be meant, I wonder who are the Church in which they are set? ver.
29. Our Brethren say, prophecy is called a Gift, Romans 12.6. but there is
nothing plainer, than that by gift, is meant office, to him that reads ver.
7.8.

3. Whereas our Brethren say those Texts, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. may be
meant of extraordinary prophets, Page 96.
we take them at their word; and say it is all we have been contending for;
only then it lies upon our brethren to prove, that the prophets spoken of 1
Cor. 14. are not the same spoken of 1 Cor. 12.28. we appeal to every judicious
Christian to judge in the Case.

In the next place our Brethren undertake to prove it a gift still continuing
in the Church.

1. Because there is no Gospel Rule for the ceasing of it: So say the Prelates
for Archbishops, and Bishops; where is the rule for the ceasing of their
Office? We say the Apostles giving Rules for the ordaining Pastors and Teachers
in Churches, and committing government to them, was enough, and the cessation
of their extraordinary Mission was enough. So we say for these Prophets, the
cessation of the Gift manifested by obvious experience, is a demonstration to
us that prophecy is ceased, where is there any now that can without study and
meditation, infallibly give the sense of Scriptures, from revelation, or can
foretell things to come? we have pitiful experience every day that those
pleaded for cannot do the first, and the year 1657. being come and gone, and
the Jews not converted, proves that John Tillinghast (though as famous and able
as any our Brethren plead for) prove they cannot do the later. As we say to the
Prelatical party, so we say to our Brethren, St. Paul's charging Timothy to
study and meditate, etc. was a certain proof, that this prophesying is ceased.

Secondly, "Our Brethren say it was an ordinary gift, and therefore it
continues; the gift of tongues, and healing in those days were ordinary, yet
none of them is continuing, I hope.

What else our Brethren mean by ordinary, I cannot tell; for if they mean it
was given by God for a standing Ordinance, it is yet to be proved; for this
they refer us to Mr. Rutherford, (a man whom I honor, but am not of his mind
in this thing.) It was indeed his opinion, that the Apostle by prophesying, 1
Cor. 14.1. means no other than the ordinary acts of Pastors and Teachers,
though from an extraordinary principle and faculty; so that still he thought,
the gift was extraordinary, which they by their prophesying did exercise. For
those eight particulars instanced in by Mr. Rutherford, recited by our
brethren, p. 99, 100. we say they were no other than rules of order, which
extraordinary officers, as well as ordinary were to be limited by. But I wonder
our brethren should quote Mr. Rutherford, and set down his words too, which
plainly say, he thought the gift extraordinary, though their acts were but the
acts of ordinary Officers. These are his words as quoted by our Brethren.

Only the internal principle, to wit the infused gift of prophesying, made them
extraordinary prophets in fieri, as our prophets become prophets in fieri by
ordinary studies and industry; but in facto esse, and according to the
substance of the acts of prophesying, these extraordinary Prophets, and our
ordinary Pastors differ not in specie, etc. Let any Reader, who understands
English, judge whether Mr. Rutherford thought the Gift of prophecy was
ordinary; he indeed thought the Act was, viz. That God in those days by
Revelation immediately gifted the Ministers of his Gospel in the Church of
Corinth; but our brethren are to prove the Gift is ordinary; if they remember
what they undertook, page 96. to prove which Mr. Rutherford will do them no
kindness: The faculty of seeing was in an extraordinary manner given to the
blind man; and the conversion of the water into wine at Cana, John 2. (which
are the two instances Master Rutherford insists upon) were both extraordinary,
though when the blind man had his visive faculty by a Miracle conferred, his
seeing was but ordinary as other men, and when the Wine was made, it tasted
like other Wine.

Our Brethren proceed still with their fallacy of arguing from the Act to the
Gift, or rather of putting in Act, where they should have put in Gift, page
100. 1. And they again tell us the Rules to regulate the work are ordinary,
what is this to prove the gift is so? the Act may be ordinary, and yet the Gift
not so; as in the case of the blind man before mentioned. The work of
extraordinary officers and gifts were to come under general Rules of order, I
hope.

2. But they tell us the description of the work is ordinary: What if it be?
The question is what the description of the Gift would be: the description of
the Gift of seeing, and the Act of seeing are two things, I hope, so in this
case; but where is that description? They tell us, 1 Cor. 14.3. He that
prophecyeth speaks unto men to edification and exhortation and comfort. Hete
they tell us is the Act, Exhortation, 2. The Ends of it, exhortation and
comfort. Surely our Brethren presumed that none should ever examine what they
say; the Text is,

(...). He that prophecyeth speaks unto men edification, and exhortation, and
comfort.

1. (So far as it is a description) It is a description of the Act not of the
gift.

Secondly, Our Brethren if they had pleased, might as well have said
edification, or comfort was the Act, as they say exhortation is; for the Text
proves the one as well as the other.

The truth is, the Apostle by these words only expresses the end of
prophesying, and such ends as were common to that, with other ordinances and
duties too. If I should say, Paul working miracles confirmed the Gospel f r the
conversion of unbelievers; would it follow that the Act of working miracles was
confirming the Gospel?

In the third place they tell us, That one great end of extraordinary
prophesying, and their main and proper act, viz. foretelling future events, is
denied to this prophesying: This they say, but they have not told us where that
denial is to be found, and I cannot find it. All that I can find them saying is
this, 1 Cor. 14.22. It is said, Tongues were for a sign to them that believed
not; but Prophecy serves not for them who believe not, but for those that
believe. Hence they observe, That the antithesis betwixt Tongues and Prophets,
that tongues were for a sign, but not prophecy, proves, that prophecy could
not be for a sign. But this is woefully fallacious.

1. The Antithesis lies not there, that Tongues were for a sign, but prophecy
not so: but here, That tongues were for a sign to heathens that bel^eved not;
but prophesying was a sign only for such as believed; viz. It was an act only
to be performed within the pale of the Church; this text only proves, that
prophecy was no sign to them that believed not.

2. Though the foretelling of things to come, might bear the nature of a sign;
yet this was not the only end of it; but the faith, and holiness of the persons
to whom the prophecy was directed; neither indeed could the foretelling of
things to come confirm any thing to any, till they saw them accomplished.

3. I conceive the chief act of those Prophetesses, 1 Cor. 14. was their
infallible interpretation of Scripture, by an extraordinary gift, which indeed
to them that believed not the Scriptures, would be of no use; but was to such
as did believe them.

Fourthly, Our Brethren say, Women Prophetesses are forbidden to speak in the
Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. But women Prophetesses might prophecy things to come,
Luke 2.38.

1. I answer, that our Brethren do not find women prophetesses mentioned 1 Cor.
14.34. only women.

2. Secondly, our Brethren do not find that Anna, Luke 2.36. spoke things to
come; the Text only says, She gave thanks unto the Lord, and spoke of him to
all them that looked for redemption in Israel: She spoke of a Christ already
born. She was called a Prophetess (in all probability) because of an
extraordinary faculty she had from Divine revelation to interpret Seripture: So
that our Brethren see this kind of public prophesying (by their own instance)
belonged to women; and therefore by their own Argument was extraordinary. But
the truth is, this Liberty was restrained by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.37. But
this is enough to show the weakness of our Brethrens Argument.

Our Brethren having spent their shot upon us, come at last to receive a volly
from us; to prove prophecy an extraordinary gift, we had told our Brethren, 1.
That ver. 26. it was evident. When therefore you come together, every one of
you has a Psalm, a doctrine, a revelation, an interpretation, (I have put in
the word doctrine now, though I think it will not much serve our Brethrens
turn.)

2. That proph^^s are mentioned with a note of singularity, denying it to be a
gift common to all, 1 Cor. 12. 29, 30. Are all prophets?

3. That prophets in all the Old Testament, and new too, signified
extraordinary officers, who acted from immediate revelation.

4. That prophecy is reckoned up as one of the rarest gifts the Apostles had,
1 Cor. 13.2. 1 Cor. 14.16. preferred before Tongues, 1 Cor. 14.1, 2. Paul
compared himself with them, 1 Cor. 14.37.

5. That it is distinguished from the word of wisdom and knowledge.

6. That it is said prophecyes shall fail, 1 Cor. 13.8.

7. That prophesying is said not to serve for those that believe not, 1 Cor.
14.22.

To the first our Brethren answer, that we left out the word doctrine, 1 Cor.
14.26. The charge falls not on me, but now it is put in, let us see what our
brethren get by it. The sense of the text must be, Either that every individual
member of the Church of Corinth had all these, and then they all had
extraordinary gifts; for surely the gift of composing Psalms, and the gift of
Revelation, etc. must be no ordinary gifts. If this be the sense, the
prophesying in the Church of Corinth was by persons extraordinarily gifted,
infallibly inspired, and so the Argument of our Brethren from their example
fails, because they argue a pari, where is no parity in the species of Gifts.
Or else the sense must be, one of you has a doctrine, another a Psalm, another
a Revelation, etc. If this be the sense, how do our Brethren prove, that the
Doctrine belonged to the prophets? Other Scriptures quoted by our Brethren, 1 Timothy 5.17. Tit. 1.9. make laboring in Doctrine, the work of Pastors and
Teachers, and if the Doctrine were the Pastors and Teachers part, either the
Psalm, or the Revelation must be the Prophets work; for the interpretation
clearly belonged ^o tongues, or at least related to it, 1 Cor. 14.13. 1 Cron.
^hren take which they will, the Gift was extraordinary. Our Brethren say, that
Revelation is distinguished from Prophecy, ver. 6. but they did not consider
that in the same words, it is distinguished from Doctrine too. What shall I
profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by
prophesying, or by doctrine? From whence we easily conclude, that the
prophesying meant, 1 Cor. 14. was not speaking to people by doctrine, and yet
this is the trade to which our Brethren would pretend a Freedom for their
gifted Brethren.

Object. But say our brethren, It may be meant of ordinary revelation, Ephesians.
1.16, 17, 18.

Answ. Let what revelation will be meant, It is not doctrine; these Prophets
spoke not by Doctrine, that was another thing, ver. 6. Now I think preaching is
a speaking by Doctrine. And that is it to justify which we say no proof can be
produced from this Text.

Secondly, We grant an ordinary revelation (sano sensu) that is, That the Lord
by his Spirit does ordinarily give his people, in the use of due means, such a
knowledge of his written word, as is necessary for their salvation; yea, as may
be for their consolation, that they may as to their own souls, know the hope of
his Calling (as in that text, Ephesians. 1.16, 17, 18. quoted by our brethren) and
know their own grace, and right unto glory, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. Phil. 3.15.
That they may be resolved in their doubts, and come up to perfection in
knowledge and holiness. But all this as to their own private use. Let our
Brethren bring us any shadow of Scripture, to prove that God has promised
ordinarily to reveal unto his people such a knowledge of the Scriptures, as
they may publicly and ordinarily communicate it in Church Assemblies.

Whereas we told them Prophets are mentioned with a note of singularity, 1 Cor.
12.29, 30. they tell us so was the gift of Teaching, yet it is an ordinary
office. Every Reader will consider, that it was enough for us to prove, either
that these Prophets were Officers, or that they had an extraordinary gift. It
is true, the note of singularity affixed (or indeed the term of restriction
affixed rather) will not prove the gift was extraordinary; but it will prove
that either the Prophets were Officers, or the gift was extraordinary; for no
others are there enumerated, but extraordinary, or ordinary officers, or such
as had the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.

To our third Allegation, That the title Prophets, and the term prophesying in
all the Old Testament is peculiar to persons that were extraordinary Officers,
and extraordinarily gifted, and generally so in the New Testament; Our Brethren
answer,

1. That they have given many Arguments to prove that in 1 Cor. 14. neither
Officers, nor persons extraordinarily gifted are meant; and that chapter
speaking chiefly of Prophecy as the subject is most fit to interpret it. But
their several Reasons being answered, no more need be added.

2. It is questionable they say, whether in some of the places mentioned, the
word prophesying be taken, either for an act of Office; or for an exercise of
an extraordinary gift; and to this purpose they mention, Acts 13.1. Rev. 10.11.
Mat. 7.22. Mat. 13.57. Luke 4.24. Mat. 10.41. Acts 15.32. To which I answer.

Indeed our Brethren of London, p. 94. and my self (from others) p. 50. did
say, that we conceive, where ever Prophets or Prophecy are mentioned in
Scripture, some extraordinary Gift or Office is understood. It had been enough
for us to have said that generally it is so. But being the word is out, let it
go, and let us examine the places our brethren have picked out to prove the
contrary.

1. For that Text, Matthew. 7.22. Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord,
we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have we cast out devils, and
done many miracles: We grant, that it cannot be from hence demonstratively
proved, that the prophesying here mentioned was an extraordinary Gift; because
the other two things mentioned were; but we appeal to all the world, whether
this be not a strong presumption on our side, and such as our Brethren can
never disprove. For that text, Acts 13.1. There were certain Prophets and
Teachers in the Church at Antioch. These were such Prophets as were joined with
Teachers. 2. Preferred before them, according to the order also used, 1 Cor.
12.28, 29. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 3. Such as the Spirit called to ordain Paul and
Barnabas: Let any reasonably judge, whether these can be thought the ordinary
gifted men of that Church; for Rev. 10.11. John in a vision took a little Book
from the Angel, and did eat it -- And then the Angel said to him, Thou may
prophecy again, etc. Was this by virtue of ordinary gift think we? Their next
is, Matthew. 13.57. A prophet is not without honor, but in his own Country; this
Rule they say, is true of all faithful Teachers. Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4.5.
commands Timothy to watch in all things, to endure afflictions, to do the work
of an Evangelist, and to make proof of his Ministry; these things are the
duties also of Ordinary Ministers: does it therefore follow, that Evangelists
were no extraordinary officers? For their two other Texts both to the same
sense, Luke 4.24. Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. What though the promise here by
analogy concerns all such as shall entertain Ministers, etc. So does the
promise made to Joshuah Josh. 1.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee
(witness the Apostle, Heb. 13.6.) belong to all Christians, yet it will not
follow, that therefore Joshuah was no extraordinary person, but a mere private
person, nor yet that the promise did not primarily concern Joshuah, as to his
extraordinary service in subduing the Canaanites. For the Text, Acts 15.32.
Judas and Silas being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren, and with
many words confirmed them. Hence our Brethren conclude, the work of Prophets
was exhorting, and say, they exhorted because they were Prophets. Page 109.


Two things, or three must here be enquired: 1. Whether Judas and Silas were
not furnished with extraordinary gifts, or clothed with an extraordinary office
or authority. 2. Whether they preached or no. 3. Whether what they did, was
done by them as Prophets.

1. As to the first, it is plain from ver. 22. that both Judas and Silas were
no ordinary persons, there the Holy Ghost calls them, (...), we translate it
chief men amongst the Brethren. The word signifies men in some office amongst
their Brethren; compare the usage of it in other texts, Matthew. 2.6. A
Governor: Luke 22.26. Where it is opposed to (...) one that serves, Acts
7.10. Heb. 13.7, 24. Those that have the rule over you: But this is not all, if
it were the same Judas mentioned, Acts 1.13. he was one of the Apostles, and
yet (might have the gift of prophecy too) we read of no other Judas (but he
that was the Traitor) For Silas, Acts 15.40. he was Paul's fellow labourer, and
acting in equal work with him, Acts 16.29. they were undoubtedly two of the
hundred and twenty, who were all filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2.4.

2. But another question is, Whether this text proves they preached, the text
says they exhorted, but all exhorting is not preaching: The truth is, they were
sent with the Synods Letters, and persuaded them to an unity in obedience to
them.

3. But yet thirdly, Suppose they (being Prophets) preached; how does it prove
that this act was performed by them as Prophets? we may say Stephen being a
Deacon preached, yet it will not follow preaching is an act of the Deacons
office. Page 109.
Our Brethren add to the Scripture, when they say, their exhorting is said to
be because they were Prophets. The text says no such thing, (...) does not
signify because. The mention of their being Prophets, 1. distinguished them
from ordinary Brethren. 2. It was made to let us know the dignity of the
persons sent as Messengers from the Synod; they were no ordinaty persons, no,
they were Prophets. For their last Text, Rev. 11.8. concerning the prophesying
of the two witnesses, Our brethren grant that they cannot determine what act is
meant by it: No more can we, only I observe there were to be but two of them,
so that the gift or office was no ordinary gift or office, and that is enough
for us: We do not say, but to some single Christian since the Apostles times,
yea even in our times, God may have given to know and foretell things to come.
Our brethren know there are several rare instances in several Ages to prove it.
For our Brethrens last instance, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. We have also a more sure word
of prophecy, ver. 20. No prophecy of the Scripture is of private
interpretation, I cannot conceive the force of any thing in that Text: That the
Scripture is partly a word of Prophecy, every one knows; and our Brethren hnow
the whole is often denominated from the name of the part, by an easy trope. We
think that text rather fights against our Brethren than for them; for it says,
no prophecy of the Scripture (i. e. which is found in the Scripture) is of
private interpretation.

4. As to our fourth presumption that prophecy was no ordinary but
extraordinary Gift, because it is reckoned among the rarest gifts of the
Apostles.

Our Brethren answer, 1 Cor. 14.20. Page 111.
that the reason why it is preferred before tongues, is expressed, there
because it is of more public use for edification.

We say that was one reason, but according to the Apostle (in case he that
spoke with tongues did interpret) that reason failed, 1 Cor. 14.5. and then
another must be found. And as to this reason, though the Prophet were greater
in one respect, yet he was less in another; for he could show no sign for the
confirmation of the truths he spoke.

5. We had told our Brethren, that the formal effect of public edifying,
comforting, edifying, convincing, converting souls, are ascribed to these
Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. and therefore some thought they were officers. To this our
Brethren answer, Pastors and Teachers are ordinary Officers, and their gifts
ordinary, yet they are useful to these ends: What does this prove? Ergo, If
Prophets be officers, their gifts also may be so useful: I think that is all.
If these Prophets were any species of officers, it is enough for our turn.

6. We told our brethren, prophesying is distinguished from the word of wisdom,
and from the word of knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, 11. To this our brethren
answer three things. 1 So exhortation is distinguished from prophecy, Romans
12.6, 7, 8. yet the Prophets exhorted, 1 Cor. 14.3. Acts 15.32. 2. It is hard
to determine the special reason, why the Apostles sometimes distinguished those
things each from other, which in themselves seem alike, as 1 Cor. 14.6. 3. If
because prophesying is distinguished from the word of knowledge, and the word
of wisdom, we will conclude, that by prophesying must be meant foretelling
things to come, then we must conclude two sorts of Prophets, one whose proper
work should be to foretell things to come; Another whose proper distinctive act
should be to exhort, convince and comfort, 1 Corinthians. 14.

To all which I Reply.

1. That there is nothing more clear, than that the Apostle in 1 Cor. 12.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. is speaking of a diversity of Gifts, divided (as he says)
ver. 11. to every man severally; from whence it will follow, that prophecy is
neither the word of wisdom, nor knowledge, nor faith, nor the gift of healing,
nor the gift of working miracles, nor the gift of discerning spirits, nor the
gift of tongues, nor the interpretation of tongues; but the formal gift of
prophecy, must be some ninth thing, distinct from all these.

But Secondly, it will not follow, but some persons might have more than one of
these gifts, though every one had not more than one, yet some might, as Paul
had the word of knowledge, and wisdom, and tongues, and miracles, and
interpretation of tongues: So I see nothing to hinder, but he that had the
special gift of prophecy, might besides have the word of wisdom and knowledge.

3. Supposing prophecy to have been a gift of foretelling things to come, or
explication of Scripture by an infallible Spirit, without use of means; yet
they might speak edification, exhortation, and comfort, which is all mentioned,
1 Cor. 14.3. the Prophets of old, Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc. did all; but the
nature of their gift, and the specifical difference of it did not lie in the
thing spoken, or the End, but in the principle, enabling them so to speak.

4. Our Brethren therefore shall never prove, that exhortation, etc. was the
distinctive act of the Prophet (as they would insinuate) for they themselves
must grant that common to Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers with
them, and this is an answer to their third thing. For what they say before,
that prophecy, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. is distinguished from exhortation, it
signifies nothing, because exhortation was not the act of Prophets as Prophets.

It was told our Brethren, that 1 Cor. 13.8. the Apostle says: Whether there
be prophecies, they shall fail, whether there be tongues, they shall cease,
whether there be knowledge, that shall vanish away. Our Brethren answer, ver.
9, 10. it shall be, Page 114.
when that which is in part is done away: 2. Not till the ceasing of knowledge
in part.

1. We may as well maintain tongues not to be ceased; for they also are
mentioned, ver. 8. as things which should fail, and we know they are failed,
and so (we judge) are prophecies too: nor will it help our Brethren (which they
say) that ver. 9. it is not said tongues are in part; for the reason is,
because they were perfect in their kind, and so need not be done away, when
that which is perfect should come; but if we take perfect in a true sense, for
a perfection of the Saints in glory, then indeed they were imperfect things,
serving only as means in order to that end: Neither does the Apostle speak of
the coming of that which is perfect, as the moving cause, or reason of that
ceasing of things that were in part; he does not say, that which is in part
shall be done away, by the coming of that which is perfect; but he speaks of it
as a consequent. The true sense is this, Both ordinary and extraordinary gifts
and offices in the Church shall cease when we come in heaven; we conceive by
tongues, and prophecy he means gifts extraordinary; By knowledge ordinary gifts
and offices, these shall all fail at that day, but some of these shall fail
before others. We lay no great stress upon this Text, I have only said thus
much to prevent our Brethrens using of it, as they here do, though without any
just ground; for the truth is, it will serve neither party.

It was told our Brethren, that prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. is said not to serve
for those that believed not, and therefore our Brethren must keep their Gifted
men to their Churches. If any thing can be clear in Scripture; surely this is
from that Text, 1 Cor. 14.22. To this our Brethren Answer,

1. " That it will warrant their preaching in Church Assemblies.

2. That the Apostles intent seems to be, but to deny prophecy to be a sign
to unbelievers, and to serve only for Believers to edify them; but they say
the Apostle acknowledges it to be useful to unbelievers to convert them.

To which I answer,

1. If there were any Prophets indeed, this would warrant the exercise of their
gifts to Church Assemblies; but our Brethren cannot prove any such Prophets now
existent.

But Secondly, It is well our Brethren say no more, than this seems to be the
Apostles intent; for the Letter of Scripture is express against them in these
words.

Wherefore tongues are for a sign, 1 Cor. 14.22.
not to them that believe, but to them that believe not, but prophesying, not
for them that believe not, but for them that believe. Our Brethren would make
us believe, that the sense is only, that prophecy was not for a sign to them
that believed not, but for their conversion it might be. Let any indifferent
Reader weigh this a little, and judge betwixt us.

1. It is plain, that if prophesying were for any sign, it must be for
unbelievers, for believers needed no sign, they had already received the
Gospel: but the Apostle plainly says, it was not for unbelievers.

2. Let any Reader judge, whether those words -- But prophesying not for those
who believe not -- do not plainly exclude the Ordinance from any relation to
unbelievers; if it were a sign at all, it must be for them who believed not:
but say our Brethren, it is denied to be a sign for them; and the words are
plain enough, it is not for them.

Object. Oh! But though it be not a sign for them, yet it might be to convert
them,

Answ. Signs were to help forward the unbelievers convetsion; now that prophecy
should be for their conversion, and not a sign for it, seems very harsh,
considering, that the world had no greater sign of the truth of the Gospel than
Prophecies. For what our Brethren say, that ver 25, 26. prove that prophecy is
useful for the conversion of unbelievers, We grant it, but it is When the
unbeliever comes in to the Church Assembly, not when the Prophet goes out to
them, ver. 23. If therefore the whole Church be come together into one place,
-- and ver. 24. There come in one that believes not, or is unlearned, he is
convinced [or reproved] of all [ i. e. those that prophesie] he is judged of
all, etc. Mark, the Prophet is tied up to the Assembly of the Church in one
place: If our Brethrens Brethren be of this sort of Prophets, what do they
traveling up and down Countries? (whom they think unbelievers) or intruding
upon Congregations that are vacant? where there is no Assembly, our Brethren
will own as a Church? these Prophets were not (by virtue of this Text) to be
sent out of the Church, only to be heard in it.

This is all our Brethren say about these Prophets, and although I really think
their Argument from this Text, the most probable of any they have; yet I hope
an equitable Reader will from what I have said, judge it not conclusive in the
case. I wonder at the reverend opinion our Brethren express of their other
Arguments in comparison of this. But let the Reader judge. Only led me add one
text more to prove this prophesying an extraordinary gift, not ordinary; it is
that,

Acts 19.6. And when Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on
them, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied,

Let any indifferent Reader weigh this Text, and con^ider, whether that the
Gospel-prophesying were not one of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. V. Containing a Vindication of all my Arguments, brought in my Vindiciae
against the ordinary preaching of Persons merely gifted, from whatsoever our
Brethren have said to infringe them, either in the seventh, or in the tenth
Chapters of their Book.
OUr Brethren in their tenth Chapter pretend to Answer my Arguments against the
licentious presumption of the ordinary Preaching of private persons. My first
Argument I laid thus, Not to observe Gospel Order in acts of instituted worship
is sinful.

But for private Christians (how well gifted soever) to preach ordinarily, i.
e. to open and apply Scriptures, in public Church Assemblies, is for them in
acts of instituted worship, not to observe Gospel Order -- Ergo,



I presumed our Brethren would only deny the Minor, which I thus proved.

To adventure upon an administration of a Gospel-Ordinance, without such a
Mission, as Gospel-precepts require, and Gospel-Presidents hold forth such
should have as so administer, is not to observe Gospel Order in Gospel Worship.

But for such to open and apply Scriptures is to do so: Ergo.

I proved the Minor, because all the precepts we have for the constitution of
Elders in Churches constituting, or constituted, required that besides their
gifts, they should, likewise be set apart by Ordination; and all the Presidents
we have of persons Preaching in a settled state of the Church ordinarily, were
of persons so set apart by Ordination.

Now what say our Brethren to all this?

1. They doubt whether I would have my Major Proposition understood
universally. Page 194.


2. But anon, they suppose it, and they deny my Minor, and say, that neither do
Gospel-Precepts require, nor Gospel-Presidents hold forth, that all those that
preach the Gospel should be solemnly set apart to the work. Then they review
the Texts quoted by me: as to the Text, Titus 1.5. they say, it only concerns
Elders. The same they answer to Acts 14.23. Acts 13.3, 4, 5. only as to 1 Timothy
5.22. they doubt whether by laying on of hands be not meant, conferring the
gifts of the holy Ghost (because laying on of hands was used in that case too)
and Timothy was an Evangelist, and as for Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.3. they
were officers and preachers before; this is all they have, page 193, 194, 195.
as to my first Argument I answer,

1. That according to our Brethrens Logic delivered to us before, That
indefinite Propositions are usually equipollent to universals: Our Brethren
needed not have doubted, but that I understood the Proposition universally.
However, I do not love to trouble my Readers with such fallacies, as arguing
from particulars to generals; but I still maintain, that no precept, no
president in the Gospel allows the ordinary public preaching of persons merely
gifted, in a settled state of the Church, unless they were such as had the
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost; or such (as according to
Scripture-direction) preached only probationis Ergo.

Secondly (this being a negative) I had no way to make a strict proof, unless
we had come to an argument viva voce, then our Brethren know I should have
argued thus,

If the Gospel-hath any Precepts, or Presidents, they must be found in the
Gospels, Epistles, Acts, or Revelations: And so have followed on the Argument,
till I had brought them to assign the Place, or the President. If they had
instanced in the scattered Christians, Acts 9.11. all would have seen it had
been nothing to the purpose; for they were some of those upon whom the Holy
Ghost fell; and the Church was under persecution. If they had instanced in
Apollo, he was either an officer, or at least a probationer; if they had told
us of the Prophets at Corinth, if they were not ordinary officers (as Mr.
Rutherford thinks) yet it is plain they had extraordinary gifts (as I have
proved) if they had brought that general Text, 1 Pet. 4.10. I had told them
(what I have now said) that if they will understand that Text in the general of
any gift to be exercised, without any more ado, then the gifted men may command
States and Armies, and administer Sacraments; if they restrain it, we have as
much warrant to restrain it to Hospitality, executed in the distribution of the
gifts of Providence. So that considering the nature of my Argument, it was
enough for me (till they had assigned precepts, or presidents) to instance in
such precepts and presidents as the Scripture afforded, laying most stress upon
what I found in Timothy and Titus (those Epistles containing the standing Rules
for the Government of the Churches planted and settled.)

Thirdly, It was enough for me, who knew no other ordinary Preachers than
teaching Elders (besides extraordinary officers) that the Scripture owns; to
prove they were ordained; they are those only that were to labor in the word
and Doctrine, that was their work, 1 Timothy 5.17. and they have their
denomination from it, from feeding called Pastors, and from Teaching called
Teachers, and if every one might ordinarily, and publicly feed and teach; I
know not for what use their names served, which usually are given to persons
and things to distinguish them from others.

Fourthly, as to what they say, that 1 Timothy 5.22. may be meant of conferring
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, They should first have proved that Timothy had any
such power, his being an Evangelist proves no such thing, but only that he was
left at Ephesus, to put the newly planted Churches into order; the Apostles in
regard of their traveling, not being able to stay so long, nor do I find any
thing to persuade me Timothy himself had received those extraordinary gifts;
however, the caution had bin needless; for it is plain, there was no long trial
of any who received those gifts, Act. 2.4.4.31. Act. 8.17. Neither do I believe
those gifts were by the Apostles hands conveyed to any, but upon extraordinary
revelation made first to them, directing upon whom they should lay their hands:
Hence they prayed, Acts 8.15. That the people might receive the Holy Ghost, and
yet laid no hands on Simon, though he believed, and was baptized, Acts 8.13.
Besides, I hope our Brethren will not say, the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. was the conferring those Gifts.

Fifthly, As to that instance, Acts 13.3. I made no further use of than to
conclude the great honor God put upon this Ordinance; I granted Paul was an
extraordinary Officer, and Preacher before: yet that the Lord may let us know
his everlasting will, concerning such as should be mediately sent out by the
Church, Paul and Barnabas (though extraordinarily Commissionated) yet being to
be sent out by the Church, are (to show what all Churches should do) sent out
by solemn fasting, and prayer, and laying on of hands; how much more should
others, who can pretend no such extraordinary gifts or office. And this is I
think enough to set my first Argument on its legs again.

My second Argument I stated thus.

Vindiciae page 33.
For any who are no Officers to take upon them to do Acts of office is sinful.

But for persons merely gifted; to preach ordinarily in public Assemblies in
the settled state of the Church, is for persons who are no officers, to take
upon them to do Acts of office.

Not to multiply words needlessly; by Acts of Office I meant Acts peculiar to
office; then (say our Brethren) they deny my assumption. Preaching (they say)
is not an act peculiar to office; I foresaw this, and therefore laid in some
proof for it.

The proper acts of Pastors and Teachers, etc. are acts peculiar to office.

But ordinary preaching in public Church Assemblies, in a settled state of the
Church, is the proper act of Pastors and Teachers, etc.

By proper Acts our Brethren might have concluded, that I meant proper quarto
modo, such as are peculiar to them: Then (they tell me) they deny the Minor;
and (Reader) this is it that they affirm, That preaching is not the peculiar
work of a preaching Elder, teaching the truth is not the peculiar work of a
Teacher; but although Pastors and Teachers be standing Officers in the Church
of Christ, who must and ought to Preach, yet others may preach as well as they.
Our Brethren do allow, that Pastors and Teachers are needful to feed the flock
of Christ; but yet that this flock may feed it self; that Christ has appointed
some, whose ordinary work should be to teach, and whose office it should be, to
the performance of which they must be set apart; but yet there are others who
may do the same thing without being set apart; this is clearly our Brethrens
sense, but how consistent with reason, let the Reader judge. As to the making
of my Argument good.

2. My former discourse will make it appear, that i^ will lie upon our Brethren
to give an instance of any one in Scripture, except extraordinary persons (in
respect of extraordinary gifts and offices) who (not in order to Ordination) in
a settled state of the Church, did ordinarily preach, or any precept to warrant
such for the future. We have proof enough in Scripture that the Elders, and
Officers of the Church did it. I can yield it our Brethren, that the name
Teacher is to distinguish from him that exhorts; but the name of Teacher and
Pastor too, must have teaching and exhorting, as their proper acts, by the
force of the same Text, Romans 12.7, 8. That work upon which the Officer of the
Church is to wait, that is his peculiar work: but preaching is that work upon
which Pastors and Teachers are to wait, Romans 12.7, 8. That by Gods appointment
it should be the work and charge of some, to wait upon the performance of an
action, which any others may do as well, and as ordinarily as they, is a
strange piece of sense: Page 199.
Our Brethren, p. 199. argue fallaciously, when they say, Distribution is an
act of the Deacons office, and yet every one may distribute: Distribution of
the Churches stock is indeed an act of the Deacons Office, and this none but
they may distribute: They might as well have said, speaking is the act of a
man: Ergo, Preaching the word is not peculiar to office: He that breaks Bread,
and gives it to another, does materially (in our Brethrens sense) the Acts of
him that administreth the Lords Supper: Yet our Brethren will grant, that the
Sacramental breaking of Bread is an act of Office; Distribution to the poor is
not materially an act of the Deacons Office; but distribution of the Churches
stock is, and that none may do (if the Church have Deacons) but they.

I proceeded to prove Preaching an Act of Office, thus; If Baptizing be an act
peculiar to office, then is preaching such.

But baptizing is: Ergo.



I proved the consequence, 1. Because they are both in the same Commission. 2.
The Apostle makes preaching the greater Act, 2 Cor. 1.17.


Our Brethren of London had used the same Argument, and brought the same Text
in justification of it, to which these Brethren endeavored an answer, chapter 9.
page 165, 166, etc. To which here they refer me, yet withal, page 200. they
give me a repetition. I will fairly sum up what they say in both places.

First, Our Brethren say, 1. That the Argument falls as heavy upon us; for we
will allow Probationers to preach, yet not to Baptize.

Secondly, Some (they say) think the Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. is given to
the Apostles as Officers; and that there is another Commission for gifted men.

But (Thirdly) they tell us it is a mistake; for the Commission, Matthew. 28.19,
20. is not that which impowereth men to preach. It was only an enlarging of a
former Commission, and a making the Gentiles capable of being preached unto.
For the Apostles preached, and baptized before, Mark 10. ver. 5, 6, 7. -- The
Apostles (they say) received as much power by this Commission, as any others
their Successors could, but they received no Office-power by it. -- It can,
they say, only be concluded from hence, that those who were in office before,
might go and preach to the Gentiles. -- Hence they deny, that the joining those
two acts together in that Commission does conclude that all who may do the one
may do the other.

Fourthly (they say) some deny that preaching is a greater work than baptizing:
Here they quote (a great Friend of theirs) Dr. Homes.

Fifthly, page 170. they suppose preaching the greater work; (else where our
Brethren ingenuously grant they think it is, page 233.) yet it does not follow,
that those who do the greater may do the less, because the less may be more
limited.

Sixthly, and lastly, They find, that men out of Office are allowed to perform
the same acts, which have the denomination of preaching, and for the same end,
Preaching without Ordination, p. 165, etc.
Matthew. 18.15. Heb. 3.13. Heb. 10.25. Now they cannot find the Gospel allowing
men out of Office, to perform that act called Baptizing, and that for the
proper end which that Ordinance of Baptism is instituted for. This is the sum
of all said in many more words, page 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 199, 200.

Now let us examine what there is in all this to prove, That those who may
preach, may not baptize, when as Christ with the same breath said, Go preach
and baptize, and Saint Paul says, he was not sent to baptize, i. e. that was
not his main act, but to preach. I shall shortly answer to all our Brethren say.

1. Under favor, our Brethren are mistaken in the fall of the Argument from
this Text upon us, who allow Probationers to preach: For 1. They were excepted
out of the question, as being by a special rule in Gods word dispensed with.
Our Brethren can show no such Rule for their gifted men. 2. Neither do we allow
them to preach ordinarily.

2. As to the second thing they say, to make their assertion good, they must
bring forth that same other Commission for gifted men, before we shall believe
it: if it be that Matthew. 10. ver. 5, 6, 7. Our Brethren acknowledge they
baptized too, the Text proves they had power to work miracles, ver. 1.

3. As to what they say next, viz. that the Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. is
not that Commission which authorizeth any to preach, we must crave leave to
deny it. Their Argument is this.

That Commission which did not give authority to the Apostles themselves to
Preach and Baptize, did not give others authority, claiming by and under the
same Commission.

But that Commission did not give them Authority: Ergo.

The Major we confess (as to the present Commission) The Minor we deny. All
they have to prove it is this: What authority they had before, that Commission
did not give.

But they had authority before to Preach, and Baptize: Ergo,



The Minor we grant, the Major we deny.

1. I say, that if a man has two Commissions to the same work, he is by both
of them empowered, and authorized, and made in Office. Suppose an act of
Parliament constituteth some as Commissioners for ejection of scandalous
Ministers in the County of Norfolk: and afterward, another Act passes to the
same purpose, enlarging also their power, to the City and County of Norwich,
does not the later Commission authorize and empower them as well as the first?
It is true, that Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. was not the first Commission
that empowered them to Preach, but it did empower them surely; for the same
authority is in the latter as in the former.

Secondly, our Brethren grant they were in no office to the Gentiles without
that Commission; therefore I think that Commission empowered them.

Thirdly, our Savior saw, that after his Ascension, there might be some
question, whether they might Preach, and Baptize, as they had done (during his
Life) and whether any others might in that work succeed them, by authority from
Christ, he therefore renews, and enlarges their Commission, and by making an
everlasting promise to those who should succeed them in that work, he does
establish a constant office of the Ministry, to the worlds end.

As to their fourth Allegation, it being that which our Brethren refuse to own,
or insist upon, I shall spend no time about it.

For what they say fifthly, that supposing Preaching the greater work, yet it
may be that Baptizing, which is the less, may be limited to Officers, and yet
not that; I^ may be so indeed, but it is not very likely.

And I suppose our Brethren must produce a very plain Scripture to prove the
limitation, before they will make any endued with a competency of reason
believe tha^ God has by his will in his word authorized Ministers in office,
to Preach, and to Baptize, and in the same word declared, that Preaching is the
great, and chief act, to which he has sent them, and rather sent them for that
than for the other, viz. Baptizing, and yet it is his will, that any ordinary
gifted persons may perform that greater act, but none but those Officers may do
the less: He that has so much, credulity as to afford any to such an assertion
may; in the mean time our Brethren have not brought us one title of Scripture,
to prove the limitation of Baptism: Some thing of reason they pretend to, in
what they say in the sixth place, that they find in Scripture, that other
persons besides Officers may do the acts of Preaching, and for the ends; the
acts, viz. admonition, exhortation, Mat. 18.15. Heb. 3.13.10.25. for the ends,
viz. to prevent sin, build up in grace, etc.

To which I Answer.

Sixthly, Admonition and Exhorting, simply considered without reference to the
persons or manner, are not the acts of Preaching; ordinary Admonishing, and
exhorting in the public Assemblies of the Church, are indeed. The pronouncing
of the words, which the Judge pronounces in passing Sentence upon a
Malefactor, is not the act of his Office, unless pronounced in due manner, upon
the Arraignment, and condemnation of a Malefactor in an open Court after Trial.

Object. Oh but it serves to the same end.

Resp. This is not enough to make it the same act. An Highway-man may pronounce
the same Sentence the Judge does, and to the same end, yet his act is not the
same: But it is they say, materially the same.

2. Our Brethren in this say nothing, for this does not Legitimate the action;
our Brethren may do actions materially the same with such as are commanded, and
yet sin in doing of them, in this or that place, or manner; it is therefore no
consequence, that because our Brethren no where read in Scripture that any but
Officers did materially the acts of Baptism, etc. But do read that they did the
material acts of Preaching, Ergo They may Preach but not Baptize.

But Thirdly, Our Brethren need no Scripture to prove, that any man may do the
material acts of Baptism, and administering the Supper: The material act of the
one is sprinkling or powering water upon a face; of the other, a breaking of
bread, and giving it to others. None ever questioned but every one may do these
acts, and our Brethren often do it to their children: Therefore this is no ground
of restraining those from Administering the Sacraments whose authority to preach
we implead. And so much shall serve for the vindication of my second Argument.

My third Argument was: From the uselesness of the great Ordinance of the
Ministerial Office, as to its chief act, viz. Preaching, if this practice be
allowed.

Now the word of God cannot be so contrary to it self, as, first to set up an
Office, and then to make it useless as to its chief work.

To make this good, I had but two things to prove: 1. That Preaching is the
chief act of the Ministerial Office. 2. That if every one who has gifts may
preach, there were no need of the Ministerial Office (as to its chiefest act.)

To prove it to be the chief Act of the Ministerial Office, I urged,

1. That it is the first Act mentioned in the Ministerial Commission.

2. That St. Paul makes it his chief act, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to
Baptize, but to Preach.

3. Either this is the chief act of the Ministerial Office, or a Minister has
no act proper to him, but that of administering Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
But no Scripture shows these more peculiar to him.

To all this our Brethren answer.

1. That the order of words does not prove preaching the chief act, in that
Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Neither did I bring it as a demonstrative
Argument: but I do not think Dr. Homes his assertion true, that Preaching is
but a preparation to Baptism; for he will find it must follow Baptism as well
as go before it, Teaching them to observe, etc. That same But therefore is a
but of the Doctors own setting up, which all Scripture, and right reason will
throw down.

2. But to make my work short, our Brethren, p. 203. at last do grant that
Preaching is the chief act of the Ministerial office, and that Text, 1 Cor.
1.17. does evidently prove it: So does that Romans 12.7, 8. Take from those two
Texts these two Arguments.

Arg. 1. That piece of the Ministerial work, for the discharge of which God
especially designs his Ministers when he sends them, that is their chief work.

But Preaching is such, 1 Cor. 1.17. Ergo.

Arg. 2. That piece of the Ministerial working, upon which the Minister is most
especially to wait, and rather to neglect other parts than that, that is their
chief work.

But Preaching is that piece of the Ministerial work upon which Ministers of
the Gospel are especially to wait, Romans 12.7, 8. to which they are especially
ordained, 1 Timothy 2.7. 1 Timothy 1.11.
to which they are in special manner to give attendance, both to be prepared
for it, and to do it, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. and to do it well, 2 Timothy 2.15.
2 Timothy 4.2. they are rather to neglect others than that, as Paul did Baptizing,
1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 16, 17. And the Apostles judged it not meet they should leave
the word of God to serve Tables, Acts 6.2. -- Ergo.

Therefore I think our Brethren have but done themselves right, in judging
Preaching the chief and main work of the Ministerial Office, p. 203. But (say
they)

Page 203.
Yet we do not find any Scripture Rule to evidence, that Preaching in it self,
is either an act of Office, or peculiar to the distinctive act of Office; to
make it so, there is required a being over them in the Lord, who are preached
to, 1 These. 5.12. -- and this they conceive does make Preaehing an act of
Office, -- etc.

What this serves for, more than to blind the Reader that he may not see the
strength of our Argument, I cannot tell. Our Argument was this.

That which is the main Act of the Ministerial Office, for the performance of
which God especially designed it, that is not lawfully to be performed, by such
as are in no Office; for it is the peculiar act of Office.

But Preaching is the main and chief act for the performance of which God has
set up an Office of the Ministry, and designed it, etc. Ergo.

The Minor our Brethren have granted; so that they must deny the Major or
nothing; we prove it, God does nothing in vain.

But in case he had set up an Office in his Church chiefly for the performance
of an act, which many out of Office might do; he had as to that act set it up
in vain. -- Ergo, It is false that any other may do it.



The Minor is evident to common sense or reason; were it not a vain thing for a
Prince to establish an Order of Officers (suppose Justices of the Peace,
Colonels, and Captains of Armies, Constables in Parishes) if by the Law every
man, though in no such office might do the main work that belonged to such an
Office?

Hence we say, that the Lords establishing a standing office of Pastors and
Teachers, and declaring in his Word, that the main end of his establishing
them, is for the Preaching of the Gospel, does clearly reveal his will, that
this should not be the work of any but such Officers. Now what say our Brethren?

The Preaching of a man in Office is an act peculiar to Office.

This is the sum of what they say. If it be sense, I am sure it is nothing to
the question, which is plainly begged in the answer. For what is the Question
but this?

Whether any but such as are in Office may ordinarily Preach?

We say no, because Preaching is an act peculiar to Office: this we prove,
because it is the main and chief act and end, for which God set up the Office.
Our Brethren grant it to be the main and chief act, for the exercise of which
God set up the Office; and yet tell us, by and by, that Preaching is not so.
But the Preaching of one in Office is so. Reader, if thou can pick out the
sense of this, I cannot.

Our Brethten should have done well to have given us the difference between
simple Preaching, as it is an Ordinance of Christ, and Office-Preaching as they
call it.

If they mean by Preaching, An act of a person clothed with the authority of
Jesus Christ, by which in obedience to his Command, the Agent opens and
applies Scriptures in order to the conversion and edification of souls, and
that in the public Assemblies, and to which people ought to attend.

We say, this must be an act of Office, and all such Preaching is
Office-Preaching, his authority puts him in Office. If they mean by Preaching,

Any persons discoursing of the Scripture, either privately, or publicly, in
such a way, as that none is by Gods command obliged to hear him, nor can hear
him looking upon what he does as the public appointment of Christ, for the
salvation of his soul; we allow gifted men may Preach in this sense: But we
say, that (strictly) this is no Preaching; it is no more than a private persons
reading a good Book, to whom people are not bound to resort to hear, nor ought
they so to do upon the Lords days, which should be spent in the duties of
public worship.

Our Brethren, p. 203. justly think, that in the hearts of some serious
Christians, there may be some such workings as these.

If this Doctrine be true, that all gifted men may by the command of Christ
Preach ordinarily, as well as Pastors, and Teachers; and all the Brethren have
as much to do in ruling tne Church, as ruling Elders, surely both Preaching and
Ruling Elders are useless: for to what purpose are they set a part for a work,
which they might do without such a setting apart, or any others do as well as
they, when made Officers.

And therefore surely these principles have too much absurdity in them, and
bear too much contradiction to the revealed will of God to be true.

But say our Brethren,

If all acts which Officers might put forth, Page 204.
might be performed by members not in Office, yet there would be enough to
speak Officers necessary, and of great use.

1. Though they put forth the same Acts, yet it is not under the same relation:
A man provideth for his children as a Father, for the poor under another
notion: A Christian friend occasionally gives wholesome instructions to the
children of his acquaintance; so does the Parent of these children; yet the
manner is different, the one is under a standing Obligation, the other not. The
Bailiffs are needful in Corporations, where the major part carry it without
the Bailiffs sometimes, page 205. Church Officers have a special oversight over
the flock, page 206. they are under a special designation. -- If a Church has
Officers, they by their place, are to go before the Church, in directing, and
executing determinations. -- But the Church may censure without Officers, p.
207.

2. They say, that we allow such an Office as has no act peculiar to it, viz.
Ruling Elders.

3. They do not say all may preach, but such as are really gifted.

4. If there be Scripture-Warrant for gifted men's Preaching, it is needful,
whether we can see it or no.

5. The Preaching of Apostles, and Evangelists did not make the Office of
Pastors and Teachers needless; nor e contra, because every Churchmember may
distribute to the poor, it will not follow the Office of Deacon was needless.

This is the sum of what our Brethren say, page 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208,
209.

in many more words: To all which I shall give a short answer:

1. As to the present debate, I have nothing to do with arguing the needlesness
of Officers, as to the Government of the Church, of Officers; if others,
besides such Officers, may act with them: Acts of Jurisdiction in the Church
were never by Christ committed to the single hand of any person, nor yet to any
single Office; I think neither the Minister alone, nor the Ruling Elders alone,
nor the multitude alone are the Church, to which offenses should be told, or
who can singly act in any formal censure (except in a very high Case of
Necessity.) The work of Preaching is of another nature, it is by Christ's Order
to be performed by this or that single hand. It will not therefore follow, that
because there is a need of a Pastor, though ruling Elders (as we say) and the
multitude as our Brethren say, ought to concur with them in acts of Censure and
Discipline; therefore there is a need of Teaching Elders, though others may
teach as well as they; for the work of teaching may be (as I said before)
performed by single hands, without a concurrence to the act of any others,
whether Officers or Members, so may not acts of Government.

2. As to what our Brethren say, That Pastors and Teachers, act under another
relation, as set over people in the Lord, this amounts to no more than a
notion, and makes no real difference: Let us examine what this signifies. Will
our Brethren say these Preach as appointed by Christ, others not so? page 209.
No say our Brethren, the gifted men are also by Divine appointment to preach,
so their authority is the same; Christ appoints both the one, and the other
(they say:) What then, do they not do the same material acts? That they do our
Brethren told us, p. 200. they had found that in Scripture: What then? Is not
the end the same, to convince, convert, exhort, edify? Our Brethren told us,
page 112. They knew not wherefore they should prophecy, if there were no hope
of such effects. So then, our Brethren say, that gifted men have the same
authority to preach, that teaching Elders; and teach the same things, and to
the same end. Now I wonder what this different relation, which they here tell
us of, signifies more then an empty notion: let us see if their similitudes
will help us: A man they say provideth for his children, as a father; for the
poor under another notion. But the quest. is quite another thing, viz. Whether
it would be necessary, that there should be a special order of persons, called
fathers, to provide for the poor, if every one were bound to provide for them;
and to do the same acts, in the same order, and to the same end that they
should do. A Christian Friend, they say, occasionaelly gives wholesome
instructions to the children of his acquaintance, so does the parents of those
children, yet the manner is different; the one is under a standing Obligation,
the other not.

If this similitude runs on four feet, our Brethrens sense is this, That there
is a need of Pastors and Teachers, though gifted men may Preach, because gifted
men are not under a standing Obligation to preach only, may do it occasionally.

So then the sense is this, gifted men may Preach, and shall not need, except
they list; they may preach, and they may let it alone; but Pastors and
Teachers, they must do it.

That they may let it aelone, I most freely grant: But that they may either do
it, or let it alone, I can never grant: All the precepts our Brethren pretended
to for this Preaching of gifted men, do not only (if they were to their
purpose) assert their Liberty, but enjoin it as their duty. See 1 Pet. 4.10. He
that has received the gift is commanded to Minister; he that has the gift of
Prophecy must Prophecy. Our Brethren, say they, preach by Divine appointment,
page 209. Now those that are appointed to Preach, are not at their liberty,
whether they will Preach or no. This pretense is therefore exceeding vain:
besides, it gives the gifted man a superiority over the Officer: for Greater is
he that sits at the Table, and may choose whether he will serve, or no, than
he who serves, and must serve.

For our Brethrens other instance, viz. that Bailiffs in a Corporation may be
useful, though the Common Council may act with them, it concerns not the
present case; it may have something in it to prove, that although the Members
of the Church have a joint power with the Officers of the Church, as to the
executing some act of censure; yet there is a need of them as to other acts
(and that is all it will do too in that Case) but here it signifies nothing,
because Preaching is an act which may be done by a single person, and we argue
that there is no need of a special order of single persons, to be in Commission
for a work for which all were commissioned, and in which others may act.

3. It is true that our Brethren say, we do allow such an Office as we say,
has no act peculiar to it, viz. that of Ruling Elders, their work is rule, and
in that work they are joint Commissioners with the Teaching Elders: But the
question is, whether we allow such as are not Officers to act in it. We say the
office of ruling is a partible Office, divided betwixt the Teaching and Ruleing
Elder; who (as to that work) make but one office, to the execution of which a
double Species of Officers is (ordinarily) necessary. These two (as heretofore
the King, Lords, and Commons of England made up the three Estates, all
necessary to enact a Law) do make up the two States as it were in the Church,
without whom an act of Rule cannot be put forth, in ordinary cases. But the
case is quite another, as to the work of Preaching, which may be performed by a
single person. If indeed we had said, that the Ruling Elder might alone without
the Teaching Elder, have (in ordinary cases) exercised acts of Rule, Our
Brethren had said something, and we should have thought the Pastors Commission,
as to ruling needless, and so e contra we should have thought the ruling Elder
needless, and should so judge it, if we could see that the Pastor (in ordinary
case) without them might rule, which is the thing our Brethren plead for, the
Preaching of Gifted men.

Fourthly, Our Brethren say they do not say all may preach, only those who are
gifted. But our Brethren dare not say, who shall judge that (as I noted before)
therefore it is all that will.

Fifthly, Our Brethren say true, our reason must vail to the will of God
revealed in Scripture. But when the question is, whether there be any ground in
Scripture for this liberty or no, and our Brethren have no plain Scripture to
prove it, no particular Precept, no Presidents but of persons qualified with
the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, that ever ordinarily preached, We
hope our Friends will judge, that it is no light Argument to prove our Brethren
mistaken in the Scriptures they pretend, because their sense of them being
granted, a standing Sacred Office of the Gospel, plainly confirmed by many
Scriptures, would be made frustraneous, and of no use.

Sixthly, But Lastly (say our Brethren) we do grant that Apostles and
Evangelists might Preach, yet was not the Office of Pastors and Teachers
needless. I Answer.

1. This is no consequence; for Apostles and Evangelists were Officers.

2. They were virtually Pastors and Teachers, they differed in nothing from
them but the extent of their power.

3. There was a plain need of Pastors and Teachers, notwithstanding these
extraordinary Officers: for 1. They were to endure but for a time. 2. They were
not to be confined to a place; it had been sin for them to have always staid in
one place. So that notwithstanding them, there was an apparent use of Pastors
and Teachers.

4. We say as to such times as they were resident in this or that particular
Church, there was no need of any Pastors or Teachers, because they could do all
their acts: But we hope our Brethren will not say so for their gifted men.

And thus much may serve to have answered all they say against my third
Argument.

My fourth Argument, I laid thus,

Vindiciae Ministerii, page 38, 39.


What things (by Scripture-warrant) are in public Assemblies to be
communicated unto others by faithful men, who shall be able to teach others,
and to whom such things shall first be committed by Gods Timothies, those
things private persons, to whom they are not so committed,may not so
communicate.

"But of this nature are Gospel Truths, 2 Timothy 2.2. Ergo.

I granted our Brethren that the Greek word, translated Commit, did sometimes
signify to propound a thing to others: But most properly such a committing as
is of a thing which is committed in trust to one, not to another, as Luke
12.48. Luke 23.46. Act 13.43. Act. 20.32. 1 Timothy 1.18. 1 Pet. 4.19. I told them
it could not be understood in the former sense here; for so Timothy was to
preach to unfaithful men, as well as faithful; but he is commanded only to
commit these things to faithful men; and it was not enough that these men were
(...) faithful, but notwithstanding that they must have these things committed
to them, before they taught others.

Now let us hear our Brethren.

1. They grant that none but such as are faithful and able may teach others;
and such as are learned in Gospel mysteries: This will go a great way; for I
hope our Brethren will not judge him able to interpret the Gospel; that is not
able to interpret the Gospel out of the Original into his own Tongue. I wonder
how he shall distinguish betwixt the Jus Divinum of the Doway Bible, translated
into English, and the Bible of our English translation; as much may be said for
the Old Testament; So that the knowledge of Greek and Hebrew, will be necessary
to understand Gospel-Mysteries, so far as to communicate them to others, viz.
Revealing the whole Counsel of God to them (indeed in cases of absolute
necessity, where enough such men cannot be found) something may be abated, not
because they are able, but because none are to be found more able: For other
Learning, as much might be said, but this is not directly to our present
purpose; our question supposes them able, yet we say they are not
Commissionated.

2. Our Brethren tell us, that the word translated Commit, is to be taken here
for a propounding of those things doctrinally. 1. Because the end is to make
them able. 2. Because it does not appear from any other Scripture, that any
other committing of Gospel Truths ( viz. such as I speak of) is required unto a
Call, no not to Office.

1. But our Brethren have nothing in the Text to prove that the end of the
Committing of those things to them was to make them able, it says no such thing.

2. Our Brethren know the Enallage of Tenses is very ordinary in Scripture; the
future used for the present, and the present for the future tense.

3. If Timothy were to commit those things only to them that should be able to
teach others, his Rule was very uncertain; for how could he know who they
should be?

4. That there is an ordination necessary, was elsewhere proved by me, and more
sufficiently by the London Brethren.

I told our Brethren, That Timothy is commanded to commit these to faithful
men only, and such as should be able to teach others; therefore it could not be
merely doctrinally, for so they should be committed to all.

To this I can find no answer, only our Brethren say, that this is to show
unconverted men are not to be Preachers.2. Nor all that are converted, but such
as are able: But how this answers my Argument, I cannot guess; for if as our
Brethren assert, the committing ^ere but doctrinal that is here meant, it is
sure enough, they were thus to be communicated to the unconverted.

Again, whereas our Brethren say, that it is the committing these things to
them makes them able. We grant it in the sense of that known Maxim, Id tantum
possumus quod jure possumus. We say the Moral ability of the Preacher is
created by his being authorized to the work, by a solemn separation to the
performance of it, without which, though many be naturally able, yet none is
morally able, as it is the Judges Commission that makes him able to relieve the
fatherless and oppressed Widow in Judgment.

Our Brethren therefore (as their safest refuge) fly to the old (...), that
this was a Precept concerning Preachers by Office. The Text says no such
thing, however, we own no others: whereas they say we must restrain it to
public Preaching: We say there is reason for it; for the Apostles business is
to direct Timothy in the settling of Gospel Churches, as to public Officers and
Administrations. And besides Reason will tell us, that those need not to have
Timothy commit the Scriptures to them, who exhort from the obligation of
Natural and Oeconomical duty. But we say, that all such public Teachers of
others are here meant, as Preach with authority, obliging the Public
Assemblies of the Church to hear them, and all such as administer that glorious
public Ordinance of God, which we call Preaching, and is the ordinary means of
saving souls.

And this is enough for the vindication of this Argument. My fifth Argument was
this.

Whosoever may lawfully Preach, may lawfully require a maintenance of the
Church, to which they preach, 1 Timothy 5.18* Mat. 10.10. Gal. 6.6.

But all the Gifted Members of a Church cannot require a Maintenance of the
Church, wherein they are -- Ergo.

Our Brethren deny the Major, and say, The Scriptures alleged speak of a
constant preaching: they say it, but they do not prove it; neither does Matthew.
10.10. nor Gal. 6.6. hint the least of such a thing; the Scripture says, he
that labors, he that teaches; our Brethren add constantly, by what
authority I cannot tell.

But our Brethren have much fault to find with my Minor, it is neither true in
matter nor form: A little matter will make it true in both. It is true (by a
slip of my Pen) instead of the Church to which they Preach, I put in the Church
in which they are: but it is the same thing; for admit that they may prophecy,
I proved before from 1 Cor. 14.23. that they had no warrant to go out of their
Church to do it. If unbelieves come in thither, well and good, but they have no
rule to go out to them.

Our Brethren here spend many words not to prove, but to speak the same thing
over again, viz. That for occasional Preaching, wages, or maintenance cannot be
required. But where nothing is proved, nothing need be answered; and all that
our Brethren preach upon this subject, is both beside the Texts quoted by me,
and without a Text produced by them.

My sixth Argument was from Romans 10.15. This they say, they answered before,
indeed their whole Seventh chapter was spent in an endeavor to that purpose.
It is too large to describe; for it reaches from page 116. to page 138. of
their Book: I will therefore only lay before my Reader, the Sum of my Argument,
and then give a summary of what they answer. I argued thus,

Vindiciae Ministerii, Page 43, 44.
What none may ordinarily do, but those that are sent, that persons merely
gifted may not do.

But none may (ordinarily) Preach, but those who are sent, Romans 10.15. -- Ergo.

I proved the Major thus,

What none may do, but those who are sent, that none may do who are not sent.

"But persons merely gifted are not sent -- Ergo.

The proof of the Minor, brought me to examine, what it was to be sent.

Reason told me, Sending was the Act of another, or others, none can send
himself.

Those who send, are either God, Angels, or Men; to the second none pretends;
of the first, the Text must be understood.

Gods sends either immediately, or mediately: immediately by a voice from
heaven; of this the Text cannot be meant; for then farewell preaching, yea, and
believing too, according to the force of that Text.

God sends mediatly by his Church, either by his Church electing, or ordaining:
Let it be which way it will, mere gifts will not serve the turn. This was the
substance of what I said.

Now let us hear what our Brethren say.

1. They grant Mission is of ordinary Teachers, page 118.

2 That it continues in all Ages, but deny it essential to the constitution of
a Minister by that Text; but say it is necessary to the Act of preaching, p.
119.

3. They deny the major of my first Syllogism, and the minor of my second, and
say, gifted persons are sent.

4. They say the sending there is not an act, constituting an Officer: 1.
Because some who were Officers before had Mission afterward, Matthew. 28.19. 2.
Because it may be repeated without losing the office, Matthew. 10.5, 6.7. Chap.
28. v 19. 3. Because some had Mission, who were no officers, Luke 10.1. Because
all that are instrumental to Conversion would then be judged Officers, Romans
10.14.

5. They say Mission is not ordination. 1. Because no Scripture says it. 2.
Because then Deacons are sent, Acts 6.6. 3. Because Mission may be iterated,
but not ordination; Matthew. 10.5.28.19. 4. Because a Church may Ordain its own
Minister, but cannot send to it self.

6. They grant, bare gifting, is not sending, Matthew. 10.1.56.7. Sending does
not make, but suppose them Preachers.

7. Sending (they say) is Christ's commanding by his word, or assigning
Preachers to go and publish the Gospel. 2. Or a providential disposing them to
this or that people: Upon this they Comment largely; that this is sending, they
prove, p. 129. by Isa. 6.8, 9. Jer. 14.14, 15, 23, 21. Matthew. 10.5.

8. They judge the sense of the Text to be a providential sending, p. 136.
except they be ordered by Providence to go to such a people.

I never love to throw a needle into a bottle of Hay, it is so hard to find it
again; in these 22. pages, our little Argument is almost lost; in short, the
Question is this, whether gifted men, as gifted, be sent, or no; if they be not
they cannot actually (at least) Preach. Let it be naturally or Morally,
impossible. They cannot preach, except sent: Our Brethren must say they are
sent, and so deny the Minor of my second Syllogism: I proceed.

If they be sent it must either be by Christ or by Antichrist.

But we say they are not sent by Christ; I hope our Brethren will say they are
not sent by Antichrist. --

Ergo, not at all. We prove the Minor, If they be sent by Christ it is either
immediately or mediately.

But neither immediately nor mediatly -- Ergo, not at all.



Our Brethren must deny the Minor, and say they are sent immediately, for if
they be sent mediately, it must be by his Church, commanding, electing, or
ordaining; which soever of these it is, it is more than gifted: The last our
Brethren deny; the second is nonsense, viz. to say the Church sends by
electing, choosing, and sending, are two things; as to the first, our Brethren
judge it not necessary, though convenient.

If their Mission be immediate, We always thought it must have been by Christ's
own voice, as he sent the 70. and the 12. or by a sign from heaven of his will
as in the case of Matthias, or by extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost
inabling them, to which was added a power of miracles, to confirm their
Mission, and give them credit in the world: But our Brethren have found out two
other ways.

1. By his revealed will in his word. 2. By his Providence.
1. As to the first, our Bre^hren have not proved it by one Text; for all their
Texts quoted concerning such Missions as were made, or should have been made by
an extraordinary voice, either from God in heaven, in a Prophetical vision,
Isaiah 6.8, 9. Jer. 14.14, 15. Jer. 23.21. Or from God incarnate on the earth,
Mat. 10.5, 6. But that Gods revealed will in his word, is called sending (as
his word is now written) is not proved, nor can be proved. God commands men in
his written word, to believe, repent, to do good to all, and to distribute; but
we no where find that this is called sending; and we should think this strange
language to say, God sends men t^ relieve the poor: But be it so at present, We
say the written word, commands none to Preach, but such as are ordained. Our
Brethren only say, gifted men are allowed, and they may do it occasionally; no
more therefore say they, they are not to be maintained.

2. Besides, sending makes them Officers, who ever I send is my Officer, the
Kings Ambassador is his Officer; and so by this Rule they are all Gods
Officers: no man can send another, but he is in office, as to that whereabout
he is sent, nor will any thing our Brethren say evince the contrary: If a man
be an Officer before, another Mission makes him still an Officer; those sent,
Luke 10.1. were Officers by their Mission; though Mission may be repealed, and
yet the Office not lost, yet Mission makes an Officer: My sending of my servant
to a place about my business makes him my Officer, as to that business, and if
I send him a second time, my second sending makes him my Officer too: I see no
contradiction in that, when the work is enlarged, as in those instances, Matthew.
10.5, 6, 7. Matthew. 28.19. Nor will it follow, that then any that are
instrumental to conversion are Officers, because it is said, How can they
believe on him of whom they have not heard; or how can they hear without a
Preacher, etc. Because the Apostle speaks of ordinary cases; else a man may
believe without hearing: suppose a man be deaf, and hear without a Preacher
too, etc.

3. Our Brethren therefore must flee to their Providential sending, and make
this the sense of the Text. How shall they preach, if God does not by his
providence direct, or permit them to Preach, if God does not give them legs to
stand, and a tongue to speak. Hence it follows,

"That it is not a Moral but a natural possibility is denied, as if a man
should say, How can a man see if his eyes be out?

And this our Brethren own, page 137. for they say all the other interrogations
deny a natural possibility. Christian Reader, do not thou think this had
been a great Gospel-Mysterie (worthy of Saint Paul to have told the Romans)
none could preach if they had no tongue to speak, or Gods Providence would not
permit them to come in place where. But to evince this to be a vanity.

1. If this notion of sending be true, then none can run before they are sent;
for all motions are under the providence of God. But the Scripture plainly
blames some that run before they were sent.

2. Then the Creep-houses mentioned, 1 Timothy 3.6. were sent, for they could
never creep into houses, but by divine providence.

Object. But say our Brethren, Gods command in his word must concur with his
providence.

Answ. What command is that? 1 Pet. 4.10. (say our Brethren) As every one has
received the gift let him minister. But say these men, we have received the
gift; therefore we are sent; who shall judge now? Not the Presbytery (say our
Brethren) nor is it necessary the Church should (say they) Ergo, it is enough
they say they have, and you ought to believe them, and look upon them as sent,
till the great day comes, which alone must try whether they be or no. And is
this the order (can any one think?) which Jesus Christ has taken for his
Church?

But I need not multiply words here, our Brethren will not own a bare
providential sending, unless the Person ^o ordered by providence be first
commanded by the word; and they can show no command conclusive in the case; but
for such as are otherwise sent, then merely gifted, and providentially
disposed: Only I must examine their reasons, why they so peremptorily conclude
Ordination cannot be the Mission intended, though we only contend it to be the
ordinary Mission, and that alone which concerns us when extraordinary calls and
gifts are ceased, as our Brethren easily will grant they be. They say:

1. " They no where find Ordination called Mission. But this falls as heavily
on our Brethren, for they cannot find us any Text, where the Command of God in
his written word is called sending. 2. We find, Acts 13.3. Upon the Ordination
of Paul and Barnabas. They fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, and
sent them away; if the last words be not exegetical of the former, our Brethren
must tell us what further act they put forth, in sending them, that is called
by that name.

2. Because our Brethren find Deacons were ordained; but they do not find
they were sent. It does not follow, that because the Ordination of Officers, by
a Church to it self cannot strictly be called sending (on the Churches part)
therefore no Ordination is, or may, where the persons are ordained Officers to
more then those that are in the Church which Ordains them.

3. " Because Mission may be repealed, but not Ordination: According to our
Brethrens principles, Ordination also may. But our Brethren must consider the
Mission mentioned, Matthew. 10.5, 6, 7. and Matthew. 28. was extraordinary Mission,
we do not say Ordination is so. There was a new work to do, but we know no new
work one ordained shall have to do, which shall need require a new ordination.

4. Our Brethren say, None can send to themselves, But a Church which has a
Presbytery, may Ordain its own Officers. Every one will not yield that a
particular Church may Ordain its own Officers, no more will I, if it have not a
greater number of preaching Presbyters than ordinarily particular Churches have
(excepting only Cases of necessity) but although a Church cannot send to its
self, yet it may send one to the whole Catholic Church of which it is but a
Member: a Citizen of Norwich may properly enough send a Message to the
Corporation, though himself be a Member of that Corporation, and the person
thus sent is at distance enough too from some part of the Catholic Church, to
all which he is sent. And thus I have answered every material thing brought by
our Brethren, to infringe my Argument from Romans 10.15.

My last Argument was acknowledged by me but a topic. From the contrary
practice and avowed Judgment of all Primitive Churches, and all Reformed
Churches. Our Brethren make light of this: But in cases where the Scripture
speaks (at best) but so darkly on our Brethrens side, and the rational
absurdities are so many and weighty, we think it very much, if we can say with
the Apostle,

If any list to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither we, nor the
Churches of Christ.

And in cases which are dark, we follow the guidance of Christ, while we walk
by the footsteps of the flock, and feed our kidds by the shepherds tents, Cant.
1.8.

CHAP. VI. Containing a review of some passages in our Brethrens Book, and in
my answer, where is examined, whether the Baptism of Christ and John, are
(according to our Brethrens sense) to be distinguished. Our Brethrens three
Texts for Election, by a particular Church, ar^ found to conclude nothing; and
the ability of every particular Church to judge of Ministers abilities, is
confuted.
THe remainder of our Brethrens Book, concerning our Reverend Brethren of the
Province of London, I take not my self concerned to give a strict answer to it,
I will only spend this Chapter in reviewing a passage which I before slipped,
and answering some things I find in their eleventh Chapter, which may seem to
take of my answer, to their greatest proofs, for popular Elections.

The passage which I slipped, is that which my Reader shall find in our
Brethrens Book, page 68, 69, 70. where (to prove Apollo was at that time no
Officer) they fight us with a weapon drawn out of the Popish and Socinian
Armory; and tell us, that Apollo, could at that time be no Officer, because he
knew only the Baptism of John, Acts 18.25. and p. 69. they tell us, that the
Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ, are distinguished each from other.
This Argument (as to the matter of it) is purely Popish, and false, as to the
form of it, and its usage in this case is primarily Socinian, as to both false,
and no way conclusive.

Bellarmine indeed, and other Jesuits and Papists say, Bellarm. de Bapt. l. 1.
c. 20. 21. Council. Trid. S^s. 8. Can. 1.
that the Baptism of Christ and John were distinguished, and different kinds of
Baptism: so says the Council of Trent, But I cannot tell that any Protestants
said so, before our Brethren. If our Brethren had consulted their Friend Dr.
Ames, Ames. Bell. Ener t. 3 l. 2. cap. 5.
he would have told them another thing, so would Dr. Willet in his Synopsis,
page 583. in his answer to the seventh Qu. of the 12. general controversy, or
Dr. Whitaker in his praelect. de Sacram. cap. 5. which is wholly spent to prove
the contrary: Of the same mind are Calvin, Bucer, Musculus, Bullinger,
Chemnitius Sadeel, Rivet, Scharpius, Chamier. Chamier. p. 4. l. 5. cap. 12. 13.
Let our Brethren weigh their Arguments.

Arg. 1. All washing of water for repentance and remissi^n of sins, appointed
by Christ was the Baptism of Christ: But such was John's Baptism, Matthew. 3. Joh.
1. who sent me to Baptize.

Arg. 2. Our Baptism and Christ's are the same: But Christ was Baptized with
John's Baptism. It is the sweetest comfort of a Christian, says Dr. Ames, that
he was baptized with the same Baptism Christ was baptized with; Chamier.
Willet, Ames, Whitaker, etc. all insist upon this Argument.

Arg. 3. If the Doctrine, off^r of grace, and Rites were the same, in the one,
and the other Baptism, then the Baptisms were the same. But the Doctrine,
Rites, and offer of grace was the same (says Dr. Whitaker. Whitakerus, prael.
de Sac. cap. 5.


Arg. 4. If the same presence of the Spirit was in John's Baptism, which is in
ours, though in a different manner, then the Baptism is the same.

Ibid. p 324.
But there was the same presence -- Ergo.

Arg. 5. Else there is no Institution of Christ's Baptism upon Record; for the
Disciples of Christ, Baptized before Christ's Resurrection.

Arg. 6. It does not appear, that either the Apostles or Apollo had any other
Baptism. But surely they were baptized with Christ's Baptism.

That Text quoted by our Brethren, Acts 19.3, 4, 5. proves nothing to the
purpose; for they were not baptized again (as some vainly gather from the fifth
verse) which is only a continuation of Paul's Narration of John's Baptism, when
they [i. e. those who heard John Preach] heard what he said, they were Baptized
[viz. of him in Jordan] in the name of the Lord Jesus: And thus Dr. Willet
answers Bellarmine, using the same weapon to the same end.

Our Brethren will easily judge, that their foundation being thus destroyed,
their Argument built upon this hay and stubble must fall. But that our brethren
may be ashamed ever to bring this Argument into the field again, I must tell
them, that as the Papist laid the foundation; so the blasphemous Socinian was
the first I ever met with, who built upon it.

Valentinus Smalcius, answering Franzius, Smalcius disp. 4. contra Theses
Franzii.
who thought Apollo, no ordinarily gifted Brother, says thus. Firmum enim
manet, quod tantum sciverit Baptisma Johannis, etc. It is strongly proved
(says he) For he had only the Baptism of John, and in that Aquila and
Priscilla instructed him more perfectly, etc. I hope we shall hear no more of
this Argument, to prove Apollo was no Officer. It is no great matter to our
case if he were not; for (as I have said) he was certainly a probationer to
office, and in that notion might preach, especially in a Jewish Synagogue, and
in that state of the Church.

The second thing (with which I shall conclude this Chapter, and my whole
Discourse, relates to what our Brethren have brought to prove election
necessary, upon express Scripture grounds, to the constitution of a Minister.
To which purpose they produce three Texts; The first, Acts 1.23, 24, 25. The
second is, Acts 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. the third, Acts 14.23. I have said something
before, to show the invalidity of each of these. Our Brethren, chap. 11.
pretend to take off something which I said: Let me examine with what success.

1. As to the first instance, Acts 1. they must argue thus. If they may, and
ought to choose the greater Officer, then they ought to choose the less. As to
the present case, we grant the consequence, though it will not follow, because
here is a different species of Officers. Because all the people of a County may
choose Parliament men by the Law, it will not follow that they may choose
Justices of the Peace: Their power of choice resulting not from nature, but
from the Law of God, the consequence in strictness is naught, for Gods Law may
will the first, and not the second. Therefore this Argument cannot be
conclusive: but, I say, at present we allow it.

2. How will it appear, that the (...) [the multitude] chose Matthias.

1. The Text says only (...), which may be translated, And two stood: so it is
Rev. 11.11. So again, Acts 18.14. -- stood afar off, Luke 17.12. the two Lepers
-- (...), stood afar off; so Luke 7.14. stood still; so in many more Texts, and
why not here? When Peter had done speaking, two stood up (possibly by an
extraordinary motion of the holy Spirit (as they at least might think) offering
themselves to the service, and then what becomes of the peoples Election from
this Text? Our Brethren see from hence, nothing can be concluded.

2. But allow there were a choice, and that some did set these two before the
rest; it is not said the multitude did it.

Object. But (say our Brethren) the exhortation was by Peter directed to the
hundred and twenty.

Answ. That the exhortation was given in the presence of the hundred and
twenty, the Text says, v. 15. But that it was given to them as their
concernment, it says not. It says, Peter stood up in the midst of the
Disciples, and it says (...) (properly) the crowd of names present was an
hundred and twenty, the word signifies a company of persons, a multitude, Mat.
4.25. Matthew. 5.1.7.28. By Disciples, ver. 15. I conceive only the Apostles are
meant, who are very often in Scripture, distinguished by this name from the
(...) multitude, as Matthew. 13.34. Matthew. 9.36, 37. and in many other Texts.
Peter stood up in the midst of the Apostles, and said to them in the hearing of
the multitude. I know the term disciple, is sometimes taken in a larger notion;
but it seems to be here distinguished from (...); sure I am our Brethren can
give no sufficient reason, to show that it signifies otherwise here than the
Apostles, (not exclusively to others, but emphatically and more eminently than
others) called Disciples (as in many other Texts) and if this sense be allowed,
they were the Apostles only that did appoint the two, verse 25. according to
our Brethrens own Argument.

3. But lastly, It is a plain case, God here chose; for two stood forth, or
were set forth; when this was done all the Church could not tell which should
be the Apostle, till God made the choice. Hence it is plain, that from this
Text nothing can be concluded.

1. It speaks nothing of the choice of a Pastor.

2. It does not say any chose them: But, they stood.

3. If any did choose, probably they were only the Apostles, called Disciples
by way of emphatical distinction.

4. The truth is, it was God who made choice.

If therefore our Brethren could prove, that the Brethren set these two before
the Apostles, and (as they say) in doing that, did as much as could be done in
the choice of an extraordinary Officer; yet this was just nothing; for nothing
was needful from them in that Case.

Their second Scripture is that, Act. 6. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. where it is
expressly said, that the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples, and said,
Look ye out amongst you seven men of honest report, etc.

In the former Argument, our Brethren argued thus. If the Brethren ought to
choose the greater Officer, then they ought to choose the less. Here now they
argue quite contrary. If they ought to choose the less, then they ought to
choose the greater; Surely both these Arguments cannot hold, being both made
affirmatively. But as to the present Argument stated thus.

If the Church mentioned, Act. 6. v. 3, 4. etc. ought to choose Deacons then, a
particular Church now ought to choose her Pastors.

But the Church, Acts 6. chose her Deacons. Ergo.

1. We deny the consequence.

2. We deny the Assumption.

I will offer Reasons for both: 1. For the denial of the Consequence.

1. It is plain, that Church, Acts 6. was the universal Church, as well as a
particular Church; as Adam though a particular man, yet was at that time all
mankind: nor is this nonsense; for by universal Church, I mean no more than
the whole body of the Gospel Church then in the earth, in which were Catholic
Officers, it was furnished with twelve Apostles.

2. It is plain that the persons choosing, were such as to the most of which
the Holy Ghost was fallen, and they had discerning Spirits, Act. 2. Act. 4.31.
No particular Church now can pretend to any such thing.

3. In most cases an Argument will not hold in the affirmative, from the lesser
to the greater, particularly it will not hold in this Case.

That in most cases it will not hold, is evident: none can argue thus; if a man
can carry a thousand weight, much more an hundred thousand. If my Friend will
give me a nights lodging, he will much more give me his house and land, or a
lodging in his house as long as I live.

On the other side, it is true in some cases it will hold. But not to run into
a Logical dispute; The present Question is.

How far it is lawful to argue from the lesser action to the greater as to
things to which men have a moral power granted them from another. Our Brethren
will grant, that the power they plead for on the behalf of the multitude as to
the choice of Church Officers, is moral not natural, viz. such a power as they
have from the will of God: Now as to this I say,

1. Nothing can demonstratively be concluded, because the will of another being
the fountain of the power acts freely, and may make it lawful to choose the
greater, and yet unlawful to choose the less; as the Law of this Land makes it
lawful for people to choose Parliament men, and yet not Lawful for them to
choose whom they please for Justices of the Peace; and so again to choose the
less, and not the greater; as the Law makes it Lawful for people to choose a
Constable of a Parish; and yet not lawful for them to choose a Colonel of an
Army, or a Justice of the Peace; so that no consequence of this nature can
prove a Law; but the Law of God must justify the Consequence; so that our
Brethren can bring no certain Argument from this Text; the height of Argument
which our Brethren can pretend to from this Text is.

2. It is probable that the Lord, who would not have so much as a Deacon chosen
without the suffrage of the multitude, would not have a Pastor chosen without
their suffrage. Our Brethren must say no more, than it is probable. And then we
answer,

1. That what seems probable to some from Scripture, is not a certain Rule
for us to walk by.

2. We say, it is not probable, because a Church is more able to judge of the
abilities of a Deacon, than of a Pastor. 2. Because this Church was more able
to judge ^f both, than any Church is now.

Our Brethren see what they are come to. 1. They ^rgue from this
particular-Vniversal-Extraordinarily-Gifted-Apostolical Church, to other
Churches, the least members of the universal Church, not in the least measure
so gifted, from a Church of 8000. to a Church of eight.

2. When all is done, they argue it but probable, and this probable has a
great improbability attending ^t too.

3. From a choice limited, as to the persons to be chosen -- Such as should be
full of the Holy Ghost -- of which they had plenty and easily to be known for
an unlimited choice of such as have no such measure of the Holy Ghost.

So that admit the Major part of the Church did here choose, yet the Argument
is a lamentable Non sequitur. But to their Minor.

Are our Brethren sure, that either the whole or the major part of the Church
here, made the choice? Our Brethren have to prove it, ver. 2. The twelve called
the multitude, (...), and ver. 5. The saying pleased the whole multitude, in
the Original, all the multitude, (...), this is all. To which I answer.

1. Our Brethren know, that (...), does not in Scripture always signify either
every individual person or thing, under the genus or species, spoken of, nor
yet the Major part: How many times in Scripture, is Christ said to have died,
(...) or (...) or (...) for all; yet Christ neither Died for every individual
man, nor for the Major part of men, Mat. 3.5, 6. It is said, That all the
Region round about Jordan, went to hear John, and were Baptized of him,
confessing their sin, (...). Yet I believe our Brethren do not believe that
every individual person in that Region, nor yet the major part, did either go
to hear, or were baptized, or confessed their sins: Christ tells the Pharisees,
they tythed (...) ^very herb; yet I believe our Brethren believe that not one
quarter of all the Herbs in the world were in any Pharisees, or any other Jews
Gardens; so that this word will not conclude, especially considering what
reason we have to believe the contrary, viz. that neither the whole, nor yet
the major part of the Church were present at this Election.

1. This Church must consist of above 8000. souls, 120. were in it, Acts 1.15.
3000. more were added, Acts 2.41. 5000. more added, Acts 4.4. here are eight
thousand one hundred and twenty souls. Now let any one in reason judge, 1. What
one place in Jerusalem could well contain them (except the Temple) and whether
it be probable, that either the Jews or the Romans would have endured such an
ordinary conflux of above eight thousand thither (enough to have made a good
Army:) the major part of these must be above four thousand. 2. This Church was
at this time in a faction too; for Acts 6.1. there was a murmuring about the
poor, between the Grecians and the He^rews; we therefore think it more
probable, that the Apostles spoke to some of this multitude to commend some fit
persons to them, and if our Brethren talk till Doomsday, they can prove no
more from this Text.

And this is a full answer to all our Brethren say in reference to this Text,
and enough to show it comes far short of a proof of what they undertake, viz.
That the whole Church, or Major part of it, must of divine right choose its own
Officers. I come to their third Text.

Acts 14.23. I will transcribe, ver. 21.22.

Ver. 21. And when they [that is, Paul and Barnabas] had preached the Gospel in
that City, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium,
and to Antioch.

Ver. 22. Confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the Faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of God.

Ver. 23. And having ordained [or chosen, it is no matter which, as to our
Brethrens purpose] them Elders in every Church, and had prayed with fasting,
they commended them to the Lord, on whom they had believed.

1. At present I will not dispute the sense of the word, (...) (I have said
something to it before) but I would fain know of any one that understands
sense, whether those that ordained, or chose, were not those that confirmed and
exhorted, v. 22. those that preached, and returned again to Lystra, etc. ver.
20. If they were, it is sure enough Paul and Barnabas were the men.

2. I would fain know of those who understand Grammar, whether (...) be not
joined by apposition with (...) and (...), or what other Syntax of the words,
according to any Grammatical Rules can be endured.

Object. But the Disciples are twice mentioned, v. 22.

Answ. It Is very true, but not as the persons confirming and exhorting, but as
the persons confirmed and exhorted, so they are mentioned here [(...)] but that
is the dative case, the other the nominative.

Our Brethren say, that Dr. Ames says, it may include the Disciples too, or
they might go before the Disciples. I answer, what Dr. Ames says without any
ground in the Text is nothing to us. 2. I thought our Brethrens end in
producing this Text had been to prove that the people ought to choose; not that
it may be they may choose.

But our Brethren think they can by sound reason prove that the choosing, or
ordaining here, was such as could not be performed only by Paul and Barnabas.
1. They say the word (...) is never used in Scripture for laying on of hands.
This will not conclude that it must not be so understood here: I hope our
Brethren know there are (...) in Scripture: Our Brethren have no Text where it
is used in the active voice and governing an accusative Case, where it
signifies the people choice. The word is (indeed) used but twice more in the
New Testament, once for choosing by suffrages, once otherwise, for Gods
destination and appointment, Acts 10.41. Our Brethren cannot find it taken for
ordaining in other Authors neither: If our Brethren mean for ordaining
Ministers, I cannot tell how Aristotle or Demosthenes, etc. should so use it.
But if they mean that in Civil Authors (...) is not used for the constituting
of a person in Office, without the peoples suffrage; if they look Stephen or
Hesychius, or Budeus they will better inform them; Hesychius says, it
signifies (...), and then (...): But this is nothing to the present purpose; we
say if it signifies choosing here, yet Paul and Barnabas chose.

2. Our Brethren say, this could not be; for (...) signifies to choose by
suffrages; now Paul and Barnabas could not make suffrages.

All this is a riddle to me; for if I understand (...) i^ signifies the hand,
not the tongue, and (...) signifies to stretch out, not to speak; the word no
otherwise signifies a choosing by suffrage, than the lifting up of the hand did
testify the suffrage. But why could not Paul and Barnabas make suffrages?
Surely they made two, and that is the plural number sure. The truth is the
primary signification of the word was to choose by lifting up of the hand, in
token of their consent, to a person named for an office: now in regard this
made vulgar Officers, the word was ordinarily used afterward for the creating
or putting one in office, whether there were an hand lifted up or no; thus it
is used in Scripture too, Acts 10.41. chosen or appointed before of God; yet I
hope our Brethren will not say, that Christ made the Apostles by suffrage: and
if two persons (according to our Brethrens Grammar) cannot make suffrages;
surely one indivisible God, could not.

3. But (say our Brethren) the thing intended by (...), must be distinct from
prayer and fasting, Act. 14.23. and when they had ordained, or ordaining them
Elders, and had prayed with fasting. That imposition of hands in ordination is
distinct from praying and fasting, we grant; But that praying and fasting is
(without it) ordination we deny: the Greek is (...): All our Brethrens strength
lies in the English Translation. In the Greek, (...) and (...) are both the
same tense, and (...) equally applicable to both. According to our Brethrens
principle, the nomination of the person, and prayer, and fasting, and then
executing by suffrage are distinct acts, yet all make but that one act of
constituting an Officer. Neither is it said, that the praying and fasting here,
at all related to the constitution of the Elders, it might relate to their
taking their leave of them, mentioned in the next words, and I am very apt to
believe it did; I am sure our Brethren cannot prove the contrary; so that it is
but gratis dictum; a thing said, which our Brethren must ask us leave to
believe, that the prayer and fasting here spoken of, was any thing relating to
Ordination.

4. In the last place, our Brethren because they cannot prove, fairly beg the
question, p. 233. Because the power of Election is no where given to Officers,
but to the people: I think this Text should have proved this thing, that it is
given to the people. On the contrary, we say, our Brethren neither have proved,
nor can prove, that the Scripture has given the power of choosing Pastors to
the people: The Texts produced (as we have heard) will prove no more than a may
be, hardly so much: And this Text it seems must have those to help it, or it
will not prove. Thus Reader, thou see how easy it is to assert what is found
hard to prove: Read and judge, whether from Scripture it can be positively
concluded, that it is Gods will that every particular Church should choose all
its own Officers, and this choice be all tha^ is necessary by Gods word to make
them Officers. See if either in the Epistles to Timothy or Titus (which of all
other Scriptures, are most to be eyed as our Rule about Church Government)
because there are given directions for the settling of ordinary Churches in a
permanent state) see if there be one word in them for the peoples choice,
though Titus was left on purpose in Crete to ordain Officers, Tit. 1.5. and
several Rules be given in those Epistles for the settling of Gospel Churches. In
the mean time we grant to our Brethren,

1. That there is nothing in Scripture, forbidding their election.

2. That in many cases, yea in all, it is very convenient, and by no means to
be neglected, if they will choose such a one as is fit for a Pastor.

But that it is necessary to the making of a Minister in Office, by any rule of
Scripture; or that in no case the election of a Pastor (in the strictest
notion) by a particular Church may be denied, or overruled, this we deny;
because we say, every particular Church is not able to judge of the abilities
of a Minister, and often does make apparent errors in Judgment.

Our Brethren, p. 236. Assert the abilities of a particular Church, to judge of
the abilities required in a Minister; they say they are able to judge^, if he
be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior,
given to hospitality. We grant this (in some measure) but there are some other
qualifications too. He must be one, 1. That holds fast the faithful word. 2.
Able by sound Doctrine to exhort. 3. Able to convince gainsayers, Titus 1.9.
4. Apt to Teach. Now we deny that every particular Church, even of our
Brethren, is able to judge of these things.

According to our Brethrens principles, any seven visible Saints may make a
Church; we say seven real Saints may not be able to judge of these things; How
can they judge if a Minister be able to convince a gainsaying Socinian, or
Arminian, or Papist, who know not what any of them hold? And how many hundred
private Christians are there who are ignorant of these things? I dare assume
that in no Church, our Brethren have in this County, there are seven men know
what the Socinians hold, much less do the major part know (yet they are
doubtless able to judge whether a Minister be able to convince them) Is any one
so senseless, as to think any seven private Christians is able to judge whether
a Minister holds the faithful word? Our Brethren know two sevens of their
Brethren, have judged that the Quakers and Anabaptists hold the faithful word:
which I speak not to create an odium upon them, for some of ours have done so
too. It does not follow, that because a good Christian must be sound in the
Faith (in things necessary to Salvation) therefore he is able to judge of the
abilities of a Minister, who is to exhort by sound Doctrine; for a Minister is
to preach more sound Doctrine, than what is absolutely necessary to salvation.

Object. Oh! But (say our Brethren) The sheep of Christ know his voice, and
they will not follow a stranger, this imports their having ability, and
liberty to judge what Teachers they should elect.

Answ. Does it so?

What belongs to Christ sheep as Christ's sheep, belongs to every sheep.

But this does not belong to every sheep of Christ. Ergo.

The Major is undoubtedly true; the Text says, my sheep, not my fold; what is
here made to belong to sheep, belongs to every sheep. I hope our Brethren will
not say, this belongs to the Women, yet are they Christ's sheep too; nor will it
serve the turn, to say they must not speak in the Church; for we are now
speaking of choosing and judging, lifting up of the hand is enough.

But surely our Brethren will not say, that every man has ability; if they do,
and will give us leave, we will ^ick them out twenty out of every hundred they
shall bring us (if not four times twenty) whose knowledge concerning sound
Doctrine, and ability to convince gainsayers, they shall be ashamed to own as
sufficient ^o judge of the abilities of a Minister.

The truth is, every sheep of Christ [that is, so truly and really, i. e. every
Elect soul] so far refuses the v^ice of strangers, as (though he may for a
time follow them) yet he shall first, or last, reject them again. Our Brethren
know, that some, both of their and our Brethren within these seven years last
past have followed Strangers, and such Strangers too, as the Christian World
never heard of before, yet we should be loath to say, they are none of Christ's
sheep, because they are gone astray. The Lord in mercy make them to return.

If our Brethren say the Text is to be understood of Christ's sheep, as folded
together in the Church. We grant what they say, but say it is meant of the one
fold, ver. 16. consisting of all the Jews and Gentiles to be converted; and
that some of them are able so to judge, or that all of them will not follow
strangers, we grant. But this is nothing to our Brethrens purpose, to prove
that every individual sheep, or every particular Church, has this ability.

FINIS.

