At a COURT of DIRECTORS of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the
Indies.
Holden at Edinburgh the 18th of April 1699.
THE said COURT of DIRECTORS taking into their Consideration, How that by the
Constitutions of the Company's Colony in America; All Persons of what Nation
soever in Amity with His MAJESTY are allowed to Trade thither under certain
easy Conditions, particularly mentioned in the said Constitutions: And that
notwithstanding the Council of their said Colony have a considerable Stock of
Merchantable Goods, and other valuable Effects by them, to give in barter for
whatsoever Provisions or other Necessaries they may have occasion for; Yet for
the further Encouragment of all such Merchants and others as shall Trade to the
said Colony, and particularly of such as shall carry good and wholesome
Provisions thither. The said COURT of DIRECTOS, Do hereby declare and make
known, that any Person or Persons, procuring a Bill or Bills, from the Council
of the said Colony, or any four of them, at any time or times, before the first
of January next to come, for any Sum or Sums, not exceeding 2000 lib. sterling. in
the whole, on the said Company's Cashier, payable in a Months time after sight,
shall be duly honored and complied with accordingly.

Ditto the 2d. Day of May 1699.
THE said COURT of DIRECTORS Re-assuming the consideration of their Act of the
18th of April last; by which they gave the Council of CALEDONIA in America, a
Credit of 2000 lib. sterling. upon the Company's-Cashier here payable to such
Persons as should procure Bills for the same, under the hands of any Four of
the said Council before the first of January next. And lest, That contrary to
the intention of the said Court, the Limitations in the said Act should be a
Discouragement to any Person or Persons that have a mind to carry Provisions to
the said Colony, upon the presumption that possibly the said Credit may, before
their Arrival there, be exhausted by Bills given, or to be given to others; And
in regard that possibly the Inhabitants of the said Colony may (GOD willing)
from time to time, increase still more and more, so as to require more
Povisions, than can conveniently at all times be bought by the bartering of
such Merchantable Goods as the said Council have lying in store by them:
Therefore, The said COURT of DIRECTORS do, upon further Consideration, hereby
Declare and make known, that any Person or Persons procuring a Bill or Bills,
from the Council of the said Colony, Four of them at least subscribing the said
Bills, on the Company's Cashier here, for Provifions brought to the said
Colony, and Sold to the said Council, at any time or times, before the first
Day of March, which shall be in the Year of GOD 1700, payable in a Months time
aftersight, shall be duly honored with Acceptance and good Payment
accordingly.

ORDERED, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published,

Extractted out of the Records of the said COURT, by Me ROD. MACKENZIE Scry.


