To His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.
The humble PETITION of The Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
Shows,
THAT whereas the Wisdom of the KING, and this present Parliament, has thought
fit by two solemn several Acts, and Letters patent under the Great-Seal of this
Kingdom, to establish our COMPANY with such Powers, Privileges and Immunities,
as were thought needful to encourage any such new Undertaking in this Nation;
And particularly to raise a Joynt-Stock in such manner as we should think fit.
And for that End to enfranchise such Forraigners as would become Partners with
us, and to enter into Treaties of Commerce with any in Amity with His Majesty
for that effect, etc. Those of our Number who were then entrusted with the
Management thereof did think it most Natural to make the first Offer of sharing
our said Privileges with our Contrymen, and other Neighbors in England, as
living under the same Monarchy: And they not only readily embraced the Offer,
but in nine Days time subscribed 300000 lib. Serling, as the one half of the
Capital-Stock then proposed, and actually paid in the first-fourth Part
thereof, part in Specie, part in Bank-Notes, and the rest in Notes payable upon
demand.

That both Houses of the Parliament of England taking Umbrage at those
Proceedings, did not only jointly Address His Majesty for frustrating the ends
of the said Act, but the House of Commons did also appoint a Committee to
Examine what Methods were taken for obtaining the said Act of Parliament here,
for establishing our Company, who were the Subscribers thereto, and who were
the Promoters and Advisers thereof, with power to send for Persons, Papers and
Records; pursuant to which, the said Committee gave Orders to Summon not only
the English Subscribers, but even some Persons then Residing in Scotland, as by
the said Address, Votes of the House of Commons, and Copy of the said Summons
may appear; By all which, together with some other measures then taken, our
Friends in England were, to our great loss, disappointment, and retardment,
forced to relinquish, etc.

That notwithstanding of that discouragement, not only most of the Nobility,
Gentry, Merchants, and whole Body of the Royal Burrows, have upon the
Inducement, and Public Faith of the said Acts of Parliament, and Letters
Patent, Contributed as Adventurers, in raising a far more considerable Joint
Stock, than any was ever before raised in this Kingdom for any Public
Undertaking, or Project of Trade whatsoever, (which makes it now of so much the
more Universal a Concern to the Nation) but we have also had all the Promising
Hopes of Foreign Aid, that our Hearts could wish, especially at Hamburgh,
where the Merchants of that City entered into Contract with our Deputees, to
join at least 200000 lib. Sterling with us, till, to our great Surprise and
Loss, the English Ministers there, did, under Pretense of Special Warrant from
His Majesty, put a Stop thereto, by giving in a Memorial to the Senate of that
City, Threatening both Senate and Inhabitants, with the King's outmost
Displeasure, if they should Countenance, or Join with us in any Treaty of
Trade, or Commerce, as by the annexed Copies thereof, in French and English,
may appear, which Memorial, we humbly pray, may, for the better Information of
Your Grace, and Right Honorable Estates, be also Read in Parliament.

That after the said Memorial was by the Senate transmitted to the Commercij or
Body of Merchants of that City, they to assert their own Freedom, did advise
and prevail upon our Deputees and Agents who were there for the time, to open
Books in the said Merchant's Hall, where for some Days they signed considerable
Sums pursuant to their said Contract, though under Condition to be void, if we
should not procure some Declaration from the King that might render them secure
from the Threatenings and other Insinuations contained in the said Memorial: And
to our great disappointment, thus the Case stands in Suspense between them and
us to this Day.

That as the reasonable (nay and unquestionable) Prospect which we had of a
powerful Assistance from Hamburgh and several other Places (if not obstructed
as aforesaid) induced us to propose a far greater Equipage at first than
otherwise we would have done; So the rendering of those Measures abortive, has
not only weakened our Stock, lessened our Credit, retarded our first
Expedition, and disheartened many of our Partners at Home, but even also
shackled our Resolutions and Power from prosecuting at Present several other
Branches of Foreign and Domestic Trades and Improvements which we had in
View, if we had not met with such Obstructions and Discouragements from Time to
Time.

That though our Company is more immediately and sensibly touched in many Respects
by such Proceedings, than any other; Yet we humbly conceiving also, that the
Honor and Independency of the Nation, as well as the Authority and Credit of
the Parliament is struck at through our sides; We could not as Country men,
and in Duty to that Collective Power, which gave our Company first a Being, but
inform His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament of the Premises, to the End, that the Great Council of
the Nation, now assembled (whom GOD Almighty Direct) may do therein as to them
in their profound Wisdom and Discretion, shall think fit.

That as to what thereof concerns our Company in particular, we shall humbly
beg leave to Suggest further, that our Ships being now at Sea, on their
intented Voyage, the former Treatment which our Company met with in England and
else where, may give us too just grounds to suspect, that if either through
multiplicity of public Affairs, or otherwise howsoever; Your Grace and Right
Honorable Estates of Parliament, should neglect the taking present Notice of
such Usage, the Enemies of our Company would be thereby encouraged, either
directly or indirectly to pursue their former designs of Ruining (if possible
all our Measures.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Right Honorable the Estates of
Parliamenr, to take the Premises into your most serious Consideration, to
vindicat our Company's Reputation Abroad, by supporting the Credit of the Acts
of Parliament, and Letters patent, by which the same is established, and
wherein the Honor of the Nation is so much concerned, to take effectual
Measures (as the said Act provides) for repairing the great Loss and Damages,
which we have already sustained, through the unwarrantable Treatment
abovementioned, as well as for preventing the like for the future; and withal
to continue to us the Privileges and Exemptions mentioned in the said Acts of
Parliament, and Letters patent for some longer time, in consideration of the
time already elapsed without Execution, and our Stock lying dead without
Improvement, by reason of the Obstructions aforesaid.

Signed at Edinburgh the 22 Day of June School. in Name and presence of the said
Council-General. By BASIL HAMILTON, I. P. C.G.


