AT EDINBURGH, The 9th Day of July, 1696.
WHEREAS the Books of Subscription to the COMPANY of SCOTLAND Trading to AFRICA
and the INDIES, have continued open at Edinburgh from the Twenty Sixth Day of
February last, to this Instant; And although continuing the Subscriptions in
SCOTLAND so long, has been very prejudicial to the Affairs of the COMPANY at
Home and Abroad; Yet in regard that all Doubts and Difficulties may be fully
Obviated, and no reasonable Means or Opportunity omitted to make this the most
Diffusive and National Joynt-Stock in the World: The COURT of DIRECTORS of the
said COMPANY, Do hereby Agree and Declare, that the said Books of Subscriptions
shall continue open until Saturday the first Day of August next, at Six a Clock
in the Afternoon: And the said COURT of DIRECTORS do further Resolve, Publish
and Declare, that if any of the Subscribers of the said COMPANY shall neglect
to pay the first Quarter-part of their Subscriptions until the Tenth Day of the
said Month of August; That then, and from thence-forward, the Share of Stock
belonging to such Person or Persons, shall either be Pursued for according to
Law, or Transferred and Disposed of by the said COURT, to such as will
Adventure and pay the Sum or Sums required, at the Pleasure of the said COURT
of DIRECTORS.

Published by Order of COURT, ROD. MACKENZIE, Sec:ry

EDINBURGH, the 3d of August 1696.
THE above-written ACT of the said COURT of DIRECTORS was Read, Considered and
Approved of by the COVNCIL-GENERAL of the said COMPANY: And the said
COVNCIL-GENERAL, Does hereby further Enact and Declare, That the said COURT of
DIRECTORS may, at any time after the said Tenth Day of August instant, Invest
in themselves, for the COMPANY'S Use, the respective Shares and Interests of
such Subscribers or Proprietors in the Joynt-Stock of the said COMPANY, as
shall either neglect or refuse to Pay or Cause Pay the first Fourth-Payment of
the respective Sums Subscribed by them as aforesaid, before the said Tenth Day
of August: And that upon such Investment, the said COURT of DIRECTORS, or any
appointed by them for that intent, may thereafter Transferr the several Shares
and Interests, not paid as aforesaid, to such as, by advancing the several Sums
required, shall become Proprietors thereof.

Then a Report being made to the said COVNCIL-GENERAL, by the COMPANY'S
Chief-Accomptant, that the complete Sum of Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
Sterling was Subscribed in the Books of the said COMPANY, by Persons residing
in SCOTLAND; The said COVNCIL-GENERAL have Ordered the said Books of
Subscription to be closed, and that the same be hereby Published and Declared
accordingly.

DAVID HOME P.


