The Lord Bishop of London 's fourth Letter to the Clergy of his Diocese.
Good Brother,
I DO acknowledge that I am bound to lay my self out in any thing that may
conduce to your Assistance, for carrying on that Great Work, which lies upon
you of the cure of Souls. But when I reflect upon the cheerful concurrence I
met with in those endeavors I have hitherto used for the promoting that
Unanimity, which is the Life and Strength of your performance, and Cements and
Embodies your whole proceeding to a lasting strength: I cannot, but with a most
thankful Heart to God, rejoice in that just disposition, with which, by his
Grace, he has filled your honest Mind. That therefore I may never be wanting,
and that this Repetition of what you were my Counselor in the last year, may
the more quicken you to do your duty in those things, which you did then so
readily consent and advise to: Take your own and my sense, so near as I can
recollect it, concerning the Subject of our last conference.

Upon Canon 54.

THe Title and Substance of this Canon is, The Licenses of Preachers refusing
Conformity, to be void. And to complete the expectation of the Church in
matters of this nature: We must look to Canon 38. which ordains, That obstinate
Revolters after Subscription, are to be deposed from the Ministry. The reason
of these severities proceeds from the absolute necessity of keeping up
Discipline in the Church of God. For Nature, the Constitution of the World,
experience in the subsistence and success of things, teach us, that the Maker
of all things is a God of Order, and hates Confusion. Therefore is the Church
of Christ likened to a Building, which consists in an orderly disposing of
different Materials into one Structure. I will Build my Church, says our
Savior, Mat. 16. 18. You also are Built together, etc. Ephesians. 2. 2. St. Paul
writing to the Schismatical Separatists of Corinth, As a wise Master Builder, I
have laid the Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 10. Ye are Gods Building, 1 Cor. 3. 9. In
whom all the Building fitly framed, Ephesians. 2. 21. And so in many other places. It
is also expressed as a Body, See 1 Cor. 12. how the Apostle adapts the
Constitution and Frame of the natural Body to that of the Church, and concludes
verse. 27. Ye are the Body of Christ. -- For the edifying the Body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 12, and verse. 16. The whole Body fitly joined together, etc. makes
increase of the Body. From which the Body by Joints and Bands, Col. 2. 19. For
his Body's sake, which is the Church, Col. 1. 24. There are many more
expressions of this kind; but I mention these especially, to show after what
manner we are Embodied, and to what end. Sometimes it is called a Kingdom,
which is a Body Politic under one Head. The Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23.
I appoint you a Kingdom, Luke 22. 29. And so in diverse other Portions of
Scripture. But to let us understand how necessarily the utmost rigor of
Discipline is to be observed in a Christian, we are most truly represented to be
in a state of War, continually encountering the Flesh, the World and the Devil,
at the Peril of an everlasting Death. And therefore he says, Put on the Armor
of Light, Romans 13. 12. Put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11. Now we know
under what severe Penalties almost the least fault is forbid by Martial Law,
and how strictly it is Executed, not from the roughness of the Profession, but
the Nicety of the Case; where every little disorder, or disobedience to
command, always gives advantage to a watchful Enemy, and many times endangers a
total overthrow. We are therefore to consider what is expected from us, for the
fitting our selves to this posture, that we may be able to stand in the day of
trial.

1. The first thing we are to do, is so well to dispose our selves, by an
humble and peaceable Mind, that in the Church where it has pleased God to place
us, In what state soever, therewith to be content: To study to be quiet and
mind our own business: And to yield a hearty, willing and thorough Conformity
to the Rules we are under. For if nothing be ordained contrary to the express
Will of God: Every Ordinance of Man is to be submitted to for the Lords sake, 1
Pet. 2. 13. To this end, the two Acts of Uniformity ought to be strictly read,
and observed by us. As also the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, Anno
1603. with the Rubricks to the several Offices in the Liturgy; taking great
heed at the same time to our Doctrine, by having a special regard to the 39.
Articles, as expounded in the Books of Homilies. That neither in word nor deed
we may hurt, or offend the Church we serve in.

What less can we think our selves obliged to; when we consider in what manner
St. Paul conjures the Corinthians? Chapter 1. 10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that
there be no divisions (or Schisms) among you: But that you be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment. And, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3. 16. Let all things be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Surely after this we may safely conclude,
that whosoever transgresses the Rule upon a less account, then obedience to the
express Will of God, or shall teach men so; he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

We are not here to understand every breach of the Rule, to lie under this
guilt, but such as are committed wilfully, or out of supine negligence. Neither
need we think it a neglect of duty in those things, which by an Universal
omission, the silence of our Superiors giving way to it, lie under a tacit
consent of Abrogation, or Suspension at least. Nor are we to think it a small
matter, the leaving these things undone; because it is of greater immediate
duty to observe the weightier matters of the Law. I say immediate, inasmuch as
the consequence in the omission of lesser matters, may occasionally and too
frequently does prove more fatal to the peace of the Church, and Men's
Consciences than the other.

2. In the next place, we are to consider our selves in the State of
Church Discipline, as Watchmen and Shepherds to guard and secure our Flocks. We
must for this reason, not only see that we our selves, but be careful that
others do not offend those that in a special manner belong to us. We must drive
away all erroneous Doctrines, and avoid disorderly Walkers. We must drive away
the bold Wolves, the little Foxes, and all Beasts of Prey, as we will otherwise
answer for the care committed unto us.

If any come upon us, or go out from among us, and discover the Savageness of
their natures, by not being content to forsake and renounce Order themselves,
but teach and encourage men so to do; these are Beasts of Prey. And it is one
of the great advantages God has bestowed upon us, in that promise to his
Church, Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing
Mothers. That all offensive and disorderly Walkers may by their Protection and
coercive Power, either be reduced, or secured from harming of us. For there is
no pretense of Persecution in this, no more than if a Man should so call a just
Conviction for an Action of Battery: Because he is Self-condemned, Tit. 3. 11.
and is not punished for his Opinion, but for his disorderly acting upon that
Opinion. Such was Diotrephes, who loved to have the pre-eminence, 3 John 9. 10.
And if you should pass over the Deeds which such Men do; you would be the
Betrayers and Murderers of your Flocks. Like the Hireling, who flees, or
sits still, when he sees the Wolf coming, Joh. 10. 13.

There is another sort of disorderly Walkers who still keep amongst us, of whom
I may say in the Apostles Words, I have told you before, and now tell you even
Weeping, that by a base compliance and a servile Aw of the most Blameworthy of
their Flock, they discover so cowardly a temper, and unsuitable to that
Christian courage, which should place them above the fear of Men; that they
become the Enemies of the Cross of Christ. Such Men should not be suffered to
herd with us, but ought to be avoided as infectious Creatures. Mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye learnt, and
avoid them, Romans 16. 17. Such Wretches lie under a complication of diseases,
being disobedient through omission of their Duty, Traitors in not Faithfully
discharging the trust committed to them; disorderly in not Walking according to
the Rule, perjured in breaking their Oath of Canonical obedience, and that of
Supremacy, injurious to their Brethren and the whole Church, by cherishing the
unruly expectations of the People, and are so many ways Unfaithful, that had
they any sense of Religion, the consequent words of St. Paul must needs make
them ashamed, and confounded. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ but their own belly. 18. Or as it is in another place, Whose end is
destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their shame, who
mind Earthly things, Phil. 3. 19.

In short do but mark the careful admonition against all (...) or disorder in
the Church. Warn them that are unruly, 1 These. 5. 14. Now we command you
Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves
from every Brother that walks disorderly. 2 These. 3. 6. And then observe with
what pleasure that (...) or good order is mentioned, For I though absent in the
Flesh, yet am with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding (...) your order,
Col. 2. 5. This word should be written in the Forehead as well as Heart of
every Christian, but especially of the Clergy, as Pilate's Inscription upon the
Cross, in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that from East to West, and throughout the
World, the Glory of our Christian consent might be understood.

You may remember upon the recommending a Hearty and Serious pronunciation of
the Divine Service, it was thought very advisable and reasonable to forbear
long and expatiating Prayers before Sermon: Lest either we should be thought
our selves to esteem the public Offices deficient, or give Occasion to others
to be of that Opinion. Upon which Occasion was mentioned Mr. Seymours little
Treatise of public set Forms of Prayer. Then likewise were recommended for
your People to read, Mr. Allens little Books viz: A Persuasive to Peace and
Unity. A serious and friendly Address to the Nonconformists. The danger of
Enthusiasm. And I shall now add his Book called Catholicism. As also Mr. Lamb's
two Books, viz: A stop to the Course of Separation: And a fresh suit against
Independency. And this I did, not only for their brevity, but because they are
written by Laymen. And such whose expressions are so fair and their integrity
and manner of living so well known in the City: That it were impossible to
propose more unexceptionable either as to the Style or Authors. I then wished
you, as I still do, to Read the Canons to your Congregation once a year, as it
is ordered in the Kings Confirmation of them: And that such Acts or
Proclamations as have been appointed to be Read upon the thirtyeth of January,
the nine and twentyeth of May, and fifth of November, might be for the future
observed.

The urging necessity of Persecution forces Men into order. But in times of
Prosperity, there is great danger of falling asleep: Especially in ours, where
the corruption of the Age makes unruliness pass for a virtue. And yet the
Censorious humor which it produces, is a strong motive on the other hand,
where any sparks of Wisdom or common prudence remain, to observe a very strict
and close Order in our own Defense. Take away then the Glory of ordaining
Rules, by that which is of infinitely more value, the observation of them. And
let not the great and painful care of the Fathers of the Primitive Church, both
by Private endeavors, and in Councils, rise up in Judgment against us, for
destroying that Discipline by disorder and neglect, which at the peril of their
Lives many times, they upheld for the preservation of Christ's Body, which is
the Church. I pray God strengthen your Heart with a courage suitable for the
times we live in, and every way enable you to answer the just expectations of,

Fullham, April 6. 1683. Your Affectionate Friend and Brother. H. London.

LONDON, Printed for W. Abington.


