THE COMPLETE Planter and Cyderist.

Together with the ART of PRUNING FRUIT TREES.

IN TWO BOOKS.

I. Containing plain Directions for the propagating all manner of Fruit Trees,
and the most approved Ways and Methods yet known, for the making and ordering
of CIDER, and other English Wines.

II. The Art of Pruning, or Lopping Fruit Trees. With an Explanation of some
Words which GARDENERS make use of, in speaking of TREES. With the Use of the
Fruits of Trees for preserving us in Health, or for curing us when we are Sick.

By a Lover of Planting.

London, Printed for Thomas Bassett at the George near St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet street. 1690.

THE Preface.
Courteous Reader,
I Shall not trouble my self with the Customary, and almost essential
Concomitant of writing, by courting you into good Humor with a blandishing
Epistle; only inform you, that having sometimes very much delighted in
Planting, and for the improvement of my knowledge therein, Read over most Books,
as well Ancient as Modern that treated thereof; I found in many of them very
wild Notions and idle Chimera's, yet the late Authors, (as Mr Evelin, Austen,
Ray, Cotton, Meagar, Worlidge, with many others, and above all, the ingenious
Mr Langford) Treat very excellently of most parts thereof, yet no one to touch
every point, but in many things very defective: wherefore I thought some idle
hours not ill spent, if out of them all, according to the best of my judgment,
I culled such Rules and Observations, as with the addition of my one
Experience, a more compendious and complete Work thereof might be Compiled,
which would save the Planter much Expense and Trouble in buying, and reading so
many as have thereon writ; the numerousness of Authors rather consuming, than
advancing any Stock of knowlidge, by leading their Readers into so many Various
and uncouth Paths, as at length to lose himself in a Meander of confusion and
contrarieties; for that, and no other end therefore is this Collection made;
and herein I have imitated the Painter, that designing the Picture of Venus,
summoned together all the fair Ladies of the Town, and from one he Selected an
Eye, another a Nose, and from a third a Lip, etc. so that whatsoever he found
commendable in any one, he reduced the same into his Draught, and thereby made
a perfect Picture of a most exquisite Beauty: In like manner have chosen out
(but whether with the same success lies in the determination of the Judicious)
whatsoever I found either useful, necessary, or conducible to this Art, for the
Planter to know, and thereby separated the best Metal from all dross, and
impurities, and out of every one extracted the Quintessence, by reducing the
same into the method you here see; which to those whose Genius leads them to
the Propagation, ordering, and managery of Fruit Trees, making of Cider, and
English Wines, may be acceptable, and of something more than ordinary esteem; by
reason they now need not tumble over and rake in a multitude of Authors, for
that which at one entire View they may clearly see, and all that is any ways
requisite to be understood concerning that Subject, as also all Impertinencies,
Legendary stories, unpracticable, and improbable Projects thereabouts utterly
rejected, which are the grand impediments and discouragments of this beneficial
Art.

How not only easy and delightful, but profitable the Planting of Fruit Trees
is, will be needless to make a discourse on, since not only Thousands of
People, but whole Counties can infallibly evidence by their daily experience
the many and vast advantages thereof. Only our Saturnine Northern People are
not very inclinable thereunto, out of a certain conceited and inbred humor, of
not doing any thing their Ancestors have not cared for, which makes them
tenaciously adhere to their old and accustomed ways of Culture, and neglect,
and almost scoffingly deride any improvement their Forefathers did not
understand, or use; this humor too, is something augmented, upon a Whim they
have, that their Soil is so Steril and improlifical by the coldness of their
situation, that it would be labor lost to go about it; all which are idle
fancies, since experience sufficiently testifies, that most sorts of Apples,
Pears, Cherries, and Plums with due Cultivation prosper very well in each part
of our Climate, unless it be amongst the mere Mountaineers; so that would our
Countrymen but exile sloth and carelessness, they may have as flourishing
Orchards as others; the Soil and Air being propitious enough for that purpose.
I have known some so negligent, that although they have had Fruit Trees given
them, which being set made a very hopeful progress in their growth and bearing,
had not their wretched Laziness permitted them to be spoiled by Cattle for want
of a good Fence and heedful looking to. Another pretended obstruction is the
Thie^^hness of the meanest sort of People, who when any one Plants, frequently
break into their Orchards, and not only rob them of their Fruit, but often
injure their Trees; which objection may be as much appropriated to other
Countries as ours; most rascally People having a propensity to Pilfering, yet
are not other places thereby discouraged to the non-user or neglect of this
gain^^^ Art; since the inconvenience may be easily conquered by a little care,
some severity, and time; for if many would Plant, there would be a less
scarcity of Fruit, (...) that Roguish People would less ^^lue them, and not so
eagerly transgress those excellent Laws of the 43 Eliz. cap. 7, and 15 Car.
(...) cap. 2. made for the punish^^^t of such People.

Upon a due consideration of the whole matter, let every one that Plants but an
Orchard of one hundred Trees, of good bearing kinds, and long keeping Apples,
regularly Planted, manured and disposed according to the directions herein, but
speak the truth, and they will ingenuously confess, that after eight or nine years
growth of the Trees, prodigious profits have thereby accrued to their Economy.

And that this Soil or situation is not so ill influenced by any Aspect of the
Heavens, as is Vulgarly, and very erroniously believed.

It only remains that I deprecate the Reader to censure this Book according to
'its merits, and not the Capricio's of his own Brain, and in so doing, he will
show all the favor is expected by the Compiler, who on that score bids him

Farewell. May 24. 1683.
The Contents.
Chapter I. Of the Seminary and Nursery. Fol. 1 Chap. II. Of the ways, Manner
and Time of Grafting. 25 Chap. III. How to Graft several ways. 36 Chap. IV. Of
Inoculating. 52 Chap. V. Of Pruning Fruit Trees, 63 Chap. VI. Touching the
distance of Fruit Trees. 69 Chap. VII. Choice of Ground for an Orchard, and the
ordering it. 74 Chap. VIII. The time most proper for Transplanting of
Fruit Trees. 87 Chap. IX. Of the manner of removing and setting Trees. 92 Chap.
X. Of Planting Wall-fruit. 103 Chap. XI. Of Trees of low Stature and gentle
Growth, commonly called Dwarf-Trees. 110 Chap. XII. How to Plant in the Fields,
with the various advantages thereof. 122 Chap. XIII. Of propagating and
ordering Vines. 139 Chap. XIV. Of Figs, their kinds and propagation. 148 Chap.
XV. Of Walnuts, their kinds and propagation. 149 Chap. XVI. Of Chestnuts. 152
Chap. XVII. Of Filbeards. 154 Chap. XVIII. Of Quinces, their kinds and
propagation. 155 Chap. XIX. Of Mulberries. 157 Chap. XX. Of Medlars and
Service-Trees. 159 Chap. XXI. Of Goosberries, Currants, Raspherries, and
Barberries. 161 Chap. XXII. Of the kinds of Peaches and Nectarins. 165 Chap.
XXIII. Of the kinds of Apricocks and Straw-berries. 168 Chap. XXIV. Of the
kinds of Plums. 170 Chap. XXV. Of the kinds of Cherries. 173 Chap. XXVI. Of
Pears and their kinds. 175 Chap. XXVII. Of Apples and their kinds. 180 Chap.
XXVIII. Of Annoyances to Fruit Trees. 195 Chap. XXIX. Of gathering Fruit, and
the best way of making Cider. 204 Chap. XXX. Brief Monthly Memorials for the
Planter. 244
THE Complete PLANTER AND CYDERIST.
CHAP. I. Of the Seminary and Nursery.
Of preparing the ground for the Seminary.
. 1. AGainst the Beginning of October carefully prepare Ground by Digging,
Levelling, and Cleansing it from Grass, Stones, Weeds, and Roots, making the
Mold very. Fine: choose not a wet or very stiff Clay Land, nor over-rich with
Dung, but such as being it self good, you may make better only with a little
mixture of very rotten Dung: Let it be fenced from the cold as well as you can,
so that it be free from shade and droppings of Trees.

How to set Stones for Stocks.
. 2. When you set Stones, (which if they be Stones of Fruit soon ripe, you must
keep in Sand till October) do it by a Line, pricking holes about six Inches
distance one from another, and then put in the Stones about two Inches deep,
with the sharp end uppermost: When one Row is finished, remove your Line a Foot
farther, and set another Row in the same manner; but let your third Row be
about a Yard distant from the second, that you may have liberty to go between
every two Rows to Weed, etc. And set your Plum-stones and Cherrystones each
apart by themselves, and so proceed to set as many as you have a mind. Possibly
some of these Stones may not come up till the second Spring after setting, and
may not frustrate your desire, if you then expect them. Some keep their Stones
in Sand or Earth, in Tubs (well covered for fear of Mice) placed in a dry
Cellar, in a House, and then in February they Sow them (having prepared their
ground) in Trenches, as Pease are Sown. The Stones of Apricocks and Peaches are
apt to spring too forward, if set too soon, and be nipt by Frosts. In like
manner you may set Stones of Sloes, Haws, etc.

How to set Nuts, etc.
. 3. After the same manner you are to set all kind of Nuts, Acorns, Ash-keys,
or the Seeds or Kernels of any other kinds of Shrubs or Trees; but because it is
necessary that your young Wallnut-Trees and Chesnut-trees should grow longer in
your Seed-plot than Stone-Fruit, before they will be fit to be removed to the
place they are to spend their Lives in: you must set them at much farther
distance, that they may have more room to grow big, without hurting one another.

How to sow Seeds.
. 4. To raise Stocks from Seeds, or Kernels of Apples, Pears, or Crabs, (each
of which sort are to be sowed by themselves) you must go thus to work.

When either you or any Neighbor has made Cider, Verjuice or Perry, take the
Must, Murc, (or as some call it the Pouz) which is the substance of the fruit
after the Juice is pressed out, the same day or the next day after, before it
heats, and with a Riddle sift out the Seeds on a clean Floor, or Cloth, and
these you must sow (as soon as you can conveniently) upon Beds of very fine
Earth, very thick; for some being bruised in the grinding or pounding the
fruit, and others not being ripe, may never come up; then sift Mold upon them,
about two Fingers breadth in thickness. This way is much better than to Sow the
Seeds with the Must, Murc, or Pouz together, (as some do) because the Must will
heat them, and many of the Seeds will putrify, and others will not be able to
root or shoot up, because they are so imprisoned in that dry and tough stuff,
clinging about them.

The Beds of Earth you sow them on may be made about two Foot in breadth, with
a good distance between the Beds, that you may the better come to Weed them,
and draw them up as you have occasion.

How to secure them from prejudice.
. 5. To keep Fowls or Birds from scraping them up, lay some white Thorn on the
Beds till the Ground be well settled.

Some cover the Beds with Fern or Straw, to keep them warm in the Winter, which
may not do amiss, but then it must be taken off at the Springs approach.

If Moles or Mice get in (which you may easily discover, because the Mice leave
shells of the Seeds on the top of the Beds) they must be destroyed.

For Mice, lay Poison, or Oatmeal mixed with Glass pounded small, and Butter,
and cast bits of it upon the Beds, or set Traps for Moles or Mice, better known
than described.

The next Spring you will see these Stones and Seeds come up plentifully; first
the Leaves, almost of the shape of the Kernel split in two, and from betwixt
them will the Stem Put forth. Keep them clean from the Weeds all the year,
which must be plucked up while they are young, lest if they get Root, in
drawing them up, you root up the Seedlings with them; but if in the Weeding any
Seedlings come up, set them again almost to the top; then water them.

These Weeds, and such as are plucked up any where else, thrown up into a heap,
will rot, especially if any Lime be scattered amongst them, and become very
good Manure; but this should be before they are Seeded, for then the Manure
made of them will be apt to make the ground it is cast upon more subject to
Weeds.

If a dry time happen, you may some time in the Summer water the Beds.

The proper Seeds for stocks, and stocks for each kind of Fruit.
. 6. Your Seminary is to be stored with Stocks raised of Stones and Seeds of
these following, viz.

Peach-stones are to yield Stocks for Peaches and Nectarines.

Stones of the Wheat-Plum (which is a Plum ripe in August, and is white) or of
the white Pear-Plum, or of some other good white Plum (in defect of them) whose
Tree puts forth large Shoots, Branches, Stones of the white Pear-plum or
Wheat-plum make the best stocks for Peaches, Nectarines and Apricocks to be
inoculated on.
and Leaves, or for want of them, Stones of the Mustle-Plum, black Pear-Plum,
Primordian, or any other black or red Plum, whose Tree is of free growth, and
large leaved, will yield you excellent Stocks for Peaches, Nectarines,
Apricocks, and Plums; but stocks raised from the stones of Damsons are the
worst, and very bad, being dry stocks, and not so sappy as the beforementioned.

The Seeds of Pears yield the best stocks for Pear Trees.

Grafting Pear-Grafts or Cyens on a white Thorn or Quince stock, will make the
Tree to be of small growth, and the Fruit bad, having hard and stony Cores, if
grafted upon a Thorn Tree.

Black Cherry stones and Red Cherry stones yield stocks to Graft or Inoculate
Cherries on; but the Black Cherry stocks are best; for they yield goodly
straight large Plants, and full of Sap, and become greater Trees than those
produced of Red Cherry stones, and consequently more proper for Orchards and
Fields.

To Inoculate an Apricock very low on a white Pear-Plum stock, or on a
Wheat-Plum-stock, and then after a Years growth Inoculate a Peach or a
Nectarine on it, is highly approved; only this way there will be two Years loss
of time: And note that the red Roman Nectarine will scarce take on a Plum-stock
any other way.

Stocks raised of Crab kernels are better than those raised of Apple kernels.
The Seeds or Kernels of Crabs and Apples yield stocks the most proper to Graft
any kind of Apple upon, and though the stocks raised of Apple-seeds or Kernels
do shoot more clear and smooth, and come forward faster, and are of a quicker
and larger growth in stock than stocks raised of Crab-kernels or Seeds, and
Grafts grafted on them will grow quicker than on Crab-stocks, yet by the
universal consent and experience of all, stocks raised from the Seeds or
Kernels of Crabs are preferred either for Orchards or Fields, Cider, Baking, or
Table, far before stocks raised of Seeds or Kernels of Apples, and that for
these reasons: Crab-stocks are more free from Canker, and more hardy, and so
better able to endure cold and course Land, and because they root better, and
so will make large Trees, and will make Buds, Blossoms, and Fruit more hardy
and strong to endure frost and cold weather in the Spring: it also not onlp
preserves, but quickens, enlivens, makes brisk and poignant the Gust of any
delicate Apple.

But if you intend to propagate any delicate Apple which is over tart in taste,
Graft it on some stock raised of the Gennet Moyl, or some sweet Apple Tree,
which will sweeten its juice something. So a Pear is improved by Grafting on a
Quince-stock, but the Tree will not be large, but serve well for a Dwarf-Tree.

However where you cannot conveniently be stored with Crab-kernels,
Apple-kernels are not so much inferior to them, but they may well enough be
made use of (as they commonly are) for raising stocks to Graft Apples upon.

Objections against Crab stocks got out of Woods and Hedges to Graft Apples on.
Do not furnish your self with Stocks for Apple Trees by getting young
Crab-trees out of Hedges, rough grounds, and Woods, because the Workmen in
getting them break some, and hurt others of the principal Roots; and it
sometimes falls out that they have been cut down, and Sprung up again, out of
the remaining stump, or otherwise hurt, which though not easily discerned,
because skinned over, yet will be a prejudice to them for ever; also many of the
stocks so got out of Woods and Hedges, have, for want of room, and by reason of
shades and the dropping of other Trees about them, been checked and baffled in
their growth, and so become crooked, scabby, ill grown, rough, and unkindly,
and never like to make good and thriving Trees. Some that furnish themselves
this way with stocks, choose such as are largest, and those having for the most
part, thick and hard Bark, and old Roots, which come on but slowly when they
are removed to make Apple Trees. Likewise if these stocks be not Grafted very
low, (and if they are, a Years growth or two will be lost) they will put forth
Branches and Suckers of their own every Year, in such abundance, that without
constant pruning of them, the Grafts will be in danger of being starved, and a
better advantage may be made of Crab-trees in Hedg-rows and rough Grounds, by
grafting them where they are, where they will thrive the better.

The only objection is, that a Man cannot be furnished with Trees of a good
largeness, to bear so soon by stocks raised by Kernels and Stones as those got
out of Woods, etc. or those raised by Suckers, that may be of several Years
growth before used.

To which it is answered and approved by daily experience, That if at the same
time that you get Crab-tree stocks (of six or seven Years growth) out of the
Wood or Hedges, or Suckers, and set them in order to be grafted, you sow
Kernels or Stones, the Stocks and Suckers you so graft for six or eight years
may continue larger and bigger than Trees that come of Kernels and Stones, but
yet these lesser Trees shall so get ground of the other, that by the tenth or
twelfth year they shall not only overtake them, but outstrip them in growth.

Stocks for Pears, Plums, and Cherries, of suckers, not good.
And as to the way of raising of Stocks for Pears, Plums, and Cherries, by
Suckers, it is to be observed, that Trees so raised will be ever apt to cast up
such Suckers themselves, and such as do, are seldom found to be good bearing
Trees, because they expend their Sap so much that way.

Nevertheless Suckers springing out of the Roots of Pear Trees, Plum-Trees, and
Cherry-Trees, may be good Stocks for to graft Pears, Plums, and Cherry-Grafts
on for Wall-Trees and Dwarf-Trees, because they make Trees of small growth.

And one shall very difficulty store himself with Crab-Tree Stocks from the
Wood and Hedges, and from Suckers, to such a number as he may desire, because
many of them will prove bad and miscarry; whereas as from Kernels, or Seeds and
Stones, it is almost the same labor to have thousands as hundreds, and such as
will almost all of them be fit and proper for use.

You may also raise Stocks to graft Apples and Pears on, by setting cuttings of
the Gennet Moyl, and Kentish Codlings, and the Quince-Tree for Pears, by
setting those in the place where the Trees of Apple and Pear are to grow, in
Dwarfor Wall Trees: and also the ends of Roots, cut off from young Trees, taken
up to be trasplanted, and set in Beds of good Earth, will shoot forth tops, and
become good Stocks, which may serve for Dwarf Trees and Wall Trees.

Or you may Inoculate Buds on the small Roots of great Trees that grow at
farthest distance from the Bodies, and after a years growth to cut off the Root
about a Foot in length, with the new shoot growing upon it, and transplant it;
because a Tree will be raised thus sooner than from 2 Seed or Stone.

In case of an exigent for a stock or two, this way may be practiced, but it
will be found too troublesome for a general use.

Suckers springing from the Root of the Wheat Plum-tree, or white
Pear-Plum-tree, make excellent stocks for Peaches, Nectarines, Apricocks, and
Plums; but to have plenty of stocks for large standards for Orchards or Fields,
there is no better way of raising them, than by ripe Kernels or Seeds of Crabs,
or for want of them, of Apples, (the ripeness of the Seed or Kernel is known by
its being black) and of Pears for Pear-stocks, and of Cherry-stones for
Cherry-stocks, and of Peach-stones for Peach-stocks, to Inoculate Peaches and
Nectarines on, and of Wheat-Plum and white Pear-Plum-stones to graft or
Inoculate Peaches, Nectarines, Apricocks, and Plums on; with which a Man may
easily provide himself.

Of removing and transplanting Seedlings or Seed plants from the Seminary into
the Nursery.
. 7. In the later end of October, or beginning of November, after one Summers
growth in the Seed-plot, you ought, and must in no wise neglect to draw up with
your hand such of your Crab, Apple, or Pear-Seedlings, as you find grown a Foot
or more in height, but those which are not grown a Foot in height you may let
remain in your Seed-Plot another year; and as for those proceeding from Stones,
they need not be removed, but grafted or inoculated in the Seminary, the stones
being set at six Inches distance, as before is said; but very many will in
October remove those coming of stones as well as of Seeds or Kernels, and like
it best; because such as grow two or three years upon the Seed-bed before
removing, thrust their Roots very deep in the Earth, and are not only very hard
to be drawn up, but their Roots, when set again, (though a great part be cut
off) must of necessity be thrust down very deep into the Earth; and then such
spread their Roots deep and below the good Soil, by thrusting their young Roots
from the lowest part where the Root was cut off, and so they neither have so
good Nourishment from the Earth, (as spreading below the best Soil) nor are
they so easily transplanted when ready, as those drawn the first year, and are
set very small.

How to order the Seedlings after drawn up.
. 8. When the Seed-plants or Seedlings are drawn up, cut off the side-sprigs
from about the top, and the strings from about the Roots, and snip off the ends
or extremities both of the top, that it may not run too fast upwards, but the
Body may grow in bigness, and of the Tap or Heart-Root, that it may not run
directly downwards, (lest it run farther than the good Soil) but may be more
apt to spread its Roots in breadth, and near the top of the Ground, where the
best Soil is.

Then have Beds prepared of good fertile dry Earth, not over-rich, lest upon
removal afterward into a much worse Soil, (as for the most part Orchard and
Field-ground is) your Trees coming of a sudden from such delicate Food to such
course Fare, pine away, if they do not perish. And this is rationally thought
to be the cause why many Trees bought out of London-Nurseries (which are vastly
deep with fat and rich Manure) decay, or come on very poorly when they are
brought into the Country.

Therefore upon every removal or transplanting, either of Seed-plants, or young
Trees, endeavor to have Earth as good, or better (to place next the Roots at
least) than that out of which they were taken.

If any of these spring upright, top them early, (that is, cut off about an
Inch long at a Bud at the uppermost end of the Seed-plant, that the cut may be
covered with a fresh sprig) and it will make them grow bigger Bodied, and
spread at the cut place, and so become sooner ready for Grasting. And let not
the Roots be too long; about a handful in length (or less) is sufficient; for
if the Roots be long, and set deep, the Trees afterward are taken up with more
difficulty, and worse Roots. And the reason why all Seed-plants ought to be
transplanted or removed after one Summers growth on the Seed-bed, is, because
they get good Roots, which of themselves thrust down one single Root for the
most part, and that into the bad Soil. But if you would have stocks an Ell or
more high, to Graft or Inoculate for Standerds, you must not top them, or cut
off their Tops; because topping them makes them to spread at the cut place, and
their growing up to cease.

If you would Plant and Orchard, and have excellent sound Trees, early, and
great bearers, and the Trees free from Cankering, remove your Seed-plants into
the places, and in the order you intend your Apple or Pear Trees to grow, and
let the Seed-plants or Stocks grow there two years, and then graft them, and
order them as you do Trees that are set in Orchards, and by this means there
will need no removal after Grafting, and you will be quit of the many mischiefs
that attend Transplanting, and have better bearing, freer growing, and sounder
Trees than any you can transplant out of the Nursery into the Orchard, only you
must carefully preserve them from Cattle, Hares, and Conies, both before and
after Grafting, until they have attained a sufficient height and bigness.

Of setting the Seedlings, stocks, or seed plants.
. 9 Let every Bed you make for setting these Plants or Stocks in, be about two
Foot broad, leaving room betwixt each Bed to walk and work about them, without
prejudicing the Plants or Stocks; set two rows a Foot or more distant from each
other on every Bed, by drawing a Line and pricking holes a full Foot a sunder;
let the holes be so deep that if the Roots be not very long, you may set your
plants or stocks about two fingers breadth deeper in the ground than they grew
in the Seed-Plot; close the Mold about them, and if it be a very dry time,
water them the very same day, the better to settle the Earth about them.

If you can get old Fern, (in some places called Brakes or Brackin) or for want
of it, Straw or new Dung, cover the Beds with it, which will keep the Roots
warm in the Winter, and preserve them from overmuch heat in the Summer; if the
Land be any whit stiff, this cover will make it mellow, and when rotten enrich
it, and very much hinder the growth of Weeds, which ought duly to be plucked up;
and put new Fern, etc. as the old rots: and be sure you draw the biggest of the
stocks first, and set them by themselves, and the least by themselves, and set
stocks of Crab-kernels by themselves, and of Apple-kernels by themselves, and
stocks raised of Plum-stones, Cherry-stones, Peach-stones, each distinctly by
themselves in straight rows.

If you intend to raise any stocks to be set out in Fields before they are
grafted, you must not top them upon their first removal, neither need you
remove them before they are grown high enough to stand in the Fields; if you
find that they spread their Roots, and run not downwards, as in gravelly, and
such kind of Soils they will not be apt to do, (and by the first you draw up
you may judge of the rest, whether they do or no) if you reserve any for this
use, you had best choose such as grow straight, and at convenient distance one
from another, which you may contrive to do in drawing out the first two years
such as be of stature to be transplanted from among them; dress these once or
twice a year, by cutting off the biggest side-branches, to hasten their growing
tall, but leave on the top, and some small side-branches, for this causes them
to thrive in bigness the more, which they ought to do proportionable to their
height, or else they will be too weak to bear a top.

Observe this also in your Grafted Trees in your Nurseries or elsewhere.

Grafts must not be grafted on different kinds.
. 10. All Stocks and Cyens or Grafts that prosper when they are joynted
together, are congenerous, or of the same kind, and nearly related in some
degree; therefore Cherry-Grafts, or Cyens, Grafted or Inoculated on
Plum-stocks, will not prosper long, nor Plum-grafts on Cherry-stocks, neither
do Apple-grafts on Pear-stocks, nor pear-grafts on Apple or Crab-stocks.
Neither will an Apple Cyens grow grafted upon a Sallow, Poplar, Alder, Elm, or
Horse-plum.

Apple-seeds, etc. will not produce the same kind of Apple, etc. they were had
out of.
Seeds or Stones of Fruits gathered from Trees that have been grafted, or
inoculated on stocks of different kinds from the Graft or Cyens, produce of
themselves (not being grafted or inoculated) not the same Fruit as that was
from whence the Seed or Stone came, but a different and most commonly a far
worse Fruit; and as concerning the Seeds of Apples, it is to be observed, That
although they produce not Trees bearing the same kind of Apples as those the
Seeds were had of, yet without grafting they will bring forth a good harsh
Fruit that may yield good Cider; and thus it is said we came by some of our best
Cyder-Apples. Neither are some sorts of Crabs so contemptible a Fruit as they
are generally accounted; for being gathered very ripe, and kept a good while to
mellow, some of them will make good Cider, or ground with other mellow Fruit,
do much enrich the Cider, and are the best refiners of foul Cider; and
generally Crabs yield a strong Liquor, so that such kind of Crabstocks may
rather help to mend some Apples of weak Juice, than make them worse. And this
inconvenience is always found in Trees coming of Seed, and not grafted or
inoculated, That they are very long before they bear Fruit, whereas stocks
grafted or inoculated from Trees, which experience assures are of good bearing
kinds, and Fruits, commonly bear well in three or four years, and so continue.
If you would have some Trees raised of the Seeds of Apple-kernel, view your
Seminary about Michaelmas, and see which of your Seedlings have produced the
broadest, fairest; and largest Leaf and Shoot, and those elect for your Trees
to be set without Grafting, for it is commonly observed that those Seed-plants
or Trees that have very large, fair, and broad Leaves, bear the fairest and
largest Fruit.

Mere grafting betters not Fruit.
. 12. Mere Grafting does not meliorate the Fruit at all; as if you graft a Cyen
upon the same Tree you took it from, the Fruit will be the very same, without
the least alteration from what the Tree bore before it was so grafted; but
Fruit may something participate of the nature of the Stock wherein it is
grafted, so as to be made by it either better or worse; as if you graft a very
sour Apple Cyen upon a sweet Apple Tree, the Fruit will be something better: So
a sweet Apple Cyen, grafted on a very harsh four Crab-stock, has produced a
better Fruit than the Tree from whence the Apple-graft was had. So a Pear-Cyen,
grafted on a Quince-stock, has mended the Pear; and though the Graft does keep
its own Nature, and mightily predominate on what Stock soever it is grafted, yet
such an union as that of the Stock and the Graft, in natural Bodies, is hardly
conceivable without some commixture of their Natures, and there are some
reasons from experience which make this more than probable, as

I. The Seeds of a grafted Tree take much after the stock, and it is something
strange to conceive the Kernel should participate so much of the stock and the
Fruit be nothing influenced by it.

II. Those that produce the best Fruit by their stones or seeds, yet vary from
the Fruit the seed or stones were taken out of, which in all likelihood
proceeds from the mixture of the quality of the stock and Cyen in that Tree the
stone came from.

III. It Is manifest that amongst Trees of one kind, in the same Orchard, you
shall have some one of them bear better Fruit than any of the rest sometimes;
and it is not known what to impute this excellency more probably to, than that
the Stocks they were grafted on might be Crab-trees that bore Crabs of several
kinds, some better, some worse.

So that to conclude, it cannot be amiss to be so far curious about the Stocks
you graft, as rather to choose such Seeds and Stones to raise them from, as
come from Trees that bear the best Fruit in their kind (if you can have them)
than to take them at adventure, which makes some choose Seeds out of fair,
large, juicy Crabs, to raise stocks to graft some delicate Apple-grafts on.

Concerning the Pith of a Tree.
. 13. It Is held by some, That the Kernel of the Fruit has a great dependence
upon, and Sympathy with the Pith of the Tree, and that hollow Trees, though
they grow and bear Fruit, yet that Fruit has few Kernels in it, and those
little better than withered Husks; and experience evidences that there are some
hollow Fruit Trees that bear Fruit so much more excellent than any of the same
kind the Owners have had, or could elsewhere meet with, that they have been
very desirous to propagate from them, but never could, any manner of way, raise
young ones of those old Trees, that would bear so good a Fruit as the old
Trees: which seems to intimate, That the Fruit of a Tree may be the better for
the Piths being consumed; and if that be true, as it must be so, because the
Pith conveys to the Fruit a worse sort of Juice than any other part of the Tree
does; and therefore being freed from that infection by the consumption of the
Pith, the Fruit becomes more choice and delicate: and that the Pith is the
conveyance of a courser or other sort of juice, is rendered in some sort
probable, because (as has been before observed) the Kernels of Fruit depend
much upon the Pith, which almost never produce such good Fruit as the seeds or
stones come out of, but generally much worse.

Reasons why every one ought to Graft, Plant, and raise his own Trees.
. 14. Because most men are through ignorance indifferent whether they have
Fruit Trees of their own or no, because for a little money they can have Plants
from others, ready brought up to their hands; yet it is far better to have them
of their own bringing up and Propagation, and to have Seminaries and Nurseries
of their own for this purpose, for these reasons,

I. Because this way a Man shall be sure to meet with no failure, either in the
kind, great bearing, or goodness of the Trees and Fruit; in all which he shall
frequently be disappointed and lose much time and expense, if he have his Trees
upon the reputation and trust of others, who make a Trade of selling them, and
are therefore many times incurious, careless, and perhaps knavish in raising
them, and in stead of the right kinds, (if they can get either ease or any
thing by it) will not stick to put him off with another.

II. This trouble and expense of buying young Plants, and getting them home,
(many times from places very remote) and the prejudice they often receive in
the carriage, will be wholly prevented.

III. This way a man shall, with almost the same labor and charge, both
furnish himself sufficiently, and have so many more as to defray the Charge he
may be at about it, if he will sell them, or to gratify his friends, if he had
rather bestow them.

IV. He will this way be provided with stocks for Apples, Pears, Plums,
Cherries, and all choice Wall-Fruit, raised from Kernels and stones of Fruit,
which are incomparably better than stocks procured any other way.

And lastly those that propagate Trees for Sale have their Nurseries exceeding
fat, rich, and fertile, whereby Trees removed out of them into the Orchard, etc.
of others, which are always almost of a far courser and worse Soil, frequently
prin, pine away, and very often dye; and if they live, they seldom prove fair,
large, or well bearing Trees; and it often happens, that the Air and Soil into
which they are removed, is heterogeneous and unsuitable for Trees coming out of
the Air and Nursery you have them: For it is a sure Rule, always to transplant
or remove Trees or Stocks from a worse to a better Soil upon every removal, and
then they will prosper well. So Trees removed out of the South into the North
seldom prosper, whereas Trees removed out of the North into the rich Southern
Soils, like well: So Trees brought up in Nurseries in Lancashire, and
transplanted into Ireland, thrive and bear exceeding well.

About the Bark of Trees on Barren ground.
. 15. Stocks or Trees that grow on barren ground, have commonly their Bark very
white and hard, whereas those on good Land have their Bark very smooth, green,
and plump, and the last years shoots large and full; but the others shoots are
short, small, and meagar.

How to raise a Fence of Crab-trees
. 16. If one have a mind to raise a good new Fence about a Field he designs to
enclose, which he can keep for four or five years together, to bear Corn, or
Clover-grass to Mow, that Cattle may be so long kept out of it, he may do it
rarely well, by sowing Apple-Kernels of as many sorts as he will on the top of
a new-made Ditch-bank, making the dead Hedge (that is usually on the top of the
Bank) on the utside of the Ditch, to defend them.

When they are grown up, he may plaish this Hedge, leaving at every four or
five yards distance one of the best Trees to grow up, which of themselves will
bear good Cyder-Fruit, (which he may guess at by the broadness and largeness of
the Leaves they bring forth) or may be grafted to bear what pleases the owner:
and by this means in a little time, and with small charge, he shall have a
fruit-bearing and impregnable hedge.

Remove out of the Seminary all Stocks, whether raised of Seed or stones.
. 17. Let all Stocks whatever, that are removed, grow a year or two before you
graft them; and notwithstanding some opinions to the contrary, no sort of young
Plants or Stocks, that come of Seed or Stones, ought to be grafted or
inoculated in the place where they were sowed, before that they have been
removed; because if they be not removed, they thrust down a single Root or two
commonly into Clay, Gravel, or moist ground, etc. which Root or Roots draw bad
nourishment from below the good Soil, which always is nearest the top of the
ground, and thereby hurts Trees, Roots, and Fruits, and in case any of them be
there grafted, and removed afterward, they want good Roots, and are difficult
to remove, because not removed when young, of one or two Summers growth.

CHAP. II. Of the Ways, Manner, and Time of Grafting.
The time to Graft in.
. 1. FRom the middle of January until the beginning of March, if the Weather be
open, without Frost, and grow warm, the wind not being North or North-East, you
may graft Plums, Cherries, and Pears, but not Apples, till the Bark of the
Stocks will a little rise or peel from the wood, which is seldom before the
middle of March, and often not till April, because this is necessary for the
best way of grafting them; but if you will graft any Apples in the Cleft, you
may do it from the beginning of March until the tenth of April, and that with
success; but grafting in the Cleft early in the beginning of March, is best,
especially, if the weather be mild and open: and Graft not within sixteen hours
before or after the Change or full of the Moon.

The grafting Instruments.
. 2. Your Instruments to graft with are to be a fine, neat, sharp, small,
well-set Saw, to cut off the heads of some stocks which are grown too big for
the Knife; a good strong Pruning-Knife, made a very little coming, which will
be ready to cut off the heads of your smaller stocks you intend to graft: also
a good midling Knife to cleave some of the smaller sort of stocks with; also an
Instrument like a broad Chisel, the handle of Iron, and the edge alike on both
sides, not sloping on one side, like that of Joyners, but plain as a Knife, and
very thin, about three or four Inches in breadth; with which you may either
cleave your larger stocks, or prune your Trees; also a little Mallet, or else a
stick about a Foot long, made of an old Spade or Shovels handle, or some other
hard wood, to use instead of a Mallet, to drive your Knife when you cleave the
stock: Also an Iron Tool about six Inches in length, made turning at each end
about an Inch and an half; if it be steeled at either end, it will be the
better, and not so apt to bend when you open a strong stock: these ends are to
be made flat, a little like a Chisel, but not above half an Inch broad at most,
only pretty strong; if yon will, one end may be pretty small for the smaller
stocks, and the other bigger; the use of it is to supply the place of a Wedge,
by holding open your Stock till you have set your Graft or Cyen exactly in its
place in the Cleft of the Stock.

This represents the Form thereof.



Instead of this Instrument you may use a Wedge of hard wood, about a Foot
long, especially for great and large stocks.

You are also to have a sharp Penknife, to shape your Grafts or Cyens with,
and also a Whet-stone to quicken the edge of your Knives when dull, and a
Basket to carry your Tools in, and another to carry your Grafts or Cyens in:
Also you are to have Ruches, Bastes, or soft Flags, to bind Grafts or Buds to
the Stock. You may be furnished therewith at the Mat makers.

The manner of preparing clay: and how to clay grafts.
Also you must have Clay prepared with Horse-dung very well mixed and workt
together as Mortar, about two parts Clay: If it be not well tempered and
wrought together, it will be apt to fall from your Graft, in case of much wet,
or chop, or cleave if dry weather happen, and so you will lose your labor in
Grafting; for you must Clay your Grafts close on every side an Inch above the
top of the Stock, and an Inch below the bottom of the Clefts, that no Air get
in to wither the Graft; and keep Clay on the grafted part until the stock be
covered over with the Graft. For Clay is as a Salve to a Wound, which heals it
up, and it rather keeps out moisture than otherwise, if well closed; and also
preserves from dry winds, Sun, and other annoyances: Therefore keep on the Clay
a year or two, till the head of the stock be covered with the Graft, and the
cleft healed up.

Choice of Grafts or Cyens.
. 3. These Cyens or Grafts you get ought to be the last years Shoots, strong
and very well grown, that grow on the top or outside of a Tree, that several
years experience of those that know it, can faithfully assure you bears very
well, and good fruit of its kind; and cut not off the tops of the Cyens until
that you graft them, for so they will keep better; but immediately after
grafting, the tops of Grafts are to be cut at a Bud, that they may spread the
better, and of such as are but short, if there be Blossom-buds on the top, as
it is commonly seen in Pearmain-Cyens, and many other good bearing kinds. Grafts
that are very small and slender commonly fail, therefore choose the fairest,
fullest, and strongest shoot of the last years growth, and fullest of Buds, and
of good bearing kinds, else you may have fair Trees, and little or no Fruit on
them, and so fancy you have an Orchard, though seldom Fruit; for some Trees
will grow and blossom very well, yet rarely bear Fruits; the reason is, for
that they were grafted from bad bearing Trees, and are of bad bearing kinds.

A shoot or Branch of the year next foregoing makes the best Cyens or Graft,
and thrives best, though in Herefordshire, when they graft old Trees, they
commend and use Cyens of two or three years growth, yet those are seldom found
to have convenient Buds to put forth at, and often times have blossoming Buds
on them, and make not so good a growth, neither have they so good a joint to
graft at as those of the last year.

When you get Grafts, you had best cut off at least three Inches of that which
grew the year before with them, besides the last years Shoot, for so they will
keep the better, and you may use about an Inch and an half of that old Wood in
every Cyens when you Graft it.

Perhaps you may not have several sorts of Plums, Cherries, or Pears so near
you, as that you may get Buds fresh enough for Inoculation: In this case you
may procure Cyens, and graft them, and they will continue fresh, though you
should send for them from beyond Sea.

These Cyens or Grafts of any kind may be grafted immediately after they are
gotten, and that successfully; or they may be kept three Weeks or a Month
before they are used, and there ought to be a Fortnight or three Weeks betwixt
the time of their being cut, and their being grafted, that the Stocks in that
time may be replenished with Sap, and the Cyens more empty of it; and then they
will quicker incorporate by more greedily attracting the Sap out of the Stock.

To keep your Cyens or Grafts after they are cut, you need not, as some direct,
bury them in moist Mold; for this may be a means to make them swell and bud
forth by receiving moisture from the Earth; and then when by grafting they are
exposed to the cold open Air, they will be in danger to wither and die before
they have nourishment from the Stock. You may lay them in a dry house, so it be
near no heat, or under the shade of an old Tree or Hedge, and cover them all
over with dry Mold, that the Air may not have too much Influence upon them:
though they seem somewhat dry, yet if they cut with a fresh color, and be not
much withered, they will not grow the worse, but rather the better; yea some
that have seemed withered, being carried 70 or 80 Miles, have grown well. And
they may be carried hundreds of Miles in a Box of Mold, or their ends stuck in
Clay, or a Turnip, and wrapped about with green fresh Moss, that they bruise
not; bind not many together; for if so, those in the middle will dry, and be
spoiled in certain days, but rather lay them thin in the Mold.

Be very careful that the Buds be neither hurt or rubbed in the binding or
carriage of the said Grafts.

In providing Cyens or Grafts of Pears, Plums, and Cherries, you must cut them
in the beginning of February, having respect to the forwardness or backwardness
of the Spring, and the warmth or coldness of the Country you live in; but you
must be sure to cut them before the Buds have any speck of white appear on them.

Cyens or Grafts for Apple Trees will seldom be too forward any time before the
beginning of March.

Grafts of Cherry and Plum-Trees must be grafted soonest, because they bud
earliest, and you are to begin with them ere they bud forth, then with
Pear Trees, and lastly with Apple Trees.

Elect the fairest and largest Grafts on the top Branches of a Tree, and of the
last years growth, and on the Sun-side of the Tree, which will bear sooner than
those got on side-branches.

Of joints and height of grafting
. 4. There be some indifferent whether they graft at a joint or no, but
forecast to have a Bud directly behind the shoulder of the Cyen; if Cyens with
joints were scarce, you might practice so on small Stocks, that will speedily
be covered, but if Cyens can be had with joints, never graft with others, for
these will cover the Stocks sooner. However this is the opinion of many, yet I
always grafted at one of the lowest Buds on the thicker end of the last years
Shoot or Sprout, and valued not a joint of the former years growth, unless the
Graft were too short; for the straiter and smoother your Graft is, the more
exactly you may fit it to your Stock, especially if your Stock be young, and
have but a thin Sap, and this was very successful; however grafting at a joint
may do well if the Stock have a thick Sap or Bark, as commonly your Wood-stocks
and all large Trees have. The wood below the knot or seam is commonly crooked,
and not so smooth and straight as the wood below a Bud on the thicker end of
the last years Shoot; therefore rather graft at a Bud, because you may join the
Graft and Stock the more exactly.

Height to graft at.
. 5. If you Graft Apple or Pear-Cyens, graft a Foot or less from the ground; do
the like for Wall-trees and Dwarf-trees, but if you graft Cherry or Plum-Cyens,
for standards in Orchards or Fields, graft them six or seven Foot high, and at
that height let them begin to spread; and when you graft, cut the top of the
Cyen or Graft off close above a Bud, about four or five Inches above the
Shoulder, if it be for a Standard-tree, two Buds above the Clay being full
enough; but for Dwarfs or Wall-trees, you may let the Cyens or Grafts be six
Inches or more long, with several Buds, that they may shoot forth many Branches
and spread from the very Stock. If you Graft old Apple, or Pear Trees, or their
Branches, you must Graft according to the thickness of their Branches, which is
usually seven or eight Foot high or more. It will do well in Grafting Stocks
for large standards, to put but one Cyens or Graft into a Stock (unless the
Stock be very large, or an old Tree you Graft) and if it put forth several
Shoots, to cut off all but one, that is the straightest and strongest: But for
Dwarffs and Wallfruit, put in two Cyens if the Stock be big enough; let the
later be Grafted near the ground, the former at such height you think fit, and
the Stock will allow.

The size of stocks to be Grafted.
6. If the Plants that you removed out of the Seed-plot into the Nursery, and
such Stocks for Stone-Fruit in the Seed-plot as you intend to Graft, be half an
Inch over in thickness where they are to be Grafted, or little more, its
enough; Its best not to have them above an Inch in the Diameter, both that you
may lose no time, and that the Stock may be easier covered by the Cyen or
Graft. In the cleft you may Graft any Stock, that is a little above half an
Inch, to three Inches Diameter at the place to be Grafted at; but one Inch
Diameter of the Stock at the Grafted place is the best,

How to mark Trees to know and distinguish their kinds.
7. In Grafting or Inoculating its necessary to have some mark, to know what
kind of Fruit is put upon each Stock: If you Graft many of one kind, (as it is
necessary for Cyder-Fruit) you may observe to make every row to consist but of
one kind, and it is but entering in a Book, that such a row has such a kind of
Fruit in it, and no other; but where there are several in one row, there may be
a Stake knocked into the ground, at the beginning of every new sort, and so
entered in your Book; and where you have very few of a kind (or for the whole
Nursery if you please) you may make marks of several figures or shapes in the
Bark of the Stocks, which marks enter in your Book, and what kind it denotes,
and at two or three years when you remove it, the mark will be very visible,
and by renewing the marks sometimes, you may continue it as long as you please;
and if any Tree be stolen, you may own it by the mark, which is made with the
point of a Penknife by cutting almost through the Bark of the Stock, the form
of a Letter or any other figure or character whereby to know the kinds of
Fruits.

Buds on the Stock at Grafting not to be pulled off until the Gr^ft put forth.
8. Buds upon the Stocks that are engrafted, should be let alone, all or most
of them, until the Grafts have put forth Buds of their own, and be able to
draw up the Sap out of the Stock, and then rub off all the Buds on the Stock,
below the Grafts, that they may have all the Sap.

9. Stocks that are white, when you Graft them will seldom make the Graft to
grow well and prosper; the whiteness being caused through the barrenness of the
Soil, and observe what length the Stock did shoot out Sprouts the foregoing
year, and commonly so long will the Graft shoot out, or more, if it take well.

CHAP. III. How to Graft several ways.
. 1. THere are several ways of Grafting and all good, if Judiciously and
dexterously performed: To which end, I shall endeavor to set down the most
plain and exact description of each way, for the better and truer information
of the young Planter, and first begin with that called slicing, or Packing on,
which being described at large, may serve as a General direction for all.

Grafting called Slicing, or Packing on.
. 1. Cut off the top of Stock, in some smooth and straight place, that may be
Answerable to the straightness of the Graft, when set on. If you do it with a
Hand-saw, cut it smooth afterward with a Knife, leaving the top flat and even.

Then prepare your Cyen or Graft, (first observing which side is straightest at
the bottom or thicker end, that so it may fit the straight part of the Stock
when set on) by cutting the Graft or Cyen on one side only, from the Joint,
Knot, or Seam, if the part below it be smooth and straight; (the Knot or Seam
is a Circle round about the Graft, dividing and distinguishing the last Summers
growth from the former) or from some one Bud on the lower part of the last
years Shoot, or Sprout, down slopewise in the Wood till it be cut quite off, in
that the slope may be about an Inch long or something more, observing it is bent,
that when the Graft or Cyen is fixed to the Stock, it may stand almost upright;
and cut the Graft or Cyen thin at the bottom of cut place, yet leave on all the
Bark on the opposite side; then give a cut cross through the Bark at the top of
the Slope, and then cut a thin Chip of that Slope upward to the cross cut, that
there may be a shoulder to rest on the top of the Stock, but cut not this
shoulder too deep, little more than through the Bark will be enough, and this
will cause a little rising in the Sloped part, which you must cut down, that
the whole Slope may be plain and smooth, without dints or risings, and lie even
and close to the side of the Stock. Cut then the top of the Cyen off, close
above a Bud, about four Inches above the shoulder if it be for a Standard-tree,
two Buds above the Clay being full enough; but for Dwarf, or Wall-trees, you
may let the Cyen or Graft be six Inches long with several Buds, that they may
shoot forth many Branches, and spread from the very Stock.

The Cyen or Graft thus prepared, lay the cut part of the Cyen or Graft upon
the straight side of the Stock, and if it may be, on the West, or South-west
side of the Stock, and so measure and mark the just length and breadth of; it
then cut away so much of the Bark of the Stock, as the cut part of the Cyen or
Graft may fit, drawing your Knife upwards; but as the Stock is bigger, and the
Bark thicker than that on the Cyen, or Graft, so the Chip must be longer and
broader, or else the passage of the Sap in the Stock and Cyen or Graft (which is
chiesly betwixt the Bark and the wood) will not meet together, which should and
must be aimed at, as in the work you will easily see.

Then lay the cut part of the Cyen or Graft on the cut part of the Stock, and
let the shoulder of the Graft or Cyen rest directly upon the top of the Stock,
so that the cut parts of both may join even and smooth all along, and so bind
them together close, with course woollen Yarn, Basses, or the inward peeling of
the Witch-tree, if you bind with such materials as will not be loose or rotten
by Midsummer; about that time give the binding a cut cross-wise with a Knife to
set the prisoners at liberty: Have in readiness some Clay free from stones,
well mixed with Horse-dung, etc. ( Vide Chap. 2. Sect. 2.) and daub it about the
Stock and Cyen, an Inch above the head of the Stock, and an Inch below the
bottom of the Cyen or Graft; work it up round the Cyen or Graft till it be
sharp at the top, that the Rainwater may fall better off it; and with a Knife
or rather a little Trowel dipped in water, smooth over the Clay, but in doing
this, be very careful not to displease the Cyen or Graft.

Thus you may Graft Pears, Plums, Cherries, and Apples, if it be before the
Bark of the Stock will part from the wood of them, for when it will, the next
way following is better for Aples.

Grafting in the Back or Rind.
. 2. The second way called Grafting in the Bark is much like this, and some
prefer it before the beformentioned, or any other way; but it can only be used
for Apples, because all Cyens of other Fruit, will be grown past use, before
the Bark of the Stock will peel, which is about the end of March or beginning
of April, but this will be time enough for Apples if your Stocks be in any
thing good liking, which if they be not, they are not fit to be Grafted any
way: Prepare then your Stock and Cyen or Graft, exactly as your were directed
in Packing, only instead of cutting the Bark of the Stock, slit it on the
South-west side, from the top, almost as long as the sloped part of the Cyen,
and loosen the Bark at the top of the slit with the point of your Knife.

Have in readiness a little Instrument made of Ivory, or of a Deer or
Sheep-shanck or Silver, or of some hard smooth wood; at one end let it be made
of the shape of the slope part of the Cyen, but much less every way; thrust it
down betwixt the Bark and wood of the Stock where it was slit, to make room for
the Cyen or Graft, Some peel off the outmost thin, brown rind of the Graft, on
the opposite side to the cut and slope part of the Graft, that must enter
between the Bark of the Stock and wood, but leave on all the inner green rind,
and then thrust the Graftdown between the wood and Bark of the Stock which does
very well.
then take it out and put in the Cyen, but first cut a little of the Bark at
the thin end of the slope of the Cyen or Graft, that it double not in going
down, yet leave it with a sharp edge; and because when your Cyen is put in, it
will bear the Bark hollow from the Stock, nick or slit the Bark, on each side
the Cyen, so that it may fall close to the Stock, and to the edges of the Cyen;
bind and Clay it as before.

This way of Grafting is commended by some, as Mr. Langford, tho others
disapprove thereof; yet I have Grafted large Stocks often this way, and very
successfully, but with small Stocks I seldom had the desired Success, tho as
careful in the operation as possible; but the first way I take to be the best
for them, for these reasons.

I. Because Stocks may be Grafted so, some years before they can be ready to
Graft in the Cleft, and though Whip-grafting may be used sooner than that way,
yet there are other great inconveniences attending it.

II. The Stocks this way are less harmed than where a Cleft is used, because
the Cleft lets wet into them, and rots and makes them not so fit for Grafting
again, (if any fail to grow the first time) as these continue to be, though
they should once miscarry.

III. The Cyen will much sooner cover the Stock and make a more sound,
healthful and swifter growing Tree.

IV. This is more speedy, easy, and sure to succeed. Therefore if the Stock
exceed three Inches Diameter at the place it is cut off, the best way is to
Graft in the Rind or Bark, and you may set many Grafts round the Stock, and
they will sooner cover the Stock; but if the Stock be from one Inch to three
Inches Diameter, then Graft in the Cleft; if under one Inch Diameter, then by
slicing, Packing on, or Whip-grafting.

Grafting in the Rind is attended with some inconvenience; for the Grafts
usually make large Shoots the first Year, which in case the Wind happen to blow
strongly on the opposite side of the Stock where the Graft is, commonly it is
broken off, having as yet no other hold than in the Bark or Rind, and being top
heavy with all, is easily broken: but after one Year the danger is past,
because that which grows so plentifully at the joining of the Graft and Stock
the first Year being but sappy Rind, the next Year is converted into solid
Wood. Some well approve by their experience the Grafting Stocks above three
Inches Diameter, by placing two Grafts opposite to each other in the Cleft, and
other two opposite to each other in the Bark, so that you may place four Grafts
in such a large Stock, and they will soon cover the Stocks head.

. 3. There is another way of Grafting small Stocks called Whip-grafting;
Whip-grafting.
and here your Graft or Cyen, and Stock ought to be exactly of the same bigness
as the manner of performing it plainly shows, viz. Slope off the Cyen or Graft
a full Inch or longer, and do the like to the Stock, and tie the one upon the
other; both the Stock and Cyen ought to be cut at the smoothest and straightest
place. You may if you will make a Shoulder on the Cyen, and cut the top of the
Stock to suit with it, and then bind them together, and Clay them about the
place. If you join the Inner Bark of the Cyen and Stock exactly together at
either side, it will grow, tho not so well as where the Cyen and Stock are of
an equal proportion.

This way called Whip-grafting, is successful enough, so that special care be
taken that both Stock and Cyen suit exactly where they are joined together,
which is somewhat troublesome to do; and so is it to find Cyens and Stocks of
an equal bigness; besides the head will be apt to overgrow the Stocks; all that
can be done to prevent it, is to Graft these very low; or if high to give the
Stock more liberty to thicken by slitting the Bark of it with a Knife almost to
the wood.

In this way of Grafting there is another little Knack may be added to very
good purpose, and that is, when the Stock and Cyen are prepared (as you heard
before) to be joined together, to make a slit, or Notch with a Knife in the
bare place of the Stock downward, beginning toward the top of the slope, and
so slitting or Notching it a little way, and doing the like in the sloped face
of the Cyen, but beginning at the same distance from the lower end of it, as
you did before from the top of the Stock, and so carrying it upwards, and then
join them by thrusting the one slice into the other, till the bare place of the
Cyen cover the bare place of the Stock.

This may be done likewise in Grafting by Packing, and in both conduces much to
strengthen the work, and is called by some Lipping, or Tounging.

In Whip-grafting the cut parts both of the Graft and Stock, must join and
answer one another from the top to the bottom.

This way of Whip-grafting is commended by some, not only for the same reason
as slitting or Packing on is, but also because the Graft soon covers the Stock,
which is not impaired by slitting or cleaving, and the Graft having it is Wood,
as well as it is Rind bound to the Stock, is not so apt to break off, as that
which is Grafted only in the Rind, nor is the Graft apt to be top heavy, the
Stocks being smaller afford not so plentiful Nourishment.

Grafting in the Cleft or slit.
. 4. The next way of Grafting is called Grafting in the Cleft, which is the
most Ancient and common way of Grafting, and if carefully managed, not inferior
to any other way of Grafting, tho the modern Planters do something slight it:
You may Graft any Stock this way, from half an Inch to three Inches Diameter,
and that if the Stock be no bigger than the Graft too, if you have neat Tools,
and be ready in the managery thereof, and with good success, as I have
frequently experienced. The manner is thus, viz.

Cut off the top of the Stock in some smooth and striaght place, that may be
answaerble to the straightness of the Graft that is put into the Cleft; if you
do it with a Hand-saw, cut it smooth afterward with a Knife, leaving the top
flat and even.

Then cleave the Stock with a strong Knife, (or the Chisel before described at
Sect. 2. in Chap. 2.) Let the slit run about two Inches deep, and let it be as
near the middle of the Stock as you can, but not in the Pith or heart, and let
the slit be on the somothest sides of the Stock. Have in readiness the Steel
Iinstrument before mentioned at Chap. 2. Sect. 2, or else a Stick of hard Wood
near a foot long, at one end made like a Wedge; when you have taken out the
Cleaver, put one end of the Instrument, or else the Wedge into the slit or cleft
of the Stock, and open it so wide as to put in the Cyen, when it is prepared,
and made ready for that purpose.

Which is by cutting the Graft or Cyen from the joint, knot, or seam, if it be
straight, or else from some Bad on the thicker end of the last years Shoot or
Sprout down aslope on both Sides, The slope cut off the Graft should be an Inch
and half long at least, if the Stock be big enough to allow it.
something more than an Inch long, making it thin at the bottom, and in shape
like a Wedge, very smooth and even without dints or risings, that it may join
close all along; so far as it goes into the Cleft of the Stock, let the outside
of the Graft or Cyen be somewhat thicker than the inner side, unless the Stock
be so big as to pinch the Cyen or Graft much, then make the Cyen or Graft as
thick on that side that goes into the Stock as on the outside, which will
prevent the Stocks hurting the Sappy part, and Bark of the Cyen or Graft, by
preserving the outside from being pinched too much.

You may let the Graft or Cyen have on the uppermost part of the slope, a
shoulder on one side, or both, or neither; all these ways are used, but
shouldering takes up more time, and makes the Cyen or Graft weaker, and so
apter by chance to be broke off; then with your sharp Penknife cut away any
Jags, or roughness, or blackness that remains after cleaving, on each side of
the Cleft of the Stock within, and so put in either one, or two Cyens or
Grafts; if the Stock be large, place them so as the passage of the Sap betwixt
the Bark and Wood both of the Stock, and Cyen or Graft may meet and join all
along the Cleft as near as you can; for you must be sure always to join the
inner side of the Bark of the Cyen or Graft to the inner side of the Bark of
the Stock all along the Cleft, that the Sap may come out of the Stock to feed
the Graft and make it grow.

The Graft being thus placed in the Stock draw forth the Instrument, or Wedge,
and Clay them close on every side, and an Inch above the top of the Stock, and
an Inch below the bottom of the Cleft, and keep Clay on about the Grafted part
until the Stock be covered with the Graft, and it will be the sounder Tree.

If you put but one Graft or Cyen in (which is best unless the Stock be large,)
then cut off a piece with a slope cut from the top of the Stock about an Inch
and half deep on the worst side of the Stock, the Graft being to be put on the
straightest and smoothest side, in cutting the Stock thus, the Graft will cover
over the sooner.

Many cleave big Stocks crosswise again, and put in two more Cyens; but
cleaving hurts the Stocks so much that it is better (if you will have more than
two Cyens in one Stock) Graft the other two in the Bark, according to the
second way of Grafting, but forecasting one of them to be on the West side of
the Stock; But two Grafts are enough for any Stock.

It Is an Erroneous practice to set the outside of the Stock and Graft even and
smooth; because the Bark of a big Stock is much thicker than the Bark of a
slender Graft, and consequently if the outside be smooth and even, the inside
must needs be uneven, but where the Graft and Stock are almost of an equal
proportion, there you may set them smooth on the outside, but where the Stock
is large, set the cut part of the Graft more inward into the Cleft of the Stock.

When you cut Grafts it is very convenient to leave a Bud or two on the outside
of the cut place, that in case any of the Grafts happen to be broken off, such
Bud or Buds on the outside, will spring out, and supply the defect, although the
Graft be broken off, even to the top of the Stock; or you may leave the Bud
just at the shoulder where the Graft joins to the top of the Stock, and it will
answer the said intentions.

The only objection that is raised against Grafting in the Cleft, is, that the
Stock being slit or cloven, the Rain is apt to get in and decay the Stock, and
sometimes the Graft too, therefore caution must be used, not only the first
year, but until the head of the Stock be covered with the Graft, to keep well
tempered Clay on the Grafted part both, of Cyen and Stock, and that as far as
the Cleft extends it self, to keep out both Wet and Air.

I have Grafted this way Stocks from half an Inch to above three Inches
Diameter, and that very succesfully, observing the aforesaid rules, but a Stock
of about an Inch Diameter is the best to use in this way of Grafting, which I
like as well as any other, notwithstanding the opinion of all modern Planters
is to the contrary.

There is one small observation necessary to be noted in Cleft-Grafting, and of
no little concernment to make Grafts thrive well, which is to cut the Graft so
as to be set as deep into the Stock as possible, so as the Stock be not clove
too far, which is by making the cut part of the Graft to be an Inch and half
long, or longer if the Stock be large, and thereby the Graft will attract more
Sap, and make a larger Graft by much, than one cut but short from the Knot,
Seam, or Bud. Therefore for that end make the cut part of the Graft an Inch and
half long at least.

Side grafting.
. 5. Side-Grafting is done by preparing the Cyen or Graft as in Whip-grafting,
then without cutting off the head of the Stock, (but making it thin of
side-Branches) from a smooth Place of it on the West side, take off as much
Bark as the Cyen will cover, as in Packing, and slit both Cyen and Stock
accordingly as is directed in the third Sect. and fix them together
accordingly; bind it close, and Clay it.

If it grow at a years end cut off the top of the Stock at the Grafted Place
slopewise, and Clay it.

Some done thus grow well, but suffer not the top of the Stock much to overgrow
the Cyen the first year before it is cut quite off.

Some use another way, that is, to slit the Bark of the Stock in the form of a
great T, and loosning it with the point of a Knife, and then clapping in a
Cyen, prepared as has been said before, (but without the slit for Lipping)
bind and Clay it; this can be only used when the Bark will part from the Stock.

Grefting by Approach.
. 6. There is another way called Grafting by Approach, Ablactation, or
Enarching, which is by having a Stock or Stocks grow so near another Tree,
whose Fruit you would propagate, that the Stock and the Branch of that Tree may
be joined together in the manner following.

Cut the side of the Branch, and of the Stock (where they will meet) about
three Inches in length, till you come near the Pith of each, and fit them both
together, that the passage of the Sap may join, and the green inner side of the
Bark of the Stock and Tree; in which posture bind and Clay them: As Soon as you
find the Cyen and Stock to be well cemented together, cut off the head of the
Stock about four Inches above the binding, and in March following, cut off the
Stub you left of the Stock, and also the Cyen underneath, close to the Grafted
place, that it may subsist by the Stock only.

It is also used to be done by cutting off the head of the Stock at first, and
slopeing half off about two Inches long, and joining the Cyen thereunto, being
cut accordingly.

This manner of Grafting is unnecessary, and scarsly practicable in common
Fruit Trees, but for Oranges, Lemons, Pomgranats, Vines, Jessamines and such
like Shrubs, it may be used. Also it is said that Trees of different kinds will
sooner take this way than any other.

. 7. I once saw a man Graft half a dozen small Stocks thus; After he had cut
off the top of the Stock, he cut it on each side from the top a slope about an
Inch and half, directly like a Wedg reverst, then he clove with his Penknife
the Graft from the bottom in the middle of the Graft an Inch and half, then he
placed this Graft on the S^ock, one side of the Graft on one side of the Stock,
and the other on the other, but joined Sap to Sap, and then bound and Clayd it;
these Grafts took well, and it is an easy way of Grafting.

. 8. Some have an Iron Instrument made for the purpose, which will make a Nick
or Notch in the Stock up to it is head, an Inch and half long through the Bark,
and some depth into the Wood, in form of an v, or rather after this form, V,
then fit the Graft, and put it into the Noch, joying Sap to Sap, and bind them
together with Bass, and Clay them. This way is much commended.

CHAP. IV. Of Inoculating.
. 1. INoculating is the taking off a Bud from one Tree, and putting it between
the Bark and the Wood of another Tree or Stock; the end and intention is the
same with other ways of Grafting; and moreover by this way, diverse sorts of
Fruits, which are not apt to take or grow by ordinary ways of Grafting, are by
this easily increased.

The manner of Inoculating.
. 2. About a fortnight before or after Midsummer (which is the best time,
though it may be done from the beginning of May until August) when you have
pitched upon such Stocks as are fit to be Inoculated, to get the Bud from,
choose out a strong and well liking Branch, or Shoot of that years growth, upon
a Tree that bears exceeding well, and such kind of Fruits as you would by this
operation produce, and about the mid le, or lower end of it, (for the top will
be too tender) fix upon a leaf that has a fresh and fair Bud growing out
betwixt it and the Bark, and about half an Inch below and above the Bud, cut
off the Branch, and so you will have a piece of it about an Inch long
remaining, with a Bud and Leaf on, this you must cleave just through the midst,
so as the Bud may be directly in the middle of the one half; and then snip off
a part of the Leaf; and holding it by the remainder, clap it to a smooth
Straight place on the Stock, and with a Penknife score out, on each side of
it, so much of the Stock as it covers, or rather a little broader, (because
when the Bark on which the Bud is, is taken off from it is own Wood, and applied
to the Stock, it will cover a wider space of the Stock than it did before)
After you have thus marked your Stock, withdraw the Cyen again, and cut the
Bark through where you had marked it; then cut the Bark cross and straight from
the uppermost end of one score to the upper end of the other, and cut the Bark
again cross and straight from one score to the other, but not so low as the
Lower ends of the scores, by a quarter of an Inch; then take the oblong square
piece of Bark, that is cut on every side, quite off the Stock, and raise up
that part of the Bark that remains betwixt the side-scores at the bottom of the
work, from the Wood, till you come to the lower end of the side-scores.

Take then a Goose-quill, cut in the fashion of an Apple-scoop, or scraper, and
having with your Nail a little loosned the upper part of that Bark that is on
the Cyen, thrust the Quill betwixt the Bark and the Wood, that it may separate
them, and take off with the Bark a little Wood or Root of the Bud over against
it: If you see a hole on the inside over against the Bud, when you have taken
the Bark off, cast it away, that little labor is lost, and try another till
you find it otherwise.

Then put in the lower end of that Bark or Cyen betwixt the Bark that was
raised on the Stock and the Wood, and so bind it on the Stock gently with
Woollen-yarn, or narrow Shreds of Linen Cloth, or gentle Stuff, or with
Basses, or Bast, of which the Russia Matts are made, but so that the Cyen may
Lie close to the Wood of the Stock that was made bare, and have an especial
care that you hurt not the Bud.

. 3. There are some other ways of Inoculating used, differing only in the
manner of the cut, both in the Bark of the Stock, and of the Cyen.

And first, some proceeding in all other things, as is before directed, cut the
Bark out of the whole length of the side-scores, and apply the Cyen to the
disbarked place.

. 4. Others cut one slit only down the Bark of the Stock, and another cross the
the top of it, like a great T, when this is done, they prepare the Cyen or Bark
as before directed (only cutting it sharp pointed at the lower end before they
take the Bud off it is Wood) Then raise the Bark of the Stock up on each side
the slit, and put in the Cyen, beginning at the top and sliding it downward
gently, and let the top of the Bud join close to the cross-cut in the upper
end, and so bind the Bark gently upon it, but not just upon the Bud: This is
the common way used by Gardiners.

. 5. Others make the cross-cut in the middle of the downright score on the
Stock, and lifting up the four corners of the Bark, and making the Cyen sharp
at both ends, put it under the Bark of the Stock at both ends, and then bind
it; but in doing this, there is danger of hurting the Bud or Cyen.

. 6. Mr. Rea commends the making the cross-cut at the lower end of the
downright cut, and having opened the sides, put in the Cyen upwards, being made
sharp at the upper end only.

You must be nimble and quick in Inoculating, and preparing the Bud, else the
Air by sudden drying the Bud or Cyen and the cut part of the Stock will much be
hurt.

Thus much to satisfy the curiosity of such as have a mind to make trial of
every way, but the first is esteemed best.

Necessary rules and observations on Inoculaing.
. 7. Lest one Bud fail, or any mischance break it, put two in every Stock, but
not directly under one another on the same side of the Stock. The Branch or
Shoot, you cut one Cyen off may yield you several.

. 8. About a Month after the Inoculating, or sooner if you perceive the Bark
swell where the binding is, cut off the binding.

If it grow it will fix to the Stock, keep it is color, and that part of the
Leaf and Stalk that was left, will drop off, and the Bud appear fair; Then
sometime before the next Spring, cut off the top of the Stock a hands breath
above the place it was Inoculated at, and all the side-branches that grow any
where upon the Stock; and at Spring the Bud will put forth; and if any other
Sprouts or Buds appear on the Stock, cut them off.

. 9. If the first Inoculation fail, or the Buds dye, the Stocks may be
Inoculated again the next Summer, and of such as are Inoculated timely in the
year, it may be sometimes seen whether they grow or not, time enough to
Inoculate them again the same year.

. 10. Apricocks will have Buds ready sooner than other Fruit, so that you may
begin with them and follow with the other.

. 11. Stocks raised of Peach-stones are commonly big enough to be Inoculated
the second Summer, sometimes the First after they are set: when they or any
other stocks are an Inch and half in compass, or thereabouts, they are big
enough to be Inoculated.

. 12. Those you intend for Wall or Dwarf-trees, are to be Inoculated within a
handful of the ground, and not Pruned at all, till you remove them, and then
you will better see what is necessary to be cut off; and these you may remove
after one years growth, or two, with more safety.

If you Inoculate any Plums, Pears, Cherries, or other Fruit, that you intend
for an Orchard, or other place for tall Standards, you may do it higher on the
Stocks, viz. six or seven foot high, and Prune these up in the Nursery, and let
them grow there, two or three years (according as they grow in hight) before
they be removed.

. 13. After Stocks that are Inoculated have made one or two years growth, you
must cut off the head of the Stock, that remained above the Bud: At your first
cutting it, cut it close to the new Branches, that it may grow over the cut;
let it be cut a little slope, and Clay'd over, if you desire the Branch should
quickly cover it; and the sooner it does the better.

. 14. Care must be had in choosing Branches or Shoots from which you are to
have your Buds, that they be of Shoots of the same years growth you Inoculate;
and of strong growth, the Bark firm, and not spungy; suffer them to fade as
little as may be before you use them; and the Shoots must be got from Trees
that your own or others experience can faithfully assure you not only to be
good Fruit, but very good bearers; and if the Fruit you design to raise, be at
such a distance that you cannot have Buds to Inoculate the same day they are
cut, put them in wet Moss or Grass in a Box, and so they will keep a day and a
night very well. But if by carriage in the Air or otherwise they are a little
withered, you may revive them by setting them in water, which will make the
Buds come cleaner from the Wood.

. 15. Nectarins, Peaches, and Apricocks are seldom raised otherwise than by
Inoculation; because they will rarely or never grow by Grafting; but Pears,
Cherries, or Plums take and grow full as well by Grafting as Inoculation. The
Bark of Cyens taken from some Plums, is so tender and spungy they will often
miscarry when Inoculated: such one be sure to raise rather by Grafting, tho
many Plums will hit very well being Inoculated.

Cyens of Apples fail for the most part, when you Inoculate Buds of them,
because their Bark is tender, and Buds weak.

Cherries and Pears take very sure being Inoculated on young fresh Stocks,
whose Bark is not very thick.

. 16. Upon consideration of all, I advise the Planter to raise all his
Fruit Trees by Grafting, as being both the surest and easiest way; only his
Peaches, Nectarins, and Apricocks can be propagated only by Inoculating; yet
where Inoculating succeeds well, it is esteemed and preferred before Grafting,
for the following reasons. 1. Because the Stock will be big enough to Inoculate
by two or three years sooner than to Graft, and your Plant grows much faster
after the nature is so altered than it did before, and will be sooner ready to
transplant than if it be suffered to grow two or three years longer, as it must
be before it be ready to be Grafted. 2. It makes a sounder Tree than one that
is Grafted, especially in the Cleft; because it covers the Stock speedily and
well. 3. It hurts not the Stock so much as Grafting; and if it chance to fail,
it may be Inoculated next year again, and sometimes the same year. 4. Some look
upon Inoculating to be more speedy, easy and delightsome than Grafting, and may
be practiced by Gentlemen, who in June may lie on the ground and do it; whereof
they cannot so well bear the cold without danger of taking hurt in February, or
March, which is the choice of Grafting season.

If you do Inoculate any Buds of Pear, Cherry, or Plum, let the Shoots be very
strong and large, but you had better Graft them.

. 17. Not only the Pith, but also the Wood of the Bud is cast away in
Inoculating, and nothing made use of but the Buds and Bark of any young Shoot,
and yet they bring forth the same Fruit as the Tree whence they are got.

. 18. It Is debated among Planters what time of the day is best for Inoculating;
Time of the day to Inoculate.
some persons argue stiffly for the morning; because there pasleth up much more
Sap or juice in the daytime than in the night, as they observe in piercing the
Birch-Tree, and other Trees to get the liquor out of them for Physical uses;
and consequently the Bud Inoculated in the morning, must be more likely to
grow, having the whole days plenty of Sap to invite it to unite with the Stock,
than if it be Inoculated late in the day, and so must be discouraged in it is
new habitation by the niggardly provision of the nights Sap.

If you follow this advice, you had best wrap some broad Leaves or Fern about
the Stock; so as to shade the Cyen from the Scorching heat of the day
following, to prevent it is drying before the Stock has undertaken the charge
of preserving it.

But this work may be done in the heat of the day, if the heat be not violent,
and then you must (as at all times you ought) be very quick in the doing of it.

And for all that has been said before, the afternoon may be as good a time as
any; because if the Bud have less liquor afforded it in the night, then the
coolness of that time makes it less thirsty; and as it is thirst increases by
the heat of the next day, a more plentiful Stream will be very seasonable to
satisfy it.

CHAP. V. Of Pruning Fruit Trees.
. 1. AFter Grafts have had their full growth the first year, they must be
Pruned, such as need it; Those that are Grafted low and yet must be made
Standards, or tall Trees, leave only one Shoot, the strongest and biggest, and
let not that Shoot begin to spread until it be seven foot high at least;
therefore cut off all the sidebranches, till they are grown to the hight you
desire. If to spread low, let some be left on each side, that the boughs on any
one side may grow straight upright. As for Wall-plants it is no matter of how
many Branches they spread, the more the better. Now unless young Grafts put
forth a strong and lusty Shoot, Prune not off all the side-branches, lest the
body of the Plant be too small and limber to bear his head; therefore if the
body be very slender suffer some of the side-twigs to grow, until the Body be
of a sufficient strength to bear the top, and from year to year Prune off those
Shoots and Branches as are superfluous, and grow too near one another,
interfere, fret and gall each other, and preserve only such as are fit to make
the Tree of a comely form; and suffer them not the first three years (at least)
to grow thick and bushy-headed, by cutting off some of the inside-shoots, and
such as grow cross one another, or pendent.

. 2. What you cut off the Body, or any Branch, do it close and even, that the
Bark may grow over it.

. 3. If you cut part of any Shoot, or of a Cyen for Grafting, cut it close at a
Bud, that the cut may be covered with a fresh Sprig, and the wound may again
grow up, and a Stub-end not be left behind.

. 4. At what hight soever, or wheresoever you would have the Tree, or any
Branch, or Shoot to spread, there top it, that is cut off a Bud, an Inch of the
very top close at a Bud, and there it will spread.

. 5. When Trees grow big that a Knife will not Prune them, use the broad Chisel
(mentioned in Chap. 2. Sect. 2.) with which, and a Mallet, you may take off a
Bough or large Branch, as you will, without either hurting the Bark of the
Tree, by cutting too near, or leaving a Stump, by not cutting near enough; one
of which is not easily avoided by the chance blows of an Ax, or Hatchet, and
being amongst thick boughs your Chisel and Mallet will be more governable than
other Instruments; If the boughs are very large you may use a Saw first, and
then smooth it with the Chisel.

. 6. Trees growing in Orchards, Fields, or Hedges, etc. must be Pruned from
year to year as need is, in November, or December, by cutting off superfluous
Branches and such as cross one another, and grow too close; leave no dead Twigs
or Branches, and scrape off the Moss on the body, or Branches of the Tree.

. 7. Concerning the Pruning and ordering of Wall-trees, see hereafter, Chap.
10. And you must not Prune those Plants you intend for the Wall, until
transplanted and set at the Wall.

. 8. Prune not much and often, if you love Fruit more than a Tree to thrive in
Wood; therefore whilst your Tree is young, bring it unto a handsome shape and
order, and when it comes to beat Fruit forbear Pruning, unless in case of
broken, or such boughs as grow cross, or gall, or fret others.

Touching the height of Fruit Trees.
. 9. And here I must beg leave to thwart and contradict the opinions of all our
modern Planters, who applaud the making Trees not to be above an ell high
before they spread: Their reasons are these that follow. 1. Because the low
Trees sooner attain to be Fruit-bearing Trees, and grow fairer than the tall;
the Sap and juice wasting in its long ball and passage, which in the shorter
Trees expends it self soon in the Branches. 2. You may Plant more of them in
the like quantity of Land, because the shadow of the one Tree does not reach
the ground of the other, as that of the tall Tree does. 3. The lower and broad
spreading Tree is the greater bearer, by reason the blossoms in the Spring are
not so obvious to the bitter Blasts, nor the Fruit in the Autumn to the fierce
and destructive Winds. 4. Fruits are more easily gathered from a low than a
tall Tree, beating or shaking down Fruit from such Trees being to be rejected
by all judicious Cyderists. 5. Any Fruit on a low well spread Tree, is better
and fairer than that on a tall Tree, by the same reason that the Tree is
fairer, because the Sap is not so much wasted in the low and humble Tree, as in
the tall and lofty by its large Trunck.


Notwithstanding these reasons seem plausible, yet experience assures, that a
Tree of a reasonable height (I mean not high like Timber Trees) bears as well
as the lower, and if you observe a due distance, which ought to be, the shade
will not be injurious; and tho Fruit on a low Tree is easily gathered, yet the
other may be with some little pains gathered well enough.

But if you design to use the Land under, or about the Trees you plant, either
in Orchard, Field, or Hedge, for the Sith, Spade, or Grasing of Cattle
especially, let your Trees be seven foot high at least before they begin to
spread, because you can scarce so cautiously preserve them, but Cattle will
sometime or other get into your Orchard, and then they will not a little
endamage your Fruit Trees, if low, by nipping off the Buds of all boughs within
their reach; and if you chance to farm the Orchard, your Tenants in despite of
all Covenants to the contrary, will either be negligent, malicious, or so
covetous as to permit Cattle to Graze in the Orchard, to your no little damage,
which by letting them be seven foot high before they begin to spread, will be
infallibly prevented. But where you intend Trees for Table-fruit to he set in
the Borders of Gardens or Walks, there you may let them spread within an ell
and less of the Earth, as you shall hereafter be more fully instructed.

. 10. In Pruning Trees be cautious of cutting off the small Sprigs, which are
the more apt to bear Fruit, it being too usual for ignorant Planters, to
beautify their Trees, by taking off these superfluous branches (as they term
them) whereby they deprive themselves of the Furit.

. 11. Cherry-trees must be Grafted at the hight you would have them spread,
about six or seven Foot high, unless for the Wall, and then within a Foot of
the ground.

. 12. Prune the Heads of some sort of Trees that have but small Pith as
Apple Trees, Pear Trees, etc. when you remove them, to proportion the Branch
and Root as near as you can; but Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, Walnut-trees, etc.
that have a large Pith are not to be top't, only some of the side Branches may
be taken away.

If you cut part of any Shoot, or a Cyen for Grafting, cut it close at a Bud or
Sprig, and the wound will again grow up, and a Stub end not left behind.

CHAP. VI. Touching the Distance of Fruit Trees.
Distance of Orchard-trees.
. 1. THe distance of Trees in Orchards ought not to be less than eight Yards,
neither need it be more than 13, or 14; the richer the Land is, the greater
distance you ought to set the Trees at from one another, to which you ought to
have respect, and also to the kinds of Fruit Trees you plant; for some Trees
take up more room than others, as most Apple Trees more than Pear Trees, and
some Apple Trees more than others, according to their aptness to grow more or
less, too tedious and difficult to be here related; only the Red-streak being
Generally a desired Fruit, you may take notice that it is one of the least
Apple Trees; where it yields the best Cider, sometimes it is almost but a Shrub,
the Winter Pear-main, Golden-renating, and John-apple, are Trees that spread
not much, but the Gregory-pippin, a Fruit-Tree in Lancashire, is a mighty
spreader, even on course Land, grows well and quickly, and is an excellent
Fruit for any use, and the Trees great bearers, and the Fruit will easily keep
until the following May.

. 2 As to the distance Wall-fruit-trees are to be set at, Distance of
Wall-trees.
where they are to grow, you may learn that best by considering their aptness
to spread; Apricocks and some other kinds of Plums spread most, the May
Cherry^, and some others are of a very small growth, it is impossible to give
Rules for all, but the general distance is about four yards asunder.

Cherry and Codling Hedge distances.
. 3. Of late times it is used to make Cherry-hedges in Gardens and Orchards, and
Hedges of Codlings, Nurs-gardens, Plums, and such like Trees that may be kept
by cutting and plaishing one Branch within another, and from growing very
large; these are usually made along the side of Walks, or round about a
Garden-plot, and are Ornamental to a Garden being ordered and kept handsomely.

Trees for these purposes are to be set about a yard, or an ell asunder; for
they should near meet the first year, and should be thus ordered, viz. stretch
a line from one end to the other where the Hedge is to be made, and set the
Trees straight at the distance aforesaid: Afterward knock down a Stake betwixt
each Tree, then having straight long Rods, or Poles of Ash, or the like; tie a
row of them from one end to the other (about a foot from the ground) fast to
the Stakes with Osiers, or such like, or else nail them, which is better, and
another row of Rods a foot above them, and so a third if need be, according to
the height of the young Plants; Having thus done spread and tie the Branches of
the Twigs of the Trees in order to the Poles, but not too hard, and draw and
fasten some of them down close to the ground, that so there may be Blossoms and
Fruit from the bottom to the top, which will be a beautiful sight in the Spring
and Summer: Then after a few years the Stakes and Poles may be taken away, and
the Branches platted and woven one within another from year to year, and the
superfluous ones cut off.

Reasons for a large distance in setting Trees.
. 4. For many respects Trees ought to be planted at a large distance,
especially for the following reasons. 1. The Plantation will be little
Annoyance to the Land, if either you set Goos-berries, Currens, Ras-berries,
Straw-berries, or Garden stuff in it; sow Corn on it while the Trees are young,
or graze it when they are grown up. 2. Whereas some say the more Trees the more
Fruit; that is absolutely false; for when they are set so close, that the Sun
cannot have a good influence on them, by refreshing the Roots, Body, Branches,
Blossoms and Fruits, they bear poorly, and ripen worse; and close-set Trees in
a few years when they should bear Fruits, crowd, fret, and gall one another,
and by rubbing often cause the Canker. 3. They cannot grow to be Trees of that
size as they would (if the Land be good) being set at a good distance, and some
kind of Trees being of stronger and swifter growth than others, will so
domineer over their neighbors, that they will make them almost good for
nothing; and one Tree that is set at a fair distance will bear oftener, and more
Fruit than three, or four Trees set close, as is daily seen by some Apple Trees
that grow single, or in a Hedge. 4. You may Plant betwixt every Tree, a
Cherry-tree, Plum-tree, or Codling-tree, which may grow up and bear with the
other Trees many years, and never reach or Prejudice them, but will decay
before the others are at full growth; Or you may set a young Apple Tree, or
Pear Tree betwixt every two of your Standards that you set in the Orchard, and
nurse it up with necessary dressing and Pruning seven or eight years, or less
time, to transplant into Fields or Pasture-land, where Cattle feed; whereby
with little help it will not be in such danger of hurt from Cattle as small
ones would, and bear Fruit soon after it is set, and you cannot let them grow so
long in your Nursery without galling, fretting, or hurting one another, unless
when you remove Trees out of your Nursery, you take care to leave every other
Tree, whereby they may have liberty to grow big, and so more fit for your
Fields.


As for Standard Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, and the like, six yards distance is
the most convenient, unless the ground be exceeding rich, and then a greater
distance, as seven or eight yards asunder.

CHAP. VII. Choice of Ground for an Orchard, and the ordering it.
SO far as it lies in ones power to choose a plot of Ground for an Orchard,
let it be done with respect to the following advantages

. 1. It should lie conveniently near him, declining and lying open toward the
South, South-east, or South-west, and defended from the North, North-east, and
Northwest Winds by buildings, Woods, or higher Grounds; the Land should rather
incline to dryness than moisture, without Springs, the Soil deep and a fat
Earth, not a stiff, cold Clay, or binding Gravel, nor a light, sandy, esky or
hollow Earth; yet with good Husbandry, if it run not into the extremes of any
of these, Fruit Trees may prosper reasonably well in it.

. 2. The natural Soil for an Orchard is more to be respected than a Garden; for
the Garden Fruit Trees, and what else grows there, rooteth little deeper than
it may be easily manured; but Pear Trees and Apple Trees in Orchards should
grow to be large Trees, and therefore send forth Roots broad and deep, so that
it transcends all cost and pains to enrich the Ground for them, as far as the
Roots every way reach.

. 3. But they that are seated or fixed in any place, and cannot conveniently
change their habitation, must be content with their own, and if any defect or
disadvantage be in it, it may be it has some advantage that another wants, if
it lie to the North, the Trees Bud and Blossom the later, and many times the
Fruit thereby succeeds the better, and is free from the injurious South-winds
in the Autumnal season.

. 4. If it lie to the East, it has not only the advantage of being later
Budded, and blown, because of the cold Easterly Winds in the Spring, but the
Fruit ripens the better, the morning Sun in the Summer being by much the best,
and the Fruits freed from the Western Winds, which with the South are the worst.

. 5. If your Land be on a dry, or rising Ground, you may Plant them the
thicker, which will cover and shade the Ground the sooner, and make them bear
the better; the Fruit will also yield a more vinous Liquor.

. 6. If your Ground lie in a cold moist Vale, the sooner may you raise a
natural Fence about it, to defend your Trees from cold Winds, and stiff Gusts,
which diversely anoy your Trees and Fruits; and I once knew a person that had a
cold moist flat springey plot of Ground, who caused double Ditches to be made
therein, at ten yards distance, each from other, and about an Ell high; upon
these Ditches he planted Apple Trees each ten yards distant from another, which
Trees did grow, prosper, and bear exceeding well.

. 7. But if you have liberty to choose what Land you will for Planting of
Fruit Trees, observe the directions given in the first Section of this Chap.
and choose a warm, light Rye-land, or either a black or brown mold, if with a
mixture of Sand, so much the better, but the heavy cold and moist Wheat-land is
not so good.

. 8. If the Ground be very light and rich of it felf, or so made by
improvement, several sorts of Apple Trees, especially the Pippin, will be so
apt to canker, that they will scarce ever be large Trees; therefore a firm and
strong Land; is best for Winter or long lasting Fruit; but for Summer-fruit,
Land cannot be too light; the more it inclines to redness the better.

How to qualify the Ground.
. 9. If the Land you intend for it be a Turf or Green-sward, you ought to Plow
it two years before you set your Trees in it, to make it mellow and loose, that
the Trees may be better take Root, and you may then lay on Manure, which by
Plowing will be well mixed with the natural Soil, and use such Manure as will
best suit to amend it; and if you sow the Ground about ten days after the
Midsummur before you Plant, with Turnips, and when they are got off, which will
be about November, if you please, then set your Trees, they will like well.

. 10. Where the natural Soil is not good of it self, whether it be in Garden,
Orchard, or Field, there it ought to be by skill assisted and bettered, at
least wise for such a compass as the Roots of every Tree take up for some time,
if not so far round as they are ever like to extend themselves.

And this must be done by mixing such Manures with the Soil as suit best with
it is temper. If the Soil be Clay, or Clay mixed with Gravel or wet heavy Land,
hot Dung, as that of Horses, or Poultry, or for want of that, of Oxen or Cows
is best to mix with it, to bring it to a due temperament.

And if the Soil be light, hollow, esky, or sandy Land; Marl, Mud out of a
Pond, Ditch, or River, or shovelings of Dirty yards or Highways, if they be not
Sandy, and be well Mellowed, by lying on heaps, and especially if those heaps
are mixed with Lime, are proper to mend it.

If this last Soil be barren likewise, you may properly add a mixture of Neats
Dung.

It has been seen that an Apple Tree on a Hemp-but, which was constantly
Plowed, and Manured to a great richness, bore more Apples than four such Trees
in an Orchard would do; and it is constantly seen in Barren hungry Land, Trees
thrive poorly, grow Mossey, or Bark-bound, bearing seldom, and that a poor
Fruit: Only Walnut-trees and Pear Trees do not necessarily require a very rich
Ground, and will prosper best on Stony, and light Land.

If your Land be too rich (which is seldom seen) you may mix Coal-ashes with it.

Moist Land to order.
. 11. If your Land is very flat, that wet is apt to stand upon it, or be a
shallow Soil, you may something help it in Plowing, also by gathering the Land
always up in and near the place where you intend the Rows of Trees shall
afterward stand, which in two years time will something raise it, and thicken
the Soil, and the Furrows so made will help to carry off the Water, or which is
better, raise the Land on broad Ridges, that the middle of them may be about
24, or 30 Foot distance, according as you intend to Plant your Trees: Let the
Intervals between the Ridges be about eight Foot broad, and the Earth taken up
between, about a Foot deep, and cast on the Ridges which will make the Ground
thicker of the best Soil than before it was, that the Roots of the Trees you
Plant on the Ridges cannot run down, nor spread into the bad Soil, which
otherwise it would do; by this means the Trees will thrive and prosper well, as
may be perceived on the Banks of some Land, and the Hedges, that Apple Trees
will thrive better there than on the Level-land.

Moist Land to order.
. 12. If it be a Springey moist or spewy Land, you must Trench it at the head
of the Spring, and that deeper than the chanel of the Spring runs in the Earth,
which you may leave open, and yearly cleanse, or fill it up with Alder or
Oler-boughs, and cover them with the Turf and Earth that came forth, much
higher than the other Land; for the Wood and loose Earth will sink very much by
degrees; or you may dig several narrow Trenches, one between each Row of Trees,
descending to some Ditch at the lower end of your Ground, and lay in the bottom
of it Alder-frith, or Faggots of Beech, and fill the Trenches again on the said
Frith or Faggots with Earth, as aforesaid, and the Water will insinuatingly
pass through the said Wood to the lower side of the Ground, leaving the rest
dryer; but if you cannot easily do this, order it as at the foregoing Section.

. 13. If it be Springey, but only lie so low and flat that in the Winter Rain
or Land-floods will lie upon it, and that it has been lately Plowed, or that
you will not lose two years time by Plowing it before you set your Trees, or if it
be shallow or ebb Soil, you may set your Trees by Tumping.

Hot dry Land to order.
. 14. If your Ground be a hot dry Sandy shallow Land, Marl laid on the surface
and there spread, will cool, sadden, and make it rich; or if you can, cause the
Current of some Rill of Water, or rather Water that runs from Pools, Ponds, or
Dunghills, to over flow it sometimes, which will not only moisten, but make the
Ground fertile also, and the Trees prosper well.

Fern or any other vegetables, nay Stones covering such Land, will preserve it
cool and moist.

Gravelly-ground to order.
. 15. Gravel-grounds are as bad as any; because a Tree in them cannot Root to
any great bigness; and if Muck, or other Soils be laid to the Roots of Trees in
such Land, the Gravel will in a few years eat it up, and convert it unto it is
own nature; but if a little Stony, a mixture of Mold among the Stones, and at
the digging to pick our the largest Stones, then Trees will Root indifferent
well in such Grounds.

Over-flown Land.
. 16. If Land be subject to be over-flown by the inundation of Rivers, or other
falls of Water, so as the Water stand not too long upon it, nor the Land be of
a stiff cold nature, it is very good for Fruit Trees.

Of uneven Ground.
. 17. If there be any unevenness in the Land, some direct to level it, by
carrying the Banks into the low places; but this will not only be very
chargeable, but hurtful, by making the high places too barren, and the low
Ground too rich.

But that your Trees may grow somewhat level in their tops, and not one
overshade another, and also appear comely, you may forecast to set such Trees
as grow pendant, or are not apt to grow tall Trees, on the highest Ground, and
such as are aspiring in the lower places.

The Fence and Order of Trees in an Orchard,
. 18. Enclose your Orchard with a good double Ditch about four Foot high, and
plant thereon two Rows of good Hawthorn, or Whitethorn, which will be an
excellent Fence by the time that the Fruit Trees bear, to keep out Cattle from
cropping the tender Twigs of the Fruit Trees, and rubing against their Stems,
and unruly People from destroying the Fruit. Good Whitethorn being the best
Quick-fence for your Orchard, when it is grown up may be plaished, the better to
prevent Hogs or Sheep for creeping into it. Set no smooth Quick in it, that may
grow to great Trees, because they will be hurtful both to the Hedge and
Fruit Trees, both by their tops and Roots when they are grown up: Having set
two Rows of good Hawthorn, and made the dead Hedge on the outside the Ditch,
the Quick-set will grow the faster, for the dead Hedge upon the Ditch is apt to
choke the Quick-sets, and thus with sometimes Weeding it you may soon raise a
good Fence.

If you have an old Hedge already about your Orchard, scour the Ditch and plaish
the Hedge, and cut down all big Trees that grow in it, unless on the North, and
Westside, the one requiring a defense to keep the Orchard warm, the other to
secure it somewhat from the strong Winds, that blow down the Fruit before it is
ripe, tho it is far better they grow on the outside the Hedge.

On the outside of your Orchard, not too near the Hedge, if it be not well
defended by Hills, Buildings, or the like; Plant on the North-side, two or
three Rows of Walnut-trees, thicker than is usually done on other accounts, to
preserve the Orchard from the cold Nothern Air.

Some are also for Planting a Defense on the west side, to protect them from
the brisk Autumnal Winds, which blow down the Fruit before ripe.

Within the Orchard on the North-side, set the first Rows of Pear Trees, or
such other Trees as you know are apt to grow tallest, and the rest Southward,
as they decrease in hight, as near as you can judge; for so shall all your
Trees share in great measure of the South-sun, and will be less liable to
receive damage by the Northern old: The best way you can set Trees in an
Orchard is according to the Figure called a Quincunx, by Planting them at an
equal distance every way, only with this observation, that every Tree of the
second Row may stand against the middle of the space of the First; in the Third
against the space of the Second; and so through out, which makes an Orchard
appear pleasant to the Eye in what part soever thereof you stand.

. 19. If your Soil be not rich enough, once in three or four years in the
Wintertime, Baring the Roots of Trees-in Winter.
open the Earth for a good space round about the body of each Tree, and about a
Month after with some proper Manure mixed with what came forth, fill up the hole
again; but if you dig or Plow your Land, you will have no need to do this so
long; and if your Trees were set by tumping, you need not do this, till the
Roots are grown past the Ditch that was made about the Tump.

Muck-water good for the Roots of Fruit Trees.
. 20. The Water that soaks from a Dunghill, is an excellent thing to enrich the
Earth about the Roots of Trees, and if your Orchard chance to lie so as that it
may be floted sometimes, you may do it after this manner.

Make a little Trench along the upper part of the Orchard, and from it cut a
small Gutter down every row of Trees, take off the upper Turf for half a yards
breadth round about every Tree, at about a Foots breadth distance from the
body, when a rainy day comes, let this soke down one Row, so that (as near as
you can) every Tree may enjoy it three or four days at several times in one
Winter

If your Orchard stand so that you cannot convey this Water to the Trees after
this manner, you may carry two or three pale-full to every Tree twice or thrice
a year, and pour it in where the Roots were opened, and against Spring put in
the Earth again; when you do this first, stir up with something the bottom of
this Water the more to thicken and enrich it.

This will follow the Roots and more enrich the Trees than can be done by
Manure, or Dung, so that you suffer the Water not to be above a days time at
once upon any one Tree.

Plant Fruit proper for the Soil and Clymate.
. 21. Some judgment is required from the Planter in setting each Tree or Plant
in the proper Clymate and So I it most delights in, or in adapting Plants to
the Nature of each Soil you have to Plant; for Trees will strangly prosper,
grow and bear in Soil and Ground they like, comparatively to what they will do
if they are Planted in Ground wherein they delight not.

The Apple it self, which is but one kind of Fruit, yet are there several sorts
of them, that delight in some places, and will not thrive in another, which
made the Kentishmen so addict themselves to the Planting of the Pippin and
Codling; because no other Apple would prosper so well in that County, whence
they are called Kentish-pippin and Codlin; when in some other places neither of
those Fruits will prosper without Art, but are destroyed by that pernicious
disease the Canker.

The Red-streak also is observed to prosper better and yield a better juice in
some places than in others, although but in the next Parish, so Summer-pears will
thrive where the Winter will not.

Therefore consider what Species of Fruits are most natural to the Country or
place where you intend to raise your Trees, which may be known partly by the
growth and well bearing of Trees in the Neighborhood, or by experimenting
variety of sorts in your own Ground, then propagate and Plant those that grow,
prosper, and bear best.

Plant not Standards too near your Houses or Walls.
. 22. When you Plant an Orchard, or any Ranges of Trees near your House or
Walls, Plant them at such a distance from your Houses or Walls, as that when
they are grown up to any considerable magnitudes, they may not over-hang your
Wall-trees, or hinder the Sun too much from coming to them, whereby your Fruit
is much better in everp respect.

CHAP. VIII. The time most proper for Transplanting of Fruit Trees.
. 1. STone-fruit will be first ready to remove; Time for removing
for after two years growth in the Seed-plot or Nursery after they are
Inoculated or Grafted, you may well remove them, be they for Wall or Dwarfs,
which you ought to do in October or November, early removing being advantageous
for all Fruit Trees, both for the security of their growing and their
well-growing. The best time to transplant into Orchards is from the end of
September to the end of November, tho you may do it until the end of February,
but that is not so good by far, for the sooner after Michaelmas the better; if
the leaves are not all fallen when you remove the Trees, pick them off.

You may begin sooner to Plant well-grown Trees, than those that are very
young, and in a very thriving condition, especially young Apple Trees, and
Peaches, whose Stocks were raised of the Stone or Kernel, which will be in a
growing posture until extreme weather put them to a stand; therefore for such
stay until about the middle of November.

Young Trees having been taken up about November, and the end of the Roots cut
off, like unto a Hind or Goats foot on the under-side, and laid in the Earth
till March to be Planted, being then taken forth again, it has appeared that
they have put out many Fibrous Roots at the ends of those big Roots cut off,
which had they done in the place they were to grow in the next Summer, this
would have been a good preparation against Spring; and it is always seen that
Trees set in February, or March make generally a much less growth the next
year, than those that were set before winter. If a dry Summer happen to
succeed, it often kills some of the late-set Trees, and puts such a Sap to
others that they recover not of many years.

In sharp Frosts, or in Snows, though you could dig, it is not good to remove
Trees.

. 2. If your Trees for Standards at seting are not very weak bodied, How to
Prune and order Trees at removal.
Prune them up, leaving three or four of the principal Branches on the top,
that grow outward, which should be lop't off almost a years growth but if they
be weak (lest the Winds should injure them by tossing them) you may top them
lower, doing it at a Bud or small Twigg, and in big Trees cut the top almost
all off; and whenever you transplant young Trees cut off the end of all big
Roots on the under-side, like unto a Hinds Foot, and they will put forth new Roots
the better.

Bigness of Trees to be removed.
. 3. At three years end after Grafting in the Nursery, Trees may be fit to be
removed into an Orchard, especially if you Plow (or which is safer, dig) the
Orchard-Land, and set Beans or other Kitchin-Garden stuff in it for some years;
but if it be such a piece of Land that you Graze, then you must be sure their
heads are grown out of the reach of Cattle before you set them there, and you
must Fence them one of the ways mentioned hereafter.

How to remove a large Tree.
. 4. It Is the best way to remove Trees very young, as at three years growth, if
they may be secured from danger, which in Orchards or Fields where Cattle have
liberty to feed, they cannot well be with ordinary Fencing, unless they be of
five or six years growth after Grafting. He that has a Nursery of his own, and
removes them into places, so near that he can well do it, let him the very same
or the next day after they are taken up, set them in the place appointed for
them, and not cut off too much of the Roots, but the greatest part of the Top;
and he may do well to Plant strong and well grown Trees especially, in his
Fields, and out-grounds; for the charge of Fencing will be much eased, and
being carefully set, they may prosper as well or better than small ones,
especially in uncultivated or stiff Land by nature, where young Trees cannot so
well put forth Roots; and the following way is better to have old Trees grows
and prosper well than is commonly practiced, viz.

If you chance to have any Trees betwixt Ten and Thirty years old that you have
a mind to remove, you must about November, the year before you Transplant them,
dig a Trench as narrow as you please, but so deep as to meet with most of the
spreading Roots at such a distance round about the body of the Tree as you
would cut the Roots off at when you remove it, (about half a yard distant from
the body may do well, if they be not very large Trees, but if you have not far
to carry them, longer) as you make the Trench cut the Roots you meet with clear
off, and smooth without splitting them, or bruising the Bark; fill up the
Trench again, and by October next after, when you take up the Tree to set it
elsewhere, you will find those great Roots will have put forth many fibrous
Roots, and made preparation for more, with fresh and tender Roots, upon removal
will enable the Tree to draw more nourishment than otherwise it would, and
consequently to prosper better in it is new mansion.

. 5. Many of those Trees removed very timely, as in the end of September, or in
October, may shrink and seem to wither much, yet they will recover and come to
their former plumpness.

CHAP. IX. Of the manner of removing and setting Trees.
Coasting Trees.
. 1. IN removing any big Tree, men generally observe to Coast them, that is, to
place the same side of the Tree to the South-East, etc. as grew formerly that
way where it stood before; to which end before you remove it, you had best make
some mark in the Bark of the Tree which way it stood, this you may observe in
straight Trees, but it is more material if your Trees lean one way more than
another, to set the leaning side toward the South-west, from whence the
strongest Winds blow; but notwithstanding this observation, you need not mind
it in small Trees, or such that have grown in close-Nurseries; they not being
capable of any considerable alteration from any Aspect of the Heavens.

In case a Tree before removal has the benefit of the East, or West Sun, more
than of the South, then Plant that Tree that before had that advantage, on the
like again in it is new place, which although it vary from the directions
aforesaid, yet not from the reason of it.

How to take up Trees to be Transplanted.
. 2. Be careful in taking up the Plants; dig round about them, and take off
the Mold from their Roots; if it be a small Plant, it may be drawn up easily,
the Mold being taken away, if it be great, and the Roots spread much, then they
may be cut about half a yard from the body of the Plant, and the greater it is,
the further off cut the Roots, and so draw it up; but keep the Spade from
coming too near the Tree, by surrounding the Tree at a good distance, and
endeavor to raise as much Earth as you can with the Tree, but if it be to carry
far, shake it off; then pick off all the Leaves, if they be not fallen off,
because the Sun and Air by their means extract the Sap out of the Branches.

Pear Trees have ordinarily more brittle Roots than Apple Trees, and the Roots
of Apple Trees, or Stocks, raised of the Kernels of good Fruit, are more
brittel than those raised of Crab or wilding Kernels; therefore take more care
and pains in opening Ground deeper and wider, when you take up the more tender
and brittle Rooted Plants, and pull not over hard, lest you leave most of the
Roots behind.

Young Trees best to set.
. 3. Young Trees of three or four years old at most when removed, do not only
grow surer, but make a larger growth at first Planting, than greater and elder
Trees can do, and are therefore best to transplant.

. 4. If your Trees have lain some time out of the Ground, or been carried in
the Wind or Frosts, that their Roots seem to be dry, set them over night in
Water, immerging only the Roots, and it will very much revive them; or when you
Plant them, after you have added an indifferent quantity of Earth, cast in a
Pail or more of Water as the largness of the Fosse or hole requires, which not
only quickens the Roots, but makes the Earth adhere thereunto, which otherwise
would lie light and hollow about them. The Air does much incommode the Root of
any Plant whatever, and so does Frost.

. 5. One may Carry young Trees many Miles to be transplanted; How to order
Trees for Carrying.
being carefully taken up, lay the Roots all one way, the smallest and
tenderest in the middle of the Bundle, and bind them close from the Roots to
their tops with a soft band, and then stuff the Roots round about with Straw,
Hay, Moss and the like; afterward bind the bundle all over from the Roots to
the very top with Hay, or Straw-bands, or something else, to preserve them from
bruising, and wrap something abouts the Roots, a piece of an old ackcloth, or
any thing that will preserve the Roots from the Wind, Sun, and from bruising:
And in Winter you may carry young Trees thus many Hundred Miles.

. 6. See Chap. 8. Sect, 2.

Set upon every Removal in a better Soil.
. 7. It must always be observed that upon every removal of Fruit Trees, to
Plant or set them again into as good or better Soil as that out of which they
were taken.

But if that cannot be, then Plant, and set them for so far as the Roots may
extend in three or four years growth in as good or better Mold than that out of
which they were removed, by laying good Soils under, upon, and about the Roots
at the setting; for after they have taken Root two or three years, they will
then grow in ordinary Soils; the great danger is at first Planting, which is
the reason Trees prosper abundantly better taken out of course and barren
Nurseries, than out of those whose Soils are very rich, either by nature, or
improvement: therefore be sure to lay as good or better Soil upon, under, and
about the Roots when they are set again, if you expect your Trees prosper.

Set not Trees deep but shallow.
. 8. Take heed of setting the Roots of your Plants too deep below the good
Soil, for if set shallow they prosper far better, than such as are set deep;
because in the top of the Earth is the best Mold, so made by the Suns influence
thereon, and every shower of Rain reaches, and refreshes, and feeds the Roots:
for all may easily observe Trees thrive best where the Roots run near the
Surface, and not at all where Planted deep; because by deep Planting they
thrust down their Roots below the good Soil into that which is barren and
unfruitful; which causes your Trees to be injured by Canker, Moss, and to be
bad bearers, and ill thrivers.

9. Cut away many of the Branches of all large Trees you set, Prune the
Branches and Roots at removal.
because every removal is a check to nature, and their growth, and the Roots
being cut, yield for some years but a faint nutriment, scarce sufficient to
preserve life, much less to make a large growth: But Plants of a lesser size
need not have their Branches cut, unless they cross one another, grow too nigh
together, or run up too high without spreading, but cut off the ends of all the
Roots; because if cut, many small Fibra's or strings shoot out of the cut
place, which draw nourishment for the Plant, which without cutting would not.

See before Sect. the second, in Chap. 8.

. 10. Make a hole about one yard square and two Foot deep; but if your Soil be
wet, or binding Gravel, or such like, How to set Trees.
very bad in the bottom, go not so deep, it will be better to set them shallow,
and raise the Earth about them; And if not manured Land you set them in, have
in readiness some very fine rich Mold, or shovelings of a Yard where Cattle are
frequently lodged or fed, or well tempered Street-dirt, or the Mold of rotten
Vegetables, or the Sediments of Currents that settle in the bottoms of Pools,
or Ditches, that have lain long on heaps, till the same are become mellow and
dry; especially if some Lime be at casting out mixed therewith, or rotten
Neats-dung, which you may mix with the Earth that came forth of the hole; and
so order it, that it may be as good or better than that out of which the Trees
came; Fill the hole full half way up with this, and tread it down in such form
(having respect to the Roots of the Tree that is to be set in it) that the
Roots may rest close upon it, then cut off the ends of all the Roots like unto
a Deers foot on the underside, they will put forth new Roots the better, (if the
Tree have one long downright Root (called the Tap, or Heart-root) cut it
almost half off) then clay your Tree in, and fill up the hole with the Mold, by
casting in the smallest and best next to the Roots, and be careful that all the
small Mold run between all the Roots; to that end, stir and shake the Plant,
that there may not be any hollow place where the Mold salls not, and with your
hand, draw up the uppermost Roots, and part them that they may spread in the
Mold every way; Fill up the hole with the Mold, and use all diligence to Place
the Roots of your Tree in the same posture they were in before you removed it.
If the Tree be young, and the Roots slender, this can be performed no way but
by throwing in a little Soil at a time, and then raising up with your hands
such Roots as are pressed down by it below their proper situation, spreading
them on the Soil you have cast in, and then throwing in more, and ordering the
Roots as before, so continuing to do till you have filled up the hole.

Old Trees with sturdy Roots require not so much curiosity, but be sure that
the Mold lie close under, betwixt, and among the Roots.

If the Soil be light, press it down gently with your foot; then cover them
half a yard about with Straw, Weeds, Litter, Fern, or the like, which will keep
the Roots warm all Winter, and moist and cool in the following Summer; but if
your Ground be not very rich, cover the top about the Tree with Dung.

Note that Dung is not good to lay next the Roots of your Trees, unless it be
converted to Mold by it is long lying and rottenness, but Dung is better, being
mixed with the Earth laid next the Roots of Trees than alone.

. 11. Forget not to water all Trees you Plant, either very early or late.

To Stake Trees.
. 12. Standard-trees Planted in an open place should for a year or two be
staked, if they be large Trees in danger to be shaken by the Winds; for a Tree
at first setting should not be shaken, but after two or three years Rooting,
shaking is good: If they stand in a sad Earth, not Plowed or dug, knock down
a straight Stake close to every Tree, and tie the Plant fast to it with a
Hay-band or other soft Band, and be careful to prevent galling or fretting by
interposing and wrapping the Hay-band once or twice about the Tree before you
tie it to the Stake; set the Stake leaning toward the Coasts you expect the
greatest Winds, and let not your Stakes continue above a year and half.

Watering Trees.
. 13. Trees being Planted, it is very good to keep yearly the Ground Dug or
Plowed about them for the first seven years, which will conduce much to their
growth, and preserve them from Moss, and other diseases.

If you are enforced to remove a Tree in Summer, take the Earth you dug out
of the Fosse or hole you intend to Plant your Tree in, and mix and temper it
well with an equal quantity of Cow Dung, and as much water as will make it into
a Liquid pap; fill the hole almost with this, and let the Root of the Tree
gently sink into it; cover it over with the Mold, and lay some Fern or Litter
over all, and once a Month water it, and it will grow well.

To help Trees on barren Soil.
. 14. If your Land be not rich on which your Trees grow, it is exceeding good in
October, November, or December to lay on the top of the Earth about them, Lees
of Wine, the washing of strong-bear Barrels, Blood of Cattle, dead Dogs, or any
Carrion, Swines-dung mixed with Earth, once in three or four years, but have a
care that you lay not too much, and too often about them, also Soap-suds, when
cold, and Soap-ashes are also good. And if your Trees be grown out of the reach
of Cattle, you may suffer them to ly amongst them in the Winter from Michaelmas
till Mayday.

About bad bearing Trees.
. 15. Trees of good bearing kinds will usually bear after they are four or five
years old, until extreme old age, unless they grow on barren Soil, or sometimes
they will not bear whilst they grow very strong, lustily and vigorously, and have
too great a supply of Sap; but after some years they will then bear well, if they
were Grafted of good bearing kinds; but in case Trees are Wall-trees and shoot
excessively, and bear not, then abate their overful and rank fertile
nourishment, by putting in Sand, or any thing that is barren instead of the fat
Soil, and cut off one or two of the biggest Roots from the body, that so it may
have less nourishment, and that left will turn to Fruits; and bend downwards
also the Branches, and fasten them to the Wall with their tops as low as may
be, which restrains and obstructs the excessive rising of Sap, which rising
moderately turns to Fruits. But if Trees are naturally bad bearers, there is no
other remedy, but Grafting them again with Grafts taken from some good bearing
kinds, which are known by yearly experience to bear Fruits well and abundantly.

To Graft old Trees.
. 16. When Fruit Trees are grown to extreme old Age, and therefore bear little,
cut off their heads or big Boughs, not straight over, but aslope, that Rain and
moisture may not rest on the top to Rot it. These will put forth many young
Shoots next Summer, which may be Grafted the Spring after with good bearing
kinds; and these old Bodies having young heads which draw up Sap vigorously,
will bear store of Fruits many years after; or you may cut off their heads even
and smooth, and put two Grafts in the Cleft, and two in the Rind, and they will
soon cover their heads, if you keep well tempered Clay continually on and about
their heads. See Chap. 2. Sect. 10.

To know the kinds of your Trees.
. 17. When you Plant Fruit Trees in your Garden, or Walls, or in Orchards, draw
the Platform of them in paper, and so set down the name of every Tree according
to the place it stands in, which will be both satisfactory and useful at any
season of the year, readily to know what kind of Fruit every Tree bears.

CHAP. X. Of Planting Wall-fruit.
AS for the Soil, distance, and Stocks for Wall-Trees you are before
instructed; It remains only to say something that before has not been touched
on concerning them.

Setting Wall-trees.
. 1. Make a Trench by the Wall-side you are to set them up to, about two Foot
broad, and as deep, and in every place where a Tree is to be set, about a yard
square, mingle good old rotten Neats-dung with the Earth, and fill it up near
as high as you intend the Borders to be, and when you have filled it up about
half full, tread it down; but if you design no Borders, make then only a hole
about a yard square; but if your Soil be wet, or binding Gravel, or such like,
very bad in the bottom, go not so deep, it will be better to set them shallow,
and raise the Earth about them. Try by setting the Tree in the hole which side
will stand best to the Wall, and then cut off such Branches as grow directly
toward, and fromward the Wall, leaving only the side-Branches to be nailed unto
it; then clap your Tree in, placing it as far from the Wall as the top will
allow, that must be spread upon it, that the Roots may have the more liberty to
spread toward the Wall, fill up the hole with the Mold, and observe the
Directions given at Chap. 9. Sect. 10. and 11. about setting Trees in all other
things.

Summer pruning of Wall-trees.
. 2. Every year it will be necessary to Prune and nail them to the Wall, twice
or thrice according as they grow more or less; First in Summer about the end of
June or middle of July. Cut off such as grow directly out-ward close to the
body; if you cut a part of any Branch off, do it at a Bud, that the Cut may be
covered with a fresh Sprig; some must be Cut off, and others spread to the
Wall; Cut off those that will not spread to the Wall, and pluck not off the
Leaves of the others.

Cutting off the small Branches in Summer, is some check to the Sap, and
hinders its excessive rising at that time, which else would spend it self in
larg and superfluous Branches, and so rob the fruit.

Lay none a cross or under one another, but let them spread as the fingers of
your hand when expanded.

The Winter Pruning.
. 3. The Winter Pruning may be done as soon as the Leaves and Fruit are fallen,
or any time before February, except Nectarin's and Peaches, which are apt to
dye if Pruned before the Sap rise; the best time to Prune them is after they
Flower.

The Winter Pruning is chiefly for the well ordering of the Branches, that
could not be well placed in Summer time, and for the Cutting off great Branches
when need is. Preserve Branches as low, and as near the Ground as may be, and
cause them to bend and grow straight along the sides of the Wall both ways, and
suffer not the biggest Branches to rise straight upward, but nail them
down-wards, to furnish the bottom of the Wall. Be sure to take off those that
grow the straightest out, and will not be bowed close to the Wall. And Observe
to bend down the strongest Shoots (that would grow upwards) toward the sides,
otherwise they will be apt to run straight upward and not cover the space you
design for them, and by their Luxurious growth will extremely rob the
side-Branches of their nourishment; there will Branches enough spring out fresh
to run upwards out of them, when they are so bowed.

Those that suffer all the young and larg Shoots, to grow as much as they will
all Summer, without Cutting, and then in Winter Cut all or most of them quite
off from the Trees, and preserve only the old stumps, or biggest Branches of
the Tree, do commit a great error; because thereby in the middle part of the
Tree, and near the Root, few or no young Branches will be seen, whereas they
should preserve all the young Branches to spread up against the Wall until it
be full of small Boughs, and then some young Shoots every year may be Cut off.

Shreads of Woollen Cloth are the best things to nail them up with; some use
gentle Leather, or the Cuttings of any old Hat, any of these may serve the turn.

To renew Old Trees
. 4. When your Wall-Trees are grown old and full of big Wood, you may in three
or four years time renew them, by Cutting out some of the biggest Stems or
Boughs yearly, cutting each Branch off at some small twig (if it may be) that
either it, or a fresh Branch may grow over the cut place, which must be kept
covered with Clay, and so go on yearly till all the big Wood is cut out. Or if
you dislike the kind of Fruit, you may Inoculate or Graft the Boughs with a
better sort of Fruit, but not all in one year, but some in one year, and some
in another.

By either of these ways you may renew a decaying Tree, and keep your Wall
almost still furnished, with less trouble and charge, or loss of Time, than by
taking up the old one, and Planting a young one in its stead.

Setting Fruit proper for each Wall.
. 5. In furnishing your Walls with Fruit Trees, Observe always to Plant Peaches
and Nectarines up to the Wall that is most Southward; the East-Wall is to be
allotted to Apricocks, early Cherries, and the choicest Plums; the West may be
set with Pears, Cherries, and Plums. Some of the coursest Pears and Plums, you
may set to the North-Wall, both to cover the Wall handsomely, and many years
they will bear as well on it, as on Standards; especially if your Wall stand
not directly North, but so as to have some considerable benefit of the Sun,
Nut-Trees likewise are proper for this Wall, and will prosper well up to it.

If your conveniences will allow it, and you are to build a new Wall, it is
much better to have your Garden Walls not stand directly toward the four
points, than otherwise, and then the worst Wall will be much better, and the
best good enough for your purpose.

As thus, the East-Wall to incline to the South; the South-Wall to the West,
the West-Wall to the North; the North to the East; or contrary, but not so
well: In the first way the two first Walls will be extraordinary good, and the
two later good enough for Ordinary Fruit.

How to build a new Wall for Fruit Trees.
. 6. In building a new Wall it would be very advantageous to make it with
half-Rounds, each semicricle being eight yards round in the inside, and about
six yards in the face, or diameter, each taking two Trees; and betwixt every
half-Round let there be two Foot breadth of plain and direct Walling, where you
may place a Flower-pot on a Pillar two Foot high, or Plant a Vine to run up it,
which every Summer, you may let spread it self a little into the half-Rounds on
each side it.

One in a cold Country having his Garden-Walls thus made, had his Trees bear
Fruit plentifully in such years as his Neighbors generally fail.

In some places Walls are thus made for raising Melons under, by a pattern and
directions from Italy.

Grapes ripen delicately on every side the Cluster that grow in a half-Round.
By means of these Rounds, every Wall will one time of the day or other, have a
share of the Sun, and the best Walls (by reason of such a Reflection, and
Collection of the Sunbeams as will be in every Round) will be exceeding hot,
and the Trees be more secure from Winds.

A Pale is as good for this purpose, and in respect of Ripening Fruit better
than any thing else; it can be raised up too, if the Pale be made of sawed
Boards, nine or ten Foot high, and exactly joined, that no wind may come
through; next to this in goodness is a Brick-Wall, and then a Stone-Wall; and
the worst of all that which is made of Timber and Mortar; but in this every one
cannot be his own chooser, but must comply with what the Country he lives in
will permit him to do for his best Convenience.

Baring the Roots of Wall-trees.
. 7. Sometime in the Winter after two or three years growth, if the Soil the
Roots are to spread into be not rich enough, open the Ground at the outside of
the holes you made at setting, as near round about as the Wall will permit; if
you find no Roots bare, let it lie open a Month, and then fill it up with the
Earth that came forth well mixed with such a Manure as suits with it.

CHAP. XI. Of Trees of low Stature and Growth, commonly called Dwarf-Trees.
. 1. DWarf-Trees have been of late more than ordinarily valued and coveted;
because they are of great advantage for Table-Fruit (whether Pears, Apples,
Plums, or Cherries) and being but of low Statute may be conveniently Planted
for Walks, and in the border of Garden-Walks, without prejudicing any thing
else about them, and their Fruit will be as well secured, and commodious for
gathering as the Wall-fruit.

Stocks for Dwarf Pear Trees.
. 2. Plants for this purpose must be provided, and prepared somewhat
differently from those for Orchards, or Fields.

The Quince-tree is generally used, and best for Stocks for Pears both for
Dwarfs and Wall, as well because it may possibly somewhat meliorate the Pear as
(and that chiefly) because it grows not to that bigness as on a Pear-stock it
would be apt to do.

Stocks for Dwarf Apple Trees.
. 3. For Dwarf Apple Trees the best Stocks are such as are raised of the
Cuttings of other Apple Trees that will grow by Cuttings, as of the
Gennet-Moil, Kentish-Codling and others.

That these are more proper for Dwarf-trees than Crabstocks appears. 1. Because
the Fruit will be rather bettered and not tainted with any asperity or
Roughness, as possibly it might be, if Crabstocks were made use of; and one
chief design in these Trees is to have choice and delicious Fruit for eating.
2. Apple Trees that are raised on such Stocks will not grow so big as those on
Crabstocks, but are with ease and certainty kept Dwarfs. Mr. Rea judging the
Paradise-Apple of somewhat slow growth in bringing forward a Cyen, advises to
Graff a Paradise on a Crabstock, and the Fruit you would have, on that
Paradise, that the Crab might yield plenty of Juice or Sap to the Paradise, and
the Paradise retard the growth of the Apple Planted on it, so as to keep it a
Dwarf; but besides loss of time the success of this is doubted, because the
Crab will put forth strong Roots, and yield plenty of nourishment; for why
Apple Trees raised of Cuttings grow not to be very large Trees, is their
putting forth such small Roots, by which means the Tree has Sap conveyed to it
accordingly. 3. By using these Cuttings for Stocks you shall get at least four
years time, reckoning from Sowing the Crab-Kernel, and the setting the Stem or
Cutting be duly considered, as by setting the Stem in the place you intend the
Dwarf-Tree shall grow, and setting it in good Earth, for then after one years
growth, you may Graft it, and you will easily discern the advantage in point of
time.


If it be said Crab-stocks ready grown may be made use of instead of Cuttings,
There Is readily answered, they must grow two, if not three years after they are
set before they are fit to Graft, and in respect of their large growth will not
be fit for Dwarfs.

Some Nursery-men have made advantage to themselves by this speedy way of
raising Trees by Cuttings, but to the disadvantage of them they put them off
to, for Planting in Orchards; because they are never like to make large or
long-lasting-Trees.

. 4. The way then to provide Stocks for Apple-Dwarfs is thus;

How to provide Stocks for Apple-Dwarfs.
In October from such Trees whose Cuttings will grow, take such Stems, or
Branches that grow straightest, and which (in the place where they shall be
Grafted) are an Inch or more thick, if they be near two Inches so much the
better; Cut them off if you can, an hands breadth below such Knots or Burs as
are on them (for at those Burs they principally put forth their Roots) and cut
off the top that they be not above a yard long, (if you cannot get them so
long) of Quinces, you must be content with shorter, if they be two foot it may
do reasonable well; Cut off also all the side-Branches close to the body,
except one small Twig near to the top, for the Sap to vent it self at; set
these presently in Beds as your Seed-plants were, or rather if your Garden be
laid out, (that you can know the places they shall stand in) set them there.

You need not fear setting these as deep as the length will bear, so that there
be of them about a Foot above Ground, because they will shoot out Roots all
along, almost to the top of the Ground, and so spread their Roots in the good
Soil, and by setting them something deep, they are in less danger of Dying, and
this prevents the trouble of covering the Ground about them with Fern or Straw;
and by this means likewise they will stand the firmer in the loose Garden-land
for Grafting at a years end, and better support a spreading top afterward.

Stocks by Circumposition.
. 5. But because its hard to meet with great plenty of such Branches, thus to
be cut and set for Stocks, that have Burs or knots on them; Planters have
therefore found out a way (which is called Circumposition) to bring these knots
or Burs upon Branches, that had them not before, and to mend and improve those
that before had them, and the way of it is as follows.

About the beginning of February next before you design to cut these Stems,
directly above the place you intend to cut them off at, for above a Foot in
length, fasten about them some Earth in an Old Hat, or Boot, or Bag made of
some strong Cloth: and in that Earth they will have put forth Roots against the
October. following, when you are to cut them off to set them.

Or (which is a quicker and readier way) you may dawb some wet Earth or Clay
about the place, and wrap a Hay-band about it, putting some moist Earth
likewise betwixt the rounds of the Band, and then running it about again over
the spaces betwixt those first rounds of the Hay-band, and making fast the ends
of it.

If the Stem have no Bur, before you go either of these ways to work, then take
off here and there a little slice of Bark, about an Inch long round about it,
near the middle of the place to be covered, as has been directed.

Some direct that before this application of the Earth, about an Inch breadth
of the Bark be taken off round about the part of the Branch, that is to be
surrounded with the Earth, that Roots may shoot out in greater quantity, by
coming out in the upper skirts of that Circle, as well as in the lower; but
this is but a Crotchet, and grounded (as my Lord Bacon and others have
observed) upon the opinion of descension of the Sap; whereas indeed there is no
such thing; for the whole mass of Sap is always ascending, but in lesser
quantity in the Winter; because the Tree is then only to be nourished, and kept
alive, to which end a small supply is sufficient, and yet necessary; and in
greater plenty in the Summer to furnish the Tree with Leaves, Fruit, and new
yearly growth; and the true reason why Leaves and Fruit fall off toward
Winter, is not because the Sap returns downward from them, but because the Sap
ascends not so vigorously at Winter as in the Summer, by reason of the coldness
of the Season, and the Suns small stay on our Horizon, and because they have
arrived to their full ripeness, and the Trees fail by degrees to convey up so
much Sap as it did in the Summer to them, to produce fresh ones; and therefore
consequently that is an idle mistake too, to think that the Sap or Juice in the
Winter, is laid up in the Roots, as a Repository, as appears plainly, inasmuch
as they are ever found dryer in the Winter than in the Summer, so that upon the
whole, this taking the Bark off round the Branch is good for nothing, but to
endanger it by intercepting the Juice or Sap, which rises in greatest quantity
betwixt the Bark and the Wood; but if as before was hinted, you take some
little slices of the Bark off round the Branch, here and there, leaving the
Bark entire in some places, this may by checking the Sap, cause it the more
abundantly pass and be converted into Roots.

But to proceed to the business in hand, you have seen the way of preparing
Cuttings by Circumposition; and though some will pretend to raise Trees of any
kind by the use of it, yet it is certain it avails not, but only in such as by a
peculiar property are apt to put forth Roots, being cut off and set into the
Ground, and those generally known and made use of this way, are the Kentish
Codling, the Gennet-Moil, some sorts of sweet Apples, and Bittersweets, the
Quince-tree, the Mulberry-tree, Goodsberry-trees, Curran-trees, and the
Paradise Apple Tree, which last is much commended by Mr. Rea, for to raise
Stcocks for Dwarf Apple Trees.

To raise Stocks by cutting down an old Tree.
. 6. Another way to raise Stocks for Dwarf-trees is, to cut down some one Tree
of little worth, of such a kind as you want Stocks of, about a Foot or more
from the ground: This will make some kind of Trees very apt to cast forth very
good Suckers from the old Roots; such as are of two years growth may be
transplanted; and the stump above ground, will also put forth abundance of
young Shoots: after these young Shoots have grown out of the Stump one year,
cast Mold or Earth about them a good height, so that you cover not the Tops of
any of them, where let them grow two years more, and they will be well rooted,
then cut them off from the old Stock (which after that may yield fresh ones
again) and set the Shoots you take off as before has been directed about
Cuttings.

These will be about three years longer before they be ready to Graft than
Cuttings, but will be very good young fresh Stocks, and is a good way to raise
Stocks of the Quince-tree for Pears, because Quince-trees generally grow so
crooked and irregular, that its difficult to procure any considerable quantity
of them by Cuttings.

If they shoot up tall after they are molded, you had best top them at a
convenient height; it will make them grow the more in bigness and so be sooner
fit to Graft. But if you have a desire to have any of the same kind as the old
Tree was, you need not top them.

And by this means if you want Quince-trees, Codlings, etc. you may be
furnished with plenty, that will make better and handsomer Trees than if you
raise them by Cuttings.

Stocks for Dwarf Pear Trees.
. 7. You may raise Stocks for Dwarf Pear Trees from Suckers of Old Pear Trees
(if you cannot conveniently get enough of the Quince-tree) for many Pear Trees
cast them naturally, which being preserved from Cattle, may be taken up and set
in Beds of Earth as you did the Seedlings.

If your Pear Trees yield not Suckers of themselves, you need only cut off the
top of some old ill Pear Tree (and Graff it with a better Fruit if you please)
and the Roots will cast forth Suckers plentifully, and you may help them by
making a small Ditch or Gutter so as to bear some of the Roots about two yards
distant from the Tree, or pare off the Grass (if any grow about the Tree) that
they may have the more liberty to spring up.

Or in this case you may bare the Roots, and then give a Cut cross some Roots
almost to the Heart, and from the cross Cut cleave the Root, raising up the
loose part, and put in a little Stone to keep it open; cover it three Inches
over with Mold; let this be done if you can, where you find a Bud or Eye on the
Root for the Sucker to Shoot out at, and either inoculate the young Shoot in
the place where it stands, or remove it to some other place after a years
growth, and when you do, cut off with it about a Foot of the old Root; and by
this means you may have Suckers from some other Trees, that do not naturally
yield them.

Stock for Dwarf-Cherry and Plum-trees.
. 8. To have Stocks for Dwarf Cherries, and Plums, or for such Trees for a
Wall, the speediest way, and such as will succeed for that purpose, is by
Suckers of the common red Cherry, and any ordinary, or rather white Plum-tree,
both which cast up Suckers plentifully.

If the Suckers grow in a place secure from harm, you may inoculate, or Graft
them before removal, under their mother Plant, and let them grow there one year
after: and thereby you will gain a years time and more; and choose such Suckers as
grow at greatest distance from the old Tree.

How to order the heads of Dwarf-trees.
. 9. In Grafting or inoculating Stocks for Dwarf-trees, observe to do it as low
as you well can, with two Cyens placed on each Stock, and those longer than in
Grafting for large Standards that they may spread from the Ground.

And after they are grown two or three years in the places they are to stand
in, to make them spread, and to keep the Boughs outward, you may tie an old
Hoop of a Barrel, or some such thing in the amidst of the Branches, to bear
them a good distance one from another; but if one Branch be much stronger, or
more inclined to grow upright than the rest, then you may drive a Stake into
the Ground, and tie the sturdy one down to it.

If you Cut the Bark crosswise in several places on the inside of the Branches,
when they are placed as you would have them, it will be a means to make them
more willing to continue in that order of their own accord, after some years
growth: If any one Branch shoot out much further than the other, cut off its
top to keep it even with the rest, and yearly cut much off, especially new
Shoots, that grow directly upwards, after they are grown to that height you
design them to be of, Trees raised of Cuttings.
which may be about a yard and an half.

. 10. Having directed how to raise Kentish-Codlings, Gennet-Moils, Quinces, or
any that grow of Cuttings for Stocks; there needs no other Rules for raising
Trees, or Hedges of the same kind of Fruit, only you need not cut them so short
as you do for Stocks.

Codlings Grafted on Crab-stocks, and set in a Garden or elsewhere will,
increase their growth; because Crab-stocks have great Roots, and will yield
them more plenty of nourishment than Roots of their own putting forth, when
they are raised only of Cuttings. Others Graft Gennet-Moils on Crab-stocks, and
they thrive well, and bear a larger and (some think) a better Fruit than those
Trees of that kind raised by Cuttings: some have Grafted several of them in
rough and Woody Grounds, which have grown with very strong Shoots, and covered
the Stocks very soon.

CHAP. XII. How to Plant in the Fields, with the various advantages thereof.
. 1. MUltitudes of Fruit Trees may be Planted abroad in the Fields and Hedges
of enclosed Grounds, whereof very great profit may be made without any
considerable damage either to Corn, Hay, or Pasture, and its best in this way
to Plant the courser, harder, and long-keeping kinds of Fruits, which will not
be meanly serviceable to a Family by using them either for Baking or Cider.
These Trees being about seven Foot high before they begin to spread, will be
out of the reach of Cattle, and not troublesome to Workmen about Hay and Corn
in Summertime, if Planted twenty or thirty Yards distant one from another, and
in Ranks throughout the Field, that the Plow may continue a straight Furrow all
along from one end to the other, whereby Corn will grow near the Roots of such
Trees almost as good as any where in the Field, and Grass as much or more under
Trees as where none are, tho not altogether so sweet, by reason of the
droppings, yet the multitude of Fruit abundantly compensates the damage almost
Ten-fold.

Many Countries in England have experienced the benefit of Planting in the
Fields, where it has been of long and general usage, and in many other
Countries Gentlemen have begun already to imitate them, which should much
encourage others to follow; for the more there are that Plant, the less
particular persons will lose by Thieves, and where Fruit is in great pleanty,
it is found to be more slighted by Idle people; and besides if a man has
store, he will not feel the loss of a little, or it may quit his cost, to have
one to cast an Eye to them, for a months time near ripening; and further yet
Cyder-Apples, Baking-Pears, and Pears for Perry are so little grateful to the
Taste (which Pilferers chiefly aim at pleasing) that he that tastes them once,
shall scarcely find his Teeth water after them a second time. However the
benefit of Planting in Fields much out-weighs these and all other
incoveniences; for by this means you may have a double Crop on your Lands, viz.
Grass or Corn, and your Fruit, and the Land rather benesitted (as the matter
may be ordered) than damaged; One of these Trees also bears as much Fruit as
three of the best in a thick-planted Orchard, the benefit whereof for Sale or
use in a Family for Baking, or Liquors, or other uses, is known to be so very
considerable, that it is needless to say more of it.

Encouragements to Plant Peartrees in Fields.
. 2. Because the Planting Pear Trees abroad in Fields is of less reputation
generally than the Planting other Fruit Trees, to take off the aspersion,
consider the following suggestions.

First some Pears do not make so contemptible a Liquor as Perry is commonly
reckoned, but very strong, and kept two or three years, drinks to admiration,
so that several good Palates that have drank of it, have not been able to
distinguish it well from Liquors of more esteem. Secondly, Their Fruit is not
eatable and so in less danger of Thieves in your out-grounds than Apples are.
Thirdly, They will grow on barren Land where Apples will not prosper so well.
Fourthly, They are Trees of long continuance, and often grow to that bigness,
and bear so plentifully, that one single Tree will bear Fruit enough to make a
Hogshead of Perry, sometimes two, or three in one year, which would save the
expense of much Malt, tho the Liquor were but mean.
There are several ways of Planting in the Fields, all which are here set down,
that every man may use that which suits best with his convenience and good
likeing.

. 3. If your Land be in tillage, you may set Fruit Trees at thirty Yards
distance from one another, How to Plantwhole Fields.
throughout the whole Fields, in straight and direct Rows, after the manner of
an Orchard, and you may go on with your Plowing with the loss only of about a
yard, or four Foot Square of Land about every Tree for twenty years at least,
and when they are grown so big, that you think your Corn receives hurt by the
shade or droppings of the Trees, if you can turn it to pasture, the Trees will
improve most kind of Land, by keeping it warm in the Spring, they will make the
Grass come and grow more early, and by Shades in the Summer preserve it from
burning; but the Trees being set at such a distance, the Land may continue for
any purpose for ever, if you dress or Prune these Trees higher up than any
other, that no Boughs may hang in the reach of Cattle, and for convenience of
going about them with your Team to any work, and thereby the Air and Rain will
have free access to the Grass, or Grain near about them, and the Fruit will be
safer from common Pilferers. These need no other fencing than Thorns bound
about them, and a Stake driven in the midst to keep them from shaking; because
you may receive the prosit of the Stubble or Fallow without suffering any large
Cattle to come into the Ground, that will browse upon them.

. 4. Another way of Planting Fruit Trees in Fields is by setting Walks of them,
How to Plant Walks of Fruit Trees in Fields.
running through the midst, or along the sides of your Pasture-grounds, where
you have a mind to have Walks for ornament, or shady: for why Walks of
Fruit Trees should not be rather Planted than of Elm, Sycamores, Ash-trees,
etc. none can pretend a reason, there being some sorts of Fruit Trees that will
(and almost any kind may be ordered so as to) grow very handsome in shape,
besides the beauty and sweet smell of the Blossoms, and worth of the Fruit.

To prevent damage by Cattle, if you go this way to work in Field Planting,
they must be well grown before you set them, that is, they must be of about six
years growth, and then well fenced, and there are two ways used to save them
harmless. 1. One much commended is by Tumping them, To set Trees by Tumping.
and it is performed thus, viz. set your Trees in the place designed on the top,
or almost on the top of the Ground, no deeper than to make it stand, tho all
the Roots be not covered, till the Tump or Mound be raised about it; and then
take a line about a yard and quarter long, tie the one end of it about the
Tree, but so that in going round the Tree with the Line strained, it may slip
about the Tree as you go; fasten the other end to an Iron setter or stick with
a sharp point, and as you go round the Tree, mark the Ground; Make then a Ditch
on the outside of the round Score, and lay the Turf handsomely two or three
heights, with the Grass-side outward so as to make the work full half a yard,
or two Foot high; then cast the Mold out of the Ditch, observing to throw the
best of it next the Roots of the Tree, till you have raised it within as high
as the Turf; then prick strong Thorns into the Mold, that they may lie upon the
Turf, and point outward a yard over the Turf; as you place the Thorns, put
more Turf or fast heavy Earth out of the Ditch upon the ends of them, treading
it down the better to fix them, and lay the Earth shelving down from the Turf
toward the Tree, that if Rain fall it may soke toward the Roots; if you have
any small Thorns, Briars, Furs, or Gorse, lay it one the top of the work
finished, round the Tree and repair all yearly as you see cause, which may be
done with small trouble. The following observations will demonstrate the great
convenience of setting Fruit Trees this way.

First if your Land be over moist this Ditch will drain all wet from the Roots
of the Tree; but if the Land be Clay or such that the Water will stand in, then
when you perceive it (which is very rarely) cut some little Notch or Trench to
let it out.

Secondly, This way of setting is commended in dry Land; because the Earth of
the Mound will secure the Roots from the heat of the Sun, and every shower of
Rain will much refresh it, by soaking toward the Tree.

Thirdly, You need not bind your Tree to a stake which does often gall and Hurt
the Tree, for so much Earth about it will keep it steady,

Fourthly, If your Land be stiff, or strong old Land, the Mound made of it will
mellow and improve about the Roots, and also by that time the Roots spread as
far as the Ditch, it will be filled up with Mold fallen from the Tump, and with
sticks, Leaves, etc. which will be rotten, loose, and good for Trees to Root
in, and by that time they will need little or no defense, if any at all; A few
Thorns tied about the bodies of the Trees, to keep Cattle from rubbing against
them will be enough.

Fifthly, The Chief benefit of setting Trees thus, is, that where the Soil is
somewhat too moist or shallow, the Tree being set on the top of the Land, will
put forth it is Roots plentifully into the Earth cast up, and thence shoot into
the upper Turf and best Land that has been Plowed and manured before.

Another way of Fencing is, by erecting at a Foot and a half distance one from
another, about every Tree three small Posts, (if they be sawed they need be but
three Inches square) or you may use Poles, or straight Boughs, either whole, or
if big enough, cloven in two, three or four parts, about five Foot above the
Ground in height, being driven into the Ground, nail a cross Bar of Wood from
each to other, within a Hand's breadth of the tops of the Posts, to which Bar,
nail a Pale or two betwixt each two Posts, stuck into the Ground or nailed to
the like Cross Bat within a Foot of the bottom of the Posts; the way of it may
be seen now in diverse places, and learned in a Minute; though what is said here
makes it plain enough.

This way is more chargable than Tumping, where Timber is scarce, but much more
dureable than it, and absolutely necessary where Deer, or Rabbets, or any thing
that peels the Bark off, come into the Land Planted.

Planting near Hedges in the Fields.
. 5. Another way of Planting in Fields which has been successfully Practiced,
is thus; When you scour a Ditch, and cut down or plaish an old Quickset-Hedg,
then set a row of Trees within a yard of the Hedge on that side that is not
Ditch't, and Fence them with half-Round Tumps only on the one side, for the
Hedge will secure them on the other, and from the cut or plaish't Hedge, you will
commonly have Thorns and Briars enough for the Mounds, to Fence it as has been
before directed; and at the same time, or in Summer, draw some of the
Quickthorns, Hips, or Briars, from the Hedge in o the Fence, about the Tump
which will contribute to the strengthening and preserving the dead fence you
had made about it before; so that you may be free from trouble about it for
ever after.

There are these advantages in this way of Planting, viz.

1. The Ditch on the outside the Hedge drains the Ground and makes it healthful
and sound. 2. The Ground near the Hedge is commonly very Rich, as not having
been impoverished by Tillage, but improved sometimes by the often scouring of
the Ditch, and commonly with the Dung of Cattle, that for shelter, Shade or
Fodder repair thither. 3. Its not the least hindrance to Plowing or Grass; for
the Hedge when its grown up, usually bears out as far as the Tree is set in
the Field. 4. And this is much better than Planting in the Hedge Row, as many
do; for in a large top its apter to weaken the Hedge under it, but these being
set a little distance from the Hedge, and growing (as they will) with the
greatest part of their Heads from it, will not damage it. 5. The Fruit may be
gathered with much more ease, than of those that are Planted in the Hedges. 6.
They will not be choked or hurt by the Hedge when its grown up, but be good
handsome fair Trees.
You may set these at eight yards distance, or nearer, being but one single
Row, and so if but half a Field (as usually it falls out) have the Ditch on the
outside, you may set a considerable number, and find advantage without damage,
and with inconsiderable charge, especially if the Ditch stand on the
North-side, if you can, therefore choose such Hedges.

This is not to be practiced near Hedges that are full of great Wood, or Trees;
but if there be but few Trees, its but leaving a vacancy near such Trees, and
setting your Fruit Trees against such places, where there grow none in the Hedge.

How to Plant in Hedges is the Fields.
. 6. Another way of Planting in Fields is this, if you would Plant without any
charge of Fencing, you may do it in your Hedges; these Trees must be well grown
and strong, that the Hedge choke them not while they are young: and when you
plaish or cut down a Quick Hedge, observe no certain distance, but as it happens
where you find it most free from Quick, set a Tree and enclose the Body in the
Hedge, but bind not the Etherings too close about it, lest they gall and fret
it, and as it grows observe what Thorns annoy it, and cut them off.

Planting by the Cuttings of Gennet-Moils, etc.
. 7. If you have a mind to set any Cuttings of Codlings, Gennet-Moils, or other
Apple Trees that grow of Cuttings, they will prosper very well in, or rather
near a Hedge, because generally there the Mold is loose and mellow for them to
put forth Roots in, and somewhat enrich't by the frequent cleansing of the
Ditch; if you Plant them near the Hedge, you must a little Fence them on the one
side, as by the third foregoing direction; but the Tumps you raise to set the
Thorns in, must not be above a Foot high, for the Cuttings will shoot out their
Roots, almost to the top of the Earth about them, and a high Mound falling down
by degrees, some of the best Roots may be left bare, or very little Earth upon
them.

The way of preparing Plants for this purpose, is by Circumposition, etc. as is
directed in the 11 Chap. of Dwarf-trees.

Make choice of Cuttings or Stems as big as a Man's wrist (if you can) toward
the lower end; before you set them, prune them out of the reach of Cattle, and
leave but little top on them when you set them, neither let them be very long;
if the tops be out of the reach of the Cattle its enough.

Planting in Fields by long Crab-tree Stocks.
. 8. There be some that get long Crab-tree-stocks out of Woods, or else dress
some up in their Nurseries to grow tall, and set them in their Fields or
Hedges, and at three years standing Graft them, which may do well and is better
approved of, because there needs no removal after they are Grafted (which is of
great advantage as to make both good-bearing and sound Trees) but some
inconvenience there is in this way: the long Stocks out of Woods being commonly
very old, their Bark thick, their Roots big, they thrive but indifferently; and
those raised in Nurseries will seldom be taper grown, or strong enough to bear
a large top well, after they are Grafted so high as they ought, being set in
Fields: You will also be longer in raising Stocks to that height, and any
considerable strength (as is necessary for this purpose) than in raising Trees,
if your Stocks be Grafted young in your Nursery, because they thrive more after
Grafting than before; and in both Cases if you Graft them high, the Stocks will
be continually putting out sprouts of their own kind below the place they are
Grafted at, which will require frequent cutting off; if you Graft them not very
high you will find it difficult to defend them from the nipping of Cattle, and
from the Cyens being broke out of the Stocks by some casualties or other, to
which they are more exposed in Fields that lie common to Cattle, than Nurseries
that are enclosed.

Planting in Fields by Gra^ting old Crab-treestocks.
. 9. The way most used in Planting-Countries is by Grafting such Crab-trees as
grow in the Hedges or Grounds, and this is the speediest way to have Fruit;
because the big Trees have Bodies already, and in four or five years time (well
ordered) will have good tops to bear; and if you Graft small Stocks in your
Ground that have grown of their own accord there, and Fence them, they will
speedily bring on Grafts, being so well Rooted.

The mischi^f of Grafting the bodies of old Trees.
. 10. Many cut off the tops of old Crab-trees, or Apple Trees, and Graft the
body or Trunk, but the Cyens could never cover the Heads of those Stocks, and
by that time the top was a little grown up, the body was ready to perish with
rottenness. The best way for big Crabtrees (or if you would change the kind of
any Fruit Trees) is to Graft them in the Boughs, where they are not bigger than
a Man's Arm, making use of none but those that grow handsome at convenient
distance one from another, cutting off the others smooth and even, close to the
Body of the Tree.

To do this, that Winter that you cut or plaish a Hedge, order the Workmen to
trim up, but not to lop or top the Crab-trees, unless it be the tops of the
Boughs two Foot above the place you intend to Graft them at, and then in March
following saw off the Heads at proper places and Graft them.

Of Grafting old Trees in the Cleft.
. 11. Many are for Grafting these in the Cleft; because they think the Cyen
has best hold, and will not be so subject to be broke off, or out, by the
Wind, as those Grafted in the Bark; but many times those in the Cleft are broke
out by the Wind, neither can you perceive that the Wood of the Cyen in the
Cleft did ever cement with the Wood of the Stock, but only on the outside as
the others do: And those in the Cleft are not so apt to grow all of them, nor
to make so great a growth as those in the Bark, which with a little wariness
may be preserved from danger of the Wind, and full as much care must be had
about those Grafted in the Cleft, if you will preserve them all from the same
prejudice.

How to Graft old Trees.
. 12. You may observe the following difference in Grafting these great Foughs
from all the forementioned varieties of Grafting, and look upon it as a thing
well worthy to be taken notice of and observed.

When you have prepared the Cyen as you are directed to do when you Graft in
the Bark, apply it to the place you design to put it in, and slit the Bark of
the Bough through on both sides the Cyen close to it, beginning at the top of
the Bough, and not carrying the slits much above half length of the slope of
the Cyen, separate that little portion of the Bark between the two slits, from
the Wood with your Instrument, thrusting it a little lower than the slits, to
let in the Cyen as far as it is sloped, and then stick the Cyen in, having
first taken off from the edges of the Cyen any unevenness (not cutting through
the Bark) that all may the better fit together, and you may put in two, three,
or four Cyens in every head, having respect to the bigness of it; or you may in
the biggest put in two Cyens in the Cleft, and two others in the Bark, doing
one of the later on the West Side of it, for then the Wind blowing it toward
the Head, is not so apt to break it out, as if it drove it from the head; bind
the heads and Clay them as you heard before, and continue to do so yearly till
the heads are almost covered.

At first Claying, stick in Feathers or long Escures, to prevent Birds lighting
on the Cyens.

In July following (whether you Graft these big Stocks in the Cleft or Bark)
pick off most of the Leaves of the Cyens, and cut off such sprigs as growing
inward will make the head thick, and all straggling out Boughs, that the Wind
may not have so much force upon them to break the Branches out of the Stocks.

Cut off also some of the biggest Shoots the Crab-tree puts forth of its own
kind; but for the first three years, you must not cut off all, left the Tree
not having liberty to vent all the Sap that comes up, surfeit and dye, the
small Grafts not being able to receive near so much Sap as the old top did the
year before.

Thus many Countrymen when they take off the head of an old Oak, have
sometimes found it dye, and therefore in some Countries, they leave one big
Bough to grow for one year to draw up the Sap, (as they term it) whereas it is
indeed that the Sap may have liberty to vent it self; for Trees that have a
thick Bark, as old Oaks have, when all the small Boughs are cut off, are long
in putting forth Branches; and difficulty at last put forth so many as will
spend the Sap which comes up the Tree, in some proportion to what it did the
year before, when the whole top was on, which Sap being chiefly in the greatest
Channel betwixt or near the Bark and outside of the Body of the Tree, and not
being vented, is either dried or consumed by the heat of the Sun, or putrifies
for want of that continual motion that is in it, when it has vent, that
several Trees dye of this Disease; and when Trees dye this way the Bark will
drop off from the Body of them sooner by some years than otherwise.

Hence it is that you may kill a Tree, by lopping off the whole top in the
Summer time, or so much of it that the remaining Boughs cannot receive all the
Sap, but it lies choakt up for want of Issue.

The second Summer you ought to bind some Hay-ropes, about the lower part of
the Cyens; there will be no great need of repeating this the third Summer, but
if done, it will the more certainly secure them from breaking by the Wind.

Thus you may securely and speedily Graft old Trees, that are either bad
Bearers, or bear Fruit of bad kinds, and they will in three or four years hear
plentifully, if you take care (which you always ought to do upon any Grafting
or inoculating) to Graft them with kinds that experience of your self, or
others, can faithfully assure you to be of very good bearing kinds.

CHAP. XIII. Of propagating and ordering Vines.
Soil proper for Vines.
. 1. THe best Ground for them is a rich dry, light, Sandy Land, inclinable to
Stony or Gravel, so it bind not; if it incline much to Brambles it is a sign of
apt Ground for this Plant; the richness of the Soil is not altogether so
requisite as the heat and dryness thereof; a short Vine full of Knots or Joints
is most fruitful, and fittest for our Clymate. The best Dung to Fatten the
Earth they grow in, is Horse or Sheeps-dung; make bare the Roots in the
beginning of Winter, and throw in plenty of the same Dung most Winters.

Kinds of Vines to be propagated in England
2. Next be sure to make choice of such Grapes as are most suitable to the
English Soil and Clymate, which is more subject to nipping Frosts and cold
blasts than France etc. and our Northern Country much worse than the Southern
for these Fruits (as well as all other) especially, are better or worse, and
bear according to the place they grow in, if they have a proper Soil, be well
ordered, have much Sun, as upon a South-Wall or upon the East-Wall which is
best next, the Fruit will be better and sooner ripe. And I have read that the
Vine that yields Grapes in the Canaries, of which the Sack is made, was
transplanted from the Rhine in Germany thither, and that it was no other than
the Rhenish-Wine Grape, which agreeing and improving in that Clymate, affords
the most delicate Wine, far different from it is parents on the Rhine.

The small black Grape, by some called the Cluster-Grape, or Currant-Grape, is
the first ripe, bears well, the Bunches are small, but the Grapes so thick
that you cannot put a pin between them, and is a very pleasant sweet Grape, and
as fit for propagation as any. There is another sort so them without Stones.

The next is the Red and White Muskadine, bearing well, large Bunches, and fair
Fruit, and ripens in most years against a South-Wall; but the Red is not so
good as the White.

The Red and White Frontin^ac, is a Fruit, of a very pleasant haut-gust, where
it comes to perfect ripeness, which it scarce does, unless in a hot Summer, and
it be Planted against a good South-Wall.

The Black or Red Orleance is a very good Grape, and ripens very well with us.

The great Blue-Grape, is very good Fruit, and ripens well with us.

The Canada, or Parsley-Grape, so called from the Country whence it came, and
from the form of it is Leaf, being divided and Jagged like a Parsley Leaf, it is
ripe somewhat late, but a good Fruit.

The Raisin-Grape is a large and long Grape, but ripens not well in this
Clymate.

The Burlet, is a very large Grape, but seldom ripening here.

Grape de Arbois, is a very good Grape.

The Bursarobe is an excellent large sweet White Crape, and in some years
ripens well, as also will the Muscat.

The way of propagating Vines by Layers.
. 3. The best way of propagating Vines, is in November, to Lay a Branch of that
years growth into the Earth, under the old Tree, without cutting it off; lay as
many Joints, or Buds in the Earth as you can, leaving but one or two out; for
it puts forth it is Roots chiefly at the Joints; at a years end, or in the
February come twelvemonth cut it off from the old one, and Plant it where you
design it should grow; lay it in the Earth in the same posture it lay in
before, and also lay some of the Buds of the new Wood that grow out since it
was first laid down; that it may gain the more Roots, leaving out of the Ground
again not above one or two Buds.

Propagating Vines by Suckers and Cuttings.
You may chance to have Suckers of an old Vine which will be sure to grow. Or
you may take Cuttings of Vine-Branches of that years growth, and cut the bottom
in shape of a Deer's foot on the under side, and set them in good warm loose
Land, and many will grow; if it be in the place you intend they shall always
stand in, next year lay down a part of that which has grown out, to Root also,
or else upon removal lay in the new growth all but a Bud or two, with that part
which is already Rooted; if it have made but small growth the first year, lay
part of the second years growth in the Ground; it will more advantage them by
helping them to good Roots, than the loss of a year or two's growth in the top
will amount to.

. 4. If you have an old Vine that bears not well, To help an old Vine.
lay down in February or March some of the strongest Branches of the foregoing
year, (that grow low) in the Mold under the old Tree, without cutting them off,
leaving out of the Ground a Bud or two to grow, and your Wall will quickly be
furnished with new and Fresh Branches; so that by degrees you may cut off many
of the old Branches of the Vine; for tho one Vine may cover abundance of
Walling, yet three or four Roots in that compass will strengthen it the more to
bear.

Of Pruning Vines.
. 5. As Vines stand in more need of Pruning than other Fruit Trees, so great
care is to be taken in the performing of it; when you have set your Vine as you
have been before directed, so that not above two Buds of it remain above
Ground, you are to nail up such Branches as grow forth up to the Wall, till it
have overspread as much Wall as you design for it, suffering not above two
Branches to grow from the Ground, and snipping yearly the tops of the Branches
a considerable length, as far as they are weak and tender, and also all small
poor ones, close to the body, unless the well-liking Branches be but few, and
then you may leave the lowest Bud of some of them, to grow forth next year, and
this you are to do yearly toward February, or the beginning of January.

When your Vine comes to bear, you are to use your Knife about it three times
in the year.

First at farthest in February, and the beginning thereof you are to prune off
part of the foregoing years Shoots where they are too thick, close to the old
Wood. As it enriches your Vine to keep it thin of Branches, so you must take
care it be well stored with Buds against the Spring following, for it bears
Grapes only on the new Shoots of every year; and in cutting off these Branches,
you must take care your Wall continue furnished with such Branches as may be
spread upon the Wall regularly and decently, not thick in one place and thin in
another, nor crossing out another. On every Sprig you cut off in this Pruning,
where you would have Fruit the succeeding year, leave two or three Buds, for
out of those Buds, especially the second or third, proceeds the Clusters; also
cut off the Branch aslope on one side or under, that the Rain rest not on the
Pith of the remaining part.

Secondly, The next time to take off superfluties from your Vine is about
Midsummer, when the Grapes are knit; clip off then the end of the Branches that
have Grapes on them, a little above the Grapes, that they may have the more
nourishment and keep them nailed to the Wall, as also barren Branches where the
Wall needs them.

Thirdly, The last time of cutting is in August, for then, because Leaves and
Branches may be so thick, as to keep the Heat of the Sun from the Grapes, which
is necessary to ripen them, you may pluck off some of the Leaves, and cut off
some of the Branches to open way for the Sun to come to them.

There Is on thing to be observed in Pruning these, peculiar to it, that whereas
others are cut at a Bud, the Branches of these must be cut off near the midst
betwixt two Buds, and that not later in the year than the beginning of
February, Note. that December and Jannary, are the best times for tee Winter
Pruning of Vines.
for afterward the Sap or Juice will run out, and the Vine will be much
weakened by bleeding. You will by that time also see what the Frost of the
Winter foregoing has killed, which must be taken all away.

If Frosts come before any Grapes are ripe, defend them in the night time by
Tilts or Mats.

. 6. It Is not worth your labor to Plant Vines by Espaliers, Vineyards prosper
not in England.
or in a Vineyard in England; because of the early nipping Frosts which our
Clymate is very subject to, which is the reason it is seldom used, and the usage
of people in such cases affords no weak Argument that it is of no advantage; And
Grapes seldom or never ripen well in this Isle, without great help of Art and
industry, to which purpose take these directions.

First, To Plant such as ripen soonest in the year, that they may have as much
of the Summer heat at ripening time as may be.

Secondly, Let the Wall you Plant them against, be a full South, or but a
little inclining to the East; or if you have a half round, or corner in a Wall,
or the back of a Brick Chimney, or a Kiln-wall, or Barnwall posited as
aforesaid, make use of such places for them.

Vines will prosper and bear well against a high Wall, yet that is not
altogether so necessary but that low Walls may serve turn, and the higher may
be reserved for such Fruit Trees as will not do well without them. That of a
Tarras Walk may do well for Vines, and the Gravel Walk under the Wall mightily
increase the heat about them.

If you Plant any Trees against your dwelling house Wall, there may be some
narrow places between two windows, or the like, where other Fruit Trees have
not room to spread: a Vine may grow up there, and above those narrow places
enlarge it self where ever it meets with room.

You may also Plant a Vine betwixt every Fruit-tree that grows against your
hottest Walls, and let it spread a little in the Summer time into the
Fruit Trees on either side, especially if the Fruit of such Trees use to be
early ripe, or that they bear little Fruit, or have not been so long set as to
have covered the Wall. And tho such Vines cannot extend themselves to that
bigness, as those Planted where they have more room; yet by this means you will
make advantage of such portions of your Wall, as otherwise you could have but
little benefit from.

Some Vines Shoot sorth exceeding large Branches yearly, but bear little; in
such cases bare the Roots, and cut off a Master Root, or two from the Tree,
then lay some Sand, Ashes; or any hot barren Soil to the Roots, and it will
abate the redundancy of Sap, and conduce to bearing Fruits.

. 7. Do not pull or cut off your Vine-Leaves in August, or September, with
design of giving access to the Suns heat, thereby to acclerate the maturity of
the Fruit, as many frequently use to do, and as is before directed in Sect. 5.
for on my own experince, such depriving the Grape of it is Leafed shelter from
the cool Air, or morning Frosts, has always proved pernicious and destructtive
to the Grape; and I have often observed the best Grapes and earliest ripe, to
be under the shadow and Protection of some Leaf.

CHAP. XIV. Of Figs, their kinds, and propagation.
FIgs are a Fruit that agree with English Palats and Soils much alike, Figs.
there being few that affect them. Among the several sorts of them, there are
two of chiefest note among us. The great blew Fig, as large as a
Katherine-Pear, and which is most common, and bear their Fruit to perfect
ripeness, if set against a South-Wall, and spread thereon with Nails and
Leathers, and Planted on warm Land.

And there is the Dwarf blew Fig, that is sooner ripe and better tasted than the
former, but the Tree and Fruit is lesser.

Fig Trees ought to be Planted in a very warm place, against a Wall defended
from the North and North-East Wind: every old Tree will yield plenty of Suckers
fit to raise new ones from beginning of October, until Candlemas; or they may
beraised by Layers; as Vines. Prune them no more than extreme necessity
requires.

CHAP. XV. Of Walnuts, their kinds and propagation.
Kinds of Walnuts.
. 1. THere are several sorts of Walnuts, some being larger, others thinner
sheld than the common, but differ so little one from another that Men have not
much minded giving them Names; the largest sort is usually called the French
Wallnut; the best are those of a tender thin shell, of a full Kernel, and of a
middle size.

For what Walnut Trees are good.
. 2. Walnuts are much Planted of late, and are very proper for Walks in
Grounds, and a good Fence to shelter Buildings and Orchards; the Fruit is
useful, and profitable if you can spare any to sell, or for Oil for Painters,
if the Markets should be glutted with them, and the Timber so excellent for
Tables, Chairs, Stools, and the Stocking of Guns, etc. that it goes off well,
and takes a good price.

Way of raising Walnuts.
. 3. They are raised by Nuts gathered from the same Trees: if you can, let them
have their Green Husks on them, for the bitterness thereof will defend the
Kernels from being eaten by Worms before they spring up; but you must chiefly
respect their full ripeness, at which time they are apt to shed their Husks;
you may either set them as they come immediately from the Tree, or keep them in
the Sand till March.

Set them in rich, dry, warm Land, little more than an Inch deep, and when you
transplant them, set them as speedily as you can after taking up, and cut off
little of the Roots, but by no means the Sap or heart-Root (as in other Trees)
and top them not at all, if you can help it; but if the Tree be so tall,
crooked, or dead at the top before removal, then you must put a Peg, or some
soft Wax into the Pith-Pole, or cover the Cut with Clay, that wet may not get
in, and make it dye downward, because these Trees have a large Pith; when you
do cut off the top, do it if you can, at a side-Branch or Sprig, and that will
spread under the Clay and cover the tops again; you may cut off many
side-Branches when you transplant them.

No Cattle will brouse or peel them by reason of their bitterness, so that a
Fence that will preserve them from Cattles rubbing it sufficient.

Soil proper for Walnuts.
. 4. They will grow in loose Gravelly, Stoney, or almost Rockey Land, and best
where they are first set without being removed, to which end you may in such a
Hillock as is spoken of in Field-Planting (but not so broad nor so high) set
three or four Nuts, or more, and about two years after they are grown up, pluck
up gently all but one of them, that is likely to make the best Tree.

CHAP. XVI. Of Chestnuts.
THe best Chestnuts among us are those that come from beyond Sea, but of those
that grow with us, some are larger than others, without any difference worth
observation.

Chesnut-trees grow to b^ very large, and bear good Fruit on a h^t dry Land;
they are excellent for a defense from Winds, and better then Walnut-trees, but
of much flower growth; It Is not good ^o top them as some do when they transplat
them.

They are raised by setting N^ts an Inch and half deep, that come from beyond
Sea, at the end of the year; or from good Nuts well ripended in England, which
you may set with the Husks on where they are fallen, or rather kept in Sand
till the great Frosts are over: these Tr^^s grow best likewise without being
ever ^^moved, some say that they will grow well being Grafted upon Oaks,
Beeech, or Walnut-trees.

The Horse-Chesnut growth of Layers, and makes delicate Trees for Avenues.

CHAP. XVII. Of Filbeards.
THere are two sorts of Filbeards, distinguished by the color of the skin of
their Kernells, the one being Red, and the other White: There is another sort,
called the Filbeard of Constantinople; the Leaves and Fruit of which, are
bigger than either of the former: And there is besides these an excellent large
plump Nut, that has a very good Kernel, the best of which have a very thin
shell.

Filbeards and Hazle-Nuts worthy to be Planted in Orchards or Gardens, are
raised from Nuts set in the Earth or Suckers from the Roots an old Tree, or may
be Grafted on the common Hazle-Nut-Tree.

CHAP XVIII. Of Quinces their kinds and propagation.
THere is not a more delicate Fruit for the Kitchen and Conservatory than the
Quince, whereof there are some sorts, though not many, somewhat different from
each other.

The Portugal Apple Quince, is of best esteem, it is a large yellow Fruit,
tender, pleasant, and soon boiled.

The Portugal Pear Quince is much like the former, except in it is form.

The Barbary Quince is good, but small.

The Lions Quince is a large yellow, and the Brunswick Quince a large white,
both good Fruit, but inferior to the two First.

The English Quince is the most Stony, and a harsh Fruit, and covered with a
Down or Cotton.

The way of raising Quince-trees is by Suckers, Cuttings, as you are taught in
the Eleventh Chap. aforegoing; and it is only to be added that if you have a
part of a Tree that growth so low, that you can bring it to the Ground, either
by Plaishing or otherwise, you may do it in the beginning of Winter, and cover
it all with Earth but the ends of the Branches, and let it continue so one
year, and then uncover it, and every Twig will have put forth Roots in the
Earth, which being cut off, and transplanted will make you a Tree.

And this is the way of propagating Fruit Trees by Layers: How to propagate by
Layers.
And you may here take notice, that all such Trees that may be propagated by
Cuttings, as Currants, Quince, Goosberries, Raspherries, Barberries, Figs,
Vines, Mulberries, etc. may be raised likewise by Layers, and this way takes
more sure than by Cuttings. Trees generally have large Pith that will grow by
Cuttings and Layers.

Quince-trees delight, and bear best in a fat, moist, rich Land, where some
Sinck, or Gutter that carries away the soke or Wash of a Dunghill or House, is a
place usually chosen for them, and is such as they like very well in.

Some will Graft or Inoculate Quince-stocks, with Grafts or Buds from
Quince-trees of good bearing kinds, which will cause them to bear more early.

CHAP. XIX. Of Mulberries.
MUlberries are distinguished by their Colors, for there are Black, Red, and
White.

The Black Mulberry-tree never fails of Fruit after it is grown up, but the
White seldom bears well.

They are raised by Suckers, Layers, or Cuttings from the Branches or sides of
the Tree.

These following Trees and Shrubs are very apt to grow of Cuttings or Slips, as
Codlings, Gennetings, Brets, Gennet-Moils, Quinces, Goosberries, Currants, Figs,
Vines, Tamarisk, Honeysuckles, and Roses in some Grounds. By Laying, almost any
sort of Trees or Shrubs will grow, if a little Incision be made, as the
beformentioned and Mulberries, Cornelions, Lime-trees, Gelder-Roses, Roses of
all sorts. The Season for setting of Cuttings of Trees to grow, is from the
full of the Leaf until Candlemas. The Season to increase Trees by Laying, is
from Michaelmas to the beginning of March, and sometimes in the Spring or Summer.

CAAP. XX. Of Medlars, and Service-trees.
THere are three or four sorts of Medlars, the biggest sort, called the great
Dutch Medlar without any Thorns upon the Branches, is the best, and a good
bearer; the common has Thorns upon the Branches; and there is another sort
without any Stones in the Fruit.

There are two sorts of Services, one larger than the other, that grows wild
in the Woods, but neither the sorts of these, nor of Medlars, are distinguished
by names, and the Fruit of both is not eatable till they are rotten.

Medlars are raised by Grafting on the Pear Tree, Crab-tree, White-thorn, or
Service-tree, the last is the best, and the White-Thorn by much the worst.

You may get Plants of services out of the Woods, where they grow wild, from
which you may raise Service-Trees, or Stocks for Medlars; or if you can get
none such, Graft the service on the Wickey-Berry Tree, or the White-Thorn.

CHAP. XXI. Of Goosberries, Currants, Raspherries, and Barberries.
. 1. GOosberries so called from the use that has a long time been made of
them, Goosberries.
in the Kitchen when Green Geese are in season.

There are some varieties of Goosberries, the best sorts are the Amber, and
great Hedghog Goosberry, which is prickly, but the other smooth, both of a
bright Yellow color, and the great White Holland, or Dutch Goosberry, which is
large, transparent, and a great bearer. The great Yellow Dutch Goosberry,
differs from the last only in color. The great early Red Goosberry is a
fine, sharp, pleasant Fruit, and first ripe; there are likewise some that are
Blue, differing little from the former, but late ripe, and the Great Green
Goosberry late ripe, but good; and there are several small Goosberries not
worth Planting or taking notice of.

. 2. Currants or Corinths, Currants.
taking their name from Corinthia where first had. The great White Dutch
Curran, and the great Red Dutch Curran, are the fairest, largest and best, and
the great Yellow Dutch Curran differs only in Color, all others are to be
ejected out of your Gardens; the English and Black Currants not being worth
Planting in comparison with the White and Red Dutch Currants. The great Darkred
Dutch Curran is largest, and has a sweet relish, and since it became a Native
of our Soil, is much improved, where Planted in rich moist Grounds.

. 3. Of Barberries there is the ordinary, Barberries.
or common sort, and Barberries without Stones, and the great Barberry, which
is a sort bearing bigger Fruit than either of the other.

Of Rasberries there are three sorts; Rasberries.
The Common Wild; The large Red Garden Rasberry, a pleasant Fruit, and yields a
delicate juice, And the White Rasberry little inferior to the Red.

Goosberries, Currants, Rasberries, and Barberries are best raised by Suckers,
of which you may have plenty about the Roots of old Trees. And Goosberries, and
Currants may be propagated by Layers, or by Branches, or Shoots cut off and set;
they are to be set four or five Foot distant from each other upon Borders, or
Beds of rich moist Land: The season for Planting them is from Michaelmas to
Candlemas.

Currants and Rasberries will prosper and like very well in shady places, and
the colder the Soil, the better will Rasberries bear and thrive.

Rasberries usually bear the same year they are set, if drought, or too late
Planting hinder not; and that which bears this year, dies after bearing, and
what Springs new this year bears the next; Cut no more of them than what will
make them a little handsome, and in the Winter cut or break out all the dead
Stalks from amongst the living Rasberries.

When Currants, Goosberries, and Barberries have grown some years, suffer not
too many Suckers to grow about them, nor cut the tops to a round close Bush, as
many Gardiners do, whereby they grow so thick that they neither bear, nor ripen
their Fruit so well as if the grew taller and thinner.

All the said Fruits ( viz. Goosberries, Currants Barberries and Rasberries)
like well in shades, tho the Fruits are not of so delicate a taste, as those
that grow in the Sun: You ought to keep the Ground about them free from Weeds,
and other Vegetables, and to Dig, and well Manure it each two years at
Michaelmas, and yearly with a pair of Sheers about fourteen days before
Midsummer dub the tops of Currants and Goosberries and they will bear better; do
the like at Michaelmas.

CHAP. XXII. Of the kinds of Peaches, and Nectarins.
. 1. THe Stones of Peaches produce Trees that will bear Peaches, sometimes
better than the Peaches out of which the Stones were taken, although those Peaches
grew upon a Tree that was Inoculated on a Plum-stock: And therefore some
Gardiners by setting many Stones of the Newington-peach, have found some
amongst the Trees come up from them, to bear a Fruit rather improved than
worse, and by giving it a new name, and Inoculating from it, have made good
gain of it; but this is not a practice for every private person; because
Peach-trees so raised, will be much longer before they bear Fruit, than those
which are Inoculated; and because he must run the hazard of filling great part
of his Wall with these Peach-trees thus raised from Stones, and not one, it may
be, in an hundred prove any thing extraordinary, and the rest of no use, unless
for Stocks; after he has waited several years to see what Fruit they will bear.

. 2. Of Peaches the first and soonest ripe is the White Nutmeg, next that is
the Red Nutmeg, next to that is the Troy, which is ripe almost as soon, and a
better Fruit; next ripe are.

The Isabella Savoy Early Newigton Bordeaux Old Newington Violet Muscat Persian
Modenae Morello Rumbullian Scarlet Bellice Royal Ricket Bloody Mounsieur, one
of the latest, and Red within and without, and an excellent Fruit.
Peach.

These are accounted excellent kinds of Peaches, and there are many other good
sorts besides these, and so there are of Apples, Pears, etc. more than are
mentioned in this Book, or is necessary to trouble the Reader with; some choice
Fruit of every kind being here nominated, for every one to please his fancy
with, or store himself with them or others, as he approves them, or has
convenience so to do.

The best Nectarines are. Nectarins.


The Red Roman Murry Tawny Paper White
Nectarins.

There are others though worse sorts as,

The Yellow Painted Russet Red
Nectarines.

The Algier Nectarine is commended by some; because it parts easily from the
Stone.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the kinds of Apricoks, and Strawberries.
APricok, so called from Apricus, delighting in the Sun, is a kind of Plum, but
far exceeding others in every respect.

The Algier Apricock is early ripe, and in June, it is a small round and Yellow
Fruit.

The Masculine Apricock is a better and earlier Fruit than the former, but not
so good a bearer.

The Turkey Apricock is much commended, so is the Orange; the white Apricock is
accounted better than the Common.

They are to be propagated only by Inoculating upon the White Pear-plum Stock,
or White Wheat Plum-stock, or some Plum-stock which is Sappy, of large growth,
free, and bears large Leaves, Shoots and Branches.

Strawberries will grow under the shades of more lofty Trees. Strawberries.


The common English Strawberry is much improved by being transplanted from the
Woods and Hedges into the Garden.

The White Strawberry is more delicate than the former.

The Long Red Strawberry is not altogether so good as the former.

The Polonian, or Great Strawberry is the largest of all Strawberries and very
pleasant.

The Green or Rasberry Strawberry is the sweetest of all Strawberries and
latest ripe.

The New England or American Strawberry is the earliest ripe of any English
Fruit, being often ripe at Midmay, and continues bearing till Midsummer. They
are the farest (except the Polonian,) and of the best Scarlet dye of any Fruit
that grows, and very pleasant and cool to the Taste. They are propagated by
setting of the young Roots (chiefly in the Spring and Fall) which increase from
the Strings that run from Elder-Plants, and the Strings must be very often cut,
and they Weeded.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the kinds of Plums.
IN Berries the white is commonly more delicate and sweet in Taste than the
colored, as is seen in white Grapes, white Rasps, white Straw-berries,
Currants, etc. but in Fruits the white is commonly the meanest, as in Plums the
white Harvest Plum is a base Plum, the Musle, Damazeen, and other black Plums
are of the best, etc.

There is great variety of Plums, and they appropriated to several uses, they
continue longer on the Trees than Cherries, and are a more pleasing, but not a
more wholesome Fruit.

Plums to be preferred before others are as follow, The Red and Blew
Primordian, as being first ripe, tho not so good Fruit as several of the
following.

The Morocco Myrobalan Violet Apricock, a delicate Plum, and parts clean from
the Stone. Barbary Black Damascene Green Damascene Prunella Queen Mother, one
of the best Plums. Kings Matchless Black Pear Plum Pescod Catalonia Bonum
Magnumque, a fair yellowish green Plum. Black Date Cheston Marbled Imperial,
one of the largest of Plums. Nutmeg Turkey Prince, last ripe.
Plum.

These Plums you may set to a Wall, tho most of them will bear well being
Dwarfs, or Standards, if you have not wall enough.

The white Pear Plum, Prune, Damsons, and Verdock, are good preserving Plums.

The Muscle, one of the best Plums Wheat. Lammas
Plum.

And Bullice, and Damsons, and several course Plums are raised by Suckers,
without Grafting or Inoculating, and may be set in Orchards, Hedges, or any
common places.

The driest Plums which part clean from the Stone and are of a black or
inclinable to a Black or Red color, are accounted best.

Plums are best propagated by Grafting.

CHAP. XXV. Of the kinds of Cherries.
THe May Cherry is first ripe, and should have a good Wall to expedite it is
ripening; for tho they are but ordinary Fruit, yet their earliness makes them a
rarity: next ripe are.

The Duke Archduke Flanders Red-heart Lukeward, one of the best of Cherries.
Cluster Cherry, bearing three, four or five usually on a Stalk. Bleeding-heart
Spanish Black Naples Carnation, a delicate Fruit for the Table or conservatory.
Cherry.

The Amber, the Grater. Purple, one of the best and latest Cherries and a good
bearer.
Cherry.

The great bearing Cherry of Millain, and Morella, are Blackish when ripe, and
Blood Red within, excellent to make Cherry Wine, affording a strong and Vinous
Liquor.

These viz. the Cherry of Millain; Morella, Cherry, and Prince Royal Cherry are
good to preserve.

If you have not room upon your Walls, these will bear well in any warm place,
Planted as Standards.

Those that you find put forth small Twigs, and have a small, dark, Green Leaf,
are easiliest kept for Dwarf-trees.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Pears and their kinds.
PEars are of very many kinds, in so much that some have affirmed that there
are no less than four or five hundred several kinds; but however, certain it is
there are so many, that to trouble the Reader with their names would be very
needless, therefore some of the Choicest for all uses will be most proper for
the storing your Plantation, especially if you respect profit more than
curiosity, which is the main design of this little Tract.

Pears are much improved, as is most Fruit by being Planted against Walls. In
France they are accounted among their best Fruit, and the best kinds well merit
it.

The Summer and Winter-Bon-Cristien growing pendent are fitter for a Wall, than
to be Planted of Standards; the Winter will keep till May, and is a very choice
Pear.

The Bury de-Roy, is esteemed for the Table the best of all Summer Pears, it is
a fair Brown Pear, excellent in it is season, melting in the Mouth, thence
called the Butter-pear, and bears well against a Wall; the Green Bury-pear, is
more Green, and larger than the former.

The Violet Dove Grean Musk Amadot Rousellet Messier Jaen Great Sovereign Blood
Windsor Green-field Dionier. Great Burgamot Virgalous Roshea one of the best of
Pears. Red Katherine
Pear.

The Double Flowred Pear keeps till May, not fit to eat till March, these do
well Planted against a Wall: If you have not Wall room enough, such as grow
with small Twigs, or almost any Grafted on Quince-stocks, may be kept Dwarfs.
The Winter and Summer Burgamots may also make Dwarfs.

Meet Pears for Standard-Trees in Common Orchards, are such as follow, both for
Summer and Winter-fruit.

The Hill Primating White Geneting Red Geneting Green Chissel Pearl Sovereign
Orange Red Katherine is the best of Katherines. Anthony Sugar Lions a rare
Winter Pear for the Table. Pimp Berry Popering Deadmans Scarlet Prick Royal
Nonsuch Kings Ladies Buttock Muscat Oak Virgin Lions Ice
Pear.

The Gascoign Burgamot Winter Popering Little Dogobert Great Kairville Long
Burgamot
Pear.

With diverse others, each Country affording variety.

The Slipper, and the Lewis Pear by some called the Maiden-heart, is the best
off all Pears to dry, and a good bearer.

In Fields you may set Baking Pears, and Perry-Pears for Baking.

The Norwich Quince Bishops Arundel Bell Painted
Pear.

The great Black Pear of Worcester, or Perkinsons Warden, is to be preferred
before all other Pears for Baking; the Pears usually weigh twenty ounces,
sometimes more, and it bears very well against a Wall. Also Wardens of several
sorts are good for Baking.

Pears for Perry are the Red, and Whitehorse Pear; and there are also diverse
other wild or Choak-pears, whereof the Red colored yield the strongest
Liquors. The Bosberry, and the Bareland Pears are by much the best for Perry,
yet taken notice off, the Tree that bears the Bosberry-Pear will grow to that
Bigness, that it will bear Fruit to make one, two, or three Hogsheads of Perry
in one year: their might be much said of it is excellency when it is two or three
years old. The Tree will prosper on almost any course Land.

The Turgovian-pear, mentioned by the ingenious Mr. Evelin, in his Pomona, is
said to yield the most superlative Perry the World produces, and it were wished
the same was more generally propagated.

Pear Trees require not generally a very rich Ground, but will prosper best on
Stony, and light Land.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Apples and their kinds.
. 1. APples are seldom Planted against a Wall: therefore it is best to furnish
your self with the choicest of these following for Table Fruit, by making them
Dwarfs in the Garden, or larger Trees in a secure Orchard, being very tempting
Fruit, and some of them early ripe.

The Jeniting is early ripe, and a Fruit off a pleasant taste.

The Margaret or Magdalen is the best and most early, commonly ripe about Saint
Margarets day in June; it is a fair Beautiful Fruit, of a pleasant taste and
scent, and not equaled at that time for the Table, and Kitchen.

King Apple, tho not a Common, yet esteemed an excellent Fruit, and preferred
to the Jeneting.

The Aromatic or Golden Russeting Apple has a Gold colored Coat under a
Russet hair, with some Warts on it, it is Flesh of a Yellow color, and form of
a flattish Round not ripe till after Michaelmas, lives over the Winter, and the
most pleasant tasted Apple that grows, having a delicate Aromatic haut-gust,
and melting in the Mouth.

The Flax Apple a good early Apple.

The Spice Apple in some places much valued.

The Summer Queening mixed with others, a good Cider Apple, being of it self
sweet.

The Go-no-further, or Catshead-Apple a large Fruit with Red sides.

The Golden Pippin is smaller than the Orange Apple, but like it in color,
taste, and long keeping, and the Trees are great bearers.

Bontradue, or good Houswife is the largest of Apples, a great bearer, and good
for the Kitchen, and makes good Summer Cider.

The Giant Apple is a large Fruit and well tasted, the best of any Summer Apple
for Kitchen uses.

The Pome-Water is an indifferent good lasting Fruit.

The Summer Pearmain is known to be an excellent Fruit, but not so good as the
Winter Pearmain.

Kirton Pippin or Holland Pippin is one of the best sorts of Table-Fruits from
Michaelmas to Alhallontide, and yields very good Cider.

The Orange Apple is of the color and form of an Orange, has a fine rough
Gold colored coat, resembling the Golden Pippin, only fairer, is of a very
pleasant taste, and will keep long.

Summer Bellabon is a fair Apple, the Tree a good bearer and the Fruit very
good, but will not keep any long time.

Russet Pearmain a very pleasant Fruit, continuing long on the Tree, and
participates both of the Russet and Pearmain in color and taste.

The Paradise Apple is a curious Fruit produced by Grafting a Pearmain on a
Quince-stock.

The Famagusta is one of the best early Apples.

. 2. There are also some Apples of great esteem in their respective Countries,
as,

The Darling Apple is much valued in Cheshire.

The Stocken Apple in Herefordshire, tho not known by that name in many places.

The Golden Renating in Hartfordshire, a very pleasant and fair Fruit, and it
something resembles the Pearmain, the Trees great bearers, but subject to
Canker, the Apple keeps well.

The Angles Bit in Worcestershire, a delicate tasted Apple.

Kirton Pippin in some parts of Northamtonshire.

The Harvey Apple in Cambridgshire, a choice Fruit, but the Trees no good
bearers.

The Devonshire Quarrington is a very fine early Apple.

The Bitter-scale in Devonshire much esteemed, yielding excellent Cider without
the mixture, or assistance of any other.

The Underleaf in Herefordshire, an Apple of a Rhenishwine Flavor, and may be
accounted one of the best Cider Apples.

Deans Apple is well esteemed of in Devonshire, on the same account that the
Bitter-scale is; and so is the Pleasantine Apple.

. 3. The subsequent Apples are good Winter Fruit, and such as may be Planted in
Orchards. And observe that long lasting and fair Apples, will not only adorn
your Table, but yield most profit, either for the family or sale, for one
Bushel of good Apples after Christmas may be sold for three times more, than
the same Fruit would have taken at Michaelmas; and your long keeping Fruit is
of good use and profit until new come, as well for the Table, and Kitchen, as
Cider.

The Winter Pearmain.
There are three sorts of Pearmains, and the larger sort is more pulpy than the
smaller, and keeps not so well, they are all of them excellent Fruit, but the
Winter is best.

The Winter Queening is a very good Table Fruit, and so is the Quince-Apple.

The Nonsuch Apple is a long lasting Fruit and good at the Table.

The Pealing is a long keeping Fruit, makes good Cider, and the Trees are great
bearers.

The Leather-coat a good Winter Fruit, and long liver, so is the Golden Doucet.

The Pome Roy has a good taste, a pulpy substance, and not yielding much juice,
yet that which is, is very good.

The Lording is a fair, green, and sharp Apple, a constant bearer, being a
hardy Fruit, and for the Kitchen only, and has little Core.

The July-flower is of a pleasant taste, and long lasting, a thick rind, and
hard Core, well stripped, good for Cider, making an excellent mixture.

Pear Apple is a curious pleasant Apple, of a rough coat, but the Tree no great
bearer.

Greening is a good Apple, of a Green color, and keeps to a second year.

Lones Pearmain is called by several names in several places as the
Marygold-Apple, Onyon-Apple, Kate-Apple, John or Joanes-Pearmain; It Is a very
good long lasting Fruit, fit for the Table, Kitchen, Conservatory, or Cider,
having a good juice, bears every other year to admiration, the intervening
years but a few, and there is another of them called the Summer Marygolds.

Green Russeting is a tough and hard Fruit, long lasting and of a pleasant taste.

Red Russeting is of a lesser size, but an excellent Apple and long lasting.

Pome-water is an indifferent good lasting Fruit.

Winter Fillet or Violet is an excellent Cider Fruit, yielding a delicate
Vinous juice.

Winter Bellabon is a great bearer and keeps well and is a fair Apple.

The Oakenpin a long lasting Fruit, yields excellent Liquor, and is of the
nature of the Westbury Apple, tho not in form.

The Nonsuch, is a long lasting Fruit, good at the Table, and well marked for
Cider, and the Redfennel, and Figg-Apple whose Tree yields no Blossoms as other
Apple Trees; nor Fruit any Core or Kernel, are also good Winter Fruit.

There are several other good Apples that will last and keep long as.

The John-Apple or Deuxans Westbury. Winter-Reed Flower of Kent Parsley
Winter-Chesnut Maligar
Apple.

The The Short tart The Winter-Russeting The Pelmel The Thrift The Winter-Clary
Apple.

There are many and diverse kind of Pippins, all of them very good, yet the
Gregory-Pippin propagated much about Manchester in Lancashire, I esteem to be
one of the best for profit and service; it is a fair, large, well relished
Fruit, has little Core in it, and keeps and lasts well till the following May;
The Trees are quick and large growers, and will prosper well upon courser Land
than other Pippins, and the Trees are great bearers and the Fruit good for any
Culinary use; And it is an excellent sort to be propagated, on mean Soils and
where better Soil, is not to be had and for the Northern parts.

There also are several sorts of Renatings, very choice and good Apples, as the
Goldin-Renating, the Lincoln-Renating, etc.

In Planting Winter Fruit, the best course is to Plant several Trees, of some
few of the best kinds, after you have found what sort prosper best in your
Soil; for many sorts will be troublesome in gathering, and keeping them
severally when you have done. Long lasting, keeping, and fair Fruit, and
Apples, will not only adorn your Table, but yield you most profit and service.

. 4. For Cider Fruit, the Red-streak, Bromsberry-Crab, Golden-Pippin,
Gennet-Moil, Westbury-Apple, Cyder-fruit
the White and Red Must-Apples, the John-Apple, Under-Leaf, Winter-Fillet,
Elleots, Stocken-Apple, Bitter-Scale, Claret-Wine-Apple, Arrier-Apple, Richards
or Grange-Apple, Coling-Apple, Olive-Apple, Fox-Whelp, Pippins and Pearmains
mixed, Gilliflower-Apple.

But above all Cider Fruit, the Red-streak, is most celebrated for it is juice
of any Apple the English Soil affords; It Is one sort of Wildings of
Herefordshire, and for the excellent Liquor it yields, is now spread into most
parts of England.

There are several sorts of them, as the Summer, Winter, Yellow, More-Green,
and the Red Redstreak, which is the Chief and more Red than the other. The
Redstreak should be Planted for Cider rather than any other Fruit, and that for
the following Reasons. 1. Because it yields the best of English Drinks. 2.
Because the Fruit is harsh and unpleasant, and tho kept long, tempts not the
Palats of Lewd persons. 3. The Tree thrives in as mean Land as any other Apple
whatsoever, being a spontaneous Plant at first. 4. It Is a constant bearer,
being a Wilding, enduring (more than the grater part of other Fruit) the
severity of sharp Springs often destructive to those that are more tender. 5.
The Tree bears in a few years after Grafting, recompencing betimes the industry
and cost of the Planter, the delay whereof in other Fruits, has been a
principal obstacle to the great design of Planting. 6. The Tree is low and
humble and so more of them may be Planted in a like quantity of Ground, than
the taller Trees which shade the Ground more. 7. The lowness of the Tree
prevents the sharp Winds in the Spring, and the Fruit of them are not so apt
to be blown off in Autumn. 8. The Fruit exceeds all other Apples in the Kitchen
for the time they last.


Golden Pippin.
But it is observed that the Cider made of the Redstreak is not in all places
alike, although it be a curious Liquor, excelling most Cyders in most places, yet
in some Lands other Apples may make a better Cider; As the Golden-Pippin being
a delicate Apple, yields a juice in many places exceeding the Redstreak: so
that if your Land be rich inclining to the Pippin Fruit, the Golden Pippin
merits a place in your Plantation, being a very great bearer, and the Fruit one
of the best for the Table, as well as the Mill, and makes an admirable and
restaurative Cider.

If the Redstreaks are kept till they are mellow, the Cider at first is very
luscious, if Ground early, then is the Cider more racy.

Boms burry. Crab.
The Bromsbury Crab is reputed next to the Redstreak for good Cider, and although
it be little better than the common Crab, yet if kept on heaps till almost
Christmas, and then Ground, it yields a brisk, poignant, and very excellent
Cider.

White, and Red Must-Apples.
The White and Red Must-Apples make a Cider very good to be drunk about
Christmas, next following the season of making Cider. The Trees are of quick
and large Growth, good bearers, and 12 or 14 Bushels or Strikes of them will
make a Hogshead of Cider.

Gennet Moil.
The Gennet-Moil was once accounted the best Cider Fruit, and still many
Gentlemen that are Cider Masters prefer it, and preserve it for their own
Drinking.

Winter Queening.
The Winter-Queening is not commonly used for Cider, yet it yields a strong and
Vinous Liquor, but so dry a Fruit, that 24 Bushels will go to make one
Hogshead. The Fruit must not be Ground till very late in the year.

Pippins and Pearmains.
Pippins and Pearmains mixed are much used, and Pippins alone make a strong and
wholesome Liquor.

Westbury Apple.
In Hampshire near Peterfield, there is a Fruit known by the name of the
Westbury-Apple, so called from the Village where the old Trees stood, that
yielded the Grafts to it is Neighbors. It Is a fair, Green, and dark colored
Fruit, having on the Sunny side of them some Red stripes, the Rind or Peel
exceeding rough, the Flesh spongy and not inclining to Rot, although rudely
handled; if the Fruit hang long enough on the Trees until they are ripe, which
will be with the latest.

This Fruit is not to be eaten by reason of it is tough, rough and austere
substance and Taste, until Christmas.

The may be kept until the Midsummer following, and are to be preferred for
any Kitchen uses. The Trees are great bearers, and thrive in any cold and moist
Land, and it is probable in barren Land, it being a natural Fruit to this
Country, and endures all weathers, and yields an excellent, and plentiful
juice. For which property of being hardy, unpallatable whilst on the Trees (a
worse Apple than it not being to be found) well bearing, durable, and
usefullness, the more ingenious Neighbors have encreast them. Of which Fruit
has been made Cider far excelling any Redsstreak that could be there obtained,
and it is probable may exceed any other Cyders, so that the Fruit be not Ground
until December at soonest; For all hard, durable, rough and sharp Fruits make
the worst Cider, if Ground from the Trees, or soon after, and the best when
they have been kept until time has thoroughly digested their juice by lying on
heaps and there sweating.

John-Apple, Deux-Ans, or Two-year-old Apple.
The John-Apple, or Two-year-old, so called from it is long lasting, continuing
near two years, is an Apple not much unlike the Westbury-Apple last mentioned;
for it agrees with all Soils, and where the Pippin Fruit are so subject to
Canker, that it is labor lost to Plant them, there this Deux-Ans, or John-Apple
flourishes even to excess, and it is Rind so clean, that no other Tree is to be
compared to it. The Tree is more apt to aspire than any other Apple Tree, it is
Branches grow very uniform, and therefore may be Planted near one to the other
in Rows, but those Rows at a fair distance, whereby beautiful Avenues may be
made, yielding Fruit as well as shade. The Trees are great bearers, and hardy
against all Winds and Blasts; The Fruit is so hard, sharp, and unpalatable from
the Tree, that it is freed from the danger sweeter Fruits are subject to; they
hang long on the Trees before they are ripe, and then being laid up until
December, or after, and Ground, yield a very delicate Cider, which will soon
ferment, therefore must be drawn off the Lee in a few days.

This being a common, and in some places but a Hedg-Fruit, and yielding but a
thin sour juice, being Ground from the Tree, has been of late slighted, when
in truth there is scarce a better Fruit to be Planted, than this John-Apple, or
Two-year-old, both for the beauty of the Tree, it is quick growth, it is liking
all Grounds, great bearing, enduring all Weathers, long lasting, it is
excellency for Kitchen uses, and preference at the Table, when most other
Fruits are past.

Observe that Cider Fruit may be divided into three Classes, First, such as are
for making early Cider, or for present Drinking, as the Codling and Summer
Fruits, etc. Secondly, such that are for making the best, rich, oily, spicy,
poignant, and high relished Cider, and also long keeping and lasting, such are
the Redstreak, Bromsberry Crab, Golden-Pippin, Westbury-Apple, John-Apple, the
several sorts of Musts, and Fillets, the Elliot and Stoken-Apple, etc. Thirdly,
such that are useful Fruit for the Table, yet making a very pleasant and
acceptable Cider, and such are the Pippins and Pearmains, Gilliflower,
Marigold-Apple, Golden-Renneting, Harvey-Apple, Queening, etc. Generally all
hard Apples and Wildings, having a lively, pert, poignant, brisk juice (so that
they come not too near the degree of stark Crabs) make excellent Cider; but
Cider, made of hard, harsh Fruits, is not so soon ready for drinking, as that
of Summer Fruits, and those more pleasant: That made of Table Fruit being
earliest ripe, is ready to drink so soon as it is well settled and cleared; but
that of hard Apples, not till Summer following, and will continue good for two
or three years, or longer, if kept in a cool Cellar, good Vessels, well stopped,
and will improve in keeping.

Of Planting several kinds of Apples,
Some object that since one or two kinds of Fruits may be had very good for
Cider, what occasion is there to Plant of so many sorts?

For Answer; They will find it advantageous to have several sorts of Fruit for
Cider, for the following considerations, 1. One sort of Fruit Trees may and do
bear one year when another fails. 2. Cider made of some kinds will be ready to
drink sooner than others, and thereby you may have it successively for your
use. The Must-Cyder may be clear a Month after making; The Gennet-Moil a
quarter of a year after; the Redstreak near Half a year after, though it is much
improved by longer keeping. 3. You may make your Cider with more ease, the
Fruits you make it of ripening one after another. 4. Tho some Fruits yield not
so good Cider as others, yet the Trees may be quicker of growth, bear more
plentifully, and last longer than those that yield better; and the Palates of
men being various, some like one sort and some another, and so all may be
pleased. 5. Some Fruit Trees agree with the Soil and Clymate better than
others, which you will not be able to know, till you have made trial of several.


How to make a new kind of Apple or Pear.
Graft one Fruit on another many times over, every year a different kind, (so
that you keep to those kinds that will grow together.) As first to Graft a
Crabtree near the Ground with some good kind of Apple Graft, and the next year
to Graft that again a handful or two above where the first was Grafted, and the
next year to Graft that second Graft, and so proceed for five or six years, by
setting Graft upon Graft, and this may probably make some alteration and
commixture in the Fruit of the topmost Graft; tho it be true, every Graft keeps
it is own nature, yet so as it receives some small alteration from the Stock,
the Sap thus arising and passing through so many kinds of Stocks into the
topmost, may possibly raise a new Fruit.

The more Red any Apple has in it is Rind, the better for Cider, the paler the
worse; no sweet Apple that has a rough Rind is bad for Cider, if suffered
especially to digest some time on heaps, as is hereafter directed, Chap. 29.
Sect. 3.

Mixture of Fruit is of great advantage to your Cider, the meanest Apples mixed
make as good Cider as the best alone, except the Redstreak, and some few
celebrated Apples for that purpose; but always observe that the Apples so mixed
be of equal ripeness.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Annoyances to Fruit Trees.
Concerning Moss or Canker.
. 1. THe nature of Soil is the chief cause of the Moss and Canker, and
therefore without altering the one, you can scarce prevent the other, however
you may with a hair cloth rub the Moss off, after rain, or (as some say) burn
it with a bottle of Straw under the Tree: but if you only scrape or rub off the
Moss, in few years they will be as much annoyed therewith as ever; because
Mossiness is caused by over coldness of the Ground; as in the Waterish and Clay
Grounds, and likewise by Barrenness of the Soil. If the coldness proceed from
over much moisture, lay it dryer, by Trenching the Ground; if Clay Grounds,
then mix warmer Soils therewith as you are before taught at Chap. 7. Sect. 10.
yet be sure you take away the present Moss.

All Canker, filth, and Worms, must be picked clean off, and bind some Clay
well mixed with Hay about the Cankered place.

If the Tree grow but poorly, which is for the most part caused by the ill
temper of the Soil, open the Ground about the Roots and put in some Manure
proper to cure it.

The Canker assaults generally the best sorts of Fruit Trees, as the Pippin,
Pearmain, Harvy-Apple, Golden Rennet, etc. of Pears the Wardens of all sorts,
Burgamots. etc. And it sometimes comes by galling and fretting of Boughs on each
other, and sometimes by setting Trees not shallow but too deep, as well as by
Barrenness of Soil, and sometimes it comes by breaking off Boughs (which should
be cut off close to the Tree, tho in the Summer) and Cattles nipping off the
Buds or pieces of the Tree, or unseasonable Pruning.

Raising of Stocks from Crab kernels in the same Land and Grafting on, after
once removed, and placed where they are to grow and be Grafted, prevents the
Canker.

To cure the Canker at present, cut it out, if it be upon the body or great
Boughs of Trees, and wash the place with Cowdung and urine mixed, and then cover
the place with Clay mixed with Horse-dung, and cut off the small Branches that
are dead; however stop the cause by amending the Soil at Roots with proper
Manure, as the Dung of Hogs, Pigeons, Poultry, Horses, Cows, the sediments of
Pools, Ponds, Currants, Shovelings of yards where Cattle frequent, etc.
according to the nature of the Soil.

. 2. Slitting the Bark is an excellent additional help to most of the aforsaid
evils, Bark bound.
and also for Bark binding; some advise that the Bark be cut according to the
grain of it, as in Apple Trees, Pear Trees, etc, straight down; in Cherries
etc. round about the Trees; and where the Graft over-thrives the Stock, there
slit the Stock, but not quite through the Bark, and this slitting must be done
in the Spring about the middle of February, or at Candlemas.

Some Trees prosper where others will not.
. 3. You Will often find in the same Land some kinds of Fruit Trees very subject
to some of the beforementioned evils, and others prosper well; when once you
discover this (because it is utterly in vain to make Ground and Trees of
different Genius agree together) you must make it your business by degrees to
change your Trees, till you have left none against which your Soil bears such
an implacable hatred, and furnish it with such as will flourish and be fruitful.

. 4. If any of your Trees are galled by rubbing on each other, Bark Galled
or by being bound to Stakes, or by Thorns, or otherwise, lay some Clay upon
the gald places and wrap Hay-bands about them, but withal remove the cause by
Pruning, or otherwise.

. 5. Bigg Plants that upon there removal have had their Tops cut off, Dead Tops
or bitten Twiggs to be cut off.
are apt to dye from the place they were cut off at, to the next Sprig or
Branch upon them; these dead parts, or any piece bit by Cattle, ought to be cut
off close to the next good Twig or Shoot, and covered with Clay as in Grafting,
that the head may be well grown over by such Twig or Shoot, and the wet
prevented of getting into the Pith, to the damage of the Tree.

. 6. Hares and Rabbets are very mischievous to Nurseries, Hares and Coneys.
and young Orchards by peeling off the Bark of the Plants; if your Fence be a
Wall, or close Pale, or Water, there is little danger of them, but because such
Fences about Orchards are rare, and no other can keep them out, some expedient
must be made use of.

Some have used Hay Ropes bound about the Tree from the Ground a sufficient
height; but this were endless in a Nursery, it may be done in an Orchard, but
there are other ways to be preferred before it.

Others therefore dawb the bodies of the Trees over with Tar, which being used
alone endangers the life of very young Plants, and extremely hardens the Bark,
and otherwise hurts them, which evil is prevented by mixing the Tar with any
kind of Grease, and boiling them on a Fire, so as both may incorporate, then
with a Brush, or little Broom, dawb over the body of the Tree, as high as an
Hare or Rabbet can reach, and this is to be done about the tenth of November,
it will preserve the Trees for that whole year, with that once doing, it being
the Winter time only that they will feed upon the Bark.

Some use Grease alone, and then it will require to be laid on twice in a
Winter.

Some thin stuff out of a house of Office, or the thick tempered with Water,
and brusht on, once or twice in a Winter has been often used with good success.

And if you desire to take them, set Grins of Wire, Snares, or running Nooses of
Wire (whose brittleness is allayed by the heat of Fire) at and in their Musets,
or the holes they come in at, and you may take many, but scarce all before you
have great mischiefs done you.

Pismires and Ants:
. 7. If you find Pismires, or Ants, breed about or near the Roots of any of
your Trees, cast away the Earth they lodge in, and supply it is place with some
stiff Clay: If they breed distant in several places, some direct to dawb the
Tree about with Tar, that their feet may be taken in it, but you heard already
that is prejudicial to young Trees; but if they pester you extremely, and your
Tree be young, you may bind a single list, or shred of cloth about it, and once
a week (when Buds and Blossoms are putting forth, for that is the chief time
they prejudice them) dawb the cloth over with Tar. And where you find their
breeding places, pour scalding Water thereon.

. 8. Moles are to be killed, especially in Seed plots and Nurseries: Moles and
Water Rats
Spring-traps, or Box-traps are best to destroy them, not easily described, but
are now almost generally known. There are also some kinds of Cats that will not
leave a Mole either in your Garden or Orchards, and some say that Water Rats
will spoil a whole Nursery getting through Mole holes, and Barking or eating
the young Roots, and these are said to be frequent where your Nursery is near a
Fish Pond.

Suckers.
. 9. From the Stock usually spring many Suckers, which extract the nourishment
from the Tree, they must be taken off dexterously from the Root, and may be
prevented by Grafting on good Stocks raised from Kernels: for Trees Grafted on,
or proceeding from Suckers, are always subject to this disease, which the
Canker usualy attends.

Ests.
. 10. Ests or (or some call them) Askers, are said to be pernicious to Trees;
therefore as you find either Moles, Water Rats, or them, destroy them.

Blastings, Frosts, and Caterpilars.
. 11. The greatest prejudice to Fruit is by Blastings, Frosts immediately
succeeding rain, Caterpillars, or black Flies, that eat up Buds, Leaves, and
Blossoms; therefore when in the Spring you perceive these Caterpillars or Flies
appear, make fires of something that will smoke, so near the Orchard, and in
such places that the Wind may carry the smoke as much through the Trees as may
be. A thing frequently used is Hemp sheaves (as it is called) being the Stalk of
the Hemp, when the Tow is separated from it, and 'its certainly very good, but
bad Chaff, wet Straw, or Moldy Hay, or any thing of that nature may serve turn,
and it is said to be good for Frosts also, but how, I know not; and you may also
pluck off those Leaves which have the Cobwebs made upon them, (in which they
breed) and tread them under foot, for one of them contains multitudes.

. 12. Snails are pernicious to Wall-fruit therefore destroy as many of them as
you can, Snails.
when they are best to be discovered which is early in the morning.

Cover Wall-Fruit.
. 13. To preserve your Wall-fruit as, Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarins, etc. from
blasting Winds, and Frosts, it will be necessary to cover them in the nights
and cold days, by hanging before them Canvas or thick Linen cloths, which you
may draw up and let down by Pullies.

. 14. Birds, as the Bullfinch, Titmouse, or Tomtit, Birds.
etc. are affrighted best by a dry Hawk perching in the middle of the Tree, or
by taking them with Birdlime: Crows will be frighted if you kill one or two of
them, and pull it in pieces, and scatter the pieces about the Trees, they will not
come their again whilst the Feathers are any thing fresh: but Magpies,
Jackdaws, Jay's are not to be frighted from your Cherries, but killed as they
come with a Gun, and that early in the morning.

Earwiggs.
. 15. Earwigs are destroyed by setting Oxhoofs, Canes, or any hollow thing near
the Roots of the Trees, and among the Boughs upon the ends of sticks, and
they will Creep in, and lie there, then take off these Hoofs quickly, and shake
them and crush them on the Ground with your foot.

Cattle.
. 16. Cattle, wheresoever they come amongst Trees, are a mighty and mischievous
enemy, if the Boughs be within their reach; for then they will bite off the ends
of all, and thereby with their Teeth, so bruise the ends of the Boughs and
Shoots, that the Tree seldoms thrives of many years, if ever, afterward. Where
this misfortune happens to any Tree, the only remedy is to cut off at some
Sprig or Bud, so much as they have had in their mouths, or is bruised by their
Teeth. And Fence your Orchards well from them, or else, which is the surest way,
not to let your Trees begin to spread before they be six or seven foot high, of
the Trunk or body, and so Pruned up, that all the Boughs and every part of them
be so far from the Ground as will be impossible for Cattle to reach.

Setting too deep.
. 17. Although the setting Trees too deep and below the good Soil be no disease,
yet it is the cause of many diseases to your Fruittrees, as Moss, Barkbound,
Canker, etc. therefore carefully to be avoided; setting shallow being attended
with no other inconveniences, but that the Trees are sometimes blown down, if
not Staked the first two years.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Gathering Fruit, and the best way of making Cider.
. 1. IN gathering of Fruit, be careful that the Branches of your Trees be not
battered and broken.

. 2. Such as you design to keep any time, ought not to be shaked off the Trees,
because of bruising, but picked off with your hands: Be sure the Fruit you
gather be thoroughly ripe, which you may know by it is beginning to drop, or by
cutting an Apple, and seeing the Kernels turn black: Let the Weather be fair
and dry when you gather, and no dew upon the Trees; lay up what you thus gather
in a close, but a sweet room, upon a boarded (but not with Deal) Floor, and not
on a Clay, or plaistred Floor, and lay them up without any green Leaves, or
Sticks among them. As you find any in your heaps rot, pick them out, and in
Frosts cover them with Straw, or Straw Mats, and also hang in sharp Frosts
Blankets before the Windows to keep out the Frosts. Lay every kind by
themselves.

If you have some Pears that are choice and lasting, wrap them up in paper, and
lay them one by one upon shelves, or hang them up by the Stalks, and keep out
the Air from them as much as you can.

. 3. In gathering Cider Fruit, you must be sure to let them be well ripe on the
Tree, Gathering of Cider Fruit and preparing it for the Mill.
for there is much Cider spoild because the Apples are Ground before they are
ripe, and all Fruits yield a different Liquor according to the different
degrees of maturity of the same Fruit; for when it is most ripe it yields a
richer, pleasanter and more lasting drink; but if pressed before ripe, tho it
yields a greater quantity, yet it is but a thin, raw, crude, sour, phlegmatic,
and unwholesome drink: Therefore if your Fruit be not ripe all at one time,
select such sorts as are of a like degree of maturity, or if the Wind beat down
many, and you are unwilling to spoil or lose them, let them lie dry as long as
you can before you grind them, to obtain as great a degree of ripeness as they
can, and let that Cider be thoroughly fermented before barrel'd, and the first
that is spent; neither mix ripe with unripe Fruit, not ought you to permit some
sorts of Fruit be too ripe; because it then grows pulpy in Grinding, and will
not yield it is Liquor unless some Water be mixed therewith; your choice Summer
Fruits are some of them, as also the Pippins, and Renatings subject to
pulpiness, if full ripe.

Lay such Fruit by themselves (to be Ground and pressed for Cyderkin) that are
broken; but a small bruise does not much injury.

Your Apples being well ripe, let them be gently shaken down, and laid out of
the Sun and Rain, not abroad but in a heap; upon a sweet and dry Floor that is
boarded (but not with Deals, nor on a plaisterd Floor) and on dry, Rye, Wheat
or Oaten Straw, till they have sweat out and digested their crude and
phlegmatic humor, and there let them so lie a fortnight; the Redstreak and
harder Apples you may let lie longer, that is, three weaks or a Month; the
longer they lie, the less Cider indeed they will yield, but much the better, it
being necessary to have them as ripe as may be, so that too many of them begin
not to rot, which rotten ones are to be picked out.

Grind not your Apples immediately from the Tree, so soon as they are thoroughly
ripe, tho they will then yield the greater quantity of Liquor, but neither
pleasant nor lasting, therefore let them lie on heaps as aforesaid.

By hoarding only of Windfalls for some time, or until the time it was
expected they should have been ripe in, does very much meliorate the Cider made
of them, which otherwise might have been very bad.

For from the due time, place, and manner of hoarding of the Fruit is
oftentimes the Cider very good, which otherwise might have been very bad.

Thus when your Fruit is duly ripe, gathered, preserved or hoarded some time,
it is ready for the Mill.

When you bring your Apples to the Mill, or just before you fill them up; pick
out, or cast by, all that are Green, unripe, rotten, or otherwise naught, and
all Stalks Leaves, etc. that may injure your Cider, for it is better to want a
small quantity of Liquor than to spoil the whole.

Some are of opinion that rottenness in the Apple injureth not the Cider, but
that a convenient quantity of rotten. Apples mixed with the sound is a great
help to the Fermentation and Clarification of the Cider; but it is supposed they
mean such Apples only as have been bruised in gathering, shaking down, or
carrying, which will by lying become rotten, and (the skin being whole) be not
much the worse, only the Cider will retain a smack of them; notwithstanding
which, by no means admit them amongst your Cider, that you intend for keeping,
but rather make Cider of them for a more early spending: for others affirm,
that one rotten Apple corrupts a whole Vessel, which I presume is intended only
of putrid rottenness.

. 4. Grind not your Apples too small, for if they are not very small Ground, Of
grinding and Pressing the Apples.
you will have but little less Cider (although the contrary is commonly believed.)

After your Fruit is Ground, let it stand 24 or 48 hours, according as your
time and convenience will admit, so that it be altogether in good quantities in
large Vessels; by standing thus it not only matures, but acquires color,
commendable in Cider, and also causes the lesser part of the Apple easily to
part with it is juice in the Press; therefore observe not the general advise to
press immediately from the Mill.

You may leave a passage open in the bottom of your Fat, wherein you keep your
bruised Apples, during the time of their being therein, from the grinding to
the pressing; and some of the Cider may spontaneously destill into a receiver
placed under it, or you may have a false Bottom full of holes, that the greater
quanty may be had which may run through some Tap or other passage into your
receiver: Cider thus obtained far excels that which is forced out by the Press;
as Live Honey that destills of it self from the Combs, is much better than that
which remains and is pressed out afterward; but this is only used to get some
small quantity of the richest Cider.

In pressing the Apples, in case you intend not to use (which is bad husbandry)
your Pulp, Must, or Murc afterward for the making of Water Cider, usually
called Purre, or Cyderkin, then it is best to press it as dry as you can, but
incase you intend to add Water to your Murc, and to press it again, then you
need not to press it very hard, for your Cider will then be something the worse,
and so will your Purre, or Cyderkin: for the last squeezing is the weakest, and
makes your Cider the rougher; and if any thing will, that gives it a Woody
taste, unless it be prevented in the easy Grinding; but this only is observed
when you intend to have some rich Cider, and Cyderkin for your own use,
otherwise Cyderists generally press their Apples as hard as they can, although
they intend to make Cyderkin of the Murc.

Barrelling of Cider.
. 5. As your Vessel under the Cyderpress fills, then take the Liquor, and pour
it through some Streyner or hair Sieve (which will detain the Pulp and grosser
pieces of Apples from intermixing in the Vat) into a large Vat, from whence
most prescribe to tun it immediately into the Barrels wherein it is to be kept,
lest it is spirits should evaporate; but others rather choose to cast a cloth
only over the Vat or Tun to preserve it, and rather wast and consume the wild
Spirit of the Cider, in the Tun or Vat, and let it there in some small degree
purify by standing coverd five or six hours in the Vat, before you put it into
the Barrel it is to be kept in; then they separate the pure from the impure by
leaving as many Feces or Dregs to remain on the bottom of the Vat as possible;
because Dregs very much incommode your Cider by making it quickly become acid.

Then Tun up the purest (leaving the sediment at bottom of the Vat) Liquor in a
Hogshead or Barrel, seasoned and sweet, fill it not up by two Gallons at least,
and stop it up only with a loose stopper for four or five days, and then stop
it up close with Clay on the top or Tunhole, and put a Cork or some stopper in
^^e Vent-hole, loosly putting in the Peg; but for a weeks time or more, you may
once a day draw it forth a little, lest it break the Vessel, or force some
other vent; then stop it close up also, and so let it stand till you think it
may be something clear, and then pierce it, to try how it fines; The Summer
Fruit after a Month, the Moil after the first Frosts, the Red streak not till
after January, other Winter-Fruit Cider about the same time.

If the Cider be so clear that it will not again ferment, and you intend to
keep it long in the Barrel; put in clean unground Wheat, after the proportion
of a quart to a Hogshead, which will preserve it; and this artificial head is
only to be used, where an admission of Air may probably be into the Vessel.

Stopping of Cider with Clay, if you design to keep it long, is not so good as
a Wooden Plug, turned fit to the Bunghole, and covered about with a single
brown paper wet, before you wring it into it is place, and then let the Plug be
well luted on the top and sides with Clay temperr'd with Salt.

How to fine or clear Cider.
. 6. If your Cider be not fine at the times aforementioned, try them again
about a Month after, and then if it be not fine, rack it off as you would do
Wine, setting another Vessel in a convenient place, that through a pipe of
Leather, or a Siphon, or a Crane of some metal, (as of Latten) or Glass, the
Liquor may run out of the one into the other, without being exposed to the Air,
which is a most material thing to take care of at all times, the spirits of
Cider being very apt to evaporate.

Some choose rather to fine their Cider with Water Glue, commonly called
Isinglass, than by racking it. And the common and best way is that amongst
Vintners, etc. that have frequent use for it; and it is to dissolve a
considerable quantity of Isinglass in White Wine, without putting it on the
fire, which it will do in about a Months time, and turn to a Jelly, which they
keep by them, and it will keep good a Twelvemonth; and when they have occasion
to use it, remove the Scum that will be on the top of it, and take what
quantity will serve their turn out of it, according to the proportion of a
quart to a Hogshead; and this they beat to a froth, and mix it with a quantity
of the Liquor it is to be put in, and them pour it into the Vessel mixing it
well together with a Broom, and so leaving the work.

Or if your Cider has stood long, and will not be fine, as ostentimes it so
happens; Then take Isinglass about an Ounce to an Hogshead, and steep it a
day or two in about two quarts of Cider until the whole be reduced to a Gelly,
which by standing warm it will easily do, then draw off about a Gallon of the
Cider, and mix the Gelly (being cold) thoroughly with it, and put the whole into
the Vessel of Cider at the Bung, and with a splitted staff, stir it well
together, and in a day or two it will be fine without any prejudice to your
Cider.

This way of purification will serve in all sorts of Liquors, and is much to be
preferred in the juices of Fruits, to that vulgar way of making them to Ferment
by the addition of Yeast, or Tosts therein dipped, as is usually prescribed; that
being but an Acid excitation to Fermentation, all things tending to Acidity
being (as much as may be) in our operations to be avoided.

This way also is better than the tedious way of Percolation, and racking from
Vessel to Vessel, which wastes not only the Spirits, but substance of the Liquor
it self, and leaves you but a thin and flat drink, hardly ballancing your
trouble.

When your Cider is very fine, either draw it out of the Vessel as you drink
it, or which is far better, Bottle it: And take notice after it is fine, the
sooner you draw it off the better.

. 7. Although your Cider be well made, yet if it be put into ill shaped, corrupt,
Of Vessels for Cider.
faulty, and unsound Vessels, it is certainly spoiled. Although the vulgar round
Barrel be most useful, and necessary for Transportation from one place to
another, yet is the upright Vessel, whose Ribs are straight, and the head about
a fourth or fifth part broader than the bottom, and the height equal to the
Diameter of the upper part, the best form to stand in a Cellar. The Bung-hole
of about two Inches Diameter, is to be on the top with a Plug of Wood turned
round exactly to fit into it, near unto which there must be a small Vent-hole,
that after the Cider is tumn'd up, and stopped at the Bung or Tun-hole, you may
give it Vent at pleasure; and that when you draw it forth, you may there admit
Air into the Vessel. This is called in Lancashire, a Stand Barrel, because it is
made after the form of a Vessel which the meaner sort of People keep their
drink in, called a Stand. This form is preferred; because that most Liquors
contract a skin, or cream on the top, which helps much their preservation, and
is in other forms broken by the sinking of the Liquor, but in this is kept
whole; which occasions the freshness of the drink to the last. The form hereof
is thus.

The Form of the Vessel:

a ye Bung hole b a small Vent hole c the tap


depiction of vessel

If the Vessel you put Cider in be New, scald it well with hot Water, wherein
some of the Must, Murc, or Pouz of the Apples have been boiled.

If your Vessel be tainted, take five or six Stones or more of some unslak'd
Lime, and put it in the Vessel with six or seven Gallons of Water, and stopping
it well, Roll it about a while till the Lime be thoroughly slak'd.

Wine Cask, if sweet, are accounted proper to keep Cider in; but Vessels out of
which strong Beer, or Ale have been lately drawn are to be rejected, unless
thoroughly scalded and seasoned as before, which then will serve indifferently
well, nothing agreeing worse with Cider than Malt. Small Beer Vessels well
scalded are not amiss. White or Rhenish Wine Vessels may do well for present
drinking, or for luscious Cider, else they are apt to cause too great a
Fermentation.

The using of Cider Vessels between the Cider seasons, with Beer or Ale, not
only very much prejudiceth the Cider, but the using of them for Cider, injureth
very much the next Brewing of Ale or Beer. But if you are enforced to use such,
let them be well seasoned and scalded as before.

To Sent your Cask as Vintners do for their Wines, do thus, viz. Take of
Brimstone four Ounces, of burned Alum one Ounce, and of Aqua Vitae two Ounces,
melt these together in an Earthen Pan over hot Coals, then dip therein a piece
of new Canvass, and instantly sprinkle thereon, the powders of Nutmegs, Cloves,
Mace, Ginger, Cynnamon, Coriander, and Annise Seeds, and by a wire let it down
into the Vessel, and set the Canvass on fire, and let it burn, and it will fill
the Vessel full of smoke, then take it out, and immediately Tun up your Liquor,
which gives it no ill taste, nor savor, and is an excellent preserver both of
the Liquor and your health.

Some take Brimstone, Orras Roots, and Mastick, of each a like quantity melted
altogether, and long narrow pieces of new Canvass drawn through it, being
lighted, and put in at the Bunghole, keeps the Cider long, clear, and good, and
gives it a pleasant taste.

Cider by time changes it is greenish color for a bright Yellow, inclining to
Redness.

Vessels wherein Malaga, Canary, Sherry, or Metheglin have been kept, will
much advance the Color and taste of your Cider, especially if some of the Lees
of Canary, or Malaga, be left therein, viz. about two or three quarts.

If your Vessel be musty, Boil Pepper in Water after the proportion of an Ounce
to an Hogshead; fill your Vessel therewith scalding hot, and so let it stand
two or three days, or instead thereof use Lime as aforesaid.

Wheat Bran cast into the Vessel after Fermentation, thickens the Coat or Cream
of Cider, and conduces very much to the preservation thereof.

Choice of Bottles as Corks for Cider.
. 8. Thick, double Glass Bottles containing about quarts apiece, are preferred
very much to Stone Bottles; because that Stone Bottles are apt to Leak, and
more apt to taint than the other, and are so rough in the mouth that they are
not easily uncork'd, neither are they transparent, that you may discern when
they are foul or clean; it being otherwise with Glass Bottles, whose defects
are easily discerned, and are of a more compact metal, or substance, not
wasting so many Corks. If Glass Bottels happen to be musty, they are easily
cured, by boiling them in a Vessel of Water, putting them in whilst the Water
is cold, which prevents the danger of breaking, if you be so cautious as not to
set them down suddenly on a cold Floor, but upon Straw, Board, or such like.

If your Glass Bottles be foul, you may cleanse them with hard Sand, or some
Lead-Shot (each about the bigness of an ordinary Pease) rolled, and tumbled up
and down with Water, which will also in some degree take away the mustiness
from them. Great care is to be had in choosing good Corks, much good Liquor
being absolutely spoiled through the only defect of the Cork; If the Corks are
steeped in scalding Water a while before you use them, they will comply better
with the mouth of the Bottle, than if forced in dry: also the moisture of the
Cork does advantage it in detaining the Spirits.

.9. Drawing of Cider into Bottles, and keeping it in them well stopped for some
time, Bottling of Cider.
is a great improver of Cider. This is done after it is thoroughly purified, and
at any time of the year; if it be bottled early, there needs no addition, it
having body and spirit enough to retrive in the Bottle what it lost in the
Barrel: But if it have been over-fermented, and thereby become poor, flat and
eager, then in the Bottling if you add a small quantity of Loaf Sugar, more or
less according as it may require, it will give a new life to the Cider, and
probably make it better than ever it was before, especially if it were but a
little acid, and not Eager.

When your Cider is thus Bottled, if it were new at the Bottling, and not
absolutely pure, it is good to let the Bottles stand a while uncork't before
you stop them close, or else open the Corks two or three days after, to give
the Cider Air, which will prevent the breaking the Bottles against the next
turning of the Wind to the South.

The meaner Cider is more apt to break the Bottles than the richer; being of a
more Eager nature, and the spirits more apt to fly, having not so solid a body
to detain them as the rich Cyders.

Observe that when the Bottle breaks through the Fermentation of the Cider, to
open your Corks, and give vent, and stop them up again a while after, lest you
lose many for want of this caution. Lay your Bottles sideways, not only for
preserving the Corks moist, but for that the Air that remains in the Bottle is
on the side of the Bottle, where it can neither expire, not can New be
admitted, the Liquor being against the Cork, which not so easily passes
through the Cork, as the Air. Some place their Bottles on a Frame, with their
mouth downwards for that end, which is not to be so well approved of, by reason
that if there be any the least settling in the Bottle, you are sure to have it
the first Glass.

Placing Bottles on a Frame, as is usual, or on Shelves, is not so good as on
the Ground; by reason the farther from the Ground they stand, the more are they
subject to the Variation of the Air, which is always more rare in the upper,
than lower part of a Cellar, or other Room. Setting Bottles in Sand is much
used, but without reason, because it adds not that coldness to the Bottles as
is generally expected, being rather of a dry and temperate quality than cold.

The placing of Bottles in Wells, or in Cisterns of Spring Water running, or
very often changed, is questionless the best way to preserve either Ale, Cider
or any other Vinous Liquor.

A Conservatory made where a continual recruit of a cool refrigatory Spring
Water may conveniently be had, will so long preserve Cider until it become to
the strength even of Canary it self.

Where you have not convenience of Water, or are unwilling to be at the expense
of making such Conservatories, there the best way is to dig Vaults in your
Cellars, under the level of the bottom, or to make Niches in the Walls near the
Ground, and in them place your Bottles leaning: for the more they are from the
Air, and the more they are encompassed with Stone or Earth, the cooler they
will continue, and the less subject to the inconveniences that happen from the
mutability of the Ambient Air.

Binding down the Corks of your Bottels in case of danger is not so much to be
commended, as well fitting them in by full Corks; because the Liquor were
better fly the Cork, that break the Bottles, which must be in case the Cork be
tied down, and the Liquor not well qualified.

Restoring of Decayed Cider.
. 10. Sometimes Cider that has been good, by ill managment, or other accident
becomes dead, flat, sower, thick, muddy, or musty, all which in one sort or
other may be helped.

Deadness or flatness in Cider is often occasioned, from the too free admission
of Air into the Vessel, for want of right stopping; which is cured by pressing
some Apples, and put up only the new Must or Cider that comes from them on the
decayed Cider, and stopping it close, only sometimes trying it by opening the
small vent, that it force not the Vessel. The same may be done in Bottles, by
adding a spoonful or two of new Must or Cider to each Bottle of dead Cider, and
stopping it again. Cider that is dead or flat, will oftentimes revive again of
it self, if close stopped, upon the Revolution of the year and approaching Summer.

But Cider that has acquired a deadness or flatness, by being kept in a Beer
or Ale Vessel, is not to be revived, the smack of the Beer or Ale being the
only cause of it, will always predominate,

Honey or Sugar mixed with some Spices and added to the Cider that is flat,
revives it much; let the proportion be according as the distemper is that
requires it.

If Cider be Acid, as sometimes it happens, by reason of the Immaturity of the
Fruit too nimble an operation, too great a Fermentation in the Vessel, or too
warm a situation of your Vessels wherein it is kept, this sometimes becomes
pleasant again, in case it is Lee be yet in the Vessel, as is supposed by a
second operation on it; but in case it does not, if you add about a Gallon of
unground Wheat to a Hogshead of it, it will very much sweeten it, and make it
pleasant; The same effect will two or three Eggs put in whole, or a pound of
Figgs slit, produce, as is reported; but the surest remedy is Bottling it with
a knob of Sugar proportioned according to the occasion.

Wheat Boiled till it begin to break, and when cold, added to the Cider, but
not in too great a quantity, and stirred into it, helps it much.

If your Cider be Musty, which happens either from the place the Fruit lay in
before Grinding, or from the Vessels through which the Pulp or Must has past,
or that the Cider is contained in, the cure thereof is very difficult, although in
some measure the ill savor of it may be corrected, by Mustard Seed ground with
some of the same Cider.

Thick Cider is easily cured at what Age soever, by exciting it to a
Fermentation, and purifying it with Isinglas, as is before directed.

Note that there are several Cider Mills lately found out which are better
understood by seeing one, than any description can be given, and they are
excellent to grind Apples before you press them.

Of making Water Cider, Purre or Cyderkin.
. 11. It Is observed that many sorts of Apples thoroughly ripe, will endure some
addition of Water, without any prejudice to the drink, especially in the Island
of Jersay, where they frequently give it a dash; this dilution is only with
Apples of a mellow and rich juice, and is necessary to help it is clarification,
the Cider it self being of too glutinous a substance, and they not acquainted
with any other way of attenuating it.

If your Apples be pulpy or mellow, they will yield their juice with
difficulty, unless Water be added, but you may press them easily at first, and
extract a small quantity of the richest juice, and then add of Water boiled one
hour, but cold again, to the remaining Pulp, which after 48 hours standing will
yield you so rich a Liquor, that shall exceed most Cyders drawn from newly
ripened Fruit.

To some sorts of Fruit that are of themselves acid, crude, or of a thin juice,
dilution is very improper; but if the Water be boiled and let stand till it be
cold, it will be the better, that abating much of it is crudity.

Water mixed with the Fruit when Ground, and permitted to stand 48 hours,
incorporateth abundantly better, than if added in the Vessel; and if mixed in
the Vessel, better than if added in the Glass.

By the additon of Water no other advantage can be expected than the increase
of the Liquor, as more small Beer than strong is usually made of the same
quantity of Malt. For the ordinary expense in house keeping, you may make
Cyderkin or Purre after you have Pressed out your Cider, by putting the Murc,
Must, or Pouz up into a large Vat, and add thereto what quantity you think
convenient of boyld Water (being first cold again:) if about half that quantity
as was of the Cider that was Pressed from it, it will be good; if as much as
the Cider, then but small: Let this Water-stand upon it about 48 hours, and
then Press it well.

That which comes from the Press, Tun up immediately, and stop it up, and you
may drink it in a few days.

This being the most part Water, will clarify of it self, and supplies the
place of small Beer in a Family, and to many much more acceptable.

You may amend it by the addition of the Settling, Sediment, or Lee of your
Cider you last purified, by putting it upon the Pulp before pressure, or by
adding some overplus of Cider, that your other Vessels will not ^old, or by
Grinding some fallen or (...) Apples, that were not fit to be added to your
Cider, and pressing it with this.

This Cyderkin or Purre may be made to keep long, in case you boil it after
pressure, with such a proportion of dry Hops (but not Green Hops) as you
usually add to your Beer that you intend to keep for the same time, and it will
thus be very well preserved, but then you need not boil your Water before the
adding it to your Murc, Must, or Pouz.

How to make choice Cider.
. 12. If any one shall desire a small quantity of Cider extraordinary for it is
goodness, let him take the Liquor that comes first from the Must without much
Pressing, and dispose of what comes afterward by it self, or mix it with the
juice of another Grinding.

Some have been so curious, as to pick off the Trees the ripest Apples, and
especially those that have had most of the Sun, and to make use of them by
themselves for choice and rich Cider.

How to make Perry
. 13. Perry is made the very same way as Cider, only observe not to let your
Pears be very ripe before you Grind them, for if they should be too mellow when
Ground, they are so Pulpy, that they will not easily part with their juice: and
it is advised by some to mix Crabs at Grinding among the Pears, especially of
weakest juice, and it is affirmed they will very much mend and improve the Perry:
The proportion must be with discretion according as the sweetness of the Pear
requires.

. 14. The best addition that can be made to Cider is that of the Lees of Malaga
Sack, Of mixtures mun Cider
or Canary new and sweet; a-about a Gallon to a Hogshead; this is a great
improver and purifier of Cider.

The juice of Rasberries preserved, or the Wine thereof, gives an excellent
tincture to this Liquor, and makes it very pleasant, if the Cider be not too
new, or too luscious. When you Bottle Cider, put into every Bottle* a little
Conserve of Rasberries, and it gives it a curious taste.

Elder-berries are of great esteem to ting Cider with, which may be thus done,
Take a Gallon or more of clean picked and full ripe Elder-berries; put them in a
Pot and cover it with a Paper, set them in this Pot in an Oven immediately after
you have drawn forth your Household Bread, let them stand till the Oven be cold,
if they be not enough, heat the Oven again, but not too hot, and set them in it
again; when taken out, strain out the juice, which will be thin and clear, and
Bottle it up with Loaf Sugar for use. Two or three spoonfuls of this mixed in a
quart Bottle of Cider at the Bottling makes it of a fine Red color, pleasant
to the Taste, and endows it with all the Medicinal virtues of the Elder-berry.

In like manner you may use Mulberries and Blackberries, which will give
cooling tinctures to Cider.

If your Oven be not very hot, set the Elder-berries, etc. in with the Bread.

To make Curran Wines, etc,
. 15. Take Twelve quarts of full ripe and clean picked Currants, put them into a
Stone Mortar, and there bruise them with a wooden Pestel, or else rub them in
pieces with your hands, then put them into a well Glazed Earthen Pot, and
thereunto put of boiling hot Water that has been boiled a full hour, Twelve
quarts; stir them about very well with a wooden Slice in the Water, and let
them stand 24 hours to infuse, then drein them through a hair Sieve, and put
the Liquor into a small Barrel well seasoned, and sweet, or into an Earthen Pot
close covered, and add to each Gallon of Liquor Two pounds of bruised Loaf
Sugar, and let the Liquor stand in a cool Cellar, six or seven weeks well
stopped, only sometimes, if in a Barrel, give it a little vent, else it will
break the Vessel; Then take off the Scum or Cream that is on the top of the
Liquor, and let the Liquor run through a fine Strayner, and Bottle it, putting
into every Bottle a little spoonful of beaten brown Sugar Candy, and in six
weeks it will be ready for drinking: Let the Bottles be strong ones, else it
will break them, only you may prevent that, by opening your Bottles and let
them stand a whole day uncork't, if it either cause the Corks to fly, or break
any of your Bottles, or put the Corks loosly in at the first, and then knock
them in close after some time.

Thus you may make excellent and delicate Wines of Currants, Black-berries,
Rasberries, Goosberries, only let not your Goosberries be too ripe, but all the
rest full ripe.

If you desire the Wine to be stronger than this, put but a Pint and half, or a
Pint of boiling Water to each Quart of the Fruit, and you may make a second and
smaller sort of Wine, of the Must, Murc or Pouz of your Fruit.

Another way of making the said Wines of Currants etc. but not so good as the
former except for Cherrie-Wine.
. 16. For every pound of clean picked, and ripe Fruit stamped, and the Liquor or
juice pressed out, take a Quart of Spring Water, and a quarter of a pound of fine
White Sugar, boil the Water and Sugar, Scum it and put in the juice of your
Fruit, then let it boil up again, take it off the Fire, run it through a hair
Sieve, and when it is thoroughly cold, put it in a stean Pot or Vessel close
covered, and placed 15 days in a cool Cellar, then draw it out into Bottles,
put into each Bottle the quantity of a Nutmeg of Loaf Sugar, it will not be fit
to drink under a quarter of a years time, and will keep good a year.

Cherry Wine.
According to this last direction, you may also make Cherry Wine, or to make it
stronger use no more Water than juice of the Cherries. When you bottle any of
these Wines you may put the Corks loosely in for some time before you stop them
close.

Cherry Brandy.
. 17. Cherry Brandy is usually made with Black Cherries, by filling a Bottle
half full of Cherries, and putting in the Brandy till the Bottle is near full;
shake it sometimes, within a Month it will be ready to drink, but keep it in a
cool Cellar.

Goosberry Brandy.
. 18. If you put the like quantity of Goosberries instead of Cherries, it will
make the Brandy very delicious.

How to make Metheglin or Hydromel.
. 19. Take Live Honey (which is that Honey that naturally runs from the Combs
without pressure, by laying the Combs on a Sieve, and placing a Vessel under it
to receive the Honey) and add what quantity of Honey you please, to clear
Spring Water, (about the proportion of a Pint of Honey to a quart of Water)
then boil this Liquor in a Brass, or rather Copper Vessel, for about an hour or
more, then let it cool, the next morning you may Barrel it up, adding to the
proportion of 15 Gallons, an Ounce of Ginger, half an Ounce of Cynnamon, of
Cloves and Mace of each an Ounce, all grossly beaten, for if you beat them fine,
they will always float in your Metheglin, and make it foul, and if you put them
in whilst it is hot, the Spices will lose their Spirits: You may also, if you
please, add a spoonful of Yest, or Ale Barm, at the Bung-hole to increase it is
Fermentation, but let it not stand too cold at the first, that being a
principal impediment to it is Fermentation; As soon as it has done working,
stop it close, and let it stand for a Month; then draw it into Bottles, which
set it in a cool Cellar, or Refrigeratory of Spring Water, and it will become a
most pleasant Vinous Drink, daily losing it is luscious taste; and the longer it
is kept the better it will be.

You may make it more or less strong as you please, by adding of more Honey, or
more Water.

By long Boiling it is made more pleasant, and more durable.

All Green Herbs are apt to make Metheglin flat or dead, therefore use your
Herbs after they are well dried in the shade: Cloves are apt to make it high
colored; and the Scumming of it in the boiling is not advantageous but
injurious to it, because the Scum being of the nature of Yest or Barm, helps to
ferment and purify.

How to make small Mead.
. 20. Take 24 Quarts of clear Spring Water, that has been boiled with
Liquorish, Rosemary, Bays, Fennel and Pursly Roots, of each half a handful,
till it taste strong of them, which will be in half an hours boiling; put the
Water through a Sieve, and add full eight Pints of Honey to it; When it is
dissolved set it over the Fire in a Brass, or rather Copper Pan; let it boil a
quarter of an hour after it would boil all over, in which time continue to Scum
it clean; put it then into Earthen Pans, and when it is cold as Wort is when it
is put together, pour off the clear into a Pale, and put to it about one Pint
and half of Ale Barm, or Yest, which must be poured in by degrees as it works;
when it has stood all together a day and a night, Tun it up together in an
Earthen Pot that has a Spigot, and hang in it a bag with Nutmeg, Ginger, and
Cinnamon, quartered or sliced; if the weather be cold, cover it; it must stand
till the Barm begins to shrink from the sides, which will be in eight or ten
days; then Bottle it, and let it stand all night, with Corks put loosly in; the
next day give them Air, and knock them down; if the Weather be hot, put them in
the Cellar, otherwise in some warmer place to ripen, it will be ready to drink
in a Month.

You may this way make Metheglin by adding a grater quantity of Honey; and the
same is highly commended.

Of Birch Wine.
. 21. You may easily extract great quantities of the juice of the Birch-tree by
cutting off the ends of the Boughs of the Tree, and hanging Bottles thereon,
leaving the ends of the Boughs fit to go into the Bottles mouths, and the
Liquor will therein distill. Or with more ease cut a Swan or Goose quill at one
end, in the shape of an Apple scoop or Apple Scraper, and with a Gymblet make a
hole in the body of the Birch-tree, and put in this Quill with the mouth
upwards, and set a Pot under the other end of the Quill, and great quantities
of the juice or Liquor will fall thorough the Quill into the Pot; but that
Liquor which comes from the Branches, being better and longer digested, is
better than that which comes from the Trunk of the Tree. And this is only to be
done from the end of February, to the end of March, of this Liquor or juice of
the Birch is made a very wholesome and medicinable Wine in this manner, viz.

To every Gallon of the Liquor add a pound of refined Sugar, and boil it about
a quarter or half an hour, then set it to cool, and add a very little Yeast to
it, and it will Ferment and thereby purge it self from that little dross, the
Liquor and Sugar can yield; then put it in a Barrel, and add thereto a small
proportion of Cynnamon and Mace bruised, about half an Ounce of both to ten
Gallons; then stop it very close, and about a Month after Bottle it, and in a
few days you will have a most delicate Wine of a Flavor like unto Rhenish: It Is
Spirits are so Volatile that they are apt to break the Bottles, unless placed
in a Refrigeratory, and when poured out, it gives a White head in the Glass.
This Liquor is not of long duration unless preserved very cool. Instead of
every pound of Sugar, if you add a quart of Live Honey and boil it as before,
and adding Spice, and Fermenting it as you should do Metheglin, it makes an
admired Drink, both pleasant and medicinable.

Ale Brewed of the juice or Sap of the Birch-tree is esteemed very wholesome.

Birch Wine, as also Birch Ale, are excellent remedies against the Stone; Van
Helmont being the first that discoved it is virtue, mightily commends it.

If when you make your Metheglin you use the juice of the Birch instead of
Water, and when Barrell'd, you for every Gallon of the Liquor hang four Ounces
of Daucus Seed, something bruised in a bag in the Liquor, it is said to be very
good for the Stone.

Profits of Planting.
. 22. The advantage in Planting Trees may thus easily be computed, viz. An Acre
of Ground (accounting eight yards to the Pole or Perch) will take about 160
Trees, which may be set at distance enough; which Trees if bought, and not
raised by your self, may be had for about six pounds, when set and staked; the
yearly prosit of the herbage or Tillage of this Acre of Ground for the first
seven year^ after Planting, may well be employed in digging about the Roots of
the Trees, carrying off convenient and proper Soil, or Compost for them,
mantaining the Fences, paying duties, etc. At the seven year^ end, these 160
Trees, one Tree with another, will yield a Bushel (accounting 32 Quarts to the
Bushel) of Apples (...) Tree, although some of them may have perished, and others
as yet but young raised in their places, yet may some of these Trees at seven
years growth, bear two or three Bushels, and some a Bushel and an half, which
may in the whole amount to one hundred and sixty Bushels, which at six pence
per Bushel is four Pound; the Herbage then will be worth at least thirty
Shillings per Annum, although the Ground were worth less before it was Planted;
the eighth or ninth year your Trees may one with another, and one year with
another yield you at least two or three Bushels on a Tree, and sometimes more,
which at so low a rate, your six Pound first expended, and the forbearance of
the profit of your Land, and interest of your Money for seven years, will bring
you at least eight Pounds per Annum, the Herbage being still allowed, for the
maintenance of your Plantation; but if a good Fruit year happen, and your 160
Trees yield you six or seven hundred Bushels, and those worth twelve pence, or
eight pence the Bushel, it will in one year more then retaliate all your past
labor, charge and loss, and your self will be furnished with an excellent
Orchard, very serviceable to your Family both in baking, and making strong, and
small Cider for your Table, and thereby saving great quantities of Malt.

A Bushel and half, or 48 Quarts of Apples will make 18, 20, 22, or sometimes
24. Quarts of Cider, according to the goodness of your Fruit for that purpose,
and there will also be so much Cyderkin made of the Pouz, or Murc, as will be
better worth than the charge of Grinding and Pressing, etc. Twenty Bushels
commonly make a Hogshead of Cider.

They that are desirous to understand the ordering of a Garden, either for the
Kitchen, or Flowers, let them peruse a Book called, The English Gardener, writ
by Leonard Meagar, and therein they will find both ample and true instructions.

Although there is no Liquor, Drink, or Diet alike pleasant to all; some
preferring Dull Coffee before any other, some stale Beer, others fat Ale, or
Mum; one Claret, another Sack; yet our English know no other Drink so generally
palatable as Cider, because it may be made suit with any humourous Drinker.
It Is made Luscious by the addition of a good quantity of sweet Apples at the
Grinding; pleasant, being made with Pippins or Genent-Moyls; Racy, Poignant,
Oily, Spicy, and Rich, with the Redstreak, and several other sorts of Fruits,
even as the Operator pleases. And it satisfies thirst, if not too stale, more
than any other usual Drink whatsoever; and in such years as Corn is dear, the
best Cider may be made at a far easier rate than ordinary Ale. The
considerations whereof adds much to the exhilerating virtue of this Drink.

Next unto Cider, Perry claims the precedence, especially if made of the best
juicy Pears celebrated for that purpose, as the Bosbery-Pear, Bareland-Pear,
the Red and White Horse-Pear, or many sorts of wild and choke Pears, but above
all the Turgovian Pear.

Wines or Drinks made of Currants, Goosberries, Rasberries, Blackberries,
Cherries, or Plums, prepared and made as is before taught, may be more
acceptable to our Palats, healthy, pleasant, and profitable than those exotic
Wines many are so fond of and Dote on.

And in this very year 1682, I know Wine made of the White Dutch Curran,
according to the direction of the 15 Sect. of this Chap. (only there was but a
Pint of Water added to each Quart of the Fruit) far superior to the best
French White Whine could be bought in our Country, if several judicious Palats
were not mistaken.

Of Diapalmae, and of Deminio Composit. of each two Ounces, How to Liquor Boots
or Shoos to walk in the Fields and Orchards to keep out wet.
and of Hogsgrease rendered (no Salt being in it) half a Pound, melt them
together, keeping continual stirring, and Liquor the Leather and Soles
therewith, before the Boots or Shoos are shaped out, and afterward when
occasion is, the Liquor must be warm when used.

An Abridgment of the Statutes of 43, Eliz. Cap. 7. and 15, Car. 2. Cap. 2.
Laws against breaking Orchards and stealing Trees and Wood, etc.
IF any shall be Convicted by his own Confession, or by the Testimony of one
Witness upon Oath, before one Justice of Peace, or Head Officer, to have
unlawfully cut and taken away, any Grain growing, robbed any Orchard or Garden,
dug up or taken away any Fruit Trees, broken any Hedges, Pales, or other
Fences, cut or spoiled any Woods or under Woods, standing and growing, or the
like, or to have been accessory thereunto, shall for the first offense pay unto
the party grieved, such damages and within such time, as by the said Justice,
or head Officer shall be appointed: And in case the pary offending shall not by
the said Justice or Officer, be thought able to discharge the sade damages, or
shall not discharge them according to the said Order, then shall the said
Offender be by them, or either of them (respectivly) committed to the
Constable, or other Officer of the place, where the Offense was committed, or
the party apprehended, to be Whipped, and for every other offense committed
afterward, and proved as aforesaid, the party offending shall receive the like
punishment of Whipping.

The Constable, or other inferior Officer that herein refuses or neglects to
do his duty, shall by any such Justice of Peace or Head Officer be committed to
Prison without Bail, till he Whip, or cause to be Whipped the party offending,
as is above limited.

No Justice of Peace shall execute this Statute for Offenses done to him self,
unless he be Associated with one or more Justices of Peace, whom the Offense
does not concern. Vid. the Statute of 43. Eliz. Cap. 7. at large.

Statute, 15. Car. 2. Cap. 2. reciting the Statute of 43. Eliz. Cap. 7. does
not sufficiently prevent, nor punish the Cutting and spoiling of Woods, Enacts,
that ever Constable, Headborough, and other person in every County, City, or
other place, where they shall be Officers or Inhabitants, shall and may
Apprehend, or cause to be Apprehended, every person they shall suspect having,
carrying, or conveying, any burden or Bundle of Wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark,
Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedg-wood, Broom, or
Furze.

And by Warrant under the hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace,
directed to any Officer, such Officer may enter into, and search the Houses,
Yards, Gardens, and other places belonging to the House or Houses, of every
person or persons they shall suspect to have any kind of such Wood, or other
the said Trees, etc. and where they shall find any such, to apprehend evey
person suspected for Cutting and taking the same, and as well those apprehended
carrying any kind of Wood or other Trees and premises; as those in whose
Houses or other places belonging to them, any of the same shall be found to
carry before any one Justice of the Peace of the same County: and such persons
suspected do not give a good account how they came by the same by the consent
of the owner, such as shall satisfy the said Justice, or within some convenient
time to be set by the said Justice, produce the party of whom they bought the
said Wood, or some credible witness upon Oath, to prove such sale, which Oath
the said Justice may Adminster, then such persons so suspected, and not giving
such good account, nor, producing such witness, shall be adjudged as convicted,
for cutting and spoiling of Woods, Underwoods, Poles, Trees, Gates, Styles,
Posts, Pales, Rails, Hedg-wood, Broom, or Furze, within the meaning of the
Statute of Queen Elizabeth, and liable to the Punishments therein, and of this
Act appointed.

Every person so Convicted, shall for the first offense, give the owner
satisfaction for his damages, within such time as the Justice shall appoint,
and over and above, pay down to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish where
such offense is, such sum of Money (not exceeding ten shillings) as the
Justice shall think meet, in defalt of either of which payments, the said
Justice may commit Juch offender to the House of Correction for such time (not
exceeding one Month) as he shall think fit, or to be Whipped by the Constable or
other Officer, as in his judgment shall seem expedient.

And If such person shall again commit the said offense, and be thereof
Convicted as before, that then the persons offending the second time, and
Convicted, shall be sent to the House of Correction for one Month, and there be
kept to hard labor, and for the third offense, Convicted as before, shall be
judged and deemed as incorrigible Rogues.

Provided also whoever shall buy any Burdens, or any the premises mentioned in
this Bill suspected to be Stolen, or unlawfully come by, the Justices, Mayors,
or chief Officers, or any one of them within their respective jurisdictions,
upon complaint may examine the matter upon Oath, and if they find the same was
bought of any suspected to have Stolen, or unlawfully come by the same, then
any one of the said Justices or chief Officers, shall and may award the party
that bought the same, to pay treble the vavalue thereof to the party from whom
the same was Stolen or unlawfully taken, and in default of present payment, to
Issue out their respective Warrants to levy the same by distress, and Sale of
the Offenders Goods, rendering the overplus to the party, and in default of such
distress to commit the party to the Goal, at his own charge, there to remain
one Month without Bail.

Provided no person be questioned for any offense within this Act, unless
within six weeks after the Offense committed.

CHAP. XXX. Brief Monthly Memorials for the Planter.
JANVARY.
DIg, Trench, and Dung Ground, and make it ready for the Spring; prepare Soil,
dig Borders; uncover as yet the Roots of old unthriving, or overhasty Blooming
Trees; Plant Quicksets, transplant Fruit Trees, if not finished; set Vines, and
Prune the old; Prune especially the Branches of old Planted Fruit Trees, about
the decrease of the Moon; but Prune not the newly Planted till the Sap begin to
stir. Cleanse Trees from Moss, the Weather moist. Nail and trim the
Wall-fruit-trees, and Espalirs. Gather toward the end of the Month Cyons for
Grafts of Cherries, Plums, and Pears, before they begin to sprout and any speck
of White appears on the Buds, if the Weather be open. In over-wet or hard
Weather cleanse, mend, sharpen and prepare all your Grafting and Garden Tools:
Destroy Vermin in your Seminary of Kernels and Stones for Stocks.

FEBRVARY.
COntinue yet to Prune Fruit Trees, and bind, Plaish, Nail, and dress the most
delicate Wall-fruit, if not finished before, but be exceeding careful of
injuring the swelling Buds, and Bearers; cut and lay Quick-sets, trim up the
Hedges and espaliers; Plant Vines as yet and Hops; set Kernels, and Stones of
all sorts. Sow and set Beans, Peace, Radish, Parsnips, Carrots, Onions, Garlic.
Now is the season for circumposition by Tubs or Baskets of Earth, and laying of
Branches to take Root; rub Moss from your Trees after a soaking Rain, and
scrape and cleanse them of Cankers, draining away the Wet (if need require)
from the too much moistened Roots. Mold and Earth up the Roots of such
Fruit Trees as were bared. Pull off the Webs of Caterpillars from the Tops and
Twigs of Trees, and burn them. Gather Worms in the Evening after Rain. Plant
Cabbage Plants, Colliflowers, Parsley, Spinach and other hardy Pot Herbs. Graft
Cherries, Plums, and Pears, and toward the end of the Month, Apples if a
forward Spring. Get Cyons for Apple-grafts. You may yet transplant Trees, tho
it had been better done in October, or November. Slit almost through, the Bark,
your Bark-bound and Cankered Trees. Plant Potatos, but not amongst your
Fruit Trees.

MARCH.
DUnging is yet seasonable, and you may transplant what Trees are yet left, tho
it be dangerous and full late enough, unless in very backward, or moist places.
You may Graft' Apples all this Month, and in the beginning of it Plums,
Cherries, and Pears; you may as yet cut Quicksets, and cover such Tree-roots as
were bared in Autumn. Prune last years Grafts, and cut off the heads of your
Budded Stocks. Now is best time for raising on Hot Beds, Melons, Cucumbers,
Gourds. Slip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, etc. Sow in the beginning
Endive, Succory, Leeks, Radish, Beets, Chardbeet, Scorzonera, Parsnips,
Skerrets, Parsley, Sorrel, Bugloss, Borrage, Chervil, Sellery, Smallage,
Alisanders, etc. Sow also Lettuce, Onions, Garlic, Orach, Purslane, Turnips,
to have early, Beans, and Peace toward the full Moon, Carrots, Cabbages,
Cresses, Fennel, Majoran, Dill, Scurvygrass. Set Cabbage-plants, and
Colliflowers. Transplant any sort of Pot or Medicinal Herbs; Mid-march dress up
and string your Strawberry Beds. Uncover Asparagus, and Transplant
Asparagus-roots to make new Beds. This is the prime Month for Botling Cider,
and if you put in about half a spoonful of Spirit of Clary, it will make the
Liquor so perfectly to resemble the very best Canary, that few good and
exercised Palats will be able to distinguish it. Set Potatos, but not amongst
your Fruit Trees; Sets them thus, Plow or Dig Ground into Buts or Borders about
six Foot broad, but leave two Foot intervals; then Harrow or Rake it well, then
spread Rotten Dung thereon, on the top whereof lay Potato Sets, then Shovel up
the Earth in the intervals, and cover the Sets two or three Inches thick. Most
sorts of Sallet, Pot, and sweet Herbs may be sown from the first of March, to
the end of July, and mosts sorts of setting Herbs may be removed, slipped and
parted the same time.

APRIL.
PLant Artichock Slips, set great Beans, and sow Carrots; if the Spring be not
forward you may yet Graft Apples in the beginning of the Month. Gather Worms,
Snails, after evening showers and after all the Summer Rains: and destroy
Caterpillare Webs, and smoke Caterpillars and black Flies from your Trees. Mow
Carpet Walks. Weed your Currants, Goosberries, etc. From the beginning to the
middle set Potatos, but not amongst Fruit Trees. You may yet slip Lavender,
Thyme, Rosemary, etc. Toward the middle begin to Plant forth your Melons,
Cucumbers and so to the later end, your Ridges well prepared. Sow sweet
Majoran, Hyssop, Basil, Winter Savory, Scurvy Grass, Lettuce, Purslane,
Coliflowers, Radish, Thyme, and all fine and tender Seeds. Clip Shrubs after
showers.

MAY.
COntinue your Weeding before they run to Seeds, and with Sheers top your
Currants, and Goosberries. Sow sweet Majoran, Basil, Thyme, hot and Aromatic
Herbs and plants which are most tender. Sow Purslane to have young, Lettuce,
large sided Cabbage, Painted Beans. Look to your Melons, and toward the end of
the Month forbear any longer to cover them.

JUNE.
SOw Lettuce, Chervil, Radish, etc. to have young and tender Salleting,
Spinach. Cleanse Vines of exuberant Branches cropping not cutting, and shopping
the joint immediately before they Blossom, and some of the under Branches that
bear no Fruit, especially in young Vineyards when they first begin to bear, and
thence forwards. Gather Herbs in the full to keep dry, they keep and retain
their Virtue and sweet smell better dried in the Sun, than shade, whatever some
pretend.

About a fortnight before and as much after Midsummer are the chief and best
times to Inoculate Peaches, Apricocks, Cherries, Plums, Pears, Nectarins, and
Apples. Water lately Planted Trees, and put moist and half rotten Fearn, Weeds,
and Vegatables about the foot of their Stems. Continue Weeding, and gather
Snails after Rain. Unbind those Grafts you bound. About 14 days before or after
Midsummer, sow Turnips upon Ground prepared as for Barley; after Midsummer
makes the better Turnep. Three Pints of Seed will sow an Acre, accounting seven
yards to the Pole; your Seed is to be mixed with dry Sand thus, Three spoonfuls
of Seed with a peck of Sand, then sow; if immediately after sowing a shower of
Rain and hot Sungleams happen, it is spoiled.

JVLY.
SOw Lettuce, Radish, Spinach, etc. for late and tender Salletting. Sow later
Peace to be ripe six weeks after Michaelmas. Water young Planted Trees and
Layers. Prune now Apricocks, and Peaches, saving as many of the young likeliest
Shoots as are well placed, for the now bearers commonly perish the new ones
succeeding: Cut close and even. Let such Pot Herbs run to Seed as you would
save. About the eighth Inoculate such Fruits as in June are directed, and sow
Turnips also then and toward the full Moon. Toward the later end visit your
Vineyards again, and stop the exuberant Shoots above the Fruit, but so as not
to expose them to the Sun. Search under Wall-tree-leaves for Snails, they stick
commonly about the Fruit, pull not off what is bitten, for then the'l begin
afresh. Now (in the driest season) with Brine, Pot Ashes and Water, or a
decoction of Tobacco refuse, Water your Gravel Walks, etc. to destroy both
Worms, and Weeds, of which it will cure them for some years. Continue Weeding;
gather Currants to make Wine of. Make ready your Cider Mill and Press, etc.

AUGUST.
INoculate now early if you began not before. Prune off yet superfluous
Branches and Shoots of this second Spring, but leave some Leaves to screen the
Fruit from the Sun, furnishing and nailing what you will spare to cover the
defects of your Walls. Pull up the Suckers. Sow Radishes, tender Cabbages,
Colleflowers for Winter Plants, Corn-sallet, Marigold, Lettuce, Carrots,
Parsnips, Turnips, Spinach, Onions, also curled Endive, Angelica, Scurvy Grass,
etc. pull up ripe Onions and Garlic, etc. Toward the end sow Purslan, Chard,
Beet, Chervil, etc. Transplant such Lettuce as you will have abide all Winter.
Gather your Olitory Seeds, and clip and cut all such Herbs and Plants within
one handful of the Ground. Before the full, unbind and release the Buds you
Inoculated. Gather, your Windfal Apples from day to day, if the Weather be dry.
Make Summer Perry and Cider.

SEPTEMBER.
GAther now (if ripe) your Winter-fruit as Plums, Pears, Apples, etc. to
prevent their falling by great Winds, also in dry Weather gather Wind-falls
from day to day. Sow Lettuce, Radish, Spinach, Parsnips, Skerrets,
Colle-flowers, Cabbages, Onions, Scurvy Grass, Anniseeds, and Winter Herbs. Now
you may Transplant most sort of Esculent and Physical Plants, Artichocks, and
Asparagus Roots. Sow Winter Herbs and Roots, and Plant Strawberries out of the
Woods: Toward the end Earth up your Winter Plants, and Sallet Herbs, and Plant
forth your Colle-flowers, and Cabbages sown in August. With a pair of Sheers
top Currants, and Goosberries, dig about, Manure and Mold up their Roots toward
the end. Make Perry and Cider.

OCTOBER.
TRench, Dig, and Manure Ground for Orchading, and Kitchen. Garden to lie for a
Winter Mellowing. Plant and set Fruit Trees of all sorts, Standard, Mural, or
Shrubs, which lose their Leaf, and that as soon as it falls. Choose no Tree for
the Wall above two years Grafting at most. Now is the time for laying bare old
unthriving, or overhasty Blooming Trees. The Moon decreasing, gather the
remaining Winter-fruit in dry Weather, lay them up clean, lest they taint;
Plant and Plash Quicksets. Sow all Stoney and hard Kernels and Seeds, such as
Cherry, Pear, Plum, Peach, Almond-stones, etc. Also all sorts of Nuts, Haws,
Ashen, Sycamore, and Mapple-keys; Acorns, Beech-mast, Apple, Pear, and
Crab-Kernel for Stocks; or you may defer it till toward the later end of the
next Month. Keep your Stones and Nuts in Sand till set. Yet sow Lettuce. Make
Winter Cider, and Perry. Sow as in September. Sweep and cleanse your Walks of
Autumnal fallen Leaves.

NOVEMBER.
Carry Compost out of your Melon Ground, or turn and mingle it with the Earth,
and lay it in Ridges ready for the Spring; Trench and fit Ground for
Artichocks, Mold them up, and cover them in the beginning of Frosts with
Horse-dung. Continue setting and Transplanting Trees; lose no time, hard Frosts
come on a pace; yet you may lay bare old Trees. Plant young Trees, Standard, or
Mural. Furnish your Nursery with all sorts of Stocks to Graft in. Sow and set
early Beans, and Peace till Mid- March. Now lay up in your Cellars for Seed to
be Transplanted at Spring, Carrots, Parsnips, Cabages, Colliflowers, etc. In a
dry day gather your last Orchard Fruits. Take up your Potatos for Winter
spending, there will enough remain for Stocks, tho never so exactly gatherd,
save the small ones for Sets. Cut off the tops of Asparagus and cover them with
long Dung, or make Beds to Plant in Spring. Set yet all sorts of Kernels and
Stones to raise Stocks for Nursery. In Frosts Cover the Windows of your Fruit
Room, and the Fruits, with Mats of Straw, etc.

Now order Turnips for Seed thus, viz. about the Tenth get up some of your
largest and best Turnips, (20, will yield about a Quart of Seed) but wash them
not, then cut off the top of the Bush or Stalk, leaving five or six Inches to
grow to the Turnep, lay these about 14 days in a cool Room, then prepare a
convenient Plot of Ground by Diging and Trenching good store of rotten Muck,
then set Turnips half a yard distant from each other, and Mould up the Earth
three Inches high on the Stalk about each; in April, place small Hasel Rails
about them to keep them up, and thy'l be Seed in June, if you can preserve them
from Birds, which is done by placing a live Catling tied near i^ daily fed with
Milk, and the old ones resorting to it. If you set not these Turnips till
January, the Seed produces a Watery, but larger Turnep. Take up Carrots,
Parsnips, etc. to be kept in Cellars in Sand for spending.

DECEMBER.
PRune and Nail Wall-fruit and Standard-trees, and Plant Vines, etc. Also
Stocks for Grafting. Sow and set all sorts of Kernels, Seeds, and Stones;
Trench Ground and Dung it, to be ready for Bordures or Planting of Fruit Trees.
Turn and refresh your Autumnal Fruits, lest they taint, and open the Windows
where they lie in a clear and serene day. Preserve your Fruit from Frosts.

Let Planters note that the Wood of the Pear Tree, Plum-tree,
Black-cherry-tree, Walnut-tree, and Chesnut-tree, are excellent for Stools,
Chairs, Tables, Cabinets, and many other Works for the Joyner, and Sculptor;
and tho the Wood of some of them be subject to the Worm and putrefaction, that
may be both prevented, and cured if not too far gone, by anointing three or
four times with Linseed Oil; it has been experimented in a Walnut Table, where
it destroyed Millions of Worms immediately, and is to be practtised for Tables,
Tubes, Boxes, Mathematical Instruments, Bedsteds, Chairs, Rarities, etc. Oil.
of Walnuts will do the same, is sweeter and a better Vernish, but above all is
commended Oil of Cedar, or that of Juniper. But the more curious may use this
great secret (discovered by Mr. Evelin, Page, 70 of his Sylva) viz. put common
Yellow Sulphur into a Cucurbit Glass, upon which pour so much of the strongest
Aqua Fortis, as may cover it three fingers deep, distill this to dryness, which
is done by two or three Rectifications: Let the Sulphur remaining in the bottom
(being of a Blackish or sad Red Color) be laid on a Marble, or put into a
Glass where it will easily dissolve into Oil: With this Anoint either what is
infected, or to be preserved of Timber, it tinges Wood with no unpleasant
Color, by no Art to be Washed out, and such a preservation of all manner of
Woods, nay of many other things as Ropes, Cables, Fishing-nets, Masts of Ships,
etc. That it defends them from putrefaction, either in Waters, under, or above
the Earth, in the Snow, Ice, Air, Winter or Summer, etc.

FINIS.
ADDENDA.
1. TO the end of the first Chapter, should have been added the following, viz.
And when Stocks are removed out of the Seminary into the Nursery, or elsewhere,
be sure to cut off as well the greatest part of the down right Tap, or
Heart-root of Stocks; as also the ends of all other Roots, and then to set them
as shallow as possible, so as they may be able to take good Rooting.

2. AT the end of the 6th Sect. in Chap. Second, this should have been added,
viz. Be sure therefore to let your Stocks for Pears and Apples be well grown
before they are Grafted, that they may be able to make strong, and tall Shoots
the first year after Grafted; for if Grafted the same year they are removed, or
the next year, not one of many makes a good Tree; besides there are several
sorts of Fruit Trees, as Pearmains, Winter-queenings, and July-flower-apples,
etc. that will not make a Tree worth your labor, unless Grafted on a lusty
plump Stock; because they naturally Shoot weak and crooked; so diverse sorts of
Pears, of which the Wardens are the worst to make a handsome Tree of.

3. AT the end of the first Sect. in Chap. seventh, the following should have
been added, viz. And indeed all Land proper for Corn, as Wheat, Barley, Rye,
Beans, and Peese are proper for Fruit Trees: but the most improper are extreme
hot and dry Sands, and on the other side grounds very Wet and cold.

4. AT the end of the seventh Chap. page 86, the following Sect. should have
been added, viz.

. 23. After your Trees are transplanted into Orchards, the greatest care and
charge is to keep them safe from being abused, either by Weeds that may grow
about them, Suckers that may grow out of them, between the Roots, and spreading
Boughs, and from all Cattle, Hares, Coneys, and Canker (for which some affirm
Hogsdung either mixed with the Earth, or some laid on the top about the stem to
be an excellent remedy) and in case where they are dug or Plowed about the
Roots, your Trees will thrive much better, and grow twice as fast.

5. IN Page 99, at the end of the tenth Sect. the following should have been
added, viz. Observe in setting Fruit Trees to cut off the greatest part of the
downright Tap, or Heart-root, and also the ends of all the other Roots of the
Tree, and let not the top of the uppermost Roots be above two Inches under the
Surface, and the bottom of the Roots not more than nine or ten Inches below the
Surface of the Earth; and if the Hole the Tree is to be set in, be dug deep,
and filled up again with good Earth before the Tree is Planted (unless the
Earth be very well trod down) the Tree and all will sinck together, and never
prosper: therefore in such a case, 'its best to set the Tree so shallow as to
raise the Earth six or seven Inches above the Roots about the stem, and to
cover the uppermost Roots with good Earth, to prevent that misfortune.

6. AT the end of the third line in Page 163, the following should have been
added, viz. You may also obtain many excellent Sets of Currants and Goosberries,
if in January, or beginning of February, when the weather is open, you lay down
several Limbs and Twiggs of them, flat and close to the Earth, and so keep them
down by a hooked stick driven into the Earth, or a Brick stove; then cover
every Limb and Twigg so laid down, all along two Inches thick with good Earth,
except the top Branch or Twigg, which must lie, out and be uncovered, and by
that time the next year, you will have abundance of well Rooted Plants, fit to
transplant: take care to keep that part of the uncovered Stock, which is
between the old Root and the Covered part, that it run not out in Buds or
Branches, for if it do, the Twigs will be robbed of that nourishment which
should feed them: Also remember to keep them clear of all Grass and Weeds that
may in the least annoy them.

7. AT the end of the 22 Chap. Page 167, the following should have been added,
viz. Peaches and Nectarins are Propagated only by Inoculating, and that on
Stocks raised either on Peach-stones, or Plum-stones; But observe that Stocks
raised of Peach-stones will be sooner ready to Inoculate, and the Buds will
take very sure that are Inoculated into them; but they must be carefully and
tenderly used in the removal, and must not be expected to make long lasting
Trees.

Stocks from Plum-stones, and Budded with a Peach will make a more firm and
lasting Peach-tree; and such as will bear Fruit well.

Therefore rather raise Stocks for Peaches, Nectarins, Apricocks, and Plums
from Stones of the Wheat-plum, which is a White Plum ripe in August, (if you
can have them) or in want of them from the Stones of the White Pear-plum, which
is generally commended and used, or of other good White Plum whose Tree puts
forth large Shoots or Branches.

The Suckers likewise from the Roots of the said Wheat Plum make excellent
Stocks for Peaches, Nectarins, Apricocks, and Dwarf and Wall Plum-trees.

8. AT the end of the 23 Chap. Page 169, the following should have been added,
viz. Strawberries are increased by setting the young Roots, which increase from
the strings which run from the elder Plants, they are to be found in Woods and
such like Places, from whence many provide themselves as well as in Gardens;
they are Planted at diverse Seasons, but principally at the Spring and Fall; but
many refuse to set them in the Spring, because then there is a Summers Weeding,
and little or no Fruit the first year, so that most Plant about the 24th of
August, or Michaelmas, and sometimes later, but something sooner is better; for
then they will have got strength, and bear both more, and fairer Fruit. Set them
about half a foot asunder, which is near enough; and if you will have fair Fruit
and your Bed last longer without renewing, or new Planting; often cut away the
strings that run from the Roots, otherwise they will starve one another; also
every Winter, not Summer, new mold them, and in dry Weather often Water them,
chiefly in Blooming and Fruit time, but do it thoroughly; where not carefully
looked after, a Bed of Strawberries lasts not above two or three years at most.

The ordering of great Strawberries differs but little, only to be set at a
larger distance, and the Root kept molded up, and the Stalks for Fruit tied up,
and often Watered in dry Weather.

9. AT the end of the 25th Chap. page 174 the following should have been added,
viz. Cherries are propagated by Grafting or Inoculating on Stocks raised from
Cherry-stones, set or sowed, or young wild Chery-trees got out of Woods, etc.
or Suckers from the common harsh Red Cherry. The wild Stocks make large
handsome Standard. Trees, but though Grafted with a good kind, do not bear
Fruit so plentifully as the Suckers of the Red being Grafted do, which Suckers
are fittest to Graft Cherries on for Wall or Dwarf-trees, being of much smaller
growth than those of the wild kind are. No Fruit Trees prosper under the
dripping of Walnut-trees, and Cherry-trees. Note that Suckers of Pears,
Cherries, and Wheat Plums, make good Stocks to Graft Pears, Cherries, and Plums
on, for Wall-trees, or Dwarf-trees.

ARRATA.
PAge 39. l. 7. r. displease. P. 43. l. 31. r. Slicing. P. 64. l. 14. r. Bud or
Sprig. P. 64. l. 21. dele a Bud. P. 80. l. 16 r. if it be not Springey. P. 83.
l. 10. After Walnut Trees, add Chestnut Trees or some large growing Trees. P.
83. l. 25. for old, r. cold. P. 88. l. 21. for Sap, r. Stop. P. 90. l. ult. r.
which P. 95. l. 3. r. Sackcloth. P. 97. l. ult. for Clay, r. Clap. P. 102. at
the end of 16 Sect. r. Chap. 12. Sect. 10.11.12. P. 118. l. 11. r. bare P. 140.
l. 19. r of. P. 144 l. 3. r. one. P. 150. l. 16 r. Tap. P. 159. l. 3. r. fall.
P. 176. l. 7. r. Great Musk. and l. ult. for Meet, r. Meat. P. 178. l. 9 for
is, r. are. P. 199. l. 1. after Broom, add, when cold. P. 208. l. 25. r.
Quantity. P. 216. l. 30. after Quarts, add, in a Barrel or Hogshead. P. 228. l.
14. after Currants, add, Elderberries. P. 235. l. 12. for eightpence, r.
eighteen pence. P. 164. instead of these words. viz. about 14 days before
Midsummer, r. sometimes in the Month of May.

THE APPROBATION OF THE Colledge-Royal Of Physicians at ROCHELLE.
WE subsign'd, Doctors of Physic of the Colledge-Royal of this Town, and
deputed by our Company to Read and Examine a Book Composed by one of our
Fellows, which has for Title, Of the use of the Fruits of Trees, do certify
that there is nothing thing in it which is not conformable to good Physic.

In Testimony of which we have subsign'd this Approbation, at Rochelle the 8th
of March. 1683. Censors of the said College. Chauvet, Arault,


THE PREFACE.
THere are Persons who persuade themselves that its a crime to add any thing to
Antiquity, and who say, That nothing can be invented of new more than what the
Ancients have said; and that it is a vain Glory and Presumption to imagine we
can say any thing which has not been written. But if it were free for me to
Answer this Opinion, I would say, That Arts are not of those things to which
nothing can be added, and that the Older the World grows, the more they are
carried on to perfection. Anatomy did not appear in so great a Luster in the
Time of Galen, as in our Days: and the Art of Pruning Fruit Trees was not so
perfect in the Time of the Curate of Henonville, as at present. We are like a
Dwarf on a Giants shoulders. We see much farther than our Fathers, and we daily
discover things which they knew not. I will not say for this, that there are
not any precepts or Rules found for Pruning Trees in the Books of Agriculture
and Gardening which have been Printed within Twenty or Five and Twenty Years, I
heartily own that there are some; but in truth they are so few in Number, and
the greatest part so obscure, and so little to be relied on, that I very much
doubt whether they may be followed without committing faults. If on the
contrary you stick to those which I give in this Tract; many Years experience
has assured me, that Trees Pruned according to the Rules which I Establish,
will produce great Fruits in abundance. I have therefore reduced The Art of
Pruning Fruit Trees into four Chapters; and I have caused seven Figures to be
Engraved which I Judged necessary for the understanding of what I say: The first
Chapter Treats of Pruning Trees in the Month of February. The second explains
that of the beginning of May. The third teaches the Pruning at the end of May
and the beginning of June. Lastly the Fourth comprises the Pruning of July. I
thought fit to reduce this Book into a form of precepts, without forming a
continued Discourse; because often we have need of one precept, without having
need of another: and I have writ it after so popular a manner that the most
Illiterate Gardiners might comprehend what I would say.

Opus arduum nova Conscribere, Inaudita edocere, Insolentia praeceptis firmare,
magis arduum aliquid Antiquitati addere.

THE Art of Pruning, OR Lopping Fruit Trees.
I Suppose that a Tree has been well Planted, and set in a fertile Soil, that
the Root of it has been well cut, that good choice has been made of the Plant
and of its kind; and that it has some years Growth, to be able to endure the
Pruning-knife.

CHAP. I. The Pruning or Lopping of Fruit Trees, for the Month of February.
ALmost all Trees begin to sprout forth in France toward the end of February,
or the beginning of March; and this is the motion which we call the rise of the
Sap, or the shooting of Trees. This nevertheless happens variously, the
disposition of the Air, the goodness of the Soil, the vigor or the kind of the
Tree, make the Saps or shootings to come earlier or later: They come early in a
dry year, and are backward in a moist.

This rise of the Sap invites then Gardiners to Prune or Lop Trees in the Month
of February, which is the most proper time for this work; and though it may be
done all the Winter, however the Moon be disposed, Trees being then at rest as
to their Branches; nevertheless it is much better to stay for this till the
Colds are past, and that the Rains no longer infest the wounds which are made
on Trees; by this means they seal themselves in a little time, and soonner
cover the wound which has been made on them.

Before you Prune or Lop a Tree, you ought to consider the strength and kind of
it for rendering it beautiful and fertile; for all Trees are not to be Lopt
after the same fashion: We Lop diverly (for instance) a Peach-Tree and a Winter
Pear Tree; and its by Lopping of this last, that the skill of the Gardener
shows it self the most conspicuously, and that we judge best of his ability.

There are Trees which we dare not Lop, by reason of the abundance of their
Sap; for the more we Lop them, the more Wood they shoot forth, and the less
Fruit; even the Flower-buds yield Wood, which happens often to the Tree, which
yields the delicate Pear called the little Rousselet; to the lateward Bergamot,
to the Virgoleuse, to the St. Lezan, etc. But when these sorts of Trees have
shot forth their full, after this they bear but too much. In this occasion Lop
sometimes short, and sometimes long, or not at all: take away sometimes the
young Wood, and preserve the old; another while cut away the old, for the Tree
to grow young again; at another time cut away the Branches, and all the false
Sprouts, but remember never to disgarnish the Stock, by Lopping away all the
little Branches of the sides of the Tree, and making the Trunk bare.

Gardiners have a very true Maxim, Lop in fair Weather, in the decrease of the
Moon, and in the end of the Saps, or rather when Trees are at rest.

The decrease of the Moon of January, which happens in February, is the true
time for Lopping Trees, and for preserving Grafts; not but this Rule has some
exception; for weak Trees, and those that are Planted but of that year, ought
to be Lopt at the new Moon, to make them sprout vigorously: And we must
remember that Trees ought not to be cut when we Plant them, but we ought to
stay till the Month of February following.

When you Plant a Graft of three years, which has Flower-buds, preserve some to
see the Fruit in the first year: It is of these sorts of Trees that you must
always make choice, they show from their beginning an assured fruitfulness, and
bear afterward a great deal of Fruit as long as they live.

Because it is known that an abundance of Sap makes but Branches, and that a
little or mean Sap makes Fruit: and moreover that the Moon has less influence
on sublunary things, when she begins to be in the Wain, than when she
Increases; experience has taught us that the decrease of the Moon is the most
kindly time for Lopping Trees, which have then less of motion. The decrease is
from the time of the Full to the New, nevertheless some will have it that we
may Lop Trees during the time that the Moon is not horned, that is to say, from
her eighth day to her one and Twentieth. They say that it is not only the Moon
which causes Fruit on Trees, but the disposition of the Branches; and that it
suffices that the Moon has strength, provided that on the other side she finds
in a Branch, Fibers transverse and disposed to cause Fruit-buds to be there
formed. True it is, experience has taught me that the Seeds of Flowers cast
into the Earth during all this time, turn double sooner than those that are
Sown in another time.

We ought first to Lop Apricock, Nectarin, and Peach-trees, etc. because they
shoot forth the first; the Winter Pear Trees follow next, after these those of
Autumn and of Summer, and the Portugal Quince-trees: We ought shortly after to
Lop and Prune Plum-trees, and Apple Trees, and lastly Spanish Pomegranet-trees,
because all these Trees shoot forth the one after the other; but above all, we
ought not to Lop this last till it has shot forth a little, that we may the
better distinguish the weak or dead Branches.

After the Observations which we even now made, we ought to begin to Lop and
Trim up a Tree by one of its sides from the lower part to the top, and we ought
afterward to carry on our Work without confusion, and to take one Branch after
the other. This side being thus Lopt and paled, we descend on the other side
from the top to the bottom in the same Order.

We must here remember always to cut the Branches in the form of a Hinds foot,
so that the Sun may not dry the wound, which ought to be as far as we may on
the North side; but after such a manner that the sloping side of the wound be
not too straight downward, to the end that the knot be not endammag'd;
otherwise the eye which ought to push forth wood, being cut too much by the
slope of a too straight descent (chiefly in tender Trees) will not push forth
at all or weakly, and will communicate even to five or six eyes the evil of a
wound ill made.

We must further remember to cut always a Branch near a Wood-bud, and never
near a Flower-bud; because in this last Lopping, the Fruit which would come
there, would not be secured by the Leaves against the injury of the Air.
Moreover the Branch would be exposed to the Air, and finally the wound would
not close it self, nor ever come to an Eschar the Pears carrying away all the
Sap, that ought to make it:

We ought not moreover to leave a Stub to a Branch which we cut at a Wood-bud,
that we may give way to the Branch to close it self in a short time by the
sprout that ought to grow there; I say not the same of a Branch which we cut an
Eye or two from the Trunk; this may put forth near the Stub, which we leave
there, some Fruit. buds, or some Branches which will have dispositions to
produce them, at least if the Branch be little or of a mean size; for if it be
great, it ought to be cut near the Tree. If in Lopping where we leave a Stub,
nothing shoots forth there, the year following the Stub must be cut smooth to
the Tree.

I speak not here only of Fruit with Kernels, we ought even to leave a Stub to
Fruits with Stones, not to make them push forth Wood there, for this is not
their Genius, but to keep them from being corrupted by the Weather, and not to
cause them to push forth Gum there, which is their Sap, and in this occasion
their Capital Enemy.

When the little Branches are too confused, care must be taken to cut them off
an Eye or two from the main Branch, or near the Trunk as I have said, both to
disburthen the Tree, and to make it push forth some Branches anew, but after
such a manner, that there be always room for placing the Sprig which will come.

We ought also to Observe that to fill out a Tree well, its Branches ought not
to be distant from each other above a Fingers breadth.

You must never cut Fruit-buds whatever reasons are alleged thereon; Trees at
that time do what they are ordained for, by displaying their Riches, and Nature
gives us what we demand of her for recompense of our cares and Labors.

We know a Fruit-bud by its Figure, by the small bearer where it comes, by the
motion it makes in the shoot of the Tree or finally by the abundance of Leaves
that accompany it.

If a little and long Branch be well stored with Flower-buds, do not cut any of
them (I say it once again) and do not so much as touch the Branch, wait rather
till the Flowers are come forth of the Bud to destroy them, or till the Fruit
are kern'd to cut with Scissars the Stems of the least and worst formed; by
this means you will not cut away the Bud which will produce other Fruit the
following years when the Branch has fortified it self.

Nevertheless, if for some great reason, we are Obliged to cut Flower-buds in a
Branch bared of shoots, for drawing thither the Sap, and to cause some void
space to be filled, and that there are no other Branches found for supplying
this Default, we must cut the Branch at a Wood-knot to fill out the Tree, and
we must take good heed not to cut it near the Flower or Fruit-buds, for the
reasons which we have mentioned, and after this we must take away the
Fruit-buds to give it more strength to push forth.

The old Buds which have yielded Fruit for many years together, and which give
us no longer hope of producing more, must be cut away to embellish the Tree,
and to disburthen it of somewhat which is useless and superfluous.

The bearers which are two, three, or four Inches long are the best, especially
when they Issue from the great Branches near the top of the Tree; they bring
forth many years one after the other, and bear very great Fruit. Those which
are bared of Branches last indeed a long time; but they do not bear so
Beautiful Fruit, and often they are drained, unless you cut the Stems of the
Pears with Scissars; and those which are not above a nail in length, and which
come from the Trunk, bring forth very great Fruit; but ordinarily they last but
a year

A Shoot of August never yields Fruit, the Wood is not then well filled with
Sap, it ought always to be cut away, unless it be extremely necessary for
filling a void space.

If a useless or irregular Branch grows behind, it is always cut away, even
though it has on it a Flower-bud; for the Fruit which would come of it, would be
spoiled by the shadow of the Tree, and would be good for nothing: if it be
before, we cut it an Eye or two from the Mother Branch, to try to make some
Flower-buds spring forth there.

A Branch bent by force bears much Fruit, but it is small, unless it were plied
so the first year; the reason is evident, its Fibers are bent, and the Sap does
not carry it self briskly to it.

Sometimes forked sprouts, or knots of Scions shoot forth from certain places
of Trees, when they are Old and at a stand that they need to be cut to renew
them. In this occasion we ought to cut at a good length a Master Sprig in
Pear Trees and Apple Trees, and to cut some an Eye or two from the Mother
Branch, and cut others near the Trunk, but in Nectarin and Peach-trees, we
ought to cut all the lesser Branches an Eye or two from the Mother Branch, and
let the longest and streightest run on, though it would be the shortest way in
these last Trees, to cut a great Branch near the Trunk, or to cut the Trees two
or three Fingers breadth from the Earth to renew them.

You must cut one Branch short betwixt two long to fill out the Tree. The year
following the short Branch must be cut long, and the long short: It is the
secret to have much Fruit, and to preserve Trees; there are some who say that a
Tree Lopt after that manner is not agreeable to behold: but I desire them to
stay to consider them till the Month of May; and I am well assured they will
change their sentiment.

A Tree is ordinarily composed of three sorts of Branches, we find on it
Ravenous or Prodigal, Indifferent, and Fertile.

1. The Ravenous grow most commonly at the top of the Tree, and sometimes they
spring from an Old Branch; they are finely even and without Moss, greater and
more smooth than the others.

2. The Indifferent are of a mean sort, among which there are sometimes some
well supplied with Juice, they bearing sometimes Fruit within three or four
years.

3. The Fertile are ordinarily small, and growing athwart; sometimes there are
found of them great and long; they always bear Fruit; there are counted five
sorts of them.

1. The first have in their source, and in the place whence they spring, little
Wrinkles like Rings; which show that in this place there are transverse Fibers
in the Wood. Its in these Fibers where is made a slow circulation of the Sap of
the Tree, which produces the Flower-bud, whereas when the Fibers are all
straight, the Sap is carried upward vigorously and without resistance, and not
staying it self in any place, it produces naught but Wood: We may Observe these
transverse Fibers in cutting the Wood where there are of these Rings, the cut
will not be close and even as elsewhere.

The Figure following will Represent to you the Fertile Branch.

Fig. 1
depiction of branch

A. The Wrinkles and Rings of a Branch of a Bon-Chretien Pear Tree.

2. The Second Fertile sprouts have no Rings in their Origin, where they Issue
from their Mother Branch; but they have in the middle, that is to say, when an
Indifferent Branch, having not been cut in February, shoots forth Wood in May,
and forms Wrinkles at the beginning of its shoot; or when a Branch in its
middle forms Rings betwixt the end of its shoot of May, and the beginning of
that of June, which may be known easily, if a Man will make the experiment; for
in cutting the wood in this place, as I even now mentioned, the cut will not
appear smooth as elsewhere, but uneven by the transverse Fibers that are there.

The following Figure Represents the Second Fertile Branch in a Bon-Chretien.

Fig. 2
depiction of branch

A. Rings, and Wrinkles at the beginning of the Shoot of May, or betwixt the
end of the Shoot of May, and the beginning of that of June.

3. The third kind of Fertile Branches Issues from a Flower-Bud, which has
failed to blow sometimes for outward causes, and often through the abundance of
the Sap of the Tree: They Issue also from a Bud which has yielded Pears; they
are called Fertile, because they come of a Flower or Fruit-bud which experience
discovers to us to have transverse Fibers.

The third Figure shows it us in a little Branch with Flower and Fruit-buds of
a Bon-Chretien.

Fig. 3
depiction of branch

A. The Bud which has yielded Pears, or has failed to blow.

B. The Fertile Branch which we must let grow on.

C. The lesser Branch which we must cut away.

D. Where it ought to be cut at two knots:

E. The Bearer.

4. The Fourth kind of Fertile Branches are those which the year before were
Indifferent, and which are become Fertile through the little Sap that is come
to them, and by the Buds which are grown to a fullness.

5. Finally, the Fifth are those which have a Flower-bud at the end of the
Branch.

1. Of these three sorts of Branches, that is to say, of the Prodigal,
Indifferent, and Fertile, the Prodigal are always cut very short at the first
or second knot, to make the Sap pass to another side of the Tree, and produce
there Branches Indifferent or Fertile. This Lopping reiterated many times,
makes the Prodigal Dye, or at leastwise hinders the Tree from pushing them so
vigorously. Its by reason of this experiment that we ought not to cut Trees
much, because by cutting them in all their Branches, they are made to Languish
and afterward to Dye. The Prodigals which have been cut many times the
precedent year, ought to be Lopt at the first knot near the Mother Branch
whence it grows, as the Fourth Figure shows.

Fig: 4
depiction of branch

A. A Prodigal cut in February at the Second knot.

B. A Prodigal cut in June at the Second knot.

C. A Shoot of the Prodigal in July which has not been cut, because it has shot
very little.

D. Where we must cut a Prodigal in February, of the following year at the
first knot.

Lop therefore the top of the Tree, where the Prodigal Branches are Ordinarily
found, and spread it at the bottom and at the sides; this Lopping gracefully
fills a Tree, and hinders it from Growing to too great a height and from
destroying it self in a short time.

2. As for the Indifferent Branches, some of them ought to be Lopt, others not;
that is to say, we ought in the Month of February to let those grow on which
have Buds for Wood very near each other, and which issue from a good place, as
also those which have two great Leaf-buds which touch each other at the end of
the Branch; to the end we may know their Genius at the Lopping of June. The
greatest and best supplied with Juice will be the best for keeping. The
Indifferent which we ought to cut at the third or fourth knot, are those which
are least disposed to bear Fruit, and which have the Leaf-buds far from one
another.

3. The Fertile ought never to be Lopt, though they are as long as the Arm; Trees
left to run up from which we Lop no Branches and which bear so much Fruit, show
us well that we ought never to Lop the Fertile: nevertheless, if there be need
of them for filling up a void space where it happens, and that no other Branch
can be found for this purpose, I permit them to be cut for embellishing the
Tree.

And to explain my self farther in speaking concerning a Fertile Branch, I say
that that which has Rings in its source, Wrinkles at the beginning of its shoot
of May or of June, or finally knots near each other, ought not to be cut
without a great necessity; for experience has taught me that all these Branches
bear Infallibly their Fruit toward the end of their Branches, which our ill
Gardiners always cut away, So at the beginning of February Observe exactly the
end of the shoots of the precedent year, that you may always cut the Branch
when the Saps are at a stand at the first or second knot in the Wood which
comes after, and to leave all the knots which will be as many Flower-buds, that
will not fail to form themselves there in two or three years. Its an
Observation which will embellish your Trees by the abundance of Fruits which
they will produce. That which I say being somewhat difficult to comprehend
without seeing it, the fifth Figure will make you understand it.

Fig: 5
depiction of branch

A. The Lop of February in an Indifferent Branch.

From B. to C. three Branches of the shoot of May.

D. The Lop of June in Indifferents.

From D. to E. The shoot of June.

From E. to F. The shoot of August, the Wood of which is very full of Sap.

G. Where we must Lop in February, of the following year when the Saps are at
rest.

H. Where in two years Fruit-buds will be formed in a Branch which from
indifferent is become Fertile.

The Fertile Branches which Issue from a Bud which has yielded Fruit, and which
have not been cut at the beginning of May, ought not to be cut in February,
unless they are double. In this occasion we must let run the better, and Lop
the other at the first or second knot. Experience has taught me that these
Branches never fail of bearing Fruit the second or third year. See the third
Figure.

Finally, the same Experience has taught me that the Fruit-buds which come at
the end of the Branches in Trees whose Genius is often to bear their Fruit in
this place, ought not to be cut, especially if they produce little, and we
should have but few Gracioli, Coins Francs, nor Grenades d'Espagne, if we
should cut these sorts of Trees at the end of their Branches.

It is said that the Fruits which come at ends of Branches are small, and that
the Wind blows them down. I own that the first default is without remedy, but
the Second is not so, for we may bind up the Branch laden with Fruit against
the Wind. Nature doing well what she does, when she places a Fruit-bud at the
end of a Branch of a Pear Tree, has an intent to render this Branch Fertile;
for the Fruit which she produces there, seals that Branch, and hinders it from
pushing forth afterward; this Branch receiving not then much Sap, forms in all
its length an Infinite number of Fruit-buds, and two or three years after it is
all decked with them; which it continues to do for five or six years following,
till the Branch is worn out; if this Flower-bud be cut away the Sap will come
freely and vigorously into the Branch cut, and instead of the Fruit which
Nature had there designed, we shall have naught but Wood through the Gardiners
Ignorance.

When we will have larg Fruit, especially in the Bon-Chretien and in other
Trees, which bear great, we ought to Lop short, the nearer the Fruit-buds are
to the Trunk, the greater the Fruit is, for it receives more of the Juice.

There are Gardiners who make the Bush of a Tree too thin by cutting away the
little Branches, and leaving the Trunk almost bare: we might leave in it some
clear space in the middle and the sides, to give entrance to the Sun which must
color the Pears, but we ought not to cut it too much: the shadow of the Leaves
ought to secure the Trunk of the Tree against the parching heat of the Sun
which makes it chop, and which breeds the Scab and the Canker by the dryness of
its Bark. Tree it is that we ought to cut shorter Trees with a round Bush head
than Espaliers, and that we ought not to let them run up too much: In a strong
and moist Soil we must keep a Bush head thinner of Branches than in another
Soil, which is poor and dry; but in all places we ought to keep it well filled,
and not cut away the Branches in the midst of it as much as is done at this day.

The nicest Trees do not delight in this Figure, Pear Trees do not much take to
it, and Apricock-trees less. Trees Grafted on the great Quince-tree, are more
proper for it than those which are Grafted on a Pear Tree, these later cannot
be reduced, the more you cut them the more they shoot of Wood; and besides with
this, they do not bring forth much Fruit, their nature being to be always high.

Cherry-trees which bear sharp Cherries, grow very well with a Bush head,
provided that they are Grafted on the small bitter Cherry-tree; and they take
to it better yet if they are permitted to grow up, for they do not much delight
in the Pruning-knife, and less when they are old.

The Plum-tree is of the same nature with the Cherry-tree; it is ordered also
after the same manner.

We ought rather to cut a Branch away, than to cut it in many places; the
diverse wounds which we give Trees, decay them, and make them dye languishing,
witness the Prodigal, which we kill by often cutting.

Experience has taught me for many years following, that Fruit with stones
(that is to say the Apricock-tree, the Nectarin, and the Peach-tree) ought not
to be Lop't as Pear Trees.

We ought only to cut away Branches, and sometimes the greatest to make them
renew themselves: and contrary to the custom of other Trees, they bear in
young shoots which lade themselves with Fruit the first year. Its after this
manner that they last Twenty or Thirty years; the more therefore that a
Peach-tree shoots forth, the more Fruit it bears.

We never ought in these Sorts of Trees to cut a Branch in the middle, though the
Apricock-tree is not so much damnified by it as the others; because they have a
larg Pith very susceptible of the injuries of the Air. The wound often causes
five or six knots to dye in a Branch, which has been cut after that manner, and
by taking off with the Pruning-knife the end of the Branch, as is ordinarily
done, we carry away at the same time the Fruit that ought to form it self
there, and we leave but an end of a Branch which brings naught but Wood.

I say it once again; the Fruit comes but at the end of the shoot of the two
first Saps; if we Lop away this end, we carry away the Fruit, and we blockishly
deprive our selves of that which we seek with so much passion. Its a remark
which we ought well to Observe, for the Sap having spent and as it were wearied
it self after having past all along a Branch, does not exert it self with so
much vigor, and its motion is not so impetuous, nor so nimble at the end of a
Branch as in the beginning of it; also it employs it self rather to form Buds
for Flowers when it acts mildly, than when it agitates it self with so much
praecipitation.

Because Fruit with Stones shoot more briskly and more in confusion than
Pear Trees, we must also take good heed to Lop them with discretion. These
Trees having shot forth vigorously a Branch during one year, and having
produced Fruit there, lose their force in this same Branch the year following,
and shoot forth naught but Scions here and there, but which are laden with an
infinite number of Fruit; and the greatest part of these same Scions dye the
year following as well as all the annual buds of the Tree. When a great Branch
is old we ought to cut it in its Source, as you may see in the Figure following.

Fig: 6
depiction of branch

A. Wood worn out of three or four years.

B. The place where it ought to be cut.

C. Young Wood of the year which ought not to be cut in the middle.

D. Flower or Fruit-buds of the precedent year, which are dry.

The Nectarine and the Peach-tree, being of the nature of those Trees which
shoot much in their tops, we must not hope to be able to subdue them as
Pear Trees, and force them to fill themselves well in the lower part: if we Lop
them as these Trees, that is to say, if we Lop their Branches in the middle we
hinder them indeed from shooting in their tops, but they do not fill themselves
for this in their lower part; they mount always, and by cutting them after that
manner, no Fruit comes of it, and we kill them in a short time.

In general, the Plum-tree and the Cherry-tree delight more in Lopping than the
Apple Tree: but all three of them do not delight in it as much as the
Pear Tree, which is the only Tree that endures it best. We must take naught
from these three first Trees but the dead Wood, unless we will form them at
first for Bush-trees or Espaliers.

Because the Corand-tree has much Pith, and that it comes easily of a slip, its
nature does not endure it to be Lopt in the middle of its Branches, no more
than the Peach-tree; above all we must take good care of cutting it, when we
set it. We ought in an old Corand-tree to cut near the Root a Branch past
bearing, in order to renew it, and to cut also from the lower part some young
shoots of the year to hinder it from being too much confused. The young shoots
which we preserve, serve to renew it when we cut it in its old Wood.
Nevertheless, though it does not delight in being Lopt, we make Bushes of it, and
form it in an Espalier, which is beautiful to behold, at the time that it is
laden with Fruit.

I say the same of the Mulberry-tree, and of the Fig Tree, which cannot endure
the knife by reason of the abundance of their Pith; the last especially is
visibly damnified by it, unless we Lop from them great useless Branches, for
rendering them regular: and neither of them can be made to grow low, they love
too much the free and open Air.

Medlar-trees and Service-trees naturally grow high, the former endure the
knife much more than the latter.

The Portugal Quince-trees, and the Pomegranate-trees of Spain will not be
Lopt, because they bear their Fruit at the end of their Branches. Nevertheless
we may take from them entire Branches, which cause a confusion, and which are
old; and cut near the Trunk the useless Prodigals, which are usual enough in
these sorts of Trees. As for the other Prodigals which embellish the Tree, and
which in four or five years will yield Fruit, we ought not to Lop them.

Care must be taken to cover the great Wounds of Trees with a Plaster made of
a pound of Drogue a flambeau, four Ounces of Rosine, and two Ounces of Sheeps
Sewet. When we walk in our Garden in a fine day of the Month of April, we must
have in our hand a Magdaleon of the Plaster even now mentioned, we must cut a
little of it with a knife, and after having wrought it betwixt the moistn'd
Fingers, for rendering it a little soft, we must apply it on the great Wounds,
which we had forgot to seal in the Month of March. And to the end that this
Plaster may keep the longer on the Wounds, we must put on it a bit of paper as
a binder, which we must press on softly with the Finger, to the end that the
heat of the Summer making the Plaster melt, the paper may press it, stay it,
and glue it more to the Wood: it is what we ought to do in the two other
Loppings following.

CHAP. II. The Lopping of Fruit Trees, at the beginning of the Month of May.
PRoperly speaking, it is not a Lopping that is done to Trees at this time;
they are as yet in the motion of their Sap. We cut but Scions, which though
Fertile of themselves, bring in the mean time a great prejudice to the Fruit;
at the beginning of May we must therefore take a particular care to cut away
the useless Branches which grow by the Buds for Fruit, and especially in
Pear Trees; that is to say, to cut away at the second knot a little Scion which
comes among the clusters of Pears: to delay this is not good, the Sap which
ought to Communicate it self to the Fruit, is carried into the shoot, which
draws a part of the humor of the Fruit-bud, where the Pears are fastn'd, which
causes either that their Stem drys for want of Sap, or that they come very
small.

You may see what I mean in the following Figure.

Fig. 7
depiction of branch

A. A shoot which comes on the Fruitbud through the abundance of the Sap.

B. The place where you must cut it.

CHAP. III. The Lopping of Fruit Trees at the beginning of June.
IN the Decrease of the Moon of May, which happens often in June, you must Lop
Trees for the second time; but with more moderation than in February: for we
ought never in June to cut great Branches, and properly speaking, it is but a
relopping of Trees.

We must wait above all till the Sap be ended, according to the Maxim which we
have alleag'd before, and it will be good to repeat it here: Lop in Fair
weather, in the Decrease of the Moon, at the end of the Saps; or rather when
Trees are at rest.

The rest of a Tree is known by a bud Garnish't ordinarily with two Leaves,
which forms it self at the end of the Branches, and we observe chiefly this bud
at the end of May, or at the beginning of June, that is to say, after the first
Sap or shooting.

The second Sap or shooting of Trees begins ordinarily in the middle of June,
and ends a Month after, toward Magdalen-tide, so that betwixt the end of the
first Sap, and the beginning of the second there is about a Month: and its at
this time that we must cut Trees again.

The effect of this re-cutting is to make the Buds of the first Sap to fill up,
to force Trees to make Fertile Branches, or to form Flower-buds for the
following year; whereas the Lop of February, furnishes but Wood to yield Fruit
three years after, if we except the Orange, the Bergamot, the Double-flower,
the Summer Bon-Chretien, and some others.

You ought here to call to mind that we have distinguished the Branches of Trees
Into Prodigals, Indifferent and Fertile.

There are few Trees Grafted on cultivated Trees, and on Trees come of Kernels,
which do not yield some Prodigal in the first Sap, and which do not continue
even to yield of them in the others. Care must be taken therefore to cut them
at the second Leaf-bud, and thus to correct the shoot which transports it self,
and which draw a great part of the Sap of the Tree. O^ this matter you may see
the fourth Figure

As for Trees Grafted on the great Quince trees, they have not often of these
sorts o^ Prodigal shoots: and some Gardiners are even of the mind that they
ought not to be Lopt at this time, and that the tops of them ought only to be
pincht off with the Nails.

We must not deal with the Indifferent Branches as with the Prodigal: for we
ought to keep the best without touching them, and observe exactly those which
we permitted to run on in the Month of February. If these have good marks for
proving Fertile, we must cut nothing there; but if they have not, they must be
cut short enough to make them yield some; that is to say, they must be cut at
the fifth or sixth knot for Leaves: As for the other Indifferents, we ought to
cut them at half a foot, or even a foots length, for rendering them Fertile the
year following. The Indifferents which we must not cut, have particular marks
which we have observed in the first Chapter.

We ought not to touch the Fertile Branches for the reasons mentioned
elsewhere, unless it be sometimes those which Issue from a Flower-bud which has
failed.

Before I pass farther, it will be proper for me to explain my self on what I
pretend to say by a Flower-bud which has failed; and you must give me leave to
make two sorts of Flower-buds. One sort is certain and never shoots forth Wood:
they are these which will yield Fruit in a short time. The others shoot forth
Wood when the Sap abounds too much, or when we cut a Tree too short, and that
by this means we draw the Sap too much toward these sorts of Buds. They are
these Buds which will not blow under two or three years. Their Origin, their
situation, and their-Figure make them easily distinguishable to a Gardener
which has experience and a good sense. This being thus established, I may say
that a Scion which shoots in a Fruit-bud which has failed, is situated in a
good place for being called Fertile as I have said it elsewhere; and that if
the Sap of the Tree had not been so abundant, to make this Bud shoot which
yielded the Scion, doubtless this Bud would have become the year following a
Flower-bud; besides the Fibers of the Bud being transverse, cause the Sap to
circulate more slowly, and during all this time the Sun concocts and digests
the humor to form there Fruit-buds for Fruit.

I thought good to allege all this, to show the error wherein some are, who
will have us always to cut this Scion, even when the Fruit has failed, and for
this they call it a false and an ill shoot. But experience has taught me that
it has marks of Fertileness, and that two years, or at farthest three years
afterward, if it were not cut away, it would furnish it self with Flower-buds;
and would bear during six or seven years an infinite number of Fruit.

If therefore the Flower-bud which is on a little bearer, that has failed,
which would yield Fruit the next year or two years after, shoots Wood; it ought
to be cut short in June, to make it form there Fruit-buds, which happens
sometimes otherwise through the abundance of the Sap; for a Scion or two form
themselves there as may be seen in the third Figure.

Nevertheless, there are some who will not have us to cut this Scion in June;
they preserve it for the Fruit, and cut it long in the Month of February
following, or do not Lop them at all; and if there are two, they let the best
grow, and cut the other an Eye or two from the Mother-Branch.

But however, I think we must here distinguish two sorts of Scions which come
in a Flower-bud which has failed. There are bearers and vigorous Buds, which
shoot forth two or three Scions, whereof some are long and slender, others
short and slender, and others again short and thick: We must not touch these
last; because most commonly a Flower-bud forms it self there, and we must not
always cut the others an Eye or two from the Mother-Branch: If some disposition
for a Flower-bud forms it self near the Scion, cut within an Eye or two of the
Mother-Branch, we must accept of it from the liberal hand of Nature; if none be
formed there, and that another Scion grows there, they must be left for the
Months of July or February following. If the Bud which produces the Scion, be
weak, we must not touch it, but we must preserve the Scion for the Fruit, at
least if it appears well furnished with Sap in August; for if we cut it, it will
be at a stand and will not shoot.

We must cut larger in June than in February; because it is at that time that
we give the Figure to the Tree for the year following, and that we cause
Fruit-buds to be formed for two years after.

If Grafts within a cleft made in the top of a Stock; are vigorous the year
that they are Grafted, it is better (as some think) to pinch the ends of them
away with the Nails at the beginning of June, than to cut them. But experience
has taught me that if we design a Graft which shoots vigorously either for a
Bush head or for an Espalier, we ought to cut it at the New of the Moon, three
or four Months after it is Grafted, to make it spread below, and to secure it
from the Wind: We gain a year by so doing.

As for Trees which we design to let run up to a height it will be good not to
cut them at all till the second year.

We must not touch the first year a Bud Grafted, be it never so vigorous; we
must wait the year following to cut the Stump of the Tree come of Seed, mean
while care must be taken to stay it up against the Wind.

I repeat it once again here, that we ought never to cut Flower-buds, because
we take away the Buds which bring a great deal of Fruit during six or seven
years following. When the little Branches, where the Buds are fixed, are
fortified by the hardness of the Tree, it is then that we must no longer cut
off with Sheers, neither Flowers nor Pears.

There are some who say, that we ought to cut Apricock, Nectarin and
Peach-trees, four or five times a year, to wit, in February, in May, in June,
and in July: but Experience has taught me, as well as Father Feuillant, who has
writ of Fruit Trees, that these sorts of Trees do not much love the knife;
otherwise, they do not last long, and we destroy them in the end, by much
cutting them: We are obliged in this Month to nale them up, and to cut at the
same time the Branches which cannot be applied to the Espalier. Some preserve
them to be cut in the Month of February, according to the Maxim that these
sorts of Trees, being very nice, do not love to be cut, or rather, they pull
away with the Finger the Branches, as fast as they come against order, and in
an Irregular place.

After the first Lopping of February, I am not of opinion that we ought to cut
any thing from Apple Trees, or Plum-trees, or Cherry-trees, or Goosberry-trees,
or Portugal Quince-trees, or Spanish Pomegranate-trees, unless we take from
these two last Trees some Prodigals, which ordinaly grow there, and which do
not fill, nor embellish the Tree.

Though I resolved to speak here but of Lopping Trees, nevertheless it may be
allowed me to say somewhat curious concerning their watering, which contributes
much to the abundance and greatness of their Fruit.

It will be proper in the Evening at Sun set, during the great heats of the
Summer to sprinkle with Water sometimes the Branches and the Fruit of Trees
with a Dutch Pump. The Tree will be greener, and the Fruit better supplied with
nourishment: it is far better to do so than to Water them at the Root; for this
last watering renders Peats unsavory, and of an ill taste, whereas the first,
answering to an Evening Rain, or the due of the Night, keeps the Tree supplied
with nourishment, which afterward gives its Fruit the Juice, which is meat for
them, for rendering them good and delicious.

For this we ought to Observe that the Water which we will make use of, ought
to be drawn in the Morning, and to have been a little exposed to the Sun, so
that it should not be cold in the Evening when we would use it: Moreover that
the Pump has three or four little holes, that it may make the Water which
issues from it to divide it self into a Thousand little drops. Finally, that we
ought to place our selves at fifteen or twenty Foot from the Tree which we will
Water.

CHAP. IV. The Lopping of Fruit Trees at the end of July.
WE said in the foregoing Chapter, that the second Sap or shoot began in the
middle of June, and ended at the end of July; and we say at present, that the
third manifests it self in the Month of August, and sometimes in the Month of
September according to the disposition of the Air, and the difference of the
seasons: so that it is at the end of the second Sap that we ought to meddle
with Trees; for in the Month of August we must take good heed not to cut any
thing there, and if we cut then any Branch, the Wound does not cicatrize it
self all the year, the heat drys it, and the approaching Winter incommodes it
with the excess of its Rains and colds.

This Lopping is not performed but to cause the Branches to be fortified, to
make the Flower-buds to fill themselves, and to cause the Fruit to be nourisht
the more.

If we ought to be scrupulous in the Month of June to Lop Trees, we ought to be
so for a much greater reason this Month, for at present we must but pinch away
with the nails the ends of, or cut a little some Branches.

We must choose then in July a fine day and the decrease of the Moon to visit
the Trees: and we must call to mind the division which we have made of the
Branches of Trees.

We must Lop again at the second knot the Prodigals a third time, if they have
shot vigorously, that we may wound so often the Branch which receives much of
Sap, that its diverse Wounds may weaken it, and divert by this means the Sap to
other places, that it may be divided into many Branches. These Prodigals come
not much but in Trees Grafted on the Pear Tree; and Planted in a good Soil, as
I have said: and so we must not seek for them elsewhere, for those which are
Grafted on the great Quince-tree do not shoot much: and in this Month we ought
to cut nothing in these last sorts of Trees.

In this Month we must not touch the Indifferent Branches, which we judged to
be so in the Months of February and of June, we must stay till the Month of
February following to Lop them, if they ought to be Lopt.

Neither must we touch of those which are Fertile: but concerning those which
issue from a Flower-bud which has faild, there are differing sentiments. The
shoot which issues from this Bud having been cut at the second knot in the
Month of June, shoots sometimes at the second Sap, and yields one or two
Scions. Some will have it that we should cut these also at the second knot:
because they pretend that Nature ought to form there some disposition to make
Buds. Others Lop at the second Eye the least, and preserve the fairest and best
fed and knotted, to see in February following if it will show its Genius, and
at that time they leave it all entire, because it comes from a Fertile place,
or cut it very long. They have observed by experience that three years
afterward it brings a great many Buds, whence issue an infinite number of
Fruit.

If in this Month there are found some useless Branches besides, they must be
cut an Eye or two from the Mother-Branch, to make them shoot forth somewhat
that is good.

There come often on Peach and Nectarin-trees, and sometimes on Pear Trees a
cluster of Branches, which happens often to Trees grown old, and fit to be cut
for renewing themselves. We must do at this time as we did in the February
before: that is to say, we must make choice of the Master Sprig to preserve it,
and cut away the others. Nevertheless there are some who stay till the Month of
February ensuing to do this, because that in July the heat penetrates to the
quick into the Wounds of nice Trees; and besides that which Trees shoot after
this season ought not to be preserved. They cut therefore Trees at this time
the least they can, relying doubtless on experience which has obliged them so
to do.

Toward Magdelan-tide, in the Decrease of the Moon, which happens in the Month
of July, we must nail up again Peach-trees, Nectarin-trees, etc. and we must
cut all the Branches which are not flexible, and which are grown contrary to
Order, though with this diligence, that we must cover as soon as may be with a
Plaster, and paper the Wounds which have been there made.

Those who are for the lasting of these Trees, pale them up at this time, but
they stay to cut them till the Month of February; these sorts of Trees
(according to their sentiment) being so nice, that they cannot endure the
Summer, the great heat penetrating into their Wounds, causes five or six Eyes
to dye. Which we perceive dried the year following: this is the way (say they)
to make them last forty years, as experience shows it. They chose much rather
(as I have said) to pull away with the Finger, as they walk, the Branches which
come contrary to order, than to cut them, and if there are found some which
ought to be cut, they keep them for the Month of February following.
Nevertheless, if they are too much confused, and that their shadow hinders the
Sun from heating the Fruit, we shall be obliged to cut them away.

The abundance of Pears being ordinarily the Enemy of Espaliers, and making the
Trees often dye, we must cut with Sheers the middle of the stalk of the Pears,
to disburthen the Trees. This ought to be done when the Fruit is a quarter or a
third part as big as it ought. This Rule is only for great Winter-Fruit, and
chiefly for the Bon-Chretien: we must observe also not to leave above one or
two Pears on a weak Branch, a strong one being able to bear more.

Its also in this Month that Fruit enter into Juice, and begin to take a color
through the light of the Sun: but because often there are Leaves, which hinder
the rays fron touching the Fruit, care must be taken in July to take away some
from before them, and in the Month of August following we must cut away the
rest with Sheers, so managing the Light by reason of the burning heat of the
Sun.

End of the First Tract.
An Explanation of some words which Gardiners make use of to express themselves
in speaking of Fruit Trees.
CAnker, or Scab is often caused by the heat of the Sun, or through the taint
of the Tree which is in an ill Soil,

Espalier, is an edge row of Fruit Trees set close together, their Boughs
interlac'd one within another, and held with Stakes, Railes, or Pales.

False Shoots, are little useless Branches, or Sprouts of the shoot of August,
turning yellowish, and ill supplied with Juice.

Franc, is said of Fruit, when they are cultivated and domestic, or of a Tree
Grafted, or lastly of a young Tree come of a Kernel, Sown, which has no thorns,
and which has large Leaves, for there are excellent Fruit which come of Seed so
Sown. We say to Graft a Franc on a Franc, Coin Franc.

Fertile, Fertile shoots are the Branches which always bear Fruit.

Indifferents, are Sprouts which sometimes yield Fruit within three or four
years. A knot is the place where a Tree shoots forth Wood.

Prodigal or Ravenous, are great and smooth shoots, which draw the Sap of the
Tree, and which bring not Fruit in a long time; they dissipate all the
substance of their Mother.

Sap, is taken for the humor which rises betwixt the Wood and the great Bark,
by the little Bark which is betwixt both, it answers to the Blood of Animals:
It is Rosin in the Pine Tree, Turpentine in the Larch-tree, Gum in the Apricock
and Cherry-trees, Milk in the Fig Tree, Water in the Vine and in the Pear Tree.

Scion, is a little Fertile Branch.

Void spaces, when there are no Branches to fill out the Espalier.

Worms called Tygres, Lutins, Diablotins, are those Worms which come in the
Month of August and gnaw the Leaves of Trees; they have the Head great and
black; the vapor of Quick Lime, or the decoction of Wormwood kills them.

The Second PART.
Of the use of the Fruits of Trees, for preserving us in Health, or for Curing
us when we are Sick.
IT is not enough for us to have Writ concerning the Lopping of Trees, to have
Fruit in abundance, we must also teach the way and the time of eating them
without being offended thereby.

If our Stomach were as good as that of our Forefathers, it would be useless
for us to Write on this matter; but because it is weakn'd by the pleasures
which men of late have taken in their way of living, there seems and Obligation
upon us to give precepts concerning the use of Fruits, either for preserving us
in Health, or for destroying our Diseases when we are afflicted with them.

There is nothing so useful in Physic, as to know the qualities of things
which we make use of in Life, either for avoiding those which offend us, or for
taking those which do us good: it is what has obliged Learned men to deliver
their sentiments concerning all that we eat, they making use always of Reason
and experience, which we shall also follow in this Tract of The use of Fruits
of Trees: for it is only of those whereof we design to speak.

We shall make therefore three different Chapters: We shall show in the First
the time and the way of using those Fruits which are easily corrupted, as
Figgs, Nectarins, Peaches, Plums, Apricocks, Mulberries, and Cherries, which we
ought always to eat fasting, on an empty Stomach, and before Meals.

The second shall Treat of those which are not easily corrupted, and which we
ought to eat the last thing after Meals, as Pears, Apples, Portugal Quinces,
Medlars, and Services.

Lastly, the third shall explain how we may eat before or after Meals Raisins,
Portugal and China Oranges, Spanish Pomegranates, and Corands. But before I
enter upon this matter, I think fit to lay down some general Maxims, without
which we cannot know the good use which we ought to make of Fruits.

We ought then in the first place to observe all the qualities of the Fruits
before mentioned, that we may use the one and the others at diverse times,
according to the precepts which we shall give in the Sequel.

We find of Sweet, of Sugared, of Amber'd, of Musked, of Vinous, of Aqueous or
Insipid, of Sharp, of Acerb, and of Austere, and to speak in a few words, there
are of sweet, sharp, and austere.

There are found moreover of Red, of Yellow, of Green, of Tawny, of Violet, of
White and of Black.

Again there are of Cassans or harsh, of Burez, of Fondans or melting and
tender; finally we find such as pass quickly through the Bowels of those that
eat them, and these are the Fruits which are easily corrupted: there are others
which stay a long time in the Stomach, and they are those which are corrupted
with difficulty.

All the Fruits whereof we design to speak in particular, cool and moisten
much, because they are but Water gathered together, and passed through the
Trunk of the Tree, which produces them; but nevertheless with this difference,
that there are some colder and moister than others.

Fruit that have a quality which is sweet, and pleasant to the taste, are less
cold than others: thus, though Figgs, Raisins, the Bon-Chretien, the Spanish
Renet, and other Fruit of the like nature, moisten much, they have nevertheless
but a coldness, which does not pass the bounds of the first degree, its for
this reason that they dulcifie much, and that they nourish a little more than
the others, their matter having more affinity with our parts. But if with their
natural sweetness they have an odor of Amber or of Musk, then they have I know
not what subtle and penetrating parts, which exhilerate our Heart and Brain,
and which make us digest them better than others.

Sharp Fruit cool more than sweet: but they do not moisten so much, they
powerfully penetrate and attenuate the thick and earthy matters, so that
afterward they are no longer capable of doing us hurt. They qualify our heated
Bowels; they destroy the Flame there, which often all the remedies of Physic
have not been able to quench during many Months: they cool our Liver, remove
all the Obstructions of our Bowels, and give our Blood a more free motion:
finally they appease fluxions, if we apply them outwardly, and they stay a Flux
of Blood from whatever part it comes.

Fruits which are austere and acerb, and which differ but in more or less,
restringe the Tongue and the Palate when we eat them: it seems that they stop
the Orifices of the threads that terminate there, by the blunted and obtuse
particles of their matter.

I do not pretend to speak here of Fruit which are not Ripe, that have all
these qualities. I banish them entirely from this Book as very pernicious to
the Life of Man; but I speak only of those, which being in a perfect maturity,
retain somewhat of austere, acerb, or astringent, as the Rake Pear, the great
Degue, the Quince, and other Fruits of the like Nature. All these Fruits are
also more cold than the sweet and the Amb'red, but they do not moisten so much:
and because their savor is in a more Earthy matter, even in this respect they
do not penetrate so much as the Sharp. They restring however the Stomach and
the Bowels, and withstand a Looseness and a Dissentery, and being applied
outwardly they hinder Vomiting, retard growing Inflammations, and easily
cicatrize the Skin, which has been opened by a considerable Wound.

After all, a Fruit which has been brought to perfection by the heat of the
Sun, and which has not been shadowed by the Leaves of its Tree, will be always
of better taste than another. A red Apple or Pear, and a yellow Raisin will
always be better than others; because their Juice will be better digested, and
their useless moisture will be easily evaporated by the heat of the Sun.

You must observe in the second place, that I give not here precepts concerning
the use of Fruits, for sound and robust Persons, on whom Fruits make no
Impression; Let such eat of them at all times, and as much as they please,
without distinguishing their Nature and Temperament, they will not find any
inconvenience: but because these sorts of Persons are very rare, and that in
the Age we Live, there are more Valetudinarians than others, I may be allowed
to Write only for those who have their Entrals tender, and who are often
incommoded by eating Fruits.

The greatest part of men at present are of a hot and dry Complexion; we have
all of us the inward parts very hot, through the excess of a burnt Choler, and
through the redundancy of a troubled Melancholy. With difficulty are we able
during the Summer to support the heat of the Season, without being exhausted of
our strength: We have the Stomach so weak and so tender through our natural
distemperature, that we have need of much precaution for the good use of Fruits.

In the third place, we must remember, that in walking in a Garden full of
excellent Fruit, which are perfectly Ripe; we must not eat one which has not
first been washed with fresh Water, and especially if the heat of the Sun, or of
the day be excessive.

It is not of to day that experience has taught me, that Fruit newly gathered,
and eaten without precaution, cause the Feve^s which we call putrid, which
always begin with shiverings and tremblings, because all the Juices of Fruits
being then through the heat of the day, and of the Season in a considerable
motion, they cause in our Stomach so great a disorder at the time that the
fermentation is there made, that the Chyle becoming crude and undigested, often
gives Birth to great Diseases, whereas the motion of the Juice of Fruits being
calmed by the cold of the Water, of the Night or of the season, the Fruits make
no disorder in our Stomach, which then digests them better, and which performs
its Office much better, when it is not interrupted by unusual causes.

After all, we ought to know that our sood being in some sort like our
substance, changes it self easily within our parts imperceptibly to us: Its
thus that Bread, Flesh, an Egg, have no Predominant quality when we put them
into our Mouth, and we do not sensibly feel the Virtues when we have them in
the Stomach. We must not say so of Aliments which we call medicamental; they
nourish little, and on the other side they have sensible qualities, which
affect our Tongue and our Palate. We may perceive that a Vertelongue, or a Pear
Portail will cool and moisten our heated Stomach, that it will qualify the
Gall of our Liver, and the heat of our Reins, and that by cooling this last
part, it will hinder Stones from being formed there.

Finally, its a grand secret for our good Health, to keep what we eat, from
corrupting in the Stomach. The things of a different Nature which we put into
it, daily cause disorders, whereof our selves are too often Witnesses; if
experience did not convince us of this truth, there would doubtless be a great
deal of pleasure in eating many things one after the other; but it shows us
that eating before or after Meals Fruits of a different Nature, that is to say,
such as are easily corrupted, as Peaches, etc. and such as have a more firm
substance, as Pears, etc. The Coction which is made in the Stomach is not
laudable, and that it is thence that often proceeds the little Health of those
who over loosly indulge themselves to the pleasure of the taste.

If therefore we eat at the end of Meals Peaches and Pears, as it often
happens, the Peaches being of a substance to be soon digested, and to pass off
quickly, and the Pears of a pretty firm matter, requiring more time to Concoct,
two great inconveniences follow; the first, that the Peaches trouble the
Belly, and make the Food taken at the Meal to descend, without being fully
digested: the second, that they hastily drag along with them the Pears, which
require a longer time for digestion, and thus there comes of it but crudities,
and afterward obstructions, which are the cause of some troublesome Disease.

It is not the same when we eat before Meals Mulberries and Peaches, or after
Meals Pears and Quinces; the two first Fruits and the two last have a matter
and qualities near alike: the former pass quickly through the Belly by reason
of their great humidity: and the later digest themselves afterward at leisure,
by constringing after the Meal the superior Orifice of the Stomach, which by
this means acquits it self much better of its office.

CHAP. I. Of Fruits which ought to be eaten before Meals.
I Say in the first place that good Fruit which are Ripe, never do hurt, unless
we misuse them, or commit faults in eating them; there are none but ill and
unripe Fruit which cause Crudities, Indigestions, Colicks, and Fevers. I say
much more; experience daily teaches us, that by the moderate use of them we
prevent an infinite number of Diseases, and that we Cure as many. Our Gardens
fail not of Remedies to relieve us, and I wonder we go so far into Foreign
Countries to seek for Drogues, which are musty or rotten, when they are brought
to us, since we have so excellent at home. Our Fruits have many more Virtues
and Charms than all those Diogues, and there are seen few Persons who refuse
Peaches, Mulberrys, or Pears, to appease the burning of the Bowels; Whereas we
daily see Persons have in horror Tamarinds, Cassia, Rhubarb, and the other
Drogues which are brought us from so far.

Because I am obliged to follow the Order which I have prescribed to my self, I
shall treat in this Chapter of the good use of those Fruits which ought to be
eaten at Breakfast, or before Meals: and I shall begin with Figgs, which among
all Fruits have always been the most esteemed.

ART. I. Of Figgs.
A Mong all the Food wherewith Men nourished themselves at the beginning of the
World, there is not one which deserves a greater praise than Figgs. The
Ancients have made Encomiums on them in many of their Books; and the
Lacedaemonians so far esteemed them, that they would never go to any Feast where
they were not provided in a great plenty. Also some have compared them to Gold,
nay have esteemed them far better than this Metal. Its doubtless by reason of
their sugary sweetess, which is the Symbol of peace, that men formerly wished
their Friends a happy year, by sending them at the beginning of it Figgs and
Honey.

In truth, they have admirable Virtues in Case they are eaten with Bread, for
Breakfast, or before Meals. For it is thus that they qualify the Bowels, and
that they appease the excess of a troublesome heat. They do not fail of
producing other good effects, they quench drought, lenify the Breast, and give
a more easy respiration. They clear the Liver and the Spleen of the
Obstructions wherewith they are afflicted. They discharge the Reins and the
Bladder of their slime and Gravel: They loosen the Belly, be it never so tardy:
finally they nourish and fatten both together, witness the famous Wrastlers,
who performed most courageously, when they lived but of Bread and Figgs.
Witness also the Keepers of Figg-Gardens, who (according to the Relation of
Galen) ate in a manner naught but Figgs, and who in the mean while were so fat,
that a man would have said that nothing was wanting to them in their way of
living.

Figgs also have this peculiar to them, that they contribute to the vigor of
young People, and to the Health of such as are Old, so that those who use of
them often, have no Wrinkles in their Face. A better Reason cannot be given
than that Figgs, by their fat substance engender a Blood which dulcifies much,
and this same matter being carried to the superficies of the Body is there
cleared as well as the Blood of all its serous and superfluous excrements, so
that what remains serves as a natural Paint, and renders the Face smooth, and
free from all sorts of Wrinkles.

After all, they have the property of Penetrating, Cleansing and Digesting; for
no man doubts but they are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second;
the great humidity they have make them soon corrupt, and obliges us to eat them
with Bread before Meals; for its the Leaven of the Bread which corrects all the
ill qualities.

Its a Maxim among Physicians, That we ought always to begin with the things
that are moistest and easiest of digestion, when we Dine, or when we Sup. And
this is also another, That after Fruits that are Sweet and Luscious, and which
withal pass quickly through the Belly, we ought rather to Drink pure Water, or
Water mixed with a little Wine, than Wine alone. Pure Wine carrys hastily into
the Lacteal Veins the matter of the Figgs before it be digested, and so causes
winds, and Indigestions in those who so do: Whereas Water is the cause of a
slower fermentation, by the means of which the Figgs are perfectly digested and
make afterward a very laudable Blood, which easily becomes our substance.

They are not proper only for such as are in Health, but likewise for those who
have a Fever and are costive, and I cannot imagine to my self that a Learned
Physician can refuse his Patient a Figg half dried on the Tree by the heat of
the Sun.

Dry Figgs have much more Virtue than those which we gather; we may eat of them
even after Meals, without offense; also they are more penetrating and hotter
than the others through the subtilty of their parts, but they are not so moist.
If they are applied in the form of a Cataplasm with Bread and a little Vinegar,
happily they are the quickest and most certain remedy for opening an abscess, for
killing a Carbuncle, or the swelling of the King's Evil, or lastly to withstand
the progress of a Latent Cancer.

They do much more, if we will believe Dioscorides, for they tear from the
Flesh (as we may say) a piece of a Bone broken, if we mix them with wild Popy
Flowers.

The German Physicians have not found a better remedy in the Smallpox, or
Measles than the decoction of these Fruits dry; experience has shown them that
this decoction, by Purging by Urine, carrys away all the Malignant serosity
which is the cause of those troublesome Diseases.

But among all the good qualities which these Fruits enjoy, there are observed
some ill: they cause Winds which swell the Stomach; they breed Lice, and makes
us fond in caressing Women.

The Spirits irritated and set in motion by the Winds which they engender, and
a viscous humidity which they cause, are two things which dispose us to be fond
of a Woman, as we have proved at larg in a Dissertation we caused to be Printed
the last year; which has for Title, Whether those who Drink Water alone are
more amorous than others?

The Lice which they say Figgs breed in those who use them in excess, proceed
but from the filth of the Skin, and from our excrements which they evacuate by
the pores: and the evils they cause in us by the Winds they engender, proceed
but from the ill use we make of them; if we eat them with Nuts or Almonds, we
shall correct all the disorders they can bring us; and I can assure you that
being so eaten, they will be without fault, and will do us no hurt, still
provided that we use them with moderation.

ART. II. Of Nectarins and Peaches.
I Cannot bear the contempt some Persons have for Nectarins, Alberges,
Brugnons, Melicotonys, Perses and Peaches, nor be satisfied with the reason
they bring for blaming them. They say among other things that these Fruits are
corrupted so easily in the Stomach, that it is almost impossible to secure them
from it; that they produce ill Blood, that they cause Fevers; that they injure
the inward parts; that the Persians, from whose Country they were brought, dare
not eat of them by reason of their Malignity, and finally that Galen, the most
knowing of the Greek Physicians, always condemned them.

But if it were free for me to explain my self at large thereon, and to break
off the design which I proposed to my self; I would show that the ill use which
is made of the most excellent things, is often the cause that they are despised
and blamed. Peaches, not to speak of the other kinds, are a Fruit so excellent
and so delicious to the taste, that I could freely prefer them before Figgs and
Raisins, which (according to the sentiment of some) ought to hold the first
rank among Fruits.

Very far from causing all the evils whereof they are accused, they cool the
Stomach when heated, quench the heat of the Liver, allay the burning of the
Blood during the extremity of the Summer heats, and moisten the matter which is
then very thick through the drought of the Season.

If we observe well their praecautions, they do not corrupt in the Stomach,
provided that they are eaten before Meals, and that after having eaten them we
drink only Water, if we find a burning in the Bowels; or excellent Wine, if we
find our selves to have a very moderate heat; It is then that they will
engender a better Blood than the Herbs we use every day.

I own that in Persia these sorts of Fruits have Malignant and purgative
qualities, but since the Trees were transported into Egypt, and have been
re-planted in Italy, and since cultivated in France, they have lost all the
Malignity which they had, and have retained but the purgative Virtue, which
they have still, and which they Communicate to their Fruit.

Its this purgative Virtue which causes them to be so much esteemed of by the
Healthy and Valetudinarians, who had much rather eat fasting four or five
excellent Peaches, and drink after them Water or Wine, to loosen the Belly;
than to take a dose of Physic, the very name of which raises a horror in
those that take it the most courageously.

Its this same property which resides in the Leaves, the Flowers and the Fruit
of the Peach-tree, which kills the Worms in the Bowels, which Purges Choler and
the Serosities of the Body, and stops even Vomitings at Sea, as we see written
in the Works of Julius of Alexandria.

If Galen had Lived in our days, and had tasted Peaches, which the Art and
Industry of our Gardiners have rendered so recommendable, I am certain he would
have had quite another opinion of these sorts of Fruit: the Peaches which were
carried to Rome in the Time of this Physician, coming by Sea from Sicily or
from about Naples, were partly rotted before they came thither, which made
Galen at that time to despise them, and to condemn them even as a Food very
pernicious for Man.

Some Persons will correct the ill quality, and the great humidity of the
Peach; by eating it with Bread, by exposing it two or three days to the
scorching heat of the Sun, by eating its Kernel, or finally by drinking pure
Wine with it.

True it is, experience has taught me, that Bread eaten with Fruits which we
ought to use before Meals, corrects their ill qualities, and that by exposing
Peaches to the Sun, they lose a superfluous humidity which often incommodes us.
But the same experience has also given me to understand, that Peach and
Apricock Kernels much charge the Stomach, and that besides their great
bitterness they are also very difficult to digest: that moreover, though pure
Wine be the sole thing which opposes it self to the coldness, and humidity of
this Fruit; nevertheless if we drink much of such as is small or of a mean
strength, we fall into Vomitings and Loosnesses, which sometimes degenerate
into a Bloody Flux. Whereas a little of excellent pure Wine corrects by its
noble heat the ill qualities of the Peach: Its happily this experiment which gave
occasion for this Latin Verse.

Petre, quid est Pescha? Cum vino nobilis Esca. ART. III. Of Plums and
Apricocks.
THere are some who prefer the Plum before all other Fruits with Stones, and
say that there is nothing more delicious to eat than a Black Damson, a Great
Date, or a Perdrigon. The Apricock does not come near them, it has I know not
what of unsavory when it is ripe, and of sharpish when it is not so; mean
while, both have very near the same qualities; they are both hot in the mean,
and moist in the second Degree.

The sweet Plum rejoices a hot Stomach, lenifies the Breast, Loosen's the
Belly, and nourishes much more than the Peach, provided however that it be
eaten before Meals, otherwise it corrupts, and by moistning too much the
superior Orifice of the Stomach after Meals, it makes the Food descend too
soon, and so causes Crudities, which it is difficult afterward to deal with.

I shall not repeat here the different Maxims which I have laid down in the
precedent Discourses concerning the Use of Fruits, which ought to be eaten
fasting, and before Meals. I shall only say that its good to cast Plums into
fresh Water before they are eaten, to the end they may cool and moisten more;
but provided that they are very ripe, and that all have their Stems, lest the
Water enter there, and render them Insipid. Its doubtless in order to be more
cooled, and more moistn'd, and to keep the Belly more soluble that some Men eat
often Prunes with their Meat, and that there are even some who dislike their
Pottage if it has not of them.

If dried Plums may be given to sick Persons, I do not doubt also but I may be
permitted to give of them to mine, after having gathered them very ripe in a
clear day; the Choler which is often the cause of all Fevers, looses its edg by
the cumbrance which it receives from the substance of Plums: and because these
Fruits oppose the heat and drought of these Diseases, they are esteemed
excellent for encountering Bilous Fevers, provided that the use be regular, and
that we take a seasonable time to give them.

ART. IV. Of Mulberries.
OF all the Fruits that are eaten there are none but Mulberries which are fit
for Men when unripe: these ought only to be Red, drawing toward the Black, to
be eaten. If they are thoroughly ripe, they corrupt so hastily in the Stomach,
that shortly after they cause in those who eat freely of them, Distempers of
the Stomach, Loosnesses, Carbuncles, Malignant Swellings, and often pernicious
and Epidemick Diseases, especially if Rains have been rife during the Summer.

There is nothing which changes it self sooner into Choler, and which becomes
sooner poison within our Body than a Black Mulberry. Those who have the Stomach
foul ought to take good heed of eating them, unless they have a mind to be sick
in a short time. The Red-blacks withstand Corruption more, and though they are
very moist, they have nevertheless I know not what of drought through their
sharpness and astriction, which hinders them from corrupting so soon.

To use them well, we ought nevertheless to mind the praecautions belonging to
them, and never to eat of them but when the Stomach is empty, clean, and hot;
for if a heat be not felt in the Bowels, how young and Choleric soever a
Person be, I do not advise him to eat of them, unless he has a mind to fall
into some one of the Diseases which we have spoken of before.

Mulberries carry their Liquor with them, and nothing ought to be Drank after
they are eaten; they excite the appetite, cool the Stomach, appease drought,
allay the heat of the Liver, Purge the Blood of its superfluous serosities,
carrying them off by Urine. They blunt the edg of the Choler, moisten those
that are troubled with Melancholy and Choler: finally they make the Belly
soluble in those who are naturally Costive. I will say much more, if Mulberries
gathered from the Tree and eaten in a good plenty can cause the Bloody Flux; as
we see it every year, nature which most commonly has placed the remedy in the
cause of our evils, has not forgotten to teach us by experience, that these
Fruits serve for an assured remedy against the inveterate Bloody Flux, if they
are given dry to the weight of a Crown in Gold in Red-Wine.

Since the chief Virtue of Mulberryes is to cool and to keep the Mass of Blood
from fermenting, by qualifying the parts which serve for sanguification, there
may be cause to believe that they may be a Remedy appropriated to the Gout as
well as all other Fruits. For the pain which Gouty Persons feel in the
ligaments of their Joints, is caused but by a Blood and a serosity too sharp,
which sharpness is blunted by the great humidity of Mulberries, they insensibly
evacuating it by Urine. We need not seek for other proofs than daily
experience, and that which Hegesander has left us in Writing. He relates that
the Mulberry-trees did not bear Fruit for Twenty years together, and that
during all that time Men, Women, and Children, were so troubled with the Gour,
that other causes could not be then discovered, than the scarcity of these
Fruit.

ART. V. Of sharp Cherries.
SHarp Fruits in general are enemies to Old and Melancholic Persons, when they
do not find within themselves an excessive heat; they are not edulcorated in
their Stomach (if I may so call it) and are distributed into their Veins
without being Concocted and blunted. Which is not done without causing in the
Mouth little sharp belchings, and in the Stomach troublesome prickings, and in
the whole Body an insupportable heavyness.

It does not happen so to young People that are Sanguine and Choleric who have
the Entrals heated: but if casually the sharpness of Cherries with short Stems
eaten fasting, causes sometimes in these prickings in the Stomach, they need
then but to mix Powder Sugar with them, to blunt the point of it.

The most refined Sugar and the whitest, which we call Royal, is the least
proper for the use of Man; it heats and drys us too much, and through the
abundance of its Sulphur and Salt, it is entirely opposite to the principles of
our Life: The finer Sugar is the less sweet it is, and the less also it
quenches thirst. Lime which is a capital Enemy of Man, if it be taken inwardly,
or outwardly applied, is the chief matter which Refiners make use of, for
rendering Sugar whiter and more solid; and though Powder Sugar be made by many
repeated Lixivium's, nevertheless it ought always to be preferred before Loaf
Sugar, and if we will choose the best of all, we must always take that which is
the whitest among the browns. It is that which is extremely sweet, which
quenches thirst, which moistens, and which lenifies the Breast: I thought it
proper to make this digression for Persons who lovesweet things, because Sugar
is often set at our Tables, for rendering our Fruits more agreeable to the taste.

Sharp Cherryes exhilerate the Stomach, they excite there the Appetite, and
appease the drought. They dissipate the thick humors, and by their sharp
quality, they cut them (as I may say) and divide them, either that they may
serve afterward for Food, or be evacuated with more ease.

By all these Virtues they are very proper as well as Mulberries, to oppose the
cause and the progress of the Gout, and experience shows us that Gouty Persons
receive a sensible relief by the use of Fruits, which qualify the Liver, and
which correct the Acrimony of the Blood.

Moreover they powerfully loosen the Belly, if they are freely eaten fasting
while the Dew is yet on the Fruit; and experience teaches us every year that
they carry off by a Looseness long Diseases, which all the other Remedies of
Physic have not been able to Cure.

The most proper time to eat them is in the Morning fasting, either with or
without Bread. They have moisture enough to oblige us not to drink any Liquor
after them. As for the lateward Cherries which we call at Rochelle des Guignes
with long Stems, though they may be eaten before Meals; nevertheless I allow them
to be eaten after Meals: they have an agreeable Astriction, which contributes
to Concoction, and which closes the superior Orifice of the Stomach, that it
performs its Office afterward much better.

The sweet Cherries, especially those which we call in this Town Guindoux and
Guigneaux, are much better than the sharp for old Persons and for these who
have a nice Stomach; they do not prick so much the inward parts, and they
nourish more.

Happily there is not any Remedy more agreeable and more excellent for qualifying
the Reins, and for clearing thence the Gravel, Slime, and little Stones, than
the Wine of sharp Cherries: We must take off them therefore in the Months of
June or July, twelve or fifteen Pounds, we must cleanse them of their Stems and
Stones, and cast them and their Stones broken through the Bung-hole of a
Barrel, (a Vessel containing somewhat more than our Barrel) of good White Wind.
After that they have been there for a Month, and have Communicated to the Wine
their cooling and opening quality, you may pierce the Vessel and drink the Wine
with pleasure. The color will be agreeable to the Eye, the taste delicious,
and the effects admirable.

CHAP. II. Of Fruits which ought to be eaten after Meals.
Though the Fruits which ought to be eaten after Meals are of a matter more firm,
which nourishes more, and which does not corrupt so easily as that of the
others, nevertheless we must remember to use them with the same precautions
which we gave in the Preface to this Tract: these precautions ought to be stood
too as Religiously in using these Fruits, as in eating the others. The faults
which are committed in their use are very considerable, and that Person whom I
Cured not long since of Vertigo's which threatened her with some severe
Distemper, has been thankful to me since, for having forbidden her the use of
Apples, which she are irregularly after Meals.

ART. I. Of Pears.
NEver has the Industry of our Gardiners appeared more admirable than in the
diverse kinds of Pears which we have in France. They have taken a particular
care to Sow Seeds, and to preserve such Trees, as in their Wood and Leaves gave
them marks of a good hope: For as by Sowing a great many Flower Seeds, there
come of all kinds, and even some that are beautiful and double, so by Sowing a
great store of Pear Kernels, it seems that Nature pleases her self in giving us
a grand variety of Pear Trees, which produce all new Fruits, and some of them
delicious to the taste: happily it is because the Pear is the most excellent
Fruit of all, that she delights in multiplying its kinds even to an infinite
number: It is thus that the Messire Jean, the Dame Houdote, or the Amadote, the
Gabriel Egand, the Micet, the Martinsire, and a great many other excellent
Pears are come of Kernels, and that they have had the honor to bear the Names
of those who raised them.

But not to stop at this Discourse, which seems to contribute nothing to my
design, I may say that the artifice of our Gardiners has multiplied for us
Pears of Summer, of Autumn and of Winter; that it has given us more of
Cassantes and of Burez, that it has shown us more of Sweet, of sharp and of
Acerb, and that finally it has procured for us more of Vinous, of Ambred and of
Musked, than we had before.

Among all these Pears the sweet and melting are esteemed the best, they
nourish more than the others which are a little sharp or Acerb, and they are
much more friendly to the nature of Man. Nevertheless there are some who prefer
before these first Pears the Sweet and Cassant^s, because these for the most
part are odoriferous, and the others are not. They prise therefore much more
the Bonchretien-Pioulier, or the great Winter Musk Pear, than the Vergoulette,
or the Bergamot of Autumn.

Be it how it will, the Pear in general cools and moistens the heated Entrals,
and by its gentle Astriction contributes much to the Concoction of the Stomach,
by gently closing its superior Orifice, and by Loosning a little the Belly;
its the reason for which it ought always to be eaten after Meals, for if it be
eaten the Stomach being empty, it cumbers us, and loads us much, and moreover
it binds the Belly; but however we eat of it after Meals, it always has very
good effects, provided that we have the Stomach disposed to receive it: for be
it that we eat it Crud, or Baked, or Roasted, or Boiled, with Powder Sugar and
Cinnamon, as old People ought to eat it, after all these manners it always
solaces the Stomach drained of its strength and weakened by the excess of heat.

That which is to be Observed in the use of Pears, is, that after Meals we
ought to eat fewer Beurees than Caffantes, the former being more digested, and
more ready to corrupt through the least fault that we commit in our way of
living. Moreover we ought always to make choice of the most colored, and
reject those which we find Worm eaten. Finally we ought after Pears to drink a
good Cup of pure Wine, letting this Latin Maxim have its force, Post Crudum,
merum. But above all we ought to remember not to drink much Wine, nor to drink
such as is small; small Wine through its defect of heat not causing the Pear to
be Concocted, and the other causing crudities by its redundancy, make both of
them disorders in a Stomach the most even tempered and the most strong. It is
what experience showed us not long since in a Person, who fell into
insupportable pains, having drank much Wine; and Rodolphus Goclenius assures
us, that another dyed having drank much Beer, both, after having eaten Pears to
an excess.

Because our Stomach is much hotter in Winter than in Summer, our heat not
dissipating it self during that first season through the pores of our Body,
there are Persons who rather eat Pears in Winter than in Summer, and who do not
find themselves so much incommoded by them. Happily these Pears have sweated in
the heap, and have there seasoned themselves; whereas the Pears of the Summer,
having their Sap still in motion, and having not lost their superfluous
humidity, trouble rather the Coction of the Stomach than the Pears of Winter.

ART. II. Of Apples.
SInce Apple Trees have been cultivated in the Pais des Basques, and in the
Province of Normandy, Men have had a greater esteem for their Fruits. Trees
have been Sown, and afterward Grafted; they have been after that planted and
re-planted: Finally they have been so often changed in their Soil, Countries,
and Climats, that the Fruit are become sweet and pleasant.

I own that Apples were a long time despised, and that in Arabia they have even
been accused of Contributing to the Prizick, and to the drying of the whole
Body. It has been said also that they caused weakness in the Joints, and that
consequently they increast the Gout and other Fluxions, that they engendered
Worms in the Bowels, and that finally they caused Vertigo's, as experience
shows it us, and as it happened formerly to Scipio Gentilis a famous Civilian,
who after Meals abused these sorts of Fruits.

But if Men have talked after this manner, either it has been because they knew
not Apples well, and that they have been taken for other Fruit, or they judged
of them, as Men do of all other things, by the ill success of those who have
abused them: for if we will examine the thing very narrowly, we shall find that
the Arabians had none but Apples that were wild, acerb and very unpleasant to
the taste; that the weakness of the Joints, the Worms of the Bowels, and the
Vertigo's are caused but by the excesses which are committed with them, or by
the ill praecautions that are taken in their use.

On the contrary, Apples which are sweet and Luscious, Odoriferous and firm,
exhilerate the Heart, and allay the excess of its beat; they correct the Gall
of the Liver, they dilute the Blood, which is too thick and gross: in a word
they cool and moisten the heated Viscera: Moreover, whatsoever is said, they
oppose the drying of the Body and the Ptisick, and we see but very few of these
sorts of evils where Cider is common: For this drink is friendly to the
Stomach, which it heats in a moderate way; it revives the Heart, and opens the
Obstructions of the Entrals: In a word it is of wonderful use to Melancholic
and atrabilarious Persons; that which issues the first from Apples squees'd in
a Press is not so excellent as the second: and the third resembles the
Demy-wine of our Peasants.

If we mix among Apples a little Powder Sugar, they make us spit, and cool our
Breast.

But they must be used with precaution, that is to say, that they must be eaten
after Meals, because they are heavy and difficult to digest, that they ought to
be forbidden Old People, unless they find themselves heated, or that they are
prepared as Pears with Powder Sugar, Cinnamon and Water, and that finally we
ought to drink a little of good Pure Wine after having eaten them.

In the Distempers which are accompanied with a considerable heat and drought,
they give a great relief, if we eat a little of them Crud, or Boiled, or that
we put of them in Water: and I wonder that in France we give our selves so much
trouble in seeking Oranges and Citrons for our: Diseases, when we have a
short-start Apple or a Spanish Rennet: Happily things which cost much, and are
often difficult to be had, are much better than the common, and that they much
more satisfy the mind of the Diseased; for it is this part which we ought often
to Cure in those who find themselves ill.

Finally, Apples do not profit us only by taking them at the Mouth, they are a
sovereign Remedy for Heart-burnings and for the heats of the Stomach if they
are outwardly applied: for if a Cataplasm be made of Boiled Apples, and applied
hot on the Region of the Heart, or on the pit of the Stomach, happily we may not
find an Epithem more Sovereign in those Cases. Also experience has shown us
that the pulp of a boiled Apple put hot on Bloodshed and inflamed Eyes, is
almost the only Remedy for this evil.

ART III. Of Grafted Quinces.
ITs a pleasant Medicine to Purge ones self by eating after Meals Portugal
Quinces: The Fruit which I so call, are the Quinces whose Grafts were brought
from that Kingdom, and which are almost as pleasant to eat and to behold as a
Bon-Cretien Pear, at least they have an odor more sweet and Luscious; they are
yellow as Gold, and yield in nothing to those Pears in greatness, Figure and
Beauty.

Quinces are cold and dry, they restringe also manifestly the parts of the Body
where they are applied; and it is by this astringent quality, that constringing
the Stomach in the upper part, and afterward the Intestines, after that they
are eaten, they squeese, and force out all they meet within their cavity, be it
Excrement, Choler or Phlegm. Its what happend to an Advocate of Pergamus, of
whom Galen speaks, who was pleasantly Purged after having eaten Quinces after a
Meal, and having walked a little upon it: so that after all the experiments that
we have had of them, we ought no longer to doubt of their Virtues.

Mean while the stirring of the Belly which they cause, does not happen but to
Persons who have the Stomach weak and nice, and who have need by reason of this
to fortify it; for these Fruits do not work the same effects in a young robust
Man; and on the other side, if they are eaten before Meals, being very far from
moving the Belly, they make it tardy; and it is so that those do who have it
ordinarily too moist.

Quinces have also other excellent Virtues; if they are eaten Crud, Boiled, or
preserved with Sugar, they give an appetite, they stop a Looseness, appease
Vomiting, withstand an old Dysentery and a Bloody Flux; and if wescrape off
them Crud, and put the pulp of them hot on the Region of the Heart in the form
of an Epitheme, when a Malignant Fever attacks us, they contribute not a little
toward the subduing it* Their penetrating and sweet odor revives the Heart and
the Brain, and it has not been heard said hitherto, that Quinces corrupt in the
Stomach.

I very much approve the method which some have of making Wine and Water of
Quinces. These two Drinks have near the same Virtues, unless it be that the
Water is most proper for those who find themselves much heated, and the Wine
more meet for those who do not find any praedominant quality, and who are old
or Phlegmatic.

The Water of Quinces which the Greeks call (...), is made after this manner.
We take in the Month of October fifty or: sixty pints of Fountain Water, of
Paris Measure [which comes near to our Quart] we put into it ten or twelve
Pounds of Portugal Quinces, pared, cleans'd, and cut in slices; they steep
there till the Water has a yellow color like that of Spanish Wine; after which
we strain this Water, and then let it sees ore a gentle Fire till the fourth
part be consumed, scumming it often, and after having put it in a Vessel well
filled and well stopped, we preserve it for the Month of March following.

The Wine is made after this manner; we take at Vintage time Ten or Twelve
Pounds of Portugal Quinces, prepared after the same manner as I have said, we
throw them into fifty or sixty pints of good Claret Must, and after that they
have wrought for thirty days, we strain the Liquor, we put it into another
Vessel which we stop up close, and we preserve it for use.

These two Drinks produce good effects in Persons who use of them; they fortify
the inward parts, oppose a Looseness and a Dysentery, cleanse the Reins of their
filth, hinder the Vapor of Wine from offending the Head, and secure us from
Pestilential Vapors: Finally, they cause so many good effects, that I must
pass the bounds of an abstract if I would name them all

ART. IV. Of Medlars and Services.
THese Fruits are seldom at our Tables, and they are eaten most commonly but in
a fancy; they are not very agreeable, and there is but little pleasure taken in
eating them. Mean while they are not without their use, and contribute
something to our Health. They are both so near allied in qualities that a
Person will not deceive himself if he takes the one for the other. They are
cold and dry when they are hard, but when they are softish they acquire a
better heat, by a sort of Corruption, that is to say, that they are not so
cold; after the first way they restringe more and nourish less: and they ought
to be used as Quinces, and to be eaten after Meals soft, Crud, Roasted, Boiled
in Wine with Powder Sugar and Cinnamon, or finally Fried in fresh Butter, which
does not render them disagreeable to the taste through the Skill of the Cook.

But because after all these manners they produce the like effects as Quinces,
this will oblige me to pass in silence what I have said in the precedent
Article: I shall only add here, that the Stones of Medlars being powdered, and
then taken by the Mouth to the weight of a Gold Crown in White Wind, cleanse
the Reins of their Impurities, and even drive forth Stones which are small
enough to pass through the Vreters, and afterward through the Passage of the
Urine.

In reality these Stones are extremely dry, and they have in their matter
particles which powerfully penetrate; for experience has taught me that the
Stones of Fruits, and the hardest bones of Beasts and Fishes provoke Urine as
specific Remedies. I do not doubt but that which Brassavolus has left us in
Writing concerning the Virtues of the Stones of Medlars, is true, since he
proves it by two sick Persons who were Cured thereby.

But we ought not to suffer our selves to be abused on this account by the
promises of Quacks and Mountebanks, who boast to have certain Remedies for
breaking the Stone in the Reins or in the Bladder: I know not whether the
Stones of Medlars have more Virtue in Italy than in France, but at least I know
by experience and reason, that neither the Stones of Medlars, nor all other
Remedies have the force to break the Stone, nor to drive it forth of the
Bladder, when it is to big too pass forth.

The chief Virtue of Services is to cool and to restringe, as we have said: its
through these qualities that they serve for powerful Remedies against moist
Diseases, against inveterate Loosnesses, and against long Dysenteries. Perhaps
the Learned Bruyerius had not been Cured of a Malignant Dysentery which lasted
him above a Month, if he had not eaten a great many Services; so true it is
that the presumptuous boldness which we have in trying Remedies in our long
Distempers, often succeeds much better with us than prudence it self.

CHAP. III. Of Fruits, which may be eaten before, or after Meals.
THere are Fruits which may be eaten at all times, because they do not corrupt
in our Stomach, but through our fault: Wherefore we ought to have a peculiar
design, and different praecautions in using them. One Person would only cool
and moiston himself. And besides this, another will have a farther design of
rendering the Belly soluble: thus there may be need of these Fruits in different
occasions.

ART. I. Of Raisins.
THe most excellent Raisins which our Province furnishes us with, and which are
ordinarily served at our Table, are those which are sweet, tasting of Sugar and
Amber: many prefer them to all other Fruits; and they yield us a Liquor, which
is the most agreeable and richest present that ever God gave to Man. If I would
extend my self here on the Encomium of Raisins, I persuade my self that I
should find but too much matter to say fine things of them; but, because I
proposed to my self to Write only concerning the use of the Fruits of Trees as
briefly as possible; I must be allowed to deliver my thoughts in a few words
concerning the use of Raisins eaten before or after Meals.

But before I explain my self thereon, I fancy that I ought to establish some
general Maxims, for well using them, without being damnified thereby.

A Woman who has the Stomach nice and weak must never eat Raisins newly
gathered; they puff up the Belly, they cause a rumbling and winds, and trouble
the Concoction of the Stomach: moreover she must not eat but of such as are
excellent and very ripe, and again she must not so much as look on those which
have grown in the shade, and which the Sun has not heated with its rays.

To correct the ill quality of Raisins, they must be gathered some days before
you will eat them, or else you may take such as have been hung up in a Chamber,
or if at time of Vintage you have an inclination for eating such as are fresh,
they must be dipped into boiling Water, and then into fresh Water, and so they
must be served to Table.

Raisins are moist and moderately hot, and by these two qualities they are
proportionate to the Principles of our Life; they nourish much more than other
Fruits, if we except Figgs: they revive the Spirits by their sweet and
odoriferous savor, they cheer up a Stomach which is languishing and heated
through Labor, and moisten the Viscera, and so correct by their pleasant
moisture the drought and which the heat of Autumn has there caused.

Nay there are Physicians who do not deny them to their sick Patients when they
begin to amend, though on condition that they eat them with Bread, and throw away
the Stones and the Skin, as two parts which cannot be digested by a Stomach how
robust soever.

It they are eaten fasting, without Bread, as they come from the Tree moistened
with the Dew of the Night, they purge the Belly even of those who have it
naturally tardy; there is neither Water of Cassia nor Manna which ought to be
preferred to Raisins so eaten.

We ought here to remember not to drink Wine unless it be well diluted, after
having eaten Raisins fasting: Nay it would be better not to drink at all, or to
drink only pure Water; pure Wine mixed in the Stomach with the new Juice of the
Raisins makes so extraordinary a fermentation, that the accidents which arise
from it are much greater than you may imagine: For the Wine carrys the Chyle and
the Juices into the Bowels and into the Reins, before they are digested, and so
causes impurities and indigestions in the Blood; whereas Water hindering the
great ebullition of the Stomach, contributes to a good Concoction; it causes
the Chyle to become more pure, and that we are more refresht and moistn'd by
the use of the Raisins.

We ought not so to do when we eat them after Meals, for we may drink a good
Glass of pure Wine, and not consider so much the Raisins prepared as we have
said before, as the food which we have taken at our Meal.

Tho the Stones cannot be digested, yet we ought not to throw them away when we
eat Raisins after Meals: For since they are astringent, they correct the great
humidity, which is the cause of the evils which they bring upon us. We must
chew them therefore very small, and reduce them to minute parts betwixt the
Teeth, that they may contribute to the Coction of our Stomach, and correct the
ill qualities of the Raisins: It is thus we ought to eat after Meals the dry
Raisins which are brought from Spain; for by nourishing and lenifying our
inward parts they solace them by their sweetness, and fortify them by the
astriction of their Stones.

I shall not pass by here the excellent drink. which is made with dry Raisins,
and is called de Cabat. The Stones must be taken away from fifteen or twenty
Pounds, and then the Raisins must be bruised a little: and in the Month of
January or of February, which is the time that they are brought to us from
Spain, they must be put in an excellent Barique (a Vessel somewhat more than
our Barrel) of White Wind to drink at Easter. This Wine will have the color of
a Spanish Wine, it will be pleasing to the Palate, and will have qualities not
to be contemned; for it lenifies the Breast, appeases the Cough, helps
respiration, and fortifies the Stomach and the Liver, creates an Appetite,
opposes inclinations to Vomit, stops a Looseness; in a word, it is an excellent
Remedy against the Dropsy, it agrees admirably with Old men, with
Valetudinarians, with Phlegmatic or Melancholic Persons, and finally with
Women of a tender Constitution.

ART. II. Of China and Portugal Oranges.
THe Grafted Orange Trees which were brought from China into Portugal, and
which have been multiplied in the later Kingdom, produce Oranges which have a
fine Rind, a vinous Juice, and which are very pleasant to eat; they may be used
before or after Meals, for being more moist than cold, they qualify also after
Meals a Stomach too hot and too dry, and so help Concoction.

Those which are brought us ordinarily from Portugal are sharp or
aigres-douces, they are colder than the former, and they refresh more, and more
oppose the Corruption of our humors.

Sharp Oranges ought never to be used after Meals, they hinder the digestion of
the Stomach by their coldness, but they are very proper for quenching the heat
of our Liver, and to give us an appetite, if we take the Juice before Meals
with Water and a little Powder Sugar, but especially when the great heats of
the Summer or of Autumn exhaust our strength.

I say no more here, for that I will not repeat what I have said in the Article
of Cherries, where you may see what sharp Fruits are capable of doing within
us, and the precautions we must take to use of them. I shall only say that the
Rinds of sharp Oranges being squees'd a little into Wine, renders it more
agreeable to the taste of many Persons, and makes it pass more readily by Urine.

Our sick Persons use both the one and the other, and if you will believe them
on their own experience, they will tell you that there is not a better Remedy
than these Fruits for quenching Thirst, cooling the Stomach, qualifying the
Liver, provoking Urine, taking away the Heart burning, opposing inward Poisons;
in a word, for Curing the Diseases which are accompanied with an insupportable
heat and drought and indeed, if we cut a China or Portugal, vinous Orange into
four parts, and throw it into a pot of Water with the Rin'd, this drink will
have all the Virtues even now mentioned.

ART. III. Of Spanish Pomegranates.
WE cultivate in our Gardens sweet, Aigres-doux, and sharp Pomegranate-trees
which came to us from Spain; for as for those of France which are wild, we
cannot eat the Fruits: The Flowers and Rinds of Pomegranates are astringent,
and both serve to Cure our Diseases which are caused through a too great
humidity. They have the Virtue of constringing the parts of our Body together,
and of giving them the Situation which they had lost: The inside of the Kernels
of a Pomegranate is useless and undigested, our Stomach cannot dissolve it, and
there is no Body who eats it. There is but the pulp which is about the Kernels
that yields an agreeable Juice, wherewith we are often solac'd in our
sicknesses.

Sharp Pomegranates ought to be used before Meals, when the Stomach is empty;
and if the point of their sharpness does us hurt, as it happens in those who
have this part weak and tender, we need but blunt it with Water and Sugar to
make a delicious Drink: Then this agreeable Liquor cools the Stomach, quenches
thirst, qualifies the Liver, weakens the sharpness of the Choler, revives the
Heart, resists putrefaction, provokes Urine; in a word, its a Drink proper for
the Sick and sound. It is much better than the Bouillons of Veal, and of
cooling Herbs, which are taken too often in the Summer, and in Autumn to
qualify the Entrals, and to resist the heat and drought of the Season: for the
continual use which is made of Bouillons, is wholly an enemy to the Stomach,
their substance relaxes too much the membranes, and to perform well its Office
it must have a certain temperament which is not too moist; whereas the Drink of
sharp Pomegranates, by restringing it gently, tempers this part, and at the
same time all the others.

Sweet and vinous Pomegranates do not cool so much as the sharp, but they
dulcify more, and are more proper for Old and atribilarious Persons.

Those who find a heat in their Bowels, are very much solac'd after having
swallowed some Spoonfulls of the Juice of these Fruits: It is so that the
Carthaginians used of them, from whose Country Pomegranates were brought: and
it were those also who taught us by their own experience the greatest part of
the good effects which they cause in us, when we use of them. It cannot be said
what goods the Juice of sweet and vinous Pomegranates, pressed forth, scumm'd,
and fermented may produce: it strongly opposes all inward Fluxions, it resists
all Fevers which are accompanied with a Looseness and an exhausting of our
strength, and it has this proper to it, that it fortifies all our languishing
parts. If we will make some Bottles of it, we must squeeze forth in a Press a
sufficient quantity of Pomegranates, we must sees the Juice over a gentle
Charcoal Fire to the diminution of the third part, after having well scumm'd
it, and afterward it must be kept for use.

If we put in White Wind the Kernels of sweet or vinous Pomegranates, or after
the same manner as we have prescribed for sharp Cherries, we shall have a Wine
which will yield in nothing to all the Remedies which Physic has invented
hitherto for allaying the burning of the Reins, for cleansing forth all the
filth, and for hindering Stones from being there formed.

ART IV. Of Corands.
THe Red Corands and the White, which we call Gadelles, have very near the same
qualities, though the Gadelles are more sharp, and the Red more pleasant to eat.
Both of them cool and restring the parts of the Body through which they pass;
they hinder Vomiting, quench drought, blunt the Choler, remove Obstructions,
fortify the parts, and they solace both the healthy and Sick that are heated,
if they are used before or after Meals.

Their pungent sharpness ought to be corrected, as that of Cherries and
Pomegranates, or we may make them into a Sugar Paste or Gelly, which is very
proper for those who have the Stomach weakend by long Sicknesses; and I have
Cured many Persons of considerable quality, who had this part very much
afflicted by continual Vomitings, and had a troublesome Looseness of the Belly,
by giving only a Paste or Gelly of Corands, and of the moist conserve of
Provins Roses.

In Imitation of the Turks, during the great heats of the Summer, we may make
of the greatest part of the Fruits before spoken of, a sort of Sherbet to be
drank with Ice: and I allow young Sanguine and bilous People, who have known by
experience that drinking with Ice does not incommode them, I allow them, I say,
to drink of it, with prudence for allaying the excess of their heat: This will
be a sure means to hinder them from being set upon by continual and Malignant
Fevers, and to keep them in good Health during all the Summer and Autumn. As
for others who are of another temperament, and of another Age, they must not
touch of it, and they must remember that heat, which we must not destroy, is
one of the Principles of our Life.

THE TABLE OF THE Chapters of the First PART.
THe Art of Pruning Fruit Trees. Page 1 Chap. 1. The Pruning of Fruit Trees for
the Month of February. p. 2 Chap. 2. The Pruning of Fruit Trees at the
beginning of May. p. 31 Chap. 3. The Pruning of Fruit Trees at the beginning of
June. p. 33 Chap. 4. The Pruning of Fruit Trees at the end of July. p. 42 An
Explanation of some words used by Gardiners to express themselves speaking of
Fruit Trees. p. 48 The end of the First Table.

THE TABLE OF THE SECOND PART.
OF the Use of the Fruits of Trees for keeping us in Health, or for Curing us
when we are Sick. Page 50 Chap. 1. Of the Fruits which ought to be eaten before
Meals. p. 59 Art. 1. Of Figgs. p. 60 Art. 2. Of Nectarins and Peaches. p. 65
Art. 3. Of Plums and Apricocks. p. 69 Art. 4. Of Mulberries. p. 71 Art. 5. Of
sharp Cherries. p. 74 Chap. 2. Of the Fruits which ought to be eaten after
Meals. p. 78 Art. 1. Of Pears. p. 79 Art. 2. Of Apples. p. 83 Art. 3. Of
Quinces. p. 87 Art. 4. Of Medlars and Services. p. 90 Chap. 3. Of the Fruits
which may be eaten before and after Meals. p. 93 Art. 1. Of Raisins. p. 94 Art.
2. Of China and Portugal Oranges. p. 98 Art. 3. Of Spanish Pomegranates. p. 100
Art. 4. Of Corands. p. 103 The end of Second Table.

A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for and to be sold by Thomas Basset at the
George in Fleet Street.
Folio.
DR. Lightsoots Works in two Volumes. Speeds Mapps, and Geography of Great
Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts. Wanleys History of Man. Bishop
Wilkins Real Character. Pharmacopeia Londinensis. Hooker's Ecclesiastical
Polity. Judge Jones Reports. Judge Winches Book of Entries. Guillims Heraldry.
Bishop Saudersons Sermons. Foulis History of Romish Treasons. Crokes Reports in
three Volumes. Daltons Offices of Sheriffs. -- Justice of Peace. Cokes Reports
in 13 Parts. Selden's Jani Anglorum in English. Lex Mercatoria. Mezerays
History of France. Cowels Interpreter, Enlarged by Manley. Littleton's Reports.
Dr. Howels History of the World. Grotius of War and Peace, English. Townsends
Historical Collections. Pharamond. Heaths Chronicle. Pettus of Mines and
Minerals. History of the Cariby Islands. Brents History of France. Browns
Entries in two Parts. Sir Roger Manly's History of the Wars of Denmark. Lord
Bridgmans Conveyances. Lord Cokes 2d. 3d. and 4th Institutes. Huttons Reports
with New References. Modern Reports. Leys Reports. Hetleys Reports. The Ten
Volumes of Year Books with New References. Edward the Second Published by
Sergeant Maynard. Officina Brevium. A Catalogue of all the Common and Statute
Law Books of this Realm, to this present Year, 1684.
Quarto.
Dr. Littletons Dictionary, the Second Edition. Gouldmans Dictionary. Coals
Dictionary. Mieges French Dictionary. The Travels of the Patriarchs. A
Discourse of the Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical. Doctrina Placitandi. Moyles
Entries. Complete Clerk. Dr. Parker of the Law of Nature. Sheppards Grand
Abridgment. Dr. Haywards two Sermons before the King. A Collection of the Cases
relating to Church Communion, Written by several Ministers in and about London.
Counter-Scuffle. Mandevils Travels. History of the Seven Champions. Dr.
Sherlocks Sermon on the Discovery of the Plot. The Difference of the Case
between the separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the
separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. Medicina Curiosa.
Octavo.
Mieges French Dictionary. The London Practice of Physic, being the whole
Practick Part of Dr Willis's Works. Dr. Salmons Dispensatory. -- his Doron
Medicum. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton. Bishop Sandersons Life. Coals
Dictionary Latin and English. Bishop Wilkins Sermons, never before Extant. --
Principles and Duty of Natural Religion. Filmers Patriarcha. Mieges French
Grammar with a Vocabulary and Dialogues. -- short French Grammar. Mieges
Present State of Denmark. -- Cosmography. Berniers Travels. Art how to know
Men. Pools English Parnassus. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry. Dr. Hinckley and Mr.
Baxters Letters. Sheppards Actions for Slander. -- Action on the Case for
Deeds. Blounts Ancient Tenures. Complete Solicitor, entering Clerk and Attorney.
Touchstone for Gold and Silver. Pettyt's Rights of the Commons. --
Miscellanies. The Egyptian History. Atwoods Jani Anglorum facies Nova. Sir John
Pettus of the Constitutions of Parliaments. Russian Impostor. Ogilbys Aesops
Fables with Cuts. Lawrence's Interest of Ireland. A New Book of Instruments.
French Monarchy. Anglers vade Meum. Scarons Novels. Meriton of Dreams. Clerks
Tutor. Brown of Fines and Recoveries. Kitchen Physic. Posing of the Parts.
Duodecimo.
Heylins help to History. Lukins Chief Interest of Man. Help to Discourse.
Mothers Blessing. Grotius de veritate Relig. Christ. Bishop Lauds Devotions.
Ladys Calling. Vaughan of Coins and Coynage. Meritons Guide for Constables. --
Landlords Law. Phillips Principles of the Law. Manwaring of Consumptions.
Catalogue of Law Books. Pharmacopeia Londoniensis. Butlers Rhetoric. Lucians
Dialogues Greek and Latin. Tullies Select Epistles.
FINIS.

