The last National Address presented to His Majesty at Hampton Court, the 16th.
day of November 1700, by the Right Honorable the Lord Yester, Sir John Pringle
of Stichell and Sir Peter Wedderburn of Gosford Baronets, Commissioners
appointed for that end.
May it please your Majesty,
WE Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and other Subscribers, your
Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects of this your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
having formerly from an unfeigned Zeal to your Majesty's Service, and to the
Good and Welfare of our Country Petitioned your Majesty for a Meeting of the
Estates in Parliament, in order to Support, and Assist our Company Trading to
Africa and the Indies, which the Parliament had, by their Unanimous Address to
your Majesty of the 5th. of August School, declared to be their own and the whole
Nation's peculiar Concern, And your Majesty having been graciously pleased to
allow the Parliament to Meet on the 21th. of May last, whereby all your good
Subjects could not but conceive suitable hopes of its happy issue, for the
Honor and Interest of your Majesty and People, do now beg leave to express our
deep Concern and Sorrow for the unexpected Adjournment thereof, without being
permitted to do any thing toward the wished for end of its Meeting, And do in
all humble manner concur with the dutiful Address lately presented to your
Majesty, from the Plurality of the Members of Parliament, Representing the
Inconveniences and prejudices arising to the pressing Concerns of the Nation,
from that Adjournment, and to the Rights and Liberties of Parliament, from the
manner of it: And it is our Unexpressible Regret, that your Majesty does seem
to have been prevailed upon by the Mis-representations of evil Councillors to
issue out Proclamations* further Adjourning the Parliament, from time to time,
whilst not only did our said Company stand extremely in need of the Countenance
Support and Protection promised to it by your Majesty in Parliament, and more
especially upon the Misfortunes that have of late befallen it by the success of
Enemies against its Colony of Caledonia, but whilst also even the Nation it
self did, and still does, remain under the pressure of such Grievances as can
only be Redressed in Parliament.

And to the end that your Majesty may have a just view thereof, we humbly beg
leave to represent to your Majesty how indispensibly necessary it is, THAT the
Protestant Religion be secured against the growth of Popery, Immorality and
Profaneness; THAT the Freedom and Independency of this Ancient Kingdom, and the
Nation's Right and Title to Caledonia, as holding of your Majesty's Crown of
Scotland, be Asserted and Supported; THAT the good inclinations of your Majesty
and Successors Kings of Scotland be preserved from Foreign Influence, as well
as from the Mis-representations and Pernicious Counsels of Unnatural
Contrymen; THAT the frequency, and sitting of Parliaments be secured and
ascertained, pursuant to the Claim of Right; THAT dangerous Influences upon the
freedom of Parliaments, either by Gratuities, Pensions, or Farms of any branch
of the Revenue, and the disposing of any part of the Revenue or annexed
Property of the Crown, otherways than acccording to Law, for the necessary
support of the Government, be prevented; THAT the public Credit be restored,
and an enquiry made into the Application of the Funds laid on, and appropriated
by Parliament, for support of the Government and payment of the Army; THAT the
Security of the Nation, and Government, be settled in a duly regulated National
Force, in stead of a standing Army, so burdensome to the Country, and
dangerous to its Liberties; THAT the manner of applying the Security, which we
have by our Claim of Right, for the Personal freedom of the Subject, against
long and Arbitrary Imprisonment, as well as against Pursutes upon old and
obsolete Laws, be specially declared; THAT the Trade of this Nation be
Encouraged and Advanced, by duly regulating its Export and Import, by
discharging prejudicial Branches thereof, by fixing the value of our current
Money, by encouraging Manufactories, by employing the Poor, and more especially
by Countenancing and Assisting our said Company, in the Prosecution of its
lawful Undertakings; And THAT all such Articles of Grievances presented to your
Majesty by the Estates of this Kingdom in the Year 1689 as have not yet been
Redressed, together with such other Grievances as the Parliament shall, at the
Meeting thereof, find the Nation aggrieved with, be Redressed in Parliament.

And your Majesty having by your Royal Letter, of the 24 of May 1689, been
graciously pleased to declare, and give full assurance to our Representatives
in that meeting of the Estates, which settled the Crown and Royal Dignity of
this Realm on your Majesty, That we should always find your Majesty ready to
Protect us, and to Assist the Estates in making such Laws, as might secure our
Religion, Liberties and Properties, and prevent or Redress whatsoever might be
justly grievous to us; That your Majesty would never believe that the true
interest of your People and the Crown could be opposite; and that your Majesty
would always account it your greatest Prerogative to assent to such Laws as
might promote Truth, Peace, and Wealth in Your Kingdom. We do therefore reckon
it our duty, humbly to desire and assuredly expect* that your Majesty will be
graciously pleased to satisfy the longing desires, and earnest Expectations of
your People, by allowing your Parliament to meet, as soon as possible; and when
met, to sit till they fully deliberate upon, and come to solid Resolutions in
the great and weighty Concerns of the Nation, and grant such Instructions to
your Commissioner, as may empower him to pass such Ac^s, as the great Council
of the Nation shall think most conducive to the true Honor of your Majesty and
Gove^^ment, the welfare of this Realm, both as to its Religious and Civil
Interest, and to the full quieting ^^e Minds of all your Majesty's good People*

His Majesty, after having heard this Address read, was Graciously pleased to
give the following Answer.
Gentlemen,
I can not take further notice of this Address, seeing the Parliament is now
met, and I have made a Declaration of my Mind for the good of my People,
wherewith I hope all my faithful Subjects will be satisfied.


