THE Comical and Tragical History OF FORTUNATUS: Wherein is contained his
Birth, Travels, Adventures, last Will and Testament to his two Sons, to whom he
bequeathed his PURSE and WISHING-CAP: Together with their Lives and Death.

Abbreviated for the Good and Benefit of young Men and Women, whose Impatience
will not allow them to read the larger Volume. The whole being Illustrated with
diverse (...) to the History.

woodcut of a gentleman and lady

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by and for C. Brown, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
Pye-corner and London Bridge.

The History of FORTVNATVS.
Chap. I.
Of Fortunatus's Parentage and Birth in the famous Island of Cyprus; How
growing up in Learning and Knowledge, his Father, by his Lavishness, was
reduced to Poverty; and he going to seek his Fortune, was entertained by the
Earl of Flanders, in his return from Jerusalem; how the Servants envyed him for
the Love their Lord bore him: with the Stratagem they used to make him secretly
withdraw from his Service, to the great Grief of the Earl.

woodcut of Fortunatus boarding a ship

IN the renowned City of Famogosta, in the pleasant Island of Cyprus, in times
past, there dwelt one Thedorius, descended of noble Parentage, who left him a
great Estate, but being brought up to nothing but Pleasure, he pursued it so
far in all manner of Sports and Riots, that it consumed a-pace: his friends
being grieved hereat, thought of no better way to check his proceedings, and
bring him within bounds of Moderation, than by matching him to some discreet
Woman, whose Wisdom and good Humor might bring him to live soberly and
fr^gally. This being, concluded on, contrary to his Knowledge, upon diligent
search, they found one, suitable to what they had proposed; in the City of
Nicovia, a virtuous young Virgin, Daughter to a Merchant, rich and beautiful,
whose name was Gratiana; and proposing it to him, with many Reasons and
Arguments, how much it would be for his good, he resolved to visit her, and
liking her comely shape, good features, but above all, her modest carriage, and
witty expressions suiting his Humor, after a few months Courtship, they were
married in splended manner, most of the principal Men of either City being at
the Wedding, who gave large gifts, as it is the Custom, to the Bride and
Bridegroom; and so for many years they lived in Content and great Felicity, in
which space they had a Son whom they named Fortunatus, at whose Christening an
old Woman taken to be a Prophetess, came in and uttered these Words:

The Child is Fortune's Darling, he shall share,
Unsought, those Riches which she will prepare;
To Travel he his Thoughts full soon will bend;
Though crossed in some, yet all shall happy end.
This was noted of many but more particularly when the Success answered her
Prediction. As he grew up, his Father, not be restrained by the tears and
entreaties of his Wife, squandred away all his Patrimony; which much grieved
Fortunatus, though he saw no way to redress it; and his Father too late seeing
his Folly, fell into a deep melancholy, often sighing, and shedding Tears,
which so afflicted his Son, that thinking he might have done something that
grieved him, he came and kneeled before him, entreating to know what caused his
Afflictions, and if he had contributed toward them, he would amend, and do any
thing that might be pleasing in his sight? But the sorrowful Father sighing,
told him, He had been very dutiful, which was the greatest comfort he had; yet
being afflicted with Poverty, which had brought him to be despised by his
Inferiors, it much afflicted him. Upon this Fortunatus begged leave to rid him
of the charge he put him to, by suffering him to travel, not doubting, as he
said, considering his Education, but he should shift for himself; and Fortune
might so befriend him, and enable him to do for him and his Mother, who had
been so tender, and gave him such liberal Education. His Father easily
consented, but his Mother not without great Reluctance; but finding there was a
necessity for it, with many tender embraces they parted. Fortunatus having the
World to ramble in, made to the Sea, and at the next Haven found a great many
armed Men landed, which at the first made him start, as supposing it an
Invasion of the Island; but he upon enquiry, found it was Baldwin, Earl of
Flanders, who had put on shore to refresh him, in his return from the Wars
against the Turks and Sarazens in the Holy Land; he took courage, and kneeling
before the Earl, offered his Service, telling him he was put forth to seek his
Fortune, and that he would be very subservient to his Commands. The Earl eying
him, and perceiving him a very promising Youth, of a comely Personage, after a
little enquiry into the Circumstances of his Parentage and former Life, he made
him his chief Servant; and so well he behaved himself, that he gained this
great Lord's entire Affection, and so departed with him in the Gally to the
next Port, which was the famous City of Venice, built in a Marsh in the Sea,
about three Leagues from the main Land, and desended from the raging of the
Ocean with mighty Banks and monsterous Pits; through whole Streets run several
Channels, so that great Boats and Lighters came with Goods and Merchandise to
the Doors of their Houses; Fortunatus knew the Language of this Country, which
he had learned from a Venetion in his own; so that meeting with diverse
Merchants there, he bought up, by his Lord's Order, store of Jewels and other
rich Merchandise, which wonderfully pleased him, the which he intended to
bestow upon the Duke of Cleve's Daughter to whom he was contracted (before his
going to the War) and at his return designed to marry; and at this Marriage
being Justs and Tournaments, the Earl, to encourage his Servants to do well, set
up a Jewel valued at three hundred Crowns, to those that should overcome, after
the Nobles and Knights had ended their Debates: Fortunatus carried the Prize
from them all, which made 'em greatly envy him, and the more, because a new
Comer should have the advantage of their Lord's Favor; and so they consulted
together to find out a Contrivance to remove him; which they effected by this
Stratagem, one Robert, an old Servant, came to him as he was reading, and told
him, that their Lord being to depart and leave his Bride, was by reason of her
Beauty so jealous, that he had ordered Surgeons to come the next morning, to
secure himself of his Servants, by gelding them. This so terrified Fortunatus
(the Man urging he revealed this in Good Will to him) that without further
consideration he besought him to help him to make his Escape for he would not
be so served for his Lord's Earldom* Robert observing this, told him he was
loath to part with him; but if he would go, he desired to know where he would
reside that when the rest were gelded, and his Lords Jealousy over, he might
return to his Service again, and very probably escape: But he said, he would
not return again, whatever betide him; so getting a Horse (he was lead by
Robert, who inwardly was pleased, and laughed in his sleeve at the Fallacy he
had put upon him) and being without the Gate, rode away with all the speed he
could; never looking behind him, till he was many Miles from the Palace.

The Earl, at his return missing Fortunatus, made great enquiry for him; but
the Servants utterly denied they knew what was become of him, then he asked his
Lady, whether she had given him any cause of Offense; but she was altogether
ignorant of any such thing, so he was forced to content himself, though much
against his will, saying, However he should at one time or other find it out,
and he would severely punish the Occasioners of it; which made Robert, who had
contrived his flight much afraid, lest he should return, and make a discovery
of what Stratagem had been used, to cause his absenting his Lord's Service.

Chap. II.
How traveling through many Countries, he embarked for England, and was
entertained by a Florentine Merchant; who together with all the Family, being
falsely accused of the Murder of a Knight of the King's Court, was with the
rest condemned to die; and by what means he on^y escaped and went for France.

woodcut of Fortunatus and others being led to the gallows

FOrtunatus getting away in manner aforesaid, was resolved to follow Fortune;
and so, coming by diverse ways to Callis, he got passage for England, where he
fell into the Company of two Cyprus Merchants, and lived with them righteously,
spending in Wine and upon Harlots, till his and their Stocks was utterly
exhausted; and being in a poor condition (void of Succou^) his Mistress, on
whom he had spent his Pleasure, thrusted him out of Doors, and refused to
relieve him; as he wandered about London, he was taken notice of by one
Jerinomus Roberti, a Florentine Merchant, who examining him, found he was of a
prompt Wit and Education, and therefore agreed with him to come into his
Service, which he joyfully accepted and being acquainted with the Customs of
Merchants, was so diligent (and so well behaved himself) that he got the good
Esteem, not only of his Master, but of all the Servants, who entirely loved
him: But soon after a great Calamity befell the Family, by means of a Villain,
which cost all, but Fortunatus, their Lives, and he very narrowly escaped; for
one Andrew, a young Spend-thrift Florentine, having been sent by his Father, to
sell a Cargo of Goods, not only ^avished away all the Money he had for them,
but continued to draw Bills upon the old Man, with promises of large returns,
till he had near ruined him before he had discovered the Cheat; at what time
being put to his shifts, he left England, and went for Bruges, where hearing of
an English Merchant who lay in Irons in a noisome Dungeon, for forging the King
of England's Passport, he went to visit him. The Merchant no sooner knew he
came from England, but he was exceeding glad, enquiring what News, and the
Welfare of his Friend^, all which he told him as well as he understood: The
Merchant said, You see what in ^^^ser able condition I lie here, if you would
return to England, and acquaint my Friends with it, I make no doubt but they
will use their Purses, and Interest at Court to release me. To be brief, he
promised to do it upon consideration of three hundred Crowns, and so took the
Names of those Friends he proposed, and Money for his passage.

Now among this Merchant's Friends, was Roberti, Fortunatus's Master, by which
means this wicked Florentine came acquainted with him to his ruin; for having
proposed to lay down three hundred Crowns for the Merchant's Ransom, if any
others would come in for Part-Security, Andrew at last told him, he had found a
Gentleman of a great Estate that would do it, and that he should provide a
Dinner, and he would bring him; this being agreed to, he went to a Knight of
the Court, whom the King had employed to get the richest Jewels that might be
had, to make a Present to his Sister, who was to be married to the Duke of
Burgundy, telling him there was a Jeweller of Florence, who hearing of the
King's Enquiry after Rarities, was come over with such, that the like had never
been seen in the Nation, and so invited him to come and see 'em at Roberti's,
where he said, he lodged, desiring him to bring his own with him, that they
might compare them. The Knight little dreaming of the Treachery designed,
promised so to do, and accordingly came, when after Dinner having him into a
private Chamber he stabbed him, but for what reason we knew not, for he had not
brought the Jewels with him, whereupon he took his Keys and his Signet, and ran
to his House, delivering them to his Wife as a Token to give him the Jewels,
for the King was to send them away; upon search she could ^ind none, nor were
they found for some time after; so that the Murderer, frustrated of his
expected Prize, came to Roberti's again, where the Murder was discovered by
the dropping of the Blood through the Ceiling, but he labored to calm their
O^teries, by saying, The Murdered was a mere Cutthroat, and designed to have
killed him for this Money; however, he would rid them of the Body: and so taking
it on his Shoulder, he threw it into a Privy, and fled by a Back-way for fear
of being apprehended.

The Knight being missing, great enquiry was made; this Merchant's House, where
they had Intelligence, he went, was searched, but nothing found, till being
about to depart, one cried, Come, let us see in the Privy, we have not searched
that yet: And there, by throwing in a lighted Paper, they saw the Murthered's
heels standing upright. The King being certified of this, the Merchant and his
Servants were examined by Tortures, all of them confessing what they knew of
the Mu^ther, but Fortunatus, whom they had kept ignorant of it, he being then
abroad: But of the Jewels they could tell nothing, so that hereupon they were
condemned to be hanged; and of seven, only Fortunatus escaped, at the Gallows,
by the others protesting his Innocence in the Matter. About half a Year after,
the Widow of the Knight being advised to think of a young Lover, and remove her
Bed into another Room, to put her out of her Melancholy, putting the latter in
practice, found a little Cabinet under it, and in it the Jewels; which, by the
Advice of a Kinsman, she carried to the King, who, for her Fidelity, gave her
the Manor of Woodstock, and caused a young Knight to marry her, settling a
thousand Pounds a Year upon them during their Lives.

Fortunatus having lost his Master, and happily 'scap'd the Gallows, grew so
fearful of such another bout, that he resolved to stay no longer in England,
but getting on board, soon sailed over to France.

Chp. II.
How, traveling from Orleance to Paris, he met with Dame Fortune, who gave him
a Purse of such a Virtue that whenever he put his Hand into it, he drew out ten
Angels of Gold, entailing it upon him and his Sons. Of the noble Entertainment
he had afterward. How he was imprisoned by Duke Rodolphus, and suspected as a
Robber for his great Profuseness; and upon what Terms he gained his Liberty.

woodcut of hounds chasing a stag through a dinner scene

FOrtunatus being freed from another Danger, left the City, and resolved to go
for Paris; when passing through a great Wood, and being at a loss which way to
go, as he gazed about, he saw a comely Shape, in Woman's Apparel, crossing his
way, and coming up to him, he demanded who she was, and her Business in that
Desert: My Name, replied she, is Fortune; and here am I placesed by the Great
Distributed and Disposer of all the things, by whose command I have Power to
give six Things to such as stand in need of them; for but one of them can, by
my means, fall to any one Man's share: Be prudent in your Choice, for you may
not choose again. He now supposed he had found his good Angel, which made him
greatly rejoice, and reflecting on his former Poverty, he chose Riches, saying,
Give me so much that I may never be poor again, so he well knew what Power
Money had in the World, it answering all things, as, make a Knave pass for an
honest Man, a Fool for a Wit, a Dowdy for a Beauty, a Coward for a valiant Man,
upon this she gave him a Purse curiously wrought in Needle Work, with various
Figures of Providence workt thereon in Silk, Gold and Pearl, saying, Take this
Purse, and be thankful for it to Almighty God; for in whatsoever Land thou art,
put thy Hand into it, and you shall as often as you do so, draw out ten Angels
of Gold of that Country Coin. For this he gave her a thousand Thanks, leaping
for Joy to which she rep^^^, Direct them to the Divine Giver of all things; I
am but the Hand to distribute them as he Directs: For continued she, I neither
see, nor have regard to the Persons on whom I bestow them, but am always
Hoodwinked as you see, therefore had Wisdom been your P^^^ion, she would have
taught you better. Upon this Fortunatus, bowing low, begged her Pardon: Then
she bid him not be proud, but always charitable and courteous to the Poor; and
then the Virtue of the Purse should hold to him and his Children, and no
longer; then directing him out of the Wood, she vanished from his sight; which
made him greatly wonder, and scarcely believe but it was a Vision, and nothing
of Reality in it, till coming to an Inn, he tried the Experiment, and found it
to be otherwise: But his Garments were so poor, that the (...), till he saw his
Money, (...) to let him have either Victuals or Drink, but seeing him draw out
Gold so fast, he began to be sweet upon him, made him a Fire, carried him into
the best Room, ordering his Daughter diligently to attend him; the best in the
House being at his Service; so that he staid there all Night: And seeing a
curious imbroider'd (...) for a Horse, ^e asked his Host to whose Horse it
belonged; To none, said he, at present, for it is left here to be sold. Upon
which, (...) to beat it no longer upon the Hoof, since he had such (...) in,
(...) to buy a Horse, bargained w^^^ him for it for (...) and the next Morning
there being (...) to a Village ten Miles furthe^ (...) stood on a Hill, here he
put i^ (...) know if there were any good Horses to (...) ^ost told him there
was a Merchant ne^^y arrived, (...) very stately ones out of Barbary, which he
(...) at the Feast that was to be held there upon the Duke of (...), which
suddenly was to commence: Upon this he desired (...); the Ho^^ seeing him so
meanly clad, inwardly laughed, knowing the Horses were of great Price, yet,
seeing some Money, to humor his Guest, he went with him, and agreeing,
contrary to his expectation, he paid 3 hundred Crowns for them, and brought
them to the Inn, then he supposed him to be some noble Man in disguise,
especially when he asked him for to help him to two Servants, he designing to
keep them to attend him. But long they had not passed away the time merrily
before Duke Redolphus, who had bid Money for the Horses, sent for them at the
Merchant's Price, they having differed before; but when he understood they were
sold, he stormed grievously, and sent to know who it was that durst buy them
out of his Hands: The Host told the Messenger, It was a Stranger in plain Habit
newly come, which he at first, did not think was capable of purchasing an Ass.
Whereupon he sent to apprehend him, suspecting he had committed some Robbery;
and notwithstanding all his Excuses he could make, sent him to Prison, and
compelled him, e're he could be delivered from the Misery he suffered there, to
deliver the Horses up to him, to pay three hundred Crowns as a Fine set upon
him, and ob^^ged to depart his Territories, with an Oath, never to discover
what passed between 'em.

Upon this hard Hap, he went to Anguries, a considerable City in that Province,
and there appeared very splendid at the Duke of Saxony's wedding; buying him
Horses, and getting him Seravnts with an extraordinary Equipage, so that he
past for a Noble Man, taking up the best Inn, keeping Company, and equally
spending with the Nobility and Gentry of the best Rank, who mightily esteemed
him.

Chap. IV.
How Fortunatus took Acquaintance with an Irish Man; how they traveled into
Ireland, viewed St. Patrick's Purgatory; how they traveled to Rome, and other
Places.



FOrtunatus being at the Duke's Wedding, where were many Princes, Earls and
Lords, in the height of their Jollity, which was very splendid, diverse
Musicians came in to entertain 'em, and amongst others, one Leopold, an Irish
Man; they all said, They Would been Gentlemen bred, and great Travelers, but
having spent their Fortunes, were reduced to that Employ; whereupon they gave
them plentifully: And an Earl asked Leopold, if he would be content to live
with him, and be Tutor to his Children: But he (...) it, saying, I have left my
Wife and Children many Years, and am now desirousto see them; and in Order to
it am returning to my own Country. Fortunatus observing the Carriage and
Behavior of the Man, when Dinner was ended, sent for him, and contracted a
strict friendship with him, plentifully (...) his Necessities, and promised to
go with him into Ireland* provided he would travel afterward; so passing
through France England and Scotland, seeing many Rarities by the Way, they came
to Ireland, but Leopold, through his long Absence, was unknown to his Wife and
Children, till he made them sensible who he was by many Tokens they had kept in
Memory, then they received him with Joy: And Fortunatus gave an Entertainment
to the whole Town of Wald^in^. After this they went to visit St. Patrick's
Purgatory, with other Rarities of the Country, in which descending too far into
the Labyrinths, they were lost for three Days, hearing dismal Cries, meeting
with strong Winds and hot Flashes of Fire, at last, falling to their Prayers,
an old Man, for the Promise of an hundred Crowns, which the Servants offered
him in their Master's Name, who knew the Place, went in with his Pipe, found
and brought them out, when all thought they had been dead, or past recovery;
and the Priests were praying for their Souls; for which good Deed Fortunatus
gave the Man two hundred Crowns; largely presented the Abbot and Monks that
kept the Chapel built on the Place, and so departed. Being now again resolved
to travel, he persuaded Leopold to go along with him, which he consented to, on
Condition of leaving his Wife and Children a Competency to live on; which he
did, by purchasing thirty Pounds a Year, and leaving them a thousand Crowns. So
they sailed over to France, and passed through diverse Countries, till they came
to Rome; and having sufficiently viewed that Ancient City, with the Splendour of
the Bishop's Court, they passed from thence to Venice; and, upon Notice, by a
Venetian Merchant, of great Shows of Magnificence to be at Constantinople, upon
the Emperor's Crowning his Son in his stead, being weary of the Government by
reason of his Age; they agreed with that Merchant to convey them and their
Equipage thither; which he performed, and coming to that renowned City, one of
the fairest in the World, they so dealt with the great Officers for Money, that
they had a full sight of the Court, and all that was rare in it.

Th^^ City, by reason of the great Concourse, being full of Persons of Quality
of diverse Nations, they could not hire a House, and therefore were constra^^^d
to take up in a Public Inn, where there Host seeing them full of (...), and
being of a thievish Nature, resolved to have so me part with them; so that
after they had been there a while, he co^^ived that there Wax-tapers, which
they burnt in the Night, might go out, by boring holes to the Wick, filling
them with Water, and stopping them up again; then came he in at a private Door,
when he knew they were asleep, and took all he could (...), which was about
fifty Crowns, he p^^ his Hand but once into (...) Purse, not knowing the Virtue
of it; yet having cut the Strings by which it hung to his Girdle, he threw it
under the Bed, and so went out, leaving the Doors and Windows open.

In the Morning when they awaked, they were in a sad taking, not so much for
the Money they lost, as for the Purse; whereupon the Host hearing them make a
Noise, came up, and excu^^d the matter, in their being careless of shutting the
Doors and Windows, when so many Strangers were in the City: But the Servants
protested ^^ey had shut them. And the Host hearing Fortunatus complain more for
the Purse, where he pretende^ there (...) Bill of Exchange for ^ thousand
pound, then for the Money: (...) Villain, who (...) well enough where it was,
bid them look about, saying, Few (...) regarded a Purse or Bill, for they
cannot perhaps receive it; and so helping them to search, he had no sooner
re^^oved the Bed, but, to the great Joy of Fortunaetus, the Purse appeared Then
privately trying, and finding it had not lost its Virtue, tho the Strings were
cut, remembering he had made a Vow to give once a Year a Portion in Marriage
with a poor Virgin of a virtuous Life and Conversation, he desired his Host to
seek out such a one; which he did, and on her he bestowed four hundred Crowns;
disposing of her ^^an honest young Man who was in love with her for her Beauty
and Virtue, but declined to marry her for want of Riches, lest his Father
should disinherit him.

The Host seeing his Liberality, resolved to have the (...) bout at their
Purse, going in as before; but by his (...) to (...) the Money, Leopold awaked,
and having his Sword drawn by him, steuck at a venture, and gave hsm such a Cut
in the Neck, that h^ fell with a dismal Groan, which waked Fortunatus, and his
Servants, who striking a Light, found their Host weltering in his Blood;
whereat Fortanatus was much abashed, remembering the former Miseries he un, der
went on the like occasions, and thinking little to be believed whatever he said
in his Justification, especially in a strange place: So they laid their Heads
together, and concluded not to stand the Test; but ordering two of the Servants
to convey him privately into a Well in the Back-yard, they paid their
Reckoning in the Morning, pretending urgent Business upon reading a Letter one
of the Servants presented his Master, they posted away with all speed, and
passed th^o' many Countries before they thought 'emselves safe from Pursuit:
But at length they arrived at Venice, where Fortunatus bought up a great money
rich Jewels* Imbroideries, Fringes, etc. and being desirous to see his Parents,
(...) from thence to Cyprus; upon his arrival he found his Father and Mother
dead; through Sorrow for their great Poverty, which much grieved him; yet that he
might not be wanting in what lay in his power; he built a stately Monument over
their Graves, with this Epitaph:

Under this Marble, lies a noble Pair,
Theodorius and Gratiana fair;
Who unto Fortunatus did give Birth,
And then exchanged for Heavenly Joys their Earth:
Yet mourn their Loss, as I their only Son,
With many Tears and (...) often done.
Fortunatus thinking now (...) Co^^try, built him a noble House at Fa^agosta,
(...) adorned, that the like was not in the Island. He made splendid
Entertainments for the King and Queen, who highly favored him, and wondered
whence he should be Master of so great a Treasure: But he kept that as a
Secret. At last the King advised him to Marry, in order to keep up a Family,
that was so ancient, and had been so honorable in the Country; and proposed to
him his choice of the three fair Daughters of the Lord Neniva; upon which,
having seen and discoursed them; after having consulted Leopold, he chose the
youngest, named Cassandra, purchasing a Lordship to settle for her Jointure;
because the Countess, her Mother, fearing he might spend what he had, as his
Father had done, would not be pleased without: The Wedding was kept fourteen
Days with great splendour; the King, Queen, Nobles, and all of any note in the
Island, being entertained: Jests were held for many Days, in which himself
always carried away the Prize. Then he gave very liberal to the Poor, and
gained good Report in all Places; and the first Year of this happy Marriage his
beauteous Cassandra brought him a Son, whom he named Ampe^o, and the next Year
another, whom he named Andolacia, at whose Christenings was great Feasting and
Rejoicing, the Queen standing for God-mother, and the King and the Earl of
N^monia for Godfathers.

Chap. V.
How Leopold died; and how Fortunatus was bent to travel again which he did in
Egypt, Persia, India, etc. as a Merchant, and the various Advent^^^s he ^^t
withal; How he deceived the Soldian of Egypt, of his Wishing C^p, and
returning home died, leaving (...) Ric^^s to his two Sons, and soon after died
his loving Wife.



FOrtunatus altering his former Resolutions, now began to think of traveling
into other Countries where he had not been (his former being mostly in Europe)
and therefore reading of many Rarit^^^ in other Parts of the World, he
resolved to have a Sight of them; but whilst he was preparing for it, Leopold
died; yet, upon the Arrival of his Wife and Children, wh^^ he had sent for,
Fortunatus settled them in the Country, and plentifully provided for them; he
likewise buried him in a decent manner, in the Chancel of a new Church, he had
built at his own Cost; but when he imparted his Design of Traveling to his
dear Cassandra, she was so grieved that she could not contain herself within
the Bounds of Moderation, but burshing into a Flood of Tears, and hanging about
his Neck, humbly besought him not to bereave her o^ the greatest Comfort of her
Life; but, if she had done any thing to occasion his withdrawing from her
Presence, she entreated him to tell her it, and she would not only beg Pardon,
but for the future make it her Study to avoid doing any thing that might offend
him: But gently embracing her tender Body, he told her, she had be^n the best
and lovinges^ Wife to him in the World; but that his Fancy led him not to lie
^^ing at home, but to accomplish himself in Knowledge by seeing strange (...)
and that she need not fear but he would always have her in Remembrance, and his
Children, those dear Pledges of their Nuptial-love, would soon bring him back
again; whereupon, hearing these, and many other Reasons that overcame the
thoughts of the dangers she objected, her Consent, though with some Reluctance,
was obtained, upon Promise he would return within a Year; and so, leaving her,
besides his Estate, ten thousand Crowns in ready Money, in a Ship he had hired
for his own Use, he departed, resolving to turn Merchant as well as Traveller.

The first Port he touched at, was Alexandria in Egypt; where, as the Custom
was, he immediately went to make a Present to the Soldian, which he did in*
such rich Jewels, that, that mighty Prince admired at it, and thereupon
entertained him very nobly, sending him in Requstal very rich Merchandise, and
left him a^ Liberty to traffic in things of Egypt, above the Liberty granted
to other Merchants, inviting him in a short space after to Dinner, and gave a
Charge concerning his Freedom and Entertainment in all Places, so that having
richly fraited his Ship, he sent it by the Master to Cyprus, consigned to the
Use of his Wife and Children, resolving with ten Servants to travel over the
Land; and so taking his leave of the Sultan, who gave him Letters of safe
Conduct, directed to diver^ Princes: He resolved to pass over the Deserts of
Ara^ia and P^rsia, and so to India, ta^ing Tartary in his Way, where he had a
View of the great Cham's Court at Ca^^ia, but the People being barbarous and
unciviliz'd in most Parts of* that Country, he s^^n left it, and in his Way
thence through a vast Forest, that ^^^ds toward India, he sl^w a^^^strous
Tygar, who had before destroyed many hundreds of People, and l^ft the Way
almost ^^frequented by Passengers, which was seattered with the Skulls and
Bones of those that had been devoured. This Forest took up two Days and two
Nights travel; and so passing through many Countries, he came to India, where
the mighty Emperor Prester John reigned, who, of all those Countries; was the
only Christian Prince, that Country being converted to^^^ Christian Faith, by
St. Thomas the Apostle; he ^as under him sixty two Kings, and is Lord of thirty
Islands, besides a ^a^^ Country on the Continent; here he met an old H^rmit,
whom he plentifully relieved, and would have had him showed him the Country,
but he told him, He was bound under a Vow for the Holy Land; yet, he gave him
an Account of the M^^ners and Customs of it; so they parted, and though here
Strangers were forbid to enter the Palace without the Emperor's Leave; but
Fortunatus knowing that Gold was a free Passport in all place^* (...) by that
means got Admittance and beheld such Riches, that the like he had never (...)
^^r the Walls were plated wi^^ fine Silver, whereon was engraven the Stories of
Knights; and Battles of former Emperors; some Rooms were hung with Panthers
Skins, casting a fragrant Smell; the Pillars that supported the Roof, were
Cedar, overlaid with Gold, and imbossed with precious Stones, as Diamonds,
Rubies, etc. Fortunatus having seen all he could, obtained leave of the
Emperor to depart with thirty Cammels laden with the richest Goods of the
Country, having appointed his Ship-master to meet at Alexandria.

The Sold^an having notice of his arrival in Egypt, sent diverse of his
Officers to meet, and Welcome him in his (...); whom ^ortunatus presented with
Jewels, Odours and Spices, and the Soldian with many Rarities: So unlading his
Cammels, he ^^ipped all his Goods, and remembering his Promise to his beloved
Cassandra, he ordered them to weigh Anchor, resolving to sail, but the Soldian
desired him to partake of a Banquet, before he went: After which, he would
needs show him his Rarities in his Jewel-house, which (...) such, as were
hardly to be found in the World: But, whilst Fortunatu^ was admiring their
Richness, the Soldian unlocked a Cabinet of Gold, and pulled out of it an old
Hat, (to all appearance) saying, It was a Jewel he Esteemed above all the
others, or any thing he had in the World, for (continued he) it has that secret
Virtue in it, giv^n by a great Mag^^a^, long s^^ce Dead, that put i^ upon your
Head, and wish to be where you will, you shall be immediately carried thither
Invisibly. This made Fortunatus wonder, and at the same time inwardly s^il'd,
to think, if it were true, he should be so weak, as to reveal so Important a
Secret to a Stranger: And from that mom^^t began to conclude, if he had this,
to join with his P^rse, they would be the two greatest Advantages in the World:
whereupon, having it in his Hand, he clapped it on his Head, and making to the
Window he wi^^ed himself on board his Ship, and immediately he flew out of the
Window, as swift as Lightning, and to the Amazement of the Sailors, lighted on
the Deck, without any harm: Immediately he commanded them to make all the sail
they could, which they did with such speed, that though they were pursued, they
safely reached the Isle of Cyprus.

The mean while the Soldian fretted and stormed exceedingly at his Loss
(occasioned by his Folly) and sent to a Venetian Merchant, to persuade
Fortunatus to restore his Wishing-hat, which he refused, then, according to his
Orders, he complained of the Injury done to the King of Cyprus. But he, loving
Fortunatus, and siding with him. War was deno^^ced; but whilst the Preparations
were making, the So^dan, of Ag^, and Grief for his Loss, died; and his Son
being given to Pleasure, those Military Preparations were laid aside.

Fortunatus ^aving lived long in Pleasure and Plenty, his two Sons being grow^
to Men's Estate, ^e fell sick, and calling them to him, bestowed his Riches on
them, revealing to them the Virtues of the Purse and Wishing-cap, how he came
by them, and how the first was only for their Lives; so desiring them to live
lovingly together, and not to part them, or ever discover the Virtues of them,
but use them by Turns, in a most devout manner, recommending his Soul into the
Hands of his Maker, he gave up the Ghost; and soon after Cassandra. through
exceeding Grief, falling sick of a Fever, died, and both were buried in a
stately Tomb he had caused to be built in his Life time* in the Chancel of the
new Church he had erected: having left bountifully to the Poor, and for other
charitable Uses.

Chap. VI.
How Andolocia, the youngest Son got the Purse from Ampedo, his Brother, and
traveled into France, Spain* England, etc. How falling in Love with Agrippina,
the King's fair Daughter, he revealed to her the Secrets of his Purse; and how
she got it from him; whereupon returning to Cyprus, he got (by a Trick) the
Wishing cap.



FOrtunatus and his dear Consort were no sooner laid in their cold Tombs, but
Andolocia, the youngest Son, being of a rambling Disposition, incited thereto
by the Relations he had from his Father, agreed with his ^lder Brother, though
with much ado to gain his Consent, That four Coffers should be filled with Gold
out of the Purse; that he should have the Wishing-cap, and all the visible
Estate, and he only the Purse to bear him Company in his Travels: So, setting
forward he came to the Court of France, held then at Paris, the chief City of
that Kingdom; and here he appeared so splendid in his Equipage, and so
extravagent in his Expenses, that he was wondered at by all, who took him for
some strange Prince, and rather by reason of his Courage, for in the Justs they
were made for Entertainment, he unhorsed diverse of the Nobility. And by his
often being at a poor Courtier's House, he fell deeply in Love with his
beautiful young Wife, and so doated on her, that, finding her Coy, he tempted
her with a thousand Crowns for a Night's Lodging with her: But she being
Virtuous, refused it, and told her Husband of his lacivious Importunities; who,
though he liked not to be a Cuckold, longed for the Money: And so they laid
their Heads together how to put a Cheat upon him: The Gentlewoman, for a
hundred Crowns, getting a Neighbor's Wife to supply her Place, in the dark; so
that when Adolocia thought he had all night embraced the most beautiful
Creature living, he found by the Morning-light he had only a common Strumpet in
his Arms; wherefore, vexed at, and much ashamed of the Trick put upon him, he
immediately left the City, and traveled for Spain, viewing all the Rarities of
the Country, and at length arrived at Madrid, now the principal Place in that
Kin^^^m, where the King's Court was kept; there he found them ^ng for a War
with Portugal; and he, never having seen (...) the Field, resolving to take
this Opportunity, (...) and proffered the King his Service; who (...) and made
him a Knight, hestowing on him rich Presents (...) to marry him to the Daughter
of a Marquess, but he (...) that, saying, He was bent on to Travel to se^e
strange Lands, and (...) was ^ot disposed to marry. The Wars ending, wherein he
had done Wonders, to his high Praise and Renown, he took leave of that Court^
and sailed for England, where in like manner he assisted the King in his Wars
with the Scots, behaving himself so bravely, that he was taken notice of above
all that fought in the Field, breaking through whole Squadrons, and putting all
to the Rout before him; insomuch, that after the Battle was over, the King took
him into especial Favor, brought him to Court again* And, one Day entertaining
him at Dinner, he was so smitten in Love with the fair Princess Aggrippina the
King's Daughter, that he forgot to Eat, and feasted his Eyes only on her,
insomuch, that great Notice was taken of it: And from that time he went in the
richest Apparel, that she might the more esteem him, and was foremost in all
the Just and T^rnaments: He likewise entertained the Queen and Princess at a
splendid Dinner, and afterward the King, giving very liberally to the Guards
and Servants; so that they marvelled how he, having no visible Estate, could
live at such a Rate; and were greatly desirous to know what secret Mine he had
to carry on his Grandeur at such a Height.

This, by the Advice of the King and Queen, the Princess under took to
discover; which she thought she might the better do, because she perceived he
was deeply in Love with her, and in a little time she showed him such Kindness,
that he was admitted to be in private with her in her Chamber, a Favor which
none before had received; and there being no^e but they, he thought it was now
his time to declare his Passion; which he did in such obliging Terms that she
seemed to be pleased with it; only saying, Your lavish Expenses, I fear will
bring us both to Poverty, should I marry with you. He told her that could not
be, for his Treasure, during his Life, was inexhaustible, and could not be
wasted, spend what he would, Why then, says she, you are certainly the Son of
some great Prince? No, said he, I am not the Son of a Prince, my Father is
dead, his Estate was equal with ^ine, and never can be more or less. Well,
replied she, satisfy me in this Point, and then perhaps I may grant you my
Favor. for if you love me truly, as you say you do, you will conceal nothing
from me: Let me know (I say) from whence you have these great Riches? Ah! said
he, divinest Lady, it was my dying Father's Command, not to discover it to any;
yet so dearly I love you, that I can deny you nothing: No, if my Father's Ghost
should now rise and forbid it, so your Highness will be pleased to promise to
keep it secret. To this she obliged herself; and he, drunk with Love, thereupon
showed her his Purse, told her how it was come by, and all the Secrets of it;
letting her seeing it experimentally, by pulling out several Handfuls of Gold,
which he presented her with; telling her so he could do all Day long, and every
Day as long as he lived. This made her inwardly rejoice; and from that time
plotted how to get it, which she effected under the Color of a Promise he
should lie with her before Marriage, if he would swear to be true to her, when
she had rendered up to him her Virgin-treasure. But, whilst he expected, with a
multitude of Joy, the Frution of her delicate Body, she contrived with her
Woman, to give him Drugs in his Wine; and ^ drinking him lustily, he fell fast
asleep; then turning aside his ^oa^, ^he took his Purse, and fastened another to
his Girdle of the same likeness, but different in Virtue, so that waking in the
Morning, and finding himself in a Chair, he began to wonder what had befallen
him: but just as he remembered his Assignation with Agrippina, in came her
Woman, who told him, in a sorrowful Tone, that the fair Princess going to Bed,
and keeping awake in expectation of him, and he deceiving her she was risen
very angry. This made him very blank and sorrowful, that he had lost an
Opportunity he should not reasonably expect again; supposing it down by
Necromancy, at the Instance of some of his Rivals, to disappoint him of his
Joys: and so arising, he went to his own House, being ashamed to see the
Princess, as fearing her Reproaches: little dreaming he had lost his Treasure.

By this time Agrippina had showed the Purse to the King and Queen, and told
them the Virtue of it: whereupon the King would have had it in his keeping, but
the Queen told him, seeing the Princess had so fairly ventured for it, she
ought to keep it. And now they resolved to put a Trick upon Andolocia:
whereupon the King sent to tell him, he designed to come with the Queen and
Princess to Dine with him that Day: The Messenger had no sooner delivered his
Message, and was departed, hut he called his Steward, and bid him immediately
provide Provision: but he told him, in the last two Feasts his Money was all
expended, and therefore he must have more. Whereupon Andolocia put his Hand
readily into his Purse, but found nothing: when looking wishfully on it, he
perceived it was changed. This made him look blank, not knowing for a time,
what to say or do: ^he knew the Virtue of it was so rare, that those who had
it, would never part with it by fair means. And so, pretending his Brother was
dead, he turned off all his Servants, sold his Housholdfurniture, and privately
getting on Shipboard he sailed for Cyprus, telling his Brother Ampedo, the
lamentable News of the Loss of the Purse; which greatly grieved him, and made
him blame Andolocia for his Folly, and the Breach of his Father's last
Commands: yet he relieved his Wants plentifully: But he as badly rewarded him,
for having gotten what Treasure he could, he desired him to lend him his
Wishing cap, but he a long time refused it, saying, That should be is last
Reserved when all his Money was spent: and he doubted not, but when some great
Prince should come to know of its Virtue, but to get ten thousand Pounds for
it: and if he let him have it, he would lose it as foolishly as he had done the
Purse. To this he said nothing, but one Day, desiring to see it, the other
Brother obliged him so far, when having it in his Hand, he clapped it on his
Head, wishing himself at Venice, and he was immediately there; leaving him to
repent his Folly in the Loss of his Cap, as he had done his, in that of his
Purse: Being in this rich City, he found out diverse Jews who were rich
Jewellers, and cheapning diverse of great Value, and grasping them fast in his
Hand, and wishing himself in England, he was immediately carried through the Air,
to their great Admiration, who concluded him to be no less than the Devil, and
rejoiced they had taken none of his Money, lest he should have come again, and
fetched away all their other Riches.

Chap. VII.
How Andolocia came to England, having cheated certain Jews of rich Jewels; and
counterfeiting a Merchant, carried away Agrippina, with the Purse; how she came
home, both with that and his Wishing-cap: How he, having got Goat's Horns on
his Head, by eating of certain Apples, they were taken off by a Hermit: How he
caused Horns to grow upon Agripina's Head, carried her away, and put her into a
Nuunery, how he released her from thence, she being to marry the Prince of
Cyprus. An Account of the Death of Andolocia, and his Brother, with the
Discovery and Punishment of the Murderers.



BEing in England, he disguised himself in the Habit of an Italian Merchant;
and going to Court, inquired for the Princess Agrippina: And being brought
before her, he laid out his Jewels, and proffered her them to Sale, so that in
a little time they agreed, now that which he looked for was the Purse, out of
which he supposed she would take the Money, for he suspected she had it, and
accordingly it succeeded: For going to a Coffer, and taking it out, he fastened
it to her Girdle; when he having his Wishing cap on, clasped her in his Arms,
and wishing himself in a wild Desert, away they flew together over Sea and
Land, till they came into a vast Wilderness, in Ireland, and there he set her
down, faint and almost breathless, under a Tree, on which grew very curious
Apples to see to; whereupon, casting her Eyes upon them, she entreated him to
gather some of them to quench her Thirst, for she was almost ready to perish
with Drought: Whereupon he, still loving her, though she had served him such a
slippery Trick, clapped, unadvisedly, his Cap on her Head to keep off the
scorching Sun, as knowing she knew not the Virtue of it; and so climbing up,
fell to gathering; in the mean while she sat pe^sive and sad; and all on a
sudden wishing to God she were out of that desolate Place, and in her Father's
Court, all on a sudden, contrary to her Expectation, she was carried away;
leaving Andolocia to fret at his folly, and vex himself more than ever: So,
wandering up and down, faint and weary, at length he sat down by the Brook, and
fell to eating of his Apples, when immediately a grievous Pain seized his Head,
so that he supposed them infectious, and began to fear his Life; but on the
contrary a great Pair of Goat's Horns sprung out of his Forehead, and then the
Pain ceased: This made him wonder at himself, and stand amazed; but as he was
sad and pensive, an old Hermet came to him, and seeing him a Stranger and in
(...) invited him to his Cave, and gave him such ^pan^ had, which consisted of
Nuts, wild Apples and Roots (...) proceeded from a pleasant Brook hard by: But
Andolocia (...) sollicitous about his Horns, than any thing else, (...) the
Hermet, that if he knew any way, he would use it to cure him, and he would give
him ten Crowns, which was all the Money he had left; for Agrippina had carried
away the Jewels as well as the Hat: But though he promised to cure him, yet he
refused his Money, telling him, he had retired from the World, and the Vanities
of it, and Money to him was useless; but going abroad, he brought home six fair
Apples, two of which Andolocia had no sooner eaten, but his (...) dropped off,
which (...) him greatly rejoice: So the good old Man ^idding him give Glory to
God, led him out of the Forest, and at the Edge of it they parted.

Andolocia having some of the Hornifying Apples, and likewise four of the
contrary Quality, began to meditate Revenge on Agrippina; and so, coming with
all speed for England, he changed his Garb, and got an Opportunity to present
them to her as Fruit growing in the holy Garden of Jerusalem, to restore
decayed Beauty; and keep Health for several Years, make the Aged look Young,
and many other Wonders, but she had no sooner eat two of them, and finding a
Drowsiness, lying down to sleep, and dreaming she was turned into a Goat, but
awaking, she found a strange Alteration, and going to her Glass; and seeing her
Horns, affrighted, she startled and shrieked out, whereupon her Ladies came
about her, and were as much affrighted at the sight as she: but a grave Matron,
who had been her Nurse, advised them to be silent, to prevent the Disgrace that
might follow; till Physicians where consulted, whose Skill might take them
away; so she kept close in her Chamber, and the old Women was sent to diverse
Doctors, but none of them would undertake it at the Penalty she would impose on
them, which was two thousand Crowns, if she revealed the Lady's Name, and they
did not cure her. But as she was coming back again very pensive, Andolocia, in
the Garb of a Physician. Met her, and told her, by her Sadness, and coming from
such a Doctor's House, he guessed she had some dear Friend in danger of Life,
or some other great Distress; which if she would accept of his Service, as a
Physician, he would not doubt, with the Blessing of God, to Cure.

The old Woman believing him, greatly rejoiced that she had found him so
opportunely: and telling him the whole matter, which he very well knew before,
conveyed him to the Princess's Chamber privately at a Backdoor, where he found
her lying on her Bed very pensive: But she was comforted, when he told her he
was come to cure her: so he begun to make his Application and gave her so
little of the Apple among the Drugs, that they only wasted by Degrees, then
telling her he wanted some costly Drugs to make them come off by the Roo^s and
so she should be more beautiful than ever she arose and went to her Cosfer: In
the mean while searching about the Room, he found his Wishing cap carelessly
thrown under the Bed; for she knew not the Virtue, of it, but supposed the
Devil had carried her backward and forward before: By this time she called him
to her to receive the Money; and he drawing her toward the Window, that he
might, as he pretended the better discern it, drew his Hat from under his Coat,
clapped it on his Head, grasped her in his Arms, and away he flew with her, Purse
and all. This caused great Wailing in the Court, and made the King and Queen
repent she had ever meddled with the Purse, verily believing Andolocia was a
Conjurer. In this Airy Voyage she was carried into Flanders, and set down in
the Forest af Andevia, where presenting himself to her in his true Shape, and
with a ste^ Countenance reproaching her with Threachery and Inconstancy; she,
bathing her lovely Face in Tears, fell on her knees, and begged his Pardon.
Whereupon, taking pity of her, at her request he put into a Nunnery giving the
Abbess two hundred Crowns for her Admittance, promising to fetch her so soon as
he could find a Remedy to take off her Horns; and so departed for Cyprus with
his Hat and Purse, the sight of which greatly rejoiced Ampedo, to whom he told
all the passage of his Travels: and so extolled the Beauty of Agrippina, that
the Prince of Cyprus, enamored on bare Report, prevailed with the King his
Father to send an Ambassey, to desire her in Marriage: whereupon Andolocia was
solicited to free her from the Nunnery, which he did, taking off her Horns, and
carrying her through the Air to London: and then returning again, Ambassadors,
with great Presents; and the Prince's Picture, where sent. And she, remembering
what Andolocia had said of the Beauty and Virtue of that Prince, consented, and
so with a noble Train of Lords and Ladies they sailed for Cyprus; where she was
royally received, and splendidly married: Andolocia making her Presents of very
rich Jewels, and winning the chief Prize in the lusts: whereupon the Princess,
as a Signal of her Favor, crowned him with a Garland of Triumph. This made
many of the Nobles envy him, especially the Earls of Armandalia and Limehouse,
vowed his Death, who had so much eclipsed their Honor: and so setting on him,
and his six Men, as he passed through a Wood, they, and their hundred
Attendants after a long Fight, killing his Men, took him Prisoner, for he had
not with him his Wishing cap, and casting him in a dark, and loathsome Dungeon,
set him in the Stocks, and loaded him with Irons, to make him confess whence he
had those vast Riches: which through Torment, he discovered, and gave them his
Purse: which they having proved, thought 'emselves not safe whilst he was
alive, because they knew he could go through the Air, and so might 'scape, and
they having offered the Jalors Money to dispatch him, and he refusing, the Earl
Armandalia strangled him as he sat in the Stocks: And Ampedo having in vain
sought for his Brother, and offered great Rewards for his Discovery, supposing
him Dead, burnt his Wishing cap, and soon after (through Grief) dyed: at which
time the Purse lost its Virtue, which made the Earls, who kept it by Turns,
fall out, one charging the other to have changed it: and the Quarrel growing
high, Limehouse called the other Murderer, and leting fall other Words, they
were both apprehended, and being wracked, confessed the Fact: for which they
were broke on the Wheel.

FINIS.

