A Commemoration SERMON: OR, A DISCOURSE On II COR. V. I. Occasioned by the
Death of a most Religious young Lady MARY HAMPSON The Only Daughter of Sir
Thomas Hampson, of Tapplow, In Bucks, Knight. and Bar. Who died August the 14.
1677. Together with a RELATION of her Incomparable and Exemplary LIFE.

October 3. 1677.
Imprimatur,

G. Jane.



LONDON, Printed by T. D. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1678.

TO THE Honorable and most worthy Lady, THE Lady HAMPSON:
Madam,
IT is said of Jacob that when he came to be persuaded that his lost Joseph was
alive, and a great man in the Land of Egypt, his spirit revived, he banished his
Sadness and dried up his Tears, and joyfully resolved to go down to see his
Dear Son. Madam, you have lost a Daughter, deservedly as dear, and your grief
is too much proportioned to your loss: But I hope

you will also be comforted when you Consider that she is alive, and in a Happy
Condition, that she dwells in place much better than Egypt, and is the Favorite
of a greater Monarch than ever was Pharoh. I know you have resolved to go up
and see her: and if she were here, I am well assured you could freely leave her
to ascend to that blessed Place where she now expects you. Your Affliction
therefore is now reduced only to this, That she is gone to Rest and Glory
first, whereas you thought She must have followed you. This, Madam, is no great
Evil, you had showed her the way to God, and she has outrun you: but you
will soon overtake her, and then forever you rejoice and dwell together.

I have writ, and sent your Ladyship the enclosed Papers, not so much to honor
the Memory of your most blessed Child, as to minister what comfort I could
against the grief of her Absence, both to you and to your Honorable and most
pious Mother: Not but that both your good Meditations do far exceed mine: but
because in the case of Sorrow we generally want a Remembrancer, and, even our
own Balsom applied by another hand is more healing and effectual.

Why I have herein closed a Sermon which was never preached, nor never intended
to be, was partly to divert your thoughts from your Grief by a comfortable Text
of Holy Scripture; and partly to countenance the Method of the Oration that
follows. I believe a plain Relation of the Life of your Excellent Daughter
might have been better: The Rehearsal of her virtuous Actions was the best
Praise she could receive: But I wanted particulars to complete a full History:
and the defects of my Memory and Information were best supplied and concealed
by the Rhetorical style of an Encomium.

What I have done, I wish it may be acceptable and someways serviceable to your
Ladyship: and that you may not take it ill, if an unknown hand endeavors to
wipe the Tears from your eyes: for though unknown, yet the Author truly is, and
accordingly desires to subscribe himself

Your Ladyships most humble, and most affectionate Servant

To the READER.
IF thou art pleased to be censorious upon the ensuing Relation, do but mend
the matter with thy Life, and then I am sure, thou will soon excuse, and I
shall freely acknowledge the faults of its Form and Method. It Is not my part I
am in love withal, or would have made public; but Hers who is the Occasion and
the Subject of this Discourse. I admired Her much, while living, for Her great
and singular Goodness, but yet more since She dyed, and I learnt what before I
knew not, and what here I could not duly express. It Is not unusual to write the
Lives of Persons of great worth: and 'twould be very useful, if they were all
as exemplary as this, and as faithfully related.

I need not therefore find Apologies for having printed this: it was to spare
the uneasy trouble of reading an ill hand, to that worthy Lady I offer it to,
and for whom I chiefly designed it. I intended also to disperse some Copies
among my friends to whom I thought it might be acceptable and beneficial too:
but desired to avoid the labor and tediousness of Transcribing: and withal the
thing may do good, and I am not accountable to thee to whom I am not known. I
need say the less upon this, for that I would have but a few Copies come out of
the Press; if the Printer exceeds his Commission to oblige the Public, let him
answer for it.

A Commemoration SERMON: OR, A Discourse on 2 Cor. 5. 1. Occasioned by the
Death of a most Religious young Lady MARY HAMPSON. Together with a RELATION of
her Incomparable and Exemplary LIFE.
For we know that if our Earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; 2
Cor. 5. 1.
AS in Navigation, Geography is no less useful than Astrology, in that all the
measures and Dimensions of Heaven are proportioned and related to the Earth: So
likewise, in our Spiritual Voyage through this Life, the tempestuous Sea of
this World, it is as necessary we should study the Map of our own Earth which
we carry about us, as that we should look up to that heavenly Globe, whereto we
are stearing our Course: We must understand the Meanness and Infirmity of this
our present condition, as well as the Glory and the Perpetuity of our future
Estate; The first will make us holy in our Lives, the second confident in our
Deaths: the Consideration of the Miseries and Uncertainties of this present
Life, will make us long for a better; and the knowledge of a better life will
teach us to despise the Vanities of this: when we are fully persuaded that when
this our earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, we shall have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

In these words, three things are included, and may be considered.

1. The dissolution of our Bodies; if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved. 2. The Comfort we have against it; then we have a building of God,
an House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. And 3ly. The Certainty of
this Comfort, in the word (...) we know; how far this our knowledge excludes
all kind of doubting.
Of the first St. Paul seems here to make a Question, as if it were a doubtful
matter: If our earthly house be dissolved, (says he.) But this he speaks by
way of Concession, which is a strong Affirmative, and not as a doubtful
Position: It Is as if he should say, As we are certain that this our earthly
Tabernacle must be Dissolved, so do we know with the same Assurance, that we
have a better and more enduring Building in Heaven.

And indeed, there is nothing so certain as the first, That we must all die; we
are obliged to it by the very Constitution of our Nature: our Bodies are Houses
of Clay, continually battered by Rain and rough Weather. Our Souls dwell in a
Tabernacle, an earthly Tabernacle, and sure such an Abode cannot be of long
continuance. A Tabernacle has a Roof, but it has no Foundation, it is an
Ambulatory house which may be removed at pleasure: Just so are our Bodies, they
have a roof, they are overlaid with a thin skin, but they have no Foundation,
they stand up on the sand, any forcible thrust, any Accident may overthrow them.

We are not only certain that the time of our Dissolution will come, but we are
uncertain of every moment. Our earthly house is very weak, we are sure it must
fall, but if it were never thrown down till it fell of it self, we might hope
to foresee its approaching Ruin: But every blast of Wind, every hail-stone,
or bigger drop of Rain, may crush it into the flatness of a Grave.

Tres sunt Mortis nuncii, Death is said to have Three Messengers, either of
which may come, and tell us every moment, That we must leave all, and remove
from hence: Accidents, Infirmities, and Old Age. There is no man, in whatever
condition he be, but may at any time be called or forced away by some one or
other of these Senectus praesentem, Old Age sets us on the brink of our Grave,
and makes our Death present to us. Infirmitas apparentem; Sickness and
Infirmities are the Prelude of our Mortality, and the Forerunner of a likely
approaching Death. Casus latentem, but Accidents threaten us continually with
an unseen and unexpected End; and the number of the casual Deaths is great, and
we know not how it shall be with us.

Christians, This should be seriously thought on, for 'twould be of great use
in the whole mannagement of our Lives. Meditatio mortis est vita perfecta,
Greg. Mag. The frequent Meditation of Death is the best Instrument of
Holy-Living. It would prevent and cure very many Sins and Follies, if we had it
oftener in our minds, That our Earthly house of this Tabernacle must be
dissolved, that our Strength and Beauty must be laid in the Dust, and that our
long dwelling must be in the dark Chambers of the Grave.

Who would bestow their Cares and Revenues in the beautifying of a ruinous
house, whose rotten foundation does sink continually? and were it not that men
will not be serious, how could they spend their whole Time and Estates in
adorring and pleasing their Bodies, whose origin is from the Earth, whose
matter is but Clay, whose End is Corruption, which sink and decay every day,
and cannot be kept from Dissolution.

It is written of John the Charitable Patriarch of Alexandria, that he built to
himself a fine Monument, but left it unfinish't, and commanded that his
Servants should daily put him in mind to finish what he had began: that so
being frequently remembered of perfecting his Tomb, he might think to fit
himself for it, and always have Death in his thoughts. Happy were it if we also
could find out some Art daily to put us in mind of our latter end. We cannot
all build a Sepulcher, as the Patriarch; no, but we all carry the Corpse that
must be laid in. This our earthly house must be dissolved, and every thing
whereby it is now preserved is near a kin to Death. We have many Remembrancers
of our frailty, if we would listen to their voice and mind their motions: and
truly it is more a wonder that our bodies, weak as they are, should endure so
long, than that they should at last be dissolved: for being made of so many
various parts, and joined together with so small Ligaments, and the whole being
but dirt, it is next to a Miracle they should tumble up and down so long and not
fall to pieces. Eliphas in Job 4. 19. gives us this Description of men's
frailness and their stupidity; that they dwell in houses of clay; whose
foundation is in the dust, and are crushed before the Moth; they are destroyed
(says he) from morning to evening, they perish for ever without any regarding
it; does not their excellency which is in them go away? they dye even without
wisdom.

Sure if such men as are sensual, proud and covetuous, would now and then walk
in a charnelhouse, and there take an account of those grandeurs and pleasures,
which are the worshipped Idols of the world, it is not to be thought but that
it would alay the heat of their unruly passions, abate their sinful desires,
and reduce them to some Sobriety.

There is much to be learned from that voice, which the Prophet was bid to cry
a loud, Isa. 40. 6. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as
the flower of the field. For as the strongest stalk, and fairest color of
flowers, keeps them not from fading, and being soon dried up and withered: so
the strength and beauty, and all the accomplishments of men, are no security
against the dismal change of Death; still they return to their first dust, we
must be as water spilt on the ground, which is not gathered up again.

Nay, that our hearts might not be lifted up, by any of those outward
ornaments, we observe in Scripture, that several persons who had been allowed
the largest Portion of those natural endowments, died soonest, and in the worst
manner: The strongest Sampson, the fair Absalom, the swift Asael, the wise
Achitophel, they all came to an unnatural end; they were thrown in the dust, by
violence and force. So true it is of all men, even the strongest, what we read
Job. 14. 1. Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days and full of trouble, he
comes forth as a flower, and is cut down, he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not.

I conclude this first point, by applying to this matter the dissolution of our
bodies, St. Peter's exhortation, in another case. 2. Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then
that all these things must be dissolved, all these members and comely parts of
our bodies, what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and
Godliness.

Having now considered the sad Ruin and Fall of this our earthly House, let us
see in the second place, what comfort we have against it.

How will it be with us after the Dissolution of our fleshly Tabernacle? when
this our prison, our vessel of clay is fallen to pieces, then evadit intus
reclusa columba: our Soul flies away and goes to rest; there is a building of
God, a blessed receptacle fitted to receive it.

We are not left to the uncertainties of the Emperor, animula vagula blandula,
etc. Dear soul, where art thou a going to wander in unknown places. No, our
Blessed Lord Christ by the Gospel, has brought to light, both life and
immortality, and praised be his goodness; We know that when our earthly house
of this Tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

There cannot be a greater comfort for a man forced out of a poor Cottage, than
to be promised he shall be received in a glorious Palace; For one that is
driven out of an earthly house, to be assured he shall dwell in heavenly
Mansions.

It Is true the house must fall, (...) it shall be dissolved: but then the
in-dweller shall escape, and instead of a Tabernacle of clay, shall enter a
City of Gold and Saphirs; a building of God, an house not made with hands
eternal in the heavens.

These last words are capable of a twofold interpretation, and may signify,
either the Mansions of heaven, or else our own Bodies, after our glorification.
For as sure as our Creed is true, so true it is there will be a Resurrection;
God has plainly revealed it, and we firmly believe it. And so by faith we
know, that our Bodies sown in dishonor, shall be raised in glory; they are
sown in weakness, but shall be raised in power; they are sown natural Bodies,
but shall be raised spiritual bodies; This corruptable shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, and Death shall be
swallowed up in Victory. 1 Cor. 15. Out of the dust of these our vile Bodies
God will raise a new habitation for our Souls, beautiful and glorious, beyond
what we can think. And so the Text says, not that our Bodies shall perish for
ever, and be reduced to nothing, but, only they shall be dissolved, they shall
crumble into dust, but God knows and takes care of the least part of it: and
when it is refined and cleansed from the infection of sins, God will reunite it
into a body, glorious and bright, as the light of Heaven; the Righteous shall
shine forth as the Sun, in the glory of their Heavenly Father.

If this be the sense of the words, That this building of God be meant of our
glorified Bodies, then this is a great and special comfort, which we Christians
have; that God does with our Bodies in our Death, as with our Souls in our
Conversion: When in our sincere return to God, we yield our minds and
affections to him, he renews and sanctifies them, and makes them holy and
capable of his favor, and blessed enjoyment: And so when we submit to our
portion of dust, and commit our Bodies to God, he destroys their blemishes and
imperfections, he beautifies them, and makes them impassible, glorious and
immortal, fit to dwell in Heaven, in the Society of Saints and Angels.

But then, this building of God, this Eternal house in the Heavens, may be
understood also of the blessed Mansions of Glory, wherein holy Souls are
received, after their departure out of this mortal life. For though it be
controverted whether the Souls of the Faithful be admitted into the same glory
wherein they shall enter after the great day of Judgment: or whether there be
other receptacles for them, till the Resurrection? yet it is generally agreed
on by all, but the late inventors of Purgatory, that they are in a state of
Rest, in Abraham's bosom, full of comfort, and holy hopes, and passionate
longings for the time of their reunion, and their consummation. And we are
warranted to say by the Scripture, and by the Church, the best interpreter of
it, That the Souls of the Faithful, after they are delivered from the burden
of the Flesh, are in joy and felicity. And so says the Apostle, v. 8th. We are
confident and willings, rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present
with the Lord. whether in the outward Courts, or in the inner Sanctuary, it
matters not to know. Happy are they who are present with the Lord, in whatever
part of his House it be.

There they see, hear and enjoy, what, in this World, Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, nor Heart conceived. They begin to drink and to plunge themselves in
that Ocean of Bliss, which is called Eternal Life; which I cannot describe, and
which you could not comprehend.

But O blessed Mansions of the Blessed! Eternal house in the Heavens! Glorious
building of God! how shall we understand whilst in this vale of misery, the
exceeding great stateliness, the wonderful glories, and the most pleasant
deliciousness of thy pleasures and beauties?

There are several words in the Text, which lead us very far in this blessed
enquiry, if our thoughts, and our time were not too much confined. But if we
cast an Eye upon our dwellings here below, we shall soon understand how much we
should value and desire everlasting habitations above.

There be three places wherein we sojourn before we come to our Eternal home,
the first is appointed by Nature, the Womb, wherein we live like plants,
without either sense or reason. The second is ordered by Providence, the World,
wherein we live in trouble and misery, exposed to many dangers and sorrows. The
third was built by Sin, the Grave, Chambers of Death and Darkness, wherein we
dwell with Worms, Corruption, the ruin and dishonor of our own Nature. I say,
view these, which are domus incolatus, the house of our Pilgrimage and
sojourning, and compare them with that Eternal house in the Heavens, wherein
God dwells, and whereof he is Maker: then you shall in some manner understand
how much Heaven excells all these earthly Prisons, and shall be moved to say
with the Psalmist, How amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of Host! My Soul
longs, etc.

O! how great is the difference betwixt the place of our Conception, and the
immensity of Heavenly regions! betwixt our houses of clay, and the House of
God! betwixt the Prisons of Death, and the Land of everlasting Life!

But I need say no more upon this Subject, here is comfort enough to them that
believe the Promise of Christ, when he ascended to glory, John 14. 1. I go to
prepare a place for you. Here is, I say, comfort enough against all our
sorrows, that when we leave the uneasy abode of this our earthly Tabernacle, we
shall be recieved into heavenly Palaces, here are inducements enough to despise
this wretched World, and sigh after our better Country, where we are promised
rest and joys that shall have no End.

I conclude this second Point with the exhortation of St. Peter, Therefore
beloved seeing that ye look for such things, for such a glorious house, such
heavenly Mansions, be diligent that whenever God calls for you, you may be
found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

The last thing to be considered, is the certainty of this comfort, in the word
(...), we know, how far this our Knowledge excludes all kind of doubting.

We know indeed, that there is a rest, and glorious things prepared for the
people of God; we know it by the certitude of Faith; all those many convincing
arguments that prove the Gospel to be true, and JESUS to be the Son of God,
makes it indubitable. For this is the great Revelation, which God sent his own
Son to Preach, proportioning the Message to the Messenger, This is the redord,
says St John, that God has given us Eternal Life, and this life is in his Son.

This, God has sufficiently attested, to satisfy all men that so it is: and
St. Paul in the Text is very confident, we have a building of God (says he)
and we know it; we know that if our earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, we have an
Eternal house in the heavens. He is altogether positive, and makes no doubt of
the matter; and we may rely upon his credit: for it was by the strongest
convictions that he was made to credit this truth; and afterward he suffered
the greatest of Persecutions to propagate it. Many other Witnesses also have
sealed the same with their own blood: but wherever the Gospel is embraced, this
is likewise received without objection.

The Question therefore, is not whether or no the thing be true; though the
arguments be but morally demonstrative, as being a matter of Fact, yet
generally Christians do all assent to it: I am sure all good Christians do, and
to them I now wholly address my Discourse.

The doubt with them is not about the certainty of any Promise, or of this
Scripture in particular: but about the particular application of it; shall I my
self enter into those glorious Mansions? many that have a good and tender
Conscience, and as to the real event, are undoubtedly safe, yet have fears upon
them: and sometimes from those fears, draw sad inferences.

They doubt not of Gods truth, whether or no there be such a glorious Mansion
and happiness for us, as he has revealed: but they question themselves,
whether they are fitted for it; whether they have done, or shall do, what should
qualify them for Heaven. And in this case, I say, that that fear may be an
allay to our joys: but except it be very ill managed (which a spiritual Guide
could easily prevent) it cannot be a prejudice to our final safety. I say
more, that timerousness in them that have most reason to be confident, many
sometimes do much good, be an incentive to care, and greater watchfulness: and
yet beyond this I may add, that it is even a duty.

I am sure St. Paul speaks of himself, as being afraid of becoming a
castaway, after he had Preached to others: and he gives us this general
command, Heb. 4. 1. Let us fear, least a Promise being left us of entering into
his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. So that, most certainly,
fear is not destructive of our better hopes: but is rather a motive to work out
our Salvation with the greater care and humility, and to give all diligence, as
St. Peter exhorts, to make our calling and election sure.

This is not a place to dispute with them that teach men to presume, or that
plunge them into doubts, and perpetual scruples: but to be brief, I lay this of
St. Aug. As a Position not to be denied, nunquam mala mors putanda est quam
bona precessi^ vita, a good Life can never end but in a happy Death; secure the
first, and then undoubtedly the second will follow: as for such fears and
sorrows, as may assault us, whilst we are in the state of misery and
imperfection, we must let them pass by, and go on minding our duty. For sure it
is that so it was with others before us, even with the dearest of Gods
Children. They have not always been equally sensible of spiritual comforts;
sometimes they were under the cloud, full of grief and sad apprehensions. It
was so once with David, Psalm. 77. And likely it has been so with all good men,
some one time or other, or perhaps often.

For indeed, we are for the most part in this life, as St. Peter in the Prison,
Act 12. 9. when God sent his Angel to deliver him from a great and imminent
Danger, he thought he saw but a Vision, and wist not that it was true, what was
done by the Angel, till he came to himself, after he was past the Iron gate,
and then he understood Gods gracious purpose to his own safety. And so, we
generally are not sensible of what God has already done, and is further doing
to make us happy: and we shall have but imperfect notices of it, and shall be
but as in a Dream, till we are also past the Iron gate of Death: but then we
shall wonder at our dullness, and shall be transported with ravishments of joy,
when we come to understand the design of God's Providence toward us, and are
admitted to see face to face, that which we now behold but darkly, and in a
Mystery. Let us therefore at present take no further care, but to obey and
follow, as St. Peter did, and though we go trembling, and heavily, yet at last
we shall come to joy and safety, as he did.

The fearful Passenger in the Ship, is drowned never the sooner because he
fears it: and the timorous Christian in the Church, will be safe enough, thou
he be not secure.

We have all the reason, and all the encouragements in the World, entirely to
cast our selves upon God; into the Arms of the holy JESUS, who will in no wise
cast out any that humbly comes to him: and who requires no more of us, than
what we sincerely can do. God is infinitely good, and he has done so much to
assure us of his mercy and loving kindness, that we cannot but admire his
Condescension, and rejoice that we depend upon him, who would have all men to
be saved; and has therefore purchased Salvation for all, at a mighty rate; and
has engaged all ways possible, that if we heartily desire and endeavor after
Salvation, we shall without fail obtain it.

Let us not then attend to our Fears, and the perplexed thoughts of our own
minds, let us but take care to secure our duty, by a hearty love and obedience,
do all we can to serve and to please God, and we are certainly happy: and he
will refresh us with as much comfort as we need, to carry us through this vale
of Tears.

A Merchant ventures his Estate, because thereby some are grown rich; A
Soldier will hazard his Life, because some have escapt the edge of the Sword,
and reaped a sprig of Laurel: and shall we be afraid to trust our Souls with
God, our faithful Creator, and gracious Redeemer, when from such a trust, we
expect the greatest glory and happiness.

The time was when we were nothing, and he made us; the time was when we were
as though we had not been, living without sense or knowledge in our Mothers
Bowels, and God brought us to this light. Every change has been for our
advantage; first nothing, and then a being, and then a more perfect being: and
why should we doubt but that after our next change, our dissolution, we shall
be yet better.

God has now over us as much power, as in the State of Separation: but then he
will show himself more gracious, confirming the Pardon of every repented Sin,
and assigning a recompense to every good work. And then what can we fear? not
the strangeness of the change, for it is imperceptible; Mors est depositis
sarcine gravis, Death is only the laying down of a heavy burden, the
returning of each part of man to its own principle; the Body to the Earth
whence it was, and the spirit to God who gave it. There is no ill in this.

Neither yet can we fear the strangeness of the unknown Regions of Spirits, for
we are in God as an Atome in the Air, as a drop of water in the Sea; the
immensity of his Divine Essence does overflow us; we can be no where but in
God, Though I should pass through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear
no evil, (says David) for thou art with me. Besides Death is via tria, a
beaten path, all mankind have passed through it, yea, and the Saints of God,
and the Blessed JESUS himself, who has made the passage safe and easy for all
his followers.

But I Will tell you Christians, what you must do, that you may not be afraid of
Death, and the dissolution of your earthly Tabernacle. You know that the
day-labourer looks with joy upon thr Sunsetting, because then he receives his
hire: The Traveller is glad when his journey draws to an end, for then he comes
to home and rest. Do for Eternity what these do for things temporal; labor for
heavenly rest, advance toward it in the ways of Virtue and Godliness: and when
you come near the end of your race and of your labors, and come to have a near
prospect of your Crown and your happiness, then your hopes shall be strong, and
your Comforts great, and the Text that lays before us shall be to you a spring
of joys, you shall then be able to say with great assurance, We know, that when
our earthly house, of this Tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

Amen.
I Longed to have done with the Text, that I might turn mine eyes upon that
blessed Saint, whose Virtuous Life, I now come to Commemorate. The Text indeed
abounds in Consolations, but her Example is full of Instruction, and her
excellent Life declares the Comfortable Doctrines of the Text, far better than
my Discourse could do.

That there shall be a Dissolution of our earthly Tabernacle, she preached by
her Mortification, Self denial, and Contempt of the World.

That there are heavenly Mansions prepared to entertain pious Souls after their
departure, her Devotion and Heavenly-mindedness are strong Arguments.

And how to get this joyful knowledge, the Assurance of a place for our selves
in the House of God, she has taught us by her Goodness and Humility, and all
those her Christian Virtues, for which she is now blessed and rewarded above,
and deserves here to be praised and admired, remembered and imitated.

MARY HAMPSON, of whose Noble Descent I might speak great things; For she might
have said with St. Paul, that she had whereof to glory according to the flesh,
as much as any could boast of, but she rather chose, as that great Apostle, to
value none of those outward advantages, in comparison of the excellency of the
saving Knowledge of Christ. She valued her Christian-name, though it were
common, much above her honorable Surname, which in the World would have
brought her more respect.

And indeed, the Noblest Title of a Christian is derived from his Second Birth,
and Hers was so: For in the Sacrament of Regeneration she really past into Gods
Family, and in Truth did become his Child, and an Inheritress of his Heavenly
Kingdom. She made this appear afterward as Mary in the Gospel, by choosing the
best part, the Word and Favor of JESUS above all the Pleasures and employments
in the World. And, like Mary Magdalen, she also loved much, and gave great
demonstrations of it: And though we cannot say, That so much was forgiven her
as the Penitent Magdalen, because God had preserved her in great Innocence; yet
we may say, That as she loved much, so, much was given her, for God betimes
blessed her with a mighty Grace, and from her Infancy she aspired, and fitted
herself for Glory.

This appears not only by her Virtuous Disposition and Towardliness, and her
Proficiency in the Christian Knowledge, when she could only, as St. Hierom
speaks, balbutire Christum, stammer out the name and the things of Christ: but
also by several Questions about Heaven and the Glories thereof, and such
Reflections upon them, as exceeded as much the capacity of her tender Age, as
they came short of that higher knowledge which she has now attained.

It Is true she had great Advantages in the Example and best of Instructions,
she had from her excellent Parents, from whose pious Care she received those
Seeds of Virtue which afterward did so much fructify; The Pains and Prayers of
those most Religious persons could not but have a good effect in the Education
of a Child born to God and Goodness: but it must be granted that it was the
work of a special Grace made those Means effectual; Paul may plant, and Apollo
may water, but God gives the Increase: And an Increase here was so great that I
know not where to begin to tell the fruits of it.

When I look into the time of her riper years, I see so large a field open
before me, that I lose my thoughts in its spaciousness; and though all things
in it look amiable and pleasant, yet I cannot but enter it trembling, knowing,
that to mention every thing therein remarkable and worthy our Observation,
exceeds as much my poor Ability, as to express, according to the dignity of the
matter, what I shall note and represent.

Such were the Fears of St. Gregory Nazianzene, when he was composing the
funeral Oration of his own Sister, (...), etc. I am not afraid (says he) of
exceeding, but of maiming the Truth, left a lame and imperfect Commendation,
reflect disgrace upon her, who justly, deserves the greatest honor. This is my
case. I know that my undertaking is above my strength: but yet pity it is that
so great, so fair a Virtue should be buried in an obscure Silence. If I cannot
draw her to the Life, whom God made so lovely, and so inimitable, yet I hope
that my ruder draught will reflect some Glory to God, who himself made the
Original so perfect: Thereby also I design to provoke others to Imitation, to
copy this so fair and so attractive an Example: And however, The Righteous
shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, Praise and a Memorial is justly due to
him: and if I cannot pay the debt, yet I own it, and here offer my poor
acknowledgment.

To proceed with some order in the short defective Account I shall give of the
life of this Noble and Virtuous Lady; I must, as it were break the golden
Chain, and divide those Virtues of hers, which were so closely linked together,
into three several Orders, according to the Partition of St. Paul himself.

In the first, put those that regard our selves, under the name of Sobriety.

In the Second I shall place those Virtues which are exercised toward our
Neighbor, which the Apostle calls Righteousness.

And those in the last, which more particularly do belong to God and are
therefore called Godliness.

I begin with the first, which St. Paul deservedly makes so, for except we
learn to deny, and in many things overcome, our selves, we can neither be just
to our Neighbor, nor discharge our Duty to God.

This therefore our dear Saint laid as the foundation of her high and heavenly
Virtues, she was very eminent in all the Duties which are reduced to this head.

It was not with her as it is generally with young People; they commonly live
many years by Sense, before they be so much as capable of sober Counsels,
first, that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual, says the
Apostle himself, Cor. 15. The ebulition of the youthful blood and the brisker
spirits must be a little over, before Reason and Religion can enter and rule
the Passions, and the Natural Appetites. But of her I may say, That she had
more of the Angel than of the Flesh in her: For she was grown a strong
Christian before she came to the strength of Nature: She had mastered and
brought under sinful Motions, and all sensual desires, before her joints were
fully knit or her grouth completed.

A woman in our vicious age is called Virtuous if she has not prostituted
herself to the basest Lusts. But, Lord, at how great a distance did This young
and spotless Virgin stand from them! such foul Temptation could not have dared
to look upon a face of so much Modesty: she had too many excellent Virtues,
like so many Tutelar Angels, to keep her from such deadly sins; her Soul was
pure and heavenly, and her body blessed with such a guess, could not but be chaste
and Sanctified; and indeed, she not only abstained from unlawful pleasures: but
she also refrained her self from many permitted enjoyments.

That Mundus Mulibris, that vain and tiresom attire, which is now the Study and
the Pleasure of Persons of her Age and Birth, was neither her employment, nor
less her delight; what her quality did require she wore for decency: but she
had better Ornaments than could be borrowed from her outward Apparel.

The affectation of any singularity was far from her meek and humble Spirit,
therefore she submitted to what was fit for her: but she redeemed the time of
her dressing by Reading and Meditation, and whilst others were employed about
her body, her Soul was waiting upon God.

The Tyrant Laws of Customs and Fashions, she could not altogether neglect, and
she had wherewith to exceed them, had it been her desire: but she had a better
Lord than the World: and it was her choice and passion to do his work, and to
spend upon him her time and her money, as much as was possible.

This was not out of Discontent nor Melancholy, nor that she had any reason to
fall out with the Gayties of the World, there was nothing of humor in it: it
was her free choice and serious consideration, and therefore it was her
constant course; she preserved a cheerful and contented Spirit, being well
pleased with her Condition, and having great reason to be so: only her Joy
consisted not in gaudy toys, or a looser laughter.

God had made her Body well shaped, her face comely, without any defect of
proportion or complexion, with a sweet, and yet reserved and grave Countenance;
she needed not envy others, nor any ways endeavor to mend or alter what God
had made her: and she was far enough from it; she much abhorred those Arts and
Inventions found out for to palliate defects, and Minister to vanity.

It might be said of her as of St. Gorgonia, (...), her red paint was a
graceful modesty: and her white her abstemiousness.

For indeed, abstemious she was in a high Degree, she kept under her Appetites,
as well as her Passions: her mind and her body were equally subdued to Reason
and to Religion, to the strictest temperance and mortifyedness.

Those fasting-days the Church appoints, and which devouter Christians spend in
Penitential Devotions, she without fail Religiously observed, with great
severity to her self, and yet endeavoring what she could, not to be noted.
Selfdenial was more pleasing to her than the gratifying of sense can be to
Voluptuous Persons, if she were free from outward Afflictions, yet she would
prove herself a lover of the Cross, if that may be called a Cross which was her
Delight, to deprive her self upon Religious accounts, of Lawful Liberties; to
offer to God her natural desires and Appetites as a Sacrifice.

Lord, where shall we find such Christians! how few are they who thus, by wise
and pious Considerations, can guide their affections, and despise all Worldly
Vanities, and reject Bodily pleasures, and no otherwise exceed the due bounds
of sobriety, than by being too strickt and too Mortified?

Blessed Soul, thou were here Dead and Crucified to the World! thou did feed
upon Heavenly Manna, and the thoughts of Eternity! thou were Covetous of
nothing but Grace and Virtue! thine ambition was to be dear to God, and fair in
the eyes of Heaven! thy delight was to bear the yoke of Christ, and to follow
his steps! Thou were here a wayfaring Passenger, using what absolute necessity
required, as still going forward, advancing toward that Blessed home, whether
now thou art happily come!

And now Christians, suppose she had indulged her self, in those fond
enjoyments, generally doted on by young People; suppose she had had all the
Fineries and all the Dainties in the World; where would now the advantage of it
be? Must not those mean transitory pleasures have ended with her life, If not
before it? doubtless they must: but the rewards of her sober Virtues are great,
and lasting for ever For her moderation and her self denial in Temporal
pleasures, she now takes her full of those Diviner Joys, which are Eternal but
they are Secret.

O Truly Wise and Happy Child! thou did betimes Learn the hardest Lessons of
the Christian Philosophy! Thou were persuaded there are better things in Heaven
for the followers of JESUS, than this Earth can afford! and thou did choose
and act accordingly. Thou were made Wise unto Salvation, before the inticements
and follies of the World could deprave their understanding, or seize upon thine
affections! and now Blessed art thou, and Blessed also should we be, if we
could, or would follow thine Example.

But I can not display all the Beauties of it. I must every where omit and
hasten and now pass to the second head, to speak of those Virtues which are
comprehended under the name of Righteousness. They are such as are exercised
toward our Neighbors, in their several Relations to us: and in these, she was
also very exemplary, and very eminent.

Self-Love and Interest are things that make men partial against others, where
themselves are concerned, but the having so entirely subdued those evil
Affections (as I have showed before) there was nothing in her to obstruct her
Justice and her Charity,

To her Parents therefore she was a dutyful and loving Child; she was tender of
all that concerned them, and sought nothing but to bring them as much Comfort
and Joy as a truly good Child can bring to good Parents: she exceeded what they
desired in observance to them: and the only thing they could chide her for, was
this, That she was not kind enough to her self.

To her other Relations she was dear also, and she paid to them all, all that
Respect and Affection which they could any ways challenge or desire; she was
much concerned for their good, and where otherwise she could not by Prayers,
she expressed her true kindness to them; having learnt as St. Paul taught
Christians, to show first Piety at home. 1 Timothy 5. 4.

Many there are who when they come abroad, seem very meek and obliging; they
put the best side outward, and are very courteous to Strangers: but at home
they are churlish and ungentle, angry and froward; There they are pleased with
nothing, and they please no Body; their Language and their Behavior are harsh
and vexatious, and this is a fault as great and common, as it was far from the
temper of this Blessed Christian.

She had learnt of her Blessed Master, to be meek and lowly: and of the great
Apostle, to be gentle, easy to be entreated full of Mercy and good Fruits, and
she therefore was most esteemed where she conversed most: she was best Beloved
where she was best known.

She not only made no breaches her self in the Family where she lived, but she
endeavored to close them up, as fast as others did make them, she was not only
Peaceable, but a Peacemaker; and in this she showed her Wisdom and her
Discretion, as much as her good will: for she had not only the Innocence and
Meekness of a Dove, but the Prudence of the Serpent also.

She had also learnt and practiced another great and difficult lesson, to take
heed to her ways that she might not offend in her tongue; a lesson as useful
and necessary, as it is generally neglected. That Tongue wherewith she so often
Blessed God, she would not abuse to his dishonor, to vain babbling, or to her
Brothers prejudice: that made her keep silence, when many were talkative and
loud. She could have spoke as much as they, with as much grace, and to better
purpose: but she would have discoursed upon better Subjects than impertinent
News, or uncharitable Stories.

But it was not only her care to hurt no Body: She could also seek and joyfully
embrace all Opportunities to do good to others: she would visit the sick;
exhort and comfort them; pray with them and for them: and many ways make it
appear that her Charity reached the Soul also, though it was not confined to it.

Not confined to the Soul, I say: for she was as forward to relieve the outward
wants of needy persons, as to promote the Spiritual Interest of any; whereas
many of all ranks and ages, oppress others and disable themselves by their
Luxuries and their Vanities: she contrariwise spared from her self, that she
might have the more to give to the necessitous, she did study the Art of
Almsgiving, and avoided idle expenses, to be rich in good works.

Her sweet and mild Disposition, her Charity to all the World, her readiness to
do good where she could, were the features of that Divine Image, whereby she
resembled her Heavenly Father. By these she indear'd herself to those that were
blessed with her converse, she was Righteous in the full and best sense, innocent
and beneficient.

Rejoice now Blessed Soul, with the good Angels in Heaven, thou that were a
good Angel here below! Let Charity, which upon Earth was thy delight and
employment, be thy reward above! enjoy now there that Infinite Goodness which
here made thee so good.

I run as a man that has yet a great way to go, and but a short time, you may
see that I take but here and there a drop out of the full stream: But now I
ascend up to the head Spring of it, her Godliness, whence issued all those
Virtues and all that Goodness I have mentioned: It was her Love to God, and her
desire to be with him, that made her Live Soberly and Righteously, in a manner
so excellent and so exemplary.

She was well Principled betimes, and upon a good Foundation she erected an
excellent Fabric, increasing in knowledge much faster than in years; but no
Wonder, the Divine Blessing could not be wanting where there was great
application and a persevering diligence to know God and his holy ways, she was
doubtless a great proficient in the Christian School; she read much and with
good observation: and though being wholly intent upon practice, she delighted
not in Controversies, yet she could not only give a good account of the Hope
that was in her, but also in many things convince gainsayers.

How unprofitably young people spend their time, and how much the Study of
Religion is neglected in this irreligious Age, is sufficiently known, though
not sufficiently lamented: but we have here before us an example able to Cure
this great Evil, if well attended to. She was always employed in that which was
useful to herself or others; in learning or in practicing the best of Christian
Instructions.

Books were her great delight and recreation; upon them and the poor she could
freely bestow what she seemed to grudg to her self, that those Books were not
Plays and Romances needs no telling, her Excellent Life declares it. No, they
were answerable to the great Piety of her conversation, they were Books of
Religion, and the best of that kind; such as grounded her in that Holy Faith
she professed in the best of Churches, such as taught and incited her to
discharge toward God and man, all the Dutys of a Christian; such as Ministered
to her Secret and Fervent Devotions.

As for the Books of Dissenters, which might have mislead or entangled her, she
was neither willing nor at leisure to spend any time upon them, she knew she
was right, and that the Church is the safest Guide: therefore her only care was
to follow its directions, and to see that her works might be answerable to her
Profession.

The hour of public Prayer, she expected with longing and great impatience,
and she as much Rejoiced when it came: and heartily joined with the Minister
who Morning and Evening, did offer the appointed Sacrifice in the Family: and,
whether in the Church or at home, she was always careful to be present and
praying at the beginning, That having (as she said) made her Penitent
Confession, the general Absolution might be particularly applied to her Soul.

She was not of those that count the Church-Offices to be long and tedious, she
rather thought they were too soon ended, and she would have been grieved had
any of them been omitted. 'Twas her delight to see God Worshipped, and to join
with others in that Blessed Employment; and as if her Heart had not been big
enough to entertain those Holy Public Devotions, which she so dearly loved,
she had often a Book of them in her hand, and one to be sure always about her.

How Passionately did she wish also for frequent opportunities of receiving the
Blessed Sacrament, and uniting her self in Heart and Mystery to her dearest
Savior, as much as is possible for us in this life; great was her gladness and
comfort when those happy seasons returned, great was her care to put on the
wedding garment, for that Heavenly Marriage Feast. Fasting, Tears and Prayers
were the Preparatives; a most Humble, Edifying and Devout Behavior were the
concomitants; and a great Love, fervor and gratitude were the subsequent
Effects of that most Solemn Act of Religion.

If from the Church and the Lords Table, we follow her to her private Closet,
there we shall find her every day spend much time in Reading and Meditation,
and much more yet upon her knees. No wonder, Blessed Soul, if thou were so
good, when thou did keep such Divine Company! being always with God, either
hearing him speak, or speaking to him; always conversing with Heaven, either in
thoughts or words!

We may yet advance farther to her Bedchamber. There we shall see her also
much upon her Knees, her Cheeks bedewed with Tears, her mouth filled with the
Praises of God, and her Heart with his Love, This is the first and the last
thing she does every day, Nay, days thus Religiously spent, cannot sufficiently
express that devout affection which her Soul is possessed withal; she defalks as
much as she can from the necessary refreshment of Nature; her rest is
interrupted with acts of adoration, and at midnight you may find her prostrate
upon the ground, watching to God while others sleep, and anticipating, as much
as may be, the State of Immortality, and the Blessed employment of Saints in
Heaven.

No wonder now, if so much Grace inspired that Soul which so much dwelt with
God! No wonder if her life and example be bright and luminous, as was Moses's
face, when she like him, so long conversed with God! and no wonder if God took
her to himself betimes, when she like Enoch walked so close with him, and with
so Zealous an assiduity.

Would you think it Christians, if I had not discovered it before, that I have
been reading the Life of a young person, of one that died under twenty? would
you not rather think that I have been making a Collection of all that might be
praiseworthy in the Lives of many aged good Christians?

I profess I have read the lives of the long Lived Fathers of the Desert; there
are in them some things very extraordinary, and rather to be wondered at than
imitated, but the Life and example of this our younger Saint, is far more
instructive and edifying than all theirs. She lived under no other engagement
than her Baptismal Vows, she converst freely with others, and as to the actions
of a civil Life, she willingly complied with Innocent Customs, there was in her
nothing extraordinary but an extraordinary goodness and piety.

And yet it may pass for a thing very singular and hardly to be matched, that
where there was so great a Virtue, such an elevation of mind, there should be
no contempt of others, no Pride, no desire to be observed; nothing but
lowliness and the greatest sincerity, she did as St. Gregory tells of his
Sister, (...). Seek to approve herself only to him who sees in Secret, and she
could have wished no man had took notice of what she did for God alone. Euge
bone serve, well done good and faithful Servant, was all the commendation she
aimed at, and if, notwithstanding her Light did shine before men, it was that
only God might be glorified.

Great things have been written of the zeal of retutning Penitents, but so much
fervor with so little Guilt, such an active Piety with so much innocence has
seldom been seen, her Virtue might have been a rich Ornament for gray hairs:
but that she should thus entirely devote herself to God in the prime of her
age, when she might have enjoyed all Humane pleasures, and was as likely to
live long as any one alive: is much to be admired and remembered.

But as she was soon ripe and come to perfection, so God soon took her from
among the chaff, Mat. 3. 12. and gathered her with his wheat into his garner.
She went out into her Lords Vinyard, and there began to work from break a day,
therefore he would not suffer her after such early diligence, to bear also the
brunt and the heat of the day, he paid her her wages before Noon, and dismissed
her to rest, she started for the Race, as soon as she had entered it, and she
ran with great speed, and therefore soon ended her course, and betimes received
the Crown.

How she finished her Christian Course will easily be guest by what I have
already said of its beginning and progress: it could not be with her, as with
many remiss Christians, who, when they approach the confines of Death, begin to
mend their pace, and to be very serious and active: but she that had lived
always as if she had been dying, could not but die as she had lived.

Her Body being much a stranger to her, and her Soul familiar with God, and
always delighted with Spiritual Pleasures: she therefore took little Notice of
her natural pains and decays: and her infirmities could not oblige her to omit
any thing of her wonted Devotions, insomuch that but little before her last
Agony, she was two hours upon her knees, taking her farewell of the World, and
making her approaches to God in that Devout, Humble posture, she went an even
constant pace, and died to God as she had lived to him.

And now, to her I may apply Philo's Observation, he finds that Abraham is the
first in Scripture called an old man, Genesis 25. 8. not but that the Patriarchs
before him lived much longer, but because (says he) Age should be reckoned by
Wisdom and Piety, not by years, by this account we may find also that this young
Lady lived long and died full of years, as the Patriach did, her time which she
did spend so Religiously to gain blissful Eternity cannot be said to have been
short.

And what? shall we now mourn because she is gone from us, or shall we Joy
because she is with God? shall we mourn because her Absence is a grievous loss:
or rejoice because her Presence has been a great and pleasant advantage?
doubtless a mixture of those two passions may here find a place. Sed salva
pietate, fidei gaudia praeferamus (said St. Paulinus) but without prejudice to
Human affection, the joys of Religion should prevail over the Sorrows of
Nature, Ps. 116. 15. precious in the Sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints: that which God is delighted with, should not be altogether afflictive
to us.

St. Chrysostom. (...), we should not prosecute with sadness and tears the death
of Holy Persons, but rather with Hymns and Acclamations, cum Canticis and
Psallentium vocibus as it was the manner of ancient Christians, and even the
Decree of a great Council, 3 d. Toled. Rejoicing with them that Rejoice,
congratuling their great Happiness, because if we follow their Examples; we
shall with them be numbered with the Saints of God in Glory Everlasting.

FINIS.

