THE COMPLETE CLARK, AND SCRIVENERS GUIDE. Containing Exact DRAUGHTS AND
PRESIDENTS Of all manner of Assurances and Instruments now in use: As they were
penned and perfected by diverse Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and Great
Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern. WHEREUNTO IS ALSO ADDED A CONCORDANCE of
years, from the time of King Richard the third until this present; very
useful for Conveyancers and others.

With an exact Alphabeticall Table, whereby any of the said Presidents may be
easily found out.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for H. Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, N. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill, J. Place at
Furnivals Inn Gate in Holborne, and R. Wingate, at the Golden Hind in
Chancery Lane, 1655.

To the READER.
WHat Suits, Vexations, and Losses, do frequently happen to many that have weak
and imperfect Conveyances, every days sad experience does too clearly
demonstrate: And what quiet content and security they enjoy, that have
substantial and well executed Assurances, is best known to those that have
them. And because that others may partake of that happy Condition, great pains
and care has been taken to collect and gather some choice Draughts of
Conveyances and Instruments of all sorts; Such as have been made by the advice
of several Men of great Learning and sound Judgments; Famous in the Raigns of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, the late King, and in this present Age; some
whereof now sit in the Seats of Justice, whose Advice and Counsel cannot now be
made use of; and such Care has been taken in the Composing of them, that a man
may readily find out what Conveyance, Instrument, Limitation, Proviso, Clause,
Condition, or Covenant, he has occasion to use, or desires to be satisfied in
(a Method not so exactly observed in Books of this nature:) And these
Presidents may serve, not only to inform and satisfy the younger Practitioner;
But also to ease and confirm the more Ancient: And will be very useful and
profitable to all men.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Draughts and Copies coming from several hands, and at several times,
some of them are not so orderly placed under their Titles as was intended: And
diverse of those Books being amended, and interlined by Counsel, and some of
those Amendments and Interliniations, being very dark and obscure, many
literal and some verbal Errors have been occasioned thereby; But the knowing
Clark as he will soon find them, so he may as easily correct them: Which is
desired by him, that would have no errors committed by his Press, if it were
possible.

A TABLE OR CONCORDANCE of years, from the beginning of the Reign of King
Richard the third, until the last year of the Reign of the late King Charles,
whereby may be found the year of our Lord, and the year of the Reign of each
King and Queen.
An. Dom. An. Rich. 3 1483 1 1484 2 1485 3 An. Dom. An. Hen. 7. 1485 1 1486 2
1487 3 1488 4 1489 5 1490 6 1491 7 1492 8 1493 9 1494 10 1495 11 1496 12 1497
13 1498 14 1499 15 1500 16 1501 17 1502 18 1503 19 1504 20 1505 21 1506 22 1507
23 1508 24 An: Dom: An: Hen: 8. 1509 1 1510 2 1511 3 1512 4 1513 5 1514 6 1515
7 1516 8 1517 9 1518 10 1519 11 1520 12 1521 13 1522 14 1523 15 1524 16 1525 17
1526 18 1527 19 1528 20 1529 21 1530 22 1531 23 1532 24 1533 25 1534 26 1535 27
1536 28 1537 29 1538 30 1539 31 1540 32 1541 33 1542 34 1543 35 1544 36 1545 37
1546 38 An. Dom. An. Ed. 6. 1546 1 1547 2 1548 3 1549 4 1550 5 1551 6 1552 7
An: Dom: An: Marie. 1553 1 An: Dom: An: P: and M. 1554 2 1555 3 1556 4 1557 5
1558 6 An: Dom: An: Eliz. 1558 1 1559 1 1560 2 1561 3 1562 4 1563 5 1564 6 1565
7 1566 8 1567 9 1568 10 1569 11 1570 12 1571 13 1572 14 1573 15 1574 16 1575 17
1576 18 1477 19 1578 20 1579 21 1580 22 1581 23 1582 24 1583 25 1584 26 1585 27
1586 28 1587 29 1588 30 1589 31 1590 32 1591 33 1592 34 1593 35 1594 36 1595 37
1596 38 1597 39 1598 40 1599 41 1600 42 1601 43 1602 44 1602 45 An: Dom: An:
Jac. 1603 1 1604 2 1605 3 1606 4 1607 5 1608 6 1609 7 1610 8 1611 9 1612 10
1613 11 1614 12 1615 13 1616 14 1617 15 1618 16 1619 17 1620 18 1621 19 1622 20
1623 21 1624 22 An: Dom: An: Car. 1625 1 1626 2 1627 3 1628 4 1629 5 1630 6
1631 7 1632 8 1633 9 1634 10 1635 11 1636 12 1637 13 1638 14 1639 15 1640 16
1641 17 1642 18 1643 19 1644 20 1645 21 1646 22 1647 23 1648 24 1649 1650

These Books following are Printed for Henry Twyford, and Partners, and are to
be sold at his Shop in Vine Court Middle Temple.
THe Complete Attorney, or the Practick part of the Law. A Learned Treatise of
Wards and Liveries by Sir James Ley Knight. The life of the Apostle St. Paul.
Soliloquies, Meditations, and Prayers, of St. Bonaventure. The discontented
Colonel by Sir John Sucklin. The European Mercury. The humble Remonstrance of
Sir John Stawell. Hebdoma Magna, or the Great week of Christ's Passion. Sir
Rober Brooks Reading on the Statute of Limitations. Kitchins Jurisdictions of
Courts Leet, Courts Baron, etc. Richard Brownlow Esquire; Prothonotary of the Court
of Common Pleas. His Reports, the first and second part. His Declarations and
Pleadings English. His Judicial Writs. Plowdens Abridgment. Abridgment of Lord
Cooks Littleton. Abridgment of Paultons Statutes at large, by Edmund Wingate
Esquire; The Books for the drawing up of all manner of Judgments. The Body of Law
by Edmund Wingate Esquire; The Marrow of Law, or the second part of the Faithful
Councellor. Office and duty of Executors in 80. Lay-mans Lawyer, or the second
part of the Practick part of the Law. A Commentary on the Original Writs, by
William Hughes Esquire; Stevensons Poems. The Anabaptists Anatomised in a Dispute
between Mr. Crag against Mr. Tombs. Caesar's Commentaries, with Sir Clement
Edmunds Observations. The Complete Clark and Scriveners Guide, being the exact
Form* of all manner of Conveyances and Instruments now in use: as they were
penned by Learned Counsel, both Ancient and Modern.
THE COMPLETE CLERK, AND SCRIVENERS GUIDE. BEING Exact Draughts of all manner
of Assurances, and Instruments now in Use; As they were penned, and perfected,
by diverse Eminent Judges, and Sergeants at LAW; and learned Council, both
Ancient and Modern.
A Grant of an Annuity, penned by Mr. Edmund Plowden.
THIS Indenture made the day of December, in the twentieth year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, etc. Between John Ives of
great Milton in the County of Oxon, Yeoman, and William Ives Son, and Heir
apparent of the said John of the one part; And Richard Dunt of Henley upon
Thames, in the said Counry of Oxon, yeoman, on the other part; witnesses that
the said John Ives, and William Ives, for, and in consideration of the sum of
threescore pounds of lawful money of England, to them before the ensealing of
these Presents by the said Rich: Dunt, well and truly contented and paid,
whereof, and wherewith they acknowledged themselves satisfied, and thereof do by
these Presents fully acquit, and discharge the said Richard Dunt his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, by these presents have given and granted, and by
these presents for them, and their Heirs, do give and grant to the said Richard
Dunt one Annuity or yearly Rent of six pounds, of good and lawfvll money of
England, issuing, and going out of all those Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, set, lying, and being in Milton aforesaid; now, or late in the
Tenure and Occupation of the said John Ives, or his Assigns, and out of all
other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, of them the said John and
William, or either of them, in Milton aforesaid, Chilworth and Haselley in the
said County of Oxon; To have, and to hold, pertain and enjoy the said Annuity
or yearly Rent of six pounds, and every parcel thereof to the said Richard
Dunt; his Heirs and Assigns for ever: to the only use and behoof of the said
Richard Dunt, his Heirs and Assigns for ever; at the Feast of the Circumcision
of our Lord God, and the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, by even portions
yearly to be paid: And if it happen the said yearly Rent of six pound, or any
part thereof, to be behind, and unpaid, after any of the said Feasts or days of
payment, on which as is aforesaid it ought to be paid: Then it shall be lawful
to the said Richard, his Heirs and Assigns, into the said Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and other the Premises, and into every part thereof, to enter
and distrain, and the Distresses there found, to lead, drive, and carry away,
impound, and detain, until he, or they shall be of the said Annuity or yearly
Rent so being behind, and the Arrearages thereof, if any be fully satisfied,
contented, and paid; Of which Annuity or yearly Rent of six pounds, the said
John, and William Ives have put in peaceable Possession amd Seisin, the said
Richard Dunt by delivering unto him four pence of lawful English money in the
name of Seisin, at the time of the delivery of these presents: And the said
John Ives, and William Ives, for them, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and for their Executors and Administrators, of either of them,
do covenant, promise, and grant by these presents, to, and with the said
Richard Dunt, his Heirs. Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, that they the
said John, and William are and be, or that one of them is, and stands seized
of, and in the Messuages, Lands Tenements, and Hereditaments in Milton,
Chilworth, and Haselley aforesaid, at the time of the delivery of these
presents of the clear yearly value of twenty pounds over and above all Charges
and Reprises, of a g^od perfect and lawful Estate in Fee-simple, and that they
have, or one of them has full power and lawful authority to charge the same
with the said Annuity or yearly Rent of six pounds in manner aforesaid, and
that the same Lands and Tenements shall be at all times hereafter overt and
sufficient to the Distresses of the said Richard Dunt, his Heirs and Assigns,
when they shall come to distrain for the said Rent and every part thereof then
behind. And that they the said John and William, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, shall, and will at all times hereafter, from time
to time keep, acquit, discharge, or save harmless, the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, and other the Premises, and every part thereof;
of, and from all manner of former Bargain, Sale, Jointure, Dower, Statute,
Lease and all other Title, charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, in such manner
and sort, that the said Richard Dunt, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and every
of them shall, and may have and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly Rent of six
pounds, and every parcel thereof, peaceably and quietly, without any lawful
let, or interruption of any person whatsoever. And also that the said John, and
William Ives and their Heirs shall, and will at all times hereafter, at the
reasonable request of the said Richard Dunt, his Heirs and Assigns may do, and
suffer, or cause to be made, done, and suffered, all and every such further Act
and Acts, thing and things in the Law whatsoever, for the further assurance and
sure making of the said Annuity or yearly Rent of six pounds to the said
Richard Dunt, his Heirs and Assigns, as shall be reasonably devised by the said
Richard, his Heirs or Assigns, or by his, or their learned Council, at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said John, and William Ives, their Heirs or
Assigns. Provided always, and it is covenanted, granted, and agreed between
the said parties, for them, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, by
these presenrs, that if the said John Ives, and William Ives, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them shall well, and truly
content and pay, or cause to be well and truly contented, and paid to the said
Richard Dunt, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at, or in the
now dwelling house of the said Richard Dunt in Henley aforesaid, in and upon
the Eve of the Feast Day of the Circumcision of our Lord God, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1583. Between the hours of one and three of the Clock in
the afternoon of the same day, the sum of forty pounds of good and lawful money
of England, at one whole and entire payment, that then, and from thence forth,
the said Annuity or yearly Rent of six pounds and every parcel thereof, shall
cease, determine, and be extinguished for ever, and that then the said Richard
Dunt, his Heirs and Assigns shall deliver up to the said John Ives, and William
Ives their Heirs or Assigns, so paying the said sum of forty pounds, this
present Deed, and all other Assurances concerning the same Annuity to be
cancelled, and made void any thing aforesaid, or other matter whatsoever to the
contrary notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

An Annuity with power of Revocation.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. M. of S. etc. of the one part, and N. M.
one of the younger Sons of the said R. M. etc. of the other part, witnesses
that the said R. M. as well by force, virtue, and power, and according to the
tenor and liberty of one Proviso, or clause in that behalf mentioned or
specified, in one pair of Indentures, bearing date, etc. made betwixt the said
R. M. of the one part, T. R. of, etc. of the other part, as otherwise, has
given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presents does by the liberty and
power aforesaid, give, grant, and confirm unto the said N. M. and his Assigns,
one annual or yearly Rent of ten pounds of good and lawful money of England,
to be issuing out of all and singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments of the said R. M. situate, lying, and being in D. or else where,
in the County of C. To have and to hold the said annual, or yearly rent of ten
pounds unto the said N. M. and his Assigns, during his natural life, the same
to be paid at the two several Feast-daies of the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, and Saint Michael the Archangel, by even and equal portions; The
first payment thereof to begin at such of the said Feasts as shall first happen,
next after the decease of the said R. M. And if it shall happen the said
Annuity, or annual rent of ten pounds, or any part thereof to be behind, or
unpaid in part, or in all, in which it ought to be paid as aforesaid (being
lawfully demanded) that then, and so often it shall and may be lawful to, and
for the said N. M. and his Assigns, into any Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments of the said R. M. or into any part or parcel thereof, to enter
and distrain for the said Annuity, or annual rent of ten pounds, or such part
thereof, as shall so happen to be behind, arrear, and unpaid, and the Distress
or Distresses there found, to take, drive, chase, lead or carry away, and with
him, or them, to detain, hold, and keep, until he the said N. M. of the said
Annuity or annual rent of ten pounds, with the Arrearages thereof (if any such
be) shall be fully satisfied and paid. Provided nevertheless and upon
condition, that if the said R. M. shall at any time during his natural life,
pay or tender unto the said N. M. or to any other person, or persons the sum of
twelve pence, or more, of lawful English money, with intent and of purpose to
revoke, make frustrate, or make void the said Annual Rent or the grant thereof,
that then and from thence forth this present Deed and all, and every the Gift,
Grant, and Limitation of the Rent aforesaid; And the said annual or yearly
Rent, so by these presents given, granted, or mentioned to be granted; shall
cease and be void frustrate and of no further force or effect in the Law, any
thing in these presents contained to the contrary, in any wise notwithanding.
In witness, etc.

An Annuity by Deed Pol.
TO all Christian people to whom these presents shall come; A. B. of C. in the
County of S. Esquire, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye
that the said A. B. for diverse good causes and considerations him thereunto
moving, has given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presents does give,
grant, and confirm unto E. F. of, etc. One Annuity or annual rent of five
pounds, of lawful money of England, to be well and truly paid unto the said E.
F. and his Assigns, from and immediately after the decease of the said A. B. out
of all, and singular that, and those the Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, with
their, and every of their several, and respective Appurtenances, situate,
lying, and being in P. late in the possession of L. M. called, or known by the
name of H. Tenement, to have, and to hold, receive, perceive, and take the said
Annuity, or annual rent of 5 l. by the year, to him the said E. F. and his
Assigns, immediately after the decease of the said A. B. for, and during the
term of sixty years, if he the said E. F. so long shall live; The same to be
had, taken, received, and paid by, and to him the said E. F. and his Assigns,
at the Feast-daies of Saint Martin the Bishop in Winter, and Pentecost, by even
and equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin and take commencement at
such of the said Feasts as shall first, and next happen after the death and
decease of the said A. B. with a clause of distress, as in the last mentioned
Grant.

A Rentcharge for Service done, and to be done, with a Proviso of Revocation.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. B. of etc. of the one part, and C. D. of
the other part; witnesses that the said A. B. for, and in consideration of the
good and faithful Service by the said C D. already done, and hereafter to be
done to the said A. B. has given, granted, and confirmed, and by these
presents for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, does give,
grant, and confirm unto the said C. D. one Annuity, or yearly rent of five
pounds to be issuing, payable, and going out of all and singular Messuages,
Cottages, Mills, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, situate, lying, and
being within the Towns, Town-ships, Feilds, Hamlets, and Territories of L in
the County of S. To have, hold, and yearly to receive, perceive, and take the
said Annuity, or annual rent of five pounds, yearly, from, and immediately
after the making thereof, for, and during the term of his natural life, at the
Feasts of etc. with a clause of distress as before. Of which Annuity, or
annual rent, he the said A. B. has put the said C. D. in full and peaceable
possession and Seisin by the payment of six pence, of good and lawful money of
England, for, and in the name of Seisin, and as part of the said Annuity or
annual Rentcharge of 5. l. before by these presents granted as aforesaid: And
the said A. B. does covenant and grant, to, and with the said C. D. that he the
said A. B. at the time of the sealing, and delivery of these presents, has
full power, good, and lawful Estate and authority, to charge the said
Messuages, Cottages, Mills, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with all and
singular their Appurtenances before mentioned, and every part and parcel
thereof, with the payment of the said Annuity or annual rent of five pounds, in
manner and form aforesaid: And that the said Messuages, Cottages, Mills, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, and every part, and parcel thereof, now are, and
so shall remain, and continue and be, during the term of the natural life of
the said C. D. as aforesaid, overt, chargable, sufficient, and liable to, and
for the Distress of the said C. D. for the non-payment of the said Annuity or
annual Rentcharge of the five pounds, and for the Arrearages thereof, if any
shall fortune to be: And further that he the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns,
and all, and every other person or persons, which now are or hereafter shall be
seized of the said Messuages, Cottages etc. and of every, or any part or
parcel thereof, shall and will at all, and every time, and times, during the
natural life of the said C. D. pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. the
said Annuity, or annual rent of five pounds, at the times before in these
presents limited, according to the tenor, true intent, and meaning thereof.
Provided always and nevertheless upon condition, that if he the said C. D.
shall, or do at any time, or times hereafter, during the term of the natural
life of the said A. B. refuse or deny to serve the said A. B. in such
convenient, honest, and reasonable Service, or otherwise at any time during the
life of the said A. B. shall leave or depart out of the Service of the said A.
B. without the consent of the said A. B. under the hand and Seal of the said A.
B. first had and obtained: That then, and immediately after such refusal,
denial, leaving, or departure of the said A. B. as well this present Deed, as
also all, and every clause, matter, or thing therein contained, shall be utterly
void, frustrate, and of none effect in the Law, and also that then, and from
thenceforth, the said Annuity or annual Rentcharge of five pounds, shall cease
and determine, and be no longer payable in any wise, any thing before in these
presents contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

A Grant of an Annuity, to a man and his Wife during their lives, issuing out
of Lands passed by way of a Fine and Recovery.
THis Indenture, etc. Between Sir W. H. of St. J. in the County of M. Knight,
on the one part, and T. A. Citizen and Habardasher of L. and A. his wife of the
other part, witnesses that the said Sir W. H. for, and in consideration of the
sum of etc. whereof etc. has given and granted, and by these presents does give
and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, unto the said T.
A. and A. his wife, one Annuity of a hundred pounds, of etc. by the year, by
the said Sir W. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, from
henceforth yearly to be paid to the said T. and A. and their Assigns, by, and
during the term of the natural lives of the said T. and A. and the life of the
longest liver of them, at, or in the Mansion house of the said T. situate etc.
at two equal payments in every year, in manner and form following, that is to
say, on the four and twentieth of December, or on the fortieth day next after
the same twenty fourth of December, the sum of fifty pounds of etc. and on the
twenty fourth of June, or on the fortieth day etc. the like sum of fifty pounds
of etc. The first payment thereof to begin and to be made on the twenty fourth
of December, next etc. or on the fortieth day, etc. and so from thenceforth the
said annuity to have continuance, and to be yearly paid to the said T. and A.
and their Assigns, upon the said days, and within the said times, and at the
said place, during the natural lives of the said T. and A. and the life of the
longest liver of them: And the said Sir W. H. does covenant to, and with the
said T. and A. etc. That if and as often as it shall happen the said Annuity of
a hundred pounds, or any part or parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid, on, or
after the said twenty fourth of December, or twenty fourth of June, or on, or
after either of them, that then, and so often as that shall happen, during the
natural lives of the said T. and A. the said Sir W. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, shall forfeit and lose to the said T. and A. and their Assigns
the sum of twenty Marks of etc. in the name of a Pain, and thereof shall make
full and true payment, to the said T. and A. or their Assigns, with that part
of the said Annuity of etc. whereof default shall be made as aforesaid: And for
the consideration aforesaid, and for a good and certain surety and assurance to
be had and made to the said T. and A. of, and for the said Annuity of etc. to
them the said T. and A. well and truly to be paid every year, during the
natural lives of the said T. and A. and the life of the longest liver of them,
according to the effect and true meaning of these presents: The said Sir W* H.
for him, his Heirs, and Assigns, does covenant etc. to, and with the said T. A.
his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that he the said Sir W. H. before the
tenth day of June next ensuing etc. by fine or fines, to be levied, with
Proclamations, before the Justice of the Queens Majesty's Court of Common Pleas
at Westminster, according to the order and course of the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, between the said T. A. and the said A. his wife, Plaintiffs, and
the said Sir W. H. Deforceant, shall and will recognize and acknowledge all
that Message or Tenement, now in the occupation of the said Sir W. H. or his
Farmers, or Tenants, and all Barns etc. thereunto belonging, or occupied,
demised, or leased to, or with the same: And all those Lands etc. and all and
singular other the Messuages etc. of the said Sir W. in the Towns, Feilds,
Parishes, and Hamlets, of etc. in the County of M. by such convenient name, or
names as are, or shall be devised to be the right of the said T. A. as those
which the said T. A. and A. shall have of the gift of the said Sir W. H. and
the same by the said Fine shall remise, and quit-claim from him the said Sir W.
and his Heirs, to the said T. and A. and the Heirs of the said T. for ever: And
further the said Sir W. H. shall by the same Fine, grant for him and his Heirs,
that he shall warrant the Premises with the Appurteuances to the said T. and
A. and to the Heirs of the said T. against him the said Sir W. and his Heirs
for ever; Which said Fine and Fines, and all, and every other Fines to be
levied by the said Sir W. to the said T. and A. and the Heirs of the said T. or
in any other manner of the said Premises with the Appurtenances, or of any
part, or parcel thereof before the said tenth of June next etc. by the name, or
names aforesaid, or by any other name or names whatsoever, shall be to the use
and behoof of the said T. A. and A. his wife, and of the Heirs of the said T.
A. until a perfect recovery may be had of the Premises, against the said T.
A. and A. by R. S. and R. H. And the said T. A. for himself, and for the said
A. his wife, and for the Heirs and Assigns of him the said T. covenanteth with
the said Sir W. H. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents: that after the said
Fine, or Fines, had and levied as aforesaid, he the said T. and the said A. his
wife, shall, and will suffer the said R. S. and R. H. to sue and prosecute one
Writ of Entry Sur disseisin in le post, before the said Justices of her
Majesty's said Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, against the said T. A. and
A. his wife, of all and singular the said Lands and Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, and all, and singular other the Premises with the
Appurtenances, by such convenient names and quantities, as by the said Sir W.
his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or by his or their Council learned,
shall be reasonably devised or advised; in, and by which Writ of Entry Sur
desseisin le post, so to be brought, the said T. A. and A. his wife, shall
appear and vouch to warranty the said Sir W. H. who shall appear and enter into
warranty, and vouch to warranty the common Vouchee, who after his entry into
the Warranty and Imparlance being had, shall make default, to the end one
common Recovery may be had, and prosecuted in all things, according to the
usual order, and form of common Recoveries for Assurances of Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, in such cases used and accustomed; And that the same
Recovery shall in due form of Law be executed accordingly: And it is witnessed,
declared covenanted, condescended, and fully agreed by, and between the said
parties, to these presents, that the said Recovery so to be had, aad
prosecuted, and all other Recoveries of the Premises, or of any part, or
parcel thereof, between the said parties, or any of them, before the said tenth
of June, next etc. and the full execution of them, and every of them. And also
the said Fine, and Fines after the said Recovery so had, or suffered; And also
all and singular other Fines, and Recoveries whatsoever, heretofore, had,
levied, acknowledged, or suffered, or to be had etc. of the said Premises, or
of any part thereof, by what name, or names soever, shall be, and shall be
adjudged, and taken to be to the uses, and intents, and purposes hereafter, in
these Presents mentioned, limited, and expressed, and to none other use,
purpose, or intent. That is to say, unto the use, and behoof of the said Sir W.
H. and of his Heirs and Assigns, until default shall be made in payment of the
said Annuity of etc. before, by these presents granted as aforesaid, or of any
part thereof, contrary to the true meaning of these presents: And from, and
immediately after such default in payment h^d, and made as aforesaid; Then the
said Fines, Recoveries, and other the Assurances aforesaid, shall be, and shall
be adjudged, and taken, to be to the only and proper use, and behoof of the
said T. and A. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said T. for ever, and to
none other use, purpose, or intent, any before in these presents contained, or
any other matter, or thing whatsoever, to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And the said Sir W. for him, his Heirs, and Assigns,
covenanteth with the said T: and A. etc. in form etc. viz. That all, and
singular the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and all, and
singular other the Premises, with all, and singular their Appurtenances, from,
and after any default of payment happening, contrary to the tenor and effect of
these presents, of, or in the said Annuity, or any part, or parcel thereof,
shall be, and remain unto the said T. and A. and to the Heirs and Assigns of
the said T. for ever clear, and free discharged, and exonerated, and acquitted,
or otherwise by the said Sir W. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, from
time to time, and at all times, sufficiently save harmless, and from all and
singular Farms, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Charges, Estates, Bonds,
Debts, Titles, Fine, and Fines for alienation, by these presents, Joyntures,
Dowers, Title of Dower, Amerciaments, Arrearages of Rents, and all other
Encumbrances whatsoever: The chief Rents and Services to be due and payable to
the chief Lord, or Lords, of the Fee, or Fees of the Premises, in respect of
their Seigniories only; and all Leases made of the Premises, or of any part,
or parcel thereof, for term of three lives, or one and twenty years, whereupon
the old and accustomed Rents, or more, are reserved, and shall be yearly
payable, after such default made to the said T. and A. and the Heirs of the
said T. always exempted and fore-prised. And further the said Sir W. H.
covenanteth etc. that if it shall fortune default to be made contrary to the
tenor; purpose, form, and effect of these presents, of, or in payment of the
said Annuity etc. that then, and at the time of such default made, and from
thenceforth for ever the said Premises shall be, or lawfully may be, and
continue to the said T. and A. and to the Heirs of the said T. for ever, of the
full and clear yearly value of etc. over and above all Charges and Reprises:
And that the same be now so holden and farmed. And further that then, and for
ever after the time of any such default so happening, in payment of the said
Annuity, the said T. and A. and the Heirs of the said T. for ever, shall, or
may lawfully and quietly have, hold, and enjoy, all and singular the said
Manors etc. And then also, and from thenceforth shall, or may lawfully and
quietly have, take, perceive, receive, and enjoy all, and singular the Rents,
Revenues, Issues, and Profits thereof, and of every part thereof, to the only use
of the said T. and A. and of the Heirs of the said T. for ever, without let,
molestation, Action, Suit, Entry, disturbance, or interruption of the said Sir
W. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them; And without any lawful Action etc. of
any other person or persons whatsoever, except before excepted: And also the
said Sir W. covenanteth etc. that he the said Sir W. his Heirs or Assigns,
within six months next, after any default made, contrary to the form and effect
of these presents, of, or in any payment of the said Annuity, or of any part
thereof, shall, and will, well and safely deliver, or cause to be delivered to
the said T. and A. their Heirs and Assigns, or to some of them, at the now
Mansion house etc. All and singular such Deeds, Charters, Evidences, Books of
Survey, Terieers, Writings, and Monuments, concerning the Premises only or
only any part or parcel thereof, or which the said Sir W. now has, or which he
or his Heirs then shall have, without Suit in the Law may then get, or come by
together with true Copies of all other Writings etc. which do concern the
Premises, or any part thereof, jointly with any other Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments.

Provided always, that if the said Sir W. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, shall happen not to make true payment, according to the tenor
and true meaning above in these presents declared, of the said Annuity etc. and
of all sums of money to be forfeited Nomine poene as aforesaid, and of every
part and parcel of them, but shall fail and make default in payment of the
same, or any part thereof, contrary to the form and effect of these presents: So
that the said T. and A. or the Survivor of them, or their Heirs, or Assigns, or
the Heirs and Assigns of either of them, by reason of the same default, then
shall, or may lawfully from thenceforth possess, enjoy, receive, and take, all
and singular the Rents, Revenues, Issues and Profits, of all and singular the
Premises, with all and singular the Appurtenances, according to the intent and
true meaning above in these presents specified and declared; That then the said
Annuity above granted to the said T. and A. and the longer liver of them, shall
cease, determine, and be no longer paid: And moreover the said Sir W.
covenanteth etc: that he the said Sir W. his Heirs and Assigns, and Dame N. now
wife of the said Sir W. and all, and every other person, or persons (other then
such Leases as shall lawfully claim, for, and by reason of their Leases and
Estates to be excepted) which have, or shall have, or shall, or may lawfully
claim to have any Estate, Right, Title, or Interest, of, in, or to the said
Premises with their Appurtenances, or any part thereof, shall, and will not
only at all times, during five years next ensuing the date hereof, upon
reasonable request, make, do, knowledge, and suffer, and cause etc. all and
every such act, and acts, thing, and things, as by the said T. and A. or either
of them, or the Heirs or Assigns of the said T. or by their, or any of their
Council learned in the Law, shall be lawfully demised, or advised, for the
further assurance, surety, conveyance, and sure making of all, and singular the
said Manors etc. to be had, conveyed, and made sure to the said T. and A. and
to the Heirs and Assigns of the said T. to the only use of the said T. and A.
and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said T. for ever, according to the true
meaning of these presents, and upon the conditions therein contained, and not
otherwise: But also at all times during seven years next after any default
made, contrary to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, of, or in
payment of the said Annuity, shall, and will, at, and upon the reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said T. and A. or one
of them etc. make, do, acknowledge etc. all and every such lawful and
reasonable act, etc. as the said T. etc. shall devise etc. for the further
assurance of all and singular the said Manors etc. to be had, conveyed, and
made sure to the said T. and A. and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said T. for
the only use and behoof of the said T. and A. and of the Heirs and Assigns of
the said T. for ever, without any manner of or defeasance whatsoever: And also
that he the said Sir W. his Heirs, or Assigns within one year next ensuing the
date hereof, shall, and will deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said T.
A. or the Survivors of them, or to the Heirs or Assigns of the said T. annd A.
at the now Mansion etc. one Book of a plain and perfect Survey of all the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services, and Hereditaments, and of all and
other the Premises with their Appurtenances, containing, and expressing the
names of the Tenants and Occupiers of the Land, and their Estates, and the
yearly Rents plainly and legibly written: And the said T. A. for himself and
the said A. his Wife, covenanteth etc. that they the said T. and A. or their
Assigns, or the Survivor of them, or his, or her Assigns, upon the receipt of
every payment of the said Annuity, or sums forfeited Nomine poene, to them, or
any of them hereafter to be made, according to the tenor and true meaning of
these presents, shall and will upon request therefore to be made, deliver a
Writing under their hands, or under the hands of the Survivor of them, plainly
testifying and reporting the same receipt and payment, from time to time, so
often as the said T. and A. or their Assigns, or the Survivors of them, or his,
or her Assigns shall receive any such payment. In witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity by a Lease to his Lord, issuing out of a Tenement to him
demised, with Clause of Distress, and Covenant that the House shall stand
over, and liable to Distress.
TO all to whom this present Writing shall come, G. P. of S. in the County of
E. Esquire, sends greeting; Whereas E. H. Citizen and Skinner of L. by his
Indenture of Lease, dated the sixth of February, has granted demised, and
letten to Farm to me the said G. all that Message etc. and all Shops etc.
situate in Bredstreet etc. To hold from the Feast of the Annunciation etc. now
next coming, by and during the term of one and twenty years, from thence etc.
As by the said Indenture etc. which Indenture of Lease was sealed and delivered
by the said E. H. unto the said G. P. before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents by the said G. And the said G. by virtue of the same Indenture,
was possessed of the said Message, or Tenement.

Know ye that I the said G. for very good and special causes and
considerations, him moving, has given and granted, and by these Presents, for
him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does give and grant unto the
said Annuity, or annual rent of thirty pounds of etc. to be issuing and
levying out of, and upon the said Message, or Tenement, and other the
Premises with their Appurtenances; To have, take, perceive, and receive the
said Annuity, or annual rent of etc. to the said E. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, yearly, for, and during all the said term of one
and twenty yerrs, or for so long time as the said G. P. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, shall, or may occupy and enjoy the said Message,
or Tenement, by virtue of the said Indenture of Lease, at the Feasts of Saint
Michael etc. and the Annunciation etc. or within the space of eight and twenty
days, next after every of the same Feast-daies, yearly to be paid by equal
portions during the said term; The first payment thereof to begin at the Feast
of Saint Michael etc. now next coming: And if it shall, the said Annuity, or
annual rent of thirty pounds, or any part thereof, to be behind and unpaid, by
the space of eight and twenty days after any of the said Feast-daies* wherein
the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, it being first lawfully demanded at the
said Message, or Tenement, that then it shall be lawful to, and for the said
E. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, into the said Message, or
Tenement, with the Appurtenances to enter and distrain; And all and every the
Distress, and Distresses there found, lawfully to bear, drive, and carry away,
and with them to hold and keep, until the said Annuity, and yearly rent, and
all Arrearage thereof; And of all their costs and damages in that behalf
sustained, they be fully paid and satisfied: And the said G. P. covenanteth
etc. That the said Message and Tenement with the Appurtenances, for any act,
or thing, to be done, caused procured, or agreed unto by the said G. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or by any other person, or persons, by
his, or their means, tiltle, or shall be liable and to all and every Distress
and Distresses of the said E. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from
time to time, as often as any occasion thereof shall be given, during the said
term of one and twenty years In witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity to a Woman for her life, after the decease of her
Husband, with a Clause to enter and detain.
TO all persons to whom this present Writing shall come, C. B. of S. in the
County of B. sends greeting; Know ye that I the said C. B. for and in
consideration of fifty pounds to me paid by W. D. Dean of Windsor, in marriage
with R. D. Daughter of the said W. D. and R. B. Son and Heir of me; these C. B.
have given and granted, and by this my present Writing, do confirm to the said
W. D. and to H. D. and W. D. and their Assigns, one Annuity or annual rent of
20 l. of lawful money of England, to be issuing out of the Manor, or Capital
Message, called West Town, in the County of M. etc. To have and perceive the
said Annuity or yearly rent aforesaid, to the said W. D. H. D. and W. D. etc.
and their Assigns, for the term of the life of the said Rachell, to the use of
the said Rachell for the term of her life; Payable yearly at the Feasts of
Saint Mich: and the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by equal
portions, the first term of the payment thereof to begin at that Feast, of the
Feasts aforesaid, as shall next happen after the death of the said R. B.
Husband of the said Rachell, and not before: And if it shall happen the said
Annuity, or yearly rent, to be behind or unpaid, in part, or in all, by the
space of eight and twenty days, next after any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid,
in which as aforesaid the same ought to be paid; That then and from thenceforth
it shall be lawful for the said W. D. H. D. and R. D. or any of them, or their
Assigns, or the Assigns of any of them, into the said Manor, or Capital
Message etc. to enter, and the same to hold and possess, and the rents of the
same, with all Rents, and Profits, and Commodities to the same Manor etc.
belonging or appertaining, to the use and behoof aforesaid, to take and enjoy,
until of the Annuity, or annual rent aforesaid, together with the Arrearages
of the same (if any be) to them, to the use of the said Rachell, shall be fully
satisfied and paid. In witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity, or Rentcharge of fifty Marks, and of a hundred
Shillings, Nomine poene.
TO all persons to whom this present writing Tripartite indented A good
President passed by the Kings Sergeant at Law, in the Remainders over for want
of Issue.
shall come, R. P. and I. C. and H. S. send greeting: Whereas we the said R. P.
I. C. and H. S. are seized in our Demesne as of Fee, of the Manor of S. with
the Appurtenances etc. Know ye, that we by these presents do grant to W. M. a
certain annual rent of fifty Marks, to be taken and paid out of, and in these
Manors, Lands, and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, to the said W. M. and
the Heirs of his body coming, at the Terms of Saint Michael, and Easter, yearly
by equal portions. And we do moreover grant unto the said W. M. and the Heirs
of his body issuing, the rent of a hundred shillings (Nomine poene) to be
issuing out of the Manors aforesaid, to have, and take to them so often as it
shall happen, the said Annual rents of fifty Marks, to be behind and unpaid,
in part, or in all, to the said W. M. or his Heirs aforesaid, by the space of
four months, next after any term of payment of the same fifty Marks, above
limited; And that it shall be lawful to the said W. M. and his Heirs
aforesaid, as well for the same rent of fifty Marks (if it shall happen to be
behind and unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of four months, next after
any term of payment thereof) to distrain in the said Manor of S. and these
Lands, and Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, and the Distresses
there taken, to drive, carry away, and detain, until to the said W. M. and his
Heirs aforesaid, the said rent of fifty marks, and the said rent of a hundred
shillings granted (Nomine poene) be fully contented and paid. And if it shall
happen that the said W. M. shall dye without Heirs of his body, Then we will
and grant, that the said annual rent of fifty marks shall remain to F. M. and
the Heirs of his body coming; And that the said F. M. and his Heirs aforesaid,
shall for ever after have the said yearly rent, to be paid and taken yearly at
the terms aforesaid, by equal portions, of, and in the Manor aforesaid, and
other the Premises with the Appurtenances* And we do further grant to the said
F. M. and his Heirs aforesaid, the said rent of a hundred shillings Nomine
poene, out of the Manor aforesaid issuing, to be taken and had as of ten as it
shall happen the said rent of fifty marks, to the said F. and his Heirs
aforesaid, in form aforesaid granted, to be behind in part, or in all, by the
space of four months after any term of payment hereof, and that it shall be
lawful etc.

Provided always, that ten marks of the said fifty marks, in form aforesaid
granted, shall not be paid, nor any Distress for the same ten marks shall be at
any time taken, nor levied, during the life of R. Q.

Provided also, that the persons of us the said R. P. I. C. and H. S. nor the
person of any of us, or of our Heirs, shall not be charged, or chargable with
this present Grant, but the same shall only extend to, and charge the said
Manors, Lands, and Premises, with the Appurtenances. In witness etc.

An Annuity for term of years, issuing out of Land, with liberty to sell the
Distresses.
THis Indenture etc 9 July An. 24. Eliz. Between H. D. of S. in the County of
S. Esquire, the one party, and Sir L. D. Citizen and Alderman of L. on the
other party, Witnesses that the said H. D. in full satisfaction of all Debts,
Duties, and Demands, which C. D. of L. Gentleman, deceased, Uncle of the said
H. D. did at the time of his decease owe unto the said Sir L. D. has for him,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and for every of them,
given, granted and confirmed, and by these presents, for him, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and for every of them, does give,
grant, and confirm unto the said Sir L. D. Knight, his Executors and Assigns,
one Annuity, or yearly rent of ten pounds of etc. yearly to be issuing, and
going out of all that park or grounds, called or known by the name of
Wood-park, in the Parish of M. alias N. in the County of S. and out of all
whatsoever Lands, Mills, Tenements, Woods, Under-woods, and Hereditaments
whatsoever; lying and being in I. Wood Park aforesaid, as out of all and
singular other the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of that said H. D.
within the said County of S. To have, hold, perceive, levy, receive, take, and
enjoy the said Annuity, or yearly rent of etc. unto the said Sir L. D. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the twentieth of May, which shall
be etc. 1590. for, and during the term of ten years then next ensuing, to be
complete and ended, payable, during the said term of ten years, at the usual
place of tender, receipt, and payment of money, commonly called the
Counting House, set and being on the West part of the Royal Exchange in L.
without fraud of guile, on the first day of May, and etc. the first payment of
the said Annuity, or yearly rent, to begin on the first day of May, which shall
be etc. 1591. And the said H. D. for him etc. covenanteth etc. in form, etc.
That he the the said H. D. his Heirs, Executors etc. or Assigns, shall and will
yearly, during the said term of ten years, upon the first day of May, well and
truly pay, or cause etc. unto the said Sir L. D. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, at the Counting House aforesaid, the yearly Rent,
or Annuity of ten pounds; And that if it shall happen the said annuity, or
yearly rent of etc. to be behind and unpaid, in part, or in all, at any of the
days or times above limited: That then, and so often the said H. D. his Heirs
and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will forfeit and pay unto the said
Sir H. D. his Executors or Assigns, for every such default in payment, the sum
of five pounds of etc. in the name of a pain or penalty: And that then, and at
all times after, and from time to time, so often and when, as any default of
payment of the said annuity, or yearly rent, or of any part thereof shall
happen, during the said term of one and twenty years, to be made, contrary to
the limitation aforesaid, it shall, and may be lawful unto, and for the said
Sir L. D. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and to every of them, as
well for the said sum of ten pounds, so to be due and unpaid; As for the said
five pounds to be as above forfeited and lost (Nomine poene) into the said Park
called I. Wood Park, and all and singular other the said Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and all other the Premises, into any part or parcel thereof to
enter and distrain: And the Distress or Distresses then, and there so had and
taken, and from thence lawfully to bear, lead, drive, and carry away, without
any manner of Rescous, or Suit of Replevin by the said H. D. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, or by any other person
or persons, for them, or any of them: And that the said Sir L. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, shall, and may detain, retain,
and keep the same Distress, or Distresses irrepledgably, until the said Sir L.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, be as well of the said yearly rent
of etc. which shall be due, and as aforesaid unpaid as of the said 5 l. to be
as aforesaid forfeited (Nomine poene) and of every part or parcel thereof, and
also of the reasonable costs and expenses which shall be by reason of the
non-payment thereof sustained, fully satisfied, contented, and paid: And if it
shall happen that the said yearly rent of etc. and the said five pounds
aforesaid to be forfeited (Nomine poene) for which the said Distress, or
Distresses shall be as aforesaid had, and taken, shall be behind and unpaid, at
the place afore-limitted, for the payment thereof by the space of five days,
on, or after any such Distress, or Distresses shall be taken as aforesaid, by
the said Sir L. D. his Executors, or Assigns, for the said sums, or for any
part thereof; That then and so often it shall be lawful to, and for the said
Sir L. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, to cause
the same Distress, or Distresses, to be valued and prised, and according to the
said pr^sement, to his, or their own use, to retain, or otherwise to sell the
same at the will and pleasure of the said Sir L. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for the satisfaction and payment, as well of the said Annuity of
etc. as of the said five pounds (Nomine poene) and also of the said costs and
expenses: And the said H. D. has put the said Sir L. D. in possession and
Seisin of the said Annuity, by the delivery and payment to the said Sir L. at
the ensealing and delivery hereof of four pence, of etc. And moreover the said
H. D. for him etc. covenanteth etc. in form etc. that the said Park, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, out of which the aforesaid Annuity of etc. is
limited to be issuing, and every part and parcel thereof, shall be from, and
after the said twentieth of May An. 1590. for, and during the said term of one
and twenty years, from time to time, and at all times, during the said teatm of
one and twenty years, when, and as often as the said Annuity of etc. and the
said five pounds to be forfeited Nomine poene, if any part thereof shall happen
to be behind and unpaid, at the place appointed for the payment thereof,
contrary to the limitation aforesaid; shall be liable overt and sufficient to
the Distress, or the Distresses aforesaid: And that the said Sir L. D. his
Executors and Assigns, and every of them shall, and may, from, and after the
said twentieth day day etc. for, and during the said term of one and twenty
years, to the true meaning of these presents, have, receive, and take the said
Annuity of etc. without any let, denial, or interruption, or contradiction of
the said H. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or
persons, by his, or their means, right, title, or procurement: And that he the
said H. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is seized
in his Demesne of Fee, to his, and their own use of such good Estate in
Fee-simple, of, and in three parts, in four parts to be divided, of all the
said Park, and Grounds, called and known by the name of J. Wood Park as was
granted to him and his Heirs, by the Queens Majesty, under Letters Patents,
dated at Westminster, and of, and in the fourth part thereof, of such good and
lawful Estate as was to him granted and assigned by T. B.: And that he the
said H. His Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall well and truly pay etc.
unto our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, her Heirs, and Successors, the
hundred pound mentioned in the said Letters Patents, according to the
limitation and true meaning of the same. In witness etc.

An Annuity granted out of a Lease with good Covenants.
TO all etc. M. H. of H. in the County of M. Widow, late Wife and Executrix of
the last Will and Testament of R. H. Esquire, deceased, sends greeting in our
Lord God everlasting; Whereas I. A. Recital of the Lease.
Clerk, Parson of H. in the County of M. by his Indenture of Lease, bearing
date the fourth of February Anno Regni Reginae Eliz. xiij. has demised,
granted, and to Farm-letten unto W. A. of D. in the said County, Esquire, all
that the Rectory, or Parsonage of H. with all manner of Houses, Edifices,
Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Glebe Lands, Tithes, Pentions, Portions,
Fruits, Offerings, Oblations, Obventions, and all other Rights, Profits,
Commodities, Emoluments, and Advantages whatsoever, to the said Rectory, or
Parsonage, belonging, or in any wise appertaining, set, lying, being, coming,
growing, or renewing, within the Parish or Feilds of H. aforesaid, or
elsewhere, within the County of M. except, and always reserved unto the said
I. A. and his Successors, during the term, in the said Indenture specified,
one Chamber next unto the Buttery of the same house, with free ingress, egress,
and regress, into, and from the said Chamber, at his and their will and
pleasure. To have and to hold the said Rectory, and Parsonage of H. Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Glebe Lands, Tithes, Oblations, Offerings, Profits,
Commodities, Emoluments, and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the
Premises with their Appurtenances, except before excepted, unto the said W. A
his Executors, and Assigns, from the Feast of the Annunciation etc. then next
etc. To hold for 90. years.
unto the end and term of lxxxx. years, from thence etc. and fully etc. As by
the same Indenture of Lease, containing etc. And where also the Reverend Father
in God O. B. of L. and Ordinary of the said Church of H. aforesaid, the said I.
A. continuing still Parson of H. aforesaid, Confirmation by the Bishops
Recitalls. Passages of the Lease.
by his Deed dated the twenty sixth of November 1614. and to the said Deed
indented, annexed, has ratified and confirmed the said Deed indented, and all
and singular in the same granted, demised, and leased, in manner and form, as
in the said Deed of Lease is expressed and contained, as by the said Deed of
confirmation plainly does and may appear: And where also the said W. A. by his
Deed dated, An 17. R. Eliz. etc. has given, granted etc. to I. C. etc. all his
Right etc. then to come, of, and in the said Rectory etc. To have etc. as by
the said Deed made to the said I. C. also does appear: And where also the said
W. A. by the name of W. A. true and undoubted Portion of the Parish Church of
H. aforesaid, by his Deed, dated the second of December 17. R. Eliz. for
himself, his Heirs and Assigns, has ratified and confirmed the said Deed
indented of Lease, and all and every thing therein contained, as by the said
last mentioned Deed of confirmation etc. And where also the said I. C. by his
Deed dated the second of December: An. 17. R. Eliz. has given and granted unto
the said W. A. the former recited Deeds, and all his Right etc. to have etc. as
by etc. And where also the said W. A. bargained and sold his Interest etc. to
W. R. Esquire: And where also by Indenture dated etc. the said R. assigned his
Interest in the Premises etc. to the said R. H. And where T. R. and A. R. have
given, granted, bargained, and sold to the said R. H. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, all that the Parsonage and Advowson, Nomination and Gift of the Benefice
of Parsonage and Rectory of H. aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and the
Inheritance of the same, and all their, and either of their Right, Estate,
Title, Interest, and Demand to, and in the same; Together with all manner of
Deeds, Escripts, Writings, and Mynements of the said T. and A. or either of
them only touching or concerning the said Parsonage, or Rectory, or any other
the Premises, to have and to hold the said Parsonage, Advowson, Nomination,
and Gift of the Benefice of the said Parsonage and Rectory of H aforesaid wi^h
the Appurtenances, and the Inheritance of the same, and all their, and every of
their Rights etc. together with the said Deeds etc. to the said R. H. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, to his, and their proper use, as by the said Indenture
etc. And where, moreover the said W A. by his Indenture dated etc. has remised
released and for ever, for him and his Heirs, quite claimed to the said R. H.
then being in full and peaceable Possession of the Premises, all the Right,
Estate, Title, Interest, Condition, and demands whatsoever that he the said W.
A. then had, or thereafter might have, he the said W. nor Heirs etc. as by the
said last mentioned Indenture etc. Which said Lease, Interest, and Term of
years in, and to the said Rectory and Parsonage, and other the Premises with
the Appurtenances, demised or mentioned to be demised by the said first recited
Deed indented of Lease, and also the same first recited Deed of Lease, and all
Covenants thereof, I the said M. H. now have and enjoy, amongst other things, of
the Gift, Legacy, and bequest of the said R. H. my late Grant of the Annuity.
Husband, as by his last will and Testament made and declared in writing dated
etc. Know ye that I the said M. H. for the good will and affection which I
have and bear unto my well-beloved Brother M M. of the University of O.
Gentleman, and toward the furtherance and better maintenance of his exhibition
at the Studies of the Common Laws, or any other faculty or exercise, that he
shall, or will follow, or apply himself unto, and for diverse other etc. have
given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presents do fully etc. unto the
said M. W. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, one Annuity, or yearly
rent of etc. of lawful etc. by the year, to be yearly going, issuing, and paid
out of the said Rectory of H. with the Appurtenances, and out of all and every
other the Premises with the Appurtenances, also out of singular, other Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, in or by the said several recited
Indentures, Deeds, and Conveyances The Habendum.
and every, or any of them demised, granted, or conveyed, or mentioned to be
demised; granted, or conveyed, with all and every their Appurtenances; To have,
hold, perceive, receive, levy, take, and enjoy the said Annuity, or yearly rent
of etc. to the said M. W. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the
Feast etc: unto the end etc. at the days of the Feasts of etc. or within ten
days next after every of the same Feast-daies, by even portions yearly to be
paid at the Mansion house of the said Rectory of H. or at the place where the
same house now stands, the first payment whereof to be made at etc. And I the
said M. H. do covenant etc. that I the said M. mine Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns, shall, and will well, and truly yield, and pay, or cause etc. the
said Annuity, or annual rent, and every part and parcel thereof to the said M.
W. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, yearly during the said term etc.
on the said Feast-daies of the birth of our Lord God etc. or within etc. by
equal portions, at the said Mansion house of the said Rectory.

And further I the said M. do covenant etc. that I the said M. mine Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, shall, and will forfeit and pay unto the said M.
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for every default of payment of the
said Annuity, or any part or parcel thereof to be made, contrary to the form
aforesaid, the sum etc. of lawful etc. in the name of pain, from time to time,
during the said term etc. And that when, and as often as that shall fortune
the said Annuity, or yearly rent, or any part or parcel thereof to be behind
and unpaid, contrary to the form aforesaid, That then, and so often it shall
and may be lawful to, and for the said M. W. his Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, and every of them, into the laid Rectory, and all and every other
the Premises with their Appurtenances, and into every part etc: to enter and
distrain, as well for the said Annuity, and every part thereof, and all, and
every the penalty and penalties aforesaid, and as the arrearages of the same,
or either of them, and the Distress and the Distresses there to be found and
taken, lawfully to lead, bear, drive, and carry away, and the same to detain
and keep, until he the said M. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
shall be fully paid and satisfied, of, and for the said Annuity and penalty
aforesaid, and every part and parcel of them and every of them, and all
arrearages of the same, or any of them, together with his, or their costs and
damages in that behalf to be sustained.

And also I the said M. do covenant etc. in form etc. viz. That I the said M.
at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, am the very true, perfect, and
lawful Owner of the first recited Indenture of Lease, and of all and singular
the Premises thereby demised, or mentioned to be demised, for all the whole
term and residue of the said term of etc. in the said Indenture of Lease
mentioned, and yet to come, and not expired: And have full power, good right,
lawful authority to give and grant the said Annuity, or yearly rent etc. to
the said M. his Executors, and Assigns, for, and during the said term etc. in
manner and form aforesaid. And that the Premises, and every part and parcel;
and also the said first recited Indenture of Lease, and every thing contained
therein, now are, and from henceforth shall, and may from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, during the said term etc. remain and continue, free and
clearly discharged, exonerated, or otherwise by me the said M. mine Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, suffer, defend, and save harmless, of, and from
all, and all manner of Grants, Bargains, Sales, Alienations, Surrenders,
Forfeitures, Rentries, cause, and causes of Forfeiture or Rentry, and of, and
from all other Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or done, or that
shall, or may in any wise be hurtful or prejudicial to the said M. his
Executors etc. for, or concerning the said Annuity, or yearly rent, or any
part, or parcel thereof, or for, or touching the said liberty or power of
distraining in the Premises, or any part thereof, for any manner of Arrerage or
Arrerages, of the said Annuity, or any part thereof, or for any manner of sum,
or sums of money to be forfeited Nomine poene, as aforesaid.

And also that I the said M. mine Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall,
and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the said term
etc. upon reasonable warning and request, showing the said Original Lease,
Deeds of confirmation and mean Conveyances above recited or mentioned, in
force, safe, and uncancelled without fraud etc. in any Court, or Courts at
Westminster, or elsewhere, when, and as often as need shall require, for the
necessary maintenance and defense of this present Grant, of the said Annuity,
or any other matter or thing in these presents contained or mentioned.

And further know ye that I the said M. have delivered to the said M. at the
ensealing and delivery hereof, one current Groat of Silver, for, and in the
name of the first payment of the Annuity abovesaid. In witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity during the Grantees life, charging only the Grantors
person.
THis Indenture made etc. 27. of Octo. An: R. R. Eliz. 23. Between etc.
Witnesses, that the said N. H. for, and in consideretian of the sum of 300. l.
of etc. to him in hand, before the ensealing and delivery hereof, clearly given
and paid by the said E. M. whereof etc. has given and granted, and by these
presents for him the said N. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,, does
give and grant unto the said E. M. one Annuity of lxiij l. xvj s. vj d. of
lawful etc. by the year, To have, perceive, receive, take, and enjoy the same
Annuity of lxiij l. xvij s. vj d. to the said E. M. and his Assigns, from
henceforth for, and during the term of the natural life of the said E. the
same Annuity to be yearly paid to the said E. or his Assigns, during the life
of the same E. at, or in etc. at four equal payments in every year, in manner
and form following: That is to say, on the four and twentieth day of December,
between the hours of etc. fifteen pounds nineteen shillings and four pence
halfpenny; on the twenty forth day of March, between the like hours etc. other
fifteen pounds nineteen shillings four pence halfpenny, on the twenty third
day of June, between the like hours etc. other fifteen pounds nineteen
shillings four pence halfpenny, on the twenty eighth day of September, between
the like hours etc. other fifteen pounds nineteen shillings four pence
halfpenny: The first payment to begin and to be made on the twenty fourth day
of December, next ensuing etc. between the said hours of etc. And so from
thenceforth to have, continue, and yearly to be paid to the said E. M. or his
Assigns, during the natural life of the said E. every year, upon the said
days, and between the said hours, and at the place aforesaid. And the said N.
H. covenanteth etc. that he the said M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns, shall and will, from henceforth yearly, and every year, by, and
during all the said term of the natural life of the said E. well and and
truly satisfy, content, and pay, or cause etc. unto the said E. or his
Assigns, the said Annuity of etc. and every part and parcel thereof, in manner
and form aforesaid, according to the tenor, purport, limitation, and true
meaning of these presents. And also the said N. H. covenanteth etc. That he the
said N. H. shall and will at the now dwelling house of the said N. H. satisfy
etc. at or before the end and expiration of six months next ensuing etc.
deliver, or cause etc. unto the said E. or his Assigns, one sufficient Deed,
Obligation, wherein the said N. H. and one able and sufficient Surety with him
shall stand bound unto the said E. in the sum of five hundred pounds of etc.
with a Condition thereupon, endorsed for the true performance of all and
singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Agreements in these presents
contained, which on the part and behalf of the said N. his heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, or any of them, are, or ought to be performed, according to the
same meaning of these presents, upon the delivery and receipt of which Deed,
Obligation, in form aforesaid, the said E. covenanteth etc. to re-deliver and
yield up unto the said N. H. or his Assigns, to be cancelled, one Deed,
Obligation of five hundred pounds of the date of these presents, wherein the
said N. stands bound to the said (...) for the true performance of the said
Covenants herein contained, and on the behalf of the said N. or his Assigns, to
be performed: And further the said N. H. covenanteth etc. That if he the said
N. shall depart this present life, and the said E. M. shall survive and
over-live the same N. that then the Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, of the said N. shall within three months next after such decease of
the said N. well and truly deliver, or cause etc. to the said E. or his
Assigns, at the said now dwelling house of the said N. in W. aforesaid, one
good and sufficient Deed, Obligation, wherein, and whereby one good able and
sufficient Surety shall stand bound to the said E. in the sum of five hundred
pounds, of etc. with a Condition thereupon endorsed, for the true payment of the
said Annuity to the said E. and his Assigns, from thence-forward, yearly during
the life of the said E. in manner and form aforesaid.

Provided always, and it is fully covenanted, granted, concluded,
condescended, and agreed by, and between the said N. and E. for them, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them. And the said
E. M. covenanteth etc. that if the said E. shall mislike either the Surety
which shall be contained in the said Deed, Obligation, which the said N. has
before these presents, covenanted to deliver, or cause etc. to the said E. at,
or before the end of six months, next ensuing the date hereof, or the Surety
which shall be contained in the said Deed, Obligation, to be in form aforesaid
delivered, by the Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of the said N.
to the said E. or his Assigns, within three months after the decease of the
said N. And shall signify or declare the cause of such his misliking* at the
said now dwelling house of the said N. in W. aforesaid, either to the said N.
at, or before the expiration of the said six months, next ensuing the date
hereof, or to the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of the said N at, or
before the end of the said three months, next after the day of the decease of
the said N. And that then if the said N. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns, or any of them, do pay, or cause etc. to the said E. or his
Assigns, the sum of three hundred pounds of etc. either on the second day next
after the end of the said six months, next ensuing the date hereof, between the
hours of etc. of the same second day at or in etc. or else on the second day
next after the expiration of the said three months, next after the decease of
the said N. between the like hours in the afternoon of the same last mentioned
second day, at the place last specified: That then immediately upon full
payment, had and made, of the said sum of three hundred pounds, in manner and
form aforesaid; The said Annuity of etc. by these presents granted: And all and
singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, and Agreements herein contained on
the behalf of the said N. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of
them, from thenceforth to be observed and performed, and all Bonds and
Obligations whatsoever made, or to be made by the said N. or any other person
or persons, for performance of the same Covenants, or any of them, shall cease,
clearly determine, and be utterly void, frustrate, and of no force and effect
in the Law: And that then also the said E. or his Assigns, shall, and will
immediately upon full payment had, and made of the said sum of three hundred
pounds, in manner and form aforesaid re-delivered, or cause etc. to the said N.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, this present Deed indented,
under the hand and Seal of the said N. and all the said Bonds, Obligations
made, or to be made as aforesaid, to be cancelled; these presents etc, And
moreover the said E. M. covenanteth etc. that he the said E. and his Assigns,
upon the receipt of every payment of the said Annuity to him, or them hereafter
to be made, according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, shall
and will upon request therefore to be made, deliver a Deed under his, or their
hand and Seal to the said N. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
plainly testifying and reporting the same receipt and payment, from time to
time, so often as the said E. or his Assigns shall receive any such payment. In
witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity out of a Lease by will, continuable for life, if the
Lease so long endure.
ITem, I will also and bequeath unto the said E. P. my Wife, one Annuity, or
annual rent of one and thirty pounds of lawful etc. to be yearly paid unto
her, or her Assigns, by my said Executors, at the usual Feast of Saint Michael
etc. and of the Annunciation etc. by even portions, by, and during all such
time as my Grand Lease of the Scit. and Demesnes of the Manors of Hatfield now
in mine own possession and occupation, or in the possession and occupation of
my Assigns, and granted unto me by our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty,
under the great Seal of England, shall happen to endure and have continuance,
if she the said E. P. shall so long live, the first payment thereof to begin at
such of the said Feasts as shall first happen, and follow next after the day of
my decease.

A Grant of an Annuity with the Inheritance of Land assured for the same by a
Recovery and a Fine.
THis Indenture etc. Between the Right Honorable H. Earl of H. and the Right
Honorable K. Countess of K. now his Wife, on the one party, and I. S. Citizen
and Clothworker of L. and A. his Wife, on the other party; Witnesses, that the
said Earl, for, and in consideration of the sum of three hundred pounds of etc.
whereof etc. has given and granted, and by these presents does give and grant,
for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, to the said J. and A. his
Wife, one Annuity of five hundred pounds of etc. by the said Earl, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from henceforth yearly to be paid to the
said I. E. and A. and their Assigns, and to the Survivors of them, and to the
Assigns of the Survivors of them, by, and during all the term of the natural
lives of the said I. and A. and the natural life of the longest liver of them,
at the North-gate at the now building Situate in the City of L. commonly
called the Royal Exchange entering into the place there commonly used for the
meeting of Merchants, at two equal payments in every year, in manner and form
following: That is to say, on the twentieth day of November, between the hours,
of etc. two hundred and fifty pounds, and on the twentieth day of May, between
the like hours of etc. two hundred and fifty pounds, The first payment thereof
to begin and to be made on the twentieth day of November, next coming, and so
from thenceforth to have continuance, and yearly to be paid to the said I. and
A. and to the longer liver of them, and their Assigns, and the Assigns of the
longer liver of them, every year upon the said days, and within the said
times, and at the said place, during the natural lives, of the said I. and A.
and the natural life of the longest liver of them: And for the said
consideration, and for a good and certain Surety and assurance to be had and
made to the said I. and A. his wife of, and for the said Annuity and yearly
payment of five hundred pounds, to them, and to the Survivor of them, and their
Assigns, and the Assigns of the Survivor of them well and truly to be made
every year, during the natural lives, and during the natural life of the
longer liver of them, according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents. The said Earl for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
and every of them: And A Covenant to suffer a Recovery.
for the said Countess his wife, does covenant, grant and agree, to, and with
the said I. and A their Executors* Administrators, and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents; That he the said Earl, and the said Countess his wife,
before the last day of November now next coming shall, and will permit and
suffer the said I: and A. at the costs and charges in the Law of the said I.
and A. lawfully to recover against the said Earl and Countess by Writ of Entry,
Sur-disseisin, with Voucher, or Vouchers, after the order and course of common
Recoveries, the Manor of A. with the Appurtenances, in the County of S. and
all that More called a More, with all the Appurtenances thereof in the same
County, and all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and their Appurtenances, now
or late parcel of the late Chantery of etc. with the Appurtenances, and all
and singular Message, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Rights, Patronage
of Churches, Franchises, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, esteemed, reputed, used, demised or taken, as part,
parcel, or member of the said Manor of A. or as any part of the said More
called etc. And all and singular Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever, which the said Earl and
Countess have, or either of them has, or at any time had in the Towns, Feilds,
Parishes, and Hamlets, of A. or within the said More, called etc. in the said
County of S. And also the said Earl and Countess shall likewise permit and
suffer the said I. and A. lawfully to recover against the said Earl and
Countess by another Writ of Entry Sur-disseisin, with Voucher or Vouchers,
after the order etc. ut paid, all that the Manor of B. with the Appurtenances
in the County of C. And all and singular Messuages ut predict. And all and
singular Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Courts, Leets, View and Viewers of
Franck-pledge, Franchises, Commodities, Profits, Rents, Services, and
Jurisdictions whatsoever, that the said Earl and Countess, or either of them
has, or lawfully might have, of, or in the said Manors, and other the
Premises, or of, or in any part or parcel of them, or of any of them: And
that all the said Recoveries shall be in due form of Law lawfully executed; And
moreover, that as well the said Earl, and the said Countess now his wife, at
the costs and charges of the said I. in the Law only, A Covenant to levy a Fine.
before the last day of November, now next coming as aforesaid, shall, and will
by Fine in due form of Law to be levied with proclamation, according to the
Statute in that behalf provided, convey, and assure unto the said I. and A. and
to their Heirs, or to the Heirs of one of them, all the said Manors, and all
other the Premises, with all, and singular their Appurtenances, with Warranty
of the said Earl and the said Countess his wife, and of the Heirs of the said
Earl, of all the Premises to the said I. and A. and to the Heirs of the said
I. against all men. As also that after the said Fine had, and Recoveries
executed Sir G. H. Knight, brother of the said Earl on and before the twenty
fourth day of June, which shall he An: Dom: 1557. at the cost and charges in
the Law only of the said I. or A. or of their Assigns, shall, and will by Fine
with proclamation, according to the statute in due form, by him the said Sir G.
to be levied, granted, and released to the said Earl and his Heirs, all, and
singular the Premises, with warranty of the same to the said Earl and his
Heirs, against him the said Sir G and his Heirs, according to the usual manner
of Fines: And it is condescended, concluded, and agreed between the said
parties, that as well the said Fine of the said Earl and Countess, and the said
Recovery and Recoveries so to be had, and executed as aforesaid: As also The
Uses.
the said Fine of the said Sir G. H. and all other Fine and Fines, Recovery and
Recoveries, Assurance, and Assurances, whatsoever specified, or mentioned, in
these presents, shall be to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter expressed
in these presents, and to none other use, or uses, intent or purpose; That is
to say, to the use and behoof of the said Earl, and his Heirs, until default
of payment shall be made of the said Annuity granted by these presents, or of
some part thereof, contrary to the form, tenor, and effect of these presents:
And after default of payment of the said Annuity, or any part thereof, contrary
to the form, tenor, and effect of these presents: Then to the only use and
behoof of the said I. and A. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said I.
absolutely without any manner of Condition, and to none other use, or intent
whatsoever: And that then also and from thenceforth, all and every petson, or
persons, seized, or to be seized of the Premises, or any part thereof, shall
thereof, and of every part thereof, stand and be seized to the only use and
behoof, and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said A. for ever; And that then the
said Earl, his Heirs, and Assigns, within six months next after any default of
payment made, shall, and will safely deliver, or cause etc. to the said I. his
Heirs and Assigns, at the now Mansion house of etc. All, and singular such
Deeds, Charters, Evidences, Court-Rolls, Books of Survey, Terriors, Escripts,
Writings, and Minements, concerning the Premises only, or only any part
thereof, as the said Earl now has, or which he or his Heirs then shall have, or
without Suit in Law may then get, or come by. And the said Earl, for him, his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, does covenant, and
grant to, and with the said I. and A. his wife, and the Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns of the said I. by these presents, in form etc. That
he the said Earl, and the said Countess, now are the very true perfect and
rightful Owners of all, and singular the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, A Covenant that the Grantors are seized.
and Hereditaments, and of all, and every other the Premises, with all and
singular the Appurtenances: And that the said Earl, and Countess at the time of
the said Recoveries so to be had, as is aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of
the said Manors etc. of a good perfect and sufficient Estate of Freehold,
with the Fee-simple thereof in the said Earl; And that the said Earl at the time
of the said Fine, to be levied by the said Earl, and the said Countess, shall
stand and be seized of the said Manors and other the Premises, in Fee-simple,
according to the use thereof before limited to the said Earl: And that the said
Manors, Messuages etc. shall from, and after default of payment of the said
Free from Encumbrances.
Annuity, or any part thereof, stand and continue for ever clear, and free
discharged, exonerated, and acquit^ed, or otherwise by the said Earl, or his
Heirs, from time to time, and at all times sufficiently saved harmless, of, and
from all and singular former Grants Bargains, Sales, Leases, Charges, Estates,
Titles, Fine and Fines, for license of Alienation by the said Recoveries and
Fines aforesaid, and by every, or any of them (if any be done) and all other
Encumbrances whatsoever, the chief Rents and Services to be due and payable to
the chief Lords of Except Leases and Estates by Copy.
the Fee, or Fees, of the Premises in respect of their Seigniories only, and
one Lease for the term of sixty years, made by the said Earl to one I. W.
Esquire, by Indenture, dated 26. Febr. An. 9. Eliz. of all that the Situation
of the Manor of A. and of the Mansion house called A. Court, and of other
Lands mentioned in the said Lease, and of all Leases for terms of one and
twenty years, or under, or for the term of life, or lives not exceeding three
lives by the said Earl, or any of his Ancestors heretofore made, or granted,
and hereafter by the said Earl, or his Heirs to be granted and made, during the
time that the said Earl and his Heirs, or Assigns, shall well and truly pay the
said Annuity of five hundred pounds, according to the tenor, purport, and true
meaning of these presents, above declared and expressed: And all Estate by Copy
of Court-Roll, heretofore had, made, or granted as aforesaid, or to be had,
made, or granted as aforesaid, of the Premises, or of any part thereof, upon
all, and every which said Leases, Estates, and Copies, the old accustomed
Rents, and Services are, and shall be reserved, and from henceforth shall be
due and payable to the Owners of the Reversion, and Reversions of the same,
during the several Term and Estates thereof aforesaid (only except.) And
further, that if it do fortune that the said Annuity and yearly payment of five
hundred pounds aforesaid, and every part thereof, be not well and truly paid and
contented to the said I. and A. and the Are worth 500 l. per annum.
Survivors of them, or their Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid: That then,
and at all times default made in payment thereof, or of any part thereof,
contrary to the form aforesaid; The said Manors and other the Premises shall
be, and continue for ever, unto the said I. and A. and to the Heirs and Assigns
of the said I of the clear yearly rent and value of three hundred pounds of
etc. over and above all yearly Charges and Reprises: And that the Premises
have been by the space of sixty years last past, of the said clear yearly rent
and value of three hundred pounds over and above all Charges and Reprises: And
To hold and enjoy.
that then also and from thenceforth, the said I. and A. and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said I. shall, and may lawfully and quietly have, hold, occupy,
and enjoy, all, and singular the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, and Hereditaments, and all, and singular the Premises with
their Appurtenances, and shall, and may also lawfully and quietly have, take,
perceive, receive, and enjoy all, and singular the Rents, Issues, Revenues, and
Profits thereof, and every part thereof, from thenceforth to, and for the only
Commodity, use, and behoof of the said J. and A. and of the Heirs and Assigns
of the said J. for ever: And further that the said Earl, or his Heirs, at, or
before the first day of June, which etc. 1573. shall, and will deliver, or
cause etc. to the said J. and A. and to the Survivors of them, at the now
dwelling house of etc. one Book of a plain and perfect A Covenant to deliver a
Survey of the Lands.
Survey of all, and singular the said Manors, Message, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Services, and Hereditaments, and of all other the Premises with their
Appurtenances, containing and expressing the names of the Tenants, Occupyers of
Land, and their Estates, and the yearly rents plainly and legibly written; The
same to be done and made at the costs and charges of the said Earl, his Heirs,
or Executors; And also the true Copies of all the Evidences, Charters, and
Minements which the said Earl now has, or without Suit in the Law, can get, or
come by, touching or concerning the Premises, or any part thereof, to be
legibly and plainly written, and then and there to be examined with their
Originalls, by the said I. or such other as the said J. or A. shall thereunto
name and appoint, and the charges of the writing of the said Copies of all the
said Evidences etc. then to be allowed, and paid by the said I. and A. his
wife, the said Book of Survey, and the Copies of the said Evidences to be
received by Indenture. And that the said I. S. and A. his wife, for themselves,
their Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, do covenant and grant
to, and with the said Earl, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
and every of them, by these presents; That he the said J. and A. his wife, and
their Assigns, upon the receipt of every payment of the said Annuity, to them,
or any of them hereafter to be made, according to the tenor and true meaning of
these presents, shall, and will upon request therefore to be made, deliver a
Writing under their hand, plainly testifying and reporting the same receipt and
payment, from time to time, so often as the said J. or A. or their Assigns
shall receive any such payment: And that if the said yearly payment be from
time to time, duly made to the said J. and A or their Assigns, during their
lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, in form aforesaid, that then
the Executor or Administrator of the Survivors of the said J. and A. upon any
reasonable request to them, or any of them in that behalf to be made, shall,
and will well and safely re-deliver, or cause etc. the said Book of Survey,
with the said Copies of the said Evidences, Charters, and Minements unto the
said Earl, or his Heirs, or to such person, or persons, as in the name of the
said Earl, or of his Heirs, shall require, or demand the same.

Provided always that if the said Earl, his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, shall happen not to make true payment of the said Annuity, or
yearly rent of etc. to the said J. and A. and to the longer liver of them,
according to the tenor and true meaning above in these presen^s expressed and
declared: But shall fail and make default in payment of the same, or any part
thereof, at the days, times, and place above limited for the same, so that the
said J. and A. and the Heirs of the said J. by reason of the same default for
quiet enjoying, then shall, or lawfully may from thenceforth possess, enjoy,
perceive and take the Rents, Revenues, issues, and profits of the premises
according to the intent, purpose and true meaning above expressed and declared
in these presents, That then the said annuity or yearly payment by these
presents above granted to the said I and A. shall cease, determine, and be no
longer paid.

And further the said Earl for him, etc. Covenanteth with the said J. S. his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators; by these Presents, that he the said Earl,
his Heirs, and all, and every other person and persons (other then such Leases
and Coppy-holders, as aforesaid, to claim only for their said Leases, Estates,
and Interests above excepted, which shall have or lawfully shall claim to have
any Estate, Right or Interest, of, in, or to the said Manors, and other the
premises with their Appurtenances, or any part thereof, by, from, or under the
Estate of the said Earl; at all times during two years, next after any default
made in payment of the said Annuity to the said I. and A. or either of them
contrary to the Tenor and true meaning of these Presents, At and upon the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law only of the said I.
and A. or of the Heirs and Executors of the said I. shall and will, do
knowledge, and suffer, and cause etc. All and every such lawful and reasonable
Act and acts, thing and things, A Covenant for further assurance.
as the said I. and A. and the Heirs and assigns of the said I. or any of their
learned council in the Law, shall lawfully Demise or advise for the further
assurance, Surety, Convenience, and sure making of all and singular the said
Manors with their appurtenances, and all and every other the premises, to be
had, conceived, and made sure to the said I. and A. and the heirs and assigns
of the said I. for the only use and behoof of the said I. and A. and of the
heirs and assigns of the said I. for ever, absolutely without any manner,
Condition or Defeaseance whatsoever, provided always and it is concluded and
agreed Power to make Leases.
by and between the said parties to these presents, for themselves their heirs
and assigns. That if the said Earl or his heirs or assigns, during the time as
he, or they or any of them shall well and truly pay the said annuity of, etc.
to the said I. and A. and to the survivors of them in form aforesaid, do make
and grant Lease and Leases by Indenture for years or estates by copy of
Court-Roll, according to the several customs of the said Manors to any person
or persons of the Situation or Scituations of the said Manors, and of any
Lands or Tenements aforesaid, or of any part or parcel of the said Lands or
Tenements; So always as upon every such Lease or Leases, Estate or Estates
there be reserved the accustomary yearly Rents and Services of the Lands and
Tenements, so to be leased or granted to be paid and done yearly to the owners
of the Reversion thereof, during the continuance of every such grant, Lease,
and Estate. And so that no such Lease or Estate be made without impeachment of
wast, or for any longer term then the term of one and twenty years to commence
within two years at the furthest, next after the granting thereof, or for three
lives or fewer in possession, and so as any such Lease do not bind or charge
the Owner of the Reversion, with the Reparations of any Buildings, or other
thing by such Lease to be granted; That then the said Recovery and Recoveries,
Fine, and Fines, and all other Conveyances, and Assurances above specified,
shall be to the uses and behoofes of any such Leases and Copyholders, and to
their Term and Estates abovesaid, under, and upon the Reservations, as is
aforesaid. In witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity out of Land for term of life.
THis Indenture etc. Witnesses, that the said R. F. in consideration etc. has
given and granted, and by these presents does give and grant to the said J. C.
one Annuity, or yearly rent of 22 l. of lawful etc. to be yearly issuing out
of all that the Manor of the said R. with the Appurtenances, in the County of
N. called the Manor of W. To have perceive, take, and receive the said
Annuity, or yearly Rent of two and twenty pounds, to the said I. C. and her
Assigns from henceforth, for, and during the term of the natural life of the
said I. the same Annuity, or yearly Rent, to be yearly paid to the said I. or
her Assigns, during the life of the said I. at the now Mansion house etc in the
days of the Feasts etc. or on the eight and twentieth day next after every of
the same Feast-dayes, between the hours etc: by even portions; The first
payment thereof to begin on the Feast of the Annunciation of etc. next coming
etc. or on the eight and twentieth day then next ensuing, and so from
thenceforth to have continuance, and to be paid to the said I. or her Assigns,
at such times, and in such manner and form as aforesaid, yearly during the
natural life of the same J. And if it happen the said annuity, or yearly Rent
of etc. or any part, or parcel thereof to be behind and not paid to the said J.
or her Assigns, according to the tenor and purport of these presents, at any
time, during the natural life of the said J. That then for every such default
of payment thereof, or of any part thereof, the said R. his Heirs and Assigns
shall forfeit, and loose to the said J. her Executors, and Assigns, five pounds
for, and in the name of a pain: And that then and at all times, so often as any
such default shall happen, from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to, and
for the said J. C. her Executors and Assigns, into the said Manor of W. with
the Appurtenances, and other the Premises, and into all and any part thereof to
enter and distrain, as well for the said annuity and yearly Rent, and all
Arrearages thereof, as also for all, and every pain and pains aforesaid so to be
forfeited as foresaid, and all arrearages thereof, and all and every Distress
and Distresses in the Premises, or any part thereof to be found, lawfully and
quietly to take, lead, bear, drive, and carry away, and with them to hold and
keep, until of the said yearly Rent, and pain, and pains aforesaid, and all
arrearages thereof, together with all their costs and damages in that behalf to
be sustained, they shall be paid and satisfied; and the said R. F. for him etc.
does covenant etc. in manner and form etc. That the said Manor of W. with the
Appurtenances, shall be, and continue all times chargable and liable to all and
every the Distress, and Distresses of the said I. and her Assigns, according to
the purport and intent of these presents, there to be had and taken at any
time, for default of payment of the said annuity, and pain, and pains
aforesaid, to be forfeited, as as aforesaid, or any part thereof.

And also that during the natural life of the said I. the said Manors and
other the Premises shall be contented of the clear yearly value of six and
twenty pounds of etc. over and above all Reprises: And that he the said R. F.
now is the very true, perfect, lawful, and sole Owner of the said Manor of W.
with the Appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof, a good lawful
and sure Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail, generally to his own
only use.

And moreover that the said R. F. and his Heirs, if it shall be found hereafter
that the assurance of the said Annuity by these presents made shall not be a
full and sufficient assurance thereof to the said J. C. in form aforesaid; That
then upon notice thereof given and request made to the said R. or his Heirs, by
the said J. or her Assigns: The same R. or his, shall at their own costs and
charges in the Law, make all such further assurance to the said J. of the said
Annuity, for the term of her natural life only as by her, or her learned
Council, shall be lawfully, and reasonably demised, advised, and required. In
witness etc.

A Grant of an Annuity to a Man and his Wife for their lives, issuing out of
Land with very good Covenants.
THis Indenture made An. 4. R. Elizabethae, etc, between Sir S. M. of E. in the
County of C. Knight on the one party, and R. K. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. and
S, his Wife on the other party, witnesses that the said Sir S. M. for a
certain competent sum of lawful etc. to him before hand paid by the said R.
E. has given and granted, and by these presents for him, and his Heirs, does
give, grant, Grant.
and confirm to the said R. E. and S. his wife one Annuity, or yearly Rent of
four score pound of, etc. to be going and issuing out of the Manors of E. D.
and B. in the said County of C. and great M. in the said County of W. to have,
hold, levy, and yearly perceive, receive, take and enjoy the said Annuity or
yearly Rent of four score pound to the said R. F. and S. his wife and their
Assigns, from the last day of September next ensuing the date hereof, for, and
during the term of the natural lives of the said R. and S. and the term of the
natural life of the longer liver of them; the same annuity or yearly rent to be
yearly paid to the said R. and S. and the Survivors of them and their Assigns
during the longer liver of the same R. and S. and the life of the longer liver
of them at the place where the Font stone stands within the Temple Church in
the Suburbs of the City of L. on the 22th. day of November, and the two and
twentieth day of June. between the the hours of one and three of the clock in
the after noon of every of the same several days yearly by even and equal
portions, the first payment thereof to begin, and to be made on the two and
twentieth day of November next coming; And if it shall happen the said Annuity
or yearly rent of eighty pound, or any part thereof to be behind and not paid
to the said R. E. and S. his wife or their assigns, according to the tenor and
purport of these presents at any time during the lives of the said R. and S. or
the life of the longer liver of them, that then for every such default of
payment thereof, or of any part thereof, the said Sir S. M. his heirs or
assigns shall forfeit and loose to the said R. and S. and the survivors of
them, their executors and assigns etc. of lawful, etc. for, and in the name of
a pain: and that then at all times, and so often as any such default shall
happen from thence forth, it shall, and may be lawful to, and for the said R.
and S. and the Survivor of them and their executors and assigns, into all and
every the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments or any
part thereof to enter and distrein as well for the said annuity and yearly
rent, and all arrerages thereof, as also for all and every pain and pains
aforesaid, so to be forfeited as aforesaid, and all arrerages thereof, and and
every distress vnd distresses in the premises, or any part thereof to be found
lawfully and quietly to take, lead, bear, drive, aqd carry away, and them to
hold and keep until all of the said yearly rent and pain and pains aforesaid
so to be forfeited as aforesaid, and all arrerages thereof together with all
their costs and damages in that behalf to be sustained, they shall be paid and
satisfied; and that if every such distress and distresses so to be taken as is
aforesaid shall not (from time to time so often as any such shall be taken) be
redeemed from the said R. and S. and the Survivor of them, their Executors and
Assigns within the space of ten days next after the taking thereof, that then
it shall, and may be lawful to, and for the said R. S. and the Survivors of
them and their assigns to make sale of all and every such distress and
distresses, as aforesaid, and thereof to have, leavy, and to enjoy the
arrerages of the said yearly rent and payments of the pain and pains
aforesaid forfeited, as aforesaid, without molestation, impeachment, or
vexation of any person, or persons whatsoever: and the said Sir S. M. for him,
his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them does
Covenant and Grant, to, and with the said R. E. and S. and the Survivor of
them, their executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them by these
presents in manner following. That is to say, That he the said Sir S. M. now at
the time of the insealing and delivery of these presents, is, and stands
lawfully and solely seized of a good, perfect, sure, and absolute state in the
Law in possession in his demesne, as of Fee-simple without any condition to the
only use of himself and his heirs, of, and in the said Manors of E. D. and B.
with their appurtenances in the County of C. and of the said Manor of great M.
with the appurtenances in the County of W. And if during the life of the longer
liver of the said R. and S. the said Manors with the appurtenances in the
County of W. shall be and continue the said Sir S. M. his heirs and assigns of
the clear yearly value of fifty pound of lawful, etc. or above beyond all
charges and reprises; and that also during the same time the said Manors with
the appurtenances in the County of C. shall be, and continue to the said Sir S.
his heirs and assigns of the clear yearly value of one hundred pound of etc. or
above, beyond all charges and reprises: And the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Heredita. and all other the premises with their appurt. and
heredita. and every part thereof situate lying, or being within the said
Counties of C. and W. or either of them during the natural lives of the said R.
and S. and the life of the longer liver of them from time to time shall be, and
stand liable, chargeable, and sufficient to all and every the distress and
distresses of the said R. and S. his wife, or either of them, their assigns,
and the assigns of either of them so often as any occasion of distress shall be
given to them, or any of them by the true meaning of these presents. And
further, that the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
and all and singular other the premises with their appurtenances now are, and
during the life of the longer liver of the said R. and S. shall be, and stand
clearly discharged and acquitted, or otherwise sufficiently saved harmles of,
and from all singular Grants, Titles, States and Encombrances whatsoever, which
contrary to the intent and true meaning of these presents, shall, or may bar,
avoid, prejudice, or hinder the said R. E. and S. or either of them, or their
assigns, or the assigns of either of them, to have, take, and perceive,
receive, levy, distrain for, and enjoy the said Annuity and yearly Rent, or any
part thereof, and the pain, or pains aforesaid, or any part thereof (if any such
happen to be forfeited.) And moreover that the said R. and S. during their
lives, and the longer liver of them, during his, or her life, shall be well and
truly contented and paid the said Annuity or yearly Rent of thirty pounds, and
every part thereof, according to the intent and and true meaning of these
presents, without any Fraud or Covin. And the said R. E. for him his Executors
and Administrators, does covenant and grant to, and with Sir S. M. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them by these presents;
That if the said Sir S. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and
every of them, do well and truly hold, observe perform, fulfill, and keep, all
and singular Covenants, Grants, and Articles abovesaid, for the part of the
said Sir S. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns to be holden,
fulfilled, performed, or kept; That then one Recognizance, or Writing,
Obligatory, bearing the date of these presents, knowledged before the Lord
Mayor of the City of Y. according to the form prescribed by the Statute of late
made and provided, for recovery of Debts wherein the said Sir S. and C. M.
Esquire, Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir S. do stand bound to the said R.
E. in the sum of eight hundred pounds, shall be clearly void and frustrate, or
else the same Recognizance, or Writing Obligatory, to stand and abide in all
his force, effect, strength, and virtue, any thing in these presents specified
or contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness
etc.

An Annuity granted for two lives, with the Inheritance of Land assured to the
payment thereof.
THis Indenture etc. Between R. I. and W. I. etc. on the one party, Vide a
Lease depending upon this Grant, fol.
and E. S. and A. his wife on the other party; Witnesses, that the said R. and
W. for, and in consideration of the sum of etc. whereof etc. have given and
granted, and by these presents for them, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, do give and grant to the said E. S. and A. his wife, one
Annuity of a hundred pounds etc. by the said R. and W. their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, or by some of them from henceforth yearly to be
paid to the said E. and A. and their Assigns, and to the Survivors of them and
the Assign of the Survivor of them, by, and during all the term of the
natural life of the said E. and A. and the natural life of the longer liver
of them, at, or within the tendering house etc. or at the place where the said
tendering house now stands, at two equal payments in every year, in manner
and form following; viz. On the eight and twentieth day of October, between the
hours of etc. fifty pounds, and on the eight and twentieth day of April,
between the like hours in the afternoon of the same day, fifty pounds; The
first payment thereof to begin and to be made on the eight and twentieth day of
October next etc. and so from thenceforth to have continuance, and yearly to be
paid to the said E. and A. and the longer liver of them every year, upon the
said days, and within the said times, and at the said place, during the
natural lives of the said E. and A. and the natural life of the longer liver
of them: And for a good and certain assurance and surety to be had and made to
the said E and A. his wife, of, and for the said Annuity and yearly payment of
a hundred pounds, to them and to the Survivor of them, well and truly to be
made every year, during their natural lives, and during the natural life of
the longer liver of them, according to the tenor, effect, and true meaning of
these presents: The said R. J. has given, granted, bargained, and sold, and by
these presents does clearly and fully bargain and sell unto the said E. and A.
his wife, and to their Heirs, and Assigns, all that the Manor etc. and all
that the Manors etc. and all and singular Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Woods,
Under-woods, and Hereditaments to the said Manors etc. and all and singular
Courts etc. and all the Right etc, to have and to hold the said Manors,
Messuages etc. to the said E. and A. his wife, their Heirs and Assigns, to the
only use of the said E. and A. their Heirs and Assigns: And the said W. I. has
given etc. unto the said E. and A. his wife, and to their Heirs and Assigns,
all and singular Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Woods, Under-woods,
Rents, Reversions, Services, profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments, which the
said W. I. has or ought to have within the Parish and Feilds of C. in the
County of S. to have etc. ut preantea. Provided always, and it is conditioned,
granted, and concluded, and agreed by, and between the said parties to these
presents, for themselves, their Heirs etc. by these presents; That if the said
R. I. or W. I. or either of them, or the Heirs etc. do well and truly content
and pay, or cause etc. to the said E. and A. and to the Survivors of them, and
their Assigns, and the Assigns of the Survivors of them, the said Annuity and
yearly payment of a hundred pounds, at two equal payments every year, yearly,
during the natural life of the said E. and A. and the natural life of the
longer liver of them, on the eight and twentieth day of Oct: and on the eight
and twentieth day of April, from thenceforth at the place and between the hours
therefore limited and appointed, in, and by these present Indentures: And if it
shall happen the said E. and A. nor either of them, nor any other authorized
by, and from them, or either of them to be present, at the place and times
limited and appointed for the payment of the said Annuity, ready to receive
the said payment: Then if the said R. and W. their Heirs, Executors, and
Assigns, or one of them; do upon demand to be therefore made at the now Mansion
house of the said R. I. at etc. by the said E. and A. or any other authorized
for them, or for one of them, at, and upon the tenth day next after any of the
said days and times before limited and appointed for the payment of the said
yearly Annuity, pay, or cause etc. to the said E. and A. or their lawful
Assign or Attorney, so much of the said yearly payment or Annuity as then shall
be behind, and unpaid, and all the Arrearages of the same. Then the Gift,
Grant, Bargain, and Sale made of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, and
Tenements, and all other the Premises by these presents bargained and sold to
the said E. and A and to their Heirs, shall be clearly and utterly void and
frustrate to all intents and purposes, as though the same had never been made:
And that then, and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to, and for the said R.
and W. their Heirs and Assigns, to enter into the said Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, by them severally bargained and sold by
these presents as aforesaid, and the same to have again and repossess as in
their several former Estates, any thing in these presents contained, to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And that then, and from
thenceforth, the said E. and A. and their Heirs, and all and every person and
persons to be seized of the Premises, or any part thereof by form, or under the
state of the said E. and A. or either of them shall stand and be seized of the
said Manors etc. in the said County of D. to the only use and behoof of the
said R. I. and of his Heirs, and to none other use, or uses whatsoever, and of
the said Manors, Messuages etc. in the said County of S. to the only use of
the said W. I. and of his Heirs, and to none other use or uses whatsoever; And
that then also all assurances to be made of the Premises, and of every parcel
thereof, shall be to the said last recited several uses, and to none other. And
the said R. and W. for themselves etc. do covenant and grant, and either of
them covenanteth etc. in manner and form etc. viz. That the said I. at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is the true and lawful Owner
of the said Manors of etc. and of the same Manors and Premises in his own
Right, and to his own use is, and stands lawfully and solely seized in his
Demesne as of Fee-simple, without any Condition, Mortgage, Limitation of Use,
or Uses. And that he has good Right, Power, and Authority, to give, grant,
bargain, sell, and assure the said Manors, and all other the Premises in etc.
to the said E. and A. and to their Heirs and Assigns, in form aforesaid.

And further that the said W. I. has power to sell, and is solely seized in
the Manors etc. in etc. informa Prelimitata. And also that the said Manors
and other the Premises in etc. and the said Messuages etc. in etc. now are,
and from, and after any default of payment of the said Annuity, or any part
thereof, happening contrary to the form and and effect aforesaid, shall be, stand,
and continue to the said E. and A. and to their Heirs and Assigns for ever,
clear and free discharged, exonerated, and acquitted, or otherwise by the said
R. and W. or their Heirs, or by one of them, and his Heirs, from time to time,
and at all times sufficiently saved harmless of, and from all and singular
former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Charges, Estates, Titles, Fine, and
Fines for Alienation by these presents, Joyntures, Dowers, Americaments,
Arrerages of Rents, and all other Encumbrances whatsoever, the chief Rents and
Services to be due and payable to the chief Lord, or Lords of the Fee, or Fees
of the Premises, in respect of their Seigniory only, and all Estates and
Grants made and granted for one, two, or three lives of the Premises,
according to the custom of the said Manors etc. And also one Lease etc. And
also all Estates and Grants heretofore made and granted of the Customary and
Copyhold Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in C. aforesaid, or of any part
thereof, for term of one, two, or three lives, upon all which Grants, Leases,
and Estates, the old and ancient yearly Rents and Services, or more, been
reserved, and from henceforth during the several continuances in the said
Leases and Estates to be due and payable to the Owner, and Owners of the
Reversion of the Premises only except and fore-prised.

And further the said R. I. and W. I. covenant etc. that if it do fortune that
the said Annuity and yearly payment of a hundred pounds and every part thereof,
be not well and truly contented and paid to the said etc. and to their Assigns,
and to the Survivor of them, and to the Assigns of the Survivors of them,
during the term etc. according to the tenor and purport of these presents,
that then, and at the time of such default made in payment thereof, or of any
part thereof, and from thenceforth for ever, the said Manors and Premises in
B. etc. shall, or lawfully may be, and continue to the said E. and A. and to
their Heirs and Assigns, of the clear yearly value of etc. of old and ancient
Rent not inhaunced or improved, at any time or times within the term of twenty
years now last past, over and above all Charges or Reprises; and also that
then, and from, and after the time of such default made in the payment of the
said Annuity, or any part thereof, as is aforesaid, and from henceforth for ever
the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in C. etc. shall be of
the yearly value of etc. and that the same Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
in C. aforesaid, now be let and leased for the yearly Rent of etc. and so the
same being holden and farmed.

And further, that then, and for ever after the time of any such default so
happening in payment of the said Annuity of a hundred pounds, and any part
thereof, as is aforesaid: The said E. and A. their Heirs and Assigns, shall, or
may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy the said Manors, Messuages etc. by these
presents bargained etc. And then also and from thenceforth shall, or may
lawfully have, take, perceive, receive and enjoy all and singular the Rents,
Issues, and Profits thereof, and of every part thereof, to, and for the only
commodity, use, and behoof of the said E. and A. and of their Heirs end Assigns
for ever.

Here follows an Article for delivery of the Evidence upon default.

Provided always that if the said R. I. and W. I. their heirs and assigns, or
any of them shall happen not to make true payment to the said E. and A. and
their assigns, and to the Survivor of them and his assigns of the said Annuity,
or yeatly payment of, etc. by, and during the term of the natural lives of the
said E. and A. and the life of the longer liver of them according to the tenor
and true meaning of these presents, but shall make default in payment thereof,
or of any part thereof, so that the said E. and A. and their assigns by reason
of the said default, shall, or lawfully may from thence forth, possess and hold
the said Manors, etc. and other the above bargained premises, and have, enjoy,
perceive, and take the rents, revenues, issues, and profits thereof, according
to the intent, purport, and true meaning above expressed and declared in these
presents, That then the said Annuity, or yearly payment of one hundred pound by
these presents above bargained to the said E. and A. his wife shall cease,
determine, and be no longer paid: A Covenant here follows for making
assurance, etc. of the premises to be conveied and made sure to the said E. and
A. etc. and to their heirs and assigns, according to the true meaning of these
presents, and upon the conditions therein contained, and not otherwise; so as
the said demise, assurance, or assurances extend not to take away or diminish
such interest and estate as the said R. and W. have or either of them, or the
heirs and assigns of either of them, is, or are of right to have in the
premises; And so also as the same extend not to take away, or to impair any
any such Lease or interest for term of years as the said R. and W. or either of
them in the mean time shall have of the Grant and Demise of the said E. and A.
or either of them, nor any Rent, or Profit which they are to have by reason of
any such Demise.

Here follows a Covenant for making absolute Assurance after breach of
payment of the Annuity: And then a Covenant on Mr. S. his part for giving an
Acquittance upon every payment of the said Annuity made according to the tenor
of this Indenture. In witness, etc.

A Clause in a Deed of Annuity whereby the Grantees are enabled to sell the
Distress, if it be not redeemed by a day.
ANd the Granter Covenanteth with the Grantees, etc. That if every A Clause to
sell a Distress.
such distress and distresses to be taken as aforesaid, shall not from time to
time so often as any such shall be taken, be redeemed from the said R. and S.
and the Survivor of them their Executors or Assigns, within the space of. etc.
next after the taking thereof, That then it shall, and may be lawful, to, and
for the said, etc. to make sale of all, and every such Distress and Distresses,
as aforesaid, and thereof to have, levy, and enjoy the Arrerages of the said
yearly Rent and Payments of the pain, and pains aforesaid, forfeited as
aforesaid, without any molestation, vexation, or impediment of any person, or
persons whatsoever.

A Covenant for giving an acquittance upon every payment of an Annuity.
ANd the said I. S. and A. his wife, for themselves their Executors, etc. do
covenant etc. that the said I. and A. his wife, and their A Covenant to give an
Acquittance.
Assigns, upon the receipt of every payment of the said Annuity to them, or any
of them hereafter to be made, according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, shall, and will upon request therefore to be made, deliver a Writing
under their hand and Seal, plainly testifying and reporting the same receipt
and payment from time to time, so often as the said I. or A. or their Assigns
shall receive any such payment.

A Clause for putting one in possession of an Annuity.
ANd the said I. H. has put the said I. I. in full possession and Seisin of
the said Annuity, or yearly Rent of forty pounds, for and during all the said
term of one and twenty years, well and truly to be paid, in form aforesaid, at
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, and in part thereof, did pay and
deliver to the said I. I. one silver Groat of lawful etc. which the same I.
has received acccordingly, and folded the same about the labell of that part
of these presents, which is sealed with the Seal of the said I. H.

Assignments.
An Assignment of a Rent reserved upon a Lease.
TO all Christian people etc. recite the Demise to the end of the Reddendum,
and then know ye that I the said H. F. in consideration etc. have given,
granted, assigned, and set over, and by these presents etc. as well the
Counterpain of the said Indenture of Lease, under the hand and Seal of the said
R. B. and the said yearly Rent of etc. and every part and parcel thereof, and
all the Arrerages of the same, or any part thereof, as also all such Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Reversion, Term, and Demand, as I the said H. F. have,
may, might, should, or ought to have, as well of, and in the said yearly Rent
of etc. and every part and parcel thereof, and the Arrearages aforesaid, by
virtue of the said Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein contained, or
otherwise: As also of, in, or to the said Messuages etc. and all other the
Premises with their Appurtenances, by the said Indenture demised; To have,
levy, perceive, and enjoy the said yearly Rent of six pounds thirteen shillings
four pence, and every part and parcel thereof, and all the Arrerages aforesaid,
together with the said Counterpain of the Indenture aforesaid, and also all the
Estate etc. aforesaid, and all other the Ptemisses to the said H. B. his
Executors etc. to the purpose, use etc. from the day of the date hereof, for,
and during all the residue of the said term of one and twenty years, and for,
and during all further term and Interest of me the said H. F. yet to come in
the Premises, or any part thereof, in like, and in as large, ample, and
beneficial manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as I the said H. F.
or my Assigns should, or might have done by force of the said Indenture, or by
any other ways or means whatsoever, In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease of a Manor of Rents reserved upon under Leases
thereout made, and of Bonds and Covenants made to the Vendor.
THis Indenture etc. Between Sir N of L. etc. on the one party, and W. F. and
M. of L. on the other party witnesses, that whereas T. A. Gent. Son and Heir of
T. A. Gent. brother of the late T. A. L. Chancellor of E. by his Indenture of
Lease bearing date the 23. day of Au: An: 4. Edward 6. did demise etc. to T: B.
Gentleman, all that his Manor of W. F. with the Appurtenances in the County of
E. which he the said T. A. then had in reversion, after the decease of the Lady
E. A. late wife of the above named L. T. A. then having the actual possession
of the said Manor; To have and to hold all and singular the said Manors with
the Appurtenances, unto the said T. B. his Executors or Assigns, from the Feast
of Saint Michael the Archangel, immediately following next after the decease of
the aforementioned E. A. unto the end and term of sixty years from thence etc.
yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said T. A. his Heirs and Assigns,
six and forty pounds of etc. by the year, at two terms of the year; That is to
say, at the Feasts of the Annunciation etc. and Saint Michael etc. by even
portions, during the said term, As by the said Indenture of Lease etc. And
whereas the said T. B. by his Indenture dated 31. Aug. predict. An: 4. predict.
did bargain, fell and set over unto Sir G. N. Knight, Father of the said N. all
his said Indenture of Lease of the said Manor of W. F: with the Appurtenances,
and all his Estate, Right, Title, Use, Interest, and term of years, which he
then had to come, of, and in the said Manor and all other the Premises, by
virtue of the Indenture of Lease first in these presents recited; To have and
to hold the said Manor with the Appurtenances, unto the said Sir G. N. his
Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of Saint M. next and immediately following
the decease of the aforementioned Lady E. A. unto the full end and term of all
the years then to come, specified, and comprised in the said former Indenture
of Lease, as by the said Indenture made of the Bargain, Sale, and Assignment
aforesaid, more at large may, and will appear.

And whereas also the said Sir G. N. by his Poll-Deed under his Seal, dated the
27. of April, Au. 13. R. R; Eliz. for, and toward the better maintenance and
preferment in liveing of the said Sir N. his Son, and for other reasonable
causes, him moving, did give, grant, assign, and set over unto the said Sir N.
his Estate, Right, Interest, and term of years, of, in, and to the said
Manors of VV. F. with all and singular his Members and Appurtenances; To have,
hold, possess, and enjoy the said Manor, with all and singular the
Appurtenances to the same belonging, to the said S. his Executors and Assigns,
from, and after the date of the said Poll-Deed, during the residue of the said
term of etc. as by the said Poll-Deed etc. The said Sir N. for, and in
consideration of the sum of nine hundred pounds of lawful etc. whereof etc.
Has bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these presents does
wholly, clearly, and absolutely bargain etc. to the said VV. F. all his Estate
and term of years of, and in the said Manor of VV. F. with all and singular
the Appurtenances, in the said County of E. and the Right, Title, Interest,
Reversion, and Reversions, Demand, and Term of years whatsoever, which the
said S. has, or may, or ought to have, in, or to the said Manor with the
Appurtenances, and every, or any part or parcel thereof, and all Leases,
Writings, Indentures, Bonds, Exemplifications, Court-Rolls, Rentals, Escripts,
and Minuments whatsoever, which the said Sir N. has, touching or concerning
the said Manor with the Appurtenances, or any part thereof, and all and
singular Rents and other Profits whatsoever, reserved upon any Lease or Leases
heretofore made of the Premises, or any part thereof, with all the advantages,
commodities, and benefits in Law whatsoever, which lawfully may be had, used,
or taken upon any Covenants, Grants, or Agreements, contained in the said
Leases heretofore made of the Premises, or any part thereof, either by the said
Sir G. N. or the said S. N. and of all and singular Bonds whatsoever, to them
or either of them made, for, or touching the Premises, or any part thereof; To
have, and to hold, and also to possess and enjoy the said Manor, with all and
singular the Appurtenances, and all the said Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Reversion, Reversions, Demand, and Term of years, of the said S. in, and to
the same, and all the said Leases, Writings, Indentures, Bonds,
Exemplifications, Court-Rolls, Rentals, Escripts, and Minuments, and all and
singular the Rents and Profits aforesaid, and all the advantages, commodities,
and benefits aforesaid, and all and every other the Premises above mentioned,
to be bargained and sold unto the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, by, and during all the residue of the said term of sixty years,
mentioned in the said Original Indenture of Lease, and yet to come.

And the said S. N. for him etc. covenanteth etc. in manner and form etc. viz.
That the said conveyance made of the Premises, from the said T. B. to the said
G. N. and the said conveyance thereof made from the said S. G. to the said S.
are good, lawful, and perfect conveyances of the said Manor, and every part
thereof, according to the purport and effect of the said conveyances: And that
by virtue and force thereof, the said S. at the ensealing of these presents,
has lawful Right, Title, Interest and Authority, to bargain, sell, assign,
and set over the Premises, and every part thereof to the said W. F. his
Executors and Assigns, according to the intent and true meaning of these
presents.

And also that the said Manors with the Appurtenances, and all, and every
other the said Premises, at the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
shall be, and from henceforth, by, and during all the refidue of the said term
of sixty years to come, shall stand and continue to the said W. his Executors
and Assigns, clearly and freely discharged, or otherwise from time to time
within convenient time, after notice and warning given, kept harmless by the
said S. his Heirs Executors, or Administrators, of, and from all and singular
former Bargains, Sales, Leases, Forfeitures, Re-entries, Cause, and Causes of
Forfeiture, or Re-entry, Arrearages of Rents, Charges, Estates, Titles,
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, given, or caused by the said S. G.
and S. or either of them, and by the means or procurement of them, or either of
them, or any other person or persons, lawfully claiming, in, by, or from them,
or any of them, the Rent, Covenants, Conditions, Promises, and Agreements
specified in the said Original which on, and for the party of the said T. B.
and his Assigns, hereafter shall grow due to be paid and performed: And one
Lease made by etc. by Indenture dated etc. unto etc. of the Capital place or
chief Mansion of the said Manor, and diverse parts of the said Manor, to hold
to the said etc. and his Assigns, from the Feast etc. to the end etc. Upon
which Lease there is reserved, and shall, or lawfully may be payable yearly
during the continuance of the same Lease unto the said W. F. and his Assigns,
the yearly Rent of five and twenty pounds of lawful etc. And also the several
Estates made to the several Copyholders of the said Manor, according to the
custom of the said Manor; whereupon the old accustomed Rents and Services are
reserved yearly to be paid and done during the said Estates, according to the
old custom of the said Manor, always fore-prised and excepted.

And also the said S. N. for him etc. covenanteth etc. that the said VV. his
Executors and Assigns, from henceforth shall, or may lawfully have, possess,
and enjoy all the Right, Title, Interest, and Term of years of the said S. N.
of, in, and to the said Manor with the Appurtenances, and all other the
Premises, with the yearly Rents and Services before mentioned, according to
the several Reservations of the same, without any let, disturbance, or
vexation of the said G. and S. or either of them, or of any other person, or
persons, by the means, title, or procurement of them, or either of them (except
only as before in these presents is excepted:) And that the said Sir G. N. and
S. N. and either of them, and the Executors and Administrators of them, and
either of them shall, and will from time to time, agree, permit, and suffer,
that the said VV. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, at his, and their
proper costs and charges, may by all and lawful means sue and prosecute all,
and all manner of Actions, Suits, Processes, and Recoveries upon, or by reason
of any Covenants, Grants, or Agreements, by any person, or persons heretofore
made, either with the said Sir G. or S. by any Indenture, or Writing aforesaid,
and upon, or by reason of any Bond, Statute, or Recognizance to them, or either
of them made for performance of the said Covenants, Grants, or Agreements, or
any of them, touching the said Leases and Demises, or otherwise for any other
cause touching the Premises.

And moreover that the said Sir G. and S. their Executors and Administrators,
shall at all times allow and avow all and every the said Actions, Suits,
Processes, and Recoveries in their or either of their names to be had or
prosecuted, at the only costs and charges of the said VV. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns; And that all benefits and advantages coming or
growing of, or by the said Actions, Suits, Processes, and Recoveries shall, and
may be had and taken, and quietly enjoyed to the said VV. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, without let or impediment of the said Sir G. and
S. or either of them, of, or by reason of any Act or thing to be done,
knowledged, or procured by them, or either of them, without the consent of the
said W. F. his Execut. or Admin. And further that they the said Sir G. or the
said S. or either of them, has not released or discharged any of the Bond, or
Bonds, Obligations, or Recognizances hereafter mentioned; that is to say, one
Recognizance enrolled in the Court of Chancery, knowledged by the said E. P.
and others, to the said Sir G. N. touching the Covenants of the Lease aforesaid
made etc. and one Obligation of etc. dated the etc. made by the said etc. And
the said W. F. for him etc. covenanteth etc. that he the said VV. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at, or upon reasonable request to them,
or any of them in that behalf to be made by the said T. A. the Leasor
aforesaid, or his Heirs, shall at the end of the said term of sixty years,
deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said T. A. his Heirs or Assigns, all
such Evidences, Court-Rolls, Minuments, Escripts, and Writings, as he the said
VV. his Executors or Assigns, have received or shall receive of the said S. his
Executors or Administrators, touching the Inheritance of the Premises, or any
part thereof: And such Court-Rolls and Rentalls, as hereafter in the mean time
shall be made or renewed, of the Premises, or any part thereof, by the said VV.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, and with them at the end of the said
term of sixty years, shall be in the custody of the said VV. or his Assigns.
In witness etc.

The Assignment of a Statute.
THis Indenture, etc. Witnesses, That whereas W. H. etc. by a certain
Statute, or Recognisance, bearing date, etc. Recognized and Sealed before Sir
R. C. Knight, then L. Chief Justice of England, according to the form of the
Statute late made and provided for the recovery of debts, became bound to the
said W. C. in the sum of one hundred pound of lawful, etc. payable as by the
said Recognisance more plainly may appear, The said W. C. for diverse good
considerations him thereunto moving, does by these presents fully and clearly
Give, Grant, Alien, Assign, and set Over unto the said R. S. his Executors,
Administators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use, and behoof for
ever, the said Recognisance, and the debt, and duty therein contained, and all
and every the execution, benefit, estate, and interest that may be had,
obtained, or gotten, by reason of the said Recognisance, or any Execution sued
out, or to be sued out thereof; And the said W. C. does by these presents,
make, ordain, constitute, and put in the place and places of him, the said W.
C. his Executors and Administrators and of every of them the said R. S. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, the true, lawful,
and irrevokable Attorney and Atturneyes of him the said W. his Executors and
Administrators, and of every of them, for him and them, and in his, and their
Name or Names, To ask, levy, recover, and receive of the said W. H. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them the said sum of one hundred
pound contained in the said Recognisance, and every part thereof, and also to
sue Execution of the said Recognisance; And also the said W. C. for him, his
Executors and Administrators, does by these presents give, power and Authority
to the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
for, and in the Name and Names of him the said R. C. his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, to do, cause, and procure to be done all,
and every Act, and Acts, Thing, and Things, that is, or are to be done, or that
may be done, for, in, or about the suing out of Execution upon the said
Recognisance, or for, or touching the obtaining or geting of the debt, and duty
therein contained, and every, or any part thereof, in as large ample and
beneficial manner and form, as the same may be done, in, or by the Law.

And the said W, C. Covenanteth, etc. in form, etc. That he the said W. his
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, shall, and will from time to
time, and at all times hereofter, without fraud, guile, deceit, let, or
interruption, suffer the said Letter of Attorney, and the Power and Authority
given or limited by these presents, to stand and continue in full strength,
force and effect, without any revocation, or disanulling thereof, either
directly or indirectly; And that the said W. C. or any other by his means
consent, authority at any time heretofore has not done, or assented unto, and
that he, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any other by his or
their means, consent, or procurement shall not at any time or times hereafter
without the consent and agreement of the said R. S. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, first thereunto to be had in writing under his or
their Hand and Seal, or Hands and Seals, do, or consent unto any Manner, Act or
Acts, or things whatsoever, whereby, or by reason whereof the said Recognisance
or debt therein contained, or any part thereof, or any execution, suit,
benefit, estate, or interest, that is, shall, or may be had or sued upon, or by
reason of the same Recognisance in any wise, is, shall, or may be made void,
released, barred, discharged, hindered or encumbered, other then for one
assignment over of the said Statute, and a Letter of Attorney heretofore made
by him the said W. for the suing out of the Execution upon the said Statute
unto R. C. which is meant, mentioned, and intended not to be any breach of any
Covenant, Grant, or Promise in these presents to be contained. And that he the
said R. S. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them shall,
or may by force of these presents lawfully ask, levy, recover, receive, and
enjoy the said sum of one hundred pound, and every parcel thereof, to his, and
their own proper use and behoof, without let or interruption of the said W. C.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, and without any
account or other thing, of, or for the same or any part thereof to be yielded,
or demanded to, or by him or them, or any of them, And that all suits, extents,
and executions, estate and interest, to be had or prosecuted, or obtained,
upon, or by reason of the said Recognisance, shall be, and may be had, taken
and enjoyed, to, and by the said R. S. his Executors and Assigns, to his and
their own proper use, benefit, and behoof, notwithstanding any Act, or Thing
done, or to be done by him the said W. his Executors or Administrators (other
then before in these presents are excepted and fore-prised.) And also that he
the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them,
shall and may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, at his, and their
will, liberty, and pleasure, and at his, and their costs and charges in the
Law, have, take, and sue out all, and all manner of lawful Actions, Suits,
Writs, Processes, Executions, Petitions, and Demands whatsoever, by, and upon
the said Recognizance, in the name of him the said VV. his Executors, and
Administrators, and every of them, against all and every person, and persons
whatsoever, chargable, or to be charged, by force of the said Recognizance, in
any manner whatsoever.

And further, that he the said VV. C. his Executors and Administrators, and
every of them, shall, and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time,
and at the like costs and charges of the said R. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, avow justify, and maintain with effect, all and
every such Actions, Suits, Writs, Processes, Executions, and Demands
whatsoever, which he the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
or any of them at any time hereafter shall have, or sue out, in the name of
him, the said VV. his Executors and Administrators, or any of them, by, upon,
or by reason of the said Recognizance, without non-suing, disavowing,
discontinuing, withdrawing, or discharging of the same, or any of them, unless
the same be by, and with the special consent and agreement of the said R. S.
his Executors or Administrators, in that behalf first had, and obtained in
Writing under his, or their hands and Seal, or hands and Seals.

And moreover that I the said VV: C. mine Executors and Administrators, and
every of us, upon any reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the
Law of the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of
them, shall, and will make unto him, and them, such other further good and
sufficient Letter, or Letters of Attorney, Assurance and Assurances, as he, or
they, or his, or their Council shall think meet and convenient for or touching
the said Recognizance or any thing that shall, or may be had or obtained by
reason or means thereof, or of any Extent or Execution thereupon to be sued;
and the said R. S. covenanteth, etc. that if the said R. S. at any time
hereafter commence any suit against any person or persons, for, or concerning
the said Statute or Recognizance in the name of the said W. his Executors or
administrators, and shall happen in any of the said suit or suits, to be non
suit or otherwise harred, or any order, sentence or decree to be taken, so that
any costs of suits or Damages or sums of money or other recompense shall be
adjudged, awarded, decreed or ordered against the said W. his Executors or
assigns, in and upon the same withour any willing act done or to be done for
that intent by the said W. his Executors or administrators, that then the said
his etc. shall and will bear and pay, or otherwise save harmless the said W:
his Heirs, Executors and administrators, of and from all such costs of suit,
charges, sums of money, damages or other recompenses as shall be in any such
suit awarded, ordered, judged, or decreed against the said W: his Executors or
administrators for, or concerning the said statute or Recognizance, any thing
in these Presents containned to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding, In witness etc.

An Assignment of the Execution of a Statute after the Liberate sued out.
THis Indenture, etc. Between T. H. on the one party, and E. C. on the other
party; witnesses, that whereas J. W. the twentieth day of January anno, etc.
by one Writing obligatory, bearing Date the same day and time, knowledged and
sealed before, etc. according to the statute lately provided for recovery of
Debts, did knowledge himself to owe, and bind himself to pay to the said T. H.
the sum, etc. in the Feast, etc. Of payment of which ten pounds, the said I.
yet hitherto has made clear default, and by reason thereof the said T. H. has
sued Execution upon the said Writing obligatory, and thereupon in due form of
Law has extended certain houses, buildings, Lands and Tenements in O. in the
County of O. of the yearly value of etc. whereof the said J. after the making
and sealing of the said Writing obligatory, was seized in his Demesne, as of
Fee: All which said houses etc. by virtue of the Queens Majesty's Writ of
Liberate bearing Test. etc. were delivered in Execution for the said debt to
the said T. H. on the twenty third day, etc. to hold to him and his Assigns, as
his free hold, until the same debt with his costs and damages in that behalf
sustained, thereupon should be fully satisfied, as by the Writ of the said
Extent, and the writ of Liberate aforesaid, and by the return of the same Writs
remaining of Record in the high Court of Chancery, more at large will appear:
Now the said T. H. for a certain sum of money etc, has aliened, bargained,
given, and granted. and by these presents does alien etc. unto the said E. C.
and his assigns, all the Interest, Right, Estate, Title, and Term whatsoever,
which the said T. H. has or ought to have, in or to the said houses, etc.
mentioned in the said writ of Liberate, with all and singular their
appurtenances (except only one parcel thereof extended, at the yearly value of
etc. only viz. the Tenement in G. aforesaid, now or lat: in the Tenure or
Occupation) and the said T. H. for the consideration aforesaid, does by these
presents give, grant, alien, bargain, and sell to the said E. C. as well all
and singular writings minuments and specialties concerning the said Term,
Estate, and Interest, which the said T. H. has in the Premises, as also all
the (...) issues rents and profits rising, growing, and come of all the said
houses, buildings, Lands, and Tenements, mentioned in the said Writ of
Liberate, (except only before excepted) since the said twenty third day of etc.
until the time of the ensealing and delivery of these Presents, to have and to
hold all the said Houses, Buildings, Lands, and Tenements, and all other the
premises with their appurtenances, and all the said Estate and Interest, of
the said T. H. of and in the same (except before excepted) to the said E. C.
and his assigns, for and during all such Estate, Term and Interest, as the
said T. by force or virtue of the said Writs of Extent and Liberate, and
Execution of the same, and returns thereof, or otherwise has, or may, or ought
to have in the above bargained Premises now to come, and the said T.
covenanteth, etc. that the said houses etc. (except before excepted) now at the
ensealing etc. stand and be, and from thenceforth shall remain, continue, and
abide unto the said C. etc clearly and freely exonerated discharged etc. of and
from all and singular former bargains, Sales, Grants, Leases, Releases,
Charges, and other Encumbrances whatsoever, by the said T. heretofore made,
done, or agreed unto, or by the same T. to be made or agreed unto at any time
hereafter, contrary to the true meaning and intent of these presents, In
Witness etc.

The Assignment of a Recognizance.
THis Indenture etc. Between I. L. Gentleman on the one party, and S. M. of
etc. on the other party, witnesses, that whereas E. D. of K. in the County of
L. Esquire, by one writing or recognizance bearing date the twenty fifth of
January, anno. 20. R. R. Eliz. taken and knowledged before one of the Ordinary
Masters of her Majesty's high Court of Chancery, became bound unto the said I.
L. in the sum of two hundred pounds of lawful, etc. for the payment of one
hundred and two pounds ten shillings of like money on the twenty sixth day of
April then next ensuing, as by the said Writing or Recognizance, and the
Condition thereof more plainly appears, which said sum of one hundred and
two pounds ten shillings was not paid, nor any parcel thereof was paid to the
said I. L. nor his Assigns, at nor before the twenty sixth day of April, nor
at any time sit hence; by means whereof the said Recognizance became, and now
is, and stands absolute without Condition, and in full force and strength in
the Law. Now the said J. L. for certain good causes and considerations etc.
has assigned, made, ordained, and in his stead and place by these presents,
does put and constitute the above named S. M. his true and lawful Attorney
irrevocable, giving, and by these presents granting unto the said S. M. and his
Assigns, full power and authority. by virtue hereof for him the said J. L. his
Executors or Administrators, and in his or their name or names, and to the
proper use and behoof of the said S. M. to ask, levy, recover, receive, take
up, and demand all that the said sum of two hundred pounds of lawful, etc.
mentioned and expressed in the said Recognizance, and every parcel thereof:
And for non payment thereof, or any parcel thereof, to sue Execution upon the
said Recognizance, and to obtain the moiety of the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments which were of the said E. D. at the time of the knowledging of
the said Recognisance, or at any time sithence, and also the said E. D. his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators for non-payment of the said sum or parcel
thereof, to take and cause to be arrested, and pleas and processes against him
or them to commence, maintain, and defend; and of whatsoever in this behoof
recovered or received Acquittances or other Discharges sufficient for, and in
the name of the said J. L. his Executors, or Administrators to make, seal, and
deliver, Attorneys one or more under him to appoint, and at his pleasure to
revoke the same again, and all and every other thing and things needful and
requisite in and about the premises or any parcel thereof. for and in the
name or names of the said J: L. his Executors or Administrators, to do, make,
execute, and accomplish, as fully and effectually in any thing as he the said
J. L. his Executors or Administrators might or could do, if he or they were
absolutely present, and also the said I. L. by these presents, does ratify,
confirm, approve, and allow, all and whatsoever the said S. M. or his Assigns,
shall do or cause to be done, in, or or about the premises or any parcel
thereof in the name of the said I. L. his Executors or Administrators by virtue
of these Presents And the said I. L. L, for him, etc. covenanteth, etc. in
manner, etc. viz. that he the said I. L. his Executors and Administrators and
every of them shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter at
the reasonable request, and costs and charges in the Law of the said S. M. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, ratify, advow, justify, and allow all
and every such action and actions, suit and suits plaints, processes, Extents,
Judgments, and Executions, as at any time and times hereafter shall be
brought, obtained, procured, commenced, or gotten by the said S. M. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of them in the name or names of the
said I. L. his Execut^rs or Administrators or any of them against the said E.
D. his Heirs Executors or Administrators or any of them, or against his or
their or any of their Goods, Chattells, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments or
any parcel thereof for the levying or recovering of the said sum of two hundred
pounds in the said Writing or Recognizance mentioned, or of any parcel thereof
without any Nonsuit, Release, Retraxit, Disavowry, Discontinuance, or other
wilful hinderance, or delay of the same Actions, Suits, Extents, Judgments,
Executions, or any of them except it shall be by and with the consent of the
said S. M. his Executors or Assigns thereunto first had and obtained in
Writing: And also that he the said I. L. has not at any time heretofore
released nor discharged, nor his Executors nor Administrators shall or will at
any time or times hereafter release or discharge the said Writing or
Recognizance or sum of two hundred pounds therein mentioned nor any parcel
thereof, unless it shall be by, and with the consent of the said S. M. his
Executors and assigns thereunto first had, and obtained in writing, and also
that he the said S. M. his Executors and assigns shall, or lawfully may
peaceably and quietly have, receive, take, and enjoy to his and their own
proper use for ever the said sum of two hundred pounds, and the whole benefit,
profit, commodity, and advantage, with out any time or times hereafter shall be
obtained, recovered and gotten upon, or by reason of the said Writing or
Recognizance, or upon or by reason of any of the same actions, Extenrs,
Judgments* and Executions to be had, brought or commenced upon the same
without any let, trouble or interruption of the said I. his Executors and
administrators or assigns or any of them, or of any other person or persons by
his or their means, and without any account or other thing to him or any of
them, to be therefore had, ye^lded or made, and also the said I. L. covenanteth
etc. that he the said I. L. his Executors and administrators shall and will at
all times hereafter, and from time to time at reasonable request and costs and
charges of the said S. his Executors and assigns, do make, knowledge, and
execute, and suffer to be done, made, knowledged, and executed all and every
such further act and acts, thing and things, and devise and devises whatsoever,
for the further, better, and perfecter assigning, conveying, and assuring of
the Premises, and every parcel thereof to the said G. M. his Executors and
Assigns, in form, and to the use aforesaid, as by the said G. M. his Executors,
or Assigns, or his, or their Council Learned, shall be reasonably demised,
advised, or required. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Recognizance for performance of Covenants.
THis Indenture etc. Between Sir V. B. etc. on the one party, and G. T. etc. on
the other party, witnesses, that whereas etc. reciting the Covenant of the
former Indenture.

And whereas also the said I. C. by his Recognizance, bearing date 1. Au: An:
14. Reginae Eliz. does stand bound to the said Sir V. in the sum of a 1000.
pounds of lawful etc. for the performance of all and singular the Covenants,
Grants, Articles, Clauses, Sentences, and Agreements specified in the said
former Indenture, on the part of the said I. C His Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns to be performed; As by the said Recognizance
remaining of Record, before our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, in her Court at
Westminster, commonly called the King's Bench, and the Condition thereof more
plainly and at large may, and does appear.

Now the said Sir V. B. for very good and reasonable considerations, him
thereunto moving, has granted, assigned, and set over unto the said G. T. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as well the said Recognizance and sum
of money therein specified; As also all and singular Forfeitures, Recoveries,
Advantages, and Commodities whatsoever, which at any time, or times, can or may
be lawfully had, or taken, by reason or means of the said Recognizance, or of
any Judgment thereupon given, or to be given, or of any execution thereof to be
had: And the said Sir V. B. for him etc. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That is
to say,

That he the said Sir V. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them,
from henceforth from time to time, and at all times, shall, and will agree,
permit, and suffer the said G. T. his Executors, Administrators, Substitutes,
and Assigns, at their own costs and charges, to sue and prosecute in the name
and names of the said Sir V. his Executors and Administrators, all and singular
Writ, and Writs, Process, Judgments, Recoveries, Extents, and Executions,
without any time, can or may be lawfully had, or pursued, for, or upon the said
Recognizance, or any Judgment thereupon given, or to be given against the said
I. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or against any other
person, or persons whatsoever.

And also that he the said Sir V. his Executors, and Administrators, upon every
reasonable request of the said G. T. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
and at the costs and charges of the said G. his Executors, or Administrators,
shall, and will make, seal, and deliver to the said G. T. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, such Letter, and Letters of Attorney, for the
suing of the said Recognizance, and recovery of the sum of money therein
specified, as at any time shall be needful.

And also at the like request, and costs and charges aforesaid, shall, and will
avouch and allow, of all and every the said Suits, Process, and other the
Premises.

And shall not wittingly at any time or times, do, or knowledge any act, or
acts, thing, or things, which shall hinder, let, or stay any of the said Suits,
Process, Judgments, Recoveries, Extents, or Executions aforesaid.

And also that the said G. T. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, may
from time to time, have, hold, and enjoy to their own uses, all and singular
such Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Hereditaments,
as shall be had or taken in execution of the said Recognizance, or any Judgment
thereof given, or to be given, and all other Advantages, Forfeitures, and
Benefits, which at any time shall, or may be lawfully gotten, or recovered by
means thereof, without any let, claim, disturbance, or impediment, by, or with
the consent and will of the said Sir V. his Executors, or Administrators, and
without any account therefore, or for any part thereof to be made, or to be given
to the said Sir V. his Executors or Administrators.

And also that after Execution shall be had of the said Recognizance, or of any
Judgment thereof given, or to be given; That, then at all times during the space
of two years then next following, the said Sir V. his Executors and
Administrators, upon every reasonable request to them made by the said G. T.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, and at the costs and charges of the
said G. T. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall, and will grant,
convey, and set over unto the said G. T. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, or to such other person, or persons as the said G. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns shall name and appoint, all and singular such Goods,
Chattels, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Hereditaments aforesaid, as
shall be had, or taken in Execution as aforesaid, without retaining or account
requiring thereof, or of any part thereof to the said Sir V. his Executors or
Administrators.

And also that the said Sir V. heretofore has not, And that he, his Executors,
or Administrators, hereafter shall not release, acquit, or discharge the said
I. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of his, or their
Feoffors, or any of their Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattels, or any of their
persons, of, or for any of the Covenants Articles, or Agreements, contained in
the said former Indenture, neither of, or for the said Recognizance, or sum of
money therein specified, or any part thereof, or any Process, Extent, Judgment, or
Execution therefore had, or sued, or to be had or sued without it be at, and by
the special request and agreement of the said I. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, first therefore made, and given to the said Sir V.
in writing, under his, or their hands or Seals.

And also that the said Sir V. his Executors, and Administrators, and every of
them, at any time hereafter at the request, and costs, and charges of the said
G. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall, and will do, make,
knowledge, and suffer, all, and every lawful and reasonable act, and acts,
thing, and things, in the Law which shall be needful for the making void and
discharging of the said Recognizance, and such judgments and executions as be,
or shall be had, or given upon the same.

And the said G. T. covenanteth etc.

That he the said G. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at their own
costs and charges, from time to time, shall, and will save, and keep harmless
the said Sir V. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, of, and
for all and singular such Issues, Amerciaments, Fines, Costs, and Charges
whatsoever, as shall happen to be due, or payable, for, or by reason of any
Writ, or Writs, Process, or Judgments to be had, in any Suit to be attempted,
for, and in the name of the said Sir V. his Executors, or Administrators, by
the means or appointment of the laid G. T. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, for, and about the said
Recognizance, or sum of money therein specified, or any part thereof. In witness
etc.

An Assignment of a Statute.
THis Indenture made between R. M. Esquire, on the one party, and I. G. on the
other party, witnesses, whereas W. B. of H. by his Recognizance, or Writing
Obligatory, bearing date the 25th day of July, the 3. and 4. years of the Reign
of P. and M. late King and Queen of England, taken and knowledged before Sir R.
B: Knight, then Lord chief Justice of the Common Bench at Westminster,
according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided, did become
bound to the said R. M. in 200. Marks of lawful etc. to have been paid now
long since, as by the said Recognizance appears.

The said R. M. for good and special causes and considerations him moving,
has given, granted, and delivered, and by these presents, does clearly and
absolutely give and grant unto the said I. G. the said Recognizance, or Writing
Obligatory, with all Forfeitures, Advantages, and Commodities thereof, or thereby
to be had, or taken.

And also the said R. M. for him, his Heirs etc. covenanteth etc. in form etc.
that is to say;

That the said Recognizance now is, and stands clearly forfeited in the Law
unto the said R. M.

And that he the said R. M. his Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, from henceforth shall and will permit, agree, and suffer, that the said
I. G. his Executors, Administrators, Substitutes, and Assigns, at their own
costs and charges may from time to time, sue, and prosecute in the name, and
names of the said R. his Executors and Administrators, all, and all manner of
Writ and Writs, Process, Extents, Suits, Judgments, and Executions whatsoever,
which may be lawfully had, sued, or prosecuted, for, or by reason of the said
Recognizance, either against the said W. B. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, or against any other person, or persons, their Goods, Chattels,
Lands, and Tenements, or any of them.

And that also the said R. M. his Executors, and Administrators, shall, and
will upon reasonable request, and at the costs and charges aforesaid, avouch
and allow all, and every the said Suits, Process, and other the Premises, and
shall not witingly at any time, or times, hinder, let, or stay the said I. G.
his Executors, Administrators, Substitutes, or Assigns to go forward and
prevail in the same Suits and Process, and other the Premises, or in any of
them.

And that the said I. G. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, may have,
hold, take, and enjoy to their own uses, all, and singular such Goods,
Chattels, Lands, and Tenements, as shall be delivered in execution upon the
said Recognizance, or otherwise by reason of the same. And all other benefits
and advantages thereby, or by any means thereof, to be had or recovered, without
any let, disturbance of the said R. M: his Executors, or Administrators, and
without any account thereof or be made, or given to the said R. his Executors,
or Administrators at any time.

And further, that when, and after such time as any execution shall be had as
aforesaid, That then the said R. M. his Executors, and Administrators, and
every of them, for, and against themselves (upon any reasonable request, to
them, or any of them therefore to be made) shall, and will, from time to time,
grant, bargain, sell, and set over unto the said I. G. his Executors,
Administrators, or to such other person or persons, as the said I. his
Executors or Administrators shall in that behalf, name, and appoint, all such
Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements, and other profits whatsoever, as shall be so
had and delivered in execution of the said Recognisance, or otherwise as
aforesaid, to be had and enjoyed accordingly during the same execution without
any profit or benefit to be retained, or account thereof to be made to the said
R. his Executors or Administrators in any wise.

And moreover, that he the said R. his Executors or Administrators hereafter
shall not release, acquit, or discharge the same Recognisance, or sum of money
aforesaid, or any part thereof, or any manner of Writ, Process, Suite,
Judgment, or Execution to be had, of, or for the said Recognisance, or sum of
money, or any part of the same without the special Request, Consent, and Grant,
of the said I. his Executors or Administrators to be made and given to the said
R. his Executors or Administrators by Writing to be Signed and Sealed, with the
hand or hands of the said I. his Executors, or Administrators.

And the said I. G. Covenanteth, etc. That he the said I. his executors,
administrators or assigns, shall, and will, from time to time at their own
costs and charges, bear, satisfy, and pay to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, and
to her Officers, all and singular such Fines, Issues, Amerciaments and sums of
money whatsoever as shall be due or payable, for, or by reason of all and
singular Writs, Suits, or Process to be had or sued for, or upon the said
Recognisance by the said I. his executors, administrators or assigns, in the
name or names of the said R. his executors or administrators, Or else that he
the said I. G. his executors, administrators or assigns, shall, and will, from
time to time, and at all times well and sufficiently, save and keep harmless
the said R. his heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them, of, and
from all and every the said fines, issues, amerciaments, and sums of money
aforesaid, and every part thereof, as well against our said Sovereign Lady the
Queen, and her Officers aforesaid, as against all, and every other person or
persons whatsoever. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease in Reversion from her Majesty well passed.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. W. etc. on the one party, and R. M. etc.
on the other party, witnesses, That whereas our Sovereign, etc. by her Graces
Letters Patents under the Seal of her Majesty's Court of Exchequer, dated, etc.
has demised, and to Fermletten to one R. B. all that her Highness parcel of
wast ground, etc. To have, etc. to the said R. B. etc. from the Feast of the
Annuntiation, etc. then last past, unto the end of the term of one and twenty
years, from thence, etc. yielding. etc. as by the said Letters Patents, etc.
And where also our said Sovereign, etc. by her Highness Letters Patents under
the great Seal of England, bearing date at W. etc. for considederation in the
same Letters Patents expressed, has demised, etc. to the said T. W. his
Executors and Assigns, amongst other things, all that her parcel of wast
ground, etc. To have and to I old the said Lands, Tenements, etc. unto the said
T. W. his Executors and Assigns, from the time that the said Letters Patents
and Demise thereof to the said R. B. as aforesaid made by Expiration, Surrender,
Forfeiture or Determination thereof, or by any other means whatsoever, first
and next should happen to be void, ended, and determined, unto the end of the
term of thirty years, from thence, etc. lyeelding etc. as by, etc.

Now this Indenture further witnesses, That the said T. W. for, and in
consideration of a certain sum, etc. whereof, etc. has bargained* sold,
aliened, assigned, and set over; And by these presents, etc. unto the said R.
M. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, all the Interest, estate, and
term of thirty years to him the said T. W. by the said Letters Patents granted,
of, and in the said Lands, etc. and of, and in all and singular other the
premises before in these presents recited, and to him the said T. W. by the
said Letters Patents granted; as aforesaid, and of, in, and to every part and
parcel thereof with the appurtenances; and also all the estate, right, title,
interest, term of thirty years Reversion, claim and demand whatsoever, which he
the said T. has. or may, or ought to have, or claim, of, in, or to the said
Lands, etc. and all and singular other the premises before in these presents
rented, and of, in, or to every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances
by force and virtue of the said Letters Patents, to him the said T. granted as
aforesaid, or any thing therein contained, To have, and to hold the same
premises, and all the said estate, right, title, interest, term of thirty years
reversion, claim, and demand whatsoever, of him the said T. W. of, in, and to
the same premises before recited, and, of, in, and to every part and parcel
thereof, with the appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said R. M. his
Executors or Assigns, in as large, ample, and beneficial manner and form, to
all intents and purposes, as he the said T. W. has, or may, or ought to have,
and enjoy the same by force and virtue of the said Letters Patents, to him the
said T. W. granted, as aforesaid, or any thing therein contained. And the said
T. VV. covenanteth, etc. that he the said T. his Executors or Administrators,
shall or will at all times hereafter, and from time to time free, acquit,
exonerate and discharge or otherwise in convenient time after reasonable
request sufficiently save and keep harmles the said premises before in these
presents recited, and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances and
the interest, estate, and term of years thereof by the said Letters Patents
granted, of, and from all, and all manner of former Bargains, Sales, Gifts
Grants, Leases, Charges; Titles, troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had,
made, committed, or done, by him the said T. W. or by any other person, or
persons, by his assent, means, consent, or procurement; The Rents, Covenants,
Clauses, Articles and Agreements in the said Letters Patents reserved and
contamed, which on the part and behalf of the said T. W. his Executors, or
Administrators, from henceforth, for, or in respect of the Premises, assigned,
or granted by these presents, are, or ought to be observed, performed,
fulfilled or kept, only excepted and fore-prised.

Of which said Rents, Covenants, Clauses, Articles and Agreements, and every of
them, the said R. M. does covenant etc. at all times hereafter, and from time
to time, to acquit, exonerate, and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save,
or keep harmless the said T. W. his Executors and Administrators, against our
said Sovereign Lady, her Heirs and Successors, Officers, and Assigns, and every
of them, In witness etc.

An Assignment of a part of a Stock adventured in a Voyage for discovery of
Cathaia.
THis Indenture etc. Between M. L. etc. on the one party, and M. F. on the
other party, witnesses, that whereas the said M. L. is and stands indebted
unto the said M. F. in the sum of 205. pounds of etc.

And also whereas the said N. is charged to other persons, for the said M. for
the payment of 600. pounds of like money, which the said M. cannot yet satisfy
or pay, as the same is, and shall be due and payable. And whereas the said M.
has amongst others a stock in money of 120 l. and above to a great value, as
the said M. affirms in the late Voyage, lately discovered by M. F. Esquire,
unto Meta incognita, and unto Cathaia, and other Countries intended to be
discovered in the Northwest parts, which sum of money the said M. cannot yet
have out of the said Voyage, and intended discoveries, by reason that as yet no
certain account is known, or can be made thereof: By means whereof the said M. is
not able to satisfy his Debts aforesaid, as otherwise he would willingly do,
and is, and stands bound to the said N. to do.

Therefore for better certainty and assurance to be made to the said N. F. as
well for the payment of the said 205 l. to the said N. his certain Attorney,
Executors, or Administrators, to be paid: As also for a due satisfaction and
contentation to be made to the said M. his Heirs Executors, and Administrators,
of, and for the said sum of 600 l. pounds wherewith the said N. is charged for
the said M to other persons as aforesaid. The said M. L. has given, granted,
assigned, and set over, and by these presents does clearly give etc. unto the
said N his Executors and Administrators, to, and for the only behoof and
commodity of the same M. his Executors, and Administrators, two parts of all
the said Stock of 1200. pounds, which the said M. has in the said Voyage to
Meta incognita, and other the intended discoveries aforsaid, the same being in
three parts to be divided, and a rateable part, according to the said sum of
805. pounds of etc. of all, and all manner of Merchandise, Gains, Profits,
Privileges, Liberties, Licenses, and other Emoluments whatsoever to the said
M. his Executors or Assigns, to be had, or to be gotten, or arise of, or for
the said Voyage to Meta incognita, and every, or any other Country, or
Countries discovered, or to be discovered toward the North-west as aforesaid.

And the said M. L. for him etc. covenanteth etc. That the said N. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for the only use of the said N. his
Executors and Assigns for ever, shall, and may have, receive, and enjoy, out of
the accounts of the said Voyages from the said Countries, all, and whatsoever,
which upon the making of the same account shall rateably arise and grow, of,
and for the Stock of 805. l. of etc. parcel and out of the adventure of the
said M. in the Voyage, aforesaid, without any let, default, or impediment of,
or by the said M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, or of any
other person which is, or shall be entitled by, or from the said M. L. and
that he the said M. L. his Executors, and Administrators, at, and upon every
reasonable request of the said N. F. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
shall, and will do, execute, and knowledge, all and every thing, and things,
which the said N. his Executors, or Administrators, can, or may lawfully do,
whereby the said N. his Executors Administrators, and Assigns, may the more
readily have, get and obtain the said sum of 805. pounds, out of the Stock and
Adventure of the said M. which he has in the Voyage aforesaid, without any
manner of Fraud, or Covin. In witness etc.

An Assignment of an Obligation before the same be forfeited with good
Covenants in such Case.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I. C. Lord M. etc. for diverse
good and lawful considerations, me thereunto moving, have given, granted,
assigned, and set over; And by these presents, do clearly and absolutely give,
grant, assign, and set over unto I. L. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof, as well one Deed
Obligatory, or Writing, bearing date the last of January, last etc. wherein N.
T. and C. N. are bound or mentioned to be bound to me the said Lord M. in the
sum of 400. pounds of etc. with a Condition there under written, for the
payment of 200. pounds of like money, to be paid to me the said Lord M. mine
Executors, or Assigns, in the Feast of the Purification etc. next etc. at the
Chapel of the R. in C. Lane near L. As also all the Right, Title, Action, and
Demand of me the said Lord M. mine Executors and Administrators, in, and to the
said Deed Obligatory, and all sums of money therein, or in the Condition thereof
contained or specified.

And also I the said Lord M. for me, mine Executors and Administrators, do by
these presents make, constitute, and put in my place the said I. L. his
Executors and Assigns, my true and lawful Attorney and Attorneys irrevocable,
for me and in my name, to ask, take, and demand, and receive the said sum of
200. pounds of such person, or persons as shall tender payment thereof, at the
day, time, and place expressed in the Condition of the said Obligation: And for
default of payment of the same sum of 200. pounds or any part thereof; Then to
ask, levy, recover, and receive the said sum of 400. pounds, of, and upon all
and singular person, and persons, and their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels, whatsoever chargable or liable, or to be chargble or liable to, for,
or with the satisfaction or payment thereof; Giving, and by these presents
granting to my said Attorney and Attorneys, my full Power, Right, Title, and
Authority, in all and singular the Premises; And for me, and in my name to
commence, and to sue prosecute, and sue out, all and singular Actions, Suits,
Remedies, Plaints, Pleas, Judgments, Executions, and Demands whatsoever which I
the said Lord M. my Executors, or Administrators, have, or may have, upon, or
by means of the said Obligation.

And also to acquit, compound for, and discharge the said Obligation, Attorney,
or Attorneys, one or more under him, or them, to substitute, and make; And all
other lawful acts and things to do and prosecute, in, for, and about, all and
singular the Premises, in as ample manner and form, as I the said Lord M. my
Executors, or Administrators might, or could do in proper person; ratifying and
confirming by these presents, all the acts and doings of my said Attorney and
Attorneys, in and about, all and singular the Premises.

And I the said Lord M. do covenant etc. in form etc. That the said Writing
before in these presents, recited the sufficient Deed in the Law of the said N.
and T. And that the same Deed, Obligation, is not, nor hereafter shall nor be
discharged, exonerated, released, satisfied, and made void, except it shall be
by, and with the express consent and agreement of the said I. L. his Executors,
or Assigns, first thereunto had and obtained in writing, under his or their Hand
and Seals: And that without like consent or agreement of the said I. his
Executors, or Assigns, the said sums of money, or either of them or any part or
parcel of them, or of either of them, shall not be paid, received, released,
satisfied, acquitted, or discharged. And that any of the same sums of money, or
any parcel of any of them, heretofore has not been received, or discharged.
And that any Action, Suit, Judgment, or Execution, or any Petition, or Demand
grown or arisen, or to grow or arise, of, by, or upon, or by reason or means
of the said Obligation is not, nor shall not at any time hereafter be released,
acquitted, discharged, or made void, without such consent or agreement as
aforesaid, of the said I. L. his Executors, or Assigns. And that I the said
Lord M. my Executors and Administrators, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges of the
same, in the Law of the said I. L. his Executors, or Assigns, shall and will
avow, justify and maintain all such Actions, Suits, Petitions, and other
attempts; As the said I, L. his Executors or Assigns, shall commence,
prosecute, or take, in the name, or names of the said Lord M. his Executors, or
Administrators, for, and upon the said Deed Obligatory, for the recovery and
obtaining of the said sum of 400. pounds, contained or specified in the said
Deed Obligatory. And that the said I. L. his Executors and Assigns, after the
receipt or obtaining of the said sum of 200. pounds, or 400. pounds, or of any
part or parcel of either of the same sums, shall and may to his and their own
proper use and behoof for ever, have; hold, keep, retain, and enjoy the said
sum and sums of money, and every part thereof, without any account, or other
thing thereof, or therefore to be yielded or answered to me the said Lord M. my
Executors or Administrators, or any of us, in any wise. In witness etc.

An Assignment or Bargain of two Annuities granted to a man by Fine
THis Indenture made etc. Between W. G. etc. on the one party, and R. P. etc:
on the other party, witnesses, That whereas W. H. etc. and M. his wife, by one
fine, sure Grant, and render levied before the Kings Majesty's Justices of his
Common Bench at Westminster, in the term of Saint Michael, in the 13th. year of
his Highness Reign; Between the said W. and M. Plaintiffs, and I. F. Esquire,
and B. his wife, the said W. G. and E. his wife, Deforcients: The said W. H.
and M. his wife, did grant to the said W. G: a certain yearly Rent of 6 l.
going out of one Message, and one Shop, with the Appurtenances in W. in the
Parish of etc. in the Tenure and Occupation of R. P. and the same in the said
Court, did render to the said W. G. to have and perceive the said annual Rent
of 6 l. to the said W. G. and his Heirs, at the Feasts of etc. by equal
portions yearly to be paid. And if it happen the said yearly Rent of 6 l. or
any part thereof, to be behind in part, or in all, after any Feast of the Feasts
aforesaid, in the which at ought to be paid, by the space of forty days, if it
be asked; That then the said W. H. and M. and the Heirs of the same VV. shall
forfeit to the said VV. G. and his Heirs, 10 s. in the name of a pain, so often
as the said yearly Rent of 6 l. or any parcel thereof shall be so behind. And
that then and so often it shall be lawful to the said VV. G. and his Heirs,
into the said Message and Shop, with the Appurtenances, to enter and distrain,
and the Distress so there taken, lawfully to lead, carry, and drive away, and
with him to keep, until he shall be fully satisfied and paid, as well of the
said yearly Rent of etc. with the arrerages thereof (if any shall be;) As also
of the said 10 s. forfeited in the name of a pain, shall be fully satisfied and
paid.

And also the said VV. H. and M. did likewise grant by the same Fine to the
said VV. M. one other yearly Rent of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. going out of one Message
and one Shop, with the Appurtenances in VV. in the said Parish of etc. in the
Tenure or Occupation of T. B. And the same did render etc. to have etc.

And if it happen. etc. a nomine poene of ten shillings, etc. And a distress,
etc. and also the said VV. H. and M. did grant to the above named I. F. and B.
a certain yearly rent of 8 l. going out of two Messuages, and three shops, with
the appurtenances in W. and W. in the parish of, etc. in the several Tenures
of, etc. and the same to them did render in the said Court, To have, etc. with
forfeiture nomine poene and a distress ut supra, etc. As by the said Fine
amongst other things therein contained more plainly will appear. Now the said
W. G. for, and in consideration of the sum of, etc. whereof, etc. has
bargained and sold, And by these presents does bargain and fell to the said R.
P. and his Heirs for ever, all the said several yearly Rents issuing out of the
said several Messuages and Shops abovesaid; and all and every the pain and
pains to be forfeited for non payment of the said several yearly Rents, or any
of them, and all the estate, right, title, interest, of the said W. G. and his
Heirs, of and in and to the said yearly rents and pains aforesaid, and every
of them, to have, hold, perceive, receive, and enjoy all and every the said
yearly rents at the said several Feasts abovesaid, as the same rents shall grow
due and payable; and also the said pain and pains to be forfeited for
nonpayment of the said yearly rents, or any of them, as above said, unto the
said R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to, and for the only use of the said R.
and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said W. G. does covenant, etc.
in form. etc. That he the said VV. G. and his Heirs, shall, and will acquit,
and discharge, or otherwise from time to time, save and keep harmless, as well
the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, as the said several yearly rents, and every
of them, of, and from all, and singular former bargains, etc. had, made, done,
or procured by the said W. or by his consent, knowledge, or procurement. And
further, That he the said W. and the said E. his wife* and the Heirs of the
same VV. and all, and every other person and persons, having, or which shall
have, or lawfully claim to have any former estate, right, title, or interest,
in, or to the said several yearly rents, or any of them, or any part of the
said several yearly rents by form or under the estate of the said VV. from time
to time upon reasonable request within five years next coming at the costs and
charges of the said R. his Heirs or Assigns, shall, and will, do, make,
knowledge, and suffer, and cause, etc. all, and every such further lawful and
reasonable act, and acts, thing and things, for the further or more better
Surety, assurance, and sure making of the said several yearly rents, and every
of them, and the pain and pains to be forfeited, as aforesaid, to be had, and
made sure to the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own use, and
uses for ever, as by the said R. his etc. shall be lawfully and reasonably
devised, advised, and required.

And further, That he the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, from henceforth, for
ever, shall, or lawfully may have, take, receive, and enjoy the said several
yearly rents, and every of them, and all and every pain and pains which shall
happen to be forfeited as aforesaid, without any let, trouble or interruption
of the said VV. or his Heirs, and without any lawful Let, Trouble, Interruption
or Molestation of any other person or persons, having, or which shall have any
estate or interest, in, or to the said several yearly rents, or any of them,
by, or from the said VV. G. or by, or under his Estate or Interest. In witness,
etc.

An Assignment of a Lease by him that has the same, but in Mortgage before it
be forfeited; also the money payable for the Redemption Assigned, and an
agreement that the Lease shall remain with a third Person till the Redemption
or Forfeiture.
THis Indent. made, etc: between A. M. on the one party, and H. G. on the other
party, witnesses, That whereas our said Sovereign, etc. by his Highness
Letters Patents under the Seal of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, bearing
date, etc has demised, etc. to C. C. of E: in the County of S. Esquire, all
that his Herbage, Pasture, Feeding, and Pasturage, of, and in the Park called
E. Park, in the County of S. to have and to hold etc. paying therefore yearly
etc. As by the said Letters Patents may at large appear.

And whereas also our said Sovereign etc. by other his Letters Patents, dated
etc. did demise etc. to the said C. etc. to have etc. yiedling and paying etc.
And whereas also the said C. C. by his Indenture dated etc. has bargained,
sold, assigned, and set over to the said A. M. his Executors and Assigns, to,
and for his and their own use, as well the said Herbage etc. As also all the
Estate etc. which he the said C. C. bad, could, might, or ought to have had, or
lawfully might, or could claim to have had, of, in, or to the said Herbage etc.
by force, or virtue of the said several Letters Patents, or either of them,
together with the said several Letters Patents.

By which Indenture it is provided, that if the said C. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, do well and truly pay, or cause etc. to the said A:
his certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, at the Shop which the said A:
did then occupy, situate etc. the sum of 220 l. of etc. on the 15th day of
March, which shall be etc. according to the computation etc: That then and from
thenceforth, the said Indenture, and the Bargain and Sale therein contained,
should be utterly void and of none effect, any thing to the contrary etc. As by
the said Indenture at large will appear.

Now the said A. M: for, and in consideration of the sum of etc. whereof etc.
has bargained, sold, aliened, assigned, and set over: And by these presents
does bargain, sell etc. to the said H. G. his Executors and Assigns, to, and
for his and their own use, as well all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Possession, Reversion, ^ondition, term of years, claim, and demand, which the
said A, M. has, can, or may, or ought to have, or lawfully can, or may, or
ought to have, to, of, or in the said Herbage etc. by force and virtue of the
said several Letters Patents, and Indenture above recited, or any of them: As
also the same Letters Patents, and Indentures aforesaid. And it is
condescended, concluded, and agreed by, and between the said parties to these
present Indentures, for themselves, their Executors Administrators, and
Assigns, and every of them by these presents, in manner and form following;
That is to say, That the said Letters Patents, and Indentures above mentioned,
shall continue, and remain in the hands, custody and possession of A. P. etc.
until the said 15th. day of March, which shall be etc.

And also that the said A. M. his Executors and Administrators shall agree and
suffer, that the said H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall or
may have take, and receive of the said C. C. his Executors Administrators, or
Assigns, the said sum of 220 l and every part thereof, if it shall be offered to
be paid in form aforesaid, and shall, and may retain and enjoy the same, to the
only use and behoof of the said H. G. his Executors and Assigns, without any
account thereof, or of any part thereof to the said A. his Executors, or
Administrators, to be made, or yielded. And that then and at any time after,
the said A. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall, or may deliver,
or cause etc to the said C: his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the said
several Letters Patents, and either of them whole and uncancelled; and also
the said Indenture made to the said A. M: to be cancelled. But if the said C: C
his Executors Administrators, and Assigns, shall make default, and do not pay;
or cause etc. the said sum of etc. to the said A: his certain Attorney,
Executor or Administrator, at the place, and between the hours aforesaid,
according to the purport and true meaning of the Proviso above in these
presents recited: That then, or at any time after the said A. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, shall and may deliver, or cause etc. to the said H.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the said several Letters Patents,
and Indenture above recited, whole and uncancelled, to be had, used, and
enjoyed to the said H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as his and
their own proper Goods and Chattels for ever.

And the said A. M. covenanteth etc. that the said Herbage etc. are, and be,
and during the residue of the said several terms of years, in the said Letters
Patents now to come, shall, or lawfully may be, continue, and remain to the
said H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, clear and free discharged
and acquitted, or otherwise at all times, upon reasonable request, shall be
sufficiently saved harmless by the said A. his Executors and Administrators,
of, and from all and singular former Bargains, Sales, Grants, Leases,
Surrenders, Estates, Titles, and Charges whatsoever, heretofore had, made, or
done by the said A. M. or by any other by his means, title, or procurement. The
yearly Rents, Covenants, Conditions, and Agreements, mentioned and expressed,
in the said several Letters Patents, on the part of the Lessee therein named,
and of his Assigns, from the said 15. of March etc. to grow due to be paid and
performed, by force and virtue of the said several Letters Patents, and the
Covenants, Articles, Conditions, and Agreements, contained in the said former
Indenture, only except and fore-prised. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease where the same is bound for the money to be paid for
the same; And where there is exception made of some part of the Premises
Leased.
THis Indenture etc. Between R. M. etc. on the one party, and E. W. etc. on the
other party, witnesses, that whereas the Wardens of the Goldsmiths, by their
Indenture of Lease under their common Seal, dated etc. demised to the said R.
M. all that their Message or Tenement in W. etc. and all that Garden and Shed
etc. in I. Gardens, in the Parish of Saint G. without C. Gate, to hold etc.
yiedling for the same Message etc. 5 l. and for the said Garden 8 s. at four
terms etc. As by the said Indenture of Lease etc.

Now the said R. M. for the considerations, and upon the Conditions hereafter
in these presents, does bargain etc. to the said E. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to, and for the only and proper use and behoof of
the said E. and of his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as well all the
said Estate, Right, Title, Interest and term of years, which he has yet to
come, of, and in, and to the said Message, or Tenement Shop, and other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances in W. aforesaid, as also the Indenture of
Lease thereof made as aforesaid (always saved and excepted to the said R. M.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all the said Garden etc. and all the
Estate, Term, and Interest aforesaid, herein yet to come, so fully, wholly, and
entirely, as if these presents had never been, had, or made.

And the said R. M. for him etc. covenanteth etc. for discharge of Encumbrances
done by him etc. for, and in consideration of which said Bargain, Sale,
Assignment, and Covenant by these presents, made, by, and from the said R. to
the said E. as aforesaid, the said E. has not only paid to the said R. at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, the sum of 50 l. of etc. of which 50
l. the said R. acknowledges the receipt by these presents. But also the said
E. for him, his Heirs etc. covenanteth with the said R. etc. That he the said
E. his Executors, or Assigns, shall, and will well and truly pay, or cause etc.
to the said R. etc. the sum of 450 l. of etc. at the now Mansion house of the
said R. etc. in manner following; viz. On the 25th. of M. 50 l. thereof, and on
the 29. of September 1653. other 50 l. thereof; And so from thenceforward, from
half year to half year, on every 25. of March 50 l. and on every 29. of
September, other 50 l. as the same days from thenceforth shall next come, and
ensue one another, until the said sum of 450 l. by such payments as aforesaid,
shall be unto the said R. M. his Executors, or Administrators fully paid.

And the said R: M: does covenant etc. to deliver, or cause etc. a lawful and
sufficient Acquittance, upon the receipt of each and every sum aforementioned,
testifying the receipt and payment of the same sum so paid. Provided always,
and it is especially covenanted, concluded, and agreed, by, and between the
said parties to these presents, for them etc. that it shall, and may be lawful
to, and for the said R: M: his Executors and Administrators, and every of them,
to retain and keep, in his and their own hands and custody, the said Indenture
of Lease, until the said E. his Executors etc. shall have made full payment and
satisfaction to the said R: etc. of the said sum of etc. and every part thereof.
Provided also, and it is conditioned and agreed by, and between the said
parties to these presents. And the said E. covenanteth etc. that if the said E.
his etc. do not at the said Mansion house of etc. at, or before the twenty
fifth of March, which etc. 1656. fully and wholly satisfy, content, and pay,
or cause etc. to the said R. his etc. the said sum of 450 l. and every part
thereof; That then and from thenceforth these presents, and the Bargain, Sale,
Assignment, and conveyance thereby made, and all and every the Covenants,
Grants, and Agreements in these presents contained, on the part and behalf of
the said R: his Executors, or Administrators, to be performed, shall be void
etc. And that then a Re-entry in Mr. M: etc. these presents etc. And the said
E: covenanteth etc. that he the said E: his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges at all times from
henceforth, and from time to time, until the said twenty fifth of March etc.
shall and will well and truly, and in due and convenient time and times,
according to the tenor and limitation of the said Indenture of Lease, pay the
said yearly Rent of 6 l. which for the said Message etc. in VV. aforesaid,
shall become due to be paid, by virtue of the said Indenture of Lease, and also
well and truly, and duly accomplish, observe, do, and perform, all other the
Covenants, Grants, and Agreements in the said Indenture of Lease contained and
specified, which for, by reason or in respect of the said Message etc. in VV.
aforesaid, or any part thereof, on the part and behalf of the said R. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, are, or ought, or shall
be due to be done or performed, for, and in such sort, that no forfeiture in
the mean time shall grow, or be occasioned, or made of the said Lease and term
of years* or any part thereof, for, or in default of payment of the said yearly
Rent of 6 l. or any part thereof, or for, or by reason of the nonperformance of
the said Covenants etc. or any of them, or by reason or means of any act or
thing whatsoever hereafter to be made, done, or caused, or omitted, or left
undone by the said E: his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of
them, or any other person, or persons, by his, or their means, consent, or
procurement.

And also that if the said E: his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, do
make payment to the said R: his Executors or Administrators, of the said sum of
450 l. and every part thereof, at, or before the twenty fifth of March; That
then and from thenceforth the said E: his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during
the residue of the said term of 28. then to be to come and unexpired,
sufficiently save and keep harmless the said R: M: his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, against the said Wardens and Communalty, and
their Successors, of, for, and concerning all and singular the said Rents,
Covenants, Grants, Articles; and Agreements, in the said Indenture of Lease
reserved and specified thereafter, for, or in respect of the said Message or
Tenement etc. in VV. aforesaid, on the part of the said R. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, to grow due to be paid, done, or
performed, by virtue or means, of the said Indenture of Lease. And the said R:
M: etc. covenanteth etc. that if, at, or before the said 25. of March etc. the
said E. his etc. shall have made full and true payment or lawful tender to the
said R. his Executors or Administrators, of the said sum of etc. That then
after such full payment had and made of the said sum of etc. upon any
reasonable request of the said E. his etc. he the said R: his Executors or
Administrators, shall and will deliver, or cause etc: to the said E: etc: at
the said house etc: the said Order, Indenture of Lease, under the common Seal
aforesaid, safe, whole, uncancelled, and undefaced.

And the said E: VV: covenanteth etc. That if, by, and according to the tenor
of these presents, the said Indenture of Lease shall be by the said R: etc.
delivered to the said E: his etc. as aforesaid, that then he the said E: his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, from time to time, and at all times,
after the receipt by him, or them, of the said Indenture of Lease shall and
will within convenient time after request, in any Court within the City of L:
or County of M: show the said Indenture of Lease, under the common Seal
aforesaid, in full strength, force, and effect, and suffer the same to be
openly read, and seen in the custody of the said E. his etc. for the
maintenance and defense of the Title and Interest of the said R. his etc. in,
and to the Garden and Shed, so often as it shall happen to be needful, during
the said term of etc. by reason of any controversy which shall arise in Law,
for, or concerning the Title thereof, In witness etc.

An Assignment (by an Executor of an Executor) of Land holden by extent upon a
Statute.
THis Indenture, etc. between T. B. etc. Executor of the last Will and
Testament of F. T. of E. T. widow deceased Executrix of the Testament and last
Will of I. T. her Husband late Citizen and M. of L. also deceased, on the one
party, and E. B. etc. on the other party, witnesses, That whereas R. G. and O.
G. of L. the first day of April, before Sir R. C. Knight deceased, then his
Majesty's Chief Justice Assigned for Pleas before his Highness to be holden,
did acknowledge themselves to owe to the above named I. T. 600 l. which they
ought to have paid to the said I. the first day of May then next following, And
of the payment thereof, then and yet hitherto have made full and clear default.
By reason whereof the said T. B. has procured his Majesty's Writ of Extent,
out of his High Court of Chancery, directed to the Sheriffs of L. and by virtue
thereof the said Sheriffs have found by a fine in due form of Law taken before
them, and in like due manner and form returned, That the said R. and O. at the
acknowledging of the Recognizance aforesaid were seized in their Demesne as of
Fee, of, and in one Mesuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances commonly called
the C. and F. Situate in the Parish of Saint B. in the Ward of C. of L. late
in the Tenure or Occupation of G. F. Grocer, which said Message or Tenement
with the appurtenances by virtue of the Writ aforesaid, was extended to the
clear yearly value of 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. of lawful, etc. beyond all reprises. And
was seized into the hands of our said Sovereign Lord the King, to be delivered
into the hands of the said T. B. until he should be fully satisfied of the
said 600 l. according to the form, and effect of an Act in that Case made and
provided.

And whereas sithence, that is to say, on the day of N. now last past, the said
Message, with the appurtenances was delivered to the said T. B. in Execution
for the said 600 l. according to the Form and Effect of the said Statute by the
Queens Writ of Liberate, bearing Test at Westminister the day of N. now also
last past, to hold to him and his Assigns as his Freehold, until the same
debt of 600 l. with his costs and damages in that behalf sustained thereupon
should be fully satisfied, and by the Writ of the said Extent, and the Writs of
Liberate, aforesaid, and by the virtue of the same Writs remaining of Record in
the high Court of Chancery more at large will appear. Now the said T. B for,
and in consideration of the sum of 185 l. whereof, etc. has aliened,
bargained and sold, and by these presents does alien, bargain and sell unto the
said E. B. his Executors and Assigns all the Execution, Interest, Right,
Estate, and Title whatsoever, which the said T. B has, or ought to have, of,
in, and to the said Message with the appurtenances, and every part thereof: To
have, and to hold the said Message with the appurtenances, and all the said
Execution, Right, Title, and Interest of the said T. B. of, in, and to the same
to the said E. B. his Executors and Assigns, for, and during all such Estate,
Right, and Title as the same T. has, may, or ought to have in the above
bargained Premises now to come by force or virtue of the said Writs of Extent
and Liberate, and the Execution and Returns of the same. And the said T. B.
Covenanteth, etc. That the said Message or Tenement with the appurtenances at
the Ensealing and Delivery of these presents is and stands, and so shall
continue and abide to the said E. his Executors and Assigns, clear and free
discharged and acquitted, or otherwise upon reasonable request sufficiently
saved harmless by the said T. his Executors and Administrators, of, and from
all, and singular former Bargains, Sales, Grants, Leases, Releases, Charges,
and other Encumbrances whatsoever made, done or committed by the said T. B. or
hereafter to be made, done, or procured by the same T. his Executors,
Administators, or Assigns, contrary to the intent and true meaning of these
ptesents, In witness, etc.

An Assignment of diverse debts expressed in a Schedule in consideration of a
sum of money to be paid by the Assignee to the Assignor where for better
security of payment of the consideration money the Assignee is bound to make
the Assignor his Executor.
THis Indenture, etc. Between G. S. on the one party, and J. H. the younger,
late servant to the said G. on the other party, witnesses, that the said G. S.
upon the good confidence and trust, that he the said G. has, and reposeth in
the said J. H. And for his better preferment and credit, and especially that
the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid to the said G. his Executors and Administrators, or to
one of them at the now Mansion, etc. the sum of 3500 l. etc. in manner, etc.
has Assigned, Consigned, Transferred, and set over, And by these presents
Assignment.
does, etc. unto the said J. H. his Executors, Administators, and Assigns, to,
and for his and their own use, all, and singular, the debts, duties, and
demands mentioned and expressed in the Schedule indented hereunto annexed,
Giving amd Granting to the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, such power, authority, interest and commission, to demand, ask, sue
for and recover the same, and every part thereof, to the use of him the said I.
H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as the said G: S: and his
Executors, have, shall, may, or might have had, if these Consignations had not
been made.

And the said G: S: for him etc. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he Covenant
to justify actions brought for debts in the Assignors name.
the said G: S: his Executors and Administrators, shall, and will from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, upon reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges of the said I: H: his Executors and Administrators, or any of them,
advow, justify, and maintain, all and singular lawful Actions, Suits, Pleas,
Process, Judgments, and Executions to be had, brought, pursued, or taken, in the
name or names of the said G. his Executors, or Administrators, against the
persons named and specified in the said Schedule, or any of them, of, and for
their several Debt, or Debts, mentioned to be owing in the same Schedule And
that That the Assigno^r neither has, or shall release the debts without assent.
the said G has not at any time heretofore released, discharged, or acquitted
the said persons or any of them, of; or for the said Debts, or any part thereof,
neither he the said G. his Executors, or Administrators, at any time hereafter
shall or will release, acquit, or discharge the same persons, or any of them,
of, or for the same Debts, or any of them, without it be by the special
assent, consent, or agreement of the said I. his Executors or Administrators:
And that he the said G. has not, neither he the same G. his Executors or
Administrators; at any time hereafter, will wittingly or willingly do any act,
or acts, thing, or things whatsoever, which shall, or may be prejudicial or
hurtful to the obtaining or recovering of the Debts or sums of money,
mentioned and expressed in the said Schedule, or of any part or parcel thereof.
And that he the said I. H. and his Executors, shall or may have, retain, and
enjoy the said Debts mentioned in the said Schedule, to his own proper use and
behoof, without any reckoning or account to be had, demanded or required by the
said G. S. his Executors or Assigns.

Provided nevertheless, that if the said G. his Executors, Administrators,
Proviso.
Servants, or Assigns, or any of them, have at any time heretofore received, or
at any time hereafter shall receive or discharge any part of the Debts and Sums
of money mentioned in the said Schedule indented: And do content and pay the
same Debts and Sums of money so received or discharged, or to be received or
discharged as aforesaid, to the said I. his certain Attorney, Executors, or
Administrators, at the said Mansion etc. within thirty days next after the
same I. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns shall demand the same of the
said G. his Executors or Administrators; That then he the said G. his Executors
or Administrators, shall not be in danger charged or impeached, of, or for the
Covenant above mentioned.

And the said G. J. for him etc. for the consideration aforesaid, and for that
the said G. has before the ensealing hereof, sold and delivered to the said I.
for his own use, certain Wares and Merchandises, to make up the said Debts
mentioned in the said Schedule, the sum of 3500 l. covenanteth and grants
etc. in form etc. That he the said I. his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, shall and will well and For payment of money.
truly pay, or cause etc. to the said G. his certain Attorney, Executor, or
Administrator, at the days and place above limited, the said sum of 3500 l.
and every part thereof, in manner and form before limited and expressed. And
that he the said I. within twelve days after the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, shall make his last Will and Testament in writing: And by the
same for the better means of obtaining Assignee to make the Assignor his
Executor.
and recovering of the said sum of etc. and every part thereof to the said G.
etc. according to the true meaning of these presents, if the said I. H. should
happen to dye, before the same, and every part thereof be paid, and for no other
cause, purpose, or intent, shall make, constitute, and ordain the said G. his
sole Executor. And that until the said sum of etc. and every part thereof,
shall be fully satisfied and paid to the said G. his certain Attorney,
Executor, or Administrator, according to the tenor, and true meaning of these
presents, he the said J. shall not after, revoke, or make void the said Will
and Testament, or make any other without the Consent, Will, and Agreement of
the said G. his Executors, or Administrators first thereunto had and obtained
in writing To save the Assignor from damages for Actions in his name.
under his or their hands and Seals. And moreover, That he the said I. his
Executors and Administrators, or one of them, shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, well and sufficiently discharge, or save and
keep harmless the said G. his Executors and Administrators, and his Goods,
Chattels, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and every of them, of, and from
all and singular Fines, Amerciaments, Charges, and Demands whatsoever, which
shall happen or grow by reason or means of any of the Actions, Suits, Pleas,
Processes, Judgments, and Executions aforesaid, to be had, brought, or pursued,
in the name or names of the said G: his Executors or Administrators, against
the persons named in the said Schedule, or any of them, of, and for Debts or
Sums of money, in the same Schedule mentioned, or any part thereof, In witness
etc.

The Assignment of a Recognizance inserted in an Indenture of Bargain and Sale.
ANd whereas etc. I. C. etc. by Recognizance hearing date etc. has acknowledged
himself, before our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, in her Highness
Court of Chancery, to owe to the said R. W. the Sum of a 100 l. of etc. with
condition thereunto made and under written, for the performance of the
Covenants, Grants, Articles, and Agreements contained in one Indenture etc. as
by the same Recognizance more at large appears.

The said R. W. for the consideration aforesaid, does by these presents
Assignment.
give, grant, assign, and set over unto the said I. H. his Executors and
Assigns, the said Recognizance and penalty of a 100 l. therein mentioned, and
every parcel thereof, and all the Right, Title, and Interest of the said R: W.
in or to the same. And also the said R: W: does by these Letters of Attorney.
presents constitute and make the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, his true and lawful Attorney and Attorneys irrevocable, for
him and in his name, and in the name or names of his Executors and
Administrators, or any of them, or without any account therefore to be yielded,
to ask, levy, recover, and receive the said Sum of 100 l. contained in the said
Recognizance, and every part thereof, of the Heirs, Executors, Administrators
Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels of the said I. C. or of any of them, or
any part thereof, whenever the same shall be forefeited or payable. And to
compound and agree for the same, or any part thereof; And to release and
discharge the said Recognizance, at their liberty and pleasures. And further
the Covenant to sue in the name of the cognizee, etc.
said R. W. Covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said R. his Executors and
Administrators shall and will at all times hereafter, quietly permit and suffer
the said I: H: his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, or any of
them at his and their own proper costs and charges, to have, pursue, prosecute,
and bring in the name or names of the said R: W: his Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, any lawful Action, or Actions, Suit, Plea,
Process, Extent, Judgment, Liberate, and Execution, and every of them, upon, or
by virtue of the said Recognizance, whenever the same shall be forfeited, of,
or against the Heirs, Executors, Administrators Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels of the said I. C. or any part thereof, for the recovering, getting, or
obtaining of the said Penalty of one hundred pounds, and of costs, charges,
damages, and Amends, upon the breach of any of the Covenants, Grants, or
Agreements specified in the same Indenture in such like, and in as large and
ample manner and form, as the said R. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators,
or any of them, could, ought, or might have done, if these presents had not
been had or made, without acquitting, releasing, hindering, staying,
discontinuing, barring, letting or discharging of the same Actions, Suits,
Pleas, Processes, Extents, Liberates, or Executions, or any of them, without
the consent and agreement of the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns,
in that behalf first had and obtained in writing, under his, or their hands and
Seals.

And also that he the said R. at any time heretofore has not acquitted,
released, or discharged, nor that he the said R. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, at any time hereafter shall acquit, release, or discharge the
said Recognizance and Sum of 100 l. therein contained, or any part thereof; nor
any Covenants, Grants, or Clause, contained or mentioned in the said former
Indenture.

And also that he the said R. W. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
shall quietly permit and suffer the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, to have, receive, take, and enjoy to his and their own uses for
ever, the whole benefit and execution of the said Recognizance, and all such
Sum and Sums of money, costs, charges, damages, and Amends, Lands, Tenements,
Goods, and Chattels as shall be recovered, adjudged, or gotten in any such
Action, Suit, Process, Extent, Liberate, Execution, or any of them, without any
let, trouble, interruption, claim, or demand of the said R. his Heirs,
Executors, or Administrators, or any of them, without any account, reconing, or
other thing, of, or for the Premises, or any part thereof, to him, or them, or
any of them, in any wise to be made, yielded, or given.

And further, that he the said R. W. his Heirs, Executors, and Admistrators,
shall at all times hereafter upon reasonable request to him or To make further
Letters of Attorney, and assurance of Lands extended.
them made by the said I. H. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them, and at their, or one of their costs and charges, make not only
such further reasonable Letter or Letters of Attorney to the said I. his
executors administrators and assigns, or any of them, agreeable to the tenor of
these presents, for the recovery of the said sum of 100 l. contained in the
said Recognizance, whenever need or occasion shall be, but also such further
assurance unto the said I. H. his executors administrators and assigns, or any
of them, to the only use of the said I. etc. of such Lands and Tenements Goods
and Chattels as shall at any time hereafter happen to be recovered extended or
gotten, by reason of any extent or execution, to be had upon or by virtue of
the said Recognizance: As by the said I: his etc. at his and their costs and
charges, shall be reasonably devised, or advised, In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease and Gift of all the Goods a man shall have at the
time of his decease, if his Daughter the Assignees Wife, or any Issue of her
body be then living.
This etc. An. 13. Eli. Between W. I. alias L. etc. on the one party and T. P.
etc. on the other party witnesses, That whereas A B. Clark and Parson of the
parish of S. M. at B. in L. W. C. and I. B. wardens of the goods, works, rents
and ornaments, of the said parish Church with the Recital.
assent and consent or the most part and worshipful and discreet persons
parishioners of the said parish by their Indentures of Lease dated have demised
etc. unto the said W. I. all that their message or tenement with the Shops
etc. set etc. and belonging to the said Parson and Church wardens in the right
of the same Church adjoining etc. to hold etc. for 99. years from Christmas
before the date of the lease etc. Habendum.
veelding etc. As by the said Indenture etc. the said W. I. alias L. for such
considerations and upon and under such conditions as hearafter are expressed in
these presents does alien bargain and sell to the said T. P. executors and
assigns all the said Lease term of years and interest which the said W. has
or ought to have of, in and to the said message tenement, cellar, sollors,
Garden and their appurtenance, whatsoever by force and virtue of the Indenture
of Lease aforesaid saving and always reserved and excepted to the said W. I.
alias L. and to his assigns out of the alienation bargain and sale aforesaid
the use and sole manurance and occupation of all the said message, tenement,
Cellar, Sollars, garden and their appurtenances for and during all the term and
natural life of the said W. I. And the said W. I. for him etc. does covenant
etc. that he the said W. J. And his Assigns for and during Covenat to pay
Rents, etc.
all the term of the natural life of the said W. shall and will at the costs
and charges of the same W. And of his Assigns well and truly yield pay fulfill
and perform all and singular rents, covenants, and duties, whatsoever, to be
paid done or performed for the premises or any part thereof during the natural
life of the said W. And thereof shall and will defend and keep harmless the
said T: P. his Executors, and administrators, against the said Parson and
Churchwardens, their successors, and Assigns, and all other persons whatsoever.

And the said W. I. upon and under the condition aforesaid, does by these
presents give and grant to the said T. P. all and singular such implements,
Household Stuff, and Houshold-Furniture as Bedsteds, Cupbords Seelings,
Wainscot, Feather-beds, Beddings, Sheets, Blankets, Coverings, Boulsters,
Pillowes, Mattresses, Pewter, Brass, Iron, and all other things whatsoever,
which the said W. I. shall have remaining in the said Message and other the
Premises, at the time of his decease (ready money Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels,
Writings, Evidences, and Wearing Apparel, for Men, or Women, only except)
provided, alwa^es, and it is plainly and expressly condiscended, agreed Proviso.
and conditioned, by and between the said parties to these Indentures, for
themselves, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, by
these presents, in manner and form following; that is to say, that if E.
Daughter of the said W. I. whom the said T. has lately married and taken to
his wife, or some issue of the body of the said E. by the said T. begotten, or
to be begotten, shall not be living at the time of the decease of the said W.
I. that then these present Indentures, and every thing in the same contained,
shall be so clearly frustrate and void to all intents, purposes, and
constructions in the law, and every other way whatsoever, as though the same
had never been made, mentioned or spoken of, any thing before in these presents
specified or contained, or any thing there upon to be gathered, or construed,
to the contrary thereof etc. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease for lives.
THis Indenture made etc. Between W. B. of the one party, and I. K. R. G: I. G.
I: P. and W. B. of the other party, witnesses, That whereas J. S. by his
Indenture of Demise and Lease lawfully executed, made between etc. bearing date
etc. for and upon good considerations in the said recited Indenture specified,
did demise grant and to Ferm let etc. To have and to hold, occupy etc. yiedling
and paying yearly therefore to the said J. S. his heirs and assigns, the yearly
rent of etc. at certain days and feasts therein mentioned; with a clause of
distres for non-payment of the said Rent of 10 l. And also with diverse other
Covenants Grants Matters Agreements and Damages, in the said recited Indentures
contained; as by the said Indenture more fully and at large appears.

And forasmuch as the said W. B. means and intends as well to advance
Considerations.
his own Sons with the said Message Tenement and Premises, as also to settle
and dispose the said Message Tenement and Premises, so that the same may from
time to time, during the continuance of the said Estate and term of three
lives, so thereof formerly granted as aforesaid, remain continue and be to such
person and persons, and in such manner and form, as he the said W. B. has
hereafter in the said Premises mentioned and appointed; So long as it shall
please God to permit the same: He the said W. B. for the Causes and
Considerations aforesaid and for the natural love and affection which he
bears likewise unto his own Sons, as unto such his brothers as are hereafter
in these presents named.

And also for the trust and confidence which he bears and reposeth Assignment.
in them the said I. K. etc. and for diverse other good causes and
considerations him thereunto moving, has granted assigned and set over, and by
these presents does grant assign and set over unto them the said I. K. etc. and
their Assigns, the said Indenture of Demise and Lease, and all the whole Right
Title Interest Estate Term of-lives and Possession, which he the said W. B.
has, or of Right ought, or is entitled to have, of, in, or to the said
Message Tenement and Premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, by,
or by force of the said recited Indenture of Demise and Lease, so thereof to him
formerly made as aforesaid; Habend.
To have and to hold to them the said I. K. etc. and their Assigns, from and
immediately after the making of the said presents, for and during, and to the
full end and term, and during all the term of the natural life and lives of
them the said and for and during the term of the natural life of the Survivor
and longest, liver of them, bound to, and for such use, intent, and purpose,
that they the said I. K. etc. and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his
and their Assigns, Uses.
shall and may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the
continuance of the said term of three lives aforesaid, stand, continue, and be
seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to, and for such uses,
intents, purposes, conditions, limitations, and agreements, and to the use of
such person and persons, and for such Estate and Estates, and in such manner
and form, as hereafter in these presents are particularly expressed, mentioned,
and declared, and to no other uses, intents, purposes, or meaning, in any wise;
that is to say, of, and in all and singular the said Messuages Tenements Land
Premises, with all and singular their Appurtenances, and of every part and
parcel thereof, to, and for the only use and behoof of him the said VV. B. and
his Assigns, for and during the term of the natural life of him the said VV.
B. and by and immediately after the natural death and decease of him the said
VV. B. then of and in the full Moiety, half part, purparty, and portion of the
said Message Tenement and Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof,
with the Appurtenances, to, and for the use and behoof of Katherine, now wife
of the said VV. B. and her Assigns, for and during the term of the natural
life of the said K. if they the said or any of them so long shall live: And by
and immediately after the several deaths and deceases of the said VV. B. and
Katherine his wife, and of the Survivor of them, of and in the said Moiety,
half part, Purparty, and portion of the said Message Tenement and Premises,
so before limited in use, to and for the use of the said Katherine; and
likewise also by and immediately after the natural death and decease of the
said W. B. of and in the other Moiety, half part, Purparty, and Portion of the
said Message Tenement and Premises with the Appurtenances, to and for the use
and behoof of the said R. B. Son of the said VV. B. and of the Heirs Males of
the body of the said R. B: lawfully begotten, so long as they the said R. B.
VV. B. and I. B. or any of them shall live ot continue in full life; and for
default etc. yiedling etc. covenant, remain discharged of Encumbrances:
Covenant for making further assurance, and a Letter of Attorney.

Note that a Term cannot be assigned from a day to come but the Land it self by
special name may a Lease for life. Habendum from a day to come, is not good
but from the making or from a day past.

An Assignment of a Rectory or Parsonage, Water mill, etc.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between H. of G. in the County of Not. Esquire,
third Son to the late right Honorable Earl of S. dedeceased of the one party,
and W. of, etc. of the other party witnesses, That whereas the said Earl, and
E. T. Esquire his second Son by A rent of an Assignment.
their Deed indented, bearing date the ninth day of Aug: An. 28. Eliz. did
Grant, Assign, Assure, or Convey unto the said H. T. and his Assigns, all that
the Rectory or Parsonage of VV. in Com. E. and all Glebe, Lands, Tithes,
Profits, Commodities, Oblations, Obventions, Emoluments and Advantages
whatsoever yearly arising, growing, coming or renewing, in, and upon the said
Parsonage of W. and Premises with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof for diverse years yet enduring, as by the said recited Indenture more at
large does, and may appear. And whereas also one W. S: etc. by his Indenture,
bearing date, etc. did bargain, alien, sell, assign, and set over unto the said
H: T: and his Assigns all that the Water-Mill called the Abbey Mill in B: with
the appurtenances in the said Counry of E: together with all his estate, right,
title, interest, term, and terms of years reversion, claim, and demand which
he the said W: S: had, might, or ought to have unto the said Water-Mill, and
one parcel of Land adjoining, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof by virtue of her Highness Letters Patents to him thereof made for the
term of twenty years, or by virtue of one Grant from her Majesty of the
Reversion of the same Premises for the term of one and thirty years unto one N:
H: and by the said N: conveied unto the said VV: S: as Assignment.
by the said recited Indenture more at large it does, and may appear. Now this
Indenture further witnesses, That the said H: T: for diverse good Causes and
Considerations him thereunto specially moving, has given, granted, assigned,
and set over. and by these presents does give, grant, assign, and set over unto
the said VV: R: and his Assigns, all that, and those the said Rectory, or
Parsonage or Wash, Glebe Lands, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, and all and
singular other the premises with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, and all the estate, right, title, interest, term of years, claim, and
demand whatsoever of him the said H: T: of, in, and to the same, and every part
and parcel thereof yet to come and unexpired; and also all that his said term
and estate of, in, and to the said Water-Mill, and parcel of Land adjoining in
B: aforsaid with the Mill Dam, and all and singular Watercourse and Streams,
to, or with the said Water Mill now used or occupied, lying and being in B:
aforesaid, together with free Passage to come, go, and ride to and from the
said Mill for the grinding of any manner of Corn and Grain whatsoever. And all
the estate, right, title, interest, term of years, claim and demand whatsoever,
of him the said H: T: of, in, and to the same and every part and parcel thereof
yet to come and unexpired, together with all Indentures, of Lease, Grants and
Assigns of the said premises thereof made to the said Earl E: and H. VV: and N:
or any of them, or to any other person or persons to their, or any of their
uses, all which said Writings the said H: T: for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns. Covenanteth and Grants to, and with the said VV:
R: his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, to deliver, or cause to be
delivered to the said VV: R: his Executors or Assigns safe, whole, and
uncancelled at the reasonable request of the said VV: R. his Executors or
Assigns, to them, or any of them to be made at any time before the Feast of the
Purification, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, to have and to hold, use,
occupy and enjoy the said Rectory or Parsonage of what glebe Lands, Tithes,
together with the said Water-Mill, Watercourse and Streams, and all and
singular other the premises, with their, and every of their several
appurtenances, and every the said part and parcel thereof, and all the said
estate, right, title, interest, term and terms of years, claim, and demand of
the said H. T. of, in, and to all the said premises with the appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof unto the said W. R. his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, immediately from the making hereof, for, and during all the residue
of the said several term and terms of years yet to come and unexpired in the
said Rectory or Parsonage and Mill, and either of them in as large ample, and
beneficial manner and form, to all intents, constructions, and purposes as the
said H. T. may, might, should, or ought to have hold, use, occupy and enjoy
the said Premises to the only and several uses intents and purposes, and upon
special trust and confidence hereafter in these presents limited, declared, and
appointed, of, for, or concerning the same, and to no other use, behoof, intent
or purpose, that is to say, to the use and behoof of the said W. R. and his
Assigns, for, and during his natural life, (if the said term of years shall so
long endure) And if the said VV. R. shall depart this life within the said term
of years then after the decease of the said VV R. the use, profits, and
commodities of the said premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, shall
be and come to E. now wife of the said H. T. and daughter and sole Heir of the
said VV. R. for such and so many of the years that are, or shall be unexpired
in the said Premises after the death of the said VV. R. as shall be and
continue for term of her natural life (if the said term or terms of years
shall so long endure) And if the said E. happen to depart this life before the
expiration of the aforesaid term; That then the use possession and interest of
the whole term or terms aforesaid; shall be and come wholly with all the
residue and number of years then unexpired to G. and M. Daughters of the said
H. T. begotten upon the body of the said Eliz. and the longer liver of them.

An assignement of a Lease for a hundred years.
THis Indenture, made, etc. between J. L. Gentleman, son of Sir P. L. Knight of
the one party, and J. L. one of the Sons of the said Sir P. L Knight of the
other party, witnesses, that whereas R. B. late of S. etc. deceased, by his
Indenture sufficient in Law, bearing Recital of a Lease.
date the twentieth day of May, in the said twenty second year of the Queens
Majesty's Reign that now is, did for the considerations in the said Indenture
specified, demise, grant, set, and to ferme let unto the said I. L. all and
singular his Manors, Messuages, Houses, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Services whatsoever, in the several Towns,
Hamlets, Feilds and territories of H. S. D. and B. in the said Counties of L.
or any of them, to have and to hold the said Messuages, Lands, tenements,
Rents, Reversions, Habend of the Reversion assigned.
Services, and other the premises with all and singular their Appurtenances
unto the said I. L. his Executors and Assigns indifferently, from and after the
death of M. B. the wife of the said R. B. for and during the term of one
hundred years then next following, fully to be complete and ended, yiedling and
paying therefore yeatly during the said term of one hundred years, to the said
R. B. his heirs and Assigns, a certain yearly rent, and also upon this
Condition, amongst other Conditions in the said Indenture contained) that the
said I. L. at all and every time and times after the making of the said
Indenture upon the request or demand of the said R. B. should lawfully convey
and assure, all and singular the premises with their appurtenances* or any
part or parcel thereof, to such person or persons as by the said M. B. her
Executors or Administrators, should be named or appointed, for and during all
such interest and term, as then should be unexpired of the said one hundred
years, or of such part or portion thereof, as by the said R. should be limited,
nominated or appointed, and further, as by the said Indenture more at large it
does, and may appear. Now the said I. L. at the special request and desire of
the said M. late wife of the said R. deceased, and by her nomination and
appointment, and for the performance and accomplishment of the condition above
recited, in these presents, and of the trust and confidence Consider.
in him reposed by the said R. B. deceased. H. has granted, assigned and set
over, and by these presents does grant, assign and set over unto the said I. L.
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as well the said premises with the
Appurtenances above recited in the Assignment.
these presents, and every part and parcel thereof for and during the said
term of one hundred years, as also all his estate, right, title, claim,
interest, term of years, and demand whatsoever, of in and to the said Indenture
above recited in these presents.

To this end and purpose, that the said I. L. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall from time to time and at all times hereafter, at the request of
the said M. her Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, grant, assure and convey
as well the said premises with the Appurtenances, Condition.
and every part and parcel thereof, for and during the said term of one hundred
years, or for such Interest or term of years as at the time of such request
made, shall be therein then to come and unexpired, as also the said Indenture
above recited, and all the State, Right, Title, Interest Claim, Term of years
and Demand whatsoever of the said I. L. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns of, in, and to the said premises, and every part and parcel
thereof. The said premises of all Grants, Estates, Leases, Charges, and
Encumbrances whatsoever, before that time, had, made, or done, by the said I.
L. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, in any wise, In Witness, etc.

A second Assignement of the same Lease.
THis Indenture made the day of J. etc. between I. L. Gentleman, son or Sir P.
L. Knight on the one party, and B. widow sister of the said I. L. and late
wife of R. B. late of S. in the county of L. Esquire deceased on the other
party, witnesses; that whereas the said R* B. by his Indenture sufficient in
the Law bearing date etc. did Recital.
for the consideration in the said Indenture specified, demise, grant, set, and
to ferm let unto I. L. one other of the sons of the said Sir P. L Knight, all
and singular his Manors, Messuages, Houses, buildings Orchards, Gardens,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Services whatsoever, in the several
towns, hamlets, feilds, and territories, of R. B. etc. in the said County of L.
or in any of them, to have and to hold all and singular the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and all other the
premises, with all and singular the Appurtenances unto the said J. L. his
Executors or Assigns immediately from and after the death of the said M. B. for
and during the term of one hundred years then next following, fully to be
complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the term of one
hundred years to the said R. B. his heirs, and Assigns a certain yearly Rent,
and also upon condition amongst other Conditions in the said Indenture
contained, that the said J. L. at all and every time and times after the making
of the said Indenture, upon the request or demand of the said M. B. should
lawfully convey and assure, all and singular the premises with their
Appurtenances or any part or parcel thereof to such person or persons, as by
the said M, her Executors Administrators should be named or appointed for and
during all such interest and term, as then should be unexpired of the said one
hundred years, or for such part or portion thereof, as by the said M. should be
limited nominated or appointed, as by the said Indenture more at large does,
and may appear.

And whereas the said I. L. at the special request and desire of the said M.
B. and by her nomination and appointment, and for the performance and
accomplishment of the Condition above recited in these presents, and of the
trust and confidence in him reposed by the said R. B. deceased has by his
Indenture bearing date the day of this present month of I. granted assigned
and set over unto the said I. L. his Executors Administrators and assigns, as
well the said premises with the appurtenances, above recited in these
presents, and every part and parcel thereof for and during the term of one
hundred years, and also all his Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim, Term of
years, and Demand whatsoever, of in and to the same, and every part and parcel
thereof, together with the said Indenture above recited in these presents, to
this end and purpose, that the said I. L. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, should from time to time and at all times from thenceforth at the
request of the said M. her Executors Administrators or Assigns, grant assure
and convey by his or their Indenture or Deed sufficient in the Law unto the
said M. B. her Executors, admistrators and assigns, as well the said Premises
with the Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, for and during the
said term of one hundred years, or for such interest or term of years, as at
the time of such request made, should be therein then to come and unexpired,
and also the said Indenture above recited; and all the Estate, Right Title
Interest Claim Term of years, and Demand whatsoever, of the said J. L. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, of in and to the said Premises and every
part and parcel thereof. And further, as by the said Indenture made by the
said J. L. to the said J. L. as aforesaid more at large, it does and may
appear. Now the said Io. L. at the request of the said M. B. and for the end
and purpose expressed and declared in the said Indenture made by the said J. L.
as aforesaid, 2 Assignment,
has granted assigned and set over, and by this present Indenture does grant
assign and set over unto the said M. B. her Executors Administrators and
assigns, as well the said premises with the appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof, for and during the said term of one hundred years, as also the
said Indenture above recited, made by the said R. B. to the said J. L. as
aforesaid, and all the Estate Right Title Interest Claim, Term of years, and
Demand whatsoever, of the said J. L. of in and to the said premises, and every
part and parcel thereof together with the said Indenture made by the said J.
L. to the said J. L. as aforesaid, In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Manor.
THis Indenture made, etc. between G. O. etc. on the one party, Recital of
Letters Patents.
and G. D. etc on the other party, witnesses, that whereas our said sovereign
Lady the Queens Majesty by her highness Letters Patents made under the great
seal of England, bearing date at G. the etc. in the nineteenth year of her
highness most gracious Reign, reciting certain Letters Patents of King Philip,
and our late Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, late King and Queen of England, made to
one R. B. under their great seal of England, bearing date, the etc. in the
fourth and fifth year of their Reigns, and also reciting certain her Majesty's
former Letters Patents, made to R A under the seal of the Exchequer, bearing
date at Westminster, the etc. in the twelfth year of her Highness Reign: Has
demised granted and to Farm letten amongst other things to VV. H. etc. all that
her Manor of I. with all and singular Rights Members and Appurtenances,
situate lying and being in M. in the County of L. to the late Priory of B. now
dissolved, sometime belonging and appurtaining, and parcel of the possessions
thereof, sometime being; And all that her several Fishings in the River and
water of T. and their Isles called the Eights, in the same water, on the side
of the County of Berck* and all other the Premises, to the said R. B. by the
foresaid Letters Patents, granted demised or letten, with all and singular
their Appurtenances: And all and singular Edifices Buildings Barns Stables
Dove-courts Orchards Gardens Lands Meadows Feedings Pastures Commons Wastes
Champion Grounds Heaths Moors Marshes Waters Fishings Harvest-daies of the
Tenants of the said Manor of B. Profits Commodities Advantages Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever, to the premises or any part thereof, in any manner of
days belonging or happening* or with them or any of them, for their several
Rents reserved in the said Letters Patents, therefore demised letten used
occupied or enjoyed, with all and singular their Appurtenances; And the
Reversion and Reversions whatsoever, of all and singular the premises, by the
said Letters Patents before granted, and every parcel thereof (except and
exception to our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Heirs and Successors
always reserved. All great Trees Woods Under-woods Wards Marriages Mines
Quarries Court-Leets Views of Frank-pledge Release Harriots Fines Amerciaments
Inrents Escheats Goods Chattels and Services of Bondmen, and their Sequells
Felons Fugitives Felons of themselves, Dayven to Exigent Condemned and Outlawed
Wayses Strayes whatsoever. And all and all manner of Advowsons Churches and
Chapels whatsoever, Habend.
to the premises belonging. To have and to hold the foresaid Manor of I. And
all and singular other the premises to the said R. B. as aforesaid granted
demised and letten, with all their Appurtenances, by the said Letters Patents
(except before excepted) to the said VV. H. his Executors, and Assigns, from
the time wherein the said Letters Patents and Agreements to the said R. B.
thereof as aforesaid made, by execution surrender forfeiture, or by any other
means whatsoever, first and next should happen to be void ended and determined,
unto the end and term of one and twenty years, from thence next following,
fully to be complete and ended, yiedling then and from thenceforth yearly to
our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, 11 l. of
lawful money of England, at the Feast of etc. to the hands of the Bailiff or
Receivers of the Premises, for the time being, by even portions to be paid,
during the said term of etc. And to have and to hold the foresaid Fishing
called the Eights, and all and singular other the Premises of the said R. A.
demised and letten with their Appurtenances, to the foresaid VV. H. his
Executors and Assigns, from the time wherein the said Letters Patents, and grant
to the said R. A. as aforesaid made, by expiration surrender forfeiture, or by
any other manner of ways whatsoever, first and next should happen to be void
ended or determined, unto the end and term of etc. from thence next following,
fully to be complete and ended, yiedling then therefore yearly to our said
Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, 8 s. etc. at the Feasts of
etc. to the hands of the Bailiff or Receivers of the premises, for the time
being, by even portions to be paid, during the said term of etc.

And whereas furthermore by the same Highness Letters Patents there is granted
and given by her Highness full power and authority, to the said VV. H. his
Executors and Assigns, to have Timber for the Reparations of the houses and
Buildings of the Premises, in and upon her Majesty's Wood growing upon the
Premises, to be taken by assignment of her Majesty's Officers, with further
power and authority to the said W. H. to have and take Hous-boot Hedge boot
Fire-boot Plow-boot and Cart-boot; As by the said Letters Patents granted to
the said W. H: more at large it does and may appear. The Interest Estate Right
Use Possession Reversion Claim and Demand whatsoever, of him the said W. H. of,
in, and to the said Manor of I. with the Rights Members and Appurtenancrs, and
of, and into the said Fishings in the River and water of Thames, and in the
Isles called the Eights, in the same water, and of, in, and to all other the
Premises with all and singular their Appurtenances before in these presents
recited, which one I. M. and E. V. Gentlemen, lately had and enjoyed, as by one
Indenture under the hand and seal of the said W. H. beating date etc. amongst
diverse other Covenants Grants and Agreements therein contained, more plainly may
appear.

And whereas also the said I. M. and E. V. by their Indenture under Recital of
an assignment.
their hands and seals, bearing date etc. for the consideration therein
specified, did bargain sell assign and set over unto G. O. etc. all the Estate
Right Title Use Possession Reversion Term of years Claim and Demands
whatsoever, which they the said I: M. and E. V. or either of them, had, or
has, or ought to have or claim, of, in, and to the said Manor of I. with the
Rights Members and Appurtenances, and of, in, and to the said Fishings in the
River and water of T. and in the Isles called the Eights in the same water, and
all other the Premises, with all and singular their Appurtenances, and of, in,
and to every part and parcel thereof, together with the said Letters Patents,
to the said W. H. made and granted as aforesaid, and the said Indenture of
Assignment above mentioned, and one Obligation or Writing obligatory, wherein
the said W. H: stands bound to the said I. M. and E. V. in the sum of etc.
with Condition thereupon endorsed, touching the performance of the Covenants
Grants Conditions and Provisoes, mentioned and contained in the said second
recited Indenture. To have hold occupy possess and enjoy the said Manors
Messuages Lands Tenements Fishings, and Habend.
the said three Isles called the Eights, and all and singular other the
premises, and every part and parcel thereof; and the said Estate Right Title
Interest Use Possession Reversion Claim and Demand of them the said I. M. and
E. V. and of either of them, of, in, and to the same, together with the said
Letters Patents, Indenture o^ Assignment, and Writing Obligatory aforesaid,
unto the said G. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, in as large ample
and beneficial manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as they the said
I. M. and E. V or either of them, might could should or ought to have and enjoy
the said premises, by force and virtue of the said Indenture, or otherwise, as
by the same last recited Indenture of Bargain and Sale, more plainly also
appears.

Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said G. O. for and in The
[Grant.
consideration of the sum of etc. to him in hand, at and before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents, by the said G. D. well and truly contented and
paid, whereof and wherewith he acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid;
And thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and
discharge the said G. D. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them
for ever, by these presents, has bargained sold given granted assigned and set
over, and by these presents, does plainly and clearly bargain sell give grant
assign and set over unto the said G: D. all the Estate Right Title Interest Use
Possession Reversion Term of years Claim and Demand whatsoever, which he the
said G. O. or any other person or persons to his use, have, or has, or of
right ought to have or claim, of, in, or to the said Manor of I. with the
Rights Members and Appurtenances, and of and in and to the said Fishings, in
the River and water of Thames, and in the Isles called the Eights in the same
water, and all other the premises before mentioned, with all and singular
their Appurtenances, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof, together
with the said Letters Patents to the said W. H. made and granted as aforesaid,
and the said Indenture of Assignment above mentioned, and the said Obligation,
or Writing Obligatory, wherein the said W. H. stands bound unto the said I. M.
and E. V. in the sum of etc. for the performance of the Covenants Grants
Conditions and Provisoes mentioned in the said Indenture: To have hold occupy
possess and enjoy the said Manor Messuages Lands Tenements and Fishings, and
the said three Isles called the Eights, and all and singular other the
premises with the Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof: And the
said estate right Title Interest Use Possession Reversion Claim and Demand
whatsoever, of him the said G. O. of, in, and to the same, together with the
said Letters Patents and Indentures, and Writing Obligatory aforesaid, unto the
said G. D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, in as large ample and
beneficial manner and form, in every thing and things, and to all intents and
purposes, as he the said A. B. may might should or ought to have and enjoy the
same premises, by force and virtue of the said Letters Patents, recited
Indentures, or otherwise by any ways or means whatsoever.

And the said G. O. for him his Executors Administrators and Assigns, Covenant
for quiet enjoying.
Covenanteth and Grants, to, and with the said G. D. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That he the said G. D. his
Executors Administators and Assigns, shall or may from henceforth during the
said term of, etc. peaceably and quietly, have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said
Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Fishings, and all and singular other the
Premises with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, clearly
acquitted, discharged or otherwise saved and kept harmless by the said G. O.
his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, of, and from all and
singular former Bargains, Sales, and Gifts, Grants, Leases, Assignments,
Forfeitures, Charges, Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Reentries, Cause and Causes,
Forfeiture and Reentry, and of, and from all, and every other charges, titles,
troubles, and Encumbrances whatsoever, the Rent, Covenants and payments
contained and specified in the said Letters Patents on the Tenants part and
behalf, from, and after the ninth day of, etc. next ensuing, etc. only
exceptance reserved. And furthermore, that he the said G. O. and the said I. M.
and E. W. and every of them their Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, shall A Letter of Attorney to sue up the bond assigned.
from, and after the ninth of, etc. and at all times then after, and from time
to time at the costs and charges in the Law of the said G. D. his executors
administrators and assigns, permit and suffer the said G. D. his executors
administrators or assigns, to attempt, sue and prosecute all, and every such
lawful Action and Actions, Plaints, Pleas, Processes, Judgments and Executions
as he the said G. D. his executors adminitors or assigns shall think meet or
convenient to attempt, commence, sue, or prosecute in the name of them the said
I. M. and E. VV. their executors or administrators for, or upon the said
Obligation or Deed Obligatory of, etc. by reason of any breach or not
performance of the Covenants, Grants, Articles or Agreements in the said first
recited Indenture of Assignment expressed and specified without being non suit
or willingly, nulling any discontinuance release, or other discharge of, or for
the same Actions, Suits, Judgments or Executions, or any of them without the
consent and agreement of the said G. D. his executors administrators or
assigns. And also, that neither he the said G. O. nor the said I. M. or E. W.
or any of them have released or discharged, nor that they the said G. O. I. M.
or E. VV. or any of them, their executors or administrators hereafter shall
release or discharge the said Obligation of, etc. wherein the said W. H.
stands bound, as aforesaid, nor any of the Covenants, Grants, Articles or
Agreements in the said first recited Indenture contained without the special
assent or consent of the said G. D. his executors or administrators first had
and obtained in Writing under his or their Hand and Seal; and also, that he the
said G. D. his executors administrators and assigns, shall or may Recover,
Take, Receive, and Enjoy to the only use of him the said G. D. his executors
administrators and assigns, all and every sum, or sums of money, and other
benefits as shall be Recovered. Obtained, or Gotten, upon, or by reason of the
said Actions, Suits, Judgments and Executions, or any of them without any
manner of Let, Interruption, or Disturbance of the said G. O. I. M. or E. W.
their, or any of their executors and administrators, and without any Account,
Reconing, or other thing therefore by the said G. D. his executors
administrators or assigns, to be yielded, made, or done, provided always that
and the said G. D. for him his executors administrators and assigns, and every
of them, Covenanteth, Grants, and Agrees to, and with the said G. O. his
executors administrators and assigns by these presents, That if the said G. O.
his executors administrators or assigns, or any of them do well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said G. D. his executors administrators or
assigns, or any of them the sum of etc. in the said ninth day, etc. which shall
be etc. at, or, in the now dwelling house of the said G. D. Situate and being,
etc. between the hours of etc. without fraud or further delay, That then, as
well this present Indenture of Bargain and Sale, as also one single Obligation
of the date hereof, wherein the said G. O. stands bound and surely holden
unto the said G. D. in the sum of, etc. payable in the, etc. which shall be,
etc. utterly void and of none effect in the Law to all intents and purposes,
and that then the said G. D. his executors or assigns, shall after the full
Payment and Receipt of the said sum of, etc. at the day, time and place above
mentioned, well and truly redeliver, or cause to be redelivered unto the said
G. O. his heirs executors or assigns the foresaid Letters Patents, Indentures
of Assignments, and the said recited Writing Obligatory of the sum of, etc. and
this present Indenture, and the said single Obligation wherein the said G. O.
stands bound unto the said S. D. in the sum of, etc. which shall be Cancelled
and made void without fraud or coven, provided always, if default be made or
had in the payment of the said sum, etc. contrary to the Form, Effect, true
Intent and Meaning of these Presents, then this present Grant and Assigment of
the Premises and the said single Obligation, etc. thereof made, and all other
Writings concerning the same, shall stand, abide and remain to the said G. D.
his executors administrators and assigns, absolutely without any manner of
condition in full strength and virtue. In witness whereof, etc.

An Assignment of a Bond.
THis Indenture made etc. between Sir J. S. and H. D. on the one party, and J.
S. on the other party, witnesses, that whereas H. F. by his Obligation by him
sealed and delivered as his Deed, bearing date etc. is, and does stand holden
and firmly bounden unto them the said I. S. and H. D. in 250 l. of lawful
money of England, to be paid unto the said I. S. and H. D. or their certain
Attorney or Executors, with Condition indorsed upon the said Obligation, of,
and for the true payment of the sum of etc. and further as by the said
Obligation and Condition more fully appears.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that they the said I. S. and H. D.
Consideration.
for diverse good reasonable and lawful causes and considerations them thereunto
moving, have bargained granted assigned and set over, and by these presents,
for themselves their Executors Administrators and Assigns, do bargain grant
assign and set over unto. etc. the said Bond Obligation or Writing Obligatory
of 250 l. and all the Estate Right Title Debt Benefit and Profit of the same,
which they the said I. S. and H. D. or either of them, now have, or ought, or
be entitled to have in or to the same: And all the Profit Debt and Benefit of
the said Bond Obligation or Writing Obligatory of 250 l. And also all and
singular Debts Duties Penalties sums of money, and all other duties whatsoever
contained mentioned or specified, and which is or shall be in right and equity
due or payable, by force of or upon the same: To Assignment:
have and to hold unto the said I. S. her Executors and Assigns, to the only
proper use behoof and benefit of the said J. S. her Executors and Assigns: And
they the said J. S. and H. D. for themselves, their Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, do covenant and grant by these presents, to and
with the said J. S. her Executors and Assigns, that the said Bond Obligation or
Writing Obligatory of 250 l: is already Covenant that the bond is forfeited.
forfeited by the non-payment of the said sum of 120 l. And that the said Bond
Obligation, or Writing Obligatory of 250 l. and all and every sum and sums of
money, penalty forfeitures debts and duties in the same contained or mentioned,
at the time of the ensealing and delivery here of, are not, nor is not by the
said J. S. nor by any other by his consent to his knowledge, received released
discharged levied executed That it neither is or shall be released by etc. That
the Obligee shall not release.
or satisfied. And that he the said Io. S. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, nor any of them, shall not at any time or times hereafter, release
discharge or make void the said Bond Obligation, or Writing Obligatory of 250
l. nor otherwise any sum or sums of money penalty forfeiture debt duty covenent
or grant, in them or any of them contained or mentioned, neither that any
person or persons, by the assent assignment or consent of the said Io S. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, other then the said Ia. S. her Executors
or Assigns, Deputy or Deputies authorized, and such person and persons as shall
be authorized by these present Indentures, shall commence and prosecute any
Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, for by or upon, or by reason of the said bond
or Writing Obligatory, or for by and upon any sum or sums of money, or other
debt or duty in the same contained, either against the said H. F: his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them or any other person or persons,
claiming or holding, in by or under, the Right and Title of the said H. F. or
any of them, or any of their goods or chattels, or their, or any of their
bodies, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, within the Realm of England, nor
otherwise shall have enjoy take challenge or demand to his own use and benefit,
debt or profit, in of or upon, touching or concerning the said Bond Obligation
or Writing Obligatory of 250 l. or any sum or sums of money, debt penalty or
other duty, to be due or payable, by or by force of the same, or touching or
concerning any other of the premises, without the special license agreement
and consent of the said Ia S. her Executors Administrators or Assigns, or some
of them first had and obtained in Writing.

And further also for the better strengthening and coroborating of Letter of
Attorney.
the said grant and assurance of the Premises, the said Io. S. for himself his
Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them as well has
constituted ordained deputed and in his place put, and by these presents, does
constitute ordain depute, and in his place put the said Ja. S. his true lawful
and irrevokable Attorney, as also does further grant to and for the said Ja. S.
her Executors Administrators and Assigns, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said Ja: S: her Executors Deputy Attorney and Assigns and every of
them, at all times hereafter, and from time to time, for and until execution
be had upon the said Bond Obligation, or Writing Obligatory of 250 l. at her
free will and pleasure, for and in the name and names of the said Io. S. and to
the only use of the said Ia. S. her Executors and Assigns, and at the only
costs and charges in all points of the said Ja. S. her Executors Administrators
and Assigns, lawfully to arrest sue or implead the said H. F. his Executors and
Assigns, and all and every other person and persons needful, and as the same
shall permit for and upon the said recited Bond, Obligation, or Writing
Obligatory of 250 l. and otherwise to commence prosecute and follow, any
lawful process suit action plaint plea or information in any Court or Courts
whatsoever, and before any Judge or Judges whatsoever.

And likewise also to plead any plea or pleas, and to proceed and join any
Issue or Issues, and thereupon to pray Judgment and Judgments, and sue and take
lawful execution and executions, extent and extents whatsoever, for and in the
name and names of the said J. S. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, by
or upon the said Obligation, or Writing Obligatory of 250 l. for any pain
penalty forfeiture sum or sums of money, or other debt duty or demand therein
contained mentioned or specified against the said H. F. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, and against all and every other
person and persons needful, as the Law shall permit, and against their and
every of their bodies, and likewise against their and every of their Lands
Tenements Hereditaments Goods and Chattels, of for and concerning the levying
payment and satisfaction of the said Bond Obligation, and Writing Obligatory,
and all and every the sum and sums of money, and other the debts duties
penalties and forfeitures therein contained or mentioned, and thereby or by force
thereof to be due and payable for and during, and until such time as the same
shall be fully and truly satisfied and discharged and recompensed unto the said
J. S. her Deputy Attorney Executors and Assigns.

And the said J. S. does further covenant and grant, for himself his To avow
Suits upon the bond.
Executors Administrators and Assigns by these presents, to and with the said
J. S. her Executors Administrators and Assigns, that he the said J. S. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will from
time to time, and at all and every time and times hereafte^, at the only costs
and charges in all points of the said J. S: her Executors Administrators and
Assigns, avow justify and maintain, all and singular the said lawful Arrests
Suits Processes Actions Plaints Pleas Issues Judgments Executions and Extents
so to be made commenced prosecuted followed prayed or taken as aforsaid. And
also that he the said J. S. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, Not to be
nonsuit, or released.
or any of them, shall not wittingly nor willingly be nonsuit in any such
Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, Plea Plaint or Process, nor otherwise delay
release determine discontinue, or otherwise make frustrate or void, any such
Suit or Suits, Process or Processes, Action or Actions, Plaint or Plaints, Plea
or Pleas, Issue or Issues, Judgment or Judgments, Execution or Executions,
Extent or Extents whatsoever, or any process or proceedings before, by these
presents indented, or specified to be thereupon taken or pursued, nor otherwise
shall nor will by any ways or means whatsoever, disagree unto, revoke or
countermand the same, or any lawful grant clause matter assignment or
authority, limited granted given appointed, in or by these presents, or thereby
mentioned, or truly intended, or any part or parcel thereof in any wise.

And further also, that the said Ja. S. her Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them shall and may from time to time, and at all and
every time and times hereafter, levy take receive have hold possess and enjoy,
to their sole only and proper use and behoof as aforesaid, all and singular sum
and sums of money, Lands Tenements Hereditaments Goods and Chattels, Advantages
and Commodities whatsoever, which at any time or times hereafter, shall be
lawfully had levied extended adjudged or recovered, by any lawful ways or
means whatsoever, by force of the said Bond Obligation, or Writing Obligatory
of 250 l. or any matter or thing in these presents contained.

And further also, that he the said Ja. S. his executors administrators Further
assurance.
and assigns, shall at all time and times hereafter upon reasonable request to
him or them to be made by the said Ja. S. her executors administators or
assigns at the costs and charges in the Law of the said Ja: S. her executors or
assigns, make, do, and suffer to be done, all and singular further lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things, conveiance and conveiances in the
Law, as by the said Ja: S: her executors administrators or assigns, or any of
their Council learned shall be reasouably devised, advised or required. So as,
etc. for the sure Making, Granting, Passing and assuring, unto the said Ja. S.
her assigns of the said bond, and of all sums of money thereby to be due or
payable, and also of all and singular such Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods and Chattels of any person or persons which shall be extended, recovered,
had, or taken in Execution, by or upon any Suit, Judgment, or Execution to be
had or given, by, or upon the said bond, and of all other debts, advantages,
profits and commodities, which shall, or may grow, come, or be by having of the
body of the said H. F. his executors administrators or assigns, in prison upon
any action or Execution by force of the said Bond and Obligation of 250 l. or
in any matter or thing in these presents contained or mentioned.

And lastly, the said Jo. S. for himself, his etc. does further covenant To
release, compound, or agree etc.
grant and fully agree to and with the said Ja. S. her Executors Administrators
and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, that she the said
Ia. S. her Executors and Assigns, for any act heretofore done, or hereafter to
be done by the said Io. S. his Executors or Administrators, shall or may have
full power and authority by virtue of these presents, either in her own name
(if Law will so permit) or otherwise in the name of the said Io. S. his
Executors and Assigns, at her will and pleasure, to release discharge compound
or agree with any person or persons to whom it shall appertain, or be thought
expedient or needful, of for or concerning the said Bond Obligation, or Writing
Obligatory and for and concerning any sum or sums of money, debt penalty
forfeiture duty benefit execution extent advantages profit and commodity
whatsoever, of the said Bond and Obligation of 250 l. aforesaid, or of for or
concerning any other the premises covenanted promised agreed as signed or set
over, or authorized to be levied taken or raised thereupon, In witness etc.

A very good Assignment of a Lease.
THis Indenture made etc. between A. B. etc. of the one party, and C. D. of the
other party, witnesses, That whereas H. A. deceased, by the name of H. A. of W.
in the said County Gentleman; by his Indenture of Lease under his hand and
seal, bearing date the first day of May, in the thirty eighth year of the Reign
of our late Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth of England etc. for the
considerations therein mentioned, did demise grant betake lease set and to
Ferm-let, unto the said C. D. and his Assigns, all that and those the Message
and Tenement with the Appurtenances in B. etc. called R. house, then or late in
the Tenure, holding or occupation of A. B. Father of the said A. B. or of his
Assignee or Assigns, or by what other name soever the said Message was then
called or known etc. To have and to hold the said Message and Tenement, and
all and singular the said Edifices Houses Buildings Yards Orchards Gardens
Closes Enclosures Fields Meadows Pastures Parcels of Land, and all other the
premises, with the appurtenances before therein mentioned to be demised
whatsoever, and the Reversion and Reversions thereof unto the said A. B. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, from and immediately after the decease of
the said A B I. A. and Ann. A. unto the end of the term, and for and during all
the whole term time and space of one and forty years then next and immediately
following, fully to be complete ended and determined, without impeachment of
any manner of Wast, for building in or upon the premises, or for digging or
getting of Marle, or of any manner of Under-wood, to be spent and bestowed in
and upon the premises and not elsewhere; yiedling and paying therefore yearly
during the said term of one and forty years, from and after the commencement
thereof to the said H. A. his Heirs and Assigns, the yearly Rent of 13 s. 4. d.
of etc. at the Feast days of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, and the Birth
of our Lord God, by even portions, the first day of payment thereof to commence
and begin at such of the said Feasts as should chance to be next after the
death of the Survivor and longest liver of them the said etc. and further as in
and by the said Indenture of Lease, relation thereunto being had, may more
plainly and at large appear.

And whereas the said H. A. Alice A. then wife of the said H. and E. Son and
Heir apparent of the said H. for the more better confirming of the said
Indenture of Lease, and the Estate and Term therein and thereby granted, have by
their Indentures of Covenants, bearing date the second day of May, in the said
thirty eighth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, for
the considerations therein mentioned covenanted and agreed to and with the said
A. B. his Executors and Assigns, that they the said H. A: Alice then his wife,
and the said E. A. the Son, should at the next Assizes or general great
Session for pleas then to be holden at Lancaster, before the Justices or
Justice of our said late Sovereign Lady Queen Eliz. her Heirs or Successors
there for the time being, levy and acknowledge a Fine Sur Connizance de droit
come ceo etc. with proclamations in due from of Law, to I. W. and I. S. and
their Heirs, as that which they had of the gift of the said H. A. and E. Son of
the said Humphrey, of and in all and singular the said Message and Tenement,
and all and singular other the premises with the Appurtenances, comprised and
mentioned in the said Indenture of Lease, by the name of one Message, two
Gardens, eighteen acres of Land, six acres of Meadow, and seven acres of
Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Billing: And it was thereby further agreed by
and between all the said parties, that the said fine so to be levied and
acknowledged, as is aforesaid, at all times after the levying and engrossing
thereof, and the Lands and Tenements therein to be contained, should be to the
uses of the said A. B. and his Assigns, for and during all the term of one and
forty years, mentioned in the Indenture of Lease, with other uses therein
expressed. And immediately after the determination of one and forty years, then
to the use of the said H. A. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And further as in
and by the said last recited Indentures (relation being thereunto had) may more
at large appear.

And whereas a Fine was levied in the Court of our said late Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, at Lancaster, upon Tuesday the tenth day of August, in the
year of the Reign of our said late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth etc. the 38.
before her Majesty's then Justices at Lancaster, and others, between the said
I. W. and I. S. Plaintiffs, and the said H. A. Gentleman, and Alice his wife,
and Ed. A. Son and Heir apparent of the said H Deforciants, of one Message,
two Gardens, eighteen acres of Land, six acres of Meadow, and seven acres of
Pasture, with the appurtenances in B. as by the said Fine more at large it does
and may appear.

Since the making of which said Indenture of Lease the said I. A. and Anne A
are dead.

Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said A* B. for and in
consideration of the sum of sixty pounds of good etc. to him in hand paid by
the said C. D: at and before the ensealing of these presents, whereof and
wherewith the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge himself well and truly
satisfied and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does
clearly acquit exonerate and discharge the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them for ever by these presents, Has
given granted assigned and set over, and by these presents, does fully and
absolutely grant assign and set over unto the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, all and every the said Message and Tenement Lands
and Premises etc. together with the recited Indenture of Lease, and all the
Estate Right Title Interest Common Right Power Possibility Claim and Demand
whatsoever, which the said A. B. now has or ought to have, or can or may by
any ways or means hereafter, ask challenge or demand, of in or to the said
Message and Tenement Lands and other the premises before mentioned, or of in
or to all or any part or parcel thereof, and the Reversion and Reversions
Remainder and Remainders of all and every the said Premises with the
appurtenances whatsoever: To have and to hold all and every the said Message
and Tenement, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the premises
whatsoever hereby granted, meant or mentioned to be granted, with all and
singular their and every of their appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, together with the said Indenture of Lease: and all the Estate Right
Title Interest, Right Power Possibility Claim and Demand whatsoever, which the
said A. B. has or ought to have, or can or may by any means, ask challenge or
demand, of in or to the said Message and Tenement, Lands or other the
premises, with the appurtenances, or of in or to any part thereof, and the
Reversion or Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of all and every the said
premises to the said C. D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from and
immediately after the death and decease of the said A. B. unto the end of the
term, and for and during all the whole term time and space of one and forty
years then next and immediately ensuing and following, fully to be complete
ended and determined, without impeachment of any manner of Wast for building in
and upon the said premises, or any part thereof; or for digging or getting of
Marle, or of any manner of Under-wood to be spent and bestowed in and upon the
said premises, or some part thereof, in as full large ample and beneficial
manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as the said A. B. might or could
in any wise have held and enjoyed the same, Yiedling and paying therefore yearly
during all the term hereby granted to the Heirs of the said H. A. the yearly
Rent of 13 s. 4 d. current etc. at such feasts and times as in the said
Indenture of Lease is mentioned and declared.

And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, that he the said A.
B. now has full power good and lawful authority to grant and assign the said
Message and Tenament, and all other the said premises with the appurtenances,
to the said C. D his Executors Administrator and Assigns, for and during all
the term hereby granted, in manner and form aforesaid: And that he the said C.
D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and may at all times, during
the term hereby granted, and according to the true and plain meaning of these
presents, peaceably and quietly have hold occupy and enjoy all and every the
said Message and Tenement, Lands and other the premises with the
appurtenances, without any manner of let stop suit trouble ejection eviction
interruption or disturbance of the said A. B. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, and also
acquitted exonerated discharged or otherwise well and sufficiently saved and
kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains
Gifts Grans Assignments Joyntures Dowers Judgments Executions Forfeitures, and
of and from all other charges and encumbrances whatsoever, had made suffered or
done, or hereafter to be had made suffered or done by the said A B. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, or by any other person or
persons whatsoever.

And the said A. B. for him his Executors Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, that he the said A.
B. shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during the
natural life of the said A. C. at the reasonable request costs and charges in
the Law of the said C. D. his Executors Administrators, or Assigns, do, make
knowledge and execute, or cause to be made done etc. all and every such further
act and acts, thing and things, conveyance and conveyances, assurance and
assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further assurance surety and sure
making and conveying of all and every the said Message and Tenement, Lands and
other the premises before mentioned, with the appurtenances, and every part
thereof to the said C. D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, for and
during all the term hereby granted, as by the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, or his or their Council learned
shall be reasonably devised advised and required.

And that he the said A. B. shall and will at all times hereafter, and from
time to time, so often as need shall require, during the natural life of the
said A. B. upon his and their own proper costs and charges, well and
sufficiently repair maintain and uphold all the houses and buildings, hedges
and ditches, now in the occupation of the said A. B. and being parcel of and
belonging to the said Message and Tenement, and the same so repaired in good
and Tenantable repair, shall and will leave and yield up at the death of the
said A. B. And the said C. D. for him his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
does covenant and grant, to and with the said A. B. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
that he the said C. D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and will
peaceably and quietly permit and suffer Ellen B. now wife of the said A. B. her
Assigns to have etc. all and every that and those Buildings, and parcels of
Buildings, Lands and Premises hereafter mentioned, situate in B. aforesaid,
and being parcel of and belonging to the said granted Message and Tenement
(that is to say) all that Building called the Parlor, with all the Rooms over
and above the same, and all that part of the Chamber next adjoining to the said
Parlor, as it is now divided at the Summer thereof, with liberty to Bake and Brew
in the Kitchen, and to fetch water at the Well, and free way and passage into,
and from the said Parlor and Kitchen: And also that one Bay, or binding of
Building with a piece of a Bay thereunto adjoining, standing in the East end of
the Barn, and liberty in the Threshing Bay to Thresh is, winnow, load, or
unload, any manner of Corn, or Straw, with other Necessaries in the same, and
liberty and free way of passage, with Carts, Carriages on Horseback, and on
foot, into, and from the same etc.

And moreover the said A. B. for the considerations aforesaid, has given
granted bargained and sold, and by these presents does freely and absolutely
give grant bargain and sell unto the said C. D. all the Glass and inner Doors
standing in the dwelling house belonging to the said Message, and in all other
Chambers and Rooms belonging thereunto, and all the Shelves and Fourmes, as the
same are now standing in the dwelling house and rooms aforesaid, and all that
Brass-Pan now used for a Furnace: To have etc. all and every the said Goods and
Chattels before mentioned to the said A. B. his Executors etc. from the date
hereof for ever.

Provided, and it is agreed by and between the said parties, that the said A.
B. and Ellen his wife, shall have the usage of the said Goods, during their
natural lives and the longest liver of them, the same parcells of Goods
standing and so shall remain and stand in the same places where they now stand,
In witness whereof etc.

An Assigment of a Lease, with Covenants to transfer the benefit of the
Covenants in the Lease, and of the Bond upon the same.
THis Indenture, etc. between E. N. on the one party, and R. B. on the other
party; Witnesses, That whereas A. M. Esquire Sun Recita.
and Heir of Sir R. M. Knight, late Citizen and Alderman of L. dedeased, by his
Indenture of Lease bearing date the fifth of July, etc. Did Demise, etc. to the
said E. N. all that Message or Tenement, called the Sign of the Falcon, etc.
Situate, etc. except and reserved out of the said Lease, etc. to have, etc.
yiedling etc. as by, etc Now the said E. N. Assignment.
for, and in consideration of the sum, etc. whereof etc. has bargained, sold,
assigned, and set over, and by these Presents, etc. unto the said R. B. as well
the said Indenture of Lease as also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Use, Possession, Reversion, term of Years, Claim and Demand whatsoever, which
he the said E. N. has or ought to have, to, of, or in the said Message or
Tenement, Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Warehouses, and to, of, and in all and
singular other the Premises with the appurtenances, and to, of, and in every
part and percel thereof, together with all Rents and yearly Profits reserved
upon any Demise, Lease or Grant which the said E. has made of the Premises,
or of any parcel thereof: To have and to hold all and singular the Premises
Habe^d.
before by these presents bargained, sold, assigned, and set over unto the said
R: B: his Executors administrators and assigns, from the day of the date of
these presents, for, and during, and unto the full end and accomplishment of
all the residue of the years that are now to come and unexpired of the said
term of thirty years, in as large and ample manner and form in every respect as
the said E. may, can, might, should, or ought to have and enjoy the same by
virtue of the said Indenture of Lease, or by any other ways or means
whatsoever.

And the said E: N: Covenanteth, etc. that the said Message or Covenant to
discharge of In^umbrances.
Tenement, Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Warehouses, and all and singular other the
premises with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof at the
ensealing and delivery of these presence are and be, and so from henceforth
lawfully may be, remain, and continue unto the said R: B: his executors and
assigns, for and during all the residue of the said term of thirty years that
are now to come and not expired, free and clearly acquitted, exonerated,
discharged, or otherwise by the said E: N: his executors or assigns, at all
times saved or kept harmless, of, and from all and singular former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Rents, arrerages of Rents, Re-entries,
Forfeitures, and of and from all and every other charges, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, had made committed, or done by the said E. or by any
other person or persons by or under his Estate, Right or Interest, the foresaid
yearly rent of etc. reserved by the said Indenture of Lease and other Exception.
the Covenants, Grants, Articles, and Agreements in the same Lease contained,
which on the part and behoof of the said E. his executors administrators and
assigns, and every, or any of them from henceforth are or ought to be paid,
observed, performed and kept; And also one Lease which heretofore the said E.
has granted by his Deed indented, bearing date etc. to I: W: etc. of a Shop
percel of the premises for the term of etc. which did commence at the Feast
etc. next ensuing the date of the same Lease, and upon which Lease the yearly
rent of 6 l. of lawful etc. is reserved, and during the continuance thereof
from henceforth shall be due and payable to the said R. B: and his Assigns for
any act had made or done by the said E: N: only except and foreprised.

And further the said E: N: Covenanteth etc. in manner and form following, that
is to say, That he the said R: B: his executors administrators and assigns at
his and their own proper costs and charges without any Nonsute, Release,
Retraxit or other Let, Prejudise or Interruption of him the said E. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, not only shall and may have, pursue and
maintain in the name of the said E. his Executors or Administrators, all and
every Action and Suit, Judgment and Execution, upon all and every Bond,
Covenants, Grants and Agreements whatsoever made unto him the said E. touching
or concerning the Premises or any part thereof, but also that he the said R.
his Executors and Assigns, shall, or may have and enjoy the full effect,
advantage and commodity of all and every such Bond, Covenant, Action, Suit,
Judgment and Execution to his and their own use for any Deed or Thing
whatsoever, had made committed or done, or to be had etc. by the said E. his
Executors or Administrators. And that he the said E. heretofore has not
released, discharged, or acquitted, or his Executors or Administrators shall
not release etc. hereafter any the Covenants, Grants, Agreements or Bonds
aforesaid without the request and consent of the said R. B. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns. And for the better prevailing in all and every the
Suits, Judgments and Executions aforesaid, shall, and will avouch and allow of
all and every the said Suits, Judgments and Executions which the said R. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall bring and presecute against any
person or persons upon any the Covenants, Grants, Agreements and Bonds
aforesaid, or any of them, either in the Name or Names of the said E. N. his
Executors or Administrators, or To save the Assignor from all rents, etc.
any of them; and the said R. B. Covenanteth etc. That he the said R. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns shall at all times hereafter, and from
time to time clearly acquit, discharge, save and keep harmless the said E. his
Executors and Administrators, against the said A. M. his Heirs and Assigns, and
all others, as well of, and for the payment of the said yearly rent of etc.
reserved by the said Indenture of Lease which from henceforth shall grow due to
be paid by virtue of the same Indenture, as also of, and for all and every
Covenant, Grant, Article and Agreement comprised or specified in the said
original Indenture of Lease, which on the party and behalf of the said E. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every, or any of them from henceforth
shall of right accrue, or grow to be performed or kept according to the purport
and true meaning of the said Indenture of Lease, and also of, and from all and
every Bond and Specialty made by the said E. to the said A. M. for performance
of the Covenants, Grants, and Agreements comprised in the said original
Indenture of Lease; And the said E. N. Covenanteth etc. That he the said R. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall, or may have, hold, and enjoy the
said Message etc. and all other the Premises above by these presents
bargained and sold, for and during all the residue of the said term of etc. now
to come and not expired by and under the payment of the said yearly rent of
etc. and the performance of the Covenants and Agreements aforesaid contained in
the said Indenture of Lease hereafter to grow due to be paid and performed on
the behalf of the said E. and his Assigns without any Let or Impediment to
happen by the said etc. or by reason of any Act or Thing heretofore by him or
his assigns done, caused, or committed, The said Lease made to the said J. W.
only except. In Witness etc.

An Assignment of two Leases.
THis Indenture, etc. Witnesses, That whereas etc. And whereas moreover etc.
the said T. T. in consideration etc. has bargained, sold, aliened,
transported, assigned and set over, and by these presents, etc. unto the said
H. W. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, to the proper use and behoof of
the said H. VV. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, as well the said two
several Indentures of Leases above recited, and either of them, as also all and
every the right, title, estate, interest, term and terms of years, claim and
demand, that he the said T. T. has, should, may, might or ought to have, or
claim of, in, and to the said Tenemant etc. and all and singular other the
premises by the said several Indentures of Leases, or either of them severally
demised, with all and every their appurtenances by virtue or means of the same
several recited Indentures of Leases, or either of them, or any Thing or Things
in them, or either of them contained or mentioned or otherwise. And the said T.
T. Covenanteth etc. that the said several Indentures of Leases and either of
them, and also all and every the several premises by them or either of them
demised, or letten, and every part and parcel thereof, shall from time to time
and at all times hereafter, remain, continue, and be unto the said H. W. his
executors administrators and assigns, according to the true meaning and intent
of this present Indenture, for and during all the residue of the said several
terms of years, in the same several Indentures of Leases severally mentioned
or expressed, free and clearly discharged, or otherwise by the said T. his
Executors etc. sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all and singular former
Bargains etc. had made done and committed by the said T. or by any other person
or persons, by his assent, title, or procurement, the Rents and Covenants in
the said Indentures of Leases, or either of them contained or specified, and
every of them from henceforth to be due, paid, performed, or done, for the
several premises aforesaid, and also one Re-entry supposed to be made by I.
C. into the premises demised by the said I. H. to the said T. T. as abovesaid,
only except and fore-prised, In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease not in Esse.
THis etc. between I. P. etc. on the one party, and R. R. on the other Recital.
party, witnesses, That whereas Sir R. R. Knight, Lord R. deceased, by his
Indenture of Lease, dated etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, Did
grant demise and let to Farm unto the said I. P. by the name etc. for the term
of one and twenty years next to ensue, from the Feast etc. which should be in
the year of our Lord God 1650. and for certain yearly Rents therein reserved,
all that his Manor place or Farm-house etc. except as in the said Indenture of
Lease is excepted; As by the said Indenture of Lease, containing diverse other
Covenants Articles and Agreements, more at large it may and does appear.

The said I. P. for and in consideration of the sum of 180 l. etc. Assignment.
whereof etc. has bargained, sold, granted, aliened, assigned, and set over,
and by these presents does fully, clarly, and absolutely bargain etc. as well
the said Indenture of Lease, and all the Estate and term of years, thereby
granted and limited, or mentioned to be granted or limited, of, and in the said
Manor, Place, or Farm-house, and all and singular other the premises with
their appurtenances, and every, or any part or parcel thereof: And all the
Right, Title, Interest, Reversion, Term of years, and Demand whatsoever, that
he the said I. P. has, may, might, should, or of Right ought to have, by
virtue or means of the said Indenture of Lease, or otherwise of, in, or to the
same Manor, Place, or Farm-house, and all other the premises with their
appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof. As also one Deed of R. now Lord
R. under his hand and Seal, bearing date 4 Martii ultimum preterit. whereby he
has for him, his Heirs Executors and Assigns, given his full assent, consent,
and agreement, with full power and authority unto the said I. P. to give,
alien, let, or sell the same Lease to any person or persons, at the best
discretion of him the said I. P. for so many years as the said Lease does
continue, and not above: To have, hold, and enjoy the same, together with the
said Estate and Habend.
term of years, and all and singular other the premises, and every part and
parcel thereof to the said R. R. his executors administrators and assigns, to
his and their own proper use and behoof, for and during all the said term of
one and twenty years, contained or mentioned in the said recited Indenture of
Lease, in as large and ample manner and form, as the same and every or any of
them may be had, holden, and enjoyed in or by the Law.

And the said I. P. covenanteth etc. That the said Indenture of Lease, and the
Estate and term of years aforesaid, and every part and parcel Covent to save
from Encumbrances:
thereof, and all and singular other the premises, above by these presents
mentioned to be bargained, sold, or assigned over, and every parcel thereof,
now are, and be, and at the said Feast, etc. which shall be in the said year of
our Lord God 1650. shall be, and from thenceforth for and during all the said
term of 21 years mentioned in the said Indenture of Lease, shall or may remain,
be, and continue unto the said R. R. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
and by him and them to his and their own proper use and behoof shall or
lawfully and quietly may be, for and during all the said term of 21. years, had
holden, occupied, possessed, and enjoyed, free, and clearly, discharged, or
otherwise by the said I. P. his heirs Executors or adminestrators sufficiently
saved harmless, of and from all and all Manor of bargains, sales Assignments
Grants, Leases, Alinations, Encumbrances, act and acts whatsoever, had, made,
done, occasioned, or willingly suffered or to be had etc. by the said I. P. his
Executors or Administrators or any of them, or any other person or persons, by
his or their means consent procurement, the Rents, Covenants, Articles,
Conditions, and Agreements specified in the said Indenture of Lease, on the
behalf of the said I, P. or his Assigns, to be paid and performed, only except
and foreprised, for and concerning the which rents etc. and every of them, the
said R. R. covenanteth etc. that he the said R. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall and will save harmless the said I. P his Executors and
Administrators and every of them, for and during the said term of 21 years
contained in the said Indenture of Lease: In witness etc. Dat. 26 July.

Of several terms in Leases of a Ferry by Letters Patents.
THis Indenture made etc. Between T. M. etc. and V. his wife of the one party,
and T. L. of the other party, Witnesses, that Recital of the Letters Patents.
whereas our late Sovereign Lord King James, by his highness Letters Patents,
bearing Date etc. for the considerations therein specified and expressed, did
demise, grant, betake, and to farm let unto E. C. and E* S. Gentlemen, among
other things; All that passage of water upon the Thames called Ferry, with all
and singular the profits, commodities, and advantages whatsoever, to the said
passage belonging or appertaining, lying and being in the Town of R. in the
County of S. between etc. on the West end etc. To have and to hold to the said
E. C. and E. S. their Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of the Annunciation
Habend in the Letters Patents.
of the blessed Virgin Mary, which then should be in the year of our Lord God
1622. unto the end and term, and for, by, and during all the term of forty
years, from thence ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, Yiedling and
paying therefore from thenceforth, yearly unto the said late Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, the yearly Rent of 13 s. 4 d. of lawful money of
England, at the Feast of Saint M. the Archangel, and the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, at the receipt of the Exchequer of his Highness, his Heirs
and Successors, or to the hands of the Bailiffs, or Receivers of the Premises
for the time being, by equal portions to be paid, during the term aforesaid,
granted in and by the said Letters Patents, as in and by the said Letters
Patents amongst other things therein contained, more plainly and at large it
does and may appear. The Residue of which term by mean Assignments and
Conveyances in the Law, came to the Right Honorable the Lady I. Countess of S.
as by the same mean assignments and conveyances may further appear.

And whereas one G. W. etc. did by his Indenture of Lease, bearing Recital of a
Lease.
date etc. according to a license in that behalf, demise unto one N. W. amongst
other things, five acres of customary Lands in the Fields of T. etc. for the
term of 42. years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended.

And whereas M. W. late wife of the said N. W: and sole Executrix of his last
Will and Testament, by her Deed in Writing, bearing date etc. did for the
considerations therein expressed, grant and assign unto one I. B. the residue of
the said term of 42. years, in one acre and one rood of arable Land, being
parcel of the said five acres, lying in and upon one Flat or Furlong of ground
called the W. in the East field of T. aforesaid, toward the said Ferry, which
by mean Assignments and Conveyances in the Law, came to the said Countess of S.
as by the same may appear.

And whereas the Right Honorable Lady M. Countess of H. did by her Indenture
bearing date, etc. let and set to the said Countess of S. two Messuages called
the Ferry Meads, containing, etc. one other meadow containing, etc. one other
close called by the name of the plow close, containing, etc. lying and being in
the parish of T. aforesaid, with all ways easements commodities and
appurtenances thereunto belonging: To have and to hold to the said Countess of
S. and her Assigns from the Feast day of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin
Mary last past before the date thereof, for and during the term of six years,
from thence next ensuing, at and under the yearly Rent of twenty pounds Per
annum, payable in such manner and form as in that Indenture is mentioned, as by
the said Indenture may further appear.

And whereas the said I Countess of S. by her last will in writing Recital of
a will.
bearing date, etc. did bequeath to the said V. by the name of V. C. the said
several Terms of and in the premises, and of the same her Will, made the said
V. her sole Executrix who since the decease of the said Countess, has in due
form of Law proved the said Will, and taken upon her the Execution thereof, as
by the same Will, and the probate thereof, under the seal of the prerogative
Court of Canterbury, may further appear.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said T. M. and V. his wife
Consideration.
for a good and valuable consideration in money to them paid by the said T. L.
the receipt whereof they do acknowledge by these presents, Have granted
bargained sold assigned and set over, and by these presents Assignment of the
Lenses.
do grant bargain sell assign and set over unto the said T: L: the said leases
mean assignments and conveyances, and all the residue of the said several
Terms yet to come in the premises, and every part and parcel thereof, and all
their Right title terms, interest estate and demands of in or unto the same
premises and every part and parcel thereof, and all those two Boats commonly
called the one by the name of the Horse boat, and the other by the name of the
Ferry boat, riding or rowing at or near the said Ferry, with the chains and
other things thereunto belonging. To have and to hold the said boats with the
said Habend. of part.
chains and other things thereto belonging unto the said T. L. and his Assigns,
as his and their own proper goods and chattells for ever, And to have and to
hold all the residue of the premises unto the said And of the residue.
T L and his assigns, for and during all the residue of the said several terms
respectively, and in as ample manner and form to all intents and purposes, as
the said T: M. and V: his Wife or either of them, their or either of their
Executors or assigns, may can or ought to hold and enjoy the same by force of
the said Letters Patents, Leases Assignments Conveyances and Devises, or by any
of them, and by any other ways and means whatsoever: And the said T. M: for
himself his heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does
covenant promise and agree to and with the said T. L. his Executors and assigns
A Covenant for quiet enjoying.
by these presents, that he the said T L his Executors and assigns shall or may
from henceforth during the residue of the said term of forty two years, hold
and enjoy the said one acre and one Rood of arable Land in the said flat or
furlong called the W. and receive and take the Rents Issues and profits thereof
to his or their own use, without any let suit trouble eviction, expulsion
disturbance interruption or encumbrance of or by the said T. M. and V. his wife
or either of them, or of, or by any person or persons, having or claiming
either in Law or in equity, by from or under them or either of them, or by from
or under the said Countess of S, or by from or under Sir H. L. Knight, or by
from or under his her or their, either, or any of their Right Title Interest
act estate means assent privity or procurement: And that the said T. L. his
Executors and assigns under the several Rents Covenants and agreements
respectively in the said Letters patents and Leases thereof contained, shall or
may from henceforth have hold and enjoy all the Residue of the premises and
every part and parcel thereof and take and receive the Rents Issues and profits
thereof to his and their own use, during the residue of the said several terms
therein yet to come and unexpired without any let, etc. other then such as
claim by force of the Lease hereafter in these presents excepted: And the said
T M for himself his heirs Executors and administrator; and for every of them,
does covenant grant and agree, and with the said T L A Covenant to free the
premises from encumbrances.
his Executors and assigns by these presents, That all and singular the
premises and every part thereof shall remain continue and be unto the said T L
and his assigns during the said several terms respectively free and clear, or
otherwise well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all and
every other grants bargains sales devises Leases assignments charges and
encumbrances whatsoever, had made committed done or suffered of or by them the
said T M and V his wife or either of them, their or either of their executors
or assigns or any of them, or by any other person or persons, having or
claiming by from or under them or either of them, or by or under the said
Countess of S. or by from or under her, their, or any of their Right Title
Interest act estate assent means privity or procurement, except Exceptions.
the Rents Covenants and services, in the said Letters patents and Leases of
the premises respectively contained, and which from henceforth shall first
grow due of or on the behalf of the Lessees and patentees thereof, are ot ought
to be done or performed in respect of the premises, or any of them, and except
only one Lease by indenture bearing date, etc. made by the said Countess of S,
of the said passage or Ferry to W. G. and H. G. for the term of twenty years
from the Feast of the annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary then last past,
whereupon the yearly rent of 16 pounds is reserved, payable in such sort, as in
that indenture is mentioned, which from hence forth, during all the residue of
that term, shall remain continue and be payable to the said T* H. and his
assigns according to the reservation of that Lease.

And whereas the said H. G. and VV. G. by their Obligation bearing Assignment
of an Obligation for performance of Covenants.
date etc. became bound to the said Countess of S. in the sum of 40 l. of
lawful money of England with condition thereunder written for their performance
of all the Covenants, Grants and Agreements on their parts to be performed
mentioned in the said Indenture of Lease to them made by the said Countess of
S. as aforesaid, the benefit of which Obligation the said T. M has agreed,
shall wholly come and accrue to the said T. L. Now the said T. M. to that
intent does hereby for the consideration aforesaid Grant and Assign, the said
Obligation and benefit thereof to the said T. L. and does hereby give and grant
unto him the said T. L. full Power Warrant and Authority (in case the Condition
of the said Obligation shall be broken) in the name of him the said T. M. and
the said V. or either of them to commence and prosecute such Suits thereupon
and do and execute all such Acts, either for recovering of the money which
shall become due thereupon, or for releasing or discharging of the said
Obligation as he the said T. L. shall think fit, And lastly, the said T. M. for
himself, his heirs executors and administrators, and for every of them does
Covenant, Grant, and Agree to, and with the said T. L. his executors and
assigns, by these presents, That he the said T. M. and the said V. his wife,
and either of them, their, and every of their executors and administrators, and
all, and every other person and persons having, or claiming either in Law or in
Equity, by, from, or under them, or either of them, or by, from or under the
said Countess of S. shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter at the reasonable request, cost and charges in the A Covenant for
further assurance.
Law of the said T. L. his executors or assigns, do, and execute all such acts
for the further and better conveying of the premises, or any part or parts
thereof unto the said T. L. his executors and assigns, for, and during the
residue of the said several terms repectively, and enabling the said T. L. his
executors and assigns, to have, recover and receive the benefit of the said
Obligation as by the said T. L. his executors or assigns, or any of them shall
be reasonably required. In VVitness, etc.

An Assignment of Lands granted by Letters Patents.
THis Indenture made etc* between I. P. of etc. of the one party, and Recital
of the Letters Patents.
C. D. of etc. of the other party Witnesses, That whereas our Sovereign Lady
the Queen by her Graces Letters Patents, bearing date etc. Did Give, Grant and
Assure unto Sir P. C. Knight, all that the Site of the late Monastery of I.
with the appurtenances in the County of S. and all Orchards, Gardens, and other
commodities to the same belonging, and all that Park or Ground imparked
contained by estimation ninescore Acres commonly called VV. Park in the said
County of S: to the said Monastery belonging etc. and all the Rents Reversions
and Services, of all and singular the same Premises, and every of them, to
have, hold and enjoy the said Site, Park, Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Habend
in the Letters Patents.
Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Medows, Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions,
Services, and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances to
the said Sir P. C. and to the Heirs of the body of the said Sir P. C. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten; and after the foresaid estate of the said Sir P.
C. for default of such issue of his body lawfully begotten, determined, the
remainder of all and singular the premises with their appurtenances, and of
every parcel thereof to the said Sir P. his Executors and Assigns, for and
during the term of xii. years then next following and fully to be complete and
ended as by the said Letters Patents bearing date as aforesaid, more at large
it does and may appear. And whereas the said Sir P. C. for sundry causes him
Recital of a Demise.
moving by his Indenture bearing date etc. did Demise, Grant, Set, and to Farm
Let unto the said I. P. all the said Site, Park, Messuages Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Medows, Feedings, Pastures, Reversions, Services
and Hereditaments, with all and singular their appurtenances before named, To
have and to hold all and singular the said Site, Park, Messuages, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Lands Habend of the recited Lease.
Tenements, Medows, Feedings, Pastures, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments,
with all and singular their appurtenances unto the said I. P. his Executors and
Assigns for and during the whole term of fourscore and twelve years, from the
day of the date of the said Indenture fully to be complete and ended without
impeachment of waste, if the said Sir P. shall happen so long to live, yiedling
and paying therefore Rent upon the recited Lease reserved.
yearly during the said term unto the said Sir P. C. his Heirs and Assigns the
sum of eight pound of lawful money of England, at the Feast etc. by even and
equal portions.

And whereas further the said Sir P. C. by his said Indenture for the
consideration aforesaid, did Give, Grant Bargain and Sell to the said J. P. his
Executors and Assigns the remainder of all and singular the premises, and
every part and parcel thereof to him the said Sir P. granted by his Letters
Patents for term of twelve years next and immediately following after the
aforesaid estate tail, of the said Sir P. C. in the same Letters Patents
mentioned for default of issue of the body of the said Sir P. lawfully begotten
shall be determined fully to be complete and ended, and all the estate, term
and interest of the said Sir P. of, and in all and singular the premises in as
large and amole manner and form, as he the said S. P. his Executors or Assigns,
may, might, ought, or should have the same, by virtue of the same Letters
Patents, with other Covenants in the same contained, as by the said Indenture
bearing date as aforesaid, more at large it does and may appear.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said J. P. for and in consideration
The assignment.
of the sum of 500 l. of lawful English money to him in hand paid by the said
C. D. whereof and wherewith he acknowledges himself fully satisfied, contented
and paid, and thereof etc. Has given, granted, bargained, sold, and set over,
and by these presents does give, grant* bargain, sell, assign, and set over
unto the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns, the said Indenture; And all and
singular the said Park, Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Leasows, Feedings, Pastures Rents, Reversions, Services,
and all and singular other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Term of years, and
Demands of the said J. P. of, in, and to the Premises, and every part and
parcel thereof: To have and to hold the said Indenture, and all and singular
the said Park, Messuages, houses, Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Leasows, Feedings, Pastures, Reversions, Services, and all other the
Premises, with their Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his Executors and
Assigns, for and during all the residue of the said term of 92. years, which be
yet to come in the Premises, by force of the said Indenture, without
impeachment of Wast, if the Estate tail of the said Sir P. C. in the same his
Letters Patents mentioned, for default of Issue of his body lawfully begotten,
be determined. And all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and Demand of the
said J. P. of, in, and to the Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, in
as large and ample manner and sort, as the said J. P. now has and enjoys, or
of Right ought to have and enjoy the same Premises, by force of the said
Indenture.

And the said J. P. for him etc. does covenant etc. That he the said A Covenant
for peaceably enjoying.
C. D. his Executors or Assigns, shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold
etc. the said Site Park etc. for and during the residue of the 92. years, if
the said S. P. so long shall happen to live: And also the Remainder of the
Premises, for term of twelve years, in manner and form aforesaid, without let,
interruption, Suit etc. whatsoever of him the said J. P. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or any person or persons whatsoever,
clearly discharged and saved harmless, of and from all former Bargains etc. And
all other charges and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, procured, or done by
the said J. P. or any person or persons whatsoever.

Provided always, that if the said E. D. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, at all time and times hereafter, and from time to
time for his and their parts do not well and truly observe perform fulfill and
keep all and every the Covenants, etc. contained in one pair of Indentures made
between, etc. that then this present assignment bargain and sale, shall be
utterly void, and of none effect, or else etc., In Witness, etc.

An Assignement of a Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H. P. etc. and I. L etc. on the one party,
and the right honorable G. Earl of Sh. etc. on the other party; witnesses that
whereas T* R. Esquire, and R. C. Gentleman The recital of a Lease.
by their Indenture bearing date, etc. for diverse considerations them moving,
and especially at the appointment and request of the said Earl have demised
granted and to ferm letten, unto the said H. P. and I. L and to T. C.
Gentleman, now deceased, all and singular those Manors or Lordships of W. etc.
with all and singular their appurtenances, all which Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, they the said T. had R. and R. C. then lately of, and by
assurance and conveyance made unto them by the said E. as by the same
conveyance may appear; to have and to hold to the said H. P. and I. L. and T.
C. their Executors The Habend of the recited Lease.
and Assigns from and after, the natural death of the said E. and of the Lady
E. now his wife for and during the term of sixty years, from thence next and
immediately following, fully to be complete and ended, yiedling and paying
during the said term unto the said T. R. and R. C. their heirs and assigns, all
and singular the Rents and services for all and every the said Manors Lands
Tenements and Premises, and for every parcel thereof due and accustomed, as by
the said Indenture of Lease more plainly it does and may appear, which said
Lease was made to the said H. P. I. L. and T. C. by the appointment of the said
E. and upon the special trust and confidence, that they the said H. P. I. L.
and T. C. and the survivor and survivors of them should pay the etc. unto such
person or persons as the said E. should nominate and appoint, and that the said
E. should and might at all times dispose the same at his good will and
pleasure, and afterward the said T. C. died, and the said H. P. and I. L. him
over lived, and by reason thereof the interest and term was and is wholly vested
in the said H. P. and I. L. as survivors: Now the said H. P. and J. L. at the
request of the said Earl, The Grant and assignment.
and by his appointment according to the said trust and confidence in them
reposed; have granted assigned and set over, and by these presents do grant
assign and set over unto the said E. the said Lease and term of years, and all
the Manors Lands and premises, and every part and parcel thereof, for and
during all the years and term to them granted and demised by the said A. R. and
R. C, and also all the Estate and term of years, which they the said P. H. and
J. L. have, or of right ought to have in the said Manors Lands and premises,
by virtue of the said Indenture of Lease or otherwise together with the said
Indenture, to the intent that the said E: may use the same at his good will and
pleasure: And the said H: P: and I: H: do covenant etc. to and with the said
Earl etc. that the said Manors and Premises, and the said Interest and term
of years are the day of the date hereof, clearly freed and discharged, of and
from all former Bargains, Assignments, and Encumbrances whatsoever, had made,
or done by the said H: P: or I: L: or either of them etc:

Where a Fine was levied for 100. years, the Fine recited and the Lands
assigned.
TO all, to whom this present Writing Indented shall come, I. B. and H. B. send
greeting; Whereas by one Fine levied between E. S. Esquire, and R. F. Gentleman,
Plaintiffs, H. S. Esquire, D. S. Sister and Heir apparent to E. G. Esquire; M. S.
T. S. etc. Deforciants of the Manors of L. St. B. etc. in the said County of
Y. and of 200. Messuages 100. Cottages, 100. Tofts, 10. Water Mills* 10.
Fulling Mills, 10. Wind Mills, 4. Dove-coates, 100. Gardens, 100. Orchards,
6000. acres of Land, 2000. acres of Meadow, 6000. acres of Pasture, 1000. acres
of Wood, 1000. acres of More, 1000. acres of Moss ground 1000. acres of
Turbary, 2000. acres of Heath and Furrs, and 20 l. Rent with the Appurtenances
in H. etc. in the said County of York, And also of the Advowson of the Par^sh
Church of E. by which the said H. D. etc. did recognize the foresaid Manors,
Tenements, and Rent, with the Appurtenances and the Advowson aforesaid, to be
the Right of the said E. as those which the said E. and R. had of the Gift of
the said H. D. etc. And the same did remise and quit claim from them the said
H. D. and their Heirs, to the said E. and R. and to the Heirs of the said E.
for evermore.

And furthermore the said H. D. etc. did for them and the Heirs of the said D.
that they shall warrant to the said E. and R. and the Heirs of the said E. the
foresaid Manors, Tenements, and Rents with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson
aforesaid, against the said H. D. etc. and the Heirs of the said D. for ever
more. And for the same Recognizance, Release, Quit claim, Warranty, Fine, and
Concord, the said E. and R. did grant to the said T. T. and I. B. the said
Manors Tenements, and Rent with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid,
and the same to them did give again, To have and to hold to Habend.
the same T. and J. for the term of 100 years next ensuing, the levying of the
said Fine, without impeachment of Wast if the said E. should so long live. And
after that term ended, the said Manors, Tenements, and Rent, with the
Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid, wholly to remain to the said H. S.
and to the Heirs Males of his body lawfully to be begotten, with diverse other
Remainders over, as by the said Fine remaining of Record in her Majesty's Court
of Common Pleas at Westminster, more plainly it does and may appear.

By virtue of which said Fine, the said T. T. and J. B. into the said Manors,
Lands, and Premises, entered and were thereof lawfully possessed, for and during
the term and space of 100. years, if the said E. C. so long should live: And
they being so thereof possessed, the said T. T. by good and lawful assurance in
the Law, did lawfully convey and assure all his Estate, Interest, and Demand,
in and to the Premises unto the said Consideration.
I. by reason whereof the said I. B. then was and did stand lawfully possessed
of the said whole Term and Interest. And he the said I. B. being so thereof
possessed, did grant and convey all his whole Estate, and Interest in and to
the Premises, to the said H. B. his Son and to one E. B. Gentleman, whose
Interest therein the said H. B. by good assurance and lawful conveyance now
has.

Now know ye, that we the said H. B. and I. B. as well for and in Assignment.
consideration of the sum of 100 l. of lawful English money, to us the said l.
and H. B. well and truly contented and paid, before the ensealing and delivery
hereof, by the Right Honorable G. E. D. S. of which said sum we acknowledge
our selves fully satisfied and paid, and thereof do acquit the said E. by these
presents: As also for diverse good causes and considerations as the said I. and
H. thereunto especially moving, Have bargained and sold, given and granted, and
by these presents do clearly and absolutely bargain, sell, give, and grant unto
the said E. all our Estate Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Claim, Demand,
and Term of years, which we or either of us have ot should, might, or ought to
have, of, in or to the said Manor, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises
mentioned in the said Fine, in or to any part or parcel thereof by virtue of
such Fine (such Interest and Terms of years, of and in one Tenement or Freehold
with the Appurtenances in H: B: commonly Exception.
called T: late in the Tenure or Occupation of I. C. the elder, and I. C. the
younger, only excepted and fore-prised) And we the said I. B. and H. B. do
covenant for us and either of us, and for the Executors and Administrators, of
us and either of us, with the said E. his Executors Administrators and Assigns
by these presents; That the said Manors Lands and Premises, conveyed and
assured by the said Fine, and every part thereof Covenant to free the premises
from encumbrances.
(except before excepted) are at the day of the date hereof, and so shall
continue to the said Earl, his Executors and Assigns, during the Term mentioned
in the said Fine, free and clearly exonerated and discharged, or saved harmless
by them the said I. and H. B. of and from all former Bargains, Sales, Charges,
and Encumbrances had, made, or done, by us or either of us, or by the said E.
four Tenements, or Farm-holds in R. aforesaid only excepted and fore-prised*.

And we the said I: B. and H. B. do further covenant and grant, for us our
Executors or Administrators, with the said E. his executors and Assigns, by
these presents that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said E. his
Executors and Assigns, to have, hold, and enjoy the said Manors Lands and
Premises, conveyed and assured by the said Fine, and every part and parcel
thereof (except before excepted) for and during the term of years yet to come,
mentioned in the said Fine, without any lawful let or interruption of us or of
either of us, and without any lawful let or interruption of any other person
or persons, lawfully having or claiming, or which may hereafter lawfully have
or claim, any good lawful Title or Interest, in or to the said Manors Lands
and Premises conveyed and assured by the said Fine, or any part or parcel
thereof, by, from, or under us the said I. and H. B. or either of us: In witness
etc.

AWARDS.
An Award in a Controversy between parties concerning the Administration of a
Deceased's Goods.
TO all to whom this present Writing Indented of Award shall come, H. T.
Stationer, W. N. Stationer, A. H. Draper, I. H. the elder, Stationer, L. H.
Stationer, and I. H. Habadasher, Cit of L. send greeting; Where heretofore
strife and variance have been moved between A. C. Widow, late wife of I. C.
late Citizen and Stationer of L. deceased, on the one party, and G. C. Son of
the said I. C. on the other party, for and concerning the Goods and Chattels
whereof the said I. C. dyed possessed intestate; And for and concerning the
right of the Administration, of the Goods Chattels and Debts of the said
Intestate: And whereas for the appeasing of the strife and variance aforesaid,
and for a final quietness to be had between the said parties, they of their
mutual assents and consents, did choose us the said H. T. etc. Arbitrators, to
arbiter Award, and judge, of, for, and upon all and all manner of Actions,
Suits, Quarrels, Strifes, Trespasses, Debts, Debates, Accounts, Variances,
Transgressions, Offenses, Goods, Chattels, Wares, Plate, ready money, Claims,
and all other Demands whatsoever, which at any time or times between the said
parties, before the 15. day of this present month of July, have been, had
moved, strived, or depending in Suit or Controversy, so as our Award,
Arbitrament, Ordinance, and Judgment in and upon the Premises, be made and
given up in Writing, before the 22 day of this present month of July, as by the
several Obligations of the said parties, bearing date the said 15. day of this
present month of July, wherein either of the sa^d parties stand bound to the
other in 500 l. of etc. and the cond^tions severally indorsed upon the same
Obligations will appear.

And whereas we the said Arbitrators have taken upon us the charge of the same
Arbitrament, and have heard, examined, and plainly do perceive and understand
the Controversies and causes of variance between the said parties, and have
thereupon treated with the said parties, and have by our travel brought them to
a good accord and agreement. Now by their own special means, and by their
mutual consents and requests, we do thereof make and give up by this present
Writing, our Award, Arbitrament, Ordinance, and Judgment, in manner and form as
follows.

First we do award, arbiter, ordain, and judge by these presents: That the said
A. C. shall clearly and freely, on or before the 27. day of this present month
of July, yield and deliver to the said G. C. as well one Bed-stead, a
Trundle-bed, a Press, or Table, and the Hangings in the Chamber, where the said
I. C. dyed. As also all the Goods and Chattels which were of the said
Intestates at the time of his decease, comprised and mentioned in the
Inuentory, made of his Goods and Chattels, by such as were appointed to praise
the same, unto the which Inventory the said Praisers have subscribed their
names, except such of the said Intestates Books as have been sold since the
time of his death, in the Shop of his Mansion house wherein he dyed, or
otherwise have been taken from thence without the knowledge of the said A. And
except such other thing not exceeding the value of 5 l. of the Goods and
Chattels aforesaid happening to be imbezilled or taken away, with the consent,
knowledge, or procurement of the said A. for all and singular which the sa^d
Books and other things so being sold as aforesaid, we do award that the said A.
shall content and pay to the said G. the full value thereof, and of every part
thereof, as the same are rated and prised in the Inventory abovesaid.

And further we do award, arbiter, or ordain, and judge by these presents, that
the said A. shall also before the said 27. etc. upon lawful request by the
said G. to be made, deliver unto the said G. C. all Leases and Writings which
were of the said J. C. at the time of his decease, which are come to the hands
or possession of the said A and especially the Lease of the Mansion house
wherein the said I. C. died; And the lease of the Yard thereunto adjoining, and
the Lease of those two new houses, lately being in the tenure of the said J. H.
and of one G. B. Stationer: And the Lease of the house now or late in the
several tenures of R. I. T. S. and A. B. and of other things mentioned in the
same Lease, and the Lease of the houses, now or late in the several tenures of
the said A. H. and R. P. and others, and the Lease of the Garden, which the
said I. C. occupied, lying over against the late Charter House, in the Suburbs
of L. And the Lease of the Vault under P. Church, and all Writings and
Conveyances touching the same, which came to the hands of the said A. And we
the said Arbitrators do moreover award etc. That the said A. shall forthwith
give her consent, and still from thenceforth agree, permit, and suffer, that
the said G. shall and may have the sole Administration of all the Goods,
Chattels, and Debts, which were of the said I. C. his Father, at the time of
his decease.

And also we do further award etc. That the said G. and the said G. B. and J.
H. jointly and severally before the 27. day etc. shall make, seal, and deliver
as their Deed to the said A. at the now Mansion house of the said H. T. five
several Obligations sufficient in the Law, wherein they shall jointly and
severally stand bound to the said A. for the payment of 350 l. of lawful etc.
well and truly to be paid to the said A: or her Executors, at the said now
Mansion house of the said H. T: in form as follows; for a full satisfaction
and recompense of all such part and portion as the said A. should or might
have, of all the Goods and Chattels which were of the said I. C. which are
specified in the said Inventory, or in these presents, the bond or penalty of
the first of the said Obligations to be of 120 l. for the payment of 100 l. at
or before the Feast of Saint Bartholmew the Apostle, next etc. the second to be
of etc. the third etc. and the fourth to be etc. for payment etc. in the Feast
etc. in full payment of the said sum of 350 l. And also we do award, that if at
any time hereafter, any more or further Debt or Debts shall be demanded, and
without fraud or covin lawfully recovered by Judgment or decree against the
said B. his Executors or Administrators being due or owing to the said I: C.
over and beyond those debts mentioned set down and expressed in a Scedule
indented to these presents annexed, amounting together to the sum of 321. 6 s.
2 d. That then the said A: her Executors and Administrators, shall upon
reasonable request, allow, content, and pay to the said G: his Executors or
Administrators, toward the payment of all and every debt and debts so to be
recovered, over and beyond the said debts amounting to the said sum of 321 l. 6
s. 2 d. three parts of the same debt so to be recovered, in seven parts to be
divided, together with the like three parts into parts to be divided, of all
such costs and charges, as the said G: his Executors or Administrators, shall
reasonably sustain in or about the defense, in any Suit or Action to be brought
against the said G. his Executors or Administrators, upon the demand of any
such Debt or Debts which was owing by the said J: C: and being none of the
Debts contained in the said Scedule above specified.

And further we do award, that the said G: after the delivery and yiedling up
of such the Goods, Chattels, Leases, or Writings, as are before limited,
appointed, or awarded, to be yielded up and delivered by the said A: or any of
them, shall make and deliver unto the said A: or her Assigns, a sufficient
acquittance or other sufficient Writing, under his hand and seal, of all such
Goods and Chattels, Leases and others so to be received or delivered as
aforesaid.

And further we do award and judge by these presents, that the said G. and his
Executors, without his or their claim or molestation, shall permit and suffer
the said A: to have and enjoy to her own use, as well all the wearing Apparel
belonging to her body, as also all that Furniture of her loding Chamber, Jewels
and Rings of Gold, Stone and Plate hereafter particularly mentioned in these
presents, that is to say, In witness etc. Dat.

An Award between Executors at strife about their Testators goods.
TO all to whom this present Writing of Award indented shall come H. K. sends
greeting in our Lord God everlasting, whereas lately heretofore Suit and
Variance was had and moved, between R. K. etc. on the one party, and G. K. etc.
on the other party, for and touching the Execution of the last Will and
Testament of one C. P. late of L. widow deceased, ordained and made the said R.
and G. her Executors of her said last Will and Testament for the final ending
whereof, and of all other controversies betwixt the same parties they have
submitted themselves to the Award arbiterment and Judgment of me the said H. K.
in such sort and manner as by several Obligations of 50 l. a piece in that
behalf made by either of the said parties to the other of them dated etc. with
their several conditions upon them endorsed plainly may appear. The charge and
business of which said Award and Arbitrament I the said H. K. have taken upon
me* and have thoroughly heard and considered of all the Controversies between
the said parties and of their Allegations, Declarations and Answers on both
sides. And now I do by these presents make and give up mine Award, Arbitrament,
Award.
final End, Order and Judgment, of, and upon the same premises between the
said parties in form etc. viz: First, I do Award, Order and Judge by these
presents, that the said G. K. and his Execucutors shall permit and suffer the
said R. K. to have, and enjoy to his own use that mourning Gown and Hood which
he had after the decease of the said C. P. against her Burial. And also that
the said G. his Executors Administators or Assigns, shall on the tenth day etc.
between the hours etc. pay, or cause to be paid to the said R K. his certain
Attorney Executors or Administrators, at the now dwelling house of etc. the sum
of etc. and then and there also shall clearly and freely give and deliver to
the said R. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, two Pots and a Goblet of
Silver and guilt, poize 29. ounces, which late was of the said C. P. And I do
further Award etc. that the said R. his Executors or Administrators shall not
at any time hereafter, either deal or intermeddle with the Execution of the
last Will and Testament of the said C. P. or claim, take or challenge any of
the goods or chattels which were of the said C. other then only the Pots and
Goblet aforesaid, or receive, take, acquit and discharge any debt or duty which
was owing and growing toward the said C. whilst she lived. And also that the
said R. K. his Executors Administators and Assigns, from time to time, and at
all times hereafter shall agree permit, and suffer that the said G. his
Executors and Administrators, shall, and may peaceably and quietly have and
take, and by all lawful means, recover and enjoy, all and singular the goods,
chattels and debts which were of the said E. at the time of her decease other
then only the said Pots and Goblet without any Let, Claim or Impediment of the
sald R. his Executors or Administrators.

And also that the said R. his Executors or Assigns upon payment and delivery
to him or any of them made of the sum of Money, Pots and Goblet aforesaid, in
form aforesaid shall deliver or cause etc. to the said G. K. his Executors or
Administrators, one sufficient acquittance testifying the receipt of the same
Money, Pots and Goblet. And moreover I the said H. do herby Award etc. That the
said G. his Executors Administrators, at the only costs and charges of the said
G: his Executors or Administrators, shall well and sufficiently at all times
hereafter upon reasonable request to him or them to be made by the said R. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, save and keep harmless the same R. his
Executors and Administrators, of, and for all, and all manner Actions, Suits,
Costs, Damages, Judgments, Executions and Demands which shall be had or brought
against the said R. his executors or administrators, by reason or means that
the said R. did take upon him to be Executor of the said Testament of the said
C. and also that the said G. shall pay for the Drawing and Engrossing of these
Presents to the Writer thereof 5 l. of etc. And lastly, I Award etc. that
either of the said parties their executors and administrators for their several
parts shall from henceforth surcease from all further Suit and Suits and
quarrels in Law whatsoever for any matter between them two had stirred or
depending at any time before the etc. date of the said Obligations to stand to
this Award etc. In witness etc.

The Form of an Action Indented.
TO all true christian people to whom this present awarded Indenture shall
come, A. B. and C. D. send greeting in our Lord God Recital.
everlasting. Know ye that whereas some variance and controversy has
heretofore been had and moved between E J, of G. widow late wife and Executrix
of the last Will and Testament of T. F. deceased and R F. her son, touching
certain Goods and Chattells, left demised given and appointed to the s^id R. F.
by virtue of the said last Will and Testament of the said T. F his Father,
whereof the said E. took the sole Execution and probation, for the appeasing
and ending of which said controversy both the said parties by their mutual
assents consents and agreements, have submitted compromitted, and hereto fore
become bound, either to other by their several bonds obligatory, bearing date,
the etc. in the sum of one hundred pounds, to stand to observe, perform
fulfill and keep the Award, Arbitrament, Doom, and Judgment of us the said A.
B. and C. D. Arbitrators indifferently chosen between the said parties, as by
the said bonds obligatory and Conditions thereunto subsequent, more at large
appears. Upon which submission, we the said Arbitrators for the avoiding of
further troubles, and to cause peace love and unity between the said parties,
having seen and read, and deliberatly considered of the said last Will and
other writings, having Relation to, and dependancy on the same, and having also
heard the allegations and proofs on both sides concerning the premises, and
duly weighed the circumstances thereof; we the said Arbitrators having the
consent of the said parties do the day of the date hereof, make publish and
declare this our award and judgment in the premises, in such manner and form
as follows. That is to say, --

And having set down the Award thus conclude.

And for the better testification and confirmation hereof, we the said
Arbitrators have to this our Award set our hands and seals the third day of
May, Anno Domini 1651.

An Award in a Controversy growing by means of a Copartnership.
TO all to whom this present writing of Award shall come, T. S. and S. B. etc.
send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas heretofore there has been
diverse strifes and variances moved, and are yet depending between R. H. etc.
and I. C. etc. Executors of T. C. late of L. Haberdasher deceased, on the one
party, and H. B. etc. on the other party, for the appeasing and final ending
whereof the said parties of one assent and consent, as does appear, and is
recited in several conditions of several Obligations, bearing date the tenth
of this present April, which the said parties have interchangeably made sealed
and delivered, each to the other have named and chosen, us the said T. S. etc.
their Judges and Arbitrators, to award arbiter ordain rule judge, and
determine, of for upon, and concerning all and all manner of actions as well
real as personal suits quarrels strifes variances costs damages, and demands
whatsoever, had moved stirred or depending between the said parties in any
manner of wise from the beginning of the World until the day of the date of
the said Obligation. So that the same our Award Arbitrament O^dinance and
Judgment, were had or made by us the said Arbitrators or any five of us and put
in writing under our hands and seals, ready to be delivered to the said parties
or any of them, requiring the same before the last day of April next coming
after the said date of the said Obligations, as by the said Obligations with
their several Conditions on them severally endorsed, may and will appear.

And for as much as we the said Arbitrators have taken the charge of the said
Judgment and Arbitrament upon us, and thereupon have deliberatly heard and
examined all variances between the said parties and their allegations answers
and proofs in that behalf alleged made and produced, do now thereof even this
present day of the date of these presents make and give up, in and by this
present writing indented under our hands and seals, our full and final Award
Arbitrament Ordinance and Judgment, in manner and form following, that is to
Award.
say, that whereas the said T. C. while he lived, and the said H. B. were
copartners, and had joint traffic together in diverse things, the accounts
whereof we have seen and examined, we do thereupon award arbitrate ordain and
judge by these presents, that the said R. H. and I. C. or one of them their
Executors or Administrators, shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid to
the said H. B. his Executors etc. the sum of etc. of etc. at etc. that is to
say, etc. and also we do by these presents, Arbitrate, Award, Ordain and Judge
that the said H. his Executors and Administrators, shall from time to time upon
the reasonable request of the said R: or I: their Executors or Administrators
consent, suffer and agree, that at the equal and indifferent costs and charges
of the said R: I: and H: and their several Executors and Administrators, all,
and all manner of lawful Suits, Actions, Recoveries, Judgments and Executions,
shall and may in the name and names of the said H: his Executors and
Administrators, be had and pursued, with effect against all and every person or
persons of, and upon the Books of the said accounts, and all and every Bond or
Bonds or Specialty whatsoever which the said H: has of, or touching all, or
any the debts specified in the Scedule to these presents annexed; and that all
and every the profits, commodities and advantages whatsoever to be had or
gotten by means of any the said Suits, Actions, Recoveries, Judgments and
Executions, or by means of any of them shall be equally had, divided and
parted, part and party-like the one half thereof to the said H: B: his
Executors and Administrators, and the other half thereof to the said R: and I:
his Executors and Administrators, and that neither of the said parties, nor
their several Executors or Administrators, shall wittingly and willingly
without the consent of the other party, or of his or their Executors or
Administrators, do procure or cause any thing to be done to hinder or defeat
any the said lawful Suits, Actions, Recoveries, Judgments or Executions to be
had as aforesaid, of or for any the said debts, or to let or hinder the equal
dividing of all profits, commodities and advantages thereof, or thereby to be
had or gotten contrary to the true meaning aforesaid. And further we do Award,
Order and Judge by these presents that the said H: B: upon reasonable request
shall on the first day of etc. now next coming, make sale and deliver, or
cause to be delivered to the said R. H. and J. C. or to one of them, or
otherwise for both their uses, at, or in etc. between the hours of etc. of the
same day or otherwise in the mean time before hand one lawful acquittance
general, of, and for all Actions, Suits, Quarrels and Demands from the
beginning of the world until the 8th. of April last past. And likewise we do
Award etc. by these presents; that the said R. and I. upon the like reasonable
request shall on the said etc. now also next coming, make sale and deliver, or
cause to be delivered to the said H. B. at or in etc. between the like hours
aforesaid in the forenoon etc. or otherwise etc. one lawful acquittance
general, of, and for all actions, suits quarrels and demands, from the
beginning of the world until the said 8th. day of April now last past as
aforesaid. In witness, etc.

BARGAINS.
A Bargain and Saleof Copyhold Lands by Commissioners of Banckrupts.
THis Indenture made etc. Between S. E. Esquire E: T: Esquire, and I: I: Gent.
of the one part, and R: W. of etc. R: W: etc: D: M: of etc. E: C: of etc. and
W: E: of etc. of the other part Witnesses, That whereas upon complaint made to
the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England by E: S: etc. as well for himself as for all other the Creditors of F:
M: late of VV. etc. That whereas the said F. M. using and exercising the trade
of Merchandise by way of bargaining, exchange, bartering and chevisance,
seeking his trade of living by buying and selling upon good and just cause
forwares and merchandise to him sold and delivered, and also for ready money to
him lent being indebted to the said E: S: and other his Creditors in diverse and
several sums of money, amounting in the whole to the sum of 500 l. and upwards
of late (that is to say) about the month of May in the year etc. did become
Banckrupt within the several Statutes lately made against Banckrupts, to the
intent to defraud and hinder him the said E: S: and other his Creditors of
their just debts and duties to them owing (viz.) within the Statute made in the
Parliament, begun and holden at Westminster the second day of April, in the
13th. year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth concerning
Banckrupts, and within the Statute made in the Parliament begun and holden at
Westminster aforesaid the 19th day of March, in the first year of the Reing of
our late Sovereign Lord of famous Memory King James of England France and
Ireland and of Scotland the 37, Entitled an Act for the better relief of
Creditors against such as shall become Backrupt. And also within the Statute
made in the Parliament and holden ot Westminster begun at the 19th. day of Feb.
in the 21. year of the Reign of our said late Sovereign King James of England,
France and Ireland, and of Scotland 57. Entitled, an Act for the further
description of Banckrupts and relief of Creditors against such as shall become
Banckrupts, or within one of them, our said Sovereign Lord the the Kings
Majesty that now is, by his most gracious Commission under the great Seal of
England, bearing date at Westminster the 19th. day of June in the 13th. year of
his Majesty's Reign that now is, directed to the said S: E: E: T: and I: I: and
unto F: VV: Gent. and I: P: Gent. has Named, Assigned, Constituted and
Ordained the said S: E: E. T: I: I: H: W: and I: P: his Majesty's special
Commissioners giving full Power and Authority unto them four or three of them,
whereof the said S. E. or E. T. to be one to execute the said Commission
according to the same Statutes and every or any of them not only concerning the
said F. M. his Body Lands, tenements, Frehold and Customary Goods Debts, and
other things whatsoever but also concerning all other Persons which by
concealments claim or otherwise do or shall offend touching the Premises or
any part thereof contrary to the true Intent and meaning of the same statutes
and every or any of them to do and execute all and every thing and things
whatsoever, as well toward, and for satisfaction and payment of his said
Creditors, as toward and for all other Intents and purposes, according to the
ordinance and provision of the same Statutes, as in and by the said Commission
and the complaint in writing thereunto annexed, more plainly and at largt it
does and may appear.

And whereas the said S. E. E. T. and I. I. do further find that all the time
that the said F. M. became Bankrupt as aforesaid, he the said F: M: and J. his
wife, were and stood seized to them and to the Heirs of the said F. M.
according to the custom of the Manor of W. in the County of E. of one
Copyhold or Customary Message, or Tenement called C. with a Garden and Orchard
thereunto belonging, now in the occupation of the said F. M. etc. holden by Copy
of Court-Roll, of the foresaid Manor of W. All which Copyhold or customary
Premises, the greater part of the above named Commissioners, by the said
Commission authorized, have caused to be viewed and rented, and the respective
Estates of the said F. M. of and in the same to be appraised to the best value
they may, and accordingly the same have been viewed, rented, and appraised by
J. K. and R. F. men of sufficient skill and judgment for the doing thereof, in
manner and form following; That is to say, the foresaid Message or Tenement
called C. and the Garden and Orchard thereunto belonging, in the occupation of
the said F. M. situate, lying, and being at W. aforesaid, to be let for the
yearly Rent of 6 l. of lawful money of England, and the Estate of the said F.
M. therein worth to be sold 90 l. of like money etc. The said S. E. E. T. and I.
I. with the consent and at the request of the Creditors of the said F. M. that
have sued forth and prosecuted the said Commission against the said F. M. for
and in consideration of the sum of 897 l. of lawful money of England, unto the
said S: E: E: T: and I: I: by the said R: W: R: B. D M: E. C. and W: E: to the
use, benefit, and behalf, as well of themselves, as also of all other the
Creditors of the said F: M: that have sued forth and have joined, and that
shall hereafter join in the prosecuting of the said Commission, according to
the statutes in that behalf made and provided, well and truly contented and
paid, have by force and virtue of the said Commission, as much as in them the
said S: E: and E: T: and I: I. does lie, and they lawfully may grant, bargain,
and sell, and by these B^rgain and Sale.
presents do as much as in them lies, and they lawfully may grant, bargain,
and sell unto the said R: W: R: B: D: M: E: C: and W: E: all that the foresaid
Copyhold, or customary Message, or Tenement called C: with the Garden and
Orchard thereunto belonging, and now in the occupation of the said F: M: holden
by Copy of Court-Roll of the foresaid Manor of W: etc: Together with all
Woods, Underwoods, Commons, Pastures, Feedings, Ways, Watercourses, Easments,
Proffits, Commodities, Emoluments, and Appurtenances whatsoever, unto all and
every the said Copyhold or customary Premises thereby granted, and every part
and parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appurtaining or there were
usually letten occupied, or enjoyed, and all the estate right, Title, Interest
use, Possession Reversion, and Reversions, Remainder, and Remainders, claim and
demand whatsoever, of the said F. M. of, in and to all and singular the
Premises hereby granted, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances; To have and to hold all the said Copyhold or customary Message
or Tenement called etc. and every part and parcel thereof, with all and every
the Appurtenances unto the said R. W. R. B. D. M. E. C. and W. E: their Heirs
Habendum.
and Assigns, to their own proper use and behoof for ever, according to the
custom of the said several Manors, whereof the same be respectively holden as
aforesaid: And to have and to hold all and singular the said Close or Pasture
ground called Hilly Field, and the said Close of arable Land thereunto
adjoining, and every part and parcel thereof, with all and every the
Appurtenances unto the said R. W. R. B. D. M. E, C. and W. E. and their
Assigns, to their own proper use and behoof, for and during the natural life
of the said F. M. according to the custom of the aforesaid Manor of W.
aforesaid, Yiedling, paying, performing, and doing unto the said several Lords
of the several Manors before mentioned, of whom the Copyhold or customary
Premises hereby granted, are respectively holden, all and every the Fines,
Rents, Duties, and Services of Right used and accustomed, to be yielded, paid,
performed, and done for the same: In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Lands, with general Warranty and good Covenants.
THis Indenture etc. between etc. on the one party, and R, B. etc. on the other
party; Witnesses, that the said R. C. for and in consideration of the Sum of
etc. of lawful etc. whereof etc. has given, granted, bargained, and sold, and
by these presents does fully and clearly etc. unto the said R. B. and to his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that the Manor of L. alias L. Park, in the
County of S. with all and singular the Courts, and Premises of Courts Leets,
and Views of Frank-pledge, and all other Rights, Royalties, Members, Profits,
Rents, Services, Commodities, Privileges, Jurisdictions, Casualties, and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Manor belonging, or in any wise
appurtaining, and all and singular Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Commodities, and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances,
commonly called or known by the name of L. alias L. Park, or by the name or
names of any of them, set, lying, and being in the Towns, Parishes, or Feilds
of G. alias W. T. alias T. and C. in the County of S. or in any of them, or
elsewhere, in the said County of S. And all and singular the Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Leasues, Pastures, Commons, Woods, Under-woods, Hedg-rows,
Waters, Fishings, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever,
with their Appurtenances, set, lying, and being in the Towns, Parishes, Fields,
Hamlets, Territories of etc. aforesaid, or in any of them, or else where, in
the said county of S. to the said Manors. of L. alias L. and other the
Premises, or to any of them belonging, or in any wise appurtaining or
heretofore taken, accepted reputed, esteemed, or known, to be part, or parcel,
or Member of the same Manor or Park. And all other Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Commodities, and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances,
now of the said R. C. set, lying, and being in the Towns, Parishes, and Fields
aforesaid, or any of them, or reputed and taken for the Lands or Hereditaments
of the said R. C: And all such Estate, Right, Title, Use, Possessions,
Reversion, Remainder, and Demand, as he the said R. C. has may, might, should,
or ought to have in and to the said Manors, Park and all, and singular other
the premises with the appurtenances or of, in or to any part or parcel
thereof, and also all and singular the Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Court-Rols,
Rentals, Mynuments, Escripts, Terrors, Boundaries, Counterparts of Leases and
Writings touching, or in any wise concerning the said Manor and other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, or any part or parcel thenof. All which
said Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Court-Rolls, Mynuments, Escripts, and
Writings, or all such and so many of them as the said R. has, or that he his
Heirs Executors or Assigns, may or can come by lawfully, without Suit in
Covenant to deliver Deeds.
the Law. The said R. C. covenanteth etc. for him etc. to and with etc. well
and safely to deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said R. B his Heirs or
Assigns, safe, whole, and uncancelled, at the now Mansion house etc. fcituate
etc. at or before the 4. day of December next ensuing the date hereof: To have
and to hold the said Manor of L. Habend.
alias L. Park, and the said Park, and also all the said Lands Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and all and every other the Premises, with their Appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof unto the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, to
the sole only and proper use and behoof of the said R. B: his Heirs and Assigns
for ever.

And the said R. C: for him etc: covenanteth etc. in manner and Covenants that
he is Owner in fee.
form following; That is to say, That he the said R: is now the very true,
sole, perfect and lawful Owner of all and singular the Premises in Fee, and
that he the said R. C. now at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is
lawfully, surely, solely, and indefeasibly seized in Fee, Seized in fee.
to the use of himself, and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none
other use, and that without any Condition, further limitation or determination
of use or uses, of and in the said Manor of L. alias L. Park, with the
Appurtenances, and of and in all and singular other the Premises and
Hereditaments before mentioned, to be bargained and No Reversion in the Queen.
sold. And that there is no Fee-simple, Reversion, or Remainder in the Queen of
the same, or any part thereof: And that the said R. C. has full Power, good
Right, and lawful Authority, to give, grant, bargain, sell, Authority to sell.
and assure the Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their
Appurtenances, to the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, in manner and Socage,
Tenure, and Rent etc.
form aforesaid. And that the Premises by these presents bargained and sold,
or meant, or intended to be bargained or sold, and every part and parcel
thereof, be holden in free Socage, and not in Capite or by Knights Service, but
by Fealty, and at the Rent of one pair of gilt Spurs, or 6 d. by the year, and
not charged by or with any greater Rent, or any other Service whatsoever.

And also that he the said R. C. and his Heirs, shall and will before To make a
full assurance by a day.
the last day of February next etc. at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said R. B. and his Heirs, make and execute, or cause to be made to the said R.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, a good, sure, rightful, perfect, absolute and
lawful estate in the Law in Fee Simple, to the only and proper use of the said
R. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any manner of Condition or
Defeasance, of, and in the said Manor, and all and every other the premises
with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, with Warrants
against all men, or without Warrants, as by the said R. his Heirs or Assigns,
or his, or their Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or
advised.

And further, that the said Manor, and all, and several other the Discharge of
Encumbrances.
premises with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof now are,
and at the time of the making and executing of the said estate to be made as
aforesaid shall be, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter shall and
may stand, abide, remain and continue unto the said R. his Heirs and Assigns,
freely and clearly discharged, exonerated and acquitted, and otherwise by the
said R. C. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, defended, saved and kept harmless
of, and from all and every former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Estates,
Uses, Conditions, Statutes Merchant, and Statute of the staple, Recognisance,
Condemnations, Judgments, Executions, Annuities, Fees, Joynters, Dowers, Fines,
Issues, Amerciaments, Rents, Charge, Rents-Seck, arrerage of Rent, and of and
from all and every other former Titles, Charges, and Encumbrances whatsoever,
the Rent and Service before mentioned hereafter Exceptions.
to grow due to be paid and done, and the liberty of one R. H. and his Assigns
to fetch and carry away, of, and from the premises, all such Timber, Trees, and
Woods, as were there felled and cut down before the 22. day of October last
etc. and one Lease made of parcel of the Premises, to S. H. which shall
expire and determine within 15. days next ensuing the date hereof, whereupon
there is received the yearly Rent of etc. of lawful etc, and one other Lease
made of another parcel of the Premises to W. T. which shall expire and end
etc. whereupon etc. and one other Lease etc. whereupon etc. which said several
yearly Rents from henceforth, during the several continuances of the same
several Leases, shall be due and payable to the said R. B. his Heirs and
Assigns. And also such Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and Demand, as R. C:
etc. has in the Moiety or half part of the said Manor of L. of the Grant or
Assignment of I. F. of L. Widow, contained or mentioned in an Indenture,
bearing date etc. made between the said I. on the one party, and the said R. C.
on the other party, only except and foreprised.

And furthermore the said R. C. for him, his Heirs etc. covenanteth For quiet
enjoyment.
etc. that he the said R. B. his heirs and assigns, shall and may from
henceforth for ever, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly, have, hold, possess,
inherit, and enjoy all the said Manor of L: with the appurtenances, and all
and every other the Premises, with their appurtenances: And shall and may also
lawfully receive, take, have, and enjoy, all and singular the Rents, Revenews,
Issues, and Profits thereof, from time to time coming, growing, and renewing, to
the only use and behoof of the said R. B. and of his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, according to the purport etc: of these presents, without any let,
resistance, disturbance, or interruption of the said R. his Heirs or Assigns,
and without any manner of lawful let, resistance, molestation, eviction,
expulsion, recovery, or interruption of any other person or persons whatsoever,
other then the said R. C. and his Assigns, claiming by, from, or under the said
Estate or Interest of the said R. C. before excepted, and other then such
persons as any thing claim in the said excepted Leases, or any of them, and for
and concerning such Title and Interest only, as any of the same persons
claims by force of any of the said Leases so before excepted.

And that he the said R. C. and his Heirs, and B. now his wife, and all and
every other person and persons, and their Heirs, having lawfully Further
assurances.
claiming or pretending to have, or that hereafter shall or may have or
lawfully claim or pretend to have any Estate, Title, Interest, or other thing,
into or out of the said Manors and other the Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, except the said R. C. and his Assigns, claiming by or under the said
Estate or Interest of the said R. C. before excepted, and also except such
person or persons, as shall claim for or by reason of the Leases aforesaid, or
any of them, and for and concerning only their said Titles and Interests of
their said several Leases, and also except I. F. Widow, Mother of the said R.
C. for such Title or Right of Dower only as she pretends, to have by the
ordinary course of the common Law of this Comminalty in the premises, shall
and will upon every reasonable request, at the costs and charges in the Law of
the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, further do make knowledge and suffer, or
cause to be done, made, knowledged, and suffered, from time to time and at all
times hereafter, during the space of 7. years, next ensuing the date hereof,
and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, devise and devises,
assurance and assurances, thing and things, as shall be devised or advised by
the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, or by his or their Learned Council in
the Law, for the further and more better assurance, surety, and sure making,
and for the clear and absolute having of the said Manor of L. with the
Appurtenances, and of all and singular the Premises, with the Appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof to the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the sole and only use and behoof of the said R. B. and of his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, and to none other use or intent, be it by Fine,
Feoffment, Recovery. with Voucher or Vouchers, single or double Deed or Deeds,
enrolled or not enrolled, Release with warranty against all men or by any other
ways or means whatsoever. And that the said R: C: upon reasonable request,
shall and will pay and bear the one Vendors to pay half the charges of the
fine and Post fine.
half of any Fine or Post-fine, touching or concerning any assurances to be had
or executed of the Premises, or any part thereof, by and from the said R: and
B: his wife, or either of them, or the Heirs of the said R: to the said R: C:
his Heirs or Assigns.

And moreover the said R: B: covenanteth etc. That all the said Fines,
Feoffments, Recoveries, and other Conveyances and Assurances aforesaid, and
every of them shall be and every, and all and singular the persons aforesaid,
and all and every other person and persons Assurance
whatsoever, that now have or at any time hereafter shall or may have or claim
any Estate Title or Interest, in or out of the said Manor of L with the
Appurtenances, and other the premises with their Appurtenances, or any part
thereof, by from or under the parties aforesaid or any of them, or by from or
under, or by force or means of these Presents, or of the said Fines,
Feoffments, Recoveries or other conveiances or assurances aforesaid, or any of
them, shall at all times, and from time to time, from and after every Execution
and Executions of every of the said Fines Feoffments Recoveries, or other
conveyances or assurances aforesaid, or any of them stand and be seized of the
said Manor of L. with the appurtenances, and of all the Lands Tenements Rents
Reversions and Hereditaments abovesaid, and of all and every other the premises
with all and singular their Appurtenances, and of every part and parcel
thereof to the only use and behoof of the said R. B. his heirs and assigns for
ever, In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Coppy-hold Land, and of Freehold Land with Covenants
for Assurance of each accordingly.
THis Indenture, etc. between I, I. E. etc. and T. E. etc. on the one party,
and I. C. etc. on the other party witnesses, that it is covenanted and agreed
between the said parties, in manner and form following, that is to say, the
said I. I.. E. and T: E: for them, their heirs Executors and Administrators and
every of them, do covenant and grant to and with the said I: C: his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators and every of them by these presents, that they
the said J. J. E. and D: his wife, and T: E: and E: his wife, according to the
custom of the Manor of B. in the parish of I: in the said County of Seized of
the Coppy-hold.
M. now are, or some of them now be, and do stand lawfully and tightfully
seized to the only use of themselves and their heirs, or of some of them and
their heirs, of and in one Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, etc.
and also that they the said J. J. E. and T. E. according to the custom of the
Manor of C. in the said County of M. are, and stand seized to the use of
themselves and their Heirs, of and in one close with the appurtenances called
L. field, now or late in the occupation of etc. containing by Estimation etc.
all and singular which said Messuages Tenements and closes with their
appurtenances according to the several customs of the said several Manors,
did descend and come to the said I: I: E. and T: E: and their heirs by and
after the decease of A. R. alias E. sometime the wife of W. E: late of B: in
the said County of M: And also the said I: I: E: and T: E. for them, etc: do
covenant, etc. in manner and form following; that is to say, that they the said
I: I. E. and T: E: shall and will procure and cause several Courts in the said
several Manors, lawfully and according to the several customs of the said
Manors to be holden and kept on this side the three and twentieth day of this
present month of December, and that then and their at the same several Courts,
the said I: I: E: and D. his wife, and the said T: E: and E: his wife,
according to the several customs of the said several Manors in open Court,
shall or will surrender all and singular the premises, To surrender.
with all and singular their appurtenances, to and for the only use and behoof
of the said I. C: and of his heirs and Assigns for ever. And that he the said
I: C: his Heirs and Assigns from henceforth, and For quiet emjoyment discharged
of incumbra^ces
from the time of the several making of the said several surrenders,
according to the several customs of the said several Manors, shall or
lawfully may hold, occupy and enjoy, all and singular the said premises, with
all and singular their Appurtenances, and also have, take, perceive, receive,
and enjoy all the issues Rents and profits thereof, and of every part thereof,
to and for the only use of the said I. C. and of his Heirs and assigns for
ever, clearly and freely discharged, exonerated and acquitted, or otherwise by
the said I. I: E: and T: E. their heirs or assigns, from time to time and at
all times saved harmless, of and from all and singular former Surrender and
Surrenders, Estates Titles Leases Dowers Joyntures Forfeitures arrearages of
Rents, and other encumbrances whatsoever, the Rents and Services according to
the several Customs of the said several Manors therefore of ancient time
accustomed to be paid and done, and from and after the several making of the
several Surrenders abovesaid to grow due to be paid and done, only except, and
moreover the said I. I. E. and T. E. have Bargain and sale of freehold Land.
given granted bargained and sold, and by these presents do fully clearly and
absolutely give grant bargain and sell to the said I. C. and to his heirs and
assigns for ever, all that close of meadow and pasture being Freehold
containing, etc. and all and singular such Deeds, Evidences Copies of Court
Rolls Writings and Mynuments, concerning only the premises or only any part
thereof, as now be in the hands or custody of the said I. I, E. and T. E. or in
the custody of either of them, or which they or either of them can lawfully get
without suit in the Law: Together with the true Copies of all other Evidences,
Writings Copies and Mynuments concerning the premises or any part thereof,
jointly with other Lands and Tenements, they the said I. I. and T. E. for them
their Heirs and Executors, do covenant and promise to deliver, or cause to be
delivered to the said I. C. his heirs and assigns, at the dwelling house etc.
at or on this side the etc. day of May next coming.

And further the said I. and T. do covenant, etc. that they the said Further
assurance.
I: I. E. and T. E. and E, now the wise of the said T. and all and every other
person and persons (the chief Lords of the said several Manors for their
ancient and chief Rents and services, only except) having or lawfully claiming
to have any former Right Title Estate or Interest, in or to the premises, or
any part thereof from time to time and at all times during the space of five
years next, etc. at and upon every reasonable request of the said I. C. and of
his heirs and assigns, shall and will, do knowledge and suffer, all and every
such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, as by the said I.
his heirs and assigns, or by his or their council learned in the Laws of this
Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised, for the further or
better surety assurance, and sure making of all and singular the said Copyhold
Lands, according to the customs of the said Manors, and all and singular the
premises to be had and made sure, to the said I. C. his heirs and assigns to
and for the only use of the said I. C: and of his heirs and assigns for ever,
according to the intent and true meaning of these presents. And moreover the
said I T. covenants, etc. that the yearly Rents, Issues, issuing out of the
premises now paid, and usually heretofore paid to the Lords of the Fee and
Fees; thereof do not surmount or exceed in the whole the yearly sum of etc,
And also that the said Freehold Land above bargained by these presents now is,
and from hence forth for ever, shall abid: and Free from encumbrances.
continue clear, and free discharged and acquitted or otherwise by the said I.
E. his heirs and Assigns shall be for ever saved harmless to the said I. C. his
Heirs and assigns for ever; to and for the only use and behoof of the said I.
C. and of his heirs and assigns for ever, of and from all and singular former
bargains etc* heretofore had made done or knowledged, or to be had made done or
knowledged before a lawful Estate, by livery and seisin shall thereof be had
and lawfully executed to the said I. C. and his heirs according to the intent
and true meaning of these presents: For and in consideration of which said
bargains sales covenants grants articles and agreements, above in these
presents specified, and on the part of the said I. and T. their heirs Executors
and Administrators, well and faithfully to be holden performed and kept, and
for the full and clear purchase and surrender of al and singular the premises
the said I, C. at and before the ensealing hereof, has paid to the said I. E.
and T. E. the sum of etc. for which said sum of etc. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Coppyhold Land.
THis etc. between T. H. on the one party, and W. S. etc. on the other party
witnesses, that the said T. H. in consideration of the sum of four hundred
pound, etc. whereof etc. has bargained and sold, and by these presents etc.
unto the said W. S. and his heirs, one Cottage or Tenement being customary, or
copyhold Land with a Curtillage and the gardens thereunto adjoining, sometime
called, etc. All which premises were sometimes the Lands and Tenements of John
De vouch, and are now in the Tenure and occupation of the said W. S. or his
assigns by virtue of a Lease to him thereof granted by the said T. H. by
license of the Lord for diverse years yet enduring, and the said T. H.
covenanteth, etc. that he the said T. at the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, is lawfully seized of such and so good and perfect Estate in
fee-simple of the nature of coppy-hold, according to the custom of the said
Manor of S. of all and singular the premises with their Appurtenances, as
descended and came by custom of the said Manor, unto the said T. H. from S.
E. and Sir T. H. Knight, deceased Father of the said T. discharged or otherwise
saved harmless, of and from all former bargains sales surrenders forfeitures
and encumbrances whatsoever, had made committed or done by the said Sir or the
said T. C. (the Lease above mentioned always except) and for that the
premises being holden of the said Manor, by copy of court Roll, that he the
said T. before the feast, etc. at the costs and charges of the said W. his
heirs Executors and Administrators shall and will surrender the premises into
the hands of the Lord of the said Manor for the time being in such sort as by
the said W. S. his heirs or assigns, or his or their learned council shall be
devised or required to the intent that the said Surrender presented by the
homage of the said Manor, the Lord of the said Manor for the time being, may
at his pleasure, grant the premises to the said W. S. and his heirs, to hold
the same by copy of Court Roll, according to the custom of the said Manor.
And that he the said T. H. and his heirs shall and will at the costs and
charges of the said W. S. his heirs Executors and administrators from time to
time, knowledge perform do and execute, and suffer to be done performed
knowledged and executed such reasonable act or acts thing or things which by
the said W. his heirs or assigns or his or their council learned in the Laws
of England, shall be reasonably devised advised, and required for the Lawful
and better assurance To make assurance.
and conveyance of all and singular the premises to the said W and his heirs
according to the custom of the said Manor, and according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents. Provided always that the said T. H. shall not
by reason of any Covenant or Article herein contained, for the passing of any
assurance or assurances of the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, be
enforced or compelled to travel out of the said County of C.

Moreover the said T. H. covenanteth etc. to deliver or cause to be To deliver
Writings.
delivered to the said W. S. his Heirs or Assigns, within the space of 7. years
next ensuing, upon reasonable request all such Copies, Licenses, and Evidences
whatsoever, concerning the premises only, or only any part thereof, as be in
his own hands or in the hands of any other to his use, which he may obtain or
come by without Suit in the Law.

Lastly the said T. H. does covenant etc. that he the said W. S. his For quiet
enjoyment discharged of encumbrances.
Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may lawfully and peaceably
possess, have, and enjoy all and singular the premises, with their
Appurtenances, without any manner of lawful let, disturbance, or eviction of
the said T. H. and of Dame J. Lady H. Mother of the said T. and of their Heirs,
or of either, or any of them. And also that the premises shall be discharged
or otherwise sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all Encumbrances had,
made, or suffered either by the said T. or by the said Sir T. Father of the
said T. or by any other, having, holding, or claiming, from, by, or under them
or either of them (the Rents and Services due to the Lord of the said Manor,
and his Heirs, and the Lease aforesaid always excepted.) In witness etc.

A Sale of a certain quantity of Iron to be delivered at certain several days.
THis etc. Between etc. Witnesses, That the said Earl, for, and in
considera^ion of 1000 l. of etc. whereof etc. has bargained and sold, and by
these presents does bargain and sell to the said R. M. one hundred Tuns of
good, perfect merchantable Iron, well and truly to be delivered to the said R.
M: his Executors Administrators, or to such other person or persons as the said
R. his Executors Administrators, shall in that behalf assign and appoint at B.
in the County of W. clearly freed, discharged and acquitted of all charges,
duties, payments and demands whatsoever, in manner and form following etc.
twelve Tuns thereof, at, or on this side the last day of September next etc.
and eight Tuns more thereof at, or on this side etc. and so from thenceforth
monthly on the last day of every month as from thenceforth shall next come
and follow by course one after another eight Tuns of such Iron as aforesaid,
until the said hundred Tuns of Iron shall be fully and Covenant to deliver at
the days and places.
truly delivered; and the said Earl for him etc. Covenanteth etc. That he the
said Earl his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall, and will make, or
cause to be made, full and true delivery unto the said R. M. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, of all and every part of the said hundred Tuns of
such Iron as aforesaid at the same days, and at the same place, which to, and
for the delivery thereof above by these presents, is limited and appointed,
without any default or delay, And that the said R. M. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, shall, and may have and enjoy all the said Iron, and
every part thereof to the only use of the said R. his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, without any account, demand, suit or trouble therefore, or for any
part thereof to be required, commenced or prosecuted, of, or against them, or of
any of them by any person or persons. In Winess, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Lands with the Tenants Attornment to the same.
THis Indenture made etc. Between H. F. on the one party, and F. B. on the
other party Witnesses, That the said H. F. for, and in consideration of a
certain sum etc. whereof etc. Has Given, Granted Bargained and Sold, and by
these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give etc. unto the said F. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, al those his manors of M. and C with their
appurtenances in the County of K. etc. being late parcel of the Lands and
Possessions of E. F. Esquire deceased, late Father of the said H. F. and now
lately demised to A. W. by the said H. F. by his Deed, bearing date etc. and
now lately Assigned over to A. P. etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, of all
and singular the premises above bargained with their appurtenances, and all
the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use, Possession, Seisin and Demand
whatsoever which the said H. has may, or ought to have of, in, or to the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, and
other the premises with the appurtenances above bargained by these presents
and every or any part thereof, and all and singular Deeds, Evidences, Charters,
Mynuments, Escripts and Writings concerning the premises above bargained only,
or only any part thereof, as many of which said Deeds etc. as the said H. or any
other to his use by his delivery now has or have, or that he his Heirs
Executors or Assigns shall have, or may lawfully come by without suit in the
Law, together with the true Copies of all other Evidences which the said H.
has concerning the Premises above bargained, or any part there jointly, with
other Lands and Tenements, he the said H. for him his Heirs or Executors, does
Covenant and promise well and safely to deliver or cause etc. to th said F. his
Heirs or Assigns at etc. on this side the Feast etc. to have and to hold all
the said Manors, Messuages Habend.
Lands Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, and other the
premises above bargained with their appurtenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions thereof to the said F. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever to the sole
and only use and behoof of the said F. B. and of his Heirs and Assigns for
ever; and the said H. F. for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
Covenant and Grant to, and with the said F. B* his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents in manner and form
following, that is to say, That he is seized in fee.
That he the said H. in his own Right, and to his own use now at the Ensealing
and Knowledging of these presents, is and stands lawfully and soly seized of
a good, perfect, sure and indefeasible estate in the Law in his demesne as of
Fee simple, either in Possession or in Reversion immediately expectant upon the
determination of Lease or Leases for years of, and in the said Manor Message.
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments and other the above bargained premises with
their appurtenances. And that the said Manors Messuages, Lands, Tenements
Rents, Reversions Services and Hereditaments, and all other the said That the
premises are discharged of Encumbrances.
premises above bargained with their appurtenances now be and for ever
hereafter, shall be stand and continue to the said F. B. and his Heirs clearly
and freely discharged and acquitted, or otherwise from time to time, and at all
times upon reasonable request shall be well and sufficiently saved harmless by
the said H, F. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, of, and from all and
singular former bargains and Sales, Joyntures. Dowers, Gifts, Grants, Leases,
Annuities, Charges, Estates, Exceptions,
Titles, and Encumbrances whatsoever (except always the chief Rents and
Services to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the
premises, only in respect of their Seigniories, and the abovesaid Lease made
and granted. of all and singular the above bargained premises, with their
Appurtenances, by the said H. F. to the said A. VV. and I. W. as aforesaid, for
the term of 50 years, and for the only yearly Rent of 20 s. therefore yearly to
be paid during the same Lease. And except also diverse other former particular
Leases made by the said H. F. of diverse parts of the premises, which shall
determine long before the end of the said Lease, made and granted to the said
A. and I. W. And also the said H. F. covenanteth etc. with the said F. B. etc.
That the above bargained premises from and after the expiration or other
determination of the said Lease thereof made to the said A. and I. W. as
abovesaid, and during the said other particular Leases, or any of them
heretofore made of the same premises as aforesaid, shall or lawfully may be to
the said F. B. his Heirs and Assigns, of the clear yearly value of 100. Marks
of lawful etc. beyond all reprises or above.

And further, that he the said H. F. and his Heirs, and all and every To make
further assurance.
other person or persons* having or which shall have or lawfully claim or
pretend to have any former State, Right, Title, Use, Possession, or Interest,
of, in, or to the above bargained Premises, or any part thereof, other then the
said chief Lords of their said chief Rents and Services only, and the said
Leases only, claiming by their Lease or Leases aforesaid, from time to time,
upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law only of
the said F. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will do, make, knowledge,
suffer, and execute, or cause to be made, done, knowledged, suffered, and
executed, all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, for the further and better surety, assurance, and sure making of all
and singular the Premises above bargained, by these presents, to be had and
made sure to the said F. B. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own use and
uses for ever: As by the said F. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their
learned Council in the Law of this Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably
devised or advised, and required from time to time, during two years next
ensuing the date of these presents.

And further that he the said F. B. his Heirs and Assigns, from henceforth For
quiet enjoyment.
for ever, shall or lawfully may have and hold, all and singular the Premises
above bargained and sold by these presents, and have, take, receive, and enjoy,
all and singular the Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof, without any let,
trouble, or interruption of the said H. F. or his Heirs, and without any
lawful let, trouble interruption, or eviction of any other person or persons,
having or which shall have or claim any Estate or Interest, of, in, or to the
Premises, or any part thereof, by or from the said H. or any of his Ancestors,
except only such Leases as aforesaid, only for their Leases above excepted. In
witness etc.

The Attornment of the Tenant.
MEmorand. that on the third day of November 1652. I A* P. Assignee of the
within named Lessees. A. and I. W. of and for all their term of years within
specified of and in the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments within bargained,
did thereof Attorn to the within named F. B. by the payment of one Angel Noble,
in part of payment of the Rent reserved in the Lease made of the Premises, by
the within named H. F. to the said A. and I. W. And in testimony thereof I have
written this Endorsment with mine own hand, the day and year abovesaid, and
subsigned the same.

A Bargain and Sale by a Factor of his Constitutors Goods, to the use of whose
Agent the Constitutor had taken up money by exchange on the other side of the
Sea.
TO all etc. E. T. of L. Merchant, Agent, and Factor here in the Realm of
England, of and for the Business, Affairs, and Merchandises of P. B. of L.
Goldsmith, now resident in Spain, sends greeting; Whereas the said P. has
lately taken up in Spain by way of exchange for England, of one I: R. Factor
for G. G. and R. G. of L. Merchant Tailors money, and other things there, to
the value of 285 l. of lawful money of England, as by Bills of Exchange thereof
made and consigned. from the said P. to the said E. may appear.

And whereas the said P. as well for payment of the said Bills of Exchange, as
otherwise for his use has sent and consigned out of Spain to the said E.
hither into E. 400 l. weight or therabouts of Cinnamon, in a Ship of I. called
the Pelecan, to be discharged in the Port of L. or elsewhere in the Realm of E.
as may fortune to fall out.

Now the said E. T. for and in consideration of the satisfaction and payment of
the said Bills of Exchange truly to be made to the said G. and R. has
bargained and sold, and by these presents does bargain and sell to the said G.
and R: G: all the said 400 l. weight of Cinnamon; To have and to hold the same
and every part thereof to the said G. and R. their Executors and Assigns, for
their own use for ever, absolutely without any Condition: Yet nevertheless
whereas the said Sum of etc. shall be had, raised, and satisfied to the said G:
and R: of the said Cinnamon, that then the said G: and R: and their Executors,
shall stand accomptable to the said E: for so much as shall be thereof made and
clearly had to the said G: over and above the said Sum etc. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale by Brewers of their Stock in Brewing, as well Implements,
Corn, Grain, Casks, etc. as Debts upon Tallies and Scores, with Covenants
pertinent for transferring of the Debts.
THis Indenture made etc. between I: S: and P: S: on the one party, and M: R:
on the other party; Witnesses, That the said I: and P: for and in
consideration of a certain competent Sum etc. whereof etc. Has bargained, sold
given, granted, and set over, and by these presents, Bargain and Salt.
do bargain etc. unto the said M. R. as well all such Wainscot, Glass,
Household stuff, Implements, Utnesils, Corn Grain, Hops, Horses, Carts, Draies,
Cattle, Kask, Robes, Harness, and things that are mentioned and specified in
one Schedule indented, hereunto annexed, as also all such Debts and Sums of
money as the Customers belonging to the late Beer Brewhouse of the said I. and
P. S. set and being in the Parish of A. in T. Street of L. are indebted and do
owe unto the said I. and P. or any other person or persons, being then Partners
in the said Brewhouse, jointly or severally being set down in a Book, dated the
13th. day of January last etc. remaining under the hands of them the said I. P.
and M. together with the Books, Tallies, and Scores, as do concern the names
and true Sums of the said Customers and Debts (except as in the same Book is
excepted:) To have and to hold the said Wainscot, Glass etc. and things
contained in the said Schedule, Debts, and Sums of money owing by the said
Customers, set down in the Books aforesaid, (except before excepted) together
with the said Books, Tallies, and Scores as do concern the same Debts and
Customers, and every of them, unto the said M. R. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof for
ever:

Ano the said I. and P. for them and either of them, their Executors Covenant
for quiet enjoyment.
and Assigns, and for every of them, do covenant and grant, and either of them
covenanteth and grants by these presents, to and with the said M. R. his
Executors and Assigns, that he the said M. R. his Executors or Assigns, shall
or may to his and their own use and behoof for ever, peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said Wainscot, Glass, Implements, Corn, Grain
Carts, Casks, Cattle, Hops Horses, Drayes, and things contained in the said
Schedule, without any let, trouble, interruption, or eviction of the said I.
and P. or either of them, their Executors, or Assigns, or any other person or
persons, by his or their means or procurement.

And the said I. and P. S. do covenant etc. That the said I. and P. To justify
actions.
and either of them, their Executors and Assigns, shall not only at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs
and charges in the Law of the said M. R. his Executors or Assigns, avouch,
avow, justify, and maintain with effect, all such lawful Action and Actions,
Suits, Plaints, Processes, and prosecutions, as he the said M. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, shall take, commence, sue, prosecute or follow in
the name or names of them the said I. and P. or either of them, their Executors
or Administrators, against all and every, or any of the said Customers,
specified in the said Book, (except before excepted) and against all and every,
or any of the Executors or Administrators, of the same Customers, for, or
concerning the Debts by them owing also specified in the said Book.

But also from time to time upon reasonable request, and at the costs Further
assurance.
and charges of the said M. his Executors or Administrators, make, execute, and
do, cause etc. all such further act and acts, deeds, and devlses, and things
unto the said M. his Executors and Administrators, as by the said M. his
Executors or Assigns, or Council learned, shall be reasonably advised or
devised, for the better having, recovering, and receiving of the said Debts
owing by the said Customaries (except before excepted) to the only use and
behoof of the said M. his Executors and Administrators.

And finally the said I. and P. covenant etc. That he the said M. his Not to
discharge the debts, etc.
Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and may at all times hereafter, to
his and their own use and behoof, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly have,
perceive, receive, recover, and take, all and every the said Debts owing by the
said Customers (except before excepted) and all costs of Suit, Benefit, and
Damages thereupon to be had, gotten, or recovered without any let, trouble,
denial release, or acquittance, discharge, bar, stop, or hinderance of them
the said I. and P. or any other person or persons, their Partners in Brewing in
the said Brew House, or any of them, or any the Executors or Administrators of
them or of any of them, or of any other person or persons, by the means,
assent, consent, and procurement of them or of any of them.

And the said M. R. covenanteth etc: That he the said M. his Executors To
produce the Book etc.
and Assigns, shall and will upon reasonable request, at all times hereafter,
from time to time, bring forth into any Court of Record, or other place within
L. or W. any such Book or Books, as he the said M. R. his Executors or
Administrators, shall have in his or their custody or possession, as do concern
the aforesaid Debts excepted by the aforesaid Books, and whatsoever other Debts
owing by any Customer or Customers to the said Brew House, and not set down or
written in the aforesaid Book remaining under the hands of the said I. P. and
M: whereby the said I. and P. their Executors or Assigns, may recover and get
the same Debts: In witness etc.

The said Schedule above mentioned is to be hereunto annexed. A Wood-sale, also
a Covenant to make free Copyhold Land.
THis Indenture made between etc. Witnesses, that the said Sir H. C. Knight,
Lord D. for and in consideration of a certain Sum of etc. whereof etc. has
bargained and sold, and by these presents does bargain and sell to the said R.
M. all and singular the Woods, Underwoods, and Trees whatsoever, standing,
growing, or being, in or upon all that Wood or Wood-ground called H. Park,
within the Lordship of T. in the County of M. except and reserved to the said
Lord D. all Timber Trees, already grown sufficient for Timber in and upon the
said ground, and Wavers, and Standels to be left on every acre thereof,
according to the Statute in that case provided; To have, take, fell, and carry
away all the said Woods, Underwoods, and Trees, (except only before excepted)
to the said R. M. his Executors and Assigns, for the only use of the said R. M.
his Executors and Assigns, from time to time and at all times, for and during
the space of three years next to ensue and follow, from the Feast of Christmas
next etc.

And the said R. M. covenanteth etc. That he the said R. his Executors Covenant
to hedge and and scour ditches.
and Assigns, at their own costs and charges, shall within three months next
after the first beginning of the felling of the said Woods and Underwoods, well
and sufficiently hedge and enclose all the said Wood and Wood-ground called
etc. and scour and cleanse the Ditches thereof, and preserve and keep in as good
sort as they conveniently may or can, all the young Springs arising in the
same, during the time wherein the said Wood, Underwoods, and Trees shall be in
felling, carrying, and avoiding away from the said ground called etc. and shall
therein leave standing the said Timber, Trees, and Wavers, and Standels
aforesaid without fraud or covin.

And the said Lord C. covenanteth etc. that he the said R. M. his Executors For
quiet enjoyment.
and Assigns, for their own use and commodity, from time to time and at all
times, during the said term of three years, shall and may lawfully and quietly
have, take, fell, and carry away, and enjoy the said Woods Under-woods, and
Trees (except only before excepted) without any let, impediment, denial, or
resistance of the said Lord C. his Heirs or Assigns, and without any lawful
etc. of any other person or persons.

And further that whereas J. E. a Copyholder of the said Lord C. within his said
Lordship of T. has bargained and agreed to surrender to the use of the said R.
M. and his Heirs for ever, according to the custom of the said Lordship, all
the Copyhold of the said J. within the said Lordship. The said Lord C.
covenanteth etc. That at all times hereafter, at and Covenant to enfranchise
Copyhold Land.
upon the reasonable request and costs and charges in the Law of the said R. M.
or his Heirs, the said Lord C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will
enfranchise and make free to the said R. and his Heirs all the said Copyhold
Land to be had and holden to the said R. and his Heirs for their own use in
Fee-simple for ever, without reservation of any manner of Rent, Service, or
Demand whatsoever: In witness etc.

A very good Bargain and Sale of a Lordship and Manor from a a man and his
wife, the wife having Jointure, etc.
THis Indenture etc. between H. VV. and D. his wife on the one party, and I. B.
on the other party witnesses, That the said H. W. and D. his wife, for, and in
consideration of the sum of etc. to the said H. before the ensealing of these
presents well and truly paid by the said I. B. whereof, and wherewith the said H.
and D. do acknowledge themselves satisfied and paid; and thereof, and therefore
do clearly release, discharge, exonerate and acquit th said I. B. his Heirs
Executors and Administrators by these presents, have aliened, granted,
bargained and sold, and by these presents do alien etc. unto the said I. B. his
Heirs Grant.
and Assigns for ever, all that the Lordship and Manor of C. with the
appurtenances in the County of E. etc. and all those woods, groves, underwoods
and wood-grounds with their appurtenances in C. aforesaid, called L. Wood and
S. Wood, and all and singular Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Waters, Fishings, Commons, Wastes, Ways, Profits, Easements,
Commodities and their Hereditaments with their appurtenances, which the said H.
W. and D. his wife have, or either of them has or ought to have within the
said parish of C. in the said County of E. and all and singular Courts Leets,
view of Frank-pledge, Franchises, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Rents,
Profits, Royalties and commodities, whatsoever, which the said H. and D. have
or ought to have, or lawfully might have in the said Lordship and Manor, and
other the premises, or in any part or parcel thereof, and the Advowson and
Right of Patronage of the Parish Church of C. aforesaid, and also the Reversion
and Reversions, Rents and Profits of all and singular the premises, and all
and singular Letters Patents, Deeds, Charters, Evidences and Writings
whatsoever touching or concerning the premises or any part thereof (except and
always foreprised, out of the Bargain and Sale aforesaid, all that house and
75. Acres of Meadow Land and Pasture, whether it be more or less Exception.
called Woodhern R. or otherwise R. and eight acres of land, late in the
occupation of I. B. Gent. to have, hold and enjoy the said Lordships, Habend.
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and the Avowson
aforesaid, and all other the premises with all and singular their
appurtenances, and the Reversion and Reversions thereof (except only before
excepted) to the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever to and for the only
use and behoof of the said I. B. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever; and the
said H. W. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them
does Covenant and Grant to, and with the said I. B. his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns and every of them by these presents in manner and
form following, that is to say, That he the said H. and the said D. his wife to
the only use and behoof of the same H. and D. and of the Heirs and Assigns of
the same H. now are, and at the ensealing and delivery of these presents shall
be and stand seized (the said H. in his Demesne as of Seized in Fee and power
to sell.
Fee-Simple and the said D. in her Demesne as of Freehold for term of her
life) of, and in all and singular the said Manors and Lordships, and all and
every other the premises with all and singular their appurtenances without any
condition or determination, or limitation of use, and that of such estate the
said H. and D. now have good right and lawful power and authority to Grant,
Alien, Convey and Assure the said Manor and Lordship, and all and every other
the premises with the appurtenances (except only before excepted) to the said
I. B: and to his Heirs and Assigns in form aforesaid for ever, And that the
said Manor and Lordship, and all and every other the premises with their
appurtenances (except only before excepted) now are, and from henceforth for
ever shall be, and continue to the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, clear and
free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise from time to time and at all times
upon request sufficiently saved harmless of, and from all and singular former
Bargains, former Sales, Gifts, Discharged of Encumbrances.
Grants, Leases, Estates, Rrecognizances, Bonds, Joyntures, Dowers, Fees,
Annuities Rents, Charge, Rents-seck, Arrerages of rent, Title of Dower, Wills,
Entailes, Entrusions, Fines, Amerciaments, Titles and Encumbrances whatsoever,
had made, done or suffered, or to be had etc. by the said H. W. and D. his
wife, or by S. T: alias C. widow, or by any of them, or by any other person or
persons having any lawful Estate, Title or intetest in or to the said Manor or
Lordship, and other the above bargained premises or any part thereof by, or
under the estate of the said H. D. and S. or of any of them before a lawful
estate shall be thereof made and lawfully executed to the said I. B. and his
Heirs according to the intent and true meaning of these presents except
always, as well the chief Rents and Services hereafter to grow due to chief
Lords of the fee or fees of the premises in respect of these Signiories only,
and all Estates heretofore Made and Granted by Copy of Court Roll of any
ancient Copyholders, according to the Custom of the said Manor or Lordship
whereupon the ancient Rents and Services are reserved here to be paid and done
from time to time to the said Lordship or Manor for the time being as of
ancient time has been used. And also one Lease which the said H. by his
Indenture, bearing date, etc. did Make and Grant to the said R. L. and his
Assigns without impeachment of any manner of wast (voluntary wast of houses
only except) for the term of sixty years commencing at the Feast of etc. then
last past, upon which Lease there was reserved 40 l. of etc. yearly payable to
the said H. and his Heirs whereof 6 l. yearly the said H. has released, and 40
l. of yearly rent residue thereof from henceforth due, all the residue of the
said term now to come shall be yearly due and payable to the said I. B. his
Heirs and Assigns. And moreover, the said H. W. Covenanteth etc. for himself
his heirs etc. that they the said H. W. and D. his wife before the second day
of Feb. now next coming or upon any reasonable request of the said J. B. his
Heirs or Assigns, and at the costs and charges in the Law only of the said J.
B. or of his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will in due form of Law (for better
assurance of the premises above bargained and sold) knowledge To levy a fine.
more fine or fines of the said Lordship or Manor with the appurtenances of
the said Advowson and of the free fishing in the water of C. called the
Mill-Water, and of all other the premises before bargained and sold to the
said J. B. and his heirs with warranty only against the said S. T. and other
heirs, and against the said H. W. and D. his wife, and the heirs of the said H.
As by the said I. B. his heirs or assigns, or by his or their Council learned
in the Laws of this Realm shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised,
Provided always that the said H. W. and D. or any one of them or their heirs
shall not be enforced to travel out of the City of L. or H. about the leavying
of the said Fine. And further that the the said H. W. and D. his wife, and all,
and every other person or persons, having, or lawfully claiming or pretending
to have any manner of Estate, Title or Interest of, in, or to the premises, or
any part thereof, granted, bargained and aliened by these presents other then
the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of whom the premises, or any part
thereof are holden for the chief Rents and Services only and other then such
person or persons as has any Estate or Interest by Copy of Court Roll of any
part of the said premises, by or under the estate of the said H. W. and other
then such person or persons as shall claim only by the said Lease made to the
said R. L. as aforesaid upon every reasonable request or requests of the said
J: B: his Heirs or Assigns, from time to time, and at all times during five
years next ensuing the date of these presents, at the costs and charges in Law
only of the said J. B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will do, knowledge,
suffer and execute, or cause to be done, knowledged, suffered and executed, all
and every such act and acts, thing and things in the Law whatsoever. which by
the said J. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the
Laws of this Realm shall be lawfully or reasonably devised or advised for the
further and more better conveying assuring surety and sure making of all the
said Manor and Lordship, and all other the above bargained Premises, and the
Reversion and Reversions Rents and Profits thereof To make further assurance.
to be had, conveyed and made sure to the said J. B: his Heirs and Assigns for
ever without any Condition according to the intent and true meaning expressed
in this present Indenture. In Witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale by a man and his wife of Land in London.
THis Indenture, etc. between Sir T. G. etc. Knight and Dame A. his Wife on the
one party, and N. B. etc. on the other party, witnesses, that the said Sir T:
G: and Dame A. his wife for and in consideration of the sum of one thousand
pounds of etc. to him the said Sir T. before hand paid etc. have aliened
bargained and sold, and by these presents do alien bargain, and sell unto the
said N. B: and his heirs for ever, all that capital Message or Mansion house
with the Tenements adjoining with their Appurtenances in Bashishaw, in L. which
the company of M. in L. were assured to Sir I: G Knight deceased, and I. G: his
son and to their heirs, and which said I: G: the son, and E: his wife by their
Deed indented, enrolled in the high Court of Chancery, and bearing date the
third day of January anno 9 nunc R. R. amongst other things, did bargain sell
give and grant to the said Sir T. G: and A: S: Gentleman now deceased, and to
their heirs and assigns for ever: all and singular shops rooms warehouses
buildings yards entries gates lights gardens, profits commodities easements and
here ditaments whatsoever to the capital message, and all other the said
Tenements or to any of them belonging, or in any wise appurtaining: or with the
same or any of them as part or parcel of them, or any of them now or late
heretofore had used demised or occupied, and the reversion or reversions of all
and singular the said premises, and all and singular Charters Evidences and
writings, touching or concerning the premises or only any part thereof: To
have and to hold the said capital Habend.
Message and Tenements, and all other the premises with their Appurtenances
to the said N: B: his heirs and assigns for ever, and That they or one of them
are seized in fee and have power to sell.
the said Sir T: G: for him his heirs Executors and Administrators, and every
of them, do covenant and grant to and with the said N: B: his heirs Executors
and assigns, and every of them by these presents in manner etc: that is to say,
that he the said Sir T: G: and Dame A: or or one of them in their, or one of
their own Right, or to their or one of their own use now are or be, and
stands lawfully seized of a good perfect and absolute estate in the Law in
fee simple, of and in the said capital message and Tenements, and other the
premises with their appurtenances, and have, or one of them has good and
lawful Right and authority to bargain sell and assure the same to the said N:
B: his heirs and assigns for ever, according to the true meaning of these That
the premises are discharged of encumbrances.
presents. And that the said capital message and Tenement, and all other the
premises with their appurtenances now are, and for ever here after shall be
and continue clear, and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise at all
times saved harmless by the said Sir T. his heirs Executors or administrators,
of and from all and singular former Bargains Sales Grants Estates Bonds
Statutes intrusions Dowers Title of Dower Joyntures Rents A^rearages of Rents,
and other Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or grown, or to
be had, made done or grown by or from the said Sir T. G. or by any other person
or persons, under his title or by his means or procurement, and of and from the
Jointure and title of dower of E. the wife of the said I G. and that he the
said N B. his heirs and assigns, shall and may peaceably and quietly from
henceforth for ever, have hold and occupy the said capital message and
Tenement, and all other the premises with the appurtenances, and take perceive
Receive and enjoy the Rents Issues and profits thereof, for the only use of the
said N. his heirs and assigns, from henceforth for ever, without any let
trouble eviction recovery or expulsion, of or by him the said Sir T G or
otherwise by any other person or persons by the means title or procurement of
him the said Sr. T. and also that the said Sr. T. and Dame A. and the said I G
To acknowledge a fine.
on this side and before the feast of all Saints now next coming, at the costs
and charges in the Law, only of the said N. B. his heirs or assigns shall and
will knowledge one fine or Sur cognizance de droit come ceos que il add ton
done etc. in due form of Law according to the usual course of fines unto the
said N. B. of the said capital message and Tenement, and all other the
premises, and the same by the said fine shall remise and quitt claim from them
and their heirs to the said N. and his heirs for ever, with warranty against
themselves and the heirs of the said Sr. T for ever, which fine so had and
knowledged, shall be to the use of the said N. B. and his heirs and assigns for
ever.

And moreover the said Sr T G covenanteth, etc. that he the said Sr. T. and his
heirs, and the said Dame A. his wife at all times during seven years, next
after the date of these presents, at the reasonable Request and costs and
charges in the Law, only of the said N. his heirs or assigns shall and will do
make knowledge and suffer, and cause to be done made knowledged and suffered,
all and singular act and acts thing and things, in the Law with warranty only
against him and his heirs which by the said N* his heirs or assigns, or his or
their learned council in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised or advised for the further and better assurance and sure
making To make further assurance.
of all and singular the premises to be had and made sure to the said N his
heirs and assigns, for his and their own use absolutely without any condition
whatsoever, In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Manor or Farm, with transferring of the benefit of
the Covenants made to the Vendor in his Purchase, and of a Recognizance for
performance of the same Covenants.
THis Indenture etc. between etc. witnesses, That the said W. Marquess of W.
for and in consideration of the Sum of 700 l. of etc. to him the said W.
Marquess of W. by the said W. D: already paid, whereof the said Marquess
acknowledges himself satisfied, and thereof discharges the said W. D. has
granted, bargained, and sold, and by these presents does fully and clearly
grant, bargain, and sell unto the said Grant.
W. D. and C. all that the Manor, Capital Message, or Farm called W. in the
County of M. with all his Rights, Members, and Appurtenances, and all the
Messuages, Tofts, Cottages, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows etc:

All which Manors or Farm, and other the premises, T. E. of C. in the County
of B. Esquire, by his Indenture dated etc. made between him the said T. on the
one party, and the said Marquess on the other party, bargained and sold unto
the said Marquess and his Heirs. All Evidences, Deeds, Charters, Escripts,
Mynuments, and Writings which do concern only the premises, or only any part
thereof: And the true Copies of all others which the said Marquess has
concerning the Premises, and other Tenements and Hereditaments, to be written
out at the costs and charges of the said W. D. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, as many of the same Deeds, Escripts, and Writings, as now be in
the hands, possession, and custody of the said Marquess, or of any other person
or persons to his use, by his delivery, and that he without Suit in Law may
lawfully come by. The said Marquess for him his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, does covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said
W. D. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, to deliver or cause to be
delivered to the said W. D: his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, on
this side or before the Feast of Pentecost next coming, after the date hereof:
To have and to hold the Habend.
said Manor, Capital Message, or Farm, and all other the Premises, with
their Appurtenances, unto the said W. D. and C. and to the Heirs and Assigns of
the said VV. D. and to the only and proper use and behoof of the said W. D. and
C. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said W. D. for ever.

And the said W. Marquess of W. for him, his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, does covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said
W. D. his Heirs Executors, and Administrators, that he the said Marquess at the
time of the delivery of these presents, is sole, just, and rightful Owner in
Fee-simple, without condition of all and singular the Premises: And that he
has full power and lawful authority, to give, grant, bargain, and sell the
Premises, and every parcel thereof unto the said W. D. and C. and to the Heirs
and Assigns of the said W. D. in manner and form aforesaid.

And that he the said Marquess, his Heirs Executors or Administrators, For
discharging of Encumbrances, and quiet enjoyment.
shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time acquit,
discharge, or save harmless, as well the said Manor, Capital Message, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the Premises whatsoever, with all and
singular their Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, as also the
said W. D. and C. and the Heirs, Executors, and Administrators of the said W.
D. of and from all manner of former Bargains, Sales, Promises, Joyntures,
Dowers, Estates, Tail, Legacies, Conditions, Rights, Rent Seck, Rent charge,
Recognizances, Statutes Merchant, Statutes of the Staple, Forfeitures,
Intrusions, and all other Titles, Charges, and Encumbrances whatsoever, had,
knowledged, done, caused, or made by the said Marquess, or by his assent,
consent, or procurement* at any time or times, the Rents and Services thereof
from hence forth to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the
Premises, only except and fore prised.

And that he the said VV. D. and C. and the Heirs of the said VV. shall For
further assurance.
and may peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the Premises and
every parcel thereof, without any lawful Suit, Eviction, devesting, or
disturbance of the said Marquess, or of any his Heirs, or of any other,
claiming by, from, or under him.

And that he the said Marquess and his Heirs, shall and will do and suffer to
be done at all times hereafter, within the space of three years next ensuing,
at the costs and charges in the Law of the said W. D. and C. or one of them, or
of the Heirs Executors or Administrators of the said VV. D. all and every act
and acts, thing and things, as shall be reasonably devised or Advised by the
said VV. D. and C. and either of them, or of the Heirs Executors or
Administrators of the said VV: D: or their learned Council in the Law of any
of them, for the further assurance and sure making of the Premises and every
parcel thereof, unto the said VV: D: and C: and to the Heirs and Assigns of the
said VV: be it by fine or feoffment, recovery, inrollment of these presents, or
otherwise with warranty only against the said Lord Marquess and his Heirs, so
as the said Marquess and his Heirs shall not be driven and compelled, for
making of any such assurance to travel out of his or their house or houses.
And further the said Marquess covenanteth etc. That he the said For suing upon
breach of Covenants made to the Grantor.
VV: D: his Executors and Administrators, shall and may at all times hereafter,
at his and their costs and charges, for and in the name of the said Marquess,
his Executors or Administrators, attempt, commence, prosecute, and sue all and
all manner of lawful Actions and Suits whatsoever, against the said T: E: his
Heirs Executors or Administrators, for or by reason of any Covenant, Article,
or Agreement, specified or contained in the said Indenture, bearing date the
said etc: which ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled, and kept, on the
part and behalf of the said T: his Heirs Executors or Administrators, and which
heretofore has been, or hereafter shall be broken or not observed or performed
by the said T. his Heirs Executors or Administrators. And also one Writ or
diverse Writs of Scire facias, and all other Actions and Suits whatsoever, which
may or shall be lawfully attempted, commenced, prosecuted, or sued against the
said T. E. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns* or their Goods and
Chattels, Lands and Tenements, for or by reason of any Recognizances, bearing
date the etc. knowledged by the said T. E. before our said Sovereign Lord the
King, in his High Court of Chancery, wherein the said T. stands bound to the
said Marquess in the Sum of 2000 l, of etc. which Recognizance was made for the
performance of the Covenants specified and contained in the said Indenture,
which on the part and behalf of the said T. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, ought to be observed or kept.

And that he the said Marquess, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, To
justify actions etc.
shall and will at all times, avow, justify, and maintain all such lawful
Actions, Suits, and Executions. And that he heretofore has not done, caused,
or suffered to be done, any thing, whereby the said Covenants and Agreements
contained in the said former Indenture, or any of them, or the said
Recognizance, or the said Sum of 2000 l. contained in the same, were or shall
be released, defeated, extinguished hindered, or determined. And that he the
said Marquess, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall not willingly and
wittingly be nonsuit in any of the said Actions or Suits, or discontinue the
same, or other thing do, cause, or suffer to be done, for or touching the
abatement, bar, hurt, hinderance, or impairing of the said Actions, Suits, or
Executions, without the assent of the said W. D, his Executors or
Administrators thereunto first had and obtained. And that he the said Marquess,
his Heirs Executors and Administrators shall and will at all times hereafter
permit and suffer the said W. D. his Executors and Administrators, to levy,
perceive, take, have, and enjoy to his and their own use and uses, the Sums of
money, costs, damages and benefit whatsoever, by such Actions, Suits, and
Executions, or any of them, as shall or may be recovered, had, obtained, or
gotten: And shall do all such acts and things, for the assurance of the same to
the said W. D. his Executors or Administrators, as by him, his Executors or
Administrators, or his or their learned Council in the Law shall be reasonably
devised, or advised and required so to be done: In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale by a man and his wife, of a house in London, with Covenants
to transferr the benefit of Bonds, and Covenants made to the Vendor at his
Purchase.
THis Indenture made etc. between G. M. and A. his wife, T. M. Son and Heir
apparent of the said G. And R. M. second Son of the said G. on the one party,
and R. C. on the other party, witnesses, That the said G. and A. his wife T.
M. and R. M. for and in consideration of the Sum of etc. to the said G: well
and truly paid by the said R: C: before the ensealing of these presents, whereof
and wherewith the said G: and A: T. M. and R. M: do acknowledge themselves
satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof and of every part thereof, do acquit
and discharge the said R. C. his Heirs Executors and Administrators by these
presents, has given, granted, bargained, and sold, and by these presents Grant.
does give, grant, bargain. and sell to the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, all that Capital Message, or Tenement, with the appurtenances. And
also all and singular Shops called Cellars, Sollers, Warehouses, Yards, Rooms,
Commodities, Easements, and Hereditaments, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging, or in any wise appurtaining. And the Reversion and Reversions of all
and singular the Premises; which said Message and Tenement, and other the
Premises with the Appurtenances, our late Sovereign Lord Edward the 6th: late
King of England, by his Letters Pattents, dated at L: the 00. day of N. in the
second year of his late Reign, amongst other things, did give and grant to W.
G. and to their Heirs for ever: And the said VV. G. and VV. H. the same also
amongst other things by their Deed etc. in the said second year of the said
late Reign of the said late King Edward the 6th. did give and grant to T. B.
etc. and his Heirs for ever. And since as well the said T. B. as also one I.
N. etc. have severally conveyed and assured the Message or Tenement, and all
other the Premises to the said G. VV: and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever:
As by their several conveyances thereof made to the said G. and his Heirs, will
plainly appear.

And all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Reversion, and Demand whatsoever,
which the said G. A. T. and R. VV: have, or any of them has, shall, or may
have, of, in, or to the said Message or Tenement, and other the Premises,
with their Appurtenances, or of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof: And all
and singular Deeds, Charters, Evidences, and Writings concerning the same
Message or Tenement, and other the Premises, or any part thereof: To have,
hold, and enjoy all Habend.
and singular the said Message and Tenement, with the appurtenances, and all
and every other the Premises with their appurtenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions thereof to the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to and for
the only use and behoof of the said R. C: and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said G: W. T. W. and R. W: for themselves and every of Seized etc.
them, and for their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do
covenant and grant, to and with the said R: C. his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these in form etc. That is to
say, That he the said G. W: and A. now his wife, are and do stand lawfully
seized of the said Message, and all other the Premises, that is to wit, the
said G. in his Demesne as of Fee, and the said A. in her Demesne as of
freehold, for term of her life: And that he Power to sell.
the said G: and A: his wife, and T. W. and R. W. or some of them, now be the
very true and only lawful and rightful Owners of the said Message and
Tenement, and all other the premises, with their appurtenances: And have good
right and lawful power and authority, to give, grant, bargain, sell, and assure
by these presents, the same and every part Discharge of Encumbrances.
thereof to the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And also that the
said Message and all other the Premises, with their appurtenances, and the
Reversion and Reversions thereof, now are and hereafter shall be and continue to
the said R. C. his Heirs aad Assigns, clearly discharged and acquitted, or by
the said G. T. and R. their Heirs Executors or Administrators, from time to
time and at all times, sufficiently keep harmless, of and from all and singular
former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Titles, Estates, and Encumbrances, had,
made, knowledged, done, caused, or procured by the said G. T. and R. or any of
them, or any other lawfully claiming by or from them or any of them, the chief
Rents and Services thereof, from henceforth to grow due to the chief Lords of
the Fee, in respect of their Seigniory, only except and fore-prised.

And further the said G. T. and R. do covenant etc. that he the said R. C. his
heirs and assigns, shall and may peaceably and quietly from henceforth for
ever, hold, possess, and enjoy the said Message and T^nement, and all other
the Premises, with their appurtenances, to and for the only use and behoof of
the said R. C. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any let,
interruption, molestation, resistance or eviction of the said G. T. and R. or
any of them, or the Heirs of any of them, or of any other person or persons,
which have or shall have, or lawfully shall claim to have any Estate, Right,
Title, or Interest, of, in, or to the said Message and Tenement, and other the
Premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under the Estate, Title, or
Interest of the said G. T. and R. or by, from, or under the Estate, Title, or
Interest of any of them. And moreover that the said G. and A. now his wife, and
For further assurance.
the said T. and R. W. and their Heirs, and all and every other person and
persons now having, or which hereafter shall have, or lawfully claim to have
any former Estate, Right, Title, or Interest, of, in, or to the said Message
and Tenement, with the appurtenances, or any other the Premises, or any part
thereof, by, from, or under the Estate of the said G. upon every reasonable
request, from time to time and all times, during three years next ensuing, from
the day of the date of these presents, at the costs and charges of the Law only
of the said R. C. shall and will do, make, knowledge suffer, and execute all
and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, with
warranty only against themselves and their Heirs, and all other, claiming by or
from them or any of them, which the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or
their learned Council, shall reasonably and lawfully devise or advise and
require, for the further and better conveyance, surety, assurance and sure
making of the said Message and Tenement, and all other the Premises with
their appurtenances, to be had, conveyed, and made sure to the said R. C. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, absolutely in Fee-simple, for the only use of the
said R. C. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said G. T. covenanteth etc. That he the said R. C. his Heirs
Executors, and Administrators, at their own costs and charges, shall and may
lawfully have, use, and prosecute in the name and names of the said G. and of
his Executors and Administrators, all and singular Suits, Actions, Remedies,
and Recoveries against the said T. B. and I. M. their Heirs Executors, and
Administrators, and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of every of them,
from time to time and at all times, which can or may be taken, commenced, or
prosecuted upon any Covenant or Bond made to the said G W. by the said T. B.
and one I. B. and by the said I. N. or by any or either of them, in any wise
touching or concerning any other Bargain or conveyance of the Premises, or any
part thereof.

And further that the said G. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will
allow, avow, and justify, all and every Action and Actions, Suits, Plaints,
and Recoveries whatsoever, upon any the said Covenants, Bargains, Conveyances,
or Bonds aforesaid, or any of them, which by the said R. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, at their own proper costs and charges, in the name or names of
the said G. or his Executors or Administrators, shall be had, sued, commenced,
or prosecuted. And also that he the said G. heretofore has not, nor he the
same G. his Executors or Administrators, or any of them, without the special
request and consent of the said R. C. his Heirs Executors or Administrators,
shall not, or at any time hereafter discharge any of the said Bonds, Covenants,
Bargains, Grants, or Conveyances, nor shall release, discharge, withdraw,
deliver, hinder any Action, Suit Recovery, or Execution whatsoever, to be
commenced, sued, or had upon any of the said Covenants, Bonds, Bargains,
Grants, or Conveyances, neither shall wilfully commit, do, or knowledge any act
or acts, thing or things whatsoever, which might hinder, prejudice, or abate
any of the said Actions, Suits, Recoveries, or Executions in any wise, without
such special consent and request as aforesaid.

And moreover that he the said R. C. his Heirs Executors and Administrators,
shall or lawfully may have, take, and enjoy, to the only use and profit of the
said R. and of his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, all the benefits,
advantages, and commodities of all and every the said Actions and Suits, and of
the Executions thereof, without any let, impediment, denial, or resistance of
the said G. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, and without any account
therefore, or for any part thereof to the said G. his Executors or
Administrators, to be made or given: In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale by a Company, of Land in London, where the Grantee charge
back the Land, with an Annuity to the Company for ever.
THis Indenture etc. between the Wardens or Keepers, and Fellowship of the
Mystery of B. of the City of L. on the one party, and A. R. etc: of B. on the
other party, witnesses, That the said Wardens etc. have given, granted,
bargained, and fold, and by these presents do etc. to the said A. R. and his
Heirs for ever, all that their Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances,
situate, lying, and being in the the Parish of etc. in L. aforesaid, now or
lately being in the Tenure or Occupation of the said A. R. and now commonly
called and known by the name and sign of the S. And also all and singular
Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Buildings, Yards, Lights, Rooms, Ways, void
Grounds, Commodities, Easements, and Hereditaments, whatsoever they be, with
all and singular their Appurtenances, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging or appurtaining, or as any part or parcel of the same, now or
lately, or at any time heretofore demised, letten to Farm, had, used, or
occupied with the same. And the Reversion and Reversions of the said Message
or Tenement, and of all other the Premises, with all and singular their
Appurtenances, and all the Right, Title, Interest, and Estate whatsoever, which
the said Wardens or Keepers and Fellowship of the Mystery of B. of the City of
L. and their Successors, have, can, or may have, of, in, or to the said
Message or Tenement, and all other the Premises with their Appurtenances, and
every or any part or parcel thereof, by any way or means whatsoever. And all
and singular Deeds, Evidences, Charters, and Writings, which the said Wardens
or Keepers, or any of their said Fellowship, or any other, to their use, have,
or can, or may lawfully get or come by without Suit in the Law. To have, hold,
and enjoy all the said Message Habend.
and Tenement, and all and every other the Premises with their Appurtenances,
and the Reversion and Reversions thereof, and all the said Estate, Right, Title,
and Interest of the said Wardens or Keepers, and Fellowship of the Mystery of
the B. of the City of L. and of their Successors, of, in, and to the same, and
every or any part or parcel thereof to the said A. R. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the only use of etc.

And the said Wardens or Keepers and Fellowship of the Mystery of Covenant to
discharge of Encumbrances.
the B. of the City of L. for them and their Successors, do covenant and grant
to and with the said A. R. his Heirs Executors Admininistrators and Assigns,
and every of them by these presents, in form etc, That they the said Wardens or
Keepers and Fellowship of the said Mystery, and their Successors, shall and
will at all times, and from time to time hereafter, acquit, discharge, or
otherwise save and keep harmless, as well the said Message and Tenement, and
all other the Premises, with their appurtenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions thereof, as also the said A. R. his Heirs Executors Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, of and from all and singular former Grants,
Bargains, Sales, Leases, Annuities, Rents, Charges, arrerages of Rents, and
also of and from all former Estates, Uses, Interests, Charges, and
Encumbrances, had, made, given, granted, pretended, challenged, claimed,
demanded, or charged, or to be had, made etc. by the said Wardens or Keepers
and Fellowship aforesaid or their Successors, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, all Leases and Estates for term of years heretofore made of the
Premises to the said A. R. and his Assigns, and the chief Rent to be thereof
due and payable to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee, only except and
fore-prssed.

And further, that they the said Wardens etc. and their Successors, To make
further assurance.
at and upon every reasonable request to them the said Wardens for the time
being to be made by the said A. R. his Heirs and Assigns, and at the costs and
charges in the Law, only of the said A: R. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall
and will make, do knowledge and suffer and cause etc. all and every such further
assurance and assurances, and do all, and every such lawful act and acts, thing
and things in the law whatsoever, which during the term of seven years next
ensuing the date of these presents by the said A. R. his Heirs or Assigns, or
by his or their Council learned in the Laws of this Realm from time to time
shall be reasonably and lawfully devised or advised for the further or better
conveyance, assurance, surety and sure making of all the said Message and
Tenement, and all other the premises with their appurtenances, and of every
part and parcel thereof, and of the Reversion and Reversions thereof to be had,
conveyed and sure to the said A, R. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own
use for ever without any manner of condition with warranty duly of the said
Wardens or Keepers and Fellowship, only against them and their Successors. And
it is agreed between the said parties to these presents, that all Fines and
Recoveries and other Conveyances and Assurances whatsoever of the premises or
any part thereof to be had, made, knowledged or suffered by the said Wardens or
Keepers and Fellowship and their Successors to the said A. R. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall be to the only use and behoof of the same A. and of his Heirs
and Assigns for ever and to none other use or uses, intent and purpose
whatsoever.

And also whereas in the 19th. year of K. H. 8: S. H. made and declared his last
Will and Testament of the said Capital Message with the appurtenances, and of
the said Tenement thereunto belonging or appurtaining, and by the said Testament
after diverse limitations devised the said Message and Testament unto the said
Wardens, Keepers and Fellowship of the Mystery of B. by the name of the Wardens
and Fellowship of the Craft, of B. and brother of etc. in the City of L. upon
diverse and sundry conditions and to diverse intents and purposes, as by the said
last will and testament more plainly may appear. The said Wardens etc. do
Covenant etc. that they and their Successors shall clearly and freely acquit,
exonerate, discharge and save harmless the said capital Message with the
appurtenances, and the said Tenement thereunto adjoining for ever, of, and from
all manner of Conditions, Limitations, Uses and Intents, and of, and from all
manner of Scruples, Doubts, Ambiguities, Articles, Clauses, Sentences, Legacies
or Bequests, to, and with every thing and things contained, mentioned,
expressed, bequeathed or otherwise mentioned within the said Will and
Testament. And in consideration of the said Grant, Bargain, Sale, Covenants and
Agreements abovesaid made and granted by the said Wardens etc. and on their
party truly to be performed and fulfilled toward the said A. R. his Heirs and
Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid. The said A. R. before the date hereof,
has contented and paid to the said Wardens etc. the sum of forty Marks of etc.
whereof, and wherewith the said Wardens etc. knowledge themselves to be truly
satisfied and paid.

And further the said A. by these presents does Give and Grant to Grant of a
Rent. Habend.
the said Wardens etc. and their Successors for ever one yearly Rent of 12 l 6
s. 8 d. of etc. to be issuing and going out of the said Message and Tenement
with the appurtenances, and all, and every other the premises with their
appurtenances, to have, hold, perceive, receive and take the said annual rent
to the said etc. and their Successors for ever, yearly to be paid at the Feasts
of etc. or within etc. next after every of the same Feast days by even
portions; the first payment thereof to begin and to be made at the Feast etc. or
within etc. and if it shall A clause of distress.
happen the said annual Rent of etc: or any part thereof to be behind and
unpaid by the space of etc. after any of the Feast days wherein it ought to be
paid as aforesaid, that then and so often it shall and may be lawful to, and
for the said Wardens etc: into the said Message and Tenement, and all other
the premises with their appurtenances to enter and distrein; and all and every
the distress and distresses there to be found, lawfully and quietly to take,
bear, and carry away, and with them to hold, retain and keep until they or
their Assigns, or some of them shull be fully paid and satisfied, of, and for
the said Annuity and all arrerages thereof if any be. Provided always that the
said Wardens Proviso not to charge the person.
etc: shall not at any time charge the person or persons of the said A. R. his
Heirs and Assigns, to, or with the said yearly Rent of etc. This present Gift
or Grant notwithstanding, And the said A. R. Covenanteth etc: that he the said
A: his Heirs and Assigns at all times from henceforth plainly and uprightly
without any fraudulent or covenous practice or confederacy to be made with any
other person or persons according to his and their lawful Estate, Right and
Title, and as by course of the Laws of this Realm they may do, and by their
Council learned in the same Laws shall be advised to be done, shall and will
maintain and defend all claims, titles, challenges and demands whatsoever
which shall be hereafter made to the premises, or any part thereof, and that as
often as any such claim, title challenge or demand shall be so made to the
knowledge of the said A. his Heirs or Assigns, that then and so aften, he, or
they shall thereof give or leave notice and knowledge to the said Wardens etc. or
their Successors at their Common Hall situate in G. Lane in L. and upon
reasonable request shall suffer and agree that the Council learned in the said
Laws of the said Wardens etc: shall, and may have conference witb the Council
of the said A. and of his Heirs and Assigns, for, and concerning the defense of
all the said claims, challenges and demands, and shall, and will condescend
and agree to such pleading and defense therein to be made as upon such
conference between their Counselors by the same Counselors shall be resolved
to be most meet and convenient for the defense of such title and claim as shall
chance or fortune hereafter at any tlme or tlmes so to be made. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of the Moyetie of a Manor and of an Advowson.
THis Indenture, etc. between A. C. etc. T. H. etc. and A. H. of etc. on the
one party, and I. L. etc. on the other party witnesses, That whereas one N. S.
Son to E. of late of etc. Son and Heir of I. S. etc. by sufficient Conveyance
and Assurance in the Law, was lawfully seized of an estate of Inheritance of
and in all the Moiety and half Deal of, of the Manor of W. with the
appurtenances, and of the Moiety of ten Messuages, four Lofts, one Water-Mill,
ten Gardens, four hundred acres of Land, two hundred acres of Meadow, four
hundrd acres of Pasture, thirty acres of Wood, and 40 s: of yearly Rent and
appurtenances in W. and of the Moiety of the Advowson of the Church of W. and
of diverse other Lands and Tenements to the said Moiety of the said Manor of W.
belonging, and so being thereof seized and to the intent to convey the absolute
Fee-simple and Inherirance unto the said A. C. and his Heirs of the one Moiety
of the said Premises and Manors by his Deed Indented, dated etc. did bargain
and sell unto E. R. and J. H. Esquires, and to their heirs all that the said
Moiety and half deal of the said Manor of VV: with the appurtenances in the
said County of O. together with the Moiety and half deal of the Water-Mill in
VV. aforesaid and Moiety of the Advowson and right of Patronage of the Rectory
and Parish Church of VV. aforesaid, and all Lands, Tenements Medows, Feedings,
Pastures, Woods, Underwoods and Trees, and the soil and ground of the Commons,
Wast-grounds, Heaths, Rents, Reversions, Services, Liberties, Franchises,
Priveledges, Profits, Commodities and advantages whatsoever to the said Moiety
and half deal of the said Manors and other the premises belonging or
appurtaining, or part, parcel or member thereof being, and also all other his
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments with the appurtenances in VV.
aforesaid or elsewhere in the said County of O. and after leavied a Fine, and
suffered a Recovery thereof in form of Law, which Fine and Recovery, as is
expressed in the said Deed Indented were had, levied, and executed, to, and for
the use of the said A. C. and his Heirs, as by the same Deed appears. And
whereas afterward the said A. C. and I. his wife, VV. C. and M. his wife, B. P.
and E. his wife; which said M. C. and E. P. were the daughters and only next
heirs of I. S. which was the eldest Son of the said E. S. by their Deed
indented, bearing date the etc. did bargain and sell to the said A. H. and his
heirs all the said Moiety of the said Manors of VV. with the appurtenances and
two hundred acres of Land, fifty acres of Meadow, etc. and all and singular
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and every part and parcel thereof in the
Parishes aforesaid, late the Inheritance of the said E. S. and after that the
same A C. and I. VV. C. and M. B. P. and E. his wife did levy a fine of all the
said moiety of the said Premises to the use of the said A. H. and of his heirs
for ever, as further by the said Fine and former Conveyances and the
circumstances thereof does and may appear.

Now the said A* T. C H. and A. H. for a certain Sum etc. whereof etc. have
bargained and sold, and by these presents, do grant, alien bargain, sell,
release, and continue unto the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all
the said Moiety of the said Manor of W. etc. And also all other the Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances in W. aforesaid, or
elsewherin the said County of B. which late were of the said E: S. except 20.
acres of Land in T. of which the said A C. lately heretofore has bargained and
sold unto one A. B. and his Heirs, together with all Deeds, Charters,
Evidences, and Writings concerning the Premises, or any part thereof; To have
and to hold all the said Moiety of the said Manor of W. and all and every
other the Premises, with their appurtenances (except only before excepted) to
the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to and for the only use and
behoof of the same I. L. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said T. H. and A. H. for themselves etc. covenant etc. with the said
I. L. That the said Moiety of the said Manor, and all other the Premises with
their appurtenances (except before excepted) now be, and for ever hereafter
shall abide, continue, and be to the said Discharged of Encumbrances.
I: L: his Heirs and Assigns, clear and free discharged and acquitted, or
otherwise by the said T: and A: their Heirs Executors or Administrators saved
harmless, from time to time and at all times, of and from all and singular
former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Fees,
Annuities, Rents, arrerages of Rents, Estates, Titles, Charges, Demands and
Encumbrances whatsoever, before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
had, made, done, procured, or agreed unto by the said T. and A. or either of
them, the chief Rents and Services from henceforth to be due to the chief Lords
of the Fee, and all such bargains and conveyances, as the said A. heretofore
has made to the said A. C. and his Heirs only (except and fore-prised.)

Provided always that these Indentures or any Article or Covenant contained in
the same, shall not extend to charge the said T. and A. H. or either of them,
or the Heirs Executors or Administrators of either of them, otherwise or
further then only for such acts, encumbrances, and charges as are already done,
executed, or agreed upon by the said T: and A. or either of them, which shall
or may incumber, charge, or impeach the Premises or any part thereof, contrary
to the intent and true meaning of these presents.

And the said A C. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said Seized in Fee.
A: C: and the said T: H: and A: H: or some of them, at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, are or be the rightful, true, and perfect Owner or
Owners of the said Moiety of the said Manor of W. and other the said bargained
Premises with the appurtenances (except before excepted.) And that they or
some of them now are and do stand thereof and of every part thereof, now at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, lawfully seized in his or their
Demesne as of Fee, to the only use of him or themselves, and of his or their,
or some of their Heirs, without any condition or limitation of use or uses; And
that they or some of them, have or has good rightful power and lawful
authority to give, grant, bargain, sell, and assign the said Moiety of the said
Manor, and all other the Premises with their appurtenances (except before
excepted) to the said I: L: his Heirs and Assigns in manner and form aforesaid
ever. And that the said Moiety of the said Manor, and all other the said above
bargained Premises with their appurtenances (except before excepted) now be,
and for ever hereafter shall abide, continue and be unto the said I. L. his
Heirs and Assigns, freely and clearly discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by
the Discharged of Encumbrances.
said I: C: his Heirs or Executors saved harmless, from time to time and at all
times, of and from all and singular former Bargains etc. and Encumbrances
whatsoever heretofore had, made, done, or executed by the said A: C: A: H: E:
S: and N: S. or any of them, or any the Ancestors of the said E: or N. or by
any other person or persons, which had or have any former Estate in the
Premises or any part thereof, by or under the Estate of the said A: C: A: H: E:
S: and N: S: or any of them, or any the Ancestors of the said N: or E: (the
chief Rents etc. and one Lease made by word to one R. B. of etc. to endure for
the term of etc. now to come, by and under the payment of the yearly Rent of
etc. and one other Lease etc. to one R. L. etc. and such interest of Common and
other benefits, as the Lords and Tenants of the Manor of S. W. can lawfully
claim in a piece of Ground called R parcel of the above bargained Premises,
only except and fore-prised.)

And further that he the said A. C. and I. now his wife, and the said For
further assurance.
W. C. and M. his wife, and B: P. and E. his wife, and the said R. L. and M.
his wife (saving only to the said R. the Lease for years above excepted) and
all and every other person and persons, having or lawfully claiming to have any
former Estate, Right, Title, Demand, or Interest, of, in, out, or to the said
Moiety etc. and all other the above bargained Premises, or any part thereof,
by, or under the Estate of the said E. S. except the chief Lords aforesaid, and
the said Leasees, and their Assigns, and the said Lords and Tenants of the said
Manor of S. W: claiming only their several Right and Estate above excepted,
during the space of three years now next coming, from time to time and at all
times, upon reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law only of
the said I. L. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall and will do, knowledge and
suffer, and cause to be done etc. all and every such lawful and reasonable act
and acts, thing and thins, devise and devises in the Law, for the further and
better assurance, surety, and sure making of all the Moiety of the said Manor
of W. with the appurtenances, and of the other above bargained Premises, with
their appurtenances, to be had and made sure to the said I. L. his Heirs and
Assigns, to and for the only use etc. as by the said I. L. his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their learned Council (with warranty only against the said
A. C. and the other persons aforesaid, which shall happen to be parties to such
further assurance severally against themselves and their Heirs) shall be
reasonably advised or devised: In witness, etc.

A Sale by Executors of Land belonging to their Testator.
THis Indent: etc. between R. S. etc. I. P. etc. and A. etc. his wife, and T.
H. Executors of the last Will and Testament of E. C. late and. on the one
party, and I. H. etc. on the other party, witnesses, That they the said R. S.
I. P. A. his wife, and T. H. according to the tenor and true meaning of the
said last Will and Testament of the said E. C. which late was the wife of T. C.
etc. and by force and virtue of the same last Will and Testament, for and in
consideration of the sum of 170 l. of etc. to etc. whereof etc. have bargained,
sold, and granted, and by these presents do fully and clearly bargain, sell,
and grant unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, allt that
Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, set, lying, and being etc. And
also all and singular Shops, Sollers, Yards, Commodities, Easements, and
Appurtenances, to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise
appurtaining, or as part or parcel thereof, had used, reputed, or occupied: And
all and every the Deeds, Evidences, Writings, and Mynuments concerning only the
premises, or only any part or parcel thereof. All which said Deeds, Evidences
etc. aforesaid, together with the true Copies of all other Deeds, Evidences,
Wills, Writings, and Mynuments which do concern the said Tenement, or as many
of them, as they the said R. I. A. and T. or any of them, have or has, which
they or any of them may lawfully come by without Suit in the Law, the said R.
I. A. and for them their Heirs Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do
covenant and grant, and every of them covenanteth and grants to and with the
said I. H. etc. well and truly to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, at or before etc. next etc. To have, hold, and
enjoy Habend.
all the said Message or Tenement, and all other the Premises with their
appurtenances, unto the said I. H his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to and for
the only and proper use and behoof of the said I. H: his Heirs and Assigns for
ever.

And the said R. S. I. P. and T. H: for them and for the said A. P. and every
of them. and for the Heirs Executors and Administrators of every of them, do
covenant and grant, to and with the said I. H. his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, in manner and
form following: That is to say, That they the said R. I. A. and T. or the Heirs
of the Survivor or Survivors of them, at or before the 20: day of February next
etc. at the costs and charges of the said I. and of his Heirs or Assigns, shall
make and execute, or cause etc. unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, a good sure, sufficient, and lawful estate and assurance in the Law in
Fee-simple, of and in all the said Message, and all other the Premises with
their appurtenances, to the only use and behoof of the said I. H. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, without any manner of condition or l^mitatlon of use. And
that the said Message and Tenement, and all other the premises with their
appurtenances, now are, and be at the time of the making and executing of the
said Estate and assurance in form aforesaid to be made and executed, shall be
and from henceforth shall continue and abide to the said H. I. his Heirs or
Assigns, To discharge of Encumbrances.
clear and clearly acquitted and discharged, or at all times from time to time,
sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all and every former Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Statutes, Recognizances, Annuities, Fees, Joyntures, Dowers,
Fines for Alienations, Intrusions, and of and from all and every other Charges,
Titles, Troubles, and Encumbrances whatsoever they be had, made, committed,
done, or agreed unto by the said R. S. I. A. and T. or any of them.

And moreover that they the said R. I. A. and T. or the Heirs of the Survivor
or Survivors of them, and also all and every other person and persons, any
thing lawfully having or claiming, or which at any time or times hereafter
shall or may lawfully have or claim any thing, of, in, or to the said Message,
and other the Premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under the said R. S.
I. P. and A. his wife, and T. H. or any of them, at all times hereafter, and
from time to time, during the space of 3. years next etc. upon the lawful
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said I. H. his Heirs or
Assigns, shall To make further assurance.
and will further do, cause, knowledge, and suffer to be made, done, and
knowledged, all and every such further lawful act and acts, devise and
devises, thing and things of assurance whatsoever, with warranty only against
the said R. I. A. and T. and their Heirs; As by the said I H. his etc. shall be
reasonably devised or advised for the further or better assurance, sure making,
and conveying of the said Message, and of all other the above bargained
Premises, to be had and made to the said J. H. etc. to the only use etc.

Provided always that the said R. J. A. and T. or any of them, or the Heirs or
Assigns of them, or of any of them, shall not be compelled to travel in and
about the making and executing of the said Assurances, or any of them, any
further then the Cities of L. or W. and the Suburbs of the same. In Witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of an Assignee of a Patentee of Concealed Land.
THis Indenture etc. between A. K. of L. Esquire, and F. K. of L. Gentleman, on
the one party, and C. R. of T. in the County of C: Gentleman, on the other
party, witnesses, That the said A. K: and F: K: for and in consideration of a
certain sum of etc. whereof and wherewith etc. and thereof and therefore etc. have
granted, aliened, bargained, and sold, and by these presents etc. unto the said
C: V: and his Heirs for ever, all that their House or Site of the late
Monastery of T. and all Houses, Edefices, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses,
Orchards, Gardens, Lands and Soil, as well within the said Site and Precinct
of the same late Monastery, as near and next to the same late Monastery: And
all and all manner of Demesne Lands there to the same late Monastery, sometime
belonging and appurtaining, or within the same before that used or occupied,
now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of Sir H. I. Knight, or of his Assigns:
And the Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the Premises; And all and
all manner of Woods Under-woods and Trees, in and upon the Premises, and the
Ground and Soil of the same Woods, Under-woods, and Trees: And all and singular
Rents, Revenews, and yearly Profits whatsoever, reserved upon any Lease or
Leases made of the Premises, or of any part thereof, Together with such Views
of Frank-pledg, Courts, Leets, Law-daies. Cattailes wayed and stryafed, free
Warrens, Knights Fees, and with all and all manner those and such Liberties,
Franchises, Privileges, Jurisdictions, Profits, Commodities, and Emoluments
whatsoever, as any Abbot or Prior of the said late Monastery of T. or any other
person or persons, having or possessing the premises, or any part thereof, or
of any part or parcel thereof seized, ever had held and enjoyed, or ought to
have had, holden, or enjoyed the said Site and other the Premises, or any
part thereof, by reason of any Charter of Gift, Grant, or Confirmation, or of
any Letters Patents by our said Sovereign Lady the Queen which now is, or any
of her Progenitors Kings of England, by any manner of means made, granted, or
confirmed, or by reason of any prescription, use, or custom before this time
had or used or otherwise by any manner of means Right or Title, so fully,
wholly, and amply as Sir R. H. Knight Citizen and Alderman of London, and A. G.
Citizen and Alderman of London, and T. A. Citizen and Haberdasher of L. the
said Site and Demesne Lands, and other the Premises, amongst other things
late had to them and their Heirs, of the Gift and Grant of our said Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth, by virtue of her Letters Patents thereof to them made,
under the great Seal of England, and bearing date at G. the etc. in the 12.
year of her Reign: And in as large and ample manner, as the said A. and F. the
said Site and other the Premises, amongst other things had to them and their
Heirs, of the Bargain, Sale, Grant, and Feoffment of the said Sir. R. H. A. G.
and T. A. by virtue of their Deed thereof made to the said A. and F: bearing
date etc. except and always reserved Except etc.
to the said A. and F. their Heirs and Assigns, the Granges of A. and B. with
their appurtenances, and all and singular Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, to
the same two Granges, or either of them belonging or in any wise appurtaining:
To have and to hold the said Habend.
house etc: except before excepted, to the said etc. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the only use of etc. to be holden of our said Soverain Lady Tenend.
the Queen her Heirs and Successors, as of the Manor of E. within the County
of K. by Fealty only in free Socage, and not in chief, for all Rents, Services,
and Demands whatsoever for the Premises or any part thereof, to our said
Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Heirs or Successors, in any wise to be yielded,
paid, or done.

And the said A: and F. for them their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and
every of them do covenant etc. in manner etc. That is to say, That the said
Site and Demesne Lands etc. and all other the Premises above specified, to be
bargained and sold by these presents, except before excepted, now are, and
stand, and from henceforth for ever shall continue, stand, and be to the said
C. his Heirs and Assigns, free and clearly discharged and acquitted, or at all
times etc. So follows the Encumbrances. And also that the said C. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, shall or may peaceably and quietly, have, hold, and occupy
all and singular the said Site and Demesne Lands etc. except before excepted.
And shall or may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have, take,
gather, perceive, receive, and enjoy, all and singular the Rents, Issues, and
Profits thereof, to and for the only use, commodities, and behoof of the said
C. his Heirs and Assigns, without any let etc. of the Grantors or either of
them, or of any other person or persons, by the means, title, or procurement of
the said A. and F. or either of them, or of their Heirs or Assigns, or the
Heirs or Assigns of either of them: In witness etc.

This Deed to be knowledged and enrolled, and then a release to the possession
of the said C. U. from Sir R. H. A. G. and T. A. and W. B. with warranty
against them and their Heirs.

A Bargain and Sal of a Remainder to three persons each to have a third part,
with Covenants that the Heirs of the Vendors (who may have interest) shall not
go about to reverse or annul any Fine or Recovery passed by the Vendors for
Assurance of the Land.
THis Indenture etc. Between R. C. of L. in the County of N. Gent. and I. L. of
London, and one of the daughters of Sir T. L. late Alderman of the City of L.
deceased, and of Dame A. his wife on the one party, and A. C. wife of T. C. of
etc. Esquire, K. B. wife of E. B. and W. B. daughter of G. B. daughters of the
said Sir T. L. and Dame A. his wife on the other party witnesses, That whereas
the said Sir T. L. in his life time, for diverse good and sufficient
considerations did by his sufficient Writing under his Hand and Seal, Convey
and Assure, or cause to be Conveyed and Assured to the uses hereafter in these
presents mentioned and expressed all that the Capital Message, with the
appurtenances situate in, or near I. etc. late in the Tenure, etc. all
house-buildings, etc. to the said Message belonging, that is to say, to the
use of him the said Sir T. L. for term of his life without impeachment of Wast,
and after his decease the remainder of all and singular the Premises with
their appurtenances, to the use of the said Dame A. for term of her life, and
after her decease the remainder of all and singular the premises with their
appurtenances to the use of the said I. L. and of the heirs of the body of the
said I. lawfully begotten or to be gotten (and so limiting the uses to the said
other three sisters) as the same conveyance more at large may appear; and after
the said Sir T. died, by, and after whose death the said Dame R. entered into
the Premises, and was, and yet is of the same lawfully possessed and seized in
her Demesne as of Freehold for term of her life by virtue of the said
Conveyance and Assurance, and of the Statute of Uses in that behalf made and
provided, the remainder thereof to the said I. L. and to the heirs of her body
lawfully belonging with Remainders over in manner and form aforesaid.

And whereas the said R. C. shall by the grace of God marry, and take to his
wife the said I. L. Now the said R. and I. for, and in consideration of the sum
of 500 l. to them paid etc. whereof etc. have Granted, Bargained, Sold, Released
and Confirmed, and by these presents do Grant etc. unto the said A. C. K. B,
and W. B. all the said Capital Messuages etc. and the said remainder and
Inheritance of the said I. of and in the Premises, and every parcel thereof,
and her right, title, use, possession, estate, reversion and remainder, of, in
and to the said Premises, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with
their appurtenances; and all their, or either of them, or the heirs of the body
of the said I. might, or lawfully ought to have, of, in, and to the said
Premises, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, together with all their,
and either of their Deeds etc. to have and to hold the third part of the said
Capital Message etc. and also of the said Deeds, Evidences Several Habends.
and Writings to the said A, C. her Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only
proper use and behoof of the said A. C. and of her Heirs and Assigns for ever,
and to have and to hold one other third part of the said etc. to the said H. B.
her Heirs and Assigns for ever etc. and to have etc. the other third part and
residue of the said and c. to the said W. B. her Heirs and Assigns etc. A
Covenant by the said R. C. and I. L. for discharge of encumbrances to the said
A. K. and W. A Covenant by the said R. C. and I. L. and the heirs of her body
for further assurance.

And further the said R. and J. Covenant etc. That they the said A. K. and W.
their several heirs and assigns aforesaid, shall* or may from the death of the
said Dame A. peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the
said Message without any lawful etc. of the said R. and I. or either of them
or of any other person or persons lawfully claiming, or which hereafter shall
lawfully claim, in, from* by, or under the said R. and J. or either of them, or
by their, or either of their means. assent, or procurement. And further the
said R. and J. Covenanteth, etc. That they the said R. and I: or either of
them, or any the Heirs of the bodies of them, or of any of them shall not at
any time hereafter, reverse, annul or make void, or go about to reverse, annul
or make void any fine or fines, recovery or recoveries, knowledge, levied or
had, or to be knowledged etc. by the said R. and I. or either of them to the
said A. K. and W. or any of them or the heirs of them, or of any of them, or to
any other such person or persons as they or any of them their heirs shall
thereunto name or appoint. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of the Reversion and Remainder of the fourth part of a
Parsonage.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R: T: of R. in the County of N: Esquire. on the one
party, and VV: C: of etc. on etc. witnesses, That the said R: T: for, and in
consideration of the sum of 170 l. whereof etc. Has bargained and sold, and by
these presents does freely and clerly bargain and sell unto the said VV: C: and
his heirs the Remainder and Reversion of the fourth part of the Parsonage and
Rectory of M: in the County of E: to take effect in possession unto the said
VV, C: and his Heirs, immediately by, and from the death of M. late wife of G:
B: Gent. deceased, son of Sir H: B: Knight deceased, and also for the
consideration aforesaid, has bargained and sold unto the said VV: C: and his
heirs by these presents all that the Remainder and Reversion of the fourth part
of all and singular the Glebe Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Annuities, Pencions,
Portions and Hereditaments whatsoever being part, parcel or member of the said
fourth part of the Rectory aforesaid, which is to the said fourth part of the
said Parsonage and Rectory belonging or appurtaining in any wise, renewing,
coming or growing, or to be demanded, or had by reason of the fourth part of
the said Parsonage or Rectory to take effect in Possession unto the said VV: C:
his Heirs and Assigns immediately by and from the death of the said M: B: which
Remainder and Reversion of* and in the said Parsonage and Rectory and other the
said Premises descended and came, and of right ought to descend and come unto
K: T: deceased as one of the daughters and heirs of the said Sir Sir H: B.
Knight deceased and mother unto the said R: T: and her heirs, and by and after
the death of unto the said K. the said R. T. and his heirs as son and heirs of
the said K. And also for the consideration aforesaid has bargained and sold
unto the said W. C: and his heirs all that the Remainder and Reversion of the
fourth part of the Advowson, Nomination, Presentation and Gift of the Vicarage
of M. aforesaid, which descended and came unto the said K. Mother of the said
R. T: as one of the daughters and heirs of the said S: H: together with all
Deeds, Evidences and Writings which the said R: has concerning the Premises,
to have and to hold all the said Remainder and Reversion of the said fourth
part of the said Parsonage and Rectory, Glebe-Land, Tenements, Titles Annuities
Pentions, Portions and Hereditaments whatsoever as part, parcel or member
belonging or appurtaining, renewing, coming or growing or in any wise to be
demanded or had by reason of the said fourth part of the said Parsonage and
Rectory. And also the said Remainder and Reversion of the fourth part of the
said Advowson, Nomination, Presentation and Gift of the said Vicarage of M.
unto the said W. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said
W. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. A Covenant that the said R. T. stands
lawfully seized of the Premises, And that it shall be lawful for the said W.
C: to possess the same. A discharge of Encumbrances, a Covenant for further
assurance during two years, after the death of the said M: late wife of the
said G: B.

And the said R: T: further does covenant etc. That if at any time hereafter it
shall happen the other three parts of the said Rectory, Parsonage, Vicarage, or
Premises, or any part of the said three parts to descend, remain, accrue, or
come to the said R: or his Heirs, as Heir of the said Sir H. B: or any of his
Heirs: That then the said R: or his Heirs, so having the other three parts, or
any part of the said three parts, or that lawfully may have the same, upon
reasonable request thereof made by the said W: C: his Heirs or Assigns, at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said W: C: his Heirs or Assigns, convey and
assure to the said W. his Heirs and Assigns, the said other three parts, and
every part of the said three parts, which shall or ought to descend, remain,
and accrue to the said R: T: or his Heirs as aforesaid, the said last rented
assurance to be made, with warranty only, as is before recited in the said
conveyance of the said fourth part. In witness whereof the said parties to these
present Indentures interchangably have set their Seals, given the day and year
first above written.

An Indenture where one having had a Lease Morgaged unto him and forfeited, he
now conveyeth the same back to the first Vendor, conditionally he pay a Sum of
money by a day; Note good Covenants in this Indenture.
THis Indenture etc. between J. J. Citizen and Founder of L. on the one party,
and I. D. of E. in the County of K. Gentleman, on the other party, witnesses,
That where Sir H. C. of C. in the County of W. Knight, by his Indenture of
Lease, dated etc. did demise to the said I. D. and his Assigns, for the term of
16 years, commencing at the Feast etc. then last past, for the yearly Rent of
16 l. of lawful etc. during the said term to be paid to the said Sir H. his
Heirs and Assigns, all that the Site of the Mansion place or dwelling house of
his Manor of R. alias R. in the County of E. Together with all Courts etc. and
all Demesne Lands etc. to the said Site etc. belonging, or in any wise
appurtaining, or at any time therefore had excepted etc. except as in the said
Indenture is excepted. And where the said J. D. did heretofore make sale, and
bargain to the said J. J. of all the said Lease, Estate, and Interest of the
said J. D. of and in the Premises, for the assurance of payment of a certain
Sum of money by the said J. D. to have been paid to the said J. J. at a certain
day now past: In the payment of which said Sum, the said J. D. has clearly
made default, and yet hitherto has not paid the same, or any part thereof to
the said J. J: or to any other for his use: By reason whereof the said J: D.
has clearly forfeited all his said Lease, Estate, Interest, and term of years,
which be yet to come in the Premises unto the said J: J* as by a former pair
of Indentures thereof made heretofore between the said J: D: on the one party,
and the said J: J. on the other party, bearing date etc. more at large and
plainly will appear. By reason whereof the said J: J: now is lawfully possessed
of the said Lease and other the Premises, as of his own proper goods. Yet
nevertheles at the earnest desire and request of the said I: D: and upon and
under the condition, that the said I: D: his Executors or Administrators, do
pay or cause etc. to the said I: I: his certain Attorney, Executors or
Administrators, the Sum of etc. of lawful etc. on the 12. day of D. next etc.
at etc, between the hours etc. of the said 12. day of D: next ensuing as
aforesaid: The said I: I: has granted, bargained, and sold, and by these
presents so far as in him is, does grant, bargain, sell, assign, and set over
to the said I: D: for the only use of the said I: D: and of his Executors and
Assigns all the Lease, Interest, and term of years now to come, of and in the
said Site etc. and all other the Premises above recited, in so large and
ample manner as the said I: I: had the same of the Grant, Bargain, Sale and
Assignment of the said I: D: by the said former Indenture above recited in
these presents.

Provided always that if the said I: D: his Executors and Administrators do
make default, and do not pay, or cause etc. the said sum of etc: and every part
thereof to the said I: I: his certain Attorney Executors or Administrators, in
manner and form as is above limited in and by these presents. That then and
from thenceforth these presents, and every thing in them contained or
mentioned, for the benefit or behoof of the said I: D: his Executors or
Administrators, shall be as clearly and utterly frustrate and annihillated to
all intents and purposes, as though the same had never been had nor made; Any
thing in these presents written or specified, to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

And the said I: I: covenanteth etc. That the said I: D: and his Assigns, by
and under the payment of the yearly Rent reserved of the Premises in the
Original Lease first above recited in these presents, and under the
performance and fulfilling of the Covenants and Articles therein contained, to
be payable and due to be done from henceforth, until the 12. day etc. next
etc. shall or may without let or interruption of the said I. I. his Executors
or Assigns, hold and occupy the said Site etc. and other Premises with their
appurtenances, until the said 12. etc. And the said I: D: covenanteth etc. in
manner etc. That he the said J: his Executors or Assigns, shall and will from
time to time, until the said 12. etc. yield and pay to the said Sir H. his
Heirs and Assigns, or to his or their Bailiffs or Receivers, for the time
being, all and every payment of the yearly Rent aforesaid, for the Premises by
the said Original Lease, within the space of 10. days, next after any such
payment shall be due. And for every such several payment shall take and
receive of the said Sir H: his Bailiff or Receiver for the time being, one
several acquittance, and every such acquittance shall and will deliver, or
cause etc. to the said I: I: at etc. within the space of 20. days severally,
next after the time wherein any of the said payments of the said yearly Rent,
shall be first payable by the true meaning of the said former original
Indenture of Lease.

And also that the said J. D: his Executors or Assigns, before the said 12.
etc. next etc. shall not do, procure, or suffer to be done, any act or thing in
and upon the Premises, or any part thereof, whereby the Estate, Right, or
Interest thereof granted and conveyed to the said J: D. by the said original
Indenture of Lease, or any part of the same Right or Interest, of or in the
Premises, or any part thereof, shall be impaired, hurt, or forfeited.

And further that if the said J: D: his Executors and Administrators do make
default, and do not pay or cause to be paid the said sum of etc. and every part
thereof to the said J: J: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at the said
dwelling house etc. at such time and in such manner and form, as for the
payment thereof is above limited and appointed in these presents; That then and
at all times during 3. months then next following, upon any reasonable request
to be made by the said J: J: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at the
said Mansion house of the Manor of R. the said J: D: his Executors or Assigns,
shall and will peaceably and quietly yield and deliver the said Manor, and all
other the Premises, with their Appurtenances, into the possession of the said
J: J: his Executors or Assigns, without any manner of fraud, covin, or delay.
Provided always, and the said J: J: covenanteth etc. That if the said J: D:
his Executors or Administrators, do pay or cause to be paid the said sum of
etc. to the said J: J. in such manner and form as is above in these presents
therefore limited and appointed. That then and at any time after, upon
reasonable request the said J: J: his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall and will as well deliver or cause to be delivered to the said J: D: his
Executors or Administrators, the said Original Indenture of Lease whole and
uncancelled, and all former conveyances and bonds made concerning the same by
the said J: D: to the said J: J to be cancelled: As also shall upon like
request, and at the costs and charges of the said I: D: grant, release, and
re-assign, and convey the said Site of the said etc. and all other the
Premises, and the said original Lease, with warranty by covenant for discharge
or saving harmless the same upon reasonable request, of and from all former
Grants, Alienations, Leases, and Bargains thereof, or of any part thereof, before
that time made or to be made by the said I: I: or his Executors (except only
such Grant and Bargain as the said I: I: has thereof made to the said I: D: by
these presents: In witness etc.

A Sale of Corn.
THis Indenture etc. between C: D: of S. in the County of N. Esquire, and W. G:
of etc. in the name and as lawfully hereunto authorized by the said C: D: on
the one party, and P: S: of etc. on the other party, witnesses, That the said
C: and W. for the consideration ensuing, have by these presents bargained and
sold unto the said P. S. 24. Last of Wheat, good, sweet, Merchantable, and
with the best, and not taled or branded, at the price of 12. l. of every Last
thereof; All which 24. Lasts of Wheat, of the goodness aforesaid, the said C. D.
and W. G. for them and every of them, covenanteth etc. to and with the said
etc. That they the said C. and W. their Executors Administrators or Assigns,
shall deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said P. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, before the last day of this present month of April,
at A. in the parts of Brabant, wind and weather thereunto serving, before the
said last day of this present month of April frank and free of all charges,
custom, license and other duties whatsoever, and clear of all arrests,
detainings, losses, troubles, and all other encumbrances whatsoever, that might
happen because of the said lading or transporting out of the same: And thereof
to save the said P. his Executors Administrators Assigns and Goods, and every
of them harmless, the duties of Custom at A: in Brabant aforesaid, there due
for the said Wheat always except.

In consideration whereof the said P. S. for him etc: does Covenant to, and with
the said etc. That he the said P. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall, and
will truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said etc: at the Shop etc. the sum
of 288 l: of etc. in manner etc. viz. in hand at the Ensealing and Delivery of
these presents 100 l. thereof which the said W: acknowledges by these presents
accordingly to have received, and in the last day of this present month of
April 100 l. more thereof, the 24. lasts of Wheat being laden and ready to be
conveyed as above, and the rest being 88 l. within six days next after true
certificate, or other Letter given at the delivery of the said 24. lasts of
Wheat at A. aforesaid; and the said C: and W. for themselves etc. Covenanteth
etc. That if any Prohibition or other Let or Restraint shall at any time
hereafter happen whereby the said 24. lasts of Wheat cannot proceed and be
transported into the said parts beyond the seas, or that the said Wheat being
out of this Realm shall be by force of Wind or Weather driven into this Realm
of England and Dominions thereof, and thereupon be restrained or otherwise let
from proceeding in the said Voyage, that then and in every such case the said
C: and W: or one of them, or the Executors etc. shall take all the said Wheat
again, and within one month next ensuing the said Prohibition, Restraint, or
Let made, shall restore unto the said P: his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, at the Shop etc. all the money which the said C: and W. or either of
them, or the Executors etc. shall have received for the said Wheat: And finally
the said W: G: for him etc. Covenanteth etc. that the said C: D: his Executors
and Administrators shall and will ratify these presents, and that he the said
C. his Executors and Administrators shall before the of this present month of
April, Enseal Subscribe and Deliver as his or their lawful Deed to the use of
the said P. his Executors or Administrators, as well the Counter part of these
presents already sealed and delivered by the said W. as also one Obligation of
the penalty of 300 l. of etc. for performance hereof likewise already sealed
and delivered by the said W. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Felts where the Vendees during the continuance of the
Bargain to have twenty shillings before hand.
THis Indenture, etc Between A. B. on the one party, and C, D. on the other
party witnesses, That for the consideration hereafter expressed in these
presents the said A. B. has bargained and sold, and by these presents does
bargain and sell to the said C. D. all and singular such Felts and skins of
Sheep and Lambs as the said A. B. and his Servant, or any other for him shall
make slaughter of between the day of the date hereof, and the first day of N.
now next coming. And it is agreed between the said parties, that the said W. E.
in form following, shall pay and allow to the said W. W. for every dozen of
Felts called Summer Felts, 22 s. of etc. and for every dozen of Sheepskins
called Sherlings, to be delivered before the first day of August, next coming,
6 s. of etc. And for every dozen of the same Sheepskins called Sherlings, to
be delivered after the first day of November, until etc. 10 s. of etc.

And the said W. W. for him etc. covenanteth etc. That he the said W: W: or
some of his Servants shall weekly, and from time to time from henceforth
deliver unto the said W. E. and to his Servants, all the said Felts and Skins,
as the said W. E. or his Servants shall call for the same, at the now dwelling
house of the said W. W. And that the same Skins and Felts from time to time,
shall be well and workman-like fleyn: for and in consideration whereof the said
W. E. for him and his Executors does covenant and promise, to and with the said
W. and his Executors by these presents: That he the said W. E. shall and will
before etc. next etc. content and pay to the said W. W. the sum of 40 l. of
etc. in part of payment, of and for the said Skins and Felts to be delivered as
aforesaid, and that so soon as the said W. W. shall have delivered to the said
W. E. in form aforesaid, so many of the said Felts and Skins as shall amount to
the said sum of 40 l. That then the said W. shall pay 20 l. more of like money
as aforesaid, beforehand to the said W. in part of payment of such of the said
Skins and Felts as thereafter are to him to be delivered; And so from time to
time thereafter, so soon as such money before hand to be paid by the said VV. E.
shall be to him satisfied, by such Skins and Felts to him to be delivered by
the said VV. VV. as aforesaid, the said VV. E. always to pay to the same VV.
VV. 20 l. before hand, so long as 20 l. worth of the said Skins and Felts shall
be behind to be delivered to the said VV: E: by force of the Bargain between
him and the said VV: VV: made and expressed in these presents: In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale by a Merchant of part of his Adventure in a Ship to Brazile.
THis Indenture etc. between A. R. on the one party, and B. P. etc. on the
other party, witnesses, That whereas the said A. is amongst other interested in
a good Ship of L. called the M. and of all her Tackle, munition, Provisions,
Merchandises, and Adventures, in her present Voyage, to go and return from the
Country of Brazill, under the Government of the Portugals, and of all and every
the Goods and Merchandises wherewith God shall send her to return, after the
rate and value of 70 l. of etc. which the said A. for his part has put into
the Stock made among the Adventures in the said Voyage, for the full providing
thereunto and executing and finishing the same.

Now in consideration of 20 l. of etc. which the said B. has at the Bargain.
ensealing hereof paid to the said A: whereof etc. he the said A: has, given,
granted, bargained, sold, and put over, and by these presents does etc. to the
said B. to the only use of the said B: his Executors and Assigns, the sum of
20 l. of etc: parcel of the said 70 l. and all and whatsoever that is or shall
come or grow only, of and for the said 20 l. or of the adventure of the same
and of all and every the Premises.

And also the said A. does grant and put over to the said B. his Executors and
Assigns, Interest, Right, and Title, in and to the said Ship, Tackle, Munition,
Provisions, Merchandises, and Adventures aforesaid, and to all to come and
arise thereof, as far as to the rate of the said sum of 20 l. shall etxend: In
witness etc,

A Bargain and Sale of a Fre-hold Estate in Land for term of life.
THis Indent. etc. between M: L: etc. and J: L. his wife on the one party, and
I: I: etc. on the other party, witnesses, That whereas A. I* etc. natural
Mother of the said M. by writing tripartite, bearing date etc. Rentall.
For and in consideration of a Marriage then to be had between the said M: and
I: and toward the accomplishment of certain Bonds, Promises, Covenants and
Agreements made upon consideration of the said Marriage, and for diverse other
considerations, as in the said Writing tripartite indented is expressed, has
covenanted and gtanted to and with R. T. etc. and W: H: etc. their Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, That she the said A: and all persons that then were
seized of and in all those her two Messuages or Tenements, with the
appurtenances, then in the Tenure and Occupation of the said A. Situate and
being in W: should stand and be of the same Messuages, Tenements, and Premises
with their appurtenances, seized to the use of the said A: I. for and during
her natural life, and after her decease, to the use of the said M. L: and I:
his wife, for and during the natural lives of the said M: and I. and of the
longer liver of them, and afterward to such further uses as in the said
Writing tripartite indented, are declared.

Now the said M: L. and I: his wife, for and in consideration of the Barg^in
and Sale.
sum of 300 l. of etc. whereof etc. has given, granted aliened, bargained, and
sold, and by etc. to the said I: I: and his Assigns, all the said two Messuages
and Tenements with their appurtenances, and all other the Premises, and the
said Writing indented, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and Demand
whatsoever, which the said M: L: and I: his wife, or either of them has or
ought to have, to of and in the said two Messuages and Tenements, and other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof: To have and
to hold the same two Messuages and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, and all
In this Habend. the word (Heirs) good to be used, to prevent an Occ^poney.
and singular other the Premises to the said I: and his Heirs, immediately from
the day of the date of these presents, for and during all the terms of the
natural lives of the said M: and I: his wife, and of the life of the longer
liver of them.

And the said M: for himself and for the said J: his wife, his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant etc. in form etc. That the said two Messuages,
and all other the Premises are, and from henceforth during the lives of the
said M. and I: and the life of the longer liver of them, shall abide and
continue to the said I: and his Assigns, clear and free discharged and
acquitted of and from all and every former A discharge of encumbrances.
mer Grants, Charges, and Encumbrances whatsoever, before the ensealing,
knowledging, and enrolling of these presents, had, made, done, or agreed unto,
or to be had etc. by the said M: and I: or either of them: In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Land where notwithstanding it is provided that if the
Vendor to pay the Vendee a certain sum of money within ten years, and a yearly
rent for the Premises he shall occupy, the the Sale shall be void.
THis Indenture, etc. Between I, K. the younger of N. etc. on the one party and
A. R. etc. on the other party witnesses, That the said I. K. for. and in
consideration of the sum of 400 l. of etc. whereof etc. Consideration.
And thereof etc. has given, granted, bargained and sold, and by these
Bargain.
presents does give, grant, bargain and sell to the said A. R. and his Heirs
for ever, all that the capital Message or Inn commonly called the H. or White
H. with his appurtenances, and all Chambers, Halls, Buildings, Houses, Barns,
Stables, Orchards, Dove-houses, Lands, Medows, Feedings Pastures and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging, lying and being within the Town and Fields
of N. etc. and the Reversision Reuersion etc.
and Reversions of all and singular the premises, and all and singular other
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions and Hereditaments with their appurtenances
whatsoever which the said I. K. has, or ought to have within the Town, Parish
or Fields of N. aforesaid and Deeds.
C. etc. and all and singular Deeds, Evidences Charters and writings concerning
the premises or any part or parcel thereof, as many of which said Deeds etc. as
the said J. K. now has or can come by, he has at the Ensealing of these
presents delivered to the said A. R. and the residue does promise to deliver to
the said A. and his Heirs, as they, or any of them shall come to the hands of
the said I. K. or by him or his Heirs may be had or gotten without suit in the
Law, to have, hold and enjoy all and Habend.
singular the the said Messuages Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and all
and every other the premises with their appurtenances to the said A. R, his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to, and for the only use and behoof of the said A.
R. and of his H^irs and Assigns for ever. And the said I. K. for him, his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, and every of them does Covenant and Grant, to,
and with the said A: R. his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them by these presents in manner and form following, that is to say,
That he the said I. K. and A: his wife, on this side, and before the 4th. day
of To acknowledge a Fine.
of Feb. now next coming, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said A:
shall knowledge one fine and Sur Conusanses de droit come ceo etc. of all and
singular the Messuages and other the premises to the same A: R: and his Heirs
before the Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster, with Proclamations
according to the form of the Statute in that Case made and provided by the name
of four Messuages, four Cottages, eight Gardens, five acres of Land, three
acres of Pasture, two acres of Meadow, two acres of Wood, and 40 s. Rent with
the appurtenances in N. upon T. and C. in the said County of N. and by the said
fine shall knowledge all the said Tenements and Rent, with their appurtenances
to be the right of the said A. R. as those which the said A. then shall have of
the Gift of the said I. and A. and so further, according to the usual manner of
Fines, and that now, and until the knowledging and enrowling of these
presents, and the Recording and Engrossing of the said Fine; the said I. K. and
A. or some other person or persons to their use, are and shall be plainly and
lawfully seized of, and in all the said Messuages and other the Premises by
these presents above bargained and sold to the use and behoof of the said I. K.
and A. his wife, and of the Heirs of their two bodies between them two lawfully
begotten; and for lack of such issue to the only use and behoof of the right
Heirs of the said I: K: for ever, without any Condition, Mortage, or any other
use or uses whatsoever, and that the said I. K. of such estate has lawful
Power and Authority to bargain and sell the said Messuages and other the
premises to the said A: R: and his Heirs for ever, according to the Tenor and
Purport of these presents. And that the said Messuages and Premises, and every
part and parcel Discharged of Encumbrances.
thereof, now be and at all times hereafter shall be discharged or saved
harmless to the said A: his Heirs and Assigns by the said I: his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, of, and from all and singular former Bargains,
Estates, Rights, Conditions. Grants, Leases, Titles, Entailes, and Encumbrances
whatsoever, one Lease made of a parcel of the Premises Exception.
to the said A: B: which shall expire etc. and one other Lease etc. and one
yearly Rent charge at 40 s. yearly issuing out of the Premises, and the chief
Rents and Services hereafter to grow due to the chief Lords of the Fee of the
Premises, only except and foreprised, And To make further assurance.
further, that he the said I. K. and A. his wife and their Heirs, and the Heirs
of the said I. from time to time upon every reasonable request of the said A:
R: or his Heirs, and at his and their costs and charges in the Law at all times
within seve^ years next ensuing the date of these presents, shall, and will,
do, make and knowledge all, and every such lawful and reasonable Act and Acts,
Thing and Things in the Law for the further assurance, suerty, and sure making
of all the said Messuages and Premises to be had and made sure to the said A:
R: and his Heirs for ever, to and for the only use and behoof of the said A. R.
and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, be it by Fine, Feoffment, Deed or Deeds
Enrowled, Recovery, Release with warranty against all men, or otherwise without
warranty, as by the said A. R. his Heirs and Assigns, or his or their learned
Council shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised.

Provided always, and it is especially conditioned, concluded, and Proviso for
redemption etc.
agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, for themselves
their Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, That if the said I: K. and A. his wife and the Survivor of them and
their Heirs Executors or Administrators, or the Heirs Executors or
Administrators of the said I. K. from time to time, and at all times, during
such time as they or any of them shall occupy the Premises or any part thereof,
by any Lease to be thereof made to the said I: and A. or to either of them by
the said A: R: do as well keep and maintain all and singular the Premises in
good and sufficient reparations, and pay the yearly Rent therefore to be
reserved by the said Lease, according to the tenor and true meaning. As also do
well and truly content and pay, or cause etc. to the said A. his Executors or
Administrators, or to his or their lawful Attorney, the Sum of 300 l. of etc.
at one entire payment, at the now dwelling house of the said etc. Situate etc.
Or if he be not there then dwelling, that then at such other house, where he
shall fortune to dwell within the same City, or the Suburbs thereof, at any time
within the space of ten years, next ensuing from the date of these presents,
upon any 26. day of April, or 26. day of July, between the hours of etc. in the
afternoon of any of the same days; That then and from thenceforth it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the said I. and his Heirs and Assigns, into all and
singular the Premises, to re-enter, and the same to have again and hold, as in
his or their former Estate, these presents, or any other assurance or
conveyance thereof, or of any part thereof made, or hereafter in the mean time to
be made, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that then and from thenceforth, the said Fine to be knowledged by the said
I. K. and A. his wife, of the Premises, in form aforesaid, and all other
conveyances and assurances in the mean time thereof made or to be made to the
said A. his Heirs and Assigns, shall be and enure to the only use of the said
I. K. and A. his wife, and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. K. for ever.
And that then and from thenceforth the said A. R. his Heirs and Assigns; and
all and every other person and persons which shall fortune to be seized, of or
in the Premises, or any part thereof, by or under the Estate of the said A. R.
shall thereof and of every part thereof stand and be seized, to the only use and
behoof of the said I. K: and A. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. for
ever, and to none other use or uses whatsoever.

And the said I. K: does for etc. covenant to and with the said A. R. his Heirs
Executors and Assigns; Provided always the Premises notwithstanding, That if
the said I. K. and A. his wife, their Heirs Executors and Administrators, do
not in all points well and faithfully perform and fulfill the said condition,
conclusion, and agreement in these presents last above specified, according to
the tenor and true meaning thereof; That then and at all times for ever after,
any default made in performance or fulfilling thereof, or of any part thereof, on
the part and behalf of the said I. K. and A. his wife, or of their Heirs
Executors or Administrators, these Indentures and the Fine first above
specified, and all other assurances above mentioned, shall be and enure to the
only and proper use and behoof of the said A. R. and of his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, and to none other use or uses, intent or purpose whatsoever,
absolutely without any manner of condition or mortgage; Any thing whatsoever
above in these presents specified or expressed, to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And the said A. R. covenanteth etc. with the said I. and A. his wife, and the
Heirs Executors and Administrators of the said I. that at and upon every
payment of the yearly Rent to be reserved in the said Lease to be made of the
Premises by the said A. R. to the said I. and A. as aforesaid, To give an
Acquittance upon every receipt of Rent.
the said A. R. his Heirs and Assigns shall seal and deliver to the use of the
said I. and A. and of their Executors, to such person or persons as shall make
payment of the same Rent, a lawful and sufficient several Acquittance
therefore from time to time: And that when it shall fortune the said I. K. and
A. or the Heirs Executors or Assigns of the said I. K. to content and pay, or
cause etc. to the said A. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, or to his or
their lawful Deputy or Attorney, the said Sum of 300 l. of etc. at any of the
days above named in these presents, for the payment thereof, in manner and form
before specified, and within the said term of 10. years, having then also du^y
performed the residue of the said condition, conclusion, and agreement
aforesaid; That then upon the receipt thereof the said A. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, shall and will as well seal and deliver to the said I. and A.
or to the Heirs Executors or Administrators of the said I. or to their use, to
such person or persons, as shall pay the said 300 l. a lawful and sufficient
Acquittance and Discharge for the same: As also then and thereupon, or at any
time after upon reasonable request, shall and will not only well and safely
redeliver to the said I. and A. or to the Heirs Executors or Administrators, of
the said I. whole and uncancelled all such Deeds, Evidences, and Writings,
concerning the Premises, or any part thereof, as the said A. his Heirs or
Executors, shall before that time have had, or received of or from the said I.
K. Together wiih that part of these presents, sealed by the said I. K. But also
shall upon like request, and at the costs and charges of the said I. K. his
Heirs and Assigns, do and make all such act and acts, thing and things, for the
extinguishment and release of his and their Right, Estate, and Title, in and to
all and singular the Premises, with warranty against the said A. R. and his
Heirs, as by the said I. or his Heirs shall be reasonably devised or advised,
and required at any time, within the space of one year next after payment of
the said Sum of 300 l. in form aforesaid: In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Land both Freehold and Copyhold, with liberty that if
the Vendee dislike the Purchase by a day, then the Vendor to repay the Vendee
his money, and if he like, then to pay more money.
THis Indenture etc. between R. W. etc. Parson of the Parish Church of etc: on
the one party, and W. B. and K. his wife, on the other party, witnesses, That
the said R. VV. for and in consideration of the Sum of 30 l. of etc. paid by
the said VV. etc. whereof etc. and thereof and therefore etc. has given, granted,
bargained, and sold, and by etc. to the said VV. and K. his wife, all that
Message or Tenement, and 4. Shops, with the appurtenances, now or late in
several Tenures or Occupations of etc. situate etc. in the Parish: And also
the Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the Premises, and all the
Estate, Right, Title, and Interest of the said R. VV. of in and to the same
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof: And all and singular Deeds,
Charters, Evidences, and Writings, touching or concerning the Premises only,
or only any part thereof. As many of which said Deeds etc. as the said R. now
has, or any other person or persons, by his consent or delivery have, or which
the said R: without Suit in Law, can or may lawfully get or come by, he the
said R. for him, his Heirs and Executors, does covenant and promise by these
presents, well and safe and uncancelled to deliver, or cause etc. to the said
VV. and K. his wife, their Executors or Assigns, at the now Mansion house of
the said VV. B. Situate etc. at or on this side the day of N. next coming; To
have and to hold the said Message and four Shops aforesaid, Habend.
and all other the Premises, with their appurtenances, to the said VV. B. and
K. his wife, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said VV. B. for ever, to and
for the only use and behoof of the said VV. and K. his wife, and of the Heirs
and Assigns of the said VV. B. for ever. And the The Ve^d^r lawful Owner in
possession or in reversion expectant upon determination of a Lease.
said R VV. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, covenanteth etc. to
and with the said VV. B. and K. his wife, and the Heirs Executors and
Administrators of the said VV. B. and every of them in manner etc. that etc.
That he the said R. VV. now is the true sole lawful and rightful Owner and
lawfully and rightfully sole seized of all and singular the above bargained
Premises, of a good perfect and pure Estate in Feesimple, in possession or in
Reversion, immediately expectant upon determination of Lease or Leases, for term
or terms of years, which shall expire within three years now next ensuing; And of
such Estate Authority to sell etc.
has good and lawful power, right, title, and authority, to bargain, sell,
and assure all and singular the Premises to the said W. and K. and the Heirs
and Assigns of the said W. in form aforesaid; And that all and singular the
same Premises now are, and from henceforth shall abide and continue to the
said W. and K. and the Heirs and Assigns of the said VV: clearly and freely
discharged and acquitted, or otherwise at all times by the said R. VV his Heirs
or Executors saved harmless, of and from all and singular former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts Grants, Leases, Estates, Titles, Charges, end Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, To discharge of Encumbrances.
done, or procured, or in any wise consented or agreed unto, by the said R. or
by any other for him, by his means or procurement; One Lease heretofore made of
a parcel of the premises, to one R. C. which shall not endure above two years
now next ensuing, and one Annuity or yearly Rent of 5 l: yearly issuing and
payable out of the Premises to P. now the wife of one I. B. for and during the
term of the life of the same P. and the chief Rents and Services hereafter to
be paid and done to the chief Lords of the Fees of the Premises, in respect of
their Seigniories Exceptions etc.
only except and foreprised.

And the said R. and W. covenanteth etc. That whereas the said R. VV. now has
and holds to him and his Heirs, one Garden Plot being Copyhold, adjoining to
the Messuages and 4. Shops aforesaid; That he the said R. VV. at the next Court
to be holden at the Manor of little M: in the said County etc. whereof the said
Garden Plot is holden, will either purchase and obtain the same of the Lord of
the said Manor in Fee-simple, and so then of such Estate for the consideration
abovesaid, convey and assure the same to the said VV. and K. and The Vendor to
make Estate of Copy hold land.
the Heirs of the said W. Or else at the same Court shall surrender the same
Garden Plot, according to the custom of the said Manor, into the hands of the
Lord by his Steward, for and to the use of the said VV: and K. his wife, and
the Heirs of the said VV. B. without The Vendor to be at the charges of the
Fine for the Surrender. If the Vende^ dislike, then to give warning to the
Vendor thereof, and the Vendor to repay him his money:
delay, fraud, or covin. The Fine for the surrender, and the charges of
conveyance and assurance of the said Garden Plot, now being Copyhold from the
said R. to the said VV: and K: and the Heirs of the said W. to be at the
charges of the same R. Nevertheless the said W: B: the Premises
notwithstanding, and the said R: VV: have agreed together for themselves, their
Heirs and Assigns. And the said R. covenanteth etc. to and with the said VV: B:
his etc. That if the said VV: B: at any time within the space of two years next
etc. shall dislike the Purchase of the said Message and other the Premises,
and thereof shall give notice to the said R. of such disliking by writing to be
delivered to the same R. That then he the said R. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, Nota, the best way in this assurance is, that it may be made
upon condition, if the warning be given, and money repaid at the day; and so
there needs no reassurance, but the Cellar is in the condition of his first
Estate which is most reasonable. If the Vendee before a day shall signify his
liking of the Premises, or before the same day signify not his disliking,
then to pay a further sum of money. Condition of liking, signified the liberty
of disliking, shall then after be void. For further assurance in case of liking
of the Purchase.
within three months next after such notice given of such disliking as
aforesaid, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said W. B.
and K. his wife, for the repurchase of the Premises, and in consideration of a
good and reasonable assurance thereof to be made from them and their Heirs, to
the said R. and his Heirs, the Sum of 30 l. of etc. at the said dwelling house
etc. without any fraud, or covin. Provided always, that if the said W. at any
time within the said space of two years, next after the date of these presents,
shall signify to the said R. W. that he the said W. then has an absolute
liking of the Purchase aforesaid, or during the space of the same two years,
shall not give any notice of disliking with the same Purchase unto the said R.
W. Then the said W. B. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and
every of them covenanteth and grants to him and them by these presents,
firmly binds to the said R. his Executors and Administrators, well and truly
to pay to the said R. his Executors and Administrators, for the clear purchase
of the Premises, the Sum of 15 l. of lawful etc. over and besides the said 30
l. already paid, within ten days next after such signification given of such
absolute liking as aforesaid: Or if no notice of such disliking of the said
Purchase be given, during the two years aforesaid, then to pay the said 15 l.
within ten days next after the expiration of the same two years, without fraud
or covin.

Provided moreover, that after signification given of absolute liking of the
said Purchase as aforesaid* the liberty of disliking therewith given as
abovesaid, shall be utterly annihilated and clearly determined; Any thing
abovesaid to the contrary notwithstanding.

And the said R. covenanteth with the said VV. B. etc. That if the said VV.
shall be minded to retain the Purchase of the Premises, that then at all times
during other two years, next after the end of the said former two years given
for liberty of liking and disliking, or next to ensue from the time wherein the
said VV. shall signify his absolute liking of the said Purchase, the said R.
and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, having or which
shall lawfully have, or claim to have any Estate, Right, Title, or Interest, in
or to the Premises or any part thereof, by or from the said R. VV. (except only
as is before excepted) at and upon every reasonable request to be made to the
said R. or his Heirs, and at the costs and charges of the said VV. his Heirs
Executors or Administrators, shall and will do, make, knowledge, and suffer, or
cause etc. all and singular such act and acts, thing and things in the Law, for
the further and better assurance, surety, and suremaking of all and singular
the Premises to be had and made sure to the said W. B. and K. and to the Heirs
and Assigns of the said W. for ever, as by the said W. and K. and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said W. or any of their Council learned in the Laws of this
Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised, either without
warranty or with warranty of the said R. and his Heirs, and such as shall make
any of the said assurances, only against themselves and their Heirs.

And the said W: B. covenanteth and c. That the said W: and K. his wife, and
the Heirs and Assigns of the said W: shall agree and suffer that the said R:
and his Assigns, may have and receive the yearly Rent of the Premises, until
the first day of April, which shall be etc. If in the mean time, the said W:
shall not signify to the said R: or his Heirs of the absolute liking with the
Purchase aforesaid: In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Assignment of whatsoever benefit growing to one by means of an
Administration, and the Vendee is to save harmless the Vendor of whatsoever he
may be charged with as Administrator.
THis Indenture, etc. Between I: H: of etc. and K: his wife, Daughter to N. E.
late deceased and Sister to N. E. also deceased, which I. and K. are, or one of
them is Administrator or Administrators of the Goods aad Chattels which were of
the said N. and M: on the one party, and W: B: and R: B: etc. on the other
party, witnesses, That the said I. and K: for and in consideration of a
certain Sum of money to them to be paid by Obligation, have given, granted.
confirmed, remised, released, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by
these presents, does etc. unto the said W: and R: all their Estate, Right,
Title, Interest, Term of years and Demands, Leases, Debts, Goods and Chattels
whatsoever, which the said I: and K. his wife, or either of them, their
Executors or Administrators have, or at any time hereafter may, might, or ought
to have, or at any time heretofore had since the death or deaths of the said N.
or N. belonging to her the said K. and to the said J. or either of them, or
that they or either of them might or ought to have, either by the last Will and
Testament of the said N. her Father, or by the death of the said N. her
Brother, or by any Letter or Letters of Administration to her and the said I.
or either of them committed, of the Goods of the said N. and N. or either of
them: To have, hold, and enjoy all the Premises, and Habend.
all the said Interests, Terms, Estates, Title, Claim, and Demand of the said
I: and K. to the same, to the said W: and R: their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for their own uses for ever.

And the said I: H: for him his Executors etc. does covenant etc. in form etc.
viz. That all and singular the Premises now are and from Cavenant to discharge
of Encumbrances.
henceforth shall stand and abide clearly and freely discharged and saved
harmless, of and from all and singular former Bargains, Sales, Leases, Grants,
and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or procured, by the said I. and
K. his wife, or either of them: And that To make further assu^ance.
they the said I. and K. and either of them at all times during 3. years next
ensuing etc: at and upon every reasonable request, or within convenient time
after such request, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said W. etc.
shall and will make, do, knowledge and suffer, or cause etc. All and every such
further act and acts, thing and things in the Law, as by the said W: and R. or
either of them, or the Administrators or Assigns of either of them, or any
their Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised or advised, for the better assuring of all and singular the
Premises, to be had, conveyed, and made sure from the said J. and K. to the
said W. R their Executors Administrators and Assigns, for their own use for
ever.

And further, That the said I. and K: and either of them, and the To justify
actions etc:
Executors and Administrators, of either of them at the the request, and costs
and charges aforesaid, shall and will justify and approve all and singular
lawful Suits whatsoever by the said W. and R. or either of them to the
Executors or Administrators, of either of them to be brought or prosecuted in
the name or names of the said I. and K. or either of them, or of the Executors
or Administrators of either of them for any cause or causes whatsoever as
Administrator or Administratrix of the said N. or N. being not compelled to
travel for the justifying of the same. And that the benefit and advantages, of,
and in The Vendees to have benefit af all actions etc.
all and singular Recoveries in any such Suit or Suits to be had, taken, and
enjoyed to the said W, and R. and their Executors and Administrators, for their
own use without any account thereof to be given to the said I. and K. or either
of them, or the Executors or Administrators of either of them; and the said W.
B. and R. B. do Covenant etc. to and with the said I. H. and K. his wife, and
to and with either To love the Vendors from all damages by reason of such
a^^ions etc. and of all actions to be brought against them.
of them, to save them and either of them harmles, or otherwise upon request to
recompense them for all such costs and damages as shall be taxed or judged, or
recovered against them or either of them by occasion of any such Suit or suits.
And also the said W: and R, Covenanteth etc. that they the said W. and R. their
Heirs Executors and Administrators, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, and upon reasonable requests at their own costs and charges shall
and will save and keep harmless the, said I. and K. and either of them and the
Heirs Executors and Administrators of either of them, of and from all Actions,
Suits and demands whatsoever which shall or may happen to be had or brought by
any person or persons against the said I and K. or either of them upon just
cause without Fraud or Covin as the Admininistrators, or Administratrix of the
said N. or N. or against the Executors or Administrators, of the said I. and R.
or either of them by reason of the said Administrations or of either of them,
had or taken by the said I. and K. or either of them. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Moiety of a Ship.
TO All, etc. to whom this present Writing indented shall come, M. S. of etc.
sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye that I the said M. S. for
and in consideration of the sum of 150 l. of etc. whereof etc. have hargained,
sold, given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presents do etc. unto R. M.
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, all that my Moiety of, and in all
that the good Ship called the E. of L. of the Burden or Portage of two hundred
and forty Tuns or thereabouts, now remaining and being upon the River of T. And
all that my Moiety of, and in all and singular the Masts, Sails, Saile-yards,
Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Cords Guns, Gunpowder, Munition and Shot, and all other
Instruments, Artillery, Longboat, Cockboat, Tack, Apparel, Furniture, and
other things whatsoever to the said Ship belonging, or in any wise
appurtaining, used, or serving, To have and to hold all the said Moiety of and
in Habend.
the said Ship, and the said Moiety of, and in all and singular the said Masts
etc. and all other things whatsoever before specified to the said R. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and
behoof for ever. And I the said M. S. for me etc. do That he is lawfully
possessed etc:
Covenant etc. in form etc. That I the said M. at the time of the Ensealing and
Delivery of these presents, am the true, sole, and only lawful owner, Possessor
and proprietary of the one moiety of the said Ship, and of all and singular
other the premises, and every parcel thereof. And that I the said M. in mine
own right, have full perfect, good and lawful power and authority, to give,
grant, bargain, sell, and confirm Power to sell.
the said Moiety of the said Ship, and the said Moiety of all and singular
other the premises to the said R. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, to
his and their own proper use and behoof for ever, according to the tenor and
true meaning of these presents. And also that I To discharge of Encumbrances,
and for quiet enjoyment.
the said M. mine Heirs Executors and Administrators, shall, and will from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, clearly and lawfully discharge, acquit, or
otherwise sufficiently save harmless, as well the said Moiety of the said Ship,
and of all and singular other the premises, and every part thereof. As also the
said R. M. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, of and
from all and singular former bargains, sales, molestations, gifts, grants,
titles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or occasioned before the
Ensealing and Delivery hereof.

And further, that he the said R. M. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall, or lawfully may from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
peaceably, and quietly, have, hold, dispose and enjoy the said Moiety of the
said Ship and etc. without any Let, Reclaim, Molestation, Trouble or
Interruption of me the said M. mine Executors Administrators and Assigns, or
any of us, and without any lawful Let etc. of any other person or persons
whatsoever. And that I the said M. mine Executors and Administrators, shall,
and will Warrant and Defend A Warranty,
the said Moiety of the said Ship, and of all and singular other the premises,
and every part thereof against all people to the said R. M. his Executors and
Assigns for ever to the use aforesaid, and in manner and form aforesaid for
ever. In witness, etc. to the one part, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Land in London by the Mother, who has a Freehold
therein for hor life, and the Sun in whom the Reversion is after her deceaso.
THis Indenture etc. Between Dame V. L. of L. Widow, late the wife of G. B. the
elder etc. deceased and R. B. one of the Sons of the said G. on the one party,
and W. R. etc. on the other party witnesses, That whereas the said Dame V. L.
is, and stands seized for the term of her natural life, of and in all that
great message or tenement and Garden with the appurt. etc. The mediate
Reversion whereof after the Recital.
death of the said Dame V. the said G. B. the elder by his last Will and
Testament made in Writing, did wholly devise and bequeath unto G: B. his son,
and to his Heirs for ever. And whereas the said G. B. the younger has given,
granted, bargained, aliened, sold, confirmed and released to the said R. B. and
to his Heirs for ever, all that the said great Message wfth the appurtenances,
and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, present and future
Estate, Right, Title, Use, Interest and Demand of the said G* B: the younger,
of, in and to the said great Message with the appurtenances, as by one
Indenture bearing date etc. Enrolled in the High Court of Chancery made between
the said G: B: the younger on the one party and the said R: B: by the name of
etc. of the other party, amongst diverse other Covenants and Agreements in the
said Indenture, more at large may and will appear. All which said great
Message with the appurtenances sometimes were parcel of the Possessions of Sir
M. D. Knight and Alderman of L. Now the said Dame V: L: and R. B: for and
consideration of the sum of etc: to them before etc. whereof and wherewith they
etc. and thereof and therefore etc. have bargained, sold, granted, aliened and
confirmed, and by these presents do clearly and absolutely bargain, etc. to
the said W. R: and to his Heirs for ever, all the said great Message and
Gardens with the appurtenances, and all Grounds, Yards, Lights, Shops, Cellars,
Sollers, Warehouses, Buildings, Easements and Commodities whatsoever to the
said great Message or Tenement belonging or appu^taining, or as any part or
parcel thereof demised, occupied, used, reputed or taken; and all the estate,
right, title and interest, reversion, remainder, and demanded of the said Dame
V. and R. and either of them, of, in and to the premises or any part or parcel
thereof, except one piece of a Cellar, one Buttery, one piece of a Compting
house, and three little Rooms over them, which are parcel of the possessions of
the Parish Church of etc. and now are occupied with the said great Message, by
virtue of a Lease thereof had from the said Parish Church, dated etc. A Covenant
granting the Deeds and Evidences of the Premises: To have and to hold the said
great Message Habend.
and Garden, with their appurtenances, and all and singular other the Premises
with their appurtenances, except before excepted, to the said W. R. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said W. R. and of his
Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said Dame V. for her self etc. covenanteth etc. That she Seized for
Life.
the said Dame V. is lawfully sole seized of the said great Message and
Garden, with the appurtenances, of a good and lawful Estate of Freehold for
the term of her life. And that the said Message and Garden, with the
appurtenances, are and from henceforth shall stand and continue, clearly
discharged and acquitted, or upon reasonable request and notice thereof given,
sufficiently saved harmless by the said Dame V. her Executors or
Administrators, of and from all and singular To discharge of Encumbrances.
former Bargains, Sales, Leases, Grants, Estates, Titles, Charges, or
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, caused, or agreed unto by the said Dame V:
or any other for her by her means, consent, or procurement.

And also that for the better assurance of all and singular the Premises To
come in a Fine with the Reversioner.
with their appurtenances, to be had and made sure to the said W. his Heirs and
Assigns, for the only use of the said W. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever:
She the said Dame V: at the reasonable request and charges in the Law of the
said W: his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall join with the said R. B: and any
others in a Fine to be levied in due form of Law to the said W. and his Heirs,
of all and singular the Premises, according to the usual manner of Fines.

Provided always, that the Warranty to be made in the said Fine by the said
Dame V: be solely of her self, and only against her, or against her and her
Heirs; And that for the knowledging of the Concord thereof she shall not be
compelled to travel any further then to the said great Message, without her
own good will and consent to the contrary.

And the said R: B: for him etc: covenanteth etc. in form etc: That Seized of
the immediate Reversion.
he the said R: now is lawfully and solely seized to the use of him and his
Heirs, of the immediate Reversion or Remainder of the said great Message and
Garden, with the appurtenances, from and after the decease of the said Dame V.

And he the said R. B. and S. now his wife, and the said G. B. the younger and
M. now his wife, at all times from time to time, during To make further
assurance.
the space of two years next ensuing the date of these presents, at and upon
the reasonable request, and costs and charges in the Law only of the said W. R.
his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall and will make, do, knowledge, and suffer,
or cause etc. all and every such reasonable act and acts, thing and things in
the Law, with warranty only against themselves, and their Heirs, or otherwise
without warranty; As by the said W. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their
Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully devised or
advised and required, for the better conveyance, assurance, and sure making of
all and singular the Premises with their appurtenances, to be had and made
sure to the said W. R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, for the only use etc.
And also that all the said premises and every part thereof, with For quiet
enjoyment discharged of Encumbrances.
their appurtenances now are, and at the making of the said further assurance
shall be, and from henceforth shall continue clearly and freely acquitted and
discharged, or otherwise by the said R. B. his Heirs or Executors, upon
reasonable request and not^ce thereof given, saved harmless at all times, of
and from all and singular former Bargains etc. had made, done, caused, or
agreed unto or to be had etc. by the said R. B. and G. B. the younger, or
either of them, or by any other person or persons, by the commandment, consent,
or procurement of the said R. and G. the younger, or either of them.

And further the said R covenanteth etc. That he the said W. R. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall or lawfully may from henceforth for ever, well and quietly have,
hold, and enjoy, to the only use and behoof of the said W. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, as well the said great Message and Garden, with their
appurtenances, and all other the Premises with their appurtenances, except
only before excepted, and from time to time, have, take, receive, and enjoy the
Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof, for the only use and behoof of the said W.
R. his Heirs and Assigns, without any contradiction, impeachment, let, or
impediment of the said R. and G. the younger; or of either of them, or of any
other person or persons, by the commandment, consent, means, or procurement of
either of them.

And also the said R. B. covenanteth etc. That the entire benefit of all such
Bonds, as R. H. Knight, made to the said G. B. deceased, and as I. D: Merchant
of the Staple at C. made to the said Sir R: H: for or touching the Premises,
or any part thereof, and all advantages recompenses, and sums of money, to be
gotten of or by the said Bonds or any of them, shall be and continue to the
only profit, interest and behoof of the said W. R. his Executors and Assigns,
without any let or contradiction of the said R B. and G. B. or either of them,
or the Executors or Administrators of either of them. And also that the said R.
G. and the Survivor of them, and the Executors and Administrators To justify
actions etc. upon Bonds concerning the premises.
of the same Survivor, shall always hereafter justify and avow, all and every
such Suits, Processes, Pleas, and Recoveries, as the said W. R. his Executors
or Assigns, at their own costs and charges, shall bring or pursue upon the said
Bonds, or any of them, in the name or names of the said R. and G. or either of
them, or of the Executors or Administrators or either of them, against any
person or persons chargable or to be charged for the same: And that the said R.
Not to discharg Suits etc.
and G. or either of them, or the Executors or Administrators of either of
them, shall not at any time hereafter willingly suffer to be done, any act or
acts, without the special consent of the said W. R. his Executors or
Administrators, which shall or may discharge, suspend, or determine the
Penalties or Forfeitures, of any of the said Bonds, or any Execution, to be had
by reason of the same Bonds or any of them, or any Suit or Judgment to be had
or given, in any Action to be brought as aforesaid, upon the said Bonds or any
of them: In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Land, where the same is bound for the payment of part of
the Purchase money left unpaid.
THis Indenture, etc. between R. I. of etc. on the one party, and C. B. of etc.
on the other party, witnesses, That for and in consideration of the Sum of 50
l. of etc. whereof etc. he the said R. I. has granted, bargained, and sold, and
by these presents does fully and clearly grant, bargain, and sell unto the said
C. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that Message or Tenement etc. except
etc. And the Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the premises, except
before excepted.

And further the said R. does by these presents bargain and sell to the said C.
B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all and singular Deeds, Evidences, Charters,
Escripts, and Writings whatsoever, touching or concerning the Premises, or any
of them; As in any of which said Deeds etc. as be in the hands, custody, or
possession of the said R. or of any other person or persons by his bailment or
delivery, or which he lawfully may come by without Suit in the Law. The said R.
for him, his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, covenanteth to and with the
said C. B: etc. to deliver, or cause etc. safe and uncancelled to the said C.
B. at or before the 20. of August, next ensuing the date Habend.
hereof, at the now dwelling house of the said R. I. in B. etc. To have and to
hold the foresaid Message etc. and all and every other the premises, with
their appurtenances, and the Reversion and Reversions thereof (except before
excepted) to the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof
of the said C. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, upon condition that he
the said C. his Heirs Executors Condition.
Administrators or Assigns, shall pay or cause etc. unto the said R. his
certain Attorney, Executors Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of 120 l. of
etc. in manner and form etc. viz. 60 l. thereof, on the etc. next etc. at the
said now dwelling house etc. and other 60 l residue and in full payment of the
said 120 l. on the etc. which shall be etc. at the said now dwelling etc.

And the said R. I. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That the said R. Seized in
Fee.
at the time of the ensealing etc. for any act done by him the said R. is of
all and singular the Premises, sole seized in Fee-simple, of a good perfect,
lawful, and absolute Estate in the Law, to the only use of him the said R. and
of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any condition, Mortgage, or
Defeazance. And that the reversion or remainder of the Premises, or any part
thereof, is not in our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty. And also that the
said R. I. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, shall from time to time and
at all times hereafter, acquit, To discharge of Encumbrances.
discharge, and exonerate, or upon every reasonable request, sufficiently keep
harmless the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, as all and
singular the Premises with their appurtenances, before by these presents
mentioned, to be granted, bargained, or sold, and every parcel thereof, of and
from all and singular former Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Joyntures, Dowers,
Title of Dower, Wills, Intails, Leases, Bonds, Statutes, Recognizances,
Judgments, Executions, Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Annuities, Rents: And of
and from all other Titles, Grants, Estates, Troubles, Charges, and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, done, knowledged, or willingly suffered, by the said R.
or by J. J. his Father, or R. I. his Uncle deceased, or by the Grandfather of
the said R. I. or by any other of the Ancestors of the said R. I. or by any
other person or persons, claiming or making Title, by, from, or under the said
R. or his said Father, Uncle, or Grand father, or any Ancestor or Ancestors of
the said R. J. the chief Rents and Services from henceforth to become due, for
the Premises, to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the same, and
one Lease heretofore granted of etc. which shall expire and clearly determine
within etc. now next coming, whereupon there is reserved the yearly Rent of etc.
and one other Lease etc. which said several yearly Rents from henceforth,
during the continuance of the said several Leases, shall be due and payable to
the said C. his Heirs and Assigns, only except and foreprised.

And further the said R. covenanteth, That be the said C. his Heirs For quiet
enjoyment.
and Assigns, and every of them shall or may from henceforth for ever, to his
and their own proper use and behoof, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly, have,
hold, occupy, possess, inherit, and enjoy, all and singular the premises, and
every part and parcel thereof, discharged or s^ved harmless, as is aforesaid:
And also may have, perceive, receive, levy, take, and enjoy, all and every the
Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof coming and growing; According to the purport
and true meaning of these presents, without the let, trouble, eviction, action,
suit, entry, or interruption of the said R. his Heirs or Assigns, and without
any lawful let etc. of any other person or persons, by means of any act of
acts, thing or things whatsoever, had, made, done, or willingly suffered by the
said R. I. or his said Father, Uncle or Grandfather, or by any of them, or by
any other Ancestor or Ancestors of the said R. I. other then such persons as
any thing claim, by reason of the said Leases before excepted, or any of them,
and for and concerning only the Title and Interest of the said several Leases,
and the Condition aforesaid. And also that he the said R. J. and all and every
To make further assurance.
other person and persons, lawfully claiming, having, or pretending to have, or
that hereafter shall or may lawfully pretend, claim, or ought to have any
Estate, Right, Title, Reversion, Remainder, or other thing whatsoever, in or to
the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, by, from, or under the said R. J.
or his said Father, Uncle or Grandfather, or other Ancestor or Ancestors
aforesaid, or any of them, except only such person or persons as shall claim
for or by reason of the Leases before excepted, or any of them, and for and
concerning the Title and Interest of their said several Leases, shall and will
within reasonable time, when and as often as he, they, or any of them, shall be
thereunto reasonably required by the said C. his Heirs or Assigns, within the
space of five years, next ensuing the date hereof, at the costs and charges in
the Law of the said C. his Heirs and Assigns, do make, knowledge, levy and
execute, and suffer to be done etc. all and singular such Fines, Feoffments,
Recoveries, Estates, Assurances, Acts and Things whatsoever, of, for, and
concerning the premises, and every or any parcel thereof, or the assurances
and conveyances thereof, and of every or any parcel of the same: As by the said
C. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council etc. shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised, advised, or required, according to the true meaning and
intent of these presents. And that all the said Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries,
and other Conveyances and Assurances aforesaid, and every of them shall be, and
all and singular person and persons whatsoever, which now or at any time
hereafter, shall or may have or claim any Estate, Title, or Interest, of, in,
or out of the Premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under, or by force or
means of the said Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries, and other Conveyances and
Assurances aforesaid, or any of them, shall at all times, from and after every
Execution or Executions of the said Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries, or other
conveyances or assurances aforesaid, or any of them, stand and be seized of all
and singular the said Premises, before by these presents granted, to the only
use and behoof of the said C. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, upon the
condition before by these presents limited.

Provided always that if default be made of or in the payment of the Proviso.
said Sum of 120 l. or any part thereof, contrary to the form aforesaid; That
then the Grant Bargain and Sale by these preseuts made of the Premises, and
all the Covenants Grants and Articles by these presents made of the part of the
said R. shall be void and of none effect.

And the said C: for him, his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, and every
other person seized to his, their, or any of their uses, does by these presents
covenant and grant, to and with the said R. I. his Heirs and Assigns, that then
and from thenceforth after such default made, of or in payment of the said Sum
of 120 l. or any part thereof as aforesaid, and singular the Fines, Feoffments,
Recoveries, and other conveyances and assurances before mentioned, for any act
to be done by the said C. his Heirs or Assigns, or any other person or persons,
by his or their means, shall bt to the only use of the said R. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And that then, and from and after such default made, it shall
be lawful, to and for the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, without any lawful
let or interruption of the said C. his Heirs and Assigns, or of any other
person or persons, by his or their means, into all and singular the Premises
wholly to re-enter, and the same to re-possesse and have again, as in his
former Estate, clearly discharged or saved harmless, of all Charges, Dowers,
and Encumbrances whatsoever, made or done by the said C. his Heirs or Assigns,
or any other person or persons, claiming by or from the said C. his Heirs or
Assigns, or any other seized to his or their uses; These presents, or any thing
in them contained, or any thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof etc.

And the said C. B. covenanteth etc. That he the said C. his Heirs The
Bargaince to re-deliver the Deeds in case of payment
or Assigns, after default made, of or in payment of the said Sum of 120 l. or
any part thereof, contrary to the form aforesaid, and upon reasonable request
within two months after such request, shall re-deliver or cause etc. to the
said R. his heirs or Assigns, all such Deeds Evidences and Writings, as the
said R: his heirs or Assigns, before such default making: shall have delivered
to the said C. his Heirs or Assigns, touching the Premises or any part thereof,
and that in as good case as the same were received by the said C. his Heirs or
Assigns, of the said R. his Heirs or Assigns.

And the said R. I. covenanteth etc. That he the said R. his Heirs Executors
Aministrators or Assigns, or his or their certain Attorney, from time to time,
when and so soon as the said C. his certain Attorney Executor or Administrator,
shall according to the tenor of these The Bargainor to give acquittance for
money received.
presents, have made any payment of any Moiety of the said Sum of 120 l. shall
and will make and deliver, or cause etc. to the said C. or lately his certain
Attorney Executors Administrators or Assigns, as shall make every or any such
payment, a good and sufficient acquittance and discharge in the Law, under the
hand and seal of the said R. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, of
and for such Moiety of the said Sum of 120 l. as shall be so paid as aforesaid:
In witness, etc. A Feoffmemt upon Condition aforesaid.

A Bargain and Sale of an Annuity granted by a Fine.
THis Indenture etc. between W: G. etc. and E: his wife on the one party, and
S. P. eldest Son of R. P. Citizen etc. on the other party, witnesses, That
whereas W. H. of C. and M: his wife, by one Recital.
Fine Sur Grant, and render levied before the Kings Majesty's Justices of his
Common Bench at W. in the Term of Saint Michael, in the 14. year etc. did grant
to the said W. G. a certain yearly Rent of 9 l. 13 s. 4 d. going out of two
Messuages and two Shops, with their appurtenances in W. etc. and the same to
the said W. G* did render in the said Court; To have and perceive the said
annual Rent of etc. to Habend.
the said W. G. aad his Heirs, at the Feasts of etc. by even portions yearly to
be paid: And if it happen the said yearly Rent of etc. or any Nomine poene upon
default of payment.
part thereof to be behind in part or in the whole, after any Feast of the
Feasts aforesaid, in which it ought to be paid and not paid by the space of
forty days, being asked, that then the said W. M. and the Heirs of the same W.
shall forfeit to the said W. G. and his Heirs 14 s. 4 d. in the name of a pain,
as often as the same yearly Rent of etc. or any part thereof shall be so behind:
And that then and so often it Distress.
shall be lawful to the said W. G. and his Heirs, into the said Messuages and
Shops, with their appurtenances, to enter and distrain, and the Distresses so
there taken and had, lawfully to lead carry and drive away, and with him to
detain, until he shall be fully satisfied and paid, as well of the said yearly
Rent of etc. with the Arreages thereof, if any shall be, as also of the said 14
s. 4 d. in the name of a pain as aforesaid; As by the said Fine amongst other
things therein contained, more plainly will appear.

Now the said W: G: for and in consideration of the sum of etc. Bargain etc.
whereof etc. has bargained and sold, and by these presents does bargain and
sell unto the said S: P. and his Heirs for ever, the said yearly Rent of etc.
as being out of the said two Messuages and two Shops aforesaid, and all the
estate, right, title and interest of the said W: G: and his Heirs, of, in, and
to the same yearly Rent, To have, hold, perceive, Habend.
receive, and enjoy the said yearly Rent of etc. at the said several Feasts
abovesaid, and as the same shall grow due and payable unto the said S: P: his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use of the said S. and of his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And the said W: G: Covenanteth Discharge of Encumbrances.
etc. in form etc. That the said yearly rent now is, and for ever hereafter
shall be, stand and continue to the said S. P. and his Heirs clearly and freely
discharged and acquitted, or otherwise from time to time, and at all times upon
reasonable request, shall be well and sufficiently saved harmless by the said
W: G. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, of, and from all and singular
former bargains, sales, gifts, grant, titles, troubles and encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, done, or procured by the said W. G: or by his knowledge,
consent or Further Assurance.
procurement. And further, that he the said W. G. and the said E his wife, and
the heirs of the same W: and all and every other person or persons, having or
which shall have or lawfully claim, or pretend to have any former estate, right,
title, or interest of, in, or to the said yearly rent of etc. by from, or under
the estate of the said W: G: from time to time upon reasonable requests within
two years next coming, at the costs and charges in the Law only of the said S.
his Heirs or Assigns, shall, and will, do, make, knowledge, suffer, execute and
cause etc. all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing
and things, for the further and more better assurance, and sure making of the
said yearly rent of etc. to be had and made sure to the said S. his Heirs and
Assigns, to his and their own use and uses for ever, as by the said S. his
Heirs or Assigns, or his or their learned Council in the Laws of this Realm
shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised and required. In witness,
etc.

A Bargain and Sale by a man and his wife, she being a Coheir of a third part
of certain Land in Possession, and of a Moiety of another third part of the
same Land in Reversion after the death of the late husband of one of the
Coheirs Tenant by Courtesy.
THis Indenture, etc. between E. M. and M. his wife, one of the Daughters and
Heirs of Sir A. P. Knight deceased on the one party and G: M. etc. on the other
party. That whereas the said Sir A. P. Knight Recital.
was in his life time lawfully seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of, and in one
capital Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances; and all Shops, Cellers
etc. to the said capital Message belonging etc. And the said Sir A so being of
the said capital Message and Premises, with the appurtenances seized, died
thereof seized; by, and after whose death the said capital Message or Tenement
with the appurtenances descended and came to E. M: and A. as the Daughters and
Heirs of the said Sir A. P. which M. the said E: M: has married, and taken to
wife; and whereas also the said E. whom one A. R. took to wife is now deceased,
having no issue of het body now living. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the
said E: M: and M: his wife, for, and in consideration of the sum of 120 l. of
etc. whereof etc. have bargained and sold, and by Bargained etc.
these presents do bargain and sell unto the said G: M: his Heirs and Assigns,
as well all that the third part of the said capital Message or Tenement with
the appurtenances, and the third part of all the said Shops etc. as the Moiety
of all that the Reversion of the third part of the said Message and Premises
which the said A: R: holds for the term of his life as Tenant by the
Courtesy of England, and all the right, title etc. together with all the
Deeds, Evidences etc. to have and to hold the third part, and the said Moiety
of the said Reversion, of the third part of the said Message etc. and of all
the said Shops, etc. Habend.
and all their estates, titles and interests, in, and to the premises to the
G: M: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use etc. and the said
Covenant for further ^ssurance.
E: M. Covenanteth etc. that they the said E: and M: his wife, and the Heirs
and Assigns of the said M. shall, during the space of five years, at the
reasonable request of the said G: his Heirs or Assigns, at his and their own
proper costs and charges during the said term of five years make to the said G:
and his Heirs, all such further assurance etc. be it by Deed enrolled etc. or
otherwise,, as by the said G: or his Council shall be devised etc. and that the
said third part and Moiety of the Reversion of the other third part of the said
Message etc. is free of encumbrances done by the Vendors, or by any, or by any
by their means, the Rents and Services except etc. In witness etc.

A Sale or Transport of goods arrested and stayed in Flanders by hy the King of
Spains Authority, and of all recumpence which may be had for the same.
THis Indenture, etc, between I: S: etc. on the one party, and R. P. and R: B:
etc. on the other party witnesses, That whereas the said I: S: lately before
Christmas, in the year etc. did ship in the Port of London to be discharged at
Antwerp in Brabant, diverse woollen Clothes in a Ship whereof was Master one W.
H. to the value of etc. And whereas also about the same time the said I. S, had
shipped at Antwerp aforesaid to be discharged at London, in a ship whereof was
Master etc. d^vers Foreign goods, merchandises and commodities, amounting to
the value of etc. of Flanders money, all which said clothes, goods,
merchandises, and commodities by reason of the late restraint of entercourses
made between the King of Spains Subjects, and the Subjects of the Kings Majesty
were stayed and arrested by the Kings Authority in Flanders, and there
detained, as more plainly appears, Recorded and Entered before the Kings
Majesty's Commissioners here in England in that behalf appointed.

Now the said I: S: for, and in consideration of a certain sum of money by him
had, and already received of the said R. and R. has granted, bargained, sold,
and assigned, and by these presents does grant etc. to the said R: and R. all
and singular the said clothes, merchandises, goods, and commodities aforesaid
for their own use, to them, their Executors and Assigns, to he had, taken and
enjoyed, as they or any of them may be gotten or come by for ever, together
with all and every such allowance, recompense and satisfaction whatsoever,
which is or shall be limited, allowed, or assigned to the said I: S: his
Executors or Assigns for the Premises, or any part thereof, or which may or
shall be had or taken by the said I. his Executors and Assigns, by way of any
such allowance, recompense, or satisfaction any manner of way. And the said I.
S. for him etc. does Covenant etc. in form etc. that the said R, and R. their
Executors and Assigns, or any of them, for, and in the name or names of the
said I. S. his Executors and Administrators, or otherwise as it shall be
requisite, shall, or may ask, demand, take, and receive all, and all manner of
satisfact on, recompense and allowance whatsoever to be had, made, or given to
the said I: S: his Executors or Assigns for the premises or any part thereof
without the let, hinderance, gainsaying or interruption, of the said I: his
Executors or Administrators; and that the said R: and R. their Executors and
Administrators, or any of them, for and in the name or names aforesaid, may
lawfully compound and agree for the Premises, and every or any part thereof;
And thereupon make, seal, and deliver such Release and Releases, or any other
discharge in the name or names aforesaid, as to them the said R. or R. their
Executors or Assigns, or any of them shall seem requisite. And that to the
getting, obtaining, and enjoying of all or any of the Premises., according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents: It shall and may be lawful to
the said R. and R. their Executors or Assigns, or any of them, from time to
time, and at all times, to do, knowledge, execute, and finish, all and every
thing and things, for and in the name or names of etc. as thereunto shall be
needful in any wise.

And further that the said J. S. heretofore has not had or received the
Premises, or any part thereof, or any satisfaction or recompense for the same,
or any part thereof, or hereafter without the consent of the said R. etc. shall
not receive or take the Premises, or any part thereof, or any satisfaction for
the same, or any part thereof, neither shall do or knowledge any thing which
shall let or hinder the said R. and R. their Executors or Assigns, to have,
take, and enjoy for their own use, the Premises and every part thereof,
according to the true meaning of these presents: In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Reversion or Remainder in Land well passed.
THis Indenture, etc Between W. P. the elder, of L. Gentleman, Son of M. P.
late of L. aforesaid, Gentleman, deceased, and of A. his wife, Daughter of K.
D. late of Saint B. of L. Widow, deceased, on the one party, and M. L. of L.
Widow, on the other party, witnesses, That the said W. P. for and in
consideration of 120 l. of etc. Has Consideration. Bargain and Sale.
given granted bargained and sold, and by these presents does fully clearly and
absolutely, give grant bargain and sell unto the said M. L. her Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that Message or Tenement etc. and all and singular
Cellars Sollers Rooms Back-sides Yards void Grounds Lights Easements
Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging, or in any wise appurtaining: And the Reversion and Reuersions,
Remainder and Remainders of all and singular the Premises, and of every part
thereof. And all the Estate Right Title Interest Claim and Demand of him the
said W. P. of, in, and to the said Message or Tenement, and other the
Premises with their appurtenances. And also all and singular Deeds Evidences
Charters Deeds, etc.
Wills Writings Escripts and Mynuments whatsoever, touching or concerning the
Premises, or any part ot parcel thereof: To have and to Habendum. etc.
hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the Premises
before herein bargained and sold, or mentioned to be bargained and sold, from,
in, and after etc. unto the said M. L. her Heirs and Assigns, to and for the
only and proper use and behoof of the said M. L. and of her Heirs and Assigns
for ever. And the said W. P. Covenants that he is seized of the Reversion or
Remainder in see, etc.
for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, does
covenant promise and Grant, to and with the said M. L. her Heirs Executors and
Assigns, and every of them by these presents, in manner etc. that is to say,
That he the said W. P. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, is and stands rightfully and absolutely seized of the immediate
Remainder or Reversion of the said Message or tenement and other the Premises
with the Appurtenances, depending in an Estate for term of the natural life of
the said A. P. of and in the same as of fee and right, to the only use and
behoof of the said W. P. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever without any
condition or limitation of use or uses whatsoever, And that he the said W. P.
now has full power good right and lawful authority in and by Power to sell*
the law to bargain sell and assure the said Reversion or Remainder of the
said Message or tenement and of all and singular other the Premises, above by
these Presents, mentioned, to be hereby bargained and sold, with all and
singular the Appurtenances unto the said M. L: her Heirs and Assigns, to the
only use and behoof of the said M: and of her Heirs and Assigns for ever, in
manner and form aforesaid.

Here follows a Covenant for discharge of Encumbrances. And another That the
Particular Tenants life shall attorne.
for making further Assurance. And also that the said A. P. shall within the
space of six months next after reasonable request to be made by the said M. L.
her Heirs Executors or Assigns in due form of Law attorn tennant to the said M.
L. her Heirs or Assigns in the said Message or Tenement or other the
Premises, for and in respect of That the Vendee shall enjoy without
Interruption.
the said A. her said Estate of and in the same. And further that she the said
M. L. her Heirs and Assigns to her and their own proper use and behoof from
time to time and at all times from and after the decease of the said A. P.
shall or may lawfully peacably and quietly have hold occupy, and enjoy the said
Messuages, or Tenements and all and singular other the Premises with the
Appurtenances. And the Rents Issues Revenues and profits thereof continuing or
growing to her and their own proper use and behoof shall or may receive
perceive and enjoy without any let, resistance, disturbance, eviction,
molestation, or interruption of the said W. P. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of
them, and without any lawful let, resistance, disturbance, eviction,
molestation, recovery, or interruption of any other person or persons
whatsoever, other then the said chief Lord or Lords, of Fee or Fees of the
premises, for and in respect only of their Services: In Witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale by Executors of a House which is devised to be sold to the
most advantage.
THis Indenture etc. between A. G. etc. I. B. eldest Son of T. B. late etc.
deceased, and P. B. second Son of the said T. Executors of the last Will and
Testament of the same T: on the one party, and N. B. etc. on the other party,
witnesses, That whereas the said T. B. in his life time, was seized in his
Demesne as of Fee, of and in all the great Message and Tenement etc. with all
and singular Shops etc. to the same Message, and other the Premises, or any
part thereof, by any means belonging or appurtaining, or used with the same etc.
And the said T. B. being so seized of the said Message and other the
Premises, did make his last Will and Testament in writing, dated etc. and
thereby did will and devise the said Message and Tenement, with the
appurtenances, in form as follows, that is to say, Item, I will that my
Mansion house with the appurtenances, be sold to the most advantage, and the
money thereof to be divided equally amongst my Children, part and part like.
Provided always, that if M. my Daughter be then married or toward marriage,
that she have my House before any other, giving as much therefore as any other,
so and in such sort as the rest of my Children be not hindered thereby: And then
of the same his last Will and Testament, did order and make his Executors the
said A. J. and P. as by the same last Will and Testament may plainly appear.

And after died seized of the Premises, of such Estate as aforesaid. And for
as much as M. the said Daughter of the said T. is now married unto one H. G.
and profer has been made to her and her Husband to have the said House before
any other, giving as much therefore as any other; And thereupon the said M. and
her Husband have clearly refused so to have the same house. The said A. J. and
P. for and in Bargain.
consideration of the Sum of 466 l. 13 s. 4 d. of etc. to them before hand paid
by the said N. B. (which is the most advantage that the said Mansion house
might in any wise be sold for.) Of which said Sum of etc. have bargained and
sold and granted, and by these presents do grant bargain and sell to the said
N. and his Heirs for ever, all the said Message or Tenement, situate etc.
with all and singular Shops etc to the same belonging or appurtaining, or in
any wise used with the same or accepted as part thereof, in the time of the said
T. B. or at any time since, situate, lying, and being between such Bounds and
Limits as is abovesaid. And also the Reversion and Reversions of all and
singular the above bargained Premises, And all and singular Deeds etc. which
the same A. I. and P. have touching the same, or Covenant to deliver the Wools
which they etc. To have and to hold the said Message and Tenement, and all
other the above bargained Premises, with the appurtenances, and the Reuersion
and Reuersions thereof to the said N. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the
only use of the said N. etc.

And the said A. G. for him etc. covenanteth with the Vendee etc. the Premises
to stand for ever, to the said N. B. discharged of all Encumbrances by the said
A. or his procurement. The chief Rents and Services etc. only except and
foreprised. And further etc. A Covenant by the said A. for further assurance:
In witness etc.

A Sale of Wool.
THis Indenture etc. Between Sir R. K. on the one party, and R. W. on the other
party, witnesses, That the said Sir R K. has bargained and sold, and by these
presents does etc, unto the said R. W. all the Wools of the proper growth of
the Sheep of the said Sir R. K. this present year, being by estimation the
Wool of 5400. Sheep, or therabouts, at the price of 22 s. of etc. the Todd,
all the same Wools to be waighed by the half Sack, which is 6. Todds and a half
at a draught, and at every second draught to allow unto the said R. W. his
Executors or Assigns, one Fleece of Wool for over-waight, according as the use
and custom has heretofore been at F. aforesaid, And all the said Bargain of
Woolls to be well washed, and to be wrought by a sworn man, as the Woolls of
the said Sir R. K: has heretofore accustomarily been: In consideration of
which said Bargain of Woolls, the said R. W. has paid and delivered to the
said Sir R. the Sum of 500 l. of etc. whereof the said Sir R, acknowledges the
Receipt accordingly by these presents.

And the said Sir R. for him, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant and grant, to and with the said R. W. his Executors and Assigns, by
these presents, That he the said Sir R: his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, at his or their own proper costs and charges, shall and will well and
truly deliver, or cause etc. to the said R. W. his Executors or Assigns, all
the said bargain of Wolls of the said kind growth and goodness aforesaid, at
or before the last day of September next coming, after the date hereof, at the
Manor place of the said Sir R. situate in F. aforesaid. And the said R. W.
for him etc. covenanteth etc. That he the said R. W. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, at and upon the full delivery of the said bargain of
Wools at F. aforesaid, shall well and truly content and pay, or cause etc. to
the said Sir R. his etc. the rest and residue of such Sums of money, as the
said bargain of Woolls at the price above specified shall amount unto, over and
above the said 500 l. paid and disbursed by the said R: to the said Sir R.
before hand, upon the bargain of Wools as aforesaid.

And the said Sir R. covenanteth etc: That if the said bargain of Woolls, at
and upon the delivery thereof as aforesaid, shall not amount to the full Sum of
500 l. after the rate and price of 22 s. the Todd, that then he the said Sir R.
his Executors or Assigns, at or upon the delivery of the same Wools, shall well
and truly content and pay, or cause etc. to the said R. his Executors and
Assigns, all such money, as the same Woolls shall want of the same 500 l. at
the rate and price aforesaid, without fraud or covin: In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale by two Coheirs in Land, of a Reversion.
THis Indenture made etc. Between I. K. etc. and K. his wife, and E. C: etc.
Heirs of I. S. deceased on the one party, and T. B. etc. on the other party,
witnesses, That whereas A. S. of B. in the County Recital of the Estate for
life in being Of Freehold
of H. Widow, late the wife of W. S. deceased, now is lawfully seized of an
Estate of Freehold, for term of her life, of and in one Message set and
builded in B. aforesaid, and of and in diverse Lands, Meadows, and Pasture,
lying and being in the Parishes of etc. containing by estimation 20. acres, be
they more or less; The Reversion of two six parts of all and singular the
premises, do severally belong and appurtain to the said J. K. and K. his wife,
and C. and M. his wife, as to two of the Sisters and Heirs of the said I. S.

And whereas also the said J: K: did late purchase to him and his Heirs of W: H:
of etc. and of R. his wife, and of T: E. of H: etc. and A. his wife, two other
of the Sisters and Coheirs of the said J: S: their two six parts of all and
singular the premises, that is to say, one third part of all the same premises
as by one Indenture betwixt them thereof made and bearing date the 13th day of
May now last past more plainly will appear. The said I: K: and K: his wife for
the sum of 60 l. of etc. to them paid before the ensealing of these presents by
the said T. B. have given, granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents
do etc. unto the said T: B: and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as well all
the sixth part of the said J. K. and K. his wife which they have in the right of
the same K: of, and in the said Message, and all other the premises, as also
all those two sixth parts, or one third Part of all and singular the same
Message and Premises, so by the said J: K: purchased of the said W. H. and R.
his wife, and T: E: and A: his wife as aforesaid, and all the estate, right,
reversion, title, interest, part, parts, and purparts whatsoever, which they
the said J: K: and K. his wife have, or either of them has or ought to have,
of, in or to the said Message and Premises, or to every, or any part or parts
thereof whatsoever; and also the said E. C: and M: his wife, for the sum of 24
l. of etc. have, aliened, granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents
etc. to the said T: B: and to his Heirs or Assigns for ever, all the sixth part
of the said E: and M: which they have in the right of the same M: of and in the
said Message, and all other the premises, and all their estate, right, title,
reversion, interest, part, parts, and purparts whatsoever which they the said
E. and M: his wife have, or either of them has or ought to have, of, in, or to
the said Message and Premises, or in, or to every, or any part or parcel
thereof whatsoever, and the said J: K: and K. his wife, and the said E: C: and
M: his wife, for the consideration aforesaid do by these presents bargain and
sell to the said T. B. all the Deeds, Charters, Evidences and Writings touching
the premises, and every of them severally do promise and grant to deliver unto
the said T: upon reasonable request at any time so many of the said Evidences,
as they, or any of them have, or without Suit may come by without any manner of
fraud or covin, to have and to hold all the said parts of the Habend.
said Message and Premises, with all and singular their appurtenances and all
other the premises by these presents above bargained and sold to the said T.
B: and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use etc. and the said I.
K. and T. C. for themselves, and for their wives, Covenant for knowledging of
Fines.
their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do severally and
apart, every of them only for the part of himself, and of the Heirs Executors
and Administrators, Covenant and Grant to and with the said T. B. his Heirs
Executors Administrators and Assigns by these presents in manner and form etc.
that they the said J. K. and K his wife for their part, and also that the said
E. C. and M. his wife for their part, at the cost and charges in the Law of the
said T. B. or of his Executors or Administrators in this present Hillary Term
holden at Westminster by Fine to be orderly levied and recorded before the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas etc. shall grant to the said T. and his
Heirs all the said four sixth parts of the said Message, Lands, and Tenements,
and all other the premises by these presents above bargained and sold by the
name of four Parts, into six parts divided of one Message, one Barn, one
Garden, one Orchard, 22. acres of Land, 2. acres of Meadow, 15. acres of
Pasture, with their appurtenauces in B. L. A. W. A. and T. in the said County
of H. into six parts divided as aforesaid, and the same shall severally warrant
against them and the Heirs of the said K. and M. for ever, and that the said
Message and Premises, and every of them at the time of the levying and
Engrossing For discharge Encumbrances.
of the said Fine shall be and stand clearly acquitted and discharged, or
otherwise or at all times sufficiently saved harmless by the said I. K. his
Heirs or Executors for the part of the said I. and K. his wife; and by the said
E. his Heirs or Executors for the part of the said E. and M. his wife of and
from all and singular former Bargains, Sales, Grants, Titles, Estates and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, granted, or willingly suffered by the said
I. K. and K. his wife on their part, and by the said E. C. and M. his wife on
their part, and also that the said J. K. and K. his wife on their behalf and
their Heirs, and the E. C. For further assurance.
and M. his wife on their behalf, and the Heirs of the said M. shall and will
at all time and times during four years next etc. at, and upon the reasonable
request, costs and charges in the Law of the said T. B: his Heirs or Assigns,
do suffer and acknowledge all and every such thing or things, act and acts in
the Law, with such warranty as aforesaid, as shall be reasonably devised or
advised by the learned Council of the said T. B. or of his Heirs or Assigns,
for the assurance, sure conveying and sure making of all the said four sixth
parts, and of all other part and parts, and of all the estate, right, title,
reversion and interest which the said I. and K. his wife and their Heirs, and
which the said E. and M. his wife, and the Heirs of the said M. severally have,
or may have, or claim to have, to, of, or in the said Message, or other the
premises to be had conveyed and made sure to the said T. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, to, and for the only use and behoof of the said T. and of his Heirs
and Assigns for ever. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Reversion, or Remainder of the third part of certain
Lands.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R: T. etc. on the one party, and I. L. etc.
on the other party witnesses. That whereas the late King H. 8. by his Letters
Patents under the great Seal of E. bearing date at Westminster etc. Did amongst
diverse other things, Give and Grant to A: B: the Site, Circuit and Precinct of
the late dissolved Monastery or Priory of M: with the appurtenances in the
County of L. and all manner of Messuages, Houses, Cottages, Barns, Stables
Dove-houses, Mills, void Grounds, Gardens, Orchards, and other Edifiees and
Buildings, with their appurtenances within the Site, Circuit and Precinct of
the said late Monastery or Priory, and the Churchyard thereof, and all great
Trees, Woods, and under-Woods growing and being in and upon the said Site,
Circuit and Precinct of the said late Monastery or Priory or any part or parcel
thereof, and the soil and ground of the same, great Trees, Woods, and
under-Woods, and certain Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures,
Feedings and Hereditaments of the clear yearly value of 8 l. 12 s. of lawful
etc. situate lying and being in B. H. B. and M. in the said County of L. to
the said late Monastery or Priory, sometime belonging and appurtaining: To have
and to hold the same to the said A. B. for term of their lives, and the longer
liver of them, the remainder thereof after their deceases to the Heirs of the
body of the said A: B: lawfully begotten; the Reversion thereof in Fee-simple to
the said late King, the which said Reversion or Remainder of the third part of
all and singular the forenamed premises is descended to the Lady M. now wife
of H. Earl of D. and to the Heirs of her body, as one of the Coheirs of the
said A. B. to take effect immediately after the decease of the said R. And the
said Reversion or Remainder of one third part of all the same Premises, the
said Earl and Lady M. now have to them and the Heirs of the said Lady M. for
ever, of the Gift and Grant of our said Sovereign Lady Queen Eliz. by her
Highness Letter Patents, bearing date etc. as by the said Letters Patents
appears.

And the said Earl and Lady M. by their Indenture of Bargain and Sale, dated 9
Iunij 16. Eliz. and enrolled in her Majesty's Court commonly called the Kings
Bench at Westminster, have bargained, sold, and conveyed, all their said
Reversion and Remainder, and their whole Estate, of and in all and singular the
Premises to the said R. T. and his Heirs for ever; As by the said last recited
Indenture may appear.

Now the said R. T. for and in consideration of the Sum of 533 l. 6 s. 8 d. of
lawful etc: whereof etc. has aliened bargained and sold, and by these presents
does etc. unto the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all those the
said Remainder and Remainders, Reversion and Reversions, which late were to the
said Earl and Lady M. and the Heirs of the said Lady M. and which he the said
R. now has, of and in the said third part and portion, of and in all the said
Site, Circuit, and Precinct of the said late Monastery or Priory of M. with
the appurtenances, in the said County of L. and of and in the third part and
portion of the Demesne Lands, of the said late dissolved Monastery or Priory of
M. and of and in the third part of all the said Messuages Lands Tenements
Meadows Feedings Pastures and Hereditaments, of the said yearly value of 8 l.
12 s. in B. H. B. and M: in the said County of L. And also all the Right Estate
Title Interest Reversion Remainder Demand, which he the said R: T: has or
ought to have, of, in, or to the said bargained Site Circuit and Precinct,
Demesne Lands Tenements Messuages, Lands Hereditaments, and all and singular
other the said bargained Premises, with their appurtenances, by force and
virtue of the said Indenture of Bargain and Sale aforesaid, or otherwise: And
all Deeds Evidences Charters Writings Rentals Books of Survey Court Rolls
Terrors and Mynuments whatsoever, only concerning the above bargained
Premises, or only any part thereof. As many of which said Deeds etc. To have
and to hold all that the Habend.
said Remainder and Remainders, Reversion and Reversions of the said third part
and portion of the said Site Circuit and Precinct of the said late Monastery
or Priory of M: and all the Houses, and all and singular other the Premises,
with their appurtenances, above by these presents, bargained and sold unto the
said I: L: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use etc.

And the said R. T. covenanteth etc in form etc. That the said bargained
Covenant to discharge Encumbrances.
Remainders or Reversions of the said third part, of all and singular the said
Premises, and of all and every part thereof now be, and at all times hereafter,
shall be and continue clearly acquitted exonerated and discharged, or otherwise
sufficiently saved harmless by the said R: his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, of and from all and singular Feofments, Bargains, Sales, Gifts,
Grants, Leases, Wills, Annuities, Rents, Charges, arre^ages of Rents, Bonds
Statutes, Recognisances, Mortgages, Judgments, Executions Jointures, Dowers,
Fines for Alienations, Amerciaments Charges, Titles, and Encumbrances
whatsoever made or done, or to be made or done by the said R. T. (The chief
rents and services from the decease of the said Lady K. now Duchess of S. to be
due to the chief Lords of the Fee or Fees of the Premises, and any intrusion
or other forfeiture, charge, or Encumbrance for not suing of License of
alienation heretofore, had, made, or suffered only except and fore-prised..)

And further the said R. T. covenanteth etc: That he the said R. T. For further
Assurance.
and I. his wife, and the Heirs of the same R. and all and every other person
and persons, which lawfully have or shall, or may lawfully claim to have any
lawful Right Title Interest or Estate, of, in, or to the above bargained
Premises, or any part thereof, by or from the Estate Interest or Right of the
said R. shall and will at all times during one year next coming, upon every
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said I. his
Heirs or Assigns, do, make, knowledge, and suffer, and cause to be done, made,
knowledged, and suffered, all and singular such lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things, with warranty only against the said R. T. and his
Heirs, or otherwise without warranty: As by the said I. L. his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned, shall be lawfully devised, or
advised, of and for all the said above bargained Remainder or Reversion of all
the said third part, of all and singular the above bargained Premises, and
every part thereof to be had and conveyed to the said I. L. his Heirs and
Assigns, for their own use for ever: So as the said R. and I. for any such
assurance to be made or had, shall not be enforced or compelled to travel out
of the City of L. And it is covenanted, conclude agreed and condescended by and
between the parties to these presents, and every of them. And the said R. T.
for him his Heirs and Assigns, does covenant conclude agree and condescend by
these presents, that all and every Estate and Estates, Fine and Fines, Recovery
and Recoveries, Conveyances and assurances now had and made, or hereafter to be
had or made of the said bargained Premises, or any part thereof, by the said R.
T. or his Heirs, shall for ever be, and be d^emed, judged and taken to be, to
and for the only use and behoof of the said I: L* and the Heirs and Assigns of
the same I: L: for ever. And that all and every other person and persons that
now is, or that hereafter shall be seized of and in the Premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, for and to the use of the said R: T. shall from henceforth
stand and be seized of the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders
of the same Premises, and every part thereof, to the only uses Intents
limitations and purposes mentioned and specified in these presents, and to none
other use or uses, intent or purpose whatsoever.

A Bargain and Sale of an Annuity by him that has the Grant thereof from
another, under a Condition.
THis Indenture etc. between etc. witnesses, That whereas A. B. of etc. has
granted to the said A. B. one annuity or yearly Rent of 10 l. of etc. issuing
out of all the Lands and Tenemens of the said W. in E. aforesaid, or elsewhere
in the County of O. yearly to be paid to the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever; As by a pair of Indentures thereof made between the said W. on the one
party, and the said A. on the other party, bearing date etc. more plainly and
at large does appear.

In which Indentures there is a Proviso and Condition contained; Proviso.
That if the said W. his Heirs etc. do pay etc. to the said A. his Executors
etc. the sum of 100 l. of etc, at the end of ten years mentioned in the same
Indentures; That then and from thenceforth the said annuity and yearly Rent
shall clearly cease and be no longer paid: As by the tenor of the Proviso and
Condition aforesaid, contained in the said former Indentures will also appear.

Now the said A: B: for and in consideration etc. has given granted assigned
and set over, and by these presents does give grant assign Grant.
and set over to the said C: D: etc the said annuity and yearly Rent of ten
pounds aforesaid, and all the Estate Right Title and Interest of the said A.
and his Heirs and Assigns in and to the same: And all Right Title Interest
Power and Authority, to take Distress and Distresses therefore, and for any
part thereof, as fully and freely as the said A, might or could do. And also the
said sum of 100 l. and every part thereof, if it happen to be paid, and all the
right title claim and interest which the said A. has or may have in and to the
same. And in and to every or any part thereof: To have hold perceive receive
Habendum.
and enjoy the said annuity and every part thereof: And the said 100 l. and
every part thereof to the said A: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the use etc.

A Bargain and Sale by a Coheirs Son and Heir, of his preparty in certain Land.
THis Indenture etc. between F. C. of etc. Son and Heir of M. C. one of the
Daughters and Coheirs of R. T. of S. in the County of G. Esquire, deceased, on
the one party, and N. M. of etc. on the other party, witnesses, That the said
F. C. for and in consideration of the sum of 220 l. of etc. whereof etc. has
given etc. And by these presents, does give grant bargain and sell to the said
N. M. and his Heirs for ever, all that part and pre-party of the said F. of and
in all and singular those Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions and
Hereditaments, situate lying and being in B. in the County of C. now or late
in the several Tenures of etc. And also all and singular Manors Messuages
Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services Courts, Perquisites of Courts, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, and parts and preparts of all and every Messuages
etc. which the said F: C: now lawfully has, or ought to have of any Estate
whatsoever, in B. aforesaid, or elsewhere in the County of C. And the Reversion
and Reversions, Rents Issues and Profits of all and singular the Premissos: And
all and singular Deeds Evidences and Writings, only touching the Premises or
only any part thereof: As many of which said Deeds etc. as the said F. C has in
his custody, or that be in the custody of any other, by his consent or
delivery, which he may get and come by without suit in the Law, He the said F.
for him etc. covenanteth etc. well and safely to deliver, or cause etc. to the
said N. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, at the now Mansion house of etc.
at or on this side etc. To have and to hold all and singular the Habend.
said Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions and Hereditaments and all and
singular other the Premises, with their appurtenances, to the said N. M. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said N: and of
his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said F. C: for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenants
seized in Fee-simple or Fee-tail.
and every of them Covenanteth etc. in form etc. that is to say, That he the
said F. C. now is, and stands lawfully sole seized of a good, perfect,
absolute and rightful Estate in Fee-simple or Fee-Tayle in possession, or in
Reversion expectant upon the determination of Lease or Leases for term of years
of, and in Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Heredit, or parts and preparts of
Messuages Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, situate lying and being in B.
aforesaid in the said County of C. or within three miles distance thereof in the
same County, to the clear yearly value of 7. l. or there about as the same are
now letten and demised. And that he the said F. C. and M: now his wife on this
To levy a Fine.
side the said etc. shall in due form of Law, and according to the ordinary
manner of Fines knowledge and levy one fine with proclamation according to the
due form and course of Law in the said County of C. unto the said N. M. and his
Heirs, of all and singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Reversions and
Hereditaments aforesaid, or of all their part and prepart of the same as shall
be requisite and agreeable to their estate with such, and so many terms, and
words of course as shall be sufficient to convey in the same Fine all the
premises, and the same to pass with warranty against all men.

And also that all and singular the above bargained premises now To discharge
of Encumbrance.
are and from henceforth shall stand, and continue clearly and freely acquitted
and discharged* or otherwise from time to time, at all times sufficiently saved
harmless by the said F. etc. of and from all and singular former Bargains,
Sales, Grants, Leases, Recognisances Statutes, Jointtures, Dowers, Rents,
Arrerages of Rents, Fines, Amerciaments Estates Titles, Charges and
Encumbrances whatsoever, the Rents and Services hereafter to be due to be paid
and done for the premises to the chief Lord and Lords of the Fee thereof; and
all Leases for term of years made Exceptions.
only of the Moiety, or one half of the said Bargains, Premises, or not of
any more then one Moiety thereof, and not exceeding twenty years now next to
come, only except and foreprised. And further, that the above bargained
premises are, and shall, or lawfully for ever The yearly value.
may be, and continue to the said N, M. his Heirs and Assigns, of the said
clear yearly Rent and value of 7 l. over and above all yearly charges and
reprises; and moreover that the said F. C. and his Heirs Further assurance.
from time to time at all times, during the space of seven years next ensuing
at and upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law,
only of the said M. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall, and will, do, make,
knowledge, suffer and Execute, and cause etc. all and singular such lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things in the Law for the further assurance,
conveyance, surety, and sure making of all and singular the above bargained
Premises to be conveyed and made sure to the said N. M. his Heirs or Assigns
for ever to the only use etc. as by the said N. M. his Heirs or Assigns, or by
his or their Council learned in the Laws of this Realm shall be reasonably and
lawfully devised or advised.

And that all Assurances and Coveyances whatsoever had, made, or To lend the
use.
suffered, or to be had, made, or suffered by the said F. C. and M. his wife,
or either of them, his, her, or their Heirs or Assigns to the said N: M: his
Heirs or Assigns, or to any other person or persons shall be and enure to the
only use and behoof of the said N. M. his Heirs and Assignr for ever, and to
none other use, intent or purpose. And For quiet Enjoyment.
also that the said N. M. his Heirs and Assigns, shall or may from henceforth
have and hold all and singular the above bargained Premises, and lawfully and
quietly have, take, perceive, receive and enjoy all the Rents, Issues and
Profits thereof for ever, without any Let, Trouble or Impediment of the said F.
C. or his Heirs, and without any lawful Let, Trouble, Impediment or Eviction of
any person or persons, having or which shall have, or claim to have any estate,
right, title or interest, in, or to the Premises, or any part thereof, by or
from the said F. C: or R. T. or any of his or their Ancestors whatsoever. And
the said N. M. Covenanteth etc. That he the said N: or his Executors upon
reasonable request shall and will pay and allow to the said F: C: all such
ordinary charges as the same F. shall necessarily expend and lay out for the
knowledging and passing of the said Fine, so by the said F: and his wife to be
knowledged as abovesaid. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Rentcharge.
THis Indenture etc. between E: P: Lord M. on the one party, and I: L: etc: on
the other party witnesses, That whereas the said Lord M: is seized in
Fee-simple or Fee-tail, of one Rentcharge of 50. Marks by the year, issuing
and coming and to be received and taken out of the Manor of S: and diverse
other Messuages Lands and Tenements in S: in the County of B payable yearly at
the Feasts of Saint Michael the Archangel, and Easter, by even portions, and
of one rent Note the Council thought best not to recite the said Deed, so that
it might be lost and so the purchasor should be in peril to loose this Rent
charge. Note also that this Annuity might be claimed by prescription, for that
the Lord M. and his Ancestors have been seized as it a 100. years.
of 100 s. Nomine poene, to be paid as often as the said rent of 50. Marks in
part or in all, shall be unpaid by the space of four months next after any day
of payment of the same, likewise issuing and coming, and to be received and
taken out of the said Manor and other the Messuages Lands and Tenements in S.
aforesaid, with authority and power to dist^ain for the said rents and the
arrerages of the said rent of 100 s. in the said Manor Messuages Lands and
Tenements, and being also seized in Fee-simple, of the Manor of I: in the
County of H: with the appurtenances.

Now the said E: P. Lord M. for and in consideration of the sum of 400 l. etc.
whereof etc. Has bargained and sold, given and granted, and by these presents,
does fully clearly and absolutely bargain sell give and grant unto the said I:
L: all that the said Manor of I. and all Messuages Lands Tenements Rents
Reversions Services and other Hereditaments, with all and singular their
appurtenances, parcel of or belonging unto the said Manor, or reputed,
accepted, or taken, as part, parcel, or member of the same, situate, lying
and being, coming, growing, and renewing, in the said County of H. or
elsewhere. And all that the said Rent*charge of 50. Marks, issuing and coming
out of the said Manor of S. and other Lands and Tenements in S. aforesaid. And
also all that the said Rent of 100 s. Nomine poene, for non-payment of the said
yearly Rent of 50. Marks to be received and taken out of the said Manor, and
other Messuages Lands and Tenements in S. as is aforesaid. And all other Rents
Duties and Profits Advantages Rights Actions, Suits Duties Commodities and
Demands, that the said Lord M. has or ought to have, of, or in the said Manor
of S. Messuages Lands and Tenements, or issuing or coming out of the said
Manor Messuages Lands and Tenements in S. with all and singular their
appurtenances, or any part thereof. To have and to hold, perceive, levy take,
and enjoy all and singular the said Habendum.
Rent of 50. Marks yearly, and the Rent of 100 s. Nomine poene, and all other
Rents Duties Profits Advantages Commodities and Premises out of S. as is
aforesaid, before bargained and sold, or mentioned etc. by these presents* to
the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of
the said I: L: his Heirs and Assigns for ever And to have and to hold the said
Manor of I. Lands Tenements and other the Premises thereunto belonging or
reputed, accepted, or taken, as part parcel or member of the same, with their
appurtenances, unto the said I. L. and his Heirs, for and during the natural
life of one K: H.

And the said E: Lord M. for the consideration aforesaid, has also bargained,
sold, given, and granted; And by these presents etc. unto the said I: L: all
the Deeds etc. concerning the said The Manor is assured in consideration that
K. H. has as-surance of 30 l. a year out of the said Rentcharge of 50. Marks,
that out of this Manor Mr L. might have 30 l. a year in lieu thereof, the which
he receives upon a Lease that the Lord M. takes of this Manor from Mr. L.
Rents Profits etc. in S: aforesaid, or any of them; all which or as many etc.
A Covenant that the Lord M: is lawfully seized in Fee-simple, of the Manor of
I: and in Fee simple or Fee-tail, of the Rentcharge and 5 l. Nomine poene,
without any Reversion or Remainder in the Queen; And has full power to convey
the same to I: L. as aforesaid, and that the said Rentcharge is of the clear
yearly value of 50. Marks of etc. over and above all Charges, Deductions, and
Reprises: And of the same clear yearly value, shall or may continue to the said
I: his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And also that the said Manor of I: and
other the Premises thereunto belonging, be, and shall be or may continue to the
said I: his Heirs and Assigns, for the term of the life of the said K. H:
according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, of the clear yearly
value of 30 l. of etc. over and above all Charges and Reprises.

And also the said E: Lord M: covenanteth with the said I. L: etc. That as well
the said I: L. his Heirs Executors and Assigns, in respect of the premises, as
also the said Manor of I: shall or may from henceforth continue, remain, and
be, unto the said I: L. his Heirs and Assigns, for and during the life of the
said K: And also the said Rent and Penalty shall or may be and continue to the
said I. L: his Heirs and Assigns, fully and clearly etc. or otherwise saved
harmless of and from etc. had, made, done, or committed by the said Lord M. or
by any other person or persons, at or before the ensealing of these presents,
one grant of 30 l. per annum, made of part of the said rent of 50. Marks to the
said K. holden for term of her life, and the chief Rents and Services of the
said Manor of I: to the chief Lord of the Fee thereof, and all Leases for term
of years, or lives and Copyhold Estates heretofore made, whereupon the old and
accustomed rent, or more is reserved, or shall be payable yearly during the
said Leases and Estates to the said I* L: his Heirs and Assigns. And all and
singular such Charges and Encumbrances, by all which the said Manor of I:
shall not be This general Exception was part inrespect of Fees and Penti^ns,
and such other petty charges as are paid to Officers
made of less value then of 40 l. by the year, only excepted and fore-prised.

And further the said E: Lord M: covenanteth etc. That he the said Lord M. and
his Heirs, and the right honorable Lady E: now his wife, and all and every
other person and persons, having, or that hereafter shall or may lawfully have
or claim any Estate or Interest in the said Rents and other the premises out
of S: aforesaid, or any part thereof, other then the said K: H: for her said
rent or sum of 30 l. during the term of her natural life, at the reasonable
request costs and charges in the Law etc. A Covenant for further assurance.

And the said Lord M: does further covenant etc. That he the said Lord M. and
the said honorable Lady now his wife, shall for more assurance etc. A Covenant
for levying a Fine to the said I: L: both for the Manor of I: and the
Rentcharge of 50. Marks and 5 l. Nomine poene. And it is agreed and granted
between the said Lord M: and I: L: for them their Heirs and Assigns: That the
said Fines so to be levied as aforesaid, from and after the engrossing thereof,
shall be to the only use hereafter expressed: And that the said I: L: his Heirs
and Assigns, and all and singular other persons and their Heirs and Assigns,
shall stand and be seized of and in all the said Premises, to the same uses:
That is to say, Of and for the said rents and other the premises out of S: to
the only use and behoof of the said I: L: and of his Heirs and Assigns for
ever: And of and for the said Manor of I: with the appurtenances, to the use
of the said I: L: and of his Heirs and Assigns, for and during the term of the
natural life of the said K: H: and after her decease to the only use and
behoof of the said Lord M: and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever: In witness
etc.

A Bargain and Sule of a Reversion or Remainder in Land well passed.
THis Indenture etc. between E: R: etc. Son and Heir of P: R: deceased, late
the wife of I: B: Esquire, Father of the said E. and Daugh^^r and Heir of R: W:
etc. deceased, on the one party, and R: S: etc. and Recital of the estate for
life, of the present possessors.
^ L: etc. on the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said R: S: and A:
his wife, sometimes the wife of the said R: W: are now lawfully seized in their
Demesne as of Freehold, as in the right of the said A: for and during the
natural life of the same A: of and in the Manor of B: etc. with the
appurtenances, and of and in all and singular Lands Tenements Medows Pastures
Feedings Woods Under-woods Rents Services Profits and Hereditaments, with their
appurtenances, to the said Manor belonging or appurtaining, or accepted etc.
situate lying and being etc. And of and in all that Message or Tenement etc.
And also of and in one piece of Meadow etc. the Reversion or Remainder,
Reversions or Remainders of all and singular which Premises, with the
appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof now lawfully is, or are to
the said E: R. and his heirs belonging.

The said E: R: for and in consideration of the Sum of etc. whereof etc. has
aliened granted bargained and sold, and by these presents does clearly and
absolutely grant, alien etc. unto the said R: S: and The Bargain.
I. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, the foresaid Manor Messuages and
piece of Meadow, and also all and singular other the Premises with the
appurtenances.

And Moreover, all that the Manor of B. etc. with all the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereof; And all those sixteen acres etc. and all and singular
Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Tofes, Cottages, Mills, Lands Tenements, Medows,
Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services, Rentcharge, Renseck, Rents
reserved upon whatsoever Demises or Grants, Annuities, Annual Rents, Farms,
Fee-Farms, Waters, Piscaries, Fishings, Woods, under-Woods, Firrs, Heath,
Moors, Mar^hes, Commons, Ways, void Grounds, Courts-Leets, Perquisites and
Profits of Courts and Leets, Views of Frankpledge, and all things to Court-Lees
and Views of Franckpledge belonging or hereafter belonging, Bondmen, and
Bond-women and Villains with their Sequels, Knights fees, Wards, Marriages,
Escheats, Reliefs, Heriots, Goods and Chattels, Waied, Profits, Commodities,
Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their
app^rtenances, situate, lying or being in the Towns, Fields or Hamlets, of
etc. to the said Manor of B. belonging or appurtaining, or as Members, Parts
or parcels of the same Manor, being had, known, accepted, used, reputed,
demised, or letten, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder, and Remainders
of the aforesaid Manor etc. and of all and singular other the Premises with
their appurtenances, and all and singular other the Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Reversions, Remainders, Rents, Services and Hereditaments
whatsoever, which the said E. has or ought to have, or at any time heretofore
had within the said County of K. and also all the right, title, interest,
reversion, remainder and demand whatsoever which the said E. has or ought to
have, or at any time heretofore had, of, in, or to the said Manor, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the Premises, with
all and singular their appurtenances, and all and singular Letters Pattents,
Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Wills, Writings, Court-Rools, Writings.
Terrors and Mynuments whatsoever touching or concerning the premises with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof, so many whereof as now be in the Possession
or Custody of the said E. and which he may lawfully come by without Suit in the
Law, the said E. for him etc. Covenanteth etc. to deliver or cause etc. to etc.
before the Feast etc. unhurt, uncancelled and undefaced, to have, hold and
enjoy the aforesaid Manor of B. etc. and all and singular the aforesaid
Messuages, Habend. Covenant for discharge of Encumbrances.
etc. unto the said R. S. and I L* their Heirs and Assigns to the only use and
behoof of the said R. and I. and of their Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the
said E. R: for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them
Covenanteth etc. to and with the said R and I. and either of them, and the
Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, of them; and of either of them by
these presents. That all and singular the premises, with all and singular the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof now be, and at all times
hereafter, and from time to time shall be and continue unto the said R. and I.
their Heirs and Assigns clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or well
and sufficiently saved harmless by the said R. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, of, and from all and singular Feoffments, Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Leases, Wills, Annuities, Rent, Charge, Arrerages of Rent,
Bonds, Statutes, Recognisances, Morgages, Judgments, Executions, Titles,
Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or agreed unto by the
said E. P. R. his Mother, and the said I. R. his Father, or any of them, or by
the means, assent, consent, or procurement of them, or of any of them, or
hereafter to be made, done, or agreed unto by the said E. (the chief Rents and
Services from henceforth to grow due for the premises to the chief Lord or
Lords of the Exception of the chief rents and the estate for life. For further
assurance.
Fee or Fees thereof and the said estate, interest of the said R. C. and A. for,
and during the term of the natural life of the said A. only except and
foreprised.) And the said E. further Covenanteth etc. That he the said E. and
M. now his wife, and either of them, and the Heirs of the said E. R. and the
Heirs of the said E. R. and the said I. R, and all and singular person or
persons whatsoever, which have or shall, or may lawfully claim to have any
lawful right, title, interest or estate, of, in, or to all and singular the
premises, or any part thereof, by, from or under the estate, interest or right
of the said E. R. P. R. and I. R. or any of them shall and will at all times,
and from etc. during three years next ensuing the date of these presents upon
reasonable request and costs and charges in the Law of the said R. etc. do
make, knowledge and suffer etc. and cause all and singular such lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things with warranty only against the said
E. R. and P. R. and J, R. every of them their Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs
and Assigns of every of them or otherwise without warranty, be it by Fine,
Feoffment etc. for the assurance, coveying and sure making of all and singular
the premises with the appurtenances, and every part thereof unto the said etc.
to the use of the said etc. according to the intent of these presents, as by
the said etc. or his or their Council learned shall be lawfully and reasonably
devised or advised.

And it is Covenanted, Concluded and Agreed by, and between the Agreement that
all assurances shall be to the use of the Vendees.
the said parties to these presents and every of them, for his Heirs and
Assigns, does Covenant, Conclude and Agree by these presents, That all and
every estate and estates, fine and fines, recovery and recoveries, conveyances
and assurances now had and made, or hereafter to be had or made of all and
singular the premises, or any part thereof by the said E. R. and M. his wife,
and the said I. R: or any of them, or by the Heirs of etc. other then the
estate of the said R. S. and A. for the term of the life of the said A. shall
for ever be, and be deemed, judged and taken to be, and by these presents is
and are expressed, limited and declared to be intended and mentioned to be, to
and for the only use and behoof the said R. S and I. L. and of their Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And that all and every person and persons that now is or, or
are, or that hereafter shall be seized of and in the premises with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof by force or means of any of the same estates,
fines, recoveries conveyances or assurances, except before excepted, shall from
hencefroth stand and be seized of all and singular the premises with the
appurtenances of every part and parcel thereof to the only use and behoof of the
said R. and J. and their Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none other use or
uses, intent or purpose whatsoever.

And moreover the said E. R. Covenanteth etc. That he the said E. Seized of the
immediate Reversion and in Fee etc.
at the time of the Ensealing and Delivery of these presents, is lawfully and
perfectly seized of, and in the immediate Reversion or Remainder of the said
Manor etc. immediately Expectant or Dependant upon the said Estate for term of
the natural life of the said A. of a good, perfect, absolute, lawful ann
indefeisable estate in Fee-Simple to the only use of the said E. and of his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of
any part thereof being in our said Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs or
Successors; and that the said Reversion or Remainder of all and singular the
premises with the appurtenances, and of every part thereof, by, and after the
decease of the said P. R. did lawfully and rightfully descend and come to the
said E. as Son and next Heir of the said P. R. by right of Inheritance
according to the Laws of this Realm. And that he the said E. has good
Authority to sell etc.
lawful, and rightful title, and absolute and perfect Power and Authority to
Grant and Alien, Bargain, Sell, Convey and Assure all the said reversion or
reversions, remainder or remainders of all and singular the premises, with all
and singular the appurtenances in manner and form aforesaid unto the said etc.
their Heirs and Assigns to the only use etc. according to the tenor and true
meaning of these presents. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Land upon Condition for payment of a sum of money.
THis Indenture etc. Between I: I: etc. on the one party, and G. J. etc. on the
other party witnesses, that the said J. J. for, and in consideration of the
payment of the several sums of money here under mentioned according to the
tenor and purport of these presents to be paid; Has granted, bargained and
sold etc. unto the said G. his Heirs and Assigns, under the condition hereafter
in these presents specified, all that his Water-Mill etc. to have etc. to the
said J. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use of etc. upon, and under
the Condition following and not otherwise; that is to say, That he the said G.
his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns* shall pay etc. the sum of etc.
in form etc. viz. on the last day etc. Provided always, and it is Proviso.
agreed between the said parties to these presents for themselves their Heirs
and Assigns, and every of them by these Indentures. That if default shall be
made of, or in payment of the said 50 l. or any part thereof contrary to the
form in these presents above limited, that then and at all times, from and
after any such default made of the said sum of 50 l. or any part thereof. These
present Indentures, and the Grant, Bargain and Sale thereby made of all and
singular the premises and also the Inrollment and Record thereof shall be
utterly void and frustrate,, and that then and at all times from thenceforth it
shall and may be lawful and to and for the said I J. his Heirs and Assigns into
the said etc. to reenter, and the same to have again as in the former estate of
the said J. and that then all and every person and persons that now be or that
then shall be seized of the said etc. shall thereof and of every part and parcel
thereof stand and be seized to the only use of the said J, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. This Indenture
etc. to the contrary etc. and the said J, J. does Covenant etc. in form. etc.
that he the said J. his Heirs Executors or To discharge of encumbrances.
Administrators shall and will from time to time and at all times from and
after payment made of the said sum of 50 l. according to the purport and true
meaning of these presents at his and their own costs and charges, discharge or
sufficiently save and keep harmless as well the said G. his Heirs Executors
and Administrators, and every of them, as the said Mill etc. and of and from
all and singular former bargains etc. heretofore had, made done or committed,
or hereafter to be had, made, done or committed by the said J, or any other
person or persons by or through his means, title or procurement in any wise.
And For further assurance.
furthermore, that at all times, and from time to time during the space of one
whole year next after such full payment so made of the said sum of 50 l. so
made to the said J. etc. he the said I, and I. his wife, and the Heirs of the
said I. and all and every other person and persons which shall lawfully have or
claim any thing of in or to the premises or any part thereof by from or under
the said J. or by or under his estate, right or interest upon reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the law of the said G. and of his
Heirs and Assigns shall and will do, knowledge, and suffer to be done, within
the Cities of London and Westminster, all and every such further and reasonable
act and acts, thing and things with warranty only against the said I. etc. and
his Heris as shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised by the said G.
etc. for the conveying and assuring, and for the sure making of all and
singular the premises to be had and made sure to the said G. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever without any condition. And further that he the said I. his
Heirs Executors or Administrators upon every payment made of the several
payments aforesaid shall and will make or cause to be made and delivered as his
or their Deed to the person or persons that shall make any such payment, one
sufficient Deed of acquitance, testifying the payment and Receipt of every such
sum of money so then paid. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Goods with Condition for redemption.
THis Indenture etc. between etc. witnesses, That the said I. G for and in
consideration of the Sum of 40 l. of etc. the receipt etc. Has bargained sold,
given and granted, and by these presents* does bargain sell give and grant unto
the said I. H. one silver Tankard etc. All which Plate aforementioned, the
said J. G. has, at and before the ensealing hereof, delivered into the hands
and possession of the said J. H. To have and to hold the said silver Tankard,
and all other the Goods and Chattels whatsoever, above by these presents
bargained and sold, given and granted, or mentioned, or intended to be by these
presents bargained and sold, given and granted, and every part thereof unto the
said I. H. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own
proper use for ever, freely as his and their own ^roper Goods. And the said I.
G. has put the said I. H. in full possession of all the Premises, by delivery
of the said silver Tankard, parcel of the Premises, in the name of a full
possession of all the residue of the Premises, Goods, and Chattels whatsoever.

Provided always, and upon this Condition following; viz. That Proviso.
if the said I. G. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, do well and truly pay
or cause to be paid unto the said I. H. or to his certain Attorney, his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, at or in the now dwelling house of the
said I. H. situate in C. aforesaid, the Sum of 40 l. of lawful money of
England, in manner and form following; viz. etc. That then this Indenture to be
void: But if default be had or made in payment of the said 40 l. in part or in
all, contrary to the manner and form aforesaid; That then this present
Indenture to stand in full force and effect.

And the said I. G. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, For quiet
enjoyment in case of non-payment.
does covenant and grant, to and with the said I. H. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents as follows, viz. That in case
the said I. G. his Executors or Administrators, shall make default in payment
of the said 40 l. or any part thereof, coutrary to the manner and form in the
Condition before in these presents contained; Then the said I. H. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, shall and may for the consideration aforesaid,
peaceably and quietly have hold and enjoy, to his and their own proper use for
ever, the said silver Salt etc. and all the Premises above by these presents
bargained sold, and granted, or mentioned, or intended to be etc. and every
part and parcel thereof, with all and singular the appurtenances, without any
lawful let, trouble, expulsion, eviction, molestation, or denial of the said
I. G. his Executors or Administrators, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever.

And also that he the said I. G. his Executors or Administrators, shall For
payment of Money according to the proviso.
and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said I. H. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, the said Sum of 40 l. etc. in manner and
form as aforesaid, according to the true meaning of these presents.

And the said I: H: for him, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, For
redelivery in case of payment.
does covenant and grant, to and with the said I. G. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that he the said I. H his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and will immediately after the
receipt of the said 40 l. according to the true meaning of the Condition
aforesaid, upon reasonable request well and truly re-deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the said I: G: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, the said
silver Salt etc. which Plate the said I: H: received of the said I. G. at and
before the ensealing hereof as aforesaid, in as good case as the same and every
of them now are: In witness etc.

Another with Goods, etc. with some difference in the form.
TO all to whom these presents shall come etc. A. B. etc. Greeting, Know ye,
That I the said A B. being in perfect understanding and in good memory, without
fraud deceit or guile, for diverse good and reasonable causes and
considerations, me hereunto especially moving, having given and granted, and by
this my present Writing have confirmed unto C. D. Widow, late wife of T. D. all
and singular such Goods, Things, Implements, and Movables, being in or about
the dwelling house of me the said A. B. in the Parish of etc. contained and
specified in a certain Schedule, subscribed by the proper hand of me the said
A. B. To have and to hold the said Goods etc. as her proper Goods etc. for
ever, freely, quietly, peaceably, and entirely, without any contradiction,
claim, disturbance, or hinderance of any person whatsoever; and without any
account to me, or to any other whosoever, to be made, answered, or hereafter to
be rendered: So that neither I the said A. B. nor any other for me, or in my
name, and any Right Title Interest or Demand, of or for the said Goods,
Implements. Things, and movables, or any part or parcel thereof ought to
exact, challenge, claim, or demand at any time hereafter; But from all Action
Right Estate Title Claim Demand Possession, and Interest thereof shall be wholly
barred and excluded by force of these presents. And J the said A. B. my Heirs
Executors and Administrators, all and Warran^y.
singular the Goods, Things, Implements, and Movables aforesaid, to the said
C. D. her Executors and Administrators, against all people will warrant, and
for ever defend by these presents; Of which Goods, Things, Implements, and
Movables, J the foresaid A. B. have put the said C. D. in full and peaceable
possession, by giving and delivering Giving possession.
of one penny of lawful English money, which J gave and delivered at the
sealing and delivery of these presents; In witness etc.

A Bill of Sale of Goods for payment of Debts.
TO all, to whom these presents shall come, T: H. of etc. sends greeting;
Whereas J the said T. H: am indebted unto diverse and sundry persons in diverse
great Sums of money: And whereas P. L. of etc. and H: D. of etc. have heretofore
at my request entered into security for and with me the said T. H. and for my
only debts due unto diverse persons, as well for payment of money, as otherwise,
whereof they are not as yet secured, discharged, nor freed. And whereas I the
said T. H. am fully minded and determined as well hereby to secure and save
harmless the said P. L. and H. D. of and for all and every such Sums and
securities, as they or either of them stand charged or chargable withal, for
or with me the said T. H. And likewise that they the said P. L. and H. D. shall
and may duly and truly with the residue of the Goods Chattels and Cattle to
them herein or hereby given, granted, and confirmed, or meant or mentioned to
be herein or hereby given, granted, or confirmed, satisfy and pay all such
Debts and Sums of money, as J am any way indebted or do owe unto any person or
persons whatsoever. Now know ye, That J. the said T. H. for and upon the
consideration before specified, have given, granted, and confirmed, and by these
presents, do give, grant, and confirm unto the said P. L. and H. D. all and
singular my Goods, Cattle, and Chattels whatsoever, as well real as personal,
Money, Plate, Jewels, Household Stuff, and Implements of Household Leases, and
term or terms of years whatsoever, of what name, nature, quality, or condition
soever the same be, and in whose hands, custody, or possession soever the same
be, or shall or may be found as well in the several Counties of S. D. and R*
or ^lsewhere, within the Realm of England; To have and to hold the same unto
the said P. L. and H. D. and their Assigns for ever, to and for the proper use
and behoof of the said P. L: and H. D. and their Assigns, and to no other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever: Of which (...) Goods Chattels and Premises, I
the said T: H: have put the said P: L: and H: D: in full and peaceable
possession, by the delivery to them of one piece of silver, at the time of the
sealing and delivery of these presents; In witness, etc:

Of Goods and Chattels to a man's Son.
TO all to whom etc. R. V: of etc. Greeting. Know ye, that I the said R. V. as
well for and in consideration of diverse Charges, Expenses, and Costs, which R:
V: my Son has had, sustained and been at, in the sustentation and maintenance
of me the said R: and M: my wife, and of my House and Family; As also for
diverse other good causes and considerations me thereunto especially moving, Have
given and granted, and do give, grant, and confirm to the said R. V. my Son,
all and singular my Goods and Cattle moveable and movables, as well living as
dead, of what kind or sort soever the same be, or whersoever they are, or in
whose hands soever the same Goods or Cattle now are, or hereafter may be
found. And all manner of Terms and Estates which I have in any Lands Tenements
Possessions or Hereditaments to me before this time, by any person or persons
demised, set, or to Farm-let, for term of life or years in L. aforesaid, and
elsewhere, in the said County of C. And also I have given and granted to the
said R. V. my Son, all and singular Debts and Sums of money whatsoever, which
any person or persons, at the day of the making of these presents, does, or do
owe unto me by force of any Writing Obligatory, Covenant, Bargain, Sale,
Contract, or otherwise, for any cause whatsoever,: To have, hold, use, and
enjoy, all and singular the aforesaid Goods and Chattels, Estates, Terms, and
Debts, and all other the Premises whatsoever unto the said R. V. my Son, his
Executors and Assigns, to the only use, benefit, and behoof of the said R. V.
and his Assigns for ever: In Witness etc.

Indorsed,

Sealed and delivered the day and year within written, and a penny delivered in
the name of the possession of the Goods and Chattels within granted, in
presence of, etc.

A Deed of Gift referring to a last Will, with a Clause for power of Revocation.
BE it known to all men by these presents, That I R. H. of etc. for diverse good
causes and considerations, me moving, and namely for the settling and disposing
of such Goods and Chattels as God has blessed me withal, for the advantage
and preferment of my wife and Children after my death, in such manner and form,
as is hereafter, and in my last Will and Testament shall be mentioned,
expressed, and declared: And for the preventing of questions and controversies
that might arise or grow amongst my said Wife and Children touching the same,
to their great loss and prejudice, if either I should not dispose thereof in my
life time, but leave them to the disposition of the Laws in this behalf, or
else only bequeath the same by will, according as it is my special desire and
mind that the same should go and be bestowed; Have given and granted, and by
this my present Deed of Gift, do give grant and assign unto my well-beloved
Friends R. H. Son, R. B. of etc. and T. B. of etc: all and singular my Leases
and Terms of years, Plate, Money, Coin, And all and singular my Goods and
Chattels, movables and unmoveables, real and personal, of what name, nature,
or quality soever, whersoever, or in whose hands or custody soever, or in what
place or places soever they or any of them be, or by what means or title they
are, or have been come unto me from or by E. H. deceased, my late Brother, or
by my own means or industry, or otherwise by any ways or means whatsoever: To
have and to hold the said Leases, Plate, Money, Coin, Goods, and Chattels, and
every part and parcel thereof to the said R: H: etc. their Executors and
Administrators, to the use and behoof of my last Will and Testament, and to
such uses, intents, and purposes, and under such Provisions and Conditions, and
to the use and behoof of such person and persons, for such time and terms, and
in such manner and form, as by my last Will and Testament shall be thereof
mentioned and expressed, limited and declared; And to no other use, intent or
purpose in any-wise.

And moreover know ye, That I the said R. H. have put the said R. H. etc. in
full and quiet possession of all my said Leases, Plate, Money, Coin, Goods, and
Chattels whatsoever, by the delivery of 4 d. of current lawful English money
unto the said R. H: the Son etc. in the name and by the way of possession, of
all and singular the Premises mentioned to be given by these presents.
Provided, that if I the said R. H. at any time or times hereafter during my
natural life, shall Power of revocation.
deliver or tender to be delivered unto the said R. H. the Son R. B. etc. or
any of them, the sum of 12 d. of lawful English money, thereupon declared, that
it is my will and mind, and with intent to make void and frustrate this present
Deed, that then and from thenceforth this present Deed and Gift, and every
clause, Article, and Branch thereof or therein shall be utterly void and
frustrate, and that then and from thenceforth, it shall be lawful for me the
said R: H: again, To have, hold, enjoy and dispose of the said Goods* Chattels,
and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, according to my own will and
pleasure, as freely and liberally as if these presents had never been had or
made, any thing contained in these presents, to the contrary notwithstanding:
In witness etc.

Bills of Sale and Deeds of Gift by Inden^ure.
THis Indenture etc. made between R. T. of etc. on the one party, and R. T. on
the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said R. T. has heretofore given
and bestowed to and amongst all his Children (other then the said R. T. his
younger Son) a great part of all his Goods and Chattels, to and for their
preferment in marriage, and otherwise: And has also granted unto P. T. his
eldest Son, a certain part and portion of his Message, Farm, and Tenement, for
the preferment and maintenance of the said P. his wife and Family. And
forasmuch as the said R. has hitherto given or bestowed, little or nothing at
all unto the said R. who being yet unprovided for, stands in great need to
have the residue of all his said Goods. Now the said R. not only for the causes
and considerations aforesaid, but also to and for the end and purpose, that the
said R. T. his Executors and Administrators, shall and may the better maintain,
cherish and keep him the said R: and I. his wife, during the term of their
natural lives, with meat, drink, lodging, apparel, and all other necessaries,
in such manner and form as hereafter in and by these presents is mentioned and
expressed: Has therefore given, granted, bargained and sold and by these
presents does fully, freely, clearly and absolutely give unto the said R. T.
all and singular his Goods and Chattels, real and personal, moveable and
unmovable Debts, Sum, and Sums of money, Corn, Grain, Plate, Jewels,
Implements of Husbandry, and Household, of what, sort, kind, nature, or
condition soever the same be, or in whose hands, custody, or possession soever
the same shall happen to be found within the Realm of England, together with
all the increase, profit, and advantage thereof, coming, growing, increasing, or
arising; To have and to hold all and singular the said Goods etc. together with
all the increase etc. to the said R. T. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, to the sole and proper use of him the said R. T. his Executors etc.
for ever, as fully, freely, and in as ample manner and form, to every intent
and purpose, as the said R. T. could, should, or of right ought to have, or
enjoy the same, be it by Indenture, Deed, or otherwise. And the said R. T. in
consideration thereof for himself etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said
R. T. his Executors etc. by these presents, That he the said R: T: his
Executors etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
for and during the natural and several life and lives of the said R: T: and
J. his wife, maintain, find cherish, and keep the said R: and J: and either of
them, with competent and sufficient meat, drink, and lodg^ng, apparel, washing
and wringing, and all other things needful, meet, and necessary for them,
according to their degree and calling in every respect: In witness etc.

Covenants and Conveyances for settling of Lands by Fine, Recoverie, etc.
A Covenant for a Recovery by a Writ of Right Patent in London, to strengthen a
Lease where the Land is Intailed.
BY Indenture tripertite etc. made between I. T. of L. Widow, and F. T. of L.
Goldsmith, on the one party, and W. L. and W. B. of L. etc. on the second
party, and W. B. Citizen and Mercer of L. on the third party; Reciting that
where the said I. T. and F. T. by their Indenture of Lease dated etc. following
the Reeltall to the end of the Redend. as by the said Indenture of Lease made
between the said J. and F. on the one party, and the said W. B. on the other
party, amongst diverse other Covenants therein contained, more plainly and at
large it does and may appear.

It is now fully covenanted, granted, concluded, conditioned, condiscended* and
agreed between the said parties to these presents, in manner and form
following: That is to say, The foresaid J. T. does by these presents surrender
to the said F. T. her Estate in the said Message, Garden, and Premises, upon
condition that the same within two months next after the date hereof, be
lawfully assured to the said I. for term of her life, without impediment of
Wast, with Remainder thereof, according to the tenor hereunder limited.

And the said F. T. does covenant, promise, and grant, for him his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, to and with he said W. L. W: B: and W. B: and
every of them, their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and the Heirs
Executors and Administrators, and of every of them by these presents, that for
the better assurance of the said W. B. his Executors and Assigns, of, in, and
to all the said Capital Messuages or Tenements and other the Premises to him
demised as is aforesaid, for and during the said term of 21. years; The said F:
T. shall permit and suffer the said W. L. and W. B. to pursue and bring the
Queens Majesty's Writ of Right Patent out of the Queens Majesty's Court of
Chancery, against the said F. T. to be directed to the Mayor and Sherifs of the
City of L- upon which Writ of Right Patent, accordng to the cumstom of the said
City of L. for passing of common Recoveries with Voucher, the said W. L. and W.
B. shall demand against the said F. the Capital Message or Tenement, and
other the Premises, by the name of one Capital Message, and one Garden, with
the appurtenances, situate lying and being in B. Street near B. Gate of L.
unto which Writ the said F. by himself or by his sufficient Attorney shall
appear, and upon defense shall vouch over to Warranty the common Vouchee,
whereupon Recovery, Judgment, and Execution may be had, according to the course
and order of common Recoveries, with Voucher used within the said City. And it
is by these presents covenanted, granted, expressed, condescended, declared,
and agreed between all and every the said parties, that they the said W. L. and
W: B: and their Heirs, from and immediately after Judgment and Execution in form
aforesaid had, shall stand and be seized of all the said Message or Tenement
and Garden, with the appurtenances, and every part thereof and also the said
Recovery thereof shall be to the several uses and intents hereafter in these
presents mentioned, and to none other use or intent; That is to say, to the use
of the said J: T. during her natural life, without impediment of any manner of
Wast, and after her decease to the use of the said F. T. and of the Heirs Males
of his body lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the use of R.
T. Citizen etc. and of the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten; And for
default of such Issue, to the use of J. S. and of the Heirs of the said I.
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the use of the Right Heirs
of the said F. T. for ever, and to none other use; In witness etc.

An Indenture tripertite for settling Lands upon a Marriage.
THis Indenture tripertite made etc. between Ran: Darenpart of the first part,
and Rog: Wigston of Wolston etc. of the second part, then are six Feoffees of
the third part; witnesses, That for and in consideration of a Marriage, by the
Grace of God, to be had and solemnized between Will: Da. Son and Heir apparent
of the said Ran. Da* and Eliz. Wigton, eldest Daughter, and one of the Heirs
apparent of the said Roger W: and for and in consideration that all and
singular the Manors Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Services Annuities
Rectories Parsonages Advowsons and Hereditaments of the said R. D. may come,
be, remain, and continue, to all and every person or persons, to whom the same
or any of them hereafter are limited, of and in such Estate, under such Proviso
Condition Limitation Restraint and Liberty, and in such manner and sort, as
hereafter in these presents is likewise limited and specified, according to the
true intent, purpose, and meaning of the said Ra. Da. and also of the said
Roger W. It is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by and betwixt all
the said parties to these presents, and every of them with other by these
presents, does covenant etc. in manner and form following (that is to say)
First the said R. D. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every
of them, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said R. W. his
Heirs Executors and Administrators, and to and with every of them by these
presents, that before or at the first day of M. next ensuing the day of the
date of these presents, the said Will. Da. the Son, by the Grace of God, shall
marry and take to his wife the said Eliz. Wig. if she the said Eliz. will
thereunto consent and agree, and the Laws Ecclesiastical of the Church of
England, the same will permit and suffer.

And the said R. VV. for him, his Heirs etc. does covenant etc. to and with the
said R. D. his Heirs etc. and to and with every of them by these presents, that
she the said Eliz. VVig. before or at the first day of etc. by the Grace of
God, shall marry and take to her Husband the said VV: D: if the same VV. will
thereunto consent etc. And moreover the sad R. D. for him his Heirs etc. does
covenant etc. to and with the said R. VV. his heirs etc. that he the said R. D.
now is, and at the time of the making and executing of the first Estate, which
shall hereafter be had or made to the said Gef: Shakerlax etc. then naming of
the Feeoffees, of and in all and singular the Manors Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments of the said R: D: according to the Covenants in these presents
comprised, shall be sole seized in his own right and to his own use and behoof
as of Fee-simple, or Fee-tail, general or special, without any condition or
restraint of alienation, of and in all that the Capital Message or Manor
house, with the Appurtenances, in Henbury, alias Henbury Pextall, in the said
County of Chester, commonly called the Hall of Henbury, and of and in all and
singular Lands Tenements etc. to and with the same Message or Manor house,
now or at any time heretofore, within the space of 40. years last past, usually
occupied, and accepted, reputed, and taken, as the Demesne Lands thereunto
belonging, set, lying, and being in Henbury aforesaid. And also of and in one
Water Corn Mill, with the appurtenances in Henbury aforesaid, commonly called
etc. except the Estate of K. D. Mother of the said R: D: then fallow the
grounds excepted, heretofore assured to and for parcel of the jointure of the
said K. for term of her life; And also except the Estate of one R. D: of and in
nine acres or therabouts, parcels of the Demesne of the said Manor of Henbury,
which he holds for term of his life; And also shall be sole seized in his own
Right, of and in all that the Capital Message or Manor house; with the
appurtenances in B. in the said County of Chester, commonly called the Hall of
Oyts, and of and in all and singular Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, to and
with the same Message, now or at any time heretofore, within the space of 40.
years last past, usually etc. set, lying, and being in Bredbury aforesaid: And
also of and in one Water Corn Mill, with the appurtenances in B: aforesaid
commonly called etc.: And also of and in all those his Manors of Bredbury,
Romney, and Wryneth, with their Appurtenances. And moreover, of and in all that
his Moiety of the Manor of Becheton, with the appurtenances, in the said
County of Chester; And also of and in the Reversion and Reversions of all and
singular the Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, with their
Appurtenances, heretofore assured, to and for the Jointure of the said K.
Mother to the said R: D: for term of her life only, and expectant immediately
upon the death of the said K. And furthermore of and in all and singular other
the Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of the said R: D: set,
lying, and being in the said County of Chester.

And the said R: D: for himself his Heirs etc. does covenant etc. to and with
the said Roger Wigston, his Heirs etc. and to and with every of them by these
presents, that all the said Manors Messuages Lands etc. with the
Appurtenances, covenanted to be assured, according to the true meaning of these
presents, now be, and shall remain and continue for ever, of the ancient yearly
Rent of etc. of lawful etc. over and above all Charges and Reprises.

And the said R: D: for himself, his Heirs etc. and every of them, does
covenant etc. to and with the said Roger Wigston, his Heirs etc. and to and
with every of them by these presents, that all and singular the said Manors
Messuages Lands Tenements, Reversions and Hereditaments, now are void, or
clearly discharged, from time to time, at all times hereafter, shall be well
and sufficiently saved harmless by the said R: D: his Heirs etc. of and from
all and all manner of former Bargains Sales Gifts Grants Alienations Devises
Intailes Joyntures Dowers Uses Leases Rentcharge Rent-seck Arrearages of Rents
Annuities Recognizances Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Judgments
Executions and Conditions Forfeitures Intrusions, and of and from all other
charges titles troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore had, made, or
done, or hereafter to be had, made, and done by the said R: D: or by any other
person or persons, by his act, means, consent, or procurement, except the
Rents-Customs and Services henceforth to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of
the Fee or Fees thereof. And also except the Dower and Title of Dower, of Mary
now wife of the said R: D: of, in, or to the Premises, or any of them: And
also except all and singular Leases, not exceeding the term of three lives, or
under, and all and singular Leases for the term of 21. years, or under,
whereupon the ancient and usual Rents or more be reserved, and shall continue
payable during such term, whereupon the same be reserved to such person or
persons, to whom the Reversion or Reversions thereof, by these presents are
appointed. And also except one Lease, Demise, or Grant heretofore made by the
said R: D: to Tho: Dar: his younger Son, of one Message, with the
Appurtenances in B: now or late in the occupation of R: M: and of the Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments, to and with the same usually occupied for the term
of 100. years, to begin immediately from and after the death of the same R: if
the said T. so long shall live, whereupon the yearly Rent of 20 s. 8 d. is
reserved, and yearly payable during that term, to the said R: D: and his Heirs.
And also except one other Lease, Demise, or grant heretofore made by the said
R: D: to etc. And furthermore the said R: D: for him his Heirs etc. does
covenant etc. to and with the said R: W: his Heirs etc. that he the said R. D.
before the said first day of M: next following, after the day of the date of
these presents (if the said Marriage be had and solemnized) by his sufficient
Deed indented, shall well and sufficiently convey and assure by Feoffment,
where Feoffment may be lawfully made, and by other assurance sufficient where
Feoffment cannot be law^ully made to the said Geffery Shakerley etc. all and
singular the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements Reversions Services Rents
and Hereditaments, to the only and several uses intents and behoofs, and under
such Proviso Condition Limitation Restraint and Liberty, as hereafter in these
presents be specified and limited, and to no other use, intent, or behoof, nor
under any other Proviso Condition Limitation Restraint or Liberty (that is to
say) of and in the said Message, with the Appurtenances, called the Hall of
Oyte, and of and in all the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, to and with
the same Message usually occupied and reputed, and taken, as the Demesne Lands
belonging to the said Message as aforesaid: And also of and in the said Water
Corn Mill called etc. to the use and behoof of the said R. D: for and during
all his natural life, without impeachment of Wast, and after his death, to the
use and behoof of Mary now wife of the said R: D: for and during all her
natural life, in name of part of her Jointure, and from and after her death,
to the use and behoof of the said W. D. Son of the said R: D: for and during
all his natural life, without impeachment of wast, and from and after his death
to the use and behoof of the said Elizabeth Wigston, for and during her
natural life, and from and after her death, to the use and behoof of the Heirs
Males of the body of the said W: D: the Son, upon the body of the said E:
lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the use
and behoof of the Heirs Males of the body of the said William Darenpart the
Son, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to
the use of the Heirs Males of the body of the said R: D. lawfully begotten or
to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use of the Heirs Males of
the body of the said J. D: Father of the said R: D. lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said R: D: for
ever. And of and in all those Messuages, Lands etc. situate, lying, and being
in Bredbury B. at W: aforesaid, in the several Tenures or Occupations of R: W:
S: W: etc. (naming all the Tenements) then say, And the Rents and Reversions
thereof, to the use and behoof of the said R: D: for and during his natural
life, without impeachment of any manner of Wast; And after his death, then to
the use and behoof of the said M: D: now wife of the said R: D: for and during
etc. for and in name of her full and perfect Jointure, and in full recompense
of all her Dower: And from and after her decease, then to the only use and
behoof of the said W: D: and of the Heirs Males of his body, upon the body of
the said E: lawfully begotten, or etc. And for default of etc. then to etc. of
the Heirs Males of the body of the said VV: D: begotten, and etc. then to the
use of the Heirs Males of the body of the said R: D: begotten, and for etc.
then etc. of the Heirs Males of the body of the said J: D. the Father begotten,
and for etc. then etc. of the said R: D. for ever.

And that all and every Estate Assurance Conveyance, to be had or made as
aforesaid, of all those Messuages Lands etc. with the Appurtenances in
Bredbury, Romney, VV: B. etc. in the said County of Chester, now or late in the
several Tenures or Occupations of VV: B: etc* rehersing all the Tenements
names, then say, And of all the Rents and Reversions thereof, shall be to the
only use of the said R: D: running over the States aforesaid.

Provided always, that if it shall happen the said VV: D. Son of the said R.
D. to dye without Issue, either in life or Issue dead, or begotten and not born
of his body, upon the body of the said Eliz. VVigston lawfully begotten, that
then all and every the use and estate before limited, to the said Eliz. VVig.
of all the said Messuages, Lands etc. shall cease and be void. And that then
and from thenceforth, all the said Message etc. so to her limited as
^foresaid, shall be to the use of the said R. D. for and during all his
natural life, without impeachment of Wast: And from and after his death, to
the use of the said VV. D. Son of the said R. D. and of the Heirs Males of his
body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue etc.

Provided also that the said M. D. at all time and times after the death of the
said R. D. within the space of three months next after, upon reasonable request
to be made by the said VV. D. or by his Heirs Males, or by the said Eliz. VVig:
or by any other person or persons, to whom any of the said Manors, etc. are
limited in Remainder as aforesaid, at his and their own costs and charges in
the Law, shall do and suffer, or cause etc. all and every such reasonable Act,
Thing, and Demise, for the releasing, extinguishment, and avoiding of all the
Estate, and Title, of Dower of the said M. of, in, or to all and every of the
said Manors Messuages Lands etc. or any of them, as shall be reasonably
advised or devised by the said W. D. or his Heirs Males, or by the said E. VV.
or by any other of the said person or persons before named, in Remainder as
aforesaid, or else all and singular the said use and estate before in these
presents limited to the said M: as aforesaid, shall utterly cease, determine,
and be void in the Law, any sentence, clause, matter, or thing in the said
presents, in any wise expressed or contained, to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. But the said M. shall not be compelled to travel out of the
said County of Chester, for the making of any such assurance as aforesaid. And
of and in all and singular other the Manors etc. of the said R. D* whereof no
certain use is before in these presents declared, to the only use of the said
R. D. for and during all his natural life, without impeachment of Wast: And
from and after his death to the use of the said VV. D. the Son, and of the
Heirs Males etc. And for default of such Issue to the use of the Heirs Males of
the body of the said VV. D. the Son, lawfully begotten, and for default of such
Issue, to the use of the Heirs Males of the body of the said R. D. etc. as
aforesaid.

Provided also, and the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of all
the said parties to these presents, is, that if the said VV. D. the Son, at any
time during the life of the said E. VV. or after her death having any Issue
Male in life, of his body upon the body of the said E. VV. lawfully begotten,
continuing in life, shall at any time or times hereafter, by any open, public,
or overt Act or Deed, attempt, practice, or go about to bargain, sell,
exchange, grant, give, or convey all or any of the said Manors etc. to any
person or persons, wherewith or whereby the said Manors etc. or any of them, may
or shall be discontinued, avoided, or altered in any other Manors then in
these presents is specified, that then and from thenceforth, all and singular
the Estate Right Titie Use and Interest of the said VV. D. the Son, attempting
etc. shall utterly cease (...). as though the said VV. D the Son were already
dead. And that then and from thenceforth all and singular the said Manors so
attempted etc. so to be discontinued etc. as aforesaid shall wholly come, be,
and remain for and during all the natural life of the sald VV. D. the Son,
unto the next person and persons, to whom the same next after in and by these
presents before are limited and appointed, in such and the same manner and sort
as if the s^id VV. D. the Son were already dead, any sentence, clause etc.
herein contained etc. And that then and from thenceforth the said Geff. S. etc.
naming the Feoffees, and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them and his Heirs,
shall stand and be seized, of and in all and singular the said Manors etc. so
attempted etc. to be discontinued etc. to the use and behoof of such person and
persons* to whom the same before in these presents are limited and appointed,
in such and the same manner etc. as if etc. were already dead,

Provided etc. that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said R. D. at
all and every time and times, during his natural life; And also to and for the
said VV. D. the Son, after the death of the said R. D. at all and every time
and times, during his natural life, to make such and so many several Leases,
Demises, or Grants, as either of them shall please, not exceeding the term of
three lives, or 21. years, from the time of the making of any such several
Lease etc. of all and every, and of so many of the said Messuages, Lands etc.
or such or so many thereof, as any of them shall please, except the said
Capital Message called the Hall of Henbury, and the Demesne Lands therewith
usually occupied, Oyte is excepted etc. And except so many of the said Message
Lands etc. as before are assigned, for the Jointure of the said E. VV. whereof
the said Tenement with the Appurtenances in the Tenure of the said Roger
Locket, to be one as shall amount to the ancient yearly Rent of 10 l. so as
upon every such Lease or Demise* there be duly reserved such and so much Rent
yearly, or more, payable at two usual Feasts of the year, as by the more space
of 21. years, heretofore has been reserved and paid, so as the said Rent may
be paid yearly, during the said term, accordingly in such and the same manner
and sort, to such person and persons to whom the Reversion and Reversions
thereof, according to the said several uses before declared, shall appurtain.

Provided also, and the true intent and meaning of all the said parties, is,
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. D. by his Deed or
Writing, under his hand and Seal, subscribed in the presence of four persons at
least, grant, limit, and appoint, and to discharge any of the said Premises
(except the Lands etc. appointed for the Jointure of the said Eliz. VV. with
one Rentcharge or yearly payment of 40 l. with clause of Distress yearly
payable to such woman as the said R. D. shall hereafter take to his wife, for
and in name of her Jointure, and for and during the natural life of every such
woman: And the true intent and meaning of all the said parties etc. This clause
is, that the Feoffees shall stand seized, and shall distrain according to such
Deed or Writing. Then comes in a Proviso that R. D. may charge any of the
Premises, with an Annuity or Rentcharge for any Son herefter to be begotten.

Provided likewise, and the true intent etc. that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said R. D. to charge any of the said Premises, except the said
Messuages, Lands etc. before appointed for the Jointure of the said Eliz with
any Annuity or Rentcharge of 6 l. 13 s. etc. yearly payable at two usual
Feasts in the year, to every of the Sons which he shall hereafter beget on the
body of the said Mary his now wife, or of any other wife, or wives, and of the
same Annuity or Rentcharge, to make any Grant or Grants by his Deed or Deeds
to every of his said Sons hereafter to be begotten with usual and sufficient
clause or words of distress and sum of money (Nomine poene for non-payment
thereof, or of any part thereof the same to be yearly paid at two or more Feasts
in the year at the will and pleasure of the said R. D. the same Annuitie or
Annuities, etc. to commence and begin only after the death of the said R. D.
and to have continuance severally only for and during the several natural lives
of the said several Son or Sons of the said R. D. so hereafter to be begotten.

Provided furthermore, and the true intent etc. that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said W. D. the son to charge any of the said Premises (except
the said Messuages, Lands etc. before appointed for the Jointure of the said
Eliz. W. with several Annuities or yearly Rents, charges of the sum of etc. for
the several preferment of every of his younger son or sons for and during the
several natural life or lives of every such sons with clause of distress
nomine poene.) Provided also, and it is further concluded etc. that if it
happen the said R. D. to die, having at his death one only daughter of his body
lawfully begotten, the same daughter not married before the time of his death
or one only daughter being married in the life time of the said R: D: and any
part of her marriage money at the time of his death unpaid, that then for the
advancement and preferment of such daughter, if the said R: D: by any Act, Deed
or Word so shall appoint in his life time the said W: D: the son, and the Heirs
Males of his body, and for default of such issue, then every other person
entitled to have the possession of the said Capital Message called the Hall of
Henbury by virtue of any limitation, or by reason of any Use declared in these
presents shall truly pay, or cause to be paid to such only daughter, her
Executors or Assigns the full sum of 40 l. of etc. yearly at, in, or upon the
20th. day of July, and the 20th, day of December by even portions, at or in the
South door of the Parish Church of etc. the same payment to begin at such time
as the said R* D: shall appoint, and for default of such appointment at such of
the said payable days which shall first happen after the death of the said R:
D: and so to continue until such yearly payment of 40 l. shall amount and
arise to such a sum of money as will extend to pay to such only daughter of the
said R. D: as at the time of the death of the said R: D: shall be unmarried the
full sum of 500 l. of etc. and also to continue until such yearly payment of
the sum of 40 l. shall amount and arise to such sums of money as will extend to
pay to such only daughter of the said R: D. married in his life time, and any
part of her marriage money then unpaid, the rest and residue of all such
marriage money as shall then remain unpaid, if such sum of money as the said R.
D: shall have promised or Covenanted to be paid in marriage with that only
daughter do not excced the sum of 500 l. of etc. and if the said R. D. shall
happen to have more then one daughter at the time of his death, the same
daughters, or any of them not married before the time of his death, or the same
daughters or any of them being married, and her or their marriage money in
part, or in all unpaid at the time of the dearh of the said R. D. (if the said
R. D. by any Act, Deed or Word, so shall appoint in his life time, that then
for the advancement and preferment of every such daughter the said W. D. the
son and the Heirs Males of his body, and for default of such issue then every
other person then entitled to have the possession of the said Capital Message
called etc. by virtue of any limitation, or by reason of any use before
declared in these presents, shall truly pay, or cause to be paid to every such
daughter her Executors and Assigns the full sum of etc. yearly at, in and upon
Vt supra, the same payment or payments to begin at such time as the said R. D.
shall appoint, and for default of such appointment at such of the said payable
days as shall first happen after the death of the said R. D. and are to
continue until such yearly payment of 40 l. shall amount and arise to such sums
of money as will extend to pay to every such daughter of the said R. D. which
before the time of his death shall not be married the full sum of 400. Marks of
etc. and also to continue until such yearly payment of 40 l. shall amount and
arise to such sums of money as will extend to pay to every such daughter of the
said R: D: being married before the death of the said R. D. or any part or
parcel of their or any of their marriage money unpaid, the rest and residue of
the saip marriage money as shall then remain void, if such sums of money as the
said R: shall have promised or covenanted to pay or give in marriage with such
daughter or daughters do not exceed the sum of 400. Marks apeece. [The proviso
for W. D. daughters is to the same purpose.] And it is fully agreed by and
between all the said parties to these presents, that it shall and may be lawful
as well to the said R. D. as also to the said W. D. the Son for the further
assurance of the true payment of the said several sums of money to their said
several daughters as aforesaid to make any manner or manners of Grants,
Annuities or any Assurance or Assurances with such and so many penalties,
distresses, forfeitures of sums of money or otherwise liable unto the said
Manor of Henbury with the appurtenances as to either of them, or to either of
their Council learned in the Law shall seem good, and the same to be of full
force and effect in the Law according to the contents thereof. But the true
intent and full purpose of all the said parties to those presents, is of none
of the said portions of money to be limited or granted to any of the daughters
of the said W: D. shall be levied, or attempted to be levied during the life of
the said R: D: neither yet until such time as all the said portion of money to
be levied to and for these daughter and daughters of the said R. D. as
aforesaid be or may he fully satisfied and paid as aforesaid.

Provided furthermore, and the true intent and meaning of these presents, and
of all the said parties to the said presents, is, that if the said R. D. or the
said W. D. at any time hereafter during their, or either of their lives shall
be taken prisoner in manner of Wars; or if the said R: D: or W: D: at any time
hereafter during their or either of their natural lives may not or cannot in
and with the sincerity and purity of Christian Conscience openly and publicly
confess and profess the blessed Name of Christ Jesus and the glorious Gospel,
safely and quietly within this Realm of England without danger of their, or
either of their lives, restraint of liberty, or loss of goods or chattels, that
then, and in such case it shall and may be lawful as well to and for the said
R. D: as also to and for the said W. D: for their or either of their
Redemption, Ransom, or Maintenance absolutely or conditionally to bargain,
sell, give, grant, discontinue, alter or change any of the said Premises, to
any person or persons not exceeding the yearly value of 10 l. of yearly Rent of
Assise, and not being Manor house, Demesne Lands, Milne or Milnes, or the
appurtenances thereof nor being any of the said Message, Lands etc. appointed
for the Jointure, or increase of Jointure of the said Eliz. any thing in the
said Presidents to the contrary notwithstanding.

Then next follows Covenant that R. D. and M. his wife will at any time
hereafter within five years make better Assurance of all the Premises at the
costs of the said. R. W. his Heirs etc. being not compelled to travel out of
the County for making thereof.

Provided lastly, and the true etc. is that if it happen the said E. W. after
marriage between her and the said W: D: to die* that then it shall and may be
lawful to the said W; D. the Son after the death of the said R, D: or to the
said R. D: during the life time of the said R: D: to limit and appoint, to all
and every such woman or women other then the said Eliz, W. as hereafter shall
be wife or wives of the said W. D. or to any other person or persons to the use
of such woman any of the said premises (except the said Message called the
Hall of Henbury, and the Demesne Lands, therewith usually occupied and except the
bands appointed for the Jointure of the said Ma: during her life) for and
during her or their natural life or lives for and in the name of her or their
Jointure, so as the same exceed not the value of 100. Marks yearly, And it is
further concluded etc. and the true intent etc. is that all and every Demise,
Lease, Grant, Alienation, Charge, Appointment, Estate, Assurance and Conveyance
whatsoever hereafter to be had, or made of the said Manors etc. with their
appurtenances or of any parcel thereof shall be* and that the parties to the
same and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of the said Manors etc.
whatsoever in form aforesaid to be demised leased granted, aliened charged or
appointed as before in the said presents is declared to such only use, intent,
purpose and limitation, as is aforesaid during the continuance of every such
Lease, Grant etc. according to the true intent, meaning, and effect of these
presents, and to none other use, intent, purpose or limitation, any thing in
these presents contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness whereof the parties aforesaid etc.

Covenants, Conditions and Provisoes in Conveyances for setlement of Estates.
THis Indenture etc. Between R. M. of etc. of the one party, and Limitation of
Uses and Estates
Dame M. W. widow of the other party witnesses, etc. that the said R. M. does
Covenant etc. that the said Conveyances, and Assurances so to be had, made and
executed shall be etc. and that the said Sir Fr. etc. and their Heirs etc.
shall stand and be seized of the premises etc. to the several uses, intents
and purposes, and under the Conditions, Provisoes, Covenants and Agreements
hereafter, in or by these presents, set forth, limited, mentioned or declared
according to the true meaning of these presents, and to no other use etc. that
is to say of all and singular the said Manor of C. with the appurtenances, and
of all the Lands, Tenements Rents, Reversions, Services, Hereditaments and
Premises Cum pertin in C. to the use of R. the father, and M. his wife, for
and during the term of their two natural lives, and of the longer liver of them
(without impeachment of Wast, during the life of R. only) and after the decease
of R. and M. his wife then to the use of R. the son and of the Heirs males of
his body, and for default of such issue then to the use of the Heirs Males of
the body of R. the Father legitime procrea^^ and for default etc. to the use of
the right Heirs of R. the Father for ever. And of the said Manor of S. and G.
M. Cum pertin. and of all his Lands, Tenements, Rents. Reversions, Services,
Hereditaments and Premises in S. and G. M. aforesaid to the use of R. the the
Son until the day of the solemnization of the said Marriage. And after the
said Marriage solemnized then to the use of R. the son and the said Anne; and
of the Heirs Males of the body of R. the son lawfully to be begotten, and for
default etc. then to the Father and the heirs Males of his body, and for
default of such issue then to the use of the right Heirs of R. the Father for
ever, and of the said Manor of M. with the appurtenances, and of all the said
Lands. Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments in M. aforesaid
with the appurtenances, to the use of R. the Father for life without
impeachment of Wast, and after his decease then to the use of R. the Son until
the said marriage had, and after to the use of R. the Son, and of the said R.
and of the Heirs Males of the body R. the same lawfully begotten, and to be
begotten, and for default etc. then to the Heirs Males of the body of R. the
Father lawfully etc. and then to the right Heirs of R. the Father: all which
premises in S. great M. and M. aforesaid limited and appointed to be assured
and conveyed to those of Anne are meant and intended to and for the Jointure of
Anne, of the Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and of Hereditaments of R. the
Son, and of the said Manor of C. and S. Cum pertinent. and of all and singular
the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in C. and S. aforesaid
Cum pertinent: to those of R. the Father for life Absque impetitione vasti, and
after to R. the Son and Heirs Males of his body etc. and then to the Heirs
Males of the body of R. the Father, and then to the right Heirs of R. the
Father for ever.

Provided always, and it is concluded and Agreed by and between the said
parties to these present Indentures for them and their Heirs by these presents,
that if the said R. M. the Father shall fortune to overlive the said Mary M.
his wife, and do after intend to marry again, that then and from thenceforth
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. M. the Father at all times
during his natural life to Assign, Limit, or appoint such and so much of the
said manor of C. with the Appurtenances, and of the said Lands Tenements Rents
Reversions Services Hereditaments and Premises in C. aforesaid (other then
etc.) ut infra, or the use thereof, as he the said Robert the Father shall think
convenient; So that the same exceed not the clear yearly value of 100 l. by
year, over all Charges and Reprises, to the use of any woman, who shall for
time to be his lawful wife at the time of his decease, for and during the
natural life of any such wife, for and in the name of her Jointure; So that
the Estate of such wife or wives be not made or occupied, to be without
impeachment of Wast: And that from and after every such use, limitation, or
appoinment, so shall or made to or of any such wife, all and every the said
Assurances and Conveyances of the Premises in C. aforesaid, so to be had,
made, or executed, as is aforesaid, concerning such and so much thereof only,
whereof any such assignment, appoinment or limitation, by virtue of this
Proviso, shall be so had or made, shall be. And the said Sir F. L. etc. and
their Heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their Heirs
shall stand and be seized thereof, to the use of such wise, for and during her
natural life, according to the true meaning of such limitation and thing in
these presents contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And after such Use or Estate ended or determined, then to the use of every
such person and persons, and in such manner and form, and with such Remainders
over uses and limitations, and under all and every such Conditions and
Provisoes, as the same should have been, if no such limitation or appointment,
by virtue of this Proviso had been made, limited or appointed.

Provided also, and it is likewise concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to this present Indenture, for them and their Liberty for preferment of
younger Sons of Robert the Father.
several Heirs by these presents, that it shall and may be lawful, to and for
the said R. the Father, at any time or times during his natural life, by his
Writing or Writings Indented, under his hand and Seal, to assign, limit, or
appoint the said Manor of S. with the Appurtenances, and all the said Lands
Tenements Hereditaments and Premises in S. aforesaid, with the Appurtenances,
or any part or parcel thereof, to his younger Sons, or to any of them at his
pleasure, for and during the term of the natural lives, or of the natural
life or lives of any of them, to and for their perferment in living, and after
the decease of them or any of them, to whom any such limitation shall be so
made, then to the use of any woman or women, which shall be lawful wife or
wives to any of them, at the time of his or their death, for and during the
term of her or their natural life or lives (so that the same be not made
without impeachment of Wast) for and in the name of the Jointure of such wife
or wives.

And that from and after every such limitation or appointment so made, all and
every the said assurance and conveyance of the Premises in Shelton aforesaid,
so to be had, made, or executed, as is aforesaid, concerning such and so much
thereof only, whereof any such limitation or appointment shall be so had or made,
shall be. And the said Sir F. L. etc. and their Heirs, and the Survivor and
Survivors of them, and his and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized thereof,
to the several use and uses of every such younger Son, Wife, or Wives, to whom
any such limitation shall be so had or made, for and during his, her, and their
natural life and lives, according to the true meaning of such limitation and
thing in these presents, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
And after such use or use, estate or estates, ended or determined, then to the
use of every such person and persons, and in such manner and form, and with all
such Remainders over uses and limitations: And under all and and every such
Conditions, and Provisoes as the same should have been, if no such assignment
appoinment, or limitation, by force of this Condition had been thereof made or
appointed.

Provided also, and it is likewise covenanted, concluded, and fully agreed
Liberty to assign Lands to his wife for life under a yearly Rent etc.
by and between the said parties to these Indentures, for them and their Heirs
by these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. M.
the Father, by his Writing indented, under his hand and Seal, to assign, limit,
and appoint his Capital Mansion house of M. aforesaid, and the Lands and
Tenements commonly accounted, used, or occupied his Demesne Lands to the said
Capital Message, belonging or appurtaining, to the use of the said M. his now
wife, for term of her natural life, reserving and appointing the yearly Rent
of 10 l. of lawful money of England, to be paid for the same, from and after
the death of the said Robert the Father, yearly, during the life of the said M.
at the Feast of the Annunciation of etc. Saint Michael etc: by even portions,
at the said Capital Message of M. aforesaid, to the said Robert Markham the
Son, and Anne, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Rob. the Son,
lawfully begotten, and after to such person and persons, as by the limitation
aforesaid, shall have the same House and Demesne, the first payment thereof to
begin at such of the said Feasts as shall first happen, after the decease of
the said Robert the Father. And that from and after such limitation and
appointment so had or made, the said Assurances and Conveyances shall be, and
the said Sir Francis etc. and their Heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, and his and their Heirs shall stand and be thereof seized, to the only use
of the said M. and her Assigns, according to such limitation as shall be so had
or appointed: So that the said Mary and her Assigns, do pay or cause to be paid
yearly during her life, the said Sum of 40 l. in manner and form before
mentioned, expressed, and appointed; And after the death of the said Mary, or
of the determination of her said Estate or use therein by any ways, then to the
use of the said R. M. the Son, and of the said A. and the Heirs Males of the
body of the said R. lawfully begotten, and after to the use of such person and
persons, and in such manner and form, and with all such Remainders over, uses
and limitations, and under all and every such Conditions and Provisoes, as the
same should have been, if no such assignment, appointment, or limitation, by
force of this Proviso, had been thereof made or appointed, any thing etc.

Provided also, and it is likewise concluded and fully agreed, by and between
the said parties to these Indentures, for them and their several Heirs by
these presents, where the said R. M. the Father, by one Indenture tripartite,
made between the said R. M. the Father, of the one party and Tho: S. Esquire,
of the second party, and the right honorable Sir S. Knight, Chancellor of the
Duchy etc. of the third party bearing date 18. Maij An. 19. Eliz. has granted
to the said Tho. Sad. one Annuity or yearly Rent of 100 l. by year, issuing out
of the said Manor of C. from the day of the date of the said Indenture, for
and during the term of ten years then next following, as by the said Indenture
more fully and at large does and may appear.

That for the advancement and preferment of such Daughters of the For
preferment of Daughters etc. of Robert the Father.
said M. the Father, as shall not be married before the decease of the said
Robert the Father, the said Robert the Son, and the Heirs Males of his body,
and for default of such Issue, such other person and persons, to whom the said
Manor of C. with the appurtenances, shall or ought to come, after the decease
of the said Robert, the Father in tail, according to the limitation of these
presents, shall yearly, after the decease of the said Robert the Father, and
after the end of the said ten years, pay, or cause to be paid the Sum of 100 l.
of lawfully money of England, yearly, unto such of the said Daughters as shall
not be married before the decease of the said Robert the Father, until every
such Daughter shall have received the Sum of 200 l. a piece, for and toward her
and their preferment in Marriage, or otherwise, the same to be yearly paid at
the Manor House of C. aforesaid, upon the Feast days of the Annunciation, and
Saint Michael etc. by even portions: And if it happen any default to be had or
made of, or in the said payment of 100 l. by year, as is aforesaid, that then
from and after any such default, the said Assurances and Conveyances shall be
in the said F. L. And the said F. L. P. W. T. M. and A. M. and their Heirs, and
the Survivors and Survivor of them and his and their Heirs shall stand seized
of all such part and parcel of the said Manor of C: and of the said Premises
in C. (saving the Manor House and Park in C. aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances) not exceeding the clear yearly value of 100 l. by year, as the
said R. M. the Father, shall by Writing, under his hand and Seal, in his life
time, or by his last Will and Testament in Writing express and appoint: To the
use of every the said Daughter and Daughters which shall not be married before
the death of the said Robert the Father, until every of them of the Issues and
Profits thereof, and of such part of the said Sum of 200 l. a piece as the said
R. the Son, his Heirs or Assigns, shall before that time have paid, shall have
received and had, or conveniently might have received and had the said Sum of
200 l. of lawful money of England, and after every such Estate and Use ended,
then to the use of every such person and persons, and in such manner and form,
and with such Remainders over, uses and limitations, and under all and every
such Conditions and Provisoes, as the same should have been if no such
Assignment or limitation had been thereof made any thing etc.

Provided likewise, and it is also Covenanted etc. Vt supra, that it Liberty to
make Leases of lands usually letten.
shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. M. the Father at any time or
times during his life by his Writing Indenture to be made between him and any
other person or persons, to Lease, Grant and Demise any part or parcel of the
Premises before time usually demised or leased (the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in S. great M. and M. only excepted) to any person and persons at
his pleasure, so that every such Lease and Grant be made of Lands and Tenements
in Possession and not in Reversion, and so that no such Lease or Grant be made
without impeachment of wast, nor for any longer time then for twenty one years,
or three lives, from the date of every such Lease, and so that upon every such
Lease, the old Accustomed Rent or more be reserved and yearly payable during
the terms therein contained at the Feast or days usual to such person and
persons to whom the use thereof is before by these presents limited, and that
after every such Lease to be made the said Assurance containing every such
parcel of the Premises as shall be so Leased, Granted or Demised, shall be;
And the said Sir F. L. etc. and their Heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, and his and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of all such Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments leased, to the use of every such Lessee or Grantee.
according to the true meaning of every such Lease so long, during the term in
every such Lease contained, as the said person or persons to whom any such
Lease shall be made, or his Assigns, does truly pay the Rent reserved upon his
said Lease, at the days therein for that purpose mentioned, or within 20. days
then next following, to him or them who shall have the use thereof in
possession; And after the end of every such Lease, then to the use of every
such person and persons, and in such manner and form, and with such Remainders
over, Uses, and Limitations, and under all and every such Conditions and
Provisoes, as the same should have been, if no such Lease, Assignment, or
Limitation, by force of this Proviso had been thereof made, any thing before
mentioned, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said R. M. the Father, does further covenant with the said Covenant
for keeping the Son and his w^fe and Children, and in case of dislike thereof,
then to Lease a Tenement for that end.
Dame M. by these presents, that the said R. of his own costs and charges, from
and after the said Marriage, shall and will well and decently keep and maintain
the said R. the Son, and the said Anne, and all such Children as they shall
fortune to have between them lawfully begotten: And shall also keep for the
said To. the Son, and the said Anne one Servant woman, and two Servant men,
with sufficient meat drink, fuel, and Lodging; And shall also keep for the
said Rob: the Son three Geldings Winter and Summer, during the natural life of
the said ^ob: the Father, if the said R^b: the Son, and the said Anne so long
should fortune to live, and will so long accept the same.

And further that if at any time after the end of 5. years and 6. months, next
after the date of these Indentures, the said Robert the Son, and the said Anne
shall fortune to mislike thereof, or shall better like to keep house themselves,
and will refuse the allowance appointed unto them by this Covenant. Then the
said Robert the Father, in consideration thereof, and for their better
maintenance, shall and will by his sufficient Deed in Writing, Demise, and
Lease, unto the said Robert the Son, one Message, Farm, or Tenement in C.
aforesaid, now in the Tenure, Possession, or Occupation of John Benet, or of
his Assigns, and which was before late in the Tenure or Occupation of one T. E.
or of his Assigns, with all the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments thereunto
belonging, or to or with the same heretofore usually occupied, with all and
singular the Appurtenances; To have to him the said Robert the Son, from the
end of the said five years and six months, next after the date hereof, or from
the time that he shall refuse the said allowance as aforesaid, for and during
thr term of the natural life of the said Robert the Father, the said Robert
the Son, yielding and paying thereof yearly during the said term to the said
Robert the Father, the yearly Rent of 15 s. at the terms there usual: And that
the said Message or Tenement after the said Lease to be made, shall be and
continue, during the life of the said Robert the Father, clearly acquitted,
exonerated, and discharged, or otherwise saved harmless, of all other Charges
and Encumbrances had, made, done or suffered by the said Robert the Father, the
said 5 l. and 5 s. only excepted.

Provided always, and it is further agreed by and between the said Covenant
for making Annuities to the Sons of Rob. the Son.
parties to these presents. And the said R. M. the Father, does covenant and
grant, for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, to and with the
said Dame Mary W. her Executors and Administrators, that if it fortune the said
Robert M. the Son to dye, during the life of the said Robert the Father,
leaving Sons, between him and the said Anne lawfully begotten, then the said
Robert the Father, shall by his Deeds indented, Sealed with his Seal, whereof
the said Robert shall deliver or cause to be delivered the one part to the said
Dame M. her Executors or Administrators. give, grant, limit, and appoint unto
every one of the Sons that shall happen to be begotten, of the bodies of the
said Robert the Son, and Anne (except such as shall be the Heir apparent of the
said Robert the Son) unto every of them severally by his several Deed or Deeds
indented, to be Sealed with his Seal, one Annuity or yearly Rent of 10 l. a
piece; To have and to hold from the decease of the said Robert the Son, for and
during the life of every such Son, issuing and going out of the said Manor of
C. and of all the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments in C. aforesaid
(saving the said Manor House of C. and the said Park of C.) to be paid at the
Manor House of C. aforesaid, at the said Feasts of Saint Michaell the
Arch-angell, and the Annunciation of our Lady, by even portions: And that he
the said R. M. the Father, shall in every of the said Deeds further limit and
appoint, that if it happen any default of payment to be had or made, of or in
the said several Annuities or yearly Rents, or any of them, that then the said
Estate shall be, and the said Sir F. L. P. W: T. M. and H. M. and their Heirs
and the Survivor of them, and his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized, of
and in so much of the said Lands and Tenements in C. aforesaid (except the said
Manor House of C. and the said Park of C:) as shall be of the clear yearly
value of 10 l. to and for every such Son, to whom any such Gift, Grant,
Limitation, or Appointment, shall be so had or made, the said Lands to be
expressed and set out in every of the said Deeds in certainty: To have and to
hold the same to the use of every such Son, unto whom any such default of
payment shall be had or made, for and during the term of his natural life, and
after the decease of every such Son, then to the use of every such person and
persons, and in such manner and form, and with all such Remainders over Uses
and Limitations, and under all and every such Conditions and Provisoes, as the
same should have been, if no such new Assignment by virtue of this Proviso had
been made.

Provided also, and it is likewise agreed: And also the said Robert Covenant
for preferring the Daughters of Rob the Son.
the Father, for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does further
covenant with the said Dame M. her Executors and Administrators, by these
presents, that if it fortune the said R. M. the Son to dye, during the life of
the said R. the Father, leaving Daughter or Daughters between him and the said
A. lawfully begotten; That then the said R. the Father, shall and will by his
Deed Indented, Sealed with his Seal, whereof the said Robert the Father shall
deliver or cause to be delivered the one part to the said Dame M. her Executors
or Administrators, grant, limit, and appoint, that he the said Robert the
Father, and every such person and persons, to whom the said Manor of C. with
the appurtenances, and the said Premises in C. aforesaid, shall or ought to
come after the death of the said Robert the Father in tail, according to the
limitation of these presents, shall yearly after the end of the said ten years,
mentioned in the said tripartite Indenture, and after the time that the said
Sums of money limited and appointed to be paid to the said Daughters of the
said Robert the Father, shall or may be received, or run up, according to the
true meaning, intent, and limitation aforesaid, content and pay, or cause to be
paid to every of the said Daughters that shall happen to be begotten of the
bodies of the said Robert the Son, and Anne, then living, the Sum of 100 l. a
piece, for and toward their preferment and advancement, the same to be paid
after the rate of 100 l. yearly, to every of them orderly, according to their
several ages, at the Manor House of C. aforesaid, upon the said Feast days
of the Annunciation of etc. and Saint Michael the Arch. angel, by even
portions, until every such Daughters shall have received 100 l. a piece: And
that if it happen any default to be had or made, of or in the payment of the
said Sum of 100 l. a piece to every or any of the said Daughters, or any part
thereof, that then the said Sir F. L. etc. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of
them, and his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in so much Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments in C. aforesaid (whereof the said Manor House and
Park of C aforesaid, to be no parcel) as shall be of the clear yearly value of
100 l. to be likewise expressed and set out in the said Deed in certainty, to
the use of every such Daughter of the said Robert and Anne, for and until such
time as every such Daughter of the Issues and Profits thereof shall have
received and had, or might have received and had the full Sum of 100 l. a
piece, or so much thereof as shall be behind and unpaid at the time of any such
default, for and toward her preferment and advancement as is aforesaid; And
after to the Use and Uses of every such person and persons, and in such manner
and form, and with all such Remainders over, Uses and Limitations, and under
all and every such Conditions and Provisoes, as the same should have been, if
no such new Limitation, by virtue of this Proviso had been thereof had, or made.

And furthermore the said R. M. the Father, does covenant etc. to and with the
said Dame M W. her Executors and Administrators, that the said Manors
Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments in S. great M. and M. aforesaid
mentioned and appointed to be assured and conveyed to the use of the said
Robert the Son, and Anne Warb. for her Jointure as aforesaid, at the Sealing
and Delivery hereof, are, and be of the clear yearly value of 100 l. over and
above all Charges and Reprises; And during the life of the said Anne, shall
remain and continue of the said yearly value, any thing heretofore done, or
hereafter to be done by the said R. M. the Father, or any other by his means,
consent, or procurement, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And that the said A. W. and her Assigns, if she over live the said R. M. the
Son, by virtue of the said assurance to be made as is aforesaid, shall or
lawfully may have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said Manors Messuages Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments in S. great M. and M. aforesaid, mentioned and
appointed to be assured and conveyed to the use of the said Anne for her
Jointure, and is aforesaid, according to the form, intents, limitations, and
meanings in these presents contained and expressed, quietly and peaceably,
without any lawful let, trouble, or interruption of the said R. M. the Father,
his Heirs and Assigns, or any other, claiming by or from the said Rob: the
Father, or under his Estate (Leases made before the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, last past, for the term of three lives, or under, or twenty years
or under, whereupon the accustomed Rents and Services, or more are reserved and
payable yearly to the said Rob: the Father, his Heirs and Assigns, during every
such term, contained in every such Lease, and the said Lease or Grants before
in these presents limited and appointed to be made of the said Capital
Message of M. and the Lands and Tenements commonly accounted, used, or
occupied, as Demesne Lands, to the said Capital Message belonging or
appurtaining to the use of the said Mary, wife to the said R. M. the Father,
for the term of her life, whereupon the yearly Rent of 40 l. is, or shall be
re^erved and payble as is aforesaid, during the said term, always excepted and
foreprised.)

In consideration of which said Premises the said Dame Mary W. does Covenant
to pay to R. M. the elder one thousand pounds of lawful money of England, in
manner and form following, viz. 500 l. before or upon the day of the Marriage
of R. M. the son, and Anne, and 300 l: etc. and 200 l. etc; In Witness etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of Recovery.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. B. of C. etc. Gent. of the one party, and
E. F. of G. and H. I. of etc. Gent. and L. M. etc. Gent. of the other party
Witnesses, That for and in consideration of Consideration.
a good and perfect Assurance to be had and made of all and singular the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter in these presents mentioned. It is
Covenanted, Granted, Condiscended and Agreed upon between the said Parties by
these presents, And the said A. B. A Covenant to s^e out a Writ of Entry in the
post by a day.
for himself, does Covenant and Grant to and with the said E: F. and H. I.
their Heirs etc. That he the said A. B. shall and will before the Feast of etc.
next ensuing the date hereof suffer the said E. F. and H. I. to bring and sue
out of the Kings Majesty's Court of Chancery, one Original Writ of Entry upon
the Dissesm in the Post against the said A. B. directed to the Sheriff of the
County of L. returnable before the Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster,
at a certain day in the same Writ to be contained. In which Writ the said E, F.
and The tenure of the Writ.
H. I. shall demand against the said A. B. all the Messuages and Lands called
etc. in the Tenure or Occupation of etc. lying and being in etc. and that he
the said A. B. to the said Writ shall appear before the said Justices at the
day of the return thereof in proper person or by Atturny lawfully Authorized in
the Law; after which said appearance the said E. F. and I. H. upon the said
Writ shall declare against the said A. B. after which Declaration the said A:
B. shall make defense and Vouch the common Vouchee to Warrant, and the said
common Vouchee shall thereupon appear before the said Justices, and enter into
warranty in his own proper person, and after declare against him according to
the nature of the same Writ, and the Vouchee shall imparle, and after such
imparlance make default and depart in despite of the Court, to the intent that
a good perfect Recovery and Judgment may be had against the said A. B. and so
over against the Vouchee according to the course of common Recoveries in that
case used, and Judgment and Executions thereupon had by the said L. M. etc.
their Heirs and Assigns against the said E: B: and all others, by, from or
under his Estate and interest, and after such Recovery, Judgment and Execution,
had from thenceforh shall stand and be seized of the said Messuages, Lands and
Tenements, and after the Premises with their Appurtenances before mentioned to
the only proper use and behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, of a
good and perfect Estate in Fee-simple, and to no other intent or purpose
whatsoever. In witness etc.

For suffering a Recovery to make a Fee-simple.
THis Indenture etc. Between A. B. of etc. Esquire, on the one part, and C. D.
of etc. Gent. and E. F. of etc. Gent. and C. H. and I. L. of the other part
Wit. That the said A. B. party to these presents, is and stands seized of an
Estate of an Inheritance in Fee-Taile general, viz: to him, and to the Heirs
Males of his body lawfully begotten, with diverse Remainders, over, of, and in
diverse Manors, Lordships, Parsonages Tithes, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, set, lying and being in the several
Counties of D. and S. and hereafter more particularly named. And whereas the
said A. B. is resolutely determined to clear his said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and the Estate and Title thereof, of all former Estates and Uses, and
Limitations of Uses and Estates, and Uses in Tail which have been thereof
formerly made, to the intent and purpose, that the said Manors Messuages,
Lands and Tenements may be established unto the said A. B. and his Heirs for
ever. And that the said A. B. may have a good and absolute Estate in Fee-simple
of, and in the same; and also full Power and Ability of all the said Manors
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments in these presents specified, to make Estates
and to limit Uses thereof, according as it shall seem good unto him.

Now therefore the said A. B. for the more sure and better performance A
Covenant to assure Lands by a day.
of his indented purpose for himself, his Heirs etc. and every of them, does
covenant, grant, conclude, condescend, and fully agree, to and with the said C.
D. and E. F. their Executors etc. and to and with every of them by these
presents, That he the said A. B. shall and will on this side, or before the
Feast of etc. next coming, by his sufficient Deed or Indenture enrolled on
Record, or other his Deed of Feoffment in Writing under his hand and Seal, by
him the said A. B. in his own person, lawfully and perfectly to be executed;
Give grant convey and assure unto them the said C. D. etc. and their Heirs, and
the Survivor of them and his Heirs, all and singular those his Manors
Lordships Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services and Hereditaments, with all
and singular their Appurtenances, lying and being in etc. and the Reversion and
Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the same. And likewise all those his
Manors or Lordships of etc. with all and singular their Appurtenances; To the
intent and purpose only, that they the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs,
and the Survivor of them, may become perfect Tenant or Tenants of the Freehold
of the Premises, so as lawful Recoveries with double Vouchers may be had by
the said G. H. and I. L. or by the Survivor or Survivors of them against them
the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, or the Survivor of them and his
Heirs, to, for, and according to the uses, intents, limitations, provisoes, and
agreements hereafter in these presents limited, expressed, declared, or
intended: And for the better and more perfect declaration of the use, uses,
intent, purpose, meaning, cause and considerations, as well of the making of
the said Indentures, or Deed of Feoffment indented, and the execution thereof:
And also of the acknowledging and sufferings of such said Recoveries so thereof
covenanted, mentioned, or intended to be had and acknowledged as aforesaid.

It is further covenanted, granted, and fully agreed, by and between The Uses.
all the said parties to these present Indentures for them and every of them,
and for their and every of their Heirs, that the said Deed of Feoffment,
assurances thereof before covenanted to be had and made of the said Premises,
unto them the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them
and his Heirs, shall be to the use of the said C. D etc. and their Heirs, for
and during, and until such time as they the said G. H. and I. L. and their
Heits, or the Survivor of them and his Heirs, shall and may without any fraud
or covin, according to the ordinary course of common Recoveries, might have
recovered the same Premises against the said C. D. or their Heirs, according
to the true meaning of these presents.

And further it is fully agreed by all the said parties to these presents, That
after such Recoveries had as is aforesaid, as well the said Feoffment and other
Assurances, as also all such Recovery and Recoveries so to be had or suffered,
of and upon the said Manors and Lordships, and other the said Messuages Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, according to the true meaning of these presents, by and immeditaly
after the suffering of the same, shall be and shall be adjudged, construed, and
taken to be.

And also that they the said G: H: etc. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of
them and his Heirs shall stand and be seized of, for, and touching all and
singular the said Manors and Lordships, and other the aforesaid Messuages,
Lands Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, and all other
the Premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof, whereof such said Recovery or Recoveries, shall be suffered, to
and for the only use and behoof of the said A: B: party to these presents, and
his Heirs for ever, and to no other use, intent, or purpose in any wise, any
use, limitation of use or other conveyance or assurance thereof formerly made in
any wise notwithstanding.

And lastly, it is Concluded and Agreed between the said parties; and the said
A, B, for him and his Heirs, does Covenant and Agree to, The Uses in ^^se the
Feoffment be not executed.
and with the said C: D: and E. F. by these presents, that if the said Deed of
Feoffment, shall not, or be not perfectly made and executed in part or in all
before the said Feast of etc. next coming, That then and from after the said
Feast day, the said A, B. and his Heirs, and all other person and persons that
now are or before the said Feast day shall be seized of the said Manors,
Messuages Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises or any part thereof, for,
and in consideration of the Advancement of the Blood and Issues of the said A.
B. as well Sons as Daughters, and for the intent perfect Recoveries may thereof,
and of every part thereof be suffered and had against the said C: D: and E: F:
or the Survivor of them, shall stand and be thereof, or of such part thereof,
whereof no such perfect Execution shall be had to the use of the said C: D: and
E: F: and their Heirs until such time as such Recovery or Recoveries shall or
may be suffered and had, as is aforesaid, and after wards to the use of the
said A: B: and his Heirs for ever. In witness, etc.

For the keeping of a Child and his Portion.
THis Indenture etc. between A. B. of C. in the County of L. Gentleman, of the
one part, and C. D. of etc. Gentleman, of the other part, witnesses, That the
said A. B. for diverse good causes and considerations, him thereunto moving, and
especially for and in consideration of the Sum of etc. unto him the said A. B.
by the said C. D. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
well and truly contented and paid, whereof and wherewith the said A. B. does
acknowledge himself fully satisfied, contented and paid: Has covenanted etc.
and by these presents does covenant etc. for him his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, to and with the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators by
these presents, That he the said A. B. his Heirs Executors Administrators or
Assigns, upon his or their own proper costs and charges, shall and will find
and keep at School, or cause to be found and kept with sufficient and wholesome
meat drink, clothes, books, and lodging one O. D. Son of the said C. D. meet
and convenient for him to have, from the day of the date of these presents, for
and during the term and time of ten years, from thence ensuing, fully to be
complete, ended, and determined, if the said O. D. so long shall live, and at
or in the end of the said ten years, shall and will repay unto the said C. D.
his Executors or Assigns, the said Sum of etc. of good and lawful money of
England. Provided always and covenanted, concluded, and fully agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents.

And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns by these presents; That if it please God to call the
said O. D. out of this transitory life, before the expiration of the said term
of ten years, that then he the said A. B. his Heirs Executors Administrators or
Assigns, or some of them within one whole year, next after the day of the
decease of the said O. D. shall and will repay or cause to be repaid unto the
said C. D. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at one whole and entire
payment, the said Sum of etc. without fraud or further delay. And also
provided, and is covenanted, concluded, and fully agreed by and between the
said parties to these presents, that if the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, at any time hereafter during the said term of ten
years, do or shall mislike or find fault with the keeping or finding of the
said O. D. as aforesaid, and shall give notice or warning thereof unto the said
A. B. his Executors or Administrators, that then the said A. B. his Executors
or Administrators, within one whole year next after notice given as aforesaid
shall and will re-deliver and pay, or cause to be re-delivered and paid unto
the said C. D. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, not only the said Sum
of etc. in one whole and entire payment: But also the said O. D. if he shall be
then living. And further provided and it is likewise covenanted, concluded, and
fully agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, that if the
said A: B. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, do at any time hereafter
during the said term of ten years, mislike of the keeping maintaining and
finding of the said O. D. as aforesaid, and not only give unto the said C. D.
her Executors or Administrators, one whole years notice and warning of his or
their such dislike: But also do at the end of the said year, well and truly pay
or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, at or in etc. at one whole and entire payment, the said Sum of etc.
That then, and from and immediately after such notice, warning, and payment made
of the said Sum of etc. as aforesaid, he the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will disburthen and release the said A. B.
his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, not only of and from
the finding, keeping, and maintaining of the said O. D. as aforesaid, but also
of the said Sum of etc. as if these presents had never been had or made, any
thing before in these presents mentioned to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And finally for the sure and true performance and accomplishment of all and
singular the Articles, Covenants, Grants, and Agreements above recited, which
upon the part and behalf of the said A. B. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, are or ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, the
said A. B. is contented to stand bound unto the said C. D. by his Writing
Obligatory, dated with these presents, in the Sum of etc. of good and lawful
money of England: In Witness etc.

For levying of a Fine to strengthen a Lease before made in Reversion.
THis Indenture etc. between W. D. of etc. in the County of L. Esquire; and S. his
wife, of the one part, and R. B. of etc. of the other part, Recital of a Lease.
witnesses, That whereas the said W. D and S. his wife, by their Indenture of
Lease, bearing date etc. Have demised and let to Farm to the said R. B. and his
Assigns, for the term of one and twenty years next ensuing, after the death of
the Survivor or longer liver of M. wife of the said R. and H. L. Sister of the
said M. or from the end of one Lease determinable upon their lives, all that
one Message or Tenement, and all Lands Meadows Closes Pastures and Closures of
Land Common of Pasture and Turbary, to the said Message or Tenement belonging
or appurtaining, or with the same usually occupied, demised, or letten, or
accepted, reputed, taken, or known, as part, member, or parcel thereof,
situate, lying, and being in B. aforesaid, then or late in the Tenure or
Occupation of the said R. B. for certain yearly Rents and Services to be paid
and done for the same.

And whereas also the said W. D. and S. his wife, by the same Indenture did also
covenant and grant to and with the said R. B. his Executors and Assigns, and
every of them, to make all such further assurance or assurances of the
Premises, to the said R. B. and his Assigns, for the term aforesaid, as should
be reasonably devised by the said R. B. or his Assigns, or his or their learned
Council, as by the said Indenture of Lease, it does and may more at large
appear.

Now the said W. D. and S. his wife, for the accomplishment of the said
Covenant and Grant mentioned in the said Indenture, and for the good and
perfect assurance of the same Premises to the said R. B. according to the
tenor and effect of the said Indenture. Do covenant and grant for them, and the
Heirs and Assigns of the said W. to and with the said R. B. his Executors and
Assigns, that they the said W. D. A Covenant to levy a Fine.
and S. shall and will at the next Assizes, or general great Sessions, for
Pleas to be holden at C. in the County of C. before the Queens Majesty's
Justices, or their Deputies there for the time being, levy and acknowledge a
Fine with Proclamations to T. R. and I. A. Yeomen, of the same Premises, by
the name of one Message, one Garden, twenty acres of Land, ten acres of
Meadow, twenty acres of Pasture, and four acres of Turbary, with their
Appurtenances in B. and the same shall acknowledge to be the right of the said
T. R. and I. A. as these which the said R. and I. A. have of the Gift of the
said W. D. and S. and the same shall remise and quit claim for them and their
Heirs to the said R. and I. and the Heirs of the said T. for ever.

And furthermore the said W. D. and S. and the Heirs of the said W. To warrant
the Lands in the Fine to be mentioned.
shall by the same Fine warrant the same Premises to the said R. and I. A. and
the Heirs of the said T. against all men for ever: And so shall suffer the same
Fine and Proclamations thereupon, to proceed according to the common course of
Fines and Proclamations within the said County of Chester.

And it is agreed between the said parties, that the said Fine so to be That
the Fine shall extend to no other Lands then what are mentioned in the Lease.
levied and acknowledged as is aforesaid, shall only extend to the Lands and
Tenements mentioned and expressed in the said Indenture of Lease, and to none
other Lands or Tenements in any wise.

And shall likewise after the levying and engrossing thereof, be adjudged,
taken, and reputed to be, to and for the preservation of the Estate of the said
R. B. and his Assigns, in and to the same Premises contained in the said
Indenture of Lease, for and during the Term mentioned in the said Lease.

And that then the said W. B. and S. and the Heirs of the said W. shall stand
and be seized thereof to the use of the said R. and his Assigns, for and during
the term before specified, according to the intent and meaning of the said
Indentures of Lease.

And after the determination of the said term, to the use and behoof The Use
after determination of the Lease.
of the said W. D. and the Heirs of the said W. for ever, and to no other use,
intent, or purpose in any wise: In witness etc.

VVherby the Father covenanteth with his Son and Heir apparent, to Estate him
and his wife in certain Lands before a day limited.
THis Indenture etc. between Ri. H. of etc. in the County of L. Gentleman of
the one part, and Ra. H. Son and Heir apparent of the said Ri of the other
part, witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents, in manner and form as hereafter
follows. That is to say First the said Ri. H: does covenant, grant, conclude
and agree, to and with the said Ra. H. his Executors and Administrators by
these presents; That he the said Ri. shall and will at and upon the reasonable
request, costs and charges of the said Ra: or his Assigns, before the Feast Day
of etc: next after the date hereof, demise, grant, and pass over to the said
Ra. H. and B. his wife, and their Assigns, one Message or Tenement of him the
said Ri. H. situate, lying, and being in H. near W. in the said County of L.
late in the Tenure or Occupation of I. L. of H. aforesaid Yeoman, deceased: And
all the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
thereunto belonging, with their and every of their appurtenances whatsoever,
containing by estimation etc. To have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said Houses
Buildings Lands Tenements, and all other the Premises, with their
Appurtenances, unto the said Ra. and B. his wife, and their Assigns, from the
10. day of J. which shall be in the year of our Lord God, according to the
Computation of the Church of England etc. for and during the term of forty
years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, if the said
Ra. and B. his wife, or either of them so long do live, yiedling and paying
therefore yearly during the said term to the said Ri. H. his Heirs and Assigns,
one Pepper Corn at the Feast of P. (being lawfully demanded) for all and all
manner of Rents, Suits, Services, and Demands whatsoever.

And the said Ri. H. does also covenant etc. to and with the said R. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the said Ri. shall and
will before the Feast of etc. next at and upon the reasonable request costs,
and charges of the said Ra. or his Assigns, convey, assure, and pass over unto
the said Ra. H. and to the Heirs Males of the body of the said Ra. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten upon the body of the said B. or any other woman
whom he the said Ra. shall after the decease of the said B: fortune to marry*
All such ancient Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services and Hereditaments,
of him the said Ri. in F* H. and M. in the County of L. which did descend and
come to the said Ri. from I. H. deceased, Father of the said Ri. as Son and
Heir of the said J. together with one acre of Land, lying and being in H.
aforesaid, which the said Ri. had by exchange of and from I. S: of S: in the
said County of L. Esquire, for other Lands about the same quantity and quality:
To have and to hold the said Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Remainders
Services and Hereditaments with their appurtenances, unto the said Ra. H. and
to the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, and to be begotten, from and
immediately after the several death and decease of the said Ri. H. and M. one
Lease of part of the Premises made to T. H. for the term of etc. bearing date
etc. only excepted and foreprised.

And the said Ri. H. does further covenant etc. to and with the said Ra: H: his
Executors by these presents, that he the said Ri: H. shall and will before the
Feast of etc. next coming, at and upon the reasonable request costs and charges
of the said Ra. or his Assigns, convey, assure, and pass over, to the said B.
H: and her Assigns, the third part of that the Mansion House of the said Ri. H.
situate and being in F. aforesaid: And all the Houses Buildings Yards Orchards
Gardens Lands Tenements Meadows Leasows Pastures Feedings and Common of Pasture
in F. aforesaid, and likewise the Turbary thereunto belonging, with their
appurt. whatsoever, together with the third part of the rent of the said
Message or Tenement in H: aforesaid, late in the Tenure of I: L: deceased, in
full recompense and satisfaction of her Dower, or Title of Dower, in or to any
of the Messuages Lands or Tenements, of him the said Ri: H: in the County of L.
or elsewhere in the Kingdom of England: To have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the
third part of the Mansion House, and all other the last before mentioned
Premises, with their Appurtenances, to the said B. H. and her Assigns, from
and immediately after the several deceases of the said Ri. H. M: his wife, and
the said Ra: H: for and during the term of forty years then next following,
fully to be expired and determined (if the said B. so long shall live) and if
it shall fortune the said B. to have issue Male by the said Ra: H: then living,
so that the said B. surviving and over-living the said Ra. do keep her self
sole and unmarried, or do not miscarry or mis-govern her self.

And if it shall happen the said B: to have no issue Male by the said Ra: H.
living at the time of the Commencement of her said estate, or to survive or
over-live the said Ra: H: or after the decease of the said Ra: to join her self
in Marriage with any person, or to misgovern her self; then the said Ri: H.
does further Grant and Covenant to, and with the said Ra: H: his Executors etc.
by these presents by the same or such like Assurance, to Assure and Pass over
unto the said B: before the Feast of etc. next coming, at and upon the
reasonable request costs and charges of the said Ra. or his Assigns etc. one
House or Cottage of him the said Ri: containing two Bays of Building, Situate
standing and being in F: aforesaid now in the Occupation of E: G. Widow or of
her Assigns, and three acres of land of him the said Ri: H: lying and being in
F: aforesaid adjoining to the said House, with the Ways, Liberties, Easements,
etc. thereunto belonging, with their appurtenances, To Have and to Hold the said
House or Cottage and three acres of land with the appurtenances to the said B:
and her Assigns, from and immediately after the several deceasses of the said
Ri. M. and Ra: F: for and during the term of forty years from thence next
following, fully to be expired and determined, if the said B: so long do live
in full recompense and satisfaction of her said Dower.

And the said Ri: H: for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
also further Covenant, Promise and Grant, to, and with the said Ra: H: his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That if it shall fortune the
said Ra: to decease without issue Male of his body, that he the said Ri: H:
shall, and will well and truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and
paid to the daughter or daughters of the said Ra: H: lawfully begotten, 200 l.
of lawful English money within three years next after the decease of the said
Ra. for and toward the preferment and advancement of the said daughter or
daughters. And that all the several Clauses, Covenants and Agreements etc.
above specified, may well and truly be performed, accomplished and kept, by and
on the behalf of the said Ri. H. his Heirs etc. He the said Ri: H: does
acknowledge himself to stand bound to the said Ra: in the sum of etc. and the
said Ra: H: for himself etc. does Covenant, Promise and Grant, to and with the
said Ri: H: his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by these presents, That
he the said Ra: H: his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and
will permit and suffer the said M: H: his Mother and her Assigns, to Have,
Hold, Occupy, and peaceably enjoy that the said Mansion House of the said Ri:
in F: aforesaid. And all the Edifices, Buildings, Yards etc. thereunto
belonging, Together with all the Ancient, lands, Tenements, Rents etc. of the
said Ri: in F: H: and M: aforesaid in the said County of L: (the Message or
Tenement by the said Ri: granted to the said T: for the term aforesaid, and the
said Tenement lately in the Tenure of the said I: L: deceased, with the Lands,
Tenements, Services, etc. to the said several Messuages belonging; and likewise
the Rent of the said Tenement late in the Occupation of the said I: L*
deceased, only excepted) from the immediately after the decease of the said Ri:
H: for, and during the term of forty years from thence next ensuing fully to be
expired and determined (if the said M: so long do live) to and for the most
gain and profit of the said M: and her Assigns, during the said Term, yielding
etc. And the said Ra H: does Covenant and Grant for him, etc. to and with the
said Ri. H. his Executors etc: by these presents, that he the said Ra. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall permit and suffer the said
M. H. his Mother during her natural life after the decease of the said Ri. to
Take, Receive, and Perceive the Rent of the said Tenement granted to the said
T: H: being 20 s. by the year. In Witness etc.

An Indenture of Limitation of Uses upon a Marriage.
THis Indent, made etc. Witnesses, That it is Covenanted, Granted, Covenant
for Marriage.
Concluded, Condescended, and fully Agreed, by and between the said parties to
these presents in manner and form following; And first, the said E: S. for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, Grant, and
fully Agree to and with the Jo. O. his Executors and Administrators by these
presents, That A. S. Son and Heir apparent of the said E. S: shall before the
Feast of* (...) next ensuing after the day of the date hereof by Gods permission
Espouse Marry, and take to his wife A. O. daughter of the said J. O: if she the
said A; O: will thereunto consent and agree, and the Laws of Holy Church. the
same will permit and suffer; and in like manner the said J. O. etc. In
consideration of which said Marriage so to be had and solemnized, in manner
Considerations
and form aforesaid, and also in consideration of such sum and sums of money as
are already paid and otherwise agreed upon to be paid to the said E. S. by the
said J: O: and wherewith the said J: O: stands bounden, charged, or
covenanted, in any wise to pay or satisfy unto the said E: S. in consideration
of the said Marriage, as also for the better continuance and preservation of
the House and Name of the said E. S. with such Manors Lordships, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, as hereafter in these presents are mentioned,
expressed or intended to be granted or conveyed so long as it shall please God
to permit and suffer the same, and for the better advancement of the said S. A.
with a Covenant Jointure for the said A. and likewise for the preferment and
advancement of the children, and others of the kindred, and Blood of the said
E: S: and for the natural love and affection which he bears to them, and
every of them.

It is further Covenanted, Concluded, and fully Agreed, by and between To make
further Covenants and Assurances.
the said parties to these presents in manner and form following. And first,
the said E: S: for himself etc. does Covenant and Grant, to and with the said
J: O: his Executors, and Administrators etc. and with every of them by these
presents, that he the said E. S. his Heirs within the space of etc. shall and
will at the costs and charges in the Law of the said J. O. and at and upon the
reasonable request or requests of the said J. O. his Heirs Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them to be made to the said E. S. at etc.
upon twenty days warning by Word or Writing, or otherwise without request by
Fine, or Fines, with Proclamations in due form of Law to be Levied, Recovery,
or Recoveries to be had and pursued according to the Order and Course of common
Recoveries, Deed or Deeds Enrolled or not Enrolled Feoffments, or such other
good and sufficient Conveyances and Assurances in the Law, as by him the said
J. O. his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, or their, or any of their Council
learned shall be reasonably devised or advised. So that the said E: S. be not
enforced to travel further then etc. for the doing, making, or acknowledging of
such said Fine or Fines Recovery or Recoveries, or such said other Assurance or
Conveyance aforesaid, shall and will Convey and Assure, or cause to be Conveyed
and Assured unto R: H: T: T: etc. and their Heirs, or to the Heirs of one of
them; and to the Survivor of them and his Heirs, all and singular his Manors
and Lordships of S. etc. and in the said County of L: and also all and singular
Suits, Seigniories, Services, Franchizes, Privileges Courts Leets, Perquisites
of Courts and Leets, View of Franckpledge, and all that to view of Franckpledge
appurtaineth, and all other appurtenances, Emoluments and Hereditaments
whatsoever unto the said Manors and Lordships, or unto any of them
appurtaining or belonging. And all and singular his Manors Messuages, Mills,
Dove Houses, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Medows, Feedings, Pastures,
Woods, Under-woods, Commons, Common of Pasture, and Turbary Rents, Reversions,
Services, Appurtenances, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, within the
several Towns, Townships, Fields, Hamlets, Precincts and Territories of etc. or
elsewhere within the said County of L. in whose Hands or Possession soever the
same be, or shall be; and also the Advowsons of the Churches Declaration dez
Uses del Fine.
of Claypole, Cottham, and Shelton aforesaid.

And for the better Declaration of the Use, Uses, and Intents and Purpose of
such said Fine, and Fines, Recovery, or Recoveries, and other Estates
Assurances and Conveyances, so to be knowledged, suffered, executed, or made of
the said Premises as aforesaid, it is covenanted, granted, and agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents.

And the said E: T. for himself etc. does covenant, promise, grant, declare,
limit, and fully agree, to and with the said I. O. his etc. and to and with
every of them by these presents, That the said Fine and Fines, Recovery and
Recoveries, Estate and Estates, and other Assurances whatsoever, to be levied,
knowledged, or made of the said Premises, or any part or parcel thereof as
aforesaid, and the Estate Right Title Interest and Possession of them the said
I: R: H: T: T: and their Heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, his and
their Heirs, shall be, and for ever be adjudged etc. to be, and also that the
said I: R: etc. shall stand and be seized, of and in the said Manors,
Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services appurtenances, Emoluments
and Hereditaments, and of all other the said Premises, with all and singular
their Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, to the several uses
intents purposes agreements limitations liberties provisoes and conditions
hereafter in these presents expressed, mentioned, and declared, and to no other
use, intent or purpose, in any Lands appointed for the Jointure of Anne.
wise, viz. Of in and upon all that Message, Tenement, and Farmhold, situate,
lying, and being in S. aforesaid, now or late in the Occupation of etc. And of,
in, and upon all Houses Edifices Buildings Barns Stables Kilnes Dove houses
Orchards Gardens Crofts Lands Tenements and Hereditaments thereunto belonging or
appurtaining, or therewith as part, parcel, or member thereof, heretofore had,
occupied, used, demised, enjoyed, accepted, or taken, with all and singular
their appurtenances, being parcel of the said Premises before covenanted, to
be assured and conveyed as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of them the said A.
S. and A. now his wife, and their Assigns, for and during the term of their
natural lives, and for and during, and until the full end and term, and
during all the term of the natural life of the Survivor and longest liver of
them the said A. and A. for and in recompense, and as parcel of the Feoffment
or Jointure of the said A. and by and immediately after the natural death and
decease of them the said A. and A. then to the use etc. And also of, in, and
upon all the rest and residue of the said Manors Lordships Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the said Premises, with all and singular their
Appurtenances, whereof the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, and other
the Assurances and Conveyances aforesaid, are before in and by these presents,
covenanted to be had, levied, or knowledged as aforesaid, other then the said
Message Tenement and Premises, in the Possession of the said etc. and his
Assigns as aforesaid, to and for the only use and behoof of him the said E. S.
party to these presents, and of his Assigns, for and during the term of the
natural life of him the said E. S. without impeachment of any manner of Wast,
by him the said E. S. to be charged and chargable with such Annuities, yearly
Rents, Sums of money, payments, or Rents and Distress for the same, as shall
be hereafter in these presents limited or expressed, according to the true
intent of these presents. And by and immediately after the natural death and
decease of the said E. S. then to the use and behoof of etc.

Provided always, and for the further explaining of the true intent and
meaning of the said parties to these presents, it is further covenanted, A
yearly Rent for the maintenance of A. and A. his wife, and for fulfilling up
her Jointure.
granted, concluded, condescended, and fully agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents; and nevertheless the said E: S. for etc. does
further covenant and grant, to and with the said Jo. O. his etc. and to and
with every of them by these presents, that the said Fine and Fines, Recovery
and Recoveries, and other the Assurances and Conveyances before covenanted or
mentioned to be levied suffered had or made of the said Manors Messuages Lands
Tenements Hereditamenrs and Premises, with the Appurtenances, or any part
thereof, shall be, and that they the said R. H. T. T. and their Heirs, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them, and his or their Heirs, shall stand and be
seized of and in all and singular the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements
Hereditaments, and other the Premises other then etc. and excepting the said
Message Tenement and Premises, now in the possession of etc. as well to and
for the use of such person and persons, and of and for such and the self same
Estates Uses Intents and Purposes, as before in and by these presents are
thereof expressed and declared, nevertheless charged and chargable, with the
payments of such Rents Sums of money, and Annual payments, as hereafter in
these presents are limited, covenanted, or intended to be paid out of, or out
of the same. And also to and for the assurance of such said Rents, Sums of
money, and payments, and in such sort, manner and form, as hereafter follows.
That is to say, The said Estate and Estates, and every of them shall be, and
that they the said R. H. T. T. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them and
his Heirs, shall stand and be thereof, and of every part thereof (except before
excepted) seized to and for such use, uses, intent and purpose notwithstanding,
and the use or uses thereof before in these presents limited or express^d; That
if the said E. S. during his life time and after his death, all and every other
person and persons to whom the said Premises (except before excepted) shall by
force and virtue of the uses and limitations before in these presents thereof
declared, come, remain, or be, as they and every of them shall come to, and be
in actual and real possession or exception of the same, or their several
Assigns, shall not, or do not yearly, from and after the day of the date
hereof, for and during the term of the natural lives of them the said A. S.
and A. his wife, and for and during the term of the natural life of the
Survivor and longest liver of them, well and truly content, satisfy, and pay
unto the said A. S. and A. his wife, their Executors Administrators. and
Assigns, at or within etc. the whole and just Sum or yearly Rent or payment of
etc. of good and lawful money of England, yearly at two several Feast-daies
in the year, viz. By even Portions, without any further delay* the first
payment thereof to commence and begin at the Feast of etc. next ensuing the day
of the date of these presents, that then and from thenceforth, and so often as
the said Rent or yearly payment of etc. or any part or parcel thereof, shall
fortune to be behind, after the day of the date hereof, during the natural
lives of the said A. S. and A. and during the life of the Survivor and longest
liver of them. It shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. and A. his
wife, or unto either of them, their or either of their Executors or Assigns,
Deputy or Deputies, in that behalf lawfully authorized, at all, or any time or
times thenceforth, into all and singular the said Manors Messuages Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments and all other the Premises, with all and singular
their Appurtenances (other then the said Message) and into every or any part
or parcel thereof, to enter and distrain Distress for the Rene.
as well for the said yearly Sum of money, or annual payment of and for every
or any part or parcel thereof, so being behind and unpaid as aforesaid, as also
for the arrerages of the same, and every or any part thereof, if any be, or
shall be then behind and unpaid: And the Distress and Distresses so there
taken, lawfully to lead drive take carry away and impound, and with them, or
either or any of them, to detain and keep, until such time as the said yearly
Rent or payment of and every part and parcel thereof, so to be behind and unpaid
as aforesaid, and the arrerages thereof, if any shall fortune to be behind and
unpaid as aforesaid be unto them the said A. and A. his wife, or the one of
them, their, or the one of their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or some
of them fully contented, satisfied and paid.

Provided also, and it is further Covenanted and Agreed between Proviso to make
Joyntures for Wives.
the said parties to these presents, that the said Fine or Fines, Recovery, and
Recoveries, and other the Assurances and Conveyances before Covenanted or
Mentioned to be levied, suffered, had or made of the said premises or any part
thereof shall be, and also that they the said R. H. T. T. and their Heirs and
the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his or their Heirs shall stand and be
seized of and in all and singular the said premises with the appurtenances,
other then the said Message, to and for such intent and purpose, that it shall
and may be lawful, to and for the said E. S. at any time or times during his
life by his last Will and Testament in Writing or otherwise by his Writing
under his Hand and Seal, to assure, appoint, limit and convey to the now wife
of the said E. or any other lawful wife or wives, which he the said E: S: shall
hereafter fortune to marry for term of life, only of such wife or wives or to
any other person or persons to the use of any such wife or wives for term of
life, only of such wife or wives, for and in the name of the Jointure or
Joyntures of such said wife or wives a full third part or less, or so much as
shall amount to a full third part or less of all the said Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the premises; so that the said
Message be not part or parcel, thereof; and so that no such Assurance,
Appointment, Limitation or Conveyance shall or do extend unto, or be made of
more, or any greater part of the Capital Houses, Demesne Lands, Milne and
Fishings now in the annual Occupation of the said E: S: then a full third part
of the same.

And further also, That it shall and may be likewise lawful to, and for Power
reserved to make Leases.
the said E: S: from time to time, and at all and every time and times
hereafter during the term of his natural life, by his Deed or Deeds, or other
lawful act or acts in Writing under his Hand and Seal, or otherwise by his last
Will and Testament, to Give, Grant, Dispose, Limit, Assign, Assure, Convey, or
Appoint to any person or persons whatsoever, all and every, or any the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and other the said
Premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, the cheief House called
etc. and the Demesnes thereto belonging, and all Mils, Mil-Dams, and free
Fishing, now in the possession of the said E. S. And also the said Message,
Tenement and Lands, before, in and by these presents, Limited, Expressed or
Appointed, to or for parcel of the Jointure of the said A. only excepted) for
and during the term of one and twenty years, or for some shorter or lesser term
of years, or for the term of one, two, or three lives, to be all in full life
at the time of the making of such Grant, Lease Demise, or Devise aforesaid,
charged or chargeable, with such rents, sums of money, and payments, as before
or after in these presents are appointed, limited or declared, to be had,
levied, or issuing out of the same, or any part thereof, as in these presents is
mentioned and declared; so always that all and every such Lease and Leases,
Devise and Devises, nor any of them be not made to be without impeachment of
any manner of Wast, by any special Clause, Proviso or Covenant therein to be
contained; and that every such Lease, Grant, Demise or Devise be so made of
Lands or Tenements in possession, usually letten to Farm by the greater space
of one and twenty years last Past, and not of any Lands in Reversion, and so
that upon every such Grant, Lease, Demise and Devise, the old and accustomed
Rent and Rents, Boons, Arrerages, Customs and Services, or more be reserved to
be due and payable during the continuance of every such Devise, Grant and
Lease, at the Days and Times, and in such manner and form as the same have
been accustomed.

Provided always, and it is further Covenanted, Granted, and fully For levying
of money for daughters.
agreed by, and between the said parties to these presents, for them, and every
of them, their Heirs and Assigns, and the true intent and meaning of these
presents, etc. of either of the said parties, is notwithstanding any the
Limitation or Limitations of the Use or Uses aforesaid, That if it fortune the
said E: S: to die having one daughter or more of his body lawfully begotten,
then to be living and married, or if any such daughter or daughters shall be
married, and the marriage money of such daughter or daughters agreed upon and
not fully paid at the time of the death of the said E. then if the said A: S:
or the Heirs males of his body or such other person or persons to whom the said
premises other then the said Message by virtue of these presents shall come
and remain according to the Uses and Limitations before in these presents
limited and appointed, shall not, and do not content and pay yearly after the
death of the said E. unto them the said R: H. T: T: or to the Survivor or
Survivors of them and his or their Heirs the whole and just sum or yearly
payment of of good and lawful money of England, at one whole and entire payment
in and upon, yearly so long as, and until such times as they the said R: H: T:
T: or the Survivor or Survivors of them, and his Heirs, shall, may or might,
have had and received the whole and just Sum of to and for the use, benefit,
and behoof of the said Daughter and Daughters of the said E. S. as shall be so
unpreferred in marriage, or otherwise married, and the marriage money agreed
upon, and not fully satisfied at the time of the death of the said E. for and
toward their better preferment, education, and advancement, the first payment
thereof to be made in and upon the Feast day of next ensuing after the death of
the said E. that then by and immediately after such default of payment, of any
the said Sum or Sums of money, or of any part or parcel thereof, in manner and
form aforesaid, the said Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, Estate,
Conveyances, and Assurances so to be had and made of all the said Premises as
aforesaid, other then the said Message and the Execution thereof shall be.

And also that they the said R. H. T. T. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of
them and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in all the said Manors
Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, other then the said Message
before, in and by these presents limited and appointed, for the Jointure of the
said A. to such use intent and purpose, that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said R. H. T. T. their Heirs and Assigns, or Attorneys, in that behalf,
after the death of the said E. S. and after default of payment of the said Sum
of yearly and so often as default of payment thereof shall be made as aforesaid,
from time to time, so long as, and until such time as they the said R. H. T.
T. their Heirs and Assigns, shall or may, or otherwise might have received the
said Sum of to the use and benefit of the said Daughter and Daughters as
aforesaid, into the said Manor etc. and with them to detain and keep, until
they and either of them, of the said yearly Rent or payment of and every part
thereof, then to be due be fully contented satisfied and paid, the same to be
bestowed and employed by the said R: H: T: T: and the Survivor and Survivors of
them, his and their Heirs, for and toward the preferment and advancement in
Marriage, or otherwise of such said Daughter and Daughters, any use, limitation
of use, other then the said yearly Rent or payment of before limited, and for
the fulfilling and making up of the Jointure of the said A. before in these
presents expressed, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is likewise further covenanted granted and fully
agreed by and between the said parties, to these presents for them their heirs
and Assigns, and the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of the said
parties is, notwithstanding any the Limitation of the use or uses aforesaid,
that if it fortune the said A. S. to dye, having one or more Daughters, of his
body lawfully begotten then to be living and unmarried, or their marriage money
not fully paid at the time of the Death of the said A. S. and having also issue
male of his body lawfully begotten, and then if the said issue male of the body
of the said A. shall not, or do not yearly after the death of the said A. and
after the death of the said E. S content, and pay unto the said Daughter or
Daughters of the said A. the whole and just sum, or yearly payment of, of
good and lawful money of England, at one whole and entire payment, in and
upon, yearly so long as and until such time as such said Daughter and
Daughters, or some of them shall may or might, have had and received the whole
and just sum of to and for the use benefit, and behoof of such said Daughter
and Daughters of the said A. and for default of such issue male of the body of
the said A. then if the issue male of the body of the said E S. if the said E.
shall have any issue male of his body lawfully begotten then to be living,
shall not, or do not yearly after the death of the said A. and after the death
of the said E. as they and every of them shall come and be in possession of the
said Premises, likewise content and pay unto such said Daughter and Daughters
of the said A. the said whole and just Sum of etc. of good etc. at one whole
and entire payment, in and upon etc. yearly, until such said Daughter and
Daughters, their Executors or Assigns, or some of them, shall, may, or might,
have had, and received the whole and just Sum of etc. to and for the use,
benefit, and behoof of such said Daughter and Daughters, for their better
preferment and advancement, the first payment to begin at the Feast of next
ensuing, after the death of the said E. and A. And for default of such Issue,
then if all and every person and persons, to whom the next and immediate
Remainder of the said Premises, by force, and according to the essect of the
uses aforesaid, shall then next and immediately belong and appurtain, as they
and every of them shall come to and be in actual possession of the said
Premises, shall not, or do not yearly after the several deaths of the said E.
and A: without Issue Male of their several bodies as aforesaid, content and
pay unto such said Daughter and Daughters of the said A. the whole and just Sum
of of like lawful money of England, at one whole and entire payment, in and
upon etc. yearly until such time as such said Daughter and Daughters of the
said A. their Executors or Assigns, or some of them shall, may, or might have
had and received the whole and just Sum of to and for the said benefit and
behoof of such said Daughter and Daughters of the said A. for and toward their
better preferment, education and advancement, the first payment thereof to be
made in and upon the etc. next ensuing after the death of the said E. and A.
without Issue Male of their or either of their bodies as aforesaid: Or
otherwise if it fortune the said A: S: to dye, without Issue Male, or Female of
his body lawfully begotten, then if the Issue Male of the body of the said E.
if the said E. shall have any Issue Male of his body lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Issue, if all and every other person and persons, to whom the
next and immediate Remainder of the said Premises, by force and according to
the effect of the uses aforesaid, shall next and immediately belong and
appurtain, as they and every of them shall come to, and be in actual
possession of the said Premises, shall not or do not yearly after the death of
the said A. without Issue Male of his body, and after the death of the said E.
shall not or do not content and pay unto the said R: H: T: T: or unto the
Survivor or Survivors of them, his or their Heirs, the whole and just Sum of of
like lawful money of England, at one whole and entire payment, in and upon the
etc. yearly and until such time as they the said R. H. T. T. or the Survivor
or Survivors of them, or the Heirs of the Survivor of them, shall, may, or
might have had and received the whole and just Sum of etc. to be by them used,
bestowed, paid, and employed to and for such use and uses, and to the use of
such person If A. have no Issue then the money to be levied to such uses as E
S. by his Will shall app^int.
and persons as the said E. S. by his last Will and Testament, or other his
Deed or Writing, under his hand and Seal, in his life time shall set down
express, limit, or appoint, the first payment thereof to be made in and upon
etc. next ensuing after the death of the said E: S: and A. S: without Issue
Male, of their or either of their bodies as aforesaid, that then by and
immediately after such default of payment of the said yearly sum of etc. or any
part or parcel thereof so to be made by the issue male of the body of the said
A. and for default of such issue male by the issue male of the body of the said
E: and for default of such issue by any other person and persons to whom the
next and immediate Remainder of the said premises by force of these presents
shall belong and appurtain in manner and form aforesaid, the said fine and
fines, Recovery and Recoveries, Estate, Conveyance and Assurance so to be had
and made of the said Premises as aforesaid other then the said Message, and
the execution thereof shall be: And also that they the said R. H. T. T. and
their Heirs, and the Survivor of them and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized
of and in all the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Premises, other
then the said Message as aforesaid, to such intent and purpose, that it shall
and may be lawful to and for such Daughter and Daughters of the said A. their
Executors and Assigns, and for default of such Issue of the body of the said A.
unto the said R. H. T: T: or to the Survivor or Survivors of them, his and
their Heirs, after the death of the said A. and after default of payment, and
so often as default of payment shall be made by such Issue Male of the body of
the said A or by such Issue Male of the body of the said E: or by such other
person or persons from time to time, so long as and until such time as the
said Daughter and Daughters of the said A: And for default of Issue of the body
of A then the said R: H: T: T: or their Heirs, and the Survivor of them, his
and their Heirs, shall or may, or otherwise might have received the said
several Sums of money, in manner and form aforesaid, to enter and distrain, as
well for the said yearly Sum or payment of as also for the arrerages thereof,
and for so much thereof as shall so fortune to be behind and unpaid, at the time
of such default of payment, by the Issue Male of the body of the said A. and in
default of such Issue, by the Issue Male of the body of the said E. and in
default of such Issues, by such other person and persons as is aforesaid: And
the Distress etc. to detain and keep, until she or they and every of them, of
the said yearly payment or rent of, etc. and every part then to be due, be
fully contented, satisfied and paid any use or limitation of use before in
these Presents expressed, other then the said yearly rent or payment of before
by these Presents limited, for the fulfilling and making up of the jointure of
the said A. and the 400 l. to be paid to the said R. H. T. T. to the benefit
and behoof of the Daughters of the said E. to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And it is further covenanted, granted and fully agreed, by and between the
said parties to these presents, for them and their heirs, that all such Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments, parcel of the Premises, which shall be demised
granted devised, leased or appointed, to any person or persons, by the said E.
S. according to the true intent and meaning of these provisoes, before in these
presents mentioned above every part and parcel thereof, immediately by and
after such Lease, demise devise limitation or appointment, had and made, shall
remain and be. And that the said fine and fines, Recovery and Recoveries, and
the assurance conveyance and Estate, so to be knowledged levied, had and made
of the said premises shall be; and also that they the said R H T. T. and their
heirs, shall stand and be seized of the said premises or of so much thereof as
shall be so much demised, leased, devised, or appointed as aforesaid, to the
use of every such person and persons to whom the same shall be so demised
devised or appointed, for and during such Term Estate and Terms, and by and
under such Rents Services and Boones, Arearages, and Conditions, as shall be
contained in every such said Demise, devise, and Lease, and the Reversion and
Reversions thereof, to the use and behoof of such person or persons, to whom
the said Lands and Tenements, should or ought, by the purport and true meaning
of these presents, to have reversed, remained come or been, if no such Demise
Devise Lease, or Appointment had been thereof had or made, and of like Estate
and Course of Inheritance, and with such Remainder and Remainders, in like
sort, and in the same order degree manner and form, to all intents and
purposes, as the same should or ought to have come, Rented, remained or been,
if no such Demise Devise Lease Grant or Appointment, had been thereof had or
made in any wise: Provided always, and it is likewise covenanted Proviso, if
Ann dye without Issue by A. then the uses to be void.
granted and fully agreed; by and between the said parties to these presents,
for them and either of them, their and either or their Heirs and Assigns, that
if the said A: wife of the said A. shall fortune to dye without any issue of
her body lawfully begotten by the said A. S. at any time during the natural
life of the said E. S. that then and from thenceforth all the use uses, and
charges before, in and by these presents, limited appointed created or raised,
of or in the premises, other then of, and in the said Message, and other then
the said Annuity or annual Rent of by the year, before by these presents
limited appointed, or intended unto the said A. and A. his Wife, shall cease
end and determine, and that then and from thenceforth, as well the said fine
and fines, Recovery and Recoveries, and other assurances aforesaid, before by
these presents covenanted to be levied knowledged suffered and made of the said
premises, and the Execution thereof shall be, and also that then, and from
thenceforth, they the said R. H. T. T. and their Heirs and the Survivor of them
and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized, of and in all and singular the said
Manors other the Appurrenances, and except the said Message and other the
Appurtenances, and except the said Annual rent, of etc. by the year before by
these presents limited and appointed unto the said A. and A. as aforesaid, and
of every part and parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of, etc, and the said
E. S. for him for the causes and considerations aforesaid, that if the said
Fine and Fines, Recovery and recoveries, and other the state before covenanted
to be conveyed by the said E. S. to them the said R. H. T. T. be not lawfully
and perfectly levied, knowledged, suffered, executed, and perfected, before the
said Feast of He the said E. S. and his Heirs, and all and every other person
and persons, and their Heirs that now are, or shall at any time hereafter stand
or be seized, of all or any the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, not assured or not conveyed to the uses or intents before
mentioned, by reason of any want or imperfection, shall for the considerations
aforesaid, stand, continue and be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof, which are not, or shall not be conveyed and assured, according to the
true intent and meaning of the Covenants and limitations aforesaid, to such
several uses, intents, purposes, limitations, conditions, provisoes, and
agreements as before in these presents are limited and declared, of the same
Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents, any thing before mentioned, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And further also that the said Manors before covenanted to be conveyed
Encumbrances.
or assured as aforesaid, and every of them, and every part and parcel thereof,
now are, and so shall from time to time and at all times etc. except the Rents
and Services from henceforth to be due and payable to the ^hief Lord or Lords
of the Fee or Fees thereof, the Title of Dower of A. now wife of the said E. S.
and all Conveyances Assurances, Acts and Things whatsoever, in these presents
covenanted and permitted to be made or done by the said E S. and such Leases or
Promises of Leases, as have been made by the said E. S. before.

And further likewise, that he the said E. S. and the Heirs and Assigns Further
assurance.
of the said E. and every of them, shall and will well and truly at all and
every time and times hereafter, during the term of etc. make, do, knowledge,
suffer, execute and accomplish, and cause to be made, done, knowledged,
suffered, executed, and accomplished, all and every such further act and acts,
thing and things, conveyance and conveyances, assurance and assurances in the
Law whatsoever, be it, or they by. Fine or Fines, with Proclamations, Recovery
or Recoveries, with single or double Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, to be
lawfully and perfectly executed, or any other way or means whatsoever be it by
matter of Record or otherwise, as by the said J. O. his Heirs or Assigns, or
his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be lawfully and resonably
devised advised or required, for the further, better and more perfect
assurance, surety, sure making, conveying and assuring of the said Manors
Messuages and Premises, with the appurtenances, to such several uses,
intents, purposes, conditions, limitations, provisoes, matters, agreements, and
things as before in these presents are expressed, set soth, limited, declared,
or appointed, of the said Premises, and every or any part of parcel of the
same and to no other uses, intents, purposes, or meanings in any wise.

And whereas the said E. S. is and at this present stands possessed for For
Tithes.
the term of many years, yet enduring of and in all the Tithes of Corn, Grain,
and Hay, yearly coming, growing, increasing, and renewing, of or within the
Town Town-ships Feilds Hamlets or Teritories of etc. within the said County of
L. and of the Tithe-barn of H. aforesaid, and of all other Tithes whatsoever,
belonging unto, or usually joined in the said Tithe-barn of and also of and in
the Rents reserved upon any Lease or Leases, made of the said Premises, or of
any part thereof.

Now the said E. S. for himself etc. does covenant grant and agree, to and with
the said I. O. his etc. by these presents, that all such part of the said term
or terms of years and interest, of and in the said Tithe-barn, and Tithes and
Premises* as the said E. S. now has, which he the said E. S. shall not
hereafter grant, demise, let, or bequeath, to any person or persons, by his
Deed or Deeds, under his hand or Seal, or by his last Will and Testament in
Writing, shall after the decease of the said E. be conveyed, remain, come and
be to the said A. to his own use, for the better maintenance of the Hospitality
and Housekeeping, by the said A. S. at S. aforesaid.

Provided always, and nevertheless it is the true intent and meaning
Revocation of part.
of all the said parties to these presents, that if the said E. S. be minded or
determined at any time during his natural life to alter and determine the
State and Estate limited in use, in such sort as is aforesaid, to the said T.
S. and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten and for default of such
Issue to the said I. S. for term of his life without Impeachment of wast and
after his decease to etc. and shall also by his deed Indented at any time
hereafter to be made between the said E. S. of the one part and the said R H. T
T. or the Survivor or Survivors of them on the other part or by his last will
and testament in writing under his hand and seal declare and limit the same or
such other uses as shall so seem meet and convenient to the said E. S. That
then and from thenceforth the said Estates and uses limited and appointed
before by these presents to the said T. S, to cease and determine and to be
utterly void, as though the same had never been had, made, limited, or
appointed. And that then and from thenceforth the said Estates and Convevances
before mentioned, and every of them shall be, and that they the said R. H. T.
T. and their Heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his and their
Heirs, shall stand and be seized of the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements
and Premises, and every part thereof, to all the uses and intents before
mentioned, in such sort, manner, form, course and degree as the same are before
expressed, the uses before limited to the said T. S. and the Heirs Males of his
body only excepted, and afterward to such new and other uses, and for such
Estate and Estates as shall be by the said Deed indented, last before
mentioned, or by the said last Will and Tastament, limited and appointed by the
said E. S. to the said T. S. I. S. or to any of them, or to any other person or
persons, nevertheless charged and chargable with such Rents, Payments, and
other matters as are before mentioned: In witness whereof, etc.

Judgment of Covenants of Marriage for assuring a Jointure.
THis Indenture made etc. Between the Right Honorable Sir W. C. Knight, of the
most honorable Order of the Garter. Baron of B. Lord high Treasurer of
England, of the one party, and the Right Honorable E. d'V. Earl of O. Lord
great Chamberlain of England, Viscount B. and Lord of B. and R. of the other
party, witnesses, That the said Earl, for and in consideration of a Marriage
already Consideration.
had and solemnized, between him the said Earl and the Lady now his wife,
Daughter of the said Sir W. C. and for and in consideration of the Sum of 3000
l. of etc. to him etc. And for a competent Jointure to be had to the said Lady
A: now Countess of O. does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, to and with the said Sir W. C. his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, in manner and form following. That is to say, That he the said
Earl or his Heirs, before the Feast of All Saints, next ensuing the day of the
date hereof, shall and will at the costs and charges in the Law of the said W.
C. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, sufficiently assure and convey by
Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries in due form of Law to be levied and
suffered, unto the Right Honorable Sir J. D. Knight, Lord D. of C. T. C. Sir
W. F. W. Knight, and H. G. Esquire, and to their Heirs, or to the Heirs of one
of them, all the Manors Messuages Mills Tofts Lands Tenements Meadows Leasues
Pastures Woods Under-woods Moors Marshes Heaths Wast ground Waters Fishings
Rents Reversions Services Courts Liberties Franchises and Hereditaments of the
said Earl whatsoever, hereafter mentioned and expressed, with all and singular
their Rights Members and Appurtenances; Particulars differs.
This is to say, All those the Manors Lordships Tenements and Farms of W. N B.
C. I. D with all and singular their Rights Members and Appurtenances, in the
County of Essex, and all and singular the Farms Granges Parks Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments of the said Earl, in the said County of Essex, called or
known by the names aforesaid, or any of them. And also all and singular Farms
Messuages etc.

And it is Covenanted, Granted, Concluded, Condescended and Agreed by these
presents between the said parties, and their Heirs, that Uses.
the said Assurance and Conveyance, by Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries to
be made by the said Earl, or his Heirs to the persons aforesaid, and to the
Heirs of one of them, and all other Assurances and and Conveyances of the said
Manors, and all other the premises, and every parcel thereof to he made to the
said persons or any of them, before the Feast of All Saints next coming shall
be to the Uses, Behoofs, Intents and Purposes herafter expressed, that is to
say, To the use and behoof of the said Earl for term of his life, and after his
decease, then to the use and behoof of the said Lady Anne, now wife to the said
Earl, for and during her natural life, for, and in full Recompense and
Satisfaction of the Dower which the said Lady A. by reason of the said Marriage
had and Solemnized between the said Earl and her, may or might by him by any
way or means, challenge, claim or demand of any the Honors, Castles, Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Heredita. which the said Earl now has, or hereafter has
had, or at any time hereafter shall or may have, during the Coverture between
him and the said Lady A. and after the decease of both the said Earl and Lady
A. then to those of the right Heirs of the said Earl for ever.

Provision that if the Lady Anne join in assurance by Fine vel alias. for
aliening or conveying over any the Land limited to her for life then her estate
to cease and the Feoffees to stand seized to those of strangers to them after
the death of the Earl they may reconvey their interest to the use of Lady Anne
back again.
Provided always and it is agreed between the said parties, that if it shall
fortune that the said Lady A. at any time hereafter during the life of the said
Earl shall be fully and perfectly resolved and determined jointly with the said
Earl, or otherwise by any way or mean, directly, or indirectly, or immediately
to levy any fine, or suffer any Recovery, or do or assent to do any thing by
matter of Record or otherwise whereby the estate of, and in the premises before
limited or appointed to her the said Countess, for term of her life, or whereby
any estate or term for years, or interest, or other parcel of the said estate
to her limited, of, and in the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments
and other the premises, or any parcel thereof should, or might pass or be
altered, discontinued, taken away, removed, charged, encumbered or divested out,
or from the said Lady A. and shall attempt or go about or put in ure any such
full and perfect Resolution and Determination, that then immediately after such
attempt, or going about the said Use and Estate for life of and in the
premises before limited and appointed to the said Lady A. as touching all the
premises, or such part or parcel of the premises, or touching any such
attempt, or going about shall be made, shall cease and be utterly void touching
the said Lady A. And that then and from thenceforth the said Assurance and
Conveyance by Fine or Fines, or Recovery, or Recoveries and other Assurances to
be made to the said Sir I. D. L. D. T. D. W. F. and H. G. and to their Heirs,
or the Heirs of one of them after the said estate for life before limited and
appointed to the said Earl ended and determined shall be, and the said I. L. D.
etc. and their Heirs, and the Heirs of every of them, and all other persons
seized of the premises shall from hencforth stand and be seized, of, and in
all the premises, or of such part and parcel of the premises touching, and of
which such attempt or going about shall be had or made to the use and behoof of
W: H: Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir W: F: T: S: Esquire; W: C: Esquire; second
Son of Sir A: C: and their Heirs, for and during the life of the said Lady A:
to the end and intent, that the said W: Son of W. T. S. and W: C: and the
Survivor of them, or the Heirs of the Survivor of them after the decease of the
said Earl (if the said Lady A. shall fortune to over-live the said Earl) shall
and may Grant over their estate to the said Lady A: in the same premises
within six weeks after the decease of the said Earl, and after the decease of
the said Earl, and the said Lady A: then the said Fines, Recoveries and other
the said Assurance, shall to the Uses and Behoofs before in these presents
limited and appointed to be behind and to take place after the decease of the
said Earl and Lady A. his wife.

Provided also, and it is Covenanted, Granted, Concluded and Agreed Power to
make Leases.
between the said parties, and their Heirs, that the said Earl shall, and may
at all times hereafter from time to time during his life make Leases by
Indentures of 21. years or under, to begin immediately after the date of the
said Indenture of any part of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other the
Premises before limited and assigned to the Jointure of the said Lady A. other
then of the said Manors and Farms of W. N: and B: with their appurtenances.
And of the Site, Orchard, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leases,
Pastures, Woods. Waters, Fishings, and other Hereditaments being accounted to
be parcel of any of the said Manors or Farms of W. N. and B. K. and other then
the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in the said Parishes, Towns and
Hamlets of W. E. and E. B. and also shall and may at all times hereafter from
time to time during his life make Leases by Indenture for term of three lives,
or four lives of any part of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments within the said County of Chester, and of the City of Chester,
being then out of Lease, to begin immediately upon the making of any such Lease
or Leases, so as upon every such Lease for life or lives, or years to be made
the old and accustomed Rents, Duties and Services, or more shall be yearly
reserved and payable yearly during the said terms unto such to whom the
immediately Reversion or Remainder therein shall be and ought to have the said
Rents by the intent of these presents; and the said Assurances and conveyances
of the Premises, by Fine Recovery or otherwise to be made, and every of them
shall be and endure: And the said persons to whom the said Assurances and
Conveyances shall be made, and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be
seized of the Premises and every part thereof, so to be demised and let, to the
use and behoof, of all and every such persons to whom any such Lease or Demise
shall be made, and to the Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, during
the said term and terms to be contained in the said Demises and Leases,
according to the tenor and effect of the said Demises and Leases; So as the
same Leases, their Executors Administrators and Assigns, and such others as
shall have interest and terms of such Leases, shall and do content and pay, to
such as shall have at that time the immediate Reversions or Remainders of the
Premises, the Rents and Services to be reserved in their Leases, at the times
in the said Leases mentioned, or within one month next after And do also
perform the Conditions and Covenants specified in the said Indentures of their
Demises, and so as they do not, nor make any wast or spoil in the Houses
Buildings Lands Tenements and Grounds so to be let.

And the said Earl, for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said W. B. of B. his
Executors and Administrators, that the said Manors Lands Tenements, and other
the Premises so to be conveyed and assured as is aforesaid, now be, and at the
time of the said Assurance to be made, shall be, and shall or may after the
death of the said Earl, and during the life of the said Lady A. continue and be
of the clear yearly value of 9 l. 60 s. 8 d. over and above all quit Rents and
other Rents and charges issuing payable, or going out of the premises. And over
and above all usual Fees or Wages due or usually paid to the Stewards Bailiffs
Receivers Auditors and other ordinary Officers of the Premises heretofore
accustomed to be allowed or paid out of or for the Premises or any parcel
thereof* other then the Fees Annuities and Charges hereafter expressed, which be
issuing and going out of some part of the Premises, during the time hereafter
declared; That is to say, to E. A: Doctor in Physic, 20 l. yearly during his
life, to R. B. yearly during his life 20 l. and to either of S. S. and W. F.
Esquires, during their several lives 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. of and from which yearly
Rents and Annuities he the said Earl, for him, his Heirs Executors and
Adminstrators, To discharge.
does covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said Sir W. C. his
Executors and Administrators, that the Heirs Executors or Administrators of the
said Earl, shall and will from the time of the death of the said Earl, and
during all the life of the said Lady A. acquit, discharge, or save harmless, as
well the said Lady A. and her Assigns, as the said Manors Lands Tenements and
other the Premises and every parcel thereof.

And the said Earl, for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenant
for further assurance.
does covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said W. C. his
Heirs Executors and Administrators, that he the said Earl and his Heirs, shall
and will at all times hereafter, during the space of two years now next
ensuing, make, do, and suffer to be done, at the costs and charges in the Law
of the said William Barow of B. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, all and
every Act and Act, Thing and Things, as shall be reasonably devised or advised
by the said W. B: of B. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, or by his or any
of their learned Council in the Law, for the further assurance and sure making
of the said Manors Lands Tenements and other the Premises, to be had, made,
conveyed, and assured, as is aforesaid, to the uses intents and meanings
aforesaid: So as he the said Earl or his Heirs, be not compelled for the
making, doing, or suffering of such further assurance or conveyance, to travel
out of the place where he or they shall be.

And the said Earl, for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenant
not to fell Timber Wood or Under-Woods.
does covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said W. B. of B.
his Executors and Administrators, that he the said Earl nor his Heirs, at any
time during the life of him, and of the said Lady A. shall not fall, sell, or
carry away, or cause to be fallen, sold, or carried away, any Woods or
Under-woods, or Copices growing or being, or that hereafter shall grow or be,
in and upon any of the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, in the Parishes,
Towns, Hamlets, and Feilds of W. aforesaid, or any of them, until the same
Copices, Woods or Underwoods, shall be of the age of 17. years growth or more.
And that he the said Earl shall at all times hereafter, during his life (if the
said Lady A. shall so long live) leave, permit, and suffer so many Oaks and
other Timber Trees, growing and being in and upon the Manor of W. H. and other
the Premises, in the Parish Towns, Hamlets and Feilds of B. E. A. and E. M. to
stand grow remain and be in good and sufficient Estate and Plight, in and upon
the said Manor, and other the Premises, in the Parishes Towns and Hamlets
last before recited, as shall be sufficient for the maintenance and
supportation of the Houses Edifices Buildings Pales Enclosures Gates Bridges
Styles, and for all other necessaries, in upon and about the same Manor of W.
and other the Premises, in the said Parishes Towns and Hamlets last before
specified.

And further that the Heirs Executors and Administrators of the said Earl,
shall and will at all times after the decease of the said Earl, and during the
life of the said Lady A. acquit, discharge, or sufficiently save and keep
harmless, as well the said Manors Lands Tenements, and all other the
Premises, as also the said Lady A. and her Assigns, of and from all Debts
Legacies and Bequests made by the last Will and Testament of the Right
Honorable J. late Earl of O. Father of the said E. now Earl of S. and of and
from all and all manner of former Bargains Sales Recognizances
Statute-Merchant, and of the Staple Rents Charges Annuities and other Titles
Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, done, or made by the said Right
Honorable J. late Earl of O. Father to the said now Earl, at any time
heretofore or hereafter, and before sufficient assurance of the said now Earl
to be made, all Leases for years, life or lives heretofore made of the
Premises or any part thereof, upon which the yearly Rents and Services
heretofore used to be paid, be reserved and payable yearly, during the
continuance of the said Leases: And all Leases hereafter to be made by the said
Earl, according to the agreements tenors and true meaning of these presents.
And all Fines for Alienations to be due for the making of any Assurance,
covenanted and granted to be made by these presents, if any such Fines for
Alienations shall be due, of which Fines the said W. B. of B. covenanteth and
grants by these presents, to acquit, discharge and save harmless, as well
the said Earl, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, as the said Manors and
other the Premises, only excepted and fore-prised; And A Covenant that the
Lady Anne shall not claim Dower in any other the Earls Lands.
to the end that the said Earl may be sure that the said Lady A. (if she chance
to over-live the said Earl) shall not challenge or claim Dower of the residue
of the Inheritance of the said Earl, nor such persons to whom he shall make any
Estate for years, life, in Tail, or in Fee-simple, of any part of the residue
of his Inheritance, shall be disturbed or inquieted, in the peaceable or quiet
occupying and enjoying the same residue of the said Earls Inheritance, or of
any part or parcel thereof, nor such Bonds as the said Earl shall make for
performance of any Bargain, of any part of the same residue of the said Earls
Inheritance, should be in danger of forfeiture, by means of challenge, claim,
or obtaining of such Dowers; Therefore the said W. B. of B. for him, his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant by these presents, to and
with the said Earl, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, that the said Lady
A. (if she chance to over-live the said Earl, and if also she and her Assigns
shall and may enjoy all and every the said Manors Lands Tenements and Heredit.
to her before limited and appointed for her Jointure, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, shall within one year, next after the
death of the said Earl, she then being unmarried, and the said W. B: of B. then
being in life, assent, and agree unto her Jointure, limited and appointed to
her, in and by these presents, so effectually, that by the same she shall be
barred and excluded by the Law of her Dower, to be had of any of the Manors
Lands and Tenements, that then to fore were to the said Earl, unless it be for
recompense of such part of her Jointure as shall be recovered, evicted, or
divested from her, if any part shall be with recompense she shall and may
demand and sue for, according to the Statute: Provided notwithstanding her said
assent and agreement to be made as is aforesaid.

And the said Earl in consideration aforesaid, for him his Heirs and That the
Feoffor and all others shall stand seized to the use above declared.
Assigns, does covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said W. B.
of B. his Heirs and Assigns, that he the said Earl, his Heirs and Assigns, and
all and every other person and persons that now stand or be seized, or that
hereafter shall stand or be seized, of and in the Manors Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, and other the Premises, with all and singular their
Appurtenances, or of any part or parcel thereof, shall immediately from and
after the Feast of All Saints, next ensuing the date hereof, stand and be
seized of such and so much of the said Manors Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the Premises, as before the Feast of All Saints
next coming, shall not be assured and conveyed by Fine or Fines, Recovery or
Recoveries, or otherwise to the uses and behoofs above expressed, according to
the intent and true meaning of these presents, to the uses intents and purposes
before expressed, and to no other use intent or purpose: In witness whereof, etc.

Covenants for settling Estates.
THis Indenture made the day of etc. between the Right Honorable H. Lord S. L.
upon the first part, H. S. and I. M. of the second parts and R. L. etc. G. L.
of the third part, witnesses, That whereas the said H. Lord S. is and stands
seized in possession* Reversion, or Remainder of any Estate of Inheritance, of
and in diverse and sundry Honors Castles Manors Lord-ships Seigniories
Messuages Parks Chases Lands Tenements Advowsons Liberties Franchises and
Hereditaments, all which, or most part thereof, have by long time remained and
continued in ^hd name, and blood of the said H. Lord S. And the residue having
been of late time purchased and gotten by the said H. Lord S. and his late
Ancestors, do yet lie and adjoyn so coveniently and commodiously, to and for
other his ancient Honors Castles Manors Lands and Possessions, that they may
not well be separated divided or aliened from the same: Now for that the said
H. Lord S. minds and intends to establish all the said Honors
Considerations.
Castles Manors Lord-ships Seigniories Messuages Parks Chases Lands Tenements
Advowsons Liberties Franchises and Hereditaments hereafter in these presents
specified, to such uses intents and purposes as that the same may remain in the
name, blood and kindred of the said Lord S. according to the uses hereafter
thereof expressed and declared, for the betrer advancement and continuance of
the house honor name and blood of the said Lord S. and as a convenient portion
or stay of living for the same, so long as it shall please God to permit and
suffer the same. And for the advancement of such his Sons and Children, and
others Male and Female, as hereafter in these presents are nominated and
mentioned, and for the Fatherly love and natural affection which he bears
unto Sir T: S. Knight, his Son and Heir apparent, and for the preferment
advancement and maintenance of the Estate of the said Lady P. now wife of the
said Sir T. S. with convenient stay of living for her Jointure or Dower; And
for diverse and sundry other great weighty, reasonable and lawful causes and
considerations him the said Lord S. thereunto especially moving, he the said H.
Lord S. for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does covenant and
grant to and with them the said H. S. etc. and to and with the Survivor and
Survivors of them, his and their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that he
the said H. Lord S. his Heirs and Assigns, Covenant to conver the Lands etc.
shall and will on this side, and before the Feast of etc. by several fines,
with Proclamations by him the said H. Lord S. in due form of Law to be had,
knowledged, and levied, of the said Honors Castles Manors Messuages Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, sufficiently and perfectly convey and assure unto them the said H. S.
and J. M. or to the Survivor of them and to his Heirs, or their Heirs, or to
the Heirs of the one of them, and all and singular those his Honors Castles
Manors Lord-ships Seigniories Fees Messuages Lands Tenements Parks Particvlars.
Chases Franchises Liberties Free Warrens Patronages Advowsons Rents Services
Cole-Mines Lead Mines Stone-Quarries, and all other his Herrditaments, lying
and being in the several Counties of York Durham Notingham Buck. and in the
County of the City of York, hereafter in these presents named mentioned or
recited; That is to say, all that the Honor Manor and Castle of B. with the
Appurtenances, in the said County of York, and also the several Seigniories
and Fees of B. and E. with the Appurtenances, in the said County of Y. with all
their and every of their Rights Members and Appurtenances: And also of and in
all and singular the several Manors and Lord-ships of E. V. and also of and
in Suits Seigniories Services Franchises Liberties Jurisdictions Authorities
Privileges Courts-Leets and Perquisites of Courts and Leets, View of
Franckpledge, and all that which to view of Frankpledge appertains, and also
all other Royalties Franchises and Liberties whatsoever, unto the said several
Manors or Lord-ships, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them, or any
of them belonging, or in any wise appurtaining, together with all and singular
their and every of their Appurtenances, in the said County of Y. And also of
and in the several Manors and Lord-ships of in the County of N: and also of
and in all Advowsons Suits Seigniories Services Franchises Liberties
Jurisdictions Authorities Privileges Courts-Leets and Perquisites of Courts
and Leets, View of Frankpledge, and all that to which Frankpledge appertains,
and all other Royalties whatsoever, unto the said several Manors or
Lord-ships, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them, belonging or in any
wise appertaining, with all and singular their and every of the Appurtenances:
And also of and in the Manor of H. with all and singular the Appurtenances, in
the said County of B. and also of and in the Manor of W. with all and singular
the Appurtenances in the said County of D: and also of and in all Suits
Seigniories Services Franchises Liberties Jurisdictions Authorities Privileges
Court-Leets and Perquisites of Courts, and Leets View of Frankpledge, and all
that which to view of Frankpledge appertains, and all other Royalties
whatsoever, unto the said several Manors or Lord-ships of H. and W. or either
of them, or any part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining,
with all and singular their and either of their Appurtenances, and also of and
in the Park and Soil and Grounds therein, and of all the Demesne Lands of E.
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, in the said County of Y. And also of and in
all those his Farms free Messuages Burgages Lands Tenements Woods Under-woods
Meadows Pastures Rents Reversions Services Fishings Cole Mines Led Mines Stone
Quarries and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their and every of
their Appurtenances, set lying and being in and every or any of them, in the
said several Counties of Y. N. D. and D. aforesaid, or any of them. And also
of and in all those his Messuages Burgages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions
Services free Fishings and Hereditaments with all and singular their
Appurtenances, lying and being within the County of the City of Y. And also of
and in all the free Fishings at O: aforesaid, in the said Water or River of T.
in the said County of Y. and also of and in the Advowson and Patronage of the
Rectory and Parish Church of H. aforesaid, in the said County of B. and also of
and in the several Advowsons or Patronage of the several Rectories Uses.
and Parsonages of L. and E. in the said County of N. and also of and in the
Advowson or Patronage of the Moiety of the Rectory and Parsonage of B. in the
said City of Y.

And it is further Covenanted, Granted, and Agreed, by and between all the said
parties to these presents for them and their Heirs, that the said several Fines
so before Covenanted, to be had, knowledged and levied, as is aforesaid, and
all and every other Fine, Conveyance and Assurance then before had made levied
or executed, by or between the said parties to these presents, and every, or
any of them, and the full force and effect of them, and every of them, of, for
and concerning the premises or any part thereof, shall be and shall be
adjudged, esteemed, and taken to be; and also that the said H. S. and I, M. and
their Heirs, and all and every other person and persons then standing and being
seized as for and concerning the said Manors of E. F. and B. with the
appurtenances in the said County of York, and also of L. S. B. and E. with the
appurtenances in the said County of N. and for and concerning the Manor of H.
with the appurtenances in the said County of B. and also of and in the several
Advowsons of the Rectories, Parsonages and Churches of L. and E. in the said
County of N. and of H. aforesaid in the said County of B. and also of and in
all Suits, Seigniories, Services, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Authorities,
Priveledges, Court-Leets, Perquisites of Courts and Leets, view of Franpledge,
and all that which to view of Franckpledge appertains, and all other
Royalties whatsoever unto the said several Manors or Lordships last before
mentioned, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof belonging or
appertaining; and also for and concerning all Messuages, Meeses Burgages,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Under-woods, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Free-fishings, Cole-mines, Led-mines, Stone-quarries, and
Hereditaments with the appurtenances in E. aforesaid with and singular the
appurtenances to the only use and behoof of them the said H. S, and I. M. and
of their Heirs, and of the Survivor of them and his Heirs, for and during, and
until such time only as several Recoveries shall be, or otherwise may be had
and prosecuted by the said R. L. and G. L. or the Survivor of them and his
Heirs, and in the said last recited Manors, Advowsons and Premises with the
appurtenances, and to that intent and purpose only that the said H. S.
Recoveries to be suffered.
and I. M. or the Survivor of them may become perfect Tenants or Tenant of the
Freehold of the Premises, so as several Recoveries as the Cause shall require
may be had and prosecuted by them the said R. L. and G. L. or by the Survivor
of them as is aforesaid, according to the usual Order and Course of common
Recoveries for assurances of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in such Cases
used and accustomed. of, for, and upon all and singular the said Manors of E.
aforesaid with the appurtenances, and also of and in the Advowsons and
Patronages of the said Churches of L. E. and H. aforesaid, and also of all
Suits, Seigniories, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures Woods,
Under-woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, Franchises, Liberties, Jurisdictions,
Authorities, Privileges, Court-Leets, Perquisites of Courts and Leets, view of
Frankpledge and all that which to view of Frankpledge appurtaineth, Roialties,
and other the premises, unto the said last recited Manors, or any of them
belonging, and of all other the said Messuages, Burgages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises with the appurtenances in E. etc. aforesaid to the
several Uses, Intents, Limitations and Provisoes, and Conditions hereafter in
these presents limited, expressed, declared or intended, of for and concerning
the same, and to no other use, intent purpose or meaning. Declaration of the
use of the fines and Recoveries.


And for the better, full and plain Declaration of the use, uses, intents,
purpose and meaning of the said several Fines and Recoveries so before
Covenanted, intended or mentioned to be had, knowledged, levied or suffered of
the said Honors, Castles, Manors, Messuages, Burgages, Lands, Tenements, Fees,
Franchises, free Fishings, Advowsons, and other Hereditaments aforesaid.

It is Covenanted, Granted, Concluded, Condescended and fully Agreed by and
between all and every the said parties to these present Indentures for them and
every of them, and for their and every of their Heirs, That the said several
Fines and Recoveries so before Covenanted, meant or intended, to be had,
levied, knowledged and suffered of the said Premises as aforesaid shall be,
and also that they the said R. L. and S. L. and their Heirs and the Survivor of
them and his Heirs, of for and concerning such and so much of the said Honors,
Castles, Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Free-Fishings, Advowsons,
Patronages, Franchises, Fees, Liberties and Hereditaments, as whereof the said
Recoveries are before mentioned or intended to he suffered as aforesaid, from
and immediately after the time of the suffering of the said Recoveries, and
likewise also that they the said H. S. and I: M. and their Heirs, and the
Survivor of them, and his Heirs of for and concerning all the rest and residue
of the said Honors, Castles, Manors, Franchises, Fees, Liberties, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, free-Fishings, Advowsons Patronages and Hereditaments, other
then the same whereof the said Recoveries are before mentioned, meant, or
intended to be suffered as aforesaid, from and immediately after the knowledge
and levying of the said several fines, so before in and by these presents
Covenanted to be levied as aforesaid, shall stand continued and be seized to
such uses, intents, purposes, conditions, limitations, provisoes, matters,
agreements and things, as hereafter in these presents are expessed, apppointed,
limited and declared and to no other uses, intents, purposes, or meanings in
any wise, that is to say, of for and concerning all and singular the said
manors, Lordships and Seigniories of W. etc. in the said several Counties Vsis.
of Y. and D. and also of and in the said Manor of H: with the
appurpurtenances in the said County of B, (the Woods and the Soil thereof and
the Patronage and Advowson of the Rectory and Parsonage of H. aforesaid only
excepted) and also of and in all Suits, Seigniories, Franchises, Liberties,
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Courts-Leets, Perquisites of Courts
and Leets, view of Franckpledge, and all that whirh to view of Frankpledge
appurtaineth, and all other Royalties; Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments
whatsoever unto the said several Manors lastly recited, or any of them, or any
part or parcel of them belonging or in any wise appurtaining, except before
excepted, and also of and in all and singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices to
the use etc. of the said Sr. T. S. Kr. Son and Heir apparent of the said H, L.
S and of the Lady P. for and during the term of the natural lives, and of the
life of the longer liver of them, for and in recompense of parcel of the
Jointure of the said L. P. without impeachment of Wast, only during the term of
the natural life of the said Sir T. S. and from and immedily after the natural
death and decease of the said Sir T. S. and the Lady P. and of the Survivor and
longer liver of them to the use and behoof of the said H. L. S. and his
Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life without impeachment of
Wast, and from and immediately after the natural death and decease of the said
Sir T. S. and the said said Lady P. and likewise after the death of the said H,
L. S. to the use and behoof E. S. Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir T. S.
and of the Heirs Males of the body of the said E, lawfully begotten or to be
begotten and so to the tenth Son and for default of such issue to the use etc.
of all and every other the Sons of the body of the said Sir T: S: to be
lawfully begotten successively one after another as they shall be born, and
shall be in Seniority of age and their Heirs Males of their several bodies to
be lawfully begotten etc. and for default of such issue to the use and behoof
of the right Heirs of the said H. L. S. for ever. And also of and in all and
singular the several Manors, Lordships and Seignioof T. aforesaid in the said
several Counties of Y, and N. and also of and in all Suits Seigniories
Services, etc. and all other Royalties, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments
whatsoever unto the said several manors, or any of them, or any part or parcel
thereof belonging or in aany wise appurtaining, and also of and in all and
singular Messuages Houses etc. and other Lands Tenements Rents Reversions
Services Woods Under-woods and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular
their Appurtenances, set sci^uate lying and being with the Manors Towns
Town-ships Parishes Feilds and Hamlets or Territories of T. etc.

And also of and in the Patronages and Advowsons of the Churches Rectories, and
Parsonages of L. and E. aforesaid or any of them, in which said last recited
premises, are parcel of the said Honors Castles Messuages Lands and
Premises, whereof the said several fines are before covenanted to be levied as
aforesaid, to the use and behoof of him the said H. L. S. and his Assigns, for
and during the term of the natural life of the said H. Lo. S. without
impeachment of any manner of wast, and from by and immediately after the
natural death and decease of the said H. L. S. to the use and behoof of the
Lady M. S. now Wife of the said H Lord S and her assigns, for and during the
term of the natural life of her the said Lady M. S. without impeachment of
Wast only in and for any Woods, Underwoods, and timber trees, standing growing
or being or which at any time hereafter, shall stand grow, or be of in or upon
the premises mentioned, or any part thereof, for and in satisfaction and
recompense of part of the Jointure or Dower of the said Lady Margeret, etc. And
likewise also of and in all and singular the several Manors Lordships and
Seigniories of V. etc. with the appurtenances in the said County of Y. aed also
of and in all Suits, Seigniories Services Franchises Liberties Jurisdictions
Authorities Privileges Courts Leets, and Perquisites of Courts and Leets, View
of Frank pledge, and all that which to view of Franckpledge appertains* and
of all other Royalties and hereditaments whatsoever, unto the said several
Manners or any of them, or any part or parcel of them, or any of them
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and also of and in all those Messuages
and Tenements with the Appurtenances, set lying and being in O. aforesaid, and
also of and in certain Messuages Meeses Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, with
the Appurtenances in R. S. and S. in the County of the City of Y. aforesaid.
And also of and in the free fishing, in the said water or river of T, at O,
aforesaid. to the use and behoof of the said H. Lord S. etc.

And likewise also of and in the rest and residue of the said Honors, Castles,
Manors, Lordships, Franchises, Fees, Liberties, Parks, Chases, Messuages Lands
Tenements Advowsons and Hereditaments, and of all other the premises, with all
and singular their appurtenances whereof the said several fines are before in
and by these presents covenanted to be levied as aforsaid, and whereof no use is
before in these presents limited or appointed to the use and behoof of him the
said H. Lord S. etc.

Provided always, and it is fully concluded condescended unto, granted and
agreed, by and between all and every the said parties to these presents for
them and every of them, and for their and every of their Heirs, and the true
intent and meaning of these presents is notwithstanding, any limitation of the
use or uses aforesaid that if it shall hereafter happen the said H. Lord S. or
the said Sir T. S. and E. S. Esquire; or the said H. S. the son or any of them or
any of the said sons or issue male of the several bodies of them or any of them
inheritable, or which shall be inheritable of the said premises by force of
these presents, and of the uses therein limited and expressed, to die and depart
this world, the Wife or wives of them or any of them being with child or
conceived with child, at or before the time of his or their death, of or with
any such son or sons, or issue male, as by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, or of any the limitations or Declarations of the use or uses
aforesaid, should or ought after the decease of his or their Father to have had
any estate or use of or in the premises or any part thereof if such son or
sons or issue male had been born in the life time of his or their Father, that
then from and after the birth of every such son or sons or issue male, the said
several fines and recoveries, covenanted or mentioned, to be had levied
knowledged or suffered of the said premises as aforesaid shall be, and shall be
adjudged construed and taken to be. And also that they the said H. S. I. R.
Lord and G. L. and their heirs and the Survivor of them and his heirs, shall
stand continue and be seied of all and singular the said Honors Castles Manors
Fees Parks Chases Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Advowsons Services
and Hereditaments, and every part and parcel thereof or of and in so much of
the said Honors Castles Manors, Fees Parks Chases Messuages Lands Tenements
and of all other the said Hereditaments, as whereof, or wherein every or any
such son or sons or issue male so to be born, shall or ought by the true intent
and meaning of the Limitations or Declarations of the use and uses aforesaid or
any of them after the death of his or their Father, to have had any Estate or
use in the same, if such son or sons or issue male had been born in the life
time of his or their said Father, to and for the use of every such son and sons
or issue male, so to be born as is aforesaid, and that of and under such Estate
Degree Order, course place quality condition and limitation in all and every
respects, and to all intents and purposes, as if every such son sons, or issue
male had been born in the life time or lives of his or their said Father, to
and for the use of every such son, and sons or issue male so to be born as is
aforesaid, and that of and under such Estate Degree Order Course Place Quality
Condition and Limitation in all and every Respects, and to all intents and
purposes, as if every such son sons or issue male had been born in the life
time or lives of his or their said Father, and with such Remainder and
limitations over in use as is before in or by these presents.

Provided always and it is fully concluded condescended unto, limimited and
agreed by and between the said parties to this present Indentures for them and
their heirs that it shall, and may be lawful to and for the said H. Lord S. at
any time or times hereafter, during his life, to grant convey assure limit or
appoint by his Deed or Deeds indented, sealed and delivered in the presence of
three lawful and credible persons at the least, all and singular the said
Honors Castles Manors Lordships Rectories Parsonages, Lands Tenements rents
Reversions, Services profits Hereditaments, and other the said Premises with
the Appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, or the use or possession of
the same, or any part or parcel of the same, to or for any woman or women whom
he the said H. Lord S. shall hereafter marry or to whom the said Sir T. S. E.
S. H. S. or any heir male, or issue then next to be inheritable of the said
premises or any part thereof by force of these presents, and of the
limitations and uses thereof expressed limited or appointed, or any of them, or
any heir apparent, of such said heir male or issue then next to be inheritable
as aforsaid, shall hereafter lawfully espouse, marry or take to his or their
wife or wives for and during only the term or terms of the natural life or
lives of such woman or women for and in the name, or in and for the
augmentation of the Jointure of such woman or women, wife or wives.

And further also that in like manner it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said H Lord S. Sir T. S. and also to and for the said H. S. the Son,
Liberty to make Leases.
and for all and every the said Sons, and Issue males or females of the
several bodies of the said Sir T. S E. S: and H. S. and to and for every of the
Issue males and females of the several bodies of the said several sons and
Issue males aforesaid being seized of the Premises or any part thereof in his
or their demesne as of Freehold or fee-taile by force of any the uses or
limitations herein before expressed by his their or any of their Deed or Deeds
Indented or by his their or any of their such last will and testament in
writing as shall be sealed and subscribed with his or their or any of their hand
or hands, and pronounced and affirmed in the presence of 3 or more lawful
witnesses to be his or their last will, to make any demise or demises Lease or
Leases Devise or devises of such of the said premises, or of such part
thereof, as whereof they the said H. Lord S. Sir T. S. E. S. or H. S. the son
or any of the said sons issue or issues male or female, or any of them shall
then be seized of in actual and real possession (other then of the Castle of
B the Park of B. those Lands and grounds now known named used and occupied, as
the demesne Lands of and to the said Castle of B. and and the Lead-mynes and
Cole-mynes, being within the several Manors of B. and P. aforesaid, or any of
them) to any person or persons, to have and to hold the same, from and after
the time of the making of such Deed or Deeds Lease or Leases devise or devises
or any of them to any person or persons for and during the term of fourscore
years or of any lesser term of years, and not above, so as the same Lease or
Leases Devise or Devises be not made to be without impeachment of wast, by any
special covenant clause or matter for that purpose to be contained within any
such deed or deeds or last Will and Testament and so as the same be made in
such sort as that the same do or shall end determine or expire by or upon the
deaths of any one person or of two persons or of three persons at the most, or
otherwise from and after the time of the making of such Deed or Deeds or last
will and testament for and during the term or terms of 21 years at the most
or for any lessor term of years and not above from the time of the making of
such Deed or Deeds or last will and testament and so that in and upon every
such demise or demises lease or leases devsse or devises to be made for twenty
years or under or for the term of fourscore years or under, determinable upon
the death of one two or three persons as is aforesaid there be reserved and
limited to be paid yearly during such term or terms to such person or persons
for the time being to whom the Immediate Freehold of the things so to be
demised letten or devised by the intents and true meaning of these presents,
shall from time to time during the continuance of such term or terms appurtain
such yearly Rent or Rents, and other sureties Boons customs arerages and
services, or more as are at this present yearly answered paid or done for the
said premises by the now renants Farmers or occupiers of the same. And further
also that it shall and may be likewise lawful to and for the said Sir T. S. E.
S. his son and heir apparent and the said H. S. and also to and for every or
any of the son or sons heirs males or Issue male of the several bodies of the
said S. E. Sir S. H. his said son and of H. S. the son and to and for every the
said sons and Issue males of several bodies of the said sons and Issue males
as is aforesaid, being then seized in their or any of their demesne as of
freehold, or in tale by force of any the uses or limitations herein before
expressed, of or in any of the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, herein
before expressed or of any part thereof in or by his their or any of their Deed
or Deeds Indented by him or them to be sealed and subscribed, and in the
presence of two or morelawful and credible witnesses at the least or by his
will last etc. by him or them pronounced or affirmed to be his or their last
will to appoint limit give or devise any part of such and so much of the said
Honors Castles Manors Lorships Advowsons Personages Messuages Lands Tenements,
and of all other the said Premises, with all and singular their appurtenances
as he or they shall then so stand or be seized of as is aforesaid not exceeding
in ancient yearly value or rent the sum of four hundred pounds by the year of
to or for any woman or women which they or any of them shall at any time or
times hereafter lawfully espowse marry or take to his their or any of their
wife or wives or which shall be married to the son and heir apparent of any such
son or Issue male, and who then shall stand and be thereof seized as before is
mentioned for her or their Jointure or Dower during the natural life or lives
only of such woman or women so as the said gift devise Limitation or
Appointment for Jointure or Joyntures be not made to be without Impeachment of
wast by any special Covenant clause or matter for that purpose to be contained
in any such Deed or Deeds or last will.

And further also that it shall and may be like wise lawful to and for
Liberties to grant annuities to younger sons
the said Sir T. S. His said son and heir apparent and to the said H. S. The
son and also to and for every of the said son or sons male or Issue male of the
said several bodies of the said Sir T. S. E. S. his said son and heir apparent
and of H. S. the son and to and for every of the said Issue male of the
several bodies of the said several sons and Issue male having as is aforesaid
the lawful actual and real possession of the Freehold of the said Premises or
of any part thereof likewise in or by his or their or any of their Deed or
Deeds Indented by him or them to be sealed and subscribed and in the presence
of two or more lawful witnesses or in or by his or their last will and
Testament in writtng by him or them to be sealed and subscribed and in the
presence of two or more lawful witnesses by him them or any of them pronounced
and affirmed to be his or their last will to appoint limit give or devise all
or any part of such and so much of the said Honors Castles Manors Lordsships
Advowsons Messuages Lands Tenements, and of all other the said Premises with
all and singular their Appurtenances as he or they, or such of them so making
such Deed or last will shall then be seized of an Estate of Freehold or in tail
as before is expressed, to or for every or to any of the younger son or sons of
them or any of them as to such person so making such Deed or last will shall
be thought meet or Convenient (other then of the said Castle of B. park of B.
and the Manors of R W. and R. in the said County of Y and all the Farms
Messuages Burgages Lands Tenements Woods Underwoods Meadows Pastures Rents
Reversions Services Cole mines, Leadmynes Stone-quarries and Hereditaments
whatsoever, all and singular their and every of their Appurtenances let lying
or being in B. etc. and every or any of them for the better livelihood
maintenance Education and preferment of such said younger son or sons or to
any other person or persons to the use or uses of such said younger son or sons
for and during the term of the natural life and lives of such said younger son
and sons only and not for any longer time or term so that the same Premises or
such part thereof as shall be so devised granted limited or appointed by such
Deed or will to such said younger son or sons as is aforesaid shall not or do
not exceed and amount in yearly Revenues profit and rent of by year for every
or any such said younger son or sons or any of them such of them as to whom or
to whose use such devise limitation or appointment so to be made to such said
younger son or sons as is aforesaid severally to every or any such said son or
sons and not Jointly one with an other and so that every such gift devise
limitation or appointment so to be made to such said younger son or sons as
aforsaid and the estate so thereof and therein to be given granted devised
limited or appointed, shall expire and end, upon the death of such said younger
Son only, as to whom or to whose use such said Grant Devise Limitation or
Appointment shall be so made as is aforesaid, and so as also such and every or
any such said Gift Devise Limitation or Appointment, for such said younger Son
or Sons as aforesaid, be not made to be without impeachment of Wast, by any
special Covenant Clause or Matter for that purpose, to be contained in any
such Deed or Deeds, or last Will: And so as also the said Devise Limitation or
Appointment shall be no encumbrance of the Lands Tenements or Hereditaments
before limited, for the Jointure of the said Lady P. or of any part thereof, or
of such Lands and Tenements as shall be demised devised or leased, according to
the form and effect of these presents, or otherwise conveyed or assured in
Lease as before is mentioned.

And it is further also likewise fully Covenanted, Granted, Concluded,
Provision for daughters unpreferred.
Condescended unto, Limited and Agreed by and between the said parties to
these present Indentures, for them and their Heirs, that if it shall happen or
fortune at any time or times hereafter, the said Sir T. S. E. S. his said Son
and Heir apparent, or the said H. S. the Son, or any the Son or Sons, Heirs
Male or Issue Male of the several bodies of the said Sir T. S. H. S. or of the
said H. S. the Son, or any the said issues Male of the several bodies of the
said H. Lo. S. or of the several sons and issues Males aforesaid, being then
seized of the premises, or of any part thereof in his Demesne as of Fee-taile,
or in his Demesne as of Freehold by force of any of the Uses, Limitations
before expressed, or any of them, and having issue one only daughter and no
more of his or their body or bodies lawfully begotten, and which at the time of
his or their death shall be unpreferred, and not sufficiently advanced in
Marriage by her said Father, or otherwise to to have two or more daughters of
his or their bodies likewise lawfully begotten, and which at the time of his or
their death shall be unpreferred and unadvanced in marriage by their said
Father, as is aforesaid, That then it shall and may be likewise lawful to and
for Sir T. S. E. S. his said son, and the said H. S. and also to and for every,
or any other of the said son or sons, Heirs Male, or issue Male of their or any
of their several bodies, and to and for every of the said issues Male of the
several bodies of the said several sons and issues male being then seized of
the Premises, or of any part thereof in his or their Demesne as of Free-holds
or Fee Tail by force of any of the Uses or Limitations herein before
expressed, in like manner in or by his or their or any of their Deed or Deeds
Indented by him or them to be sealed and subscribed in the presence of two or
more lawful witnesses, or in or by his or their last Will and Testament in
Writing by him or them to be Sealed and Subscribed, and in the presence of two
or more lawful witnesses, by him, them, or any of them to be pronounced or
affirmed to be his or their last Will, to appoint, limit, give, devise, and
demise Limitation.
such and so much of the said Honors, Castles, Manors, Lordships, Advowsons,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and all other the premises with all and singular
their appurtenances, whereof he or they, or such of them so making such Deed, or
last Will shall be then seized as is aforesaid, to or for every or any such
daughter or daughters or such of them as shall be so seized as before is
mentioned, and shall so make such Deed, or last Will as aforesaid, not
exceeding the ancient Rent and yearly value of 200 l. by year, other then of
the Castle of B. and of all the said Farms, Messuages etc. for any other person
or persons, to the Use or Uses of such said daughter or daughters, for their or
any of their better Livelihood, Maintenance, Education and Preferment in
marriage, for and during such time and term, and until such time and term as
such said daughter or daughters, or other person or persons to her or their or
any of their Uses to whom such Grant, Devise, Limitation, Demise or Appointment
shall be so had or made as is aforesaid, or may, or otherwise without fraud,
coven or collusion, might have lawfully (of the Rents, Issues, and Profits
yearly coming, growing, arising, or renewing of the said Premises, so to be
given, granted, demised, devised, limited or appointed, or of such fines or
other casualties as shall or may without fraud or coven, be received to or for
the occupation or enjoying thereof or any part thereof) received, perceived and
taken, and such sum and sums of money as shall or otherwise might suffice to
content satisfy and pay unto such said one sole daughter, if there be no more
of him or them, which shall or may by the true meaning of these present
Indentures, and of the Uses therein limited and appointed, make such said Gift,
Grant, Demise, Devise, Limitation, or Appointment at the time of his or their
death to be living and not married nor otherwise sufficiently preferred as is
aforesaid, the whole and just sum of 1000 l. of good etc. for and toward the
Education, livelihood, maintenance and preferment in marriage, as is aforesaid
of the same sole and only daughter; and if there happen to be more then one
then for and until such time as such said daughters, or such other person or
persons to whom any such Grant, Devise, Limitation, Demise or appointment,
shall be so had or made to the use of such said daughters, or any of them as is
aforesaid, shall or may, or without fraud, covin, or collution, might have
lawfully (of the Rents, Issues, and Profits yearly coming, growing, arising,
or renewing, of, or in the said premises, so to be given granted, demised,
devised, limited, or appointed for that purpose or intent) have received,
perceived and taken such sum and sums of money as may or otherwise (over and
above all charges and reprises) might suffice to content, satisfy and pay unto
such said daughters of him or them, which shall or may by the true meaning of
these present Indentures, and of the Uses therein limited and appointed, making
such said Grant, Devise, Demise, limitation or appointment, and having more
then one daughter at the time of his or their death to be living and not
married, nor otherwise sufficiently preferred, as is aforesaid, viz. To either
and every of them the whole and just sum of etc. for and toward their and
every of their Education, livelihood, maintenance, and preferment in marriage,
or otherwise as aforesaid so as the said Gift, Devise, limitation or
appointment be no encumbrance, to or for the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
before limited or appointed to or for the Jointure of the said Lady P. or of
any part or parcel thereof, or of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments to be
demised devised or leased according to the form and effect of these presents,
for or concerning the same Devises, Leases or Grants, or any of them.

And for the further security and sure making of all and singular, For making
good of such Leases as shall be made of the Premises.
and every part thereof, to be demised or letten, according to the true intent
and meaning of these present Indentures.

It is further granted, condescended unto, and fully agreed by and between all
and every the said parties to these presents, for them and their Heirs, and
every of the said parties, does covenant, grant, conclude, agree, to and with
the other of them, their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them
by these presents, that the said several Fines and Recoveries so before in and
by these presents, covenanted, mentioned, intended, meant, or specified to be
had, made, knowledged, levied or suffered, of the Premises, and of every or
any part or parcel thereof, shall be adjudged, construed, and taken to be. And
also that they the said H. S. I. M. R. L. G. L. and their Heirs, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them, his and their and every of their Heirs shall
stand and be seized, of, for, and concerning such and so much of the said
Manors Lands Tenements and other the Premises, as shall be so demised,
letten, or devised as is aforesaid, by them the said Sir T. S. E. S. his said
Son, and H. S. the Son, or any of the said Son or Sons, Heirs Male, or Issue
Male of the several bodies of the said Sir T. S. E. S. and H. S. or any of the
said Issues Males of the several bodies of the said several Sons, and Issues
Male, being then at the time of such said Demise, Grant, Limitation, or
Appointment, to be had or made as before is mentioned, seized in their or any
of their Demesne as of Freehold, or Fee-tail, by force of any the Uses,
Limitations, or Estates herein before mentioned, to the use of all such and so
many of the person and persons aforesaid, and of their Executors Administrators
and Assigns, to whom such Demise and Demises, Lease or Leases, Devise or
Devises, for any such term or terms of years shall be made, according to the
intent and true meaning of every such Demise Lease or Devise so thereof to be
made, in such sort as shall be limited, specified, or meant, in or by such
Demise, Lease, or Devise, for the person or persons to whom such Demise, Lease,
or Devise, and for the Executors Administrators and Assigns of them and every
of them; To have and to hold and enjoy the things to him or them so to be
demised, leased, or devised, for and during only such and so long time or the
term or terms, for the which such Demise or Demises, Lease of Leases, Devise or
Devises shall be had or made as is aforesaid: So as every such person or
persons, to whom such Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases, Devise or Devises
shall be so made, and his and their Executors Administrators and Assigns,
having sufficient notice and knowledge to whom the same by the true intent and
meaning of these presents, shall of right belong and appertain, shall well and
truly pay or cause to be paid to such person or persons for the time being, to
whom the next and immediate Reversion or Remainder of the thing or things, to
him or them so to be demised, letten, or devised, shall during such term or
terms appertain, the yearly Rent or Rents in or by such Demise, Lease or Devise
to be reserved or mentioned, to be reserved at the day in or by such Demise,
Lease, or Devise, according to the reservation, or clause of reservation therein
to be contained to be limited or appointed, according to the true meaning of
such Deed or Deeds, or last Will and Testament, in or by the which such Demise,
Lease, or Devise shall be so made, or within one and twenty days at the
furthest, next after demand made of and for the said Rent or Rents or such part
thereof, as in respect or by reason of such Demise Lease or Devise, Deed or
Deeds or last Will and Testament, then shall or ought to be due and payable.
For making sure of Joyntures and Annuities for young Sons and Daughters.


And that as for and concerning all and so much of the said Premises as shall
be by the said H. Lord Sir S. T. S. E. S. the Son, or any of the Issues Male of
the several bodies of the said several Sons and Issues Male, or any of them
limited appointed given disposed or devised to or for the Jointure or Joyntures
of any such woman or women, for her or their Jointure, for term of the natural
life of such woman or women, or to or for any such younger Son or Sons,
Daughter or Daughters of such and every such of them, as by and according to
the intent and true meaning of these present Indentures, and of the Uses and
Limitations therein expressed, is or shall be paid, made, provided, limited, or
declared, or to or for any other person or persons, for their or any of their
Uses, according to the purport and true meaning of such Deed or Deeds, or last
Will and Testament, wherein or whereby such Limitation Appointment, Gift, or
Devise, shall be had made or specified as is aforesaid, and after the Decease
of every such woman or women, younger Son or Sons, and after the satisfaction
of such several Sum and Sums of money, as to the said Daughter or Daughters
shall by the intent and true meaning of these presents, belong or appertain,
and as the said uses Provisions and Limitations herein before expressed, by the
true meaning and intent of these present Indentures, shall severally end and
determine, then to the use of such person and persons, as by the true intents
and limitations, or of any of the Limitations in use aforesaid, should or ought
to have the same, if no such Limitation Appointment Gift or Devise, to or for
them, or any of them, had been so thereof had made limited or appointed in any
wise, and of and for such Estate and Estates, and in such order, form, course,
nature, quality, and degree, and with such Remainder and Remainders thereof,
over and by, and upon, and under such Provisoes and Limitations, as the same
person or persons, by the true intent and meaning of these presents should and
ought to have been or remained, if no such Limitation, Appointment, Gift, or
Devise had been thereof had or made, to or for such woman or women, younger Son
or Sons, Daughter or Daughters, as before in and by these present Indentures,
are limited and expressed: And the said H. Lord S. for and upon the causes and
considerations aforesaid, does for him self and his Heirs, That all persons
seized, or which shall be seized of the premises, shall stand seized to the
Vse^ in these presents expressed.
for the further security and sure making of all and singular the Premises, to
the several Uses aforesaid, and according to the intent and true meaning of
these presents, also covenant, grant, and agree, to and with all and every the
parties to these present Indentures and their Heirs.

And it is also further covenanted, granted, and agreed, by and between all and
every the said parties to these presents, for them and their Heirs and every of
them, that he the said H. Lord S. his Heirs and Assigns, and all and every
other person and persons, and their Heirs, which from and after the said Feast
of etc. next coming, shall stand and be seized of all or any of the said Honors
Castles Manors Lordships Seigniories Advowsons Patronages Messuages Lands
Tenements Hereditaments, and other the said Premises, with the Appurtenances
above mentioned, and every or any part or parcel thereof, and which before the
said Feast of etc. next coming after the date hereof, shall not be well and
sufficiently by Fine or otherwise conveyed and assured, to the several uses
purposes and intents before in these presents mentioned, or whereof no such Fine
or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries as is aforesaid, shall be before the said
Feast Day of etc. as aforesaid, had, levied, knowledged, and suffered, of and
in every part and parcel thereof, according to the said intent and true meaning
of these present Indentures. shall at all time and times, and from and after
the said Feast Day of etc. for the considerations herein before expressed,
stand and be seized of and in the same, and every part thereof, to the several
uses purposes and intents before in these presents expressed, limited, and
appointed, and in such sort manner form quality degree nature and condition,
and of and for and of, and in such Estate and Estates, and under and upon such
Provisoes Limitations and Authorities, and according to the true intent and
meaning of these present Indentures, in such ample large and beneficial manner
and form, to all intents constructions and purposes as the same should or ought
to have grown, been raised or taken, any effect in case the said several Fine
and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, so before in and by these presents,
covenanted mentioned intended or agreed to be had levied knowledged or suffered
of the said Premises, had been had and executed, according as before in these
presents are expressed. Provided moreover, and it is also by these presents
Proviso and liberty that if the Grantor, or any the Issue Male fortune to be
taken Prisoner, that they may sell certain Lands for the ransom.
further granted, concluded, condescended unto, and fully agreed by and between
all the said parties to these present Indentures, for them and their Heirs,
notwithstanding the Premises, and notwithstanding any thing before in these
presents specified, that if it shall fortune at any time or times hereafter,
the said H. Lord S. the said Sir T. S. the said E. S. or H. S. the Son, or any
of the said Son or Sons, Heirs Male or Issue Male of the several bodies of
them, or any of them, or any of the said Issues Males of the several bodies of
the said several Sons and Issues Male, or any of them, being then seized of
the Premises, or of any part thereof, in his or their Demesne as of Freehold,
or Fee-tail, by force means or virtue of any of the uses limitations or estates
herein before expressed, at any time or times hereafter to be taken captive or
Prisoners in the time of War, or other Service of our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, and in defense of her or their Highness
Crown or Realm, by any foreign or adverse Prince, Power, or Force, that then
and at all times from thenceforth during such Captivity or Imprisonment, and
before any full ransom paid for his or their delivery, if he the said H. Lord
S. and the said Sir T. S. E. S. and H. S. the Son, or any of the Son or Sons,
Heirs Male or Issue Male, of the several bodies of them, or any of them, or of
any of the said Issues Male, of the several bodies of the said several Sons
and Issues Male, or any of them, being then (as is aforesaid) seized of the
said Premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, in his Demesne as of
Freehold, or Fee tail, and so being taken Captive and Prisoner as aforesaid,
and for the payment of his or their reasonable Ransom, or any Sum or Sums of
money, for his or their Delivery, shall or do, in or by his or their Deed or
Deeds, Writing or Writings, knowledged and enrolled in any of the Courts of
Record of our said Sovereign Lady Elizabeth the Queens Majesty, or her Heirs or
Successors at Westminster, or otherwise in or by his or their Deed or Deeds,
Writing or Writings indented by him or them to be sealed and subscribed, in the
presence of two or more lawful and credible Witnesses declare limit or
appoint, that all and every or any of the use or uses in these presents limited
or mentioned, of all or such of the said Honors Castles Manors Lord-ships
Advowsons Patronages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the said
Premises before mentioned, with the Appurtenances, whereof such person or
persons so making such declaration limitation or appointment as aforesaid,
shall be then actually seized in his Demesne as of Freehold, or in Fee-tail,
as before is mentioned, or of any of them, or of any part parcel or member of
them, or any of them in the whole, not exceeding the yearly value of 200 l. by
the year, other then of the said Castle of B. etc. and Hereditaments Exception.
whatsoever, with all and singular their and every of their Appurtenances set
lying and being in E. etc. and every or any of them as is aforesaid, That then
and from thenceforth, as well all and every such use and uses and limitations,
as are before in these presents mentioned, and shall happen so to be declared
limited or appointed to cease or to be ended and determined, and all and every
Estate and Estates, Interest and Interests, had made raised or wrought, by
reason means or in respect of these presents, or of any the several Fine or
Recoveries, Clauses or Articles Other Exceptions
above mentioned, or any of them, or otherwise then for and concerning the said
Leases and Joyntures, provided intended or limited to be had and made as
aforesaid, and either of them shall cease and determine, and otherwise be
merely and utterly adnihilated and made void, for and concerning such and so
much of the said Honors Castles Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and other the
said Premises, and every part thereof, whereof the said use or uses shall be so
declared limited or appointed to cease or to be altered avoided ended and
determined, in manner and form aforesaid, and not otherwise (saving and
accepting such Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, Devise and Devises, Lease and
Leases, Demise and Demises, Appointments or Limitations, or any term or terms
of year or years, or for the life or lives of any Wife or Wives, Woman or
Women, younger Son or Sons, Daughter or Daughters, as shall according to the
true intent of these presents be made limited or appointed by them the said H.
Lord S. Sir T. S. E. S. and H. S. the Son or any of the said Son or Sons, Heirs
Male or Issue Male of their or any of their several bodies, or by any of the
said Issues Male of the several bodies of such said Son or Sons, or Heirs
Male, being then seized in his or their Demesne as of Fee-tail or Freehold, of
or in the said Premises as aforesaid, or of any part or parcel thereof: And
that then and from thenceforth the said several Fines and Recoveries so to be
had levied and suffered of the said Premises, whereof the Use or Uses
aforesaid, shall be so declared or appointed, to cease, shall be, and shall be
adjudged, construed, and taken to be. And likewise that they the said H. S. I.
M. R. L. and G. L. and their Heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and
his and their Heirs, shall from thenceforth stand and be seized of such of the
said Premises, whereof the use or uses aforesaid shall be so declared or
appointed to cease, and of every or any part or parcel thereof, to the only use
and behoof of such of them the said H. Lord S. Sir T. S. E. S. and H. S. or any
other Son or Sons, or Issue Male of their or any of their several bodies, or
any the Issue Male of the several bodies of the said several Sons, and Issue
Male as shall so then stand or be seized, in his or their Demesne as of
Freehold or Fee-tail, of or in the Premises, or of any part thereof, and shall
so make such Declaration. Limitation, or Appointment, for the ending and
determining of the Uses before in these presents limited, of the said last
recited or mentioned Premises, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to that
intent and purpose only, that it shall and may be lawful to and for them and
any of them, so being taken Captive and Prisoner, and making such declaration,
limitation, or appointment, for the ceasing and ending of the said Uses, in
manner and form aforesaid, and every or any of them. And likewise also that
they, or such of them as shall make any such declaration or appointment, for
such ending or determining of the Uses aforesaid, to be had or made as is
aforesaid, shall have full authority and power, freely clearly and absolutely
to bargain alien sell and convey such and so much of the Premises, whereof he
or they shall be then seized as is aforesaid, not exceeding the value of 200 l.
by the year (except lastly excepted) as whereof such declaration limitation or
appointment, for the ending or determining of the Uses before in these presents
raised or limited, or any part or parcel thereof, shall be so had or made as
aforesaid, or otherwise the Reversion or Reversions, Remainder or Remainders
thereof to any person of persons whatsoever, in Fee-simple Fee-tail, or any
other Estate whatsoever, saving and always excepting and reserving, that such
said Bargain Sale Grant Conveyance, and other Assurance so thereof to be made,
for the payment of such said Ransom or Sum or Sums of money for the same
purpose or intent, be not or may not be adjudged construed or taken to be
prejudicial or hurtful to any Estate or Estates, Demise or Demises, Lease and
Leases, Devise and Devises, Appointment or limitation of any term of years, or
of life or lives of any wife or wives, woman or women, younger Son or Sons,
Daughter or Daughters, as shall then before have been, according to the true
intent of these presents, thereof made limited or appointed to them or any of
them, in any wise.

Provided likewise, and moreover it is by these presents finally Concluded,
Revocation.
Covenanted, Granted, Condescended unto, and Agreed by and between all the said
parties to these presents, for them and their Heirs, notwithstanding the
limitations, declarations and creating of the Use or Uses in or by these
presents as is aforesaid. And notwithstanding any thing before in these
presents, That if the said H. Lo. S. at any time or times hereafter, in or by
his Deed or Deeds in Writing or Writings, indented, knowledged, and enrolled in
any of the Courts of Record of our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, her
Heirs or Successors, declare limit or appointe, that all and every the use and
uses or any of the Use or Uses, in these presents before limited or mentioned
of all the said Honors, Castles, Manors, Lordships, Advowsons, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the premises before mentioned with
their appurtenances or of any of them, or of any part, parcel or member of them
or any of them shall cease, or in any wise or sort whatsoever be adnihilated,
altered, abridged, made void or determined, that then and at all times
thenceforth, and so often, as well all and every such Use and Uses so to be
declared, limited or appointed to cease, or to be altered, abridged, or made
void and determined, and all and every estate and interest, estates and
interests, had, made, raised or wrought, or to be had, made, raised, or
wrought, by reason or in respect of these presents, or of any the several
Fines, Recoverie or Recoveries above mentioned, shall accordingly cease,
determine and be adnihilated, altered, abridged, made void and determined, for
and concerning such and so much of the said Honors, Castles, Manors,
Lordships, Advowsons, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services
and Hereditaments, and of all other the said premises whereof the said several
Fines before mentioned, are Covenanted to be levied as aforesaid, whereof the
said Use or Uses shall be so declared, limited or appointed to cease or to be
altered, abridged or made void and determined (saving and excepting such Use
and Uses, Devise and Devises, Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises, Appointment
or Limitation of any term or terms, as is or shall be made according to the
form and effect of these presents by the said H. Lo. S. and also such use and
uses, estate and estates as are appointed or limited by these presents, for or
during the natural life of the said Lady P. as are before in and by these
presents, or at any time shall then before behad, limited or appointed, to or
for the said Jointure of the said Lady P. And also that the said several Fines
and Recoveries so to be had, made, levied, knowledged, suffered or executed by
the said H. Lo. S. and all and every other Fine and Fines, Conveyance and
Conveyances to be had or made thereof, or of any part thereof shall be, and shall
be adjudged, construed and taken to be. And also that they the said H. S. I. M.
R. L. and G. L. and every of them, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and
of every of them, and their, and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and every of
them shall stand and be seized of, and in such and so much of the said Honors*
Castles, Manors, Lordships, Fees, Advowsons, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and of all other the said Premises, or of any of them, whereof
the use or uses aforesaid, or any of them, or any such use or uses as is
aforesaid, shall be so declared, limited or appointed to cease, or to be
altered, abridged or made void, and determined, to and for the only use and
behoof of the said H. Lo. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for evermore, subject
and charged always notwithstanding to and with such Lease and Leases, Demise
and Demises, as the said H. Lo. S. shall hereafter grant or limit to any person
or persons according to the form and effect of these presents, and to and with
the uses, interests, and estates before limited or meant, or intended to be, to
or for the said Lady P. her Jointure as is aforesaid. But yet notwithstanding
if at any time or times hereafter the said H: Lo, S. in or by his Deed or
Deeds, Writing or Writings, knowledged and Enrolled in any Court of Record of
our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, shall give,
declare, dispose, limit or appoint all and singular the said Honors, Castles,
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Hereditaments and all other
the said premises, whereof the said several fines are before covenanted to be
levied as aforesaid, or any of the same, or any part thereof, or any Use or
Uses, Estate or Estates, Possession or Interest, of or in the said Honors
Castles Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments and Premises, or
of or in any part thereof, to or for any person or persons, or in any sort
whatsoever: That then and from thenceforth the said several Fine and Fines,
Recovery and Recoveries, to be had levied knowledged or suffered, by or for the
said H. Lord S. and the said H. S. I. M. or by or for the Survivor and
Survivors of them, shall be, and shall be adjudged construed and taken to be.
And also that they the said H. S. I. M. R. L. and G. L. and every of them, and
the Survivor and Survivors of them, and their and every of their Heirs, shall
stand and be seized for and in such and so much of the said Honors Castles
Manors Lands Tenements Hereditaments and Premises, or of any of them, as of
for or concerning the which, any such Gift Disposition Declaration Limitation
or Appointment, in or by such Deed or Deeds enrolled, shall be so had or made
by the said H. Lord S, to and for such Use and Uses, and to the Use of such
person and persons, and of and for such Estate and Estates, Interest and
Interests, and in such nature course quality and degree, and upon and under
such Condition and Conditions, Limitations and Provisoes, and in such sort
manner and form, as in or by such Deed or Deeds enrolled, shall be of for and
concerning the same limited and appointed, declared or expressed by the said H.
Lord S. whether the Uses Estates, or any Use or Estate of or in the Premises,
or any part thereof before, in and by these presents are mentioned, be in or by
such Deed or Deeds enrolled, by any express word matter or thing contained
therein, declared limited or appointed to cease or to be adnihilated altered
abridged made void and determined, or not, and yet the said other Use and Uses,
Estate and Estates, so to be disposed declared devised limited or appointed, by
the said H. Lord S. in or by such Deed or Deeds enrolled to be notwithstanding,
and always subject and charged to and with the Use and uses Interest and
Estate before by these presents, or at any time before the making of these
Presents, limited or meant, to or for the said Lady P. for her Jointure as
aforsaid, and to and with every such Lease and Leases as shall be made by the
said Lord S. according to the intent and true meaning of these Present
Indentures any thing matter or clause in these Present Indentures contained, to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, In witness whereof etc.

Popham, Egerton, Cook, Brograve, Atkinson, Godfrey, Hesketh, Owen.

Settlement of Estate.
THis Indenture made etc. Between G: B: etc: of the one part, and P. W. etc.
and W. B. etc. of the other part, witnesses that the said G. B. for diverse
good and weighty Considerations him thereunto moving, and especially to the end
intent and purpose that all and singular his Manors Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, heretofore not conveyed or assured by the said G. B. to remain
and Continue (or after the decease of the said G. B. unto the Name and Blood of
the said G. B. shall and may accrue) and come after the decease of the said G.
B. unto the Heirs males of his body lawfully issuing, and for default of such
issue then to the several brothers and next heirs males of the said G. as is
hereafter limited in and by these Presents, with the liberty nevertheless for
the said G. B. freely and clearly to dispose change or alienate the Premises
or any part thereof for any Estate or Estates whatsoever, and to revoke recall
all and every the use and uses hereafter in these Presents limited mentioned
appointed or any of them as in and by these presents herafter more fully
appears; has covenanted granted declared and agreed and by these Presents
for him his Heirs and Assigns does covenant declare grant and agree to and
with the said P. W. and W. B. their Heirs and Assigns that he the said G. B.
shall and will from and after the day of the date To levy a Fine
of these Present Indentures and before the Feast day of Easter which shall be
in the year of our Lord God 1596 acknowledge and levy two or more Fines with
Proclamations according to the course of fines used within the Counties
Palatine of Chester and Lancaster before her Majesty's Justice or Justices of
assize in that behalf lawfully authorized or before some other person or
persons in that behalf lawfully and sufficiently authorized unto them the said
P. W. and W. B: and the Heirs of one of them, or unto some other persons and
the Heirs of one of them, and by such name or names in that behalf as by the
said P. and W. B. Council learned shall be reasonably required of all and
singular the Manors Lordships Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, of the said
G. B. situate lying and being within the said several Counties Chester and
Lancaster and heretofore not conveyed or Assigned to and for the Jointure of K.
G. the now wife of the said G. has the remainders thereupon limited declared
and appointed the particulars of such lands so assured in Jointure do appear in
or by one Indenture in that behalf only had or made by the said G. B. And the
said G. B. does for him his Heirs and Assigns Covenant grant limit declare and
agree to and with the said P. W. and W. B. their Heirs and Assigns that as well
the said fine and fines so to be hereafter acknowledged and levied as aforesaid
as also that all and every other fine and fines in any wise acknowledged or
levied by the said G. B. at any time from and after the day of the date of
these present Indentures and before the Feast of Easter which shall be in the
year of our Lord God 1596. unto any person or persons of all or any the said
Residue of the said Manors Lorships Lands Tenements or other Hereditaments, of
the said G. B. and the Estate and Execution thereof shall be and that all and
every the said Conysees and their Heirs shall from and after the levying and
Execution of the said fine or fines immediately stand and be seized of all and
every the Manors Lordships Lands Tenements and other the Hereditaments,
therein Comprised or to be Comprised according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents to the only uses intents and purposes and under and upon the
Provisoes Limitations Conditions, and Agreements. hereafter mentioned and to no
other use intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say to the use and behoof
of the said G. B. and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten and to be
begotten and for default of such Issue then to the use and behalf of E. B.
brother of the said G. and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten or to
be begotten and for default of such Issue then to the use of I. B. one other
brother of the said G. B. and of the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten
and to be begotten and for default of such Issue then to the use and behoof of
R. B. one other Brother of the said G. B. and of the Heirs males of his body
lawfully to be begotten and for default of such Issue then to the use and
behoof of the said G. his Heirs and Assigns forever.

Provided always nevertheless, and it is fully agreed between the said Proviso
to make an estate.
parties to these presents, that the use and intent of the said Fine and Fines
is, and so for ever shall be reputed, and termed so to be, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said G. B. at any time or times during his
natural life by any his Deed or Deeds in Writing, as well to limit convey
appoint lease or assure all or any the Manors Lordships Lands Tenements and
other the Hereditaments so comprised or to be comprised in the said Fine or
Fines or any part or parcel thereof unto any other person or persons, their
heirs Executors or Assigns, for any term freehold, or other Estate or Estates
whatsoever, upon Condition limitation or otherwise by any his Deed or Act in
Writing under his hand and seal, or by his last Will and Testament in Writing
published in the presence of lawful witnesses, simply and absolutely at his
Will and pleasure, notwithstanding any the said use and uses in these presents
formerly limited or appointed, as also by any his like Deed or Deeds in
writing, or such last will, as aforesaid, to grant to any person or persons,
their Heirs Executors or Assigns, or to any of them to any use or uses
whatsoever, any annual or yearly Rent or Rents Charge, or otherwise to be
issuing and going out of all and singular the said Manors Lordships Lands
Tenements or Hereditaments so comprised, or to be comprised, in the said Fine
or Fines, or out of any part thereof for any term time, Estate or Estates
whatsoever, upon any Condition limitation, or otherwise simply and absolutely
at his will and pleasure, as to the said G. shall in any wise hereafter seem
expedient or convenient.

And it is likewise agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents,
that the Conusees and their heirs, shall stand and be seized from time to time,
and at all times respectively and severally, as well from and after such
Limitation Conveyance Appointment or Assurance of the said premises, or of any
parcel thereof so to be had or made by the said G. as aforesaid, of such and
so much of the said premises, as by him shall be so limited conveyed appointed
leased declared or assured as aforesaid, unto the use of such person and
persons to whom the said G. shall so limit convey appoint declare lease or
assure the premises or any part thereof as aforesaid, for such terms Estate
and Estates whatsoever, and in such manner form and condition, as the said G:
B. shall by his said Deed or Deeds, so limit will convey appoint lease declare
or assure the premises, or any part thereof, and afterward then to the
several use and uses before in these presents limited and appointed, as also
shall likewise stand and be seized to the use intent and purpose, that all and
every such person and persons, their Heirs Executors and Assigns, to whom the
said G, B. shall hereafter by any his Deed or Deeds, or by his last Will and
Testament in writing, limit appoint grant declare or bequeath any annual or
yearly Rent or Rent Charge, or otherwise to be issuing or going out of all or
any the said Manors Lordships Lands and Tenements and other Hereditaments so
comprised or to be comprised in the said Fine or fines, or out of any part
thereof shall and may annually and yearly have perceive and receive all and
every such annual or yearly Rent and Rents, to him or them limited appointed
granted declared or bequeathed at such days and times, and for such term Estate
and Estates whatsoever, and in such manner and form, as by such said limitation
Appointment, Grant declaration bequest, or by the true intent or meaning
thereof, shall be in any sort limited mentioned appointed or declared.

Provided nevertheless and upon Condition, and the use and intent of the said
Fine and Fines, and the Execution thereof is and so for ever shall be taken to
be, that if the said G. B. at any time and times hereafter, shall be minded or
determined to Revoke Repeal and make void, all or any the use or uses formerly
in or by these presents limited or appointed unto the said E. B. I. B. and R.
B. or unto any of them, or unto any of their heirs males of their or any of
their several bodies aforesaid, and hereupon shall signify or publicly by
any his Deed or Deeds in Writing sealed and delivered, or by his last Will and
Testament in Writing by him published, in the presence of two Witnesses, such
his purpose and determination, to Revoke and Recall, and shall and do thereby
likewise revoke and Recall all and any the said uses, or any the Estate or
Estates thereby, or by the means hereof invested, or to be invested in the
said E. B. A. B. and R. B. or any of them, their, or any of their heirs males
of their bodies, that then and from thenceforth all and every such use and
uses, Estate and Estates, as he the said G. B. shall so signify or Publish by
his Deed or Deeds or last Will as aforesaid, that he is so purposed to revoke
and recall, and which he the said G. B. shall so revoke and recall, shall
immediately cease be void frustrate, and of no longer Effect or Continuance in
the Law, as if the said Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, so revoked or recalled,
or signified to be Revoked or Recalled, had neverbeen mentioned or limited in
these present Indentures, any limitation of use or uses in these Presents or
any the grant Execution making or declaring of any Estate or Estates by livery
or otherwise before such said Revocation Recalling or alteration, or any other
matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. In witness whereof,
etc.

Tildesley Davenport.


Assurances.
THis Indenture tripartite etc. berween Sir R. H. and Dame K. his Wife of the
first party, A. B. on the second party, and C. D. on the third party;
witnesses, That the said Sir R. H. and Dame K. his wife, for and in
consideration of the sum, etc. by R. S. of, etc. in the said County of
Lancaster Esquire, before the sealing and delivering of these presents paid
etc. whereof they acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied thereof, and
every part thereof, do clearly acquit exonerate and discharge the said R. S.
his Heirs Executors and Administrators for ever, and by these presents do
covenant promise and grant for themselves, their Heirs Executors and
Administrators by these Presents to and with the said A. B. and C. D. etc. that
they the said Sr. R. H. and Dame K his wife, and the heirs of the said Sr R.
shall and will on this side, and before the Feast day of Easter next ensuing
after the date of these presents, by fine with Proclamations in due form of Law
to be knowledged and levied before the Queens Majesty's Justice or Justices at
Lancaster, for the time being, lawfully and sufficiently convey and assure, or
cause to be conveyed and assured unto the said A. B. and C. D. or to the
survivor of them, and to the heirs of the one of them for ever, all and
singular, that the part purparty and protion which to the said Sr. R. H. now or
at any time heretofore appertained, of or within the Manor or reputed Manor
of C. or of or in the Rights Members and Appurtenances thereof in the said
County of Lancaster, and all that capital message and Tenement in C. R.
aforesaid commonly called the Park hall, and all and every the Houses Edifices
Buildings Orchards Gardens Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, situate in C.
and W: and in either of them to the aforesaid capitail message and Tenement in
any wise appertaining, or therewithal now or at any time hertofore use
doccupied reputed or enjoyed as part or parcel thereof, or as thereunto in any
wise belonging, and all and singular other the Messuages Gardens Lands
Tenements Meadows Feedings Pastures Woods Underwoods Commons. Common of
Pasture, and Turbary Rents Reversions Services Profits Commodities Emoluments
and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their and every their appurtenances of the
said Sr. R. H. situate lying and being in C. aforesaid, B. and G. and in every
or any of them in the said County of Lancaster, in whose hands and possession
soever the same be, or shall be, whereof or wherein the said Sr, R. now has,
or at any time heretofore had any Estate or Inheritance whatsoever.

And also all and singular the Messuages Cottages Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with their and every of their Appurtenances of the
said Sir R seituate and being in C. in the said County of Lancaster hereafter
mentioned or specified etc. one other Cottage and certain Lands and
Hereditaments with the Appurtenances therewith occupied, now or late in the
tenure or occupation of William Clarkeson or his Assigns of the yearly rent of
two shillings two pence with diverse other Cottages etc. It is granted and
agreed by and between all and every the said parties to these Presents for
themselves their Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, and also thesaid Sir R.
and dame K his wife for themselves their Heirs and Assigns do Covenant grant
declare limit and agree, and with the said Sir R. H: and C. D. their Heirs and
Assigns by these Presents that the said Fine to be knowledged and levied of and
in the said Hereditaments and Premises as aforesaid, and the Execution thereof
and the Estate Right title Interest and Possession of them the said A. B. and
of the heirs of such of them to whom the Inheritance of or in the premises
shall be limited in and by the said intended Fine, and of the Survivors of them,
and his Heirs, of and in the said Hereditaments and Premises, shall be and so
for ever shall be adjudged and taken to be. And also that they the said A. B.
and the Heirs of such one of them, to whom the Inheritance of the said
Premises shall be limited in or by the said intended Fine, and the Survivor of
them and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in all and singular the
said Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part thereof, with the
Appurtenances, to and for the uses intents and purposes, and under and upon the
Provisoes Limitations Conditions and Agreements, hereafter in these presents
mentioned, and to no other use intent or purpose whatsoever; That is to wit, to
the use and behoof of the said C. D and G. and their Heirs, under and upon the
Proviso Limitation Clause Condition and Agreement, nevertheless hereafter in
these presents mentioned and contained.

Provided always, and upon Condition, and the further use and intent of the
said intended Fine, and of the Estate thereby to be had or made, of and for all
and every the said Hereditaments and Premises, is, and so for ever hereafter
shall be taken to be, that if the said Sir R. H. his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall and do well and truly satisfy
tender or pay, or cause to be well and truly satisfied tendered or paid unto the
said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, the full
Sum of etc. the said several tenders or payments to be had and made, in manner
and form aforesaid, at or in the now dwelling house of the said R. S. commonly
called or known by the name of S. that then and from thenceforth, as well all
and every the said Use and Estate of the said C. D. their and either of their
Heirs and Assigns, of and in all and every the said Hereditaments and
Premises, shall forthwith cease and be utterly frustrate and void, any thing
in these presents to the contrary notwithstanding: As also that immediately
after the said Sum shall be so lawfully tendered satisfied or paid as aforesaid,
the said Fine so intended to be limited as aforesaid, and the Estate thereby in
any wife to be had or made shall be, and so for ever hereafter shall be taken
to be, of and in all and every the said Hereditaments and Premises, to the use
and behoof of the said Sir R. H. and Dame K. his Wife, for and during their
natural lives, and for and during the natural life of the longer liver of
them, and from and after their deceases, then to the use and behoof of the
Heirs Males of the body of the said Sir R. H. upon the body of the said Da: K.
lawfully begotten and to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to
the use and behoof of the Heirs M^les of the body of the said Sir R. H:
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of the
right Heirs of the said Sir R, H. for ever, any thing in these presents, or
otherwise to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And the said C. and D. do covenant and grant to and with the said Sir R. H:
his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that if A. S.
the now wife of the said R. S. and Mother of the said Sir R. H. shall happen to
decease before default of payment of the said Sum of (...) shall happen to be
made, that then from and after her decease, the said Sir R. H. and his Assignee
or Assigns, shall and may at all times hereafter, peaceably and quietly, have,
hold, occupy and enjoy, all and singular the said Hereditaments and Premises,
and every part thereof, with the appurtenances, for and during such only time,
and until that the said Sir R. H. his Executors Administrators or Assigns,
shall make default of or in payment of the said sum, in the said Proviso or
Condition of Redemption before mentioned specified, or of any part thereof,
contrary to the tenor and true intent and meaning thereof, without any the let
trouble molestation disturbance interruption or eviction of the said C. and D.
or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, claiming by from or under them, or any of them.

And the said S. R. H: and Dame K. his wife, for them, their Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators, do Covenant and Grant, to and with the said C. D. their
Heirs and Assigns by these presents, and to and with every of them, that if the
said Sir R. H. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall make
default of or in the payment of the said sum of (...) or of any part thereof
contrary to the tenor and true meaning of the said Proviso, Clause Condition of
Redemption or Agreement before mentioned, that then and from thenceforth all
and singular the said Hereditaments and Premises, and every part thereof with
the appurtenances, shall and may remain, continue and be unto said C. and D.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, free, clear, and clearly* acquitted,
exonerated, and discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently saved and kept
harmless by the said Sir R. H. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns,
of, for, from, and concerning all and every former and other Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Leases Promises, and Agreements, Estates, Joyntures, Dowers,
Titles of Dower, Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Condemnations,
and of and from and concerning all and every other charges titles troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore committed had made done knowledged levied
suffered or executed, or hereafter to be committed had made done knowledged
levied suffered or executed by the said Sir R. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or any
of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, having or lawfully
claiming to have any Estate Right Title Interest Claim or Demand whatsoever,
of, in, or to the said Hereditaments and Premises, or of, in, or to any part
or parcel thereof, by, from, or under the said Sir R. H. and Dame K. or either
of them, or by, from, or under the Heirs or Assigns of the said Sir R. H. in
any wise. Leases heretofore made by the said Sir R. H. before the Feast Day of
Saint M. the Archangel last past, before the date hereof, of all or any part
of the said Hereditaments and Premises, to any person or persons, for three
lives, or under, or for term of one and twenty years or under, whereupon the old
ancient and accustomed Rents and Services are reserved, and shall be due and
payable during the same several Terms, and the Joyntures of A. S. now wife of
the said R. S. and Mother of the said Sir R. H. only and ever fore-prised and
excepted.

And further also that the said C. and D. their and either of their Heirs and
Assigns, and every of them, at all times from and after the non-payment or
default of payment of the said Sum of etc. contrary to the tenor and true
meaning of the said Provision Clause Condition of Redemption or Agreement
before mentioned, if any such default shall happen, shall and may peaceably,
and lawfully, and quietly have hold and enjoy all and every the said
Hereditaments and Premises and every part thereof with the Appurtenances,
discharged or saved harmless as aforesaid, and without any Let Trouble Suit
Disturbance Interruption or Eviction of the said Sir R. H. his Heirs or
Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, having
or lawfully claiming to have any Estate Right Title or Interest, of in or to
the said Hereditaments and Premises, or of in or to any part or parcel
thereof, by from or under them or any of them, except before, and in manner and
form only before excepted.

And further also that he the said Sir R. H. and Dame K. his wife, and the
Heirs of the said Sir R. H. shall and will from time to time and at all times,
during and within the space of 7. years next ensuing, after such non-payment,
or default of payment to be had or made, or happening of the said Sum etc. or of
any part thereof, at any of the said several days, times, or places before
mentioned, at and upon the reasonable request costs and charges in the Law of
the said R. S. his Heirs or Assigns, do make knowledge levy suffer and execute,
and cause to be done made knowledged levied suffered and executed, all and
every such further Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Devise and Devises,
Conveyances and Assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further better and
more assured surety, sure making, conveying and assuring, of all and singular
the said Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part thereof, and of the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of all his and
their Estate Right Title Interest Claim and Demand whatsoever, of, in, and to
the Premises, and of every part thereof, with the Appurtenances, unto, or for
the only proper and absolute use and behoof of the said C. and D. and of their
Heirs and Assigns for ever, be it either by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, with
Voucher or Vouchers over, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, Release with
warranty against the said Sir R. H. his Heirs and Assigns, except only and in
manner and form aforesaid excepted, or otherwise without Warranty Confirmation,
or by all or any of the said ways or means, or by any other lawful ways or
means whatsoever, as by the said R. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be in that behalf reasonably devised or
advised, so that for the doing making knowledging or executing thereof, they or
any of them be not enforced to travel alone the distance of ten miles, from
such place or places, where he or they respectively shall be abiding or
dwelling at the time of such Request or Requests so to be made.

And it is further agreed, that if it shall happen to be comprehended or
contained by or by reason or means of the Number or Contents of Acres to be
mentioned in such said intended Fine, any Messuages Lands, or Hereditaments,
other then the said covenanted or intended Hereditaments, so formerly agreed in
or by these presents, to be contained as aforesaid: That then the said Fine,
aad the Estate thereby to be had or made, for such and so much only of the said
other Hereditaments, not being parcel of the said Hereditaments and Premises
so covenanted and agreed in or by these presents, to be assured or conveyed as
aforesaid, as shall happen by means of such Surplusage of Acres to be comprised
in or by such said intended Fine, shall be, and so for ever shall be taken to
be to the use and behoof of the said Sir R. H. and Dame K. his wife, for and
during their natural life, and for and during the natural life of the longer
liver of them, and after their decease, then to the use of the Heirs Males of
the body of the said Sir R. H. upon the body of the said Dame K. lawfully
begotten and to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of
the Heirs Males of the body of the said Sir R. H. lawfully to be begotten, and
for default of such Issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of the said Sir
R. H. for ever: In witness whereof etc.

Walmysley, Davenport.


Settlement of an Estate.
THis Indenture tripartite made etc. Between L. S. of S. etc. of the first
part, R. S. great Cousin and Heir apparent of the said L. of the second part, W.
D. and E. I. etc. of the third part, witnesses, That whereas a Marriage was and
has been hereafter duly solemnized and consummate by and between the said R.
S. and M. now his wife, one of the Daughters of the said E. I. And whereas
certain conveyances and assurances were and have been heretofore had and made,
of the Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter in these
presents mentioned or specified, to the uses declared, contained, or specified,
in and by certain Indentures, bearing date the fourth day of A. etc. made
betwixt the said L. S. of the one part, and the said E. I. of the other part,
as by the same Indentures and Conveyances more fully and at large appears.

And whereas also it is now concluded and agreed by and between all and every
the said parties to these presents, for themselves, their Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, that all and every the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned or specified, shall from henceforth
remain continue and be to the several and only uses behoofs intents purposes,
and under and upon the Liberties Limitations Provisoes and Agreements hereafter
in these presents mentioned or specified, notwithstanding any the said
mentioned Conveyances or Assurances, or any the Use or Uses or Limitations
therein, or in any of them contained, or any other matter or thing whatsoever to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Now therefore it is covenanted concluded and fully agreed, by and between all
and every the said parties to these presents, for themselves their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following.

And first the said L. S. and R. S. for themselves, their Heirs Executors and
Administrators, do covenant grant and agree, to and with the said W. D. etc.
and E. I. their Heirs Executors and Administrators by these presents, that they
the said L. S. and R. S. and their Heirs, or the Survivor of them, and his and
their Heirs, shall and will on this side, and before the Feast day of S. M. the
Archangel, next ensuing after the date of these presents, at and upon the
equal costs and charges in the Law of the said L. S. and E I. by Fine or
Recovery, or other good and sufficient Conveyances and Assurances in the Law,
lawfully and sufficiently convey and assure, or suffer to be conveyed and
assured to the said W. D. and the said E. I. or to the Survivor of them, his or
their heirs, or to the heirs of one of them, all those the Manors or Lordships
of S. and F. with all and singular their and every of their Rights Members and
Appurtenances whatsoever, situate, lying and being within the said County of
D. and also all and singular the other Manors Messuages Mills Cottages Lands
Tenements Meadows Pastures Closes Commons Woods Under-woods Rents Reversions
Services and Hereditaments whatsoever, being of the nature of Freehold, with
all and singular their and every of their Rights Members and Appurtenances
whatsoever, situate, lying, and being within the Lordships Territories Towns
Hamlets Parishes and Feilds of S. F. H. M. F. F. C. F. M. W. M. T. M. and
little L. or any of them, in the said County of D. or elsewhere. within the
several Counties of C. and D. and of either of them, whereof or wherein they the
said L and R. or either of them, now have, or at any time heretofore had any
Estate of Inheritance, in Possession Reversion Remainder, or otherwise, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of all and singular the
said Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part thereof, with the
Appurtenances, to and for the several and only uses behoofs intents and
purposes, and under and upon the Liberties Limitations Provisoes and Agreements
hereafter in these presents expressed mentioned or declared, and to no other
use intent or purpose whatsoever: And for the better Declaration of the use
uses, intent and purpose, of such said Fine Recovery, and other the said
Covenant or intended Conveyances and Assurances so to be had made knowledged
levied or executed, of and in any the said Manors Lands Tenements
Hereditaments and premises as aforesaid. It is further covenanted concluded
and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents.

And also the said L. and R. severally for themselves their Heirs and Assigns,
do Covenant, Grant, Declare, Limit and Agree, to, and with the said W. D. and
E. I. their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that the said Fine, Recovery
or Recoveries and Covenanted or Intended Conveyances or Assurances, so to be
had, made or executed, of and in the said Manors, Hereditaments and Premises
as aforesaid, and every of them, and the execution thereof shall be, and so for
ever shall be adjudged taken to be, and also that they the said W. D. and E. I.
and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them, his and their Heirs shall stand and
be seized of and in all and singular the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part thereof with the
appurtenances, to and for the several and only uses behoofs, intents and
purposes, and under and upon the Liberties, Limitatious, Provisoes and
Agreements hereafter in these presents expressed, mentioned, declared, limited
or appointed, according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, and to
no other use intent or purpose whatsoever. That is to say, Of and in all that
Capital Message and Tenement with the appurtenances, being parcel of the
Premises commonly called or known by the name of F. H. Situate and being in
F. in the said County of D. now or late in the tenure or occupation of P. S.
Gent. brother of the said L. or his Assigns, and of and in all and singular the
Houses, Edifices, Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, and Hereditaments
wharsoever with the appurtenances to the said Capital Message and Tenement
belonging or appertaining or therwithall heretofore usually occupied or enjoyed
as part, parcel, or member or appurtenances thereof or thereto, and of and in two
Messuages and Tenements, and the Lands and the Hereditaments thereunto
belonging, with the appurtenances in like manner being parcels of the
Premises, situate lying and being in F. aforesaid, now or late in the tenure
or occupation of the said L. S. or his Assigns, and of and in two other
Messuages and Tenements and the Lands and Hereditaments thereunto belonging with
the appurtenances, parcels also of the Premises being situate lying and being
in F. in the said County of D. now or late in the several tenures, or
occupations, of one C. A. and A. H. or of either of them, their, or either of
their several Assigns, and of and in one Fulling-Mill, and all the Dams,
Streams, Waters, Watercourse Lands and Hereditaments thereunto belonging, with
the appurtenances situate and being in F. aforesaid (in like manner parcels of
the Premises being) to the use and behoof of the said L. and B. his now wife,
and of their Assigns, for and during the term of their natural lives and of the
Survivor and longer liver of them without impeachment of any manner of Wast
only during the natural life of the said L. for, and in full Recompense of the
Jointure or Dower of the said B. and in Bar of her Dower for ever.

And nevertheless it is intended and agreed, that if the said B. shall or do at
any time or times after the decease of the said L. S. (if she shall survive and
over-live the said L. her husband) Commence, or cause to be commenced any
Action or Suit for any Dower belonging, or to belonging of out of, or in all,
or any the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Heredita. and Premises,
or any part or parcel thereof, and shall not hold her self satisfied with the
said Lands and Hereditaments in or by the said limited, meant, or intended, to
and for her Jointure and Dower, then and immediately thenceforth or otherwise,
from and after the several deceases of the said L. and B. and of the Survivor
of them the said conusees, which of them shall first happen recoverors feoffees
and their heirs and the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Heirs
shall stand and be seized of and in the said Capital Message and Tenement and
the Lands and Heredit. thereunto belonging with the appurtenances, called or
known by the name of F. Hall late in the tenure or occupation of the said F. or
his Assigns, and of and in the said two Messuages and tenements, and the Lands
and Hereditaments thereunto belonging with the appurtenances in F. aforesaid,
now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said L. S. party to these
presents or his Assigns, to the use and behoof of L. S. the younger, one of the
sons of the said L. the elder, for and during his natural life (if he said L.
S. the elder do not, or shall not hereafter by any his Deed, or Act in Writing,
or by his last Will in Writing limit, or appoint, that the said estate for life
of the said L the younger should or shall cease, be frustrate or void, the
estate of the said L. the younger during the continuance thereof, nevertheless to
be charged and chargeable and to the use, intent and purpose; neverthelese that
the Heirs Males for the time being of the said L. the elder party to these
presents shall and may annually and yearly thenceforth during the natural life
of the said L. the younger, receive, perceive, and take the yearly Rent of 36 s.
of good and lawful money of England, to be issuing and payable out of the said
last two Messuages, and Tenements in F. aforesaid, at the two several yearly
Feast days of the Nativity of St: John Baptist, and St. Martin the Bishop in
Winter by equal portions, and of and in the Remainder, Reversion and Reversions
thereof immediately after the determination of the said estate for life of the
said L. the younger; and also of and in the rest and residue of all and singular
the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and of every part thereof with the
appurtenances formerly in, or by these presents limited, meant, mentioned or
appointed to or for the use of the said L. the elder and B. his wife for term
of their lives as aforesaid, from and immediately after the several deceases of
the said L. the elder and B. his wife to the use and behoof of the said R. S.
and his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life without
impeachment of any Wast, and from aad after his decease then to the use and
behoof of the first son of the body of the said R. S. upon the body of the said
M* begotten and to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the body of such said
first son lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue then to the
use and behoof of the second son of the body of the said R. upon the hody of
the said M. begotten and to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the body of
the said second son lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue then
to the use and behoof of the third son of the body of the said R. upon the body
of the said M. begotten etc. and of the Heirs Males of the body of the said
third son lawfully to be begotten etc. and that goes to the sixth son, and for
default of such issue then successively and respectively to the use and behoof
of every other next and eldest son of the body of the said R. S. lawfully to be
begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the body of every such said next and eldest
son lawfully to be begotten the elder, and the Heirs Males of his body, being
ever preferred before the younger, and the Heirs Males of his body, and for
defult of such issue then to the use and behoof of the said L. S. the younger
and his Assigns, for and during the term of eighty years then next and
immediately following fully to be complete and ended, if W. S. one other of the
Sons of the said L. the elder shall so long live, the said last mentioned
Estate of the said L. the younger, charged and chargable, and to the use intent
and purpose, nevertheless that the said W. S. and his Assigns, shall and may
annually and yearly, for and during such and so long time as the said W. shall
then happen to live, from and after such time as the said L. the younger, or
his Assigns, so by means or virtue of these presents entitled; to have and
hold the said Hereditaments and Premises, or to have and perceive the Rents
Issues and Profits thereof, and of the other Hereditaments hereafter mentioned,
by virtue of these presents, and of the Uses or Limitations therein contained,
and of the said covenanted or intended conveyances and assurances, perceive,
receive, have, and take one annual or yearly Rent of 100 l. by year, of good
and lawful money of England, hereafter mentioned, to be issuing and going and
payable yearly, during the said term, out of all the said Hereditaments and
Premises so limited, to or for the Jointure of the said B. after the said
Estate of the said B. determined, and out of the other Lands hereafter in or by
these presents mentioned to be therwithall charged, at the two several yearly
Feast days of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, and St. M. the Bishop in
Winter, by equal portions: And in default of payment thereof, or of any part
thereof, by the space of ten days next ensuing after any of the said Feast
days in which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, that then and in such
case, and so often the said W. S. and his Assigns, shall and may enter and
distrain therefore, and for the Arrerages thereof, if any such there be, in all
and every or any part of the said Hereditaments and Premises, and from and
after the determination of the said Estate or term of years so limited, unto
the said L. the younger, either by the decease of the said W. S. or by
effluxion of time, then to the use and behoof of the said W. S. and of the
Heirs Males of the body of the said W. lawfully begotten and to be begotten,
and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of the said L. S. the
younger, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten and to be begotten,
and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of E. S. of W. in the
said County of Chester, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten and
to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of C.
S. of W. aforesaid, Gentleman, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully
begotten and to be begotten, the said several Estates of the said E. and S. to
be charged and chargable, nevertheless in manner and form, as thereof or
hereafter in or by these presents are limited: And for default of such Issue,
then to the use and behoof of the said L. the elder, and his right Heirs for
ever. And of and in all those 4. Closes Enclosures or enclosed Grounds, with
the Appurt. (being parcels of the said Heredita. and Premises so to be
conveyed or assured as aforesaid) commonly called or known by the names of Over
Lee and Nether Lee, and being in S. F. aforesaid, in the said County of D. now
or late in the Tenure or Occupation of the said L. the elder, or his Assigns,
and being of the clear yearly valve of twenty Marks by year, above all Charges
and Reprises, as well to the use intent and purpose that the said R. S. and M.
his wife, and their Assigns, and the Survivor of them, his and her Assigns, for
and in recompense of the Jointure and Dower of the said M. saving the like
augmentation thereof, herein hereafter mentioned, shall and may annually and
yearly, from and after the making hereof, for and during the natural life and
lives of them, and of the Survivor and longer liver of them, perceive receive
take and enjoy, one annual or yearly Rent of 15 l. by year, of good and
lawful money of England, to be issuing going and payable out of the said last
mentioned Closes, or enclosed Grounds, at the two several yearly Feast-daies
of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, and of St. M. Bishop, by equal portions,
and in default of payment thereof, or of any part thereof, at any of the
Feast-daies, or times aforesaid, contrary to the tenor and true meaning of
these presents: That then and so often, it shall and may be lawful, to and for
the said R. S. and M. his wife, and the Survivor of them, and their and either
of their Assigns, into the said Enclosures or enclosed Grounds, to enter and
distrain for the said yearly Sum of 15 l. and every or any part thereof, and for
the Arrerages thereof, if any such there be, and the Distress and Distresses
there taken and had, to lead drive take and carry away Impark Impound, and with
them to detain and keep, until they and every of them, of the said yearly Rent
or Sum of 15 l. and of the Arrerages thereof if any such there be, be fully
satisfied and paid.

And if it happen the said yearly Rent or Sum of 15 l. or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid, in part or in all, by the space of twenty days next
ensuing, after any of the Feast-daies aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth
the said Fine Recovery, and covenanted or intended Conveyances and Assurances,
so to be had made levied or executed, of and in the said Hereditaments and
Premises aforesaid, and the execution thereof shall be, and so for ever shall
be adjudged and taken to be. And also the said Conuzees Recoverors and
Feoffees, and the Heirs and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and
their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in the said four Enclosures, or
enclosed Grounds, and of every part thereof with the Appurtenances, to the use
and behoof of the said R. and M. his wife, and of their Assigns, for and during
the term of their natural lives, and of the longer liver of them, without any
impeachment of any Wast, only during the natural life of the said R. for and
in the name and in full recompense and satisfaction, of and for the Jointure and
Dower of the said M. as also to such further use intent and purpose, that the
said Conuzees Recoverors and Feoffees, their and every of their Heirs, shall
likewise stand and be seized of and in the four Closes Closures and enclosed
Grounds so charged and chargable; Nevertheless with the said yearly Rent of 15
l. Distress and payble as aforesaid, and in manner and form aforesaid: And of
and in all and every the rest and residue of the said Manors Messuages Lands
Tenements Rents Reversions Services Heredita. and Premises, and of every part
thereof, with the Appurtenances, whereof no Use is formerly limited or appointed,
in or by these presents, immediately from and after the sealing and delivery of
these presents, to the use and behoof of the said L. the elder party to these
presents, and his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life,
without impeachment of any manner of Wast,: And from and after his decease,
then of and in one Message and Tenement, and the Lands and Hereditaments
thereunto belonging, with the Appurtenances, situate, and being in H.
aforesaid, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of of one I. F. and A F. his
wife, or their Assigns, and parcel of the Premises, to the use and behoof of
A. S. one other of the Sons of the said L. the elder, and of his Assigns, for
and during the term of 60. years, now next ensuing, fully to be complete and
ended, if the said A. so long do live, and from and after the expiration or
determination of the said term and interest so limited or appointed, to or for
the use of the said A: of and in the said last mentioned Message Tenement and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging as aforesaid; Then of the Reversion and
Remainder thereof and also of and in the rest and residue of all and singular
the said Hereditaments and Premises so lastly limited, to the use of the said
L. the elder, for term of his life, immediately from and after the decease of
the said L. the elder, to the use and behoof of the said R. S. his Assigns,
for and during the term of his natural life, without any impeachment of any
manner of Wast, and from and after his decease, then to the use and behoof of
the first Son of the body of the said R. S. upon the body of the said M.
begotten and to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the said first Son
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and
behoof of the second Son of the body of the said R. upon the body of the said
M. begotten and to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the body of the said
second Son, lawfully to be begotten etc. and this Limitation goes in like
manner to the sixth Son, and for default of such Issue, then successively and
respectively to the use and behoof of every other next and eldest Son of the
body of the said R. lawfully to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the body
of every such said next and eldest Son lawfully to be begotten, the elder, and
the Heirs Males of his body, being ever preferred before the younger, and the
Heirs Males of his body, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and
behoof of the said L. the younger and his Assigns, for and during the term of
80. years then next and immediately following, fully to be complete and ended
(if the said W. S. so long happen to live, charged and chargeable. Nevertheless
and to the use, intent and purpose that the said W. S. and his Assigns, shall,
and may annually and yearly during the said term of years so lastly limited
unto the said L. from and after such time as the said L. the younger or his
Assigns, in default of Heir Male, of the body of the said R shall be Entitled
to have and hold the said Hereditaments and Premises, or to have and perceive
the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof by virtue of these presents, and of the
uses or limitations therein contained, and of the said Covenanted, or Intended
Conveyances and Assurances for and during the natural life of him the said W.
S. perceive, receive, take and enjoy the said annual or yearly Rent, or sum of
100 l. by year before mentioned, to be issuing and going, and payable yearly
during the said term as well out of the said late mentioned Hereditaments and
Premises, as out of the Reversion and Remainder of the said Lands and
Hereditaments formerly limited or appointed in or by these Presents to or for
the Jointure or Dower of the said B. as aforesaid, at the said several yearly
Feast days of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, and St. Martin the Bishop in
Winter, by equal portions, and in default of payment thereof, or of any part
thereof by the space of ten days next ensuing after any of the said Feast days
in which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, that then and in such Case and
so often it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said W. and his Assigns,
into the said Hereditaments and Premises, to enter and distrain for the said
yearly Rent or Sum of 100 l. and for the Arrerages thereof, if any such be, and
the Distress and Distresses therein or thereupon taken or had, to lead, drive,
take and carry away, Impark Impound, and with him and them, to detain and keep
until they and every of them, of the said yearly Rent, or sum, and of the
Arrerages thereof, if any such there be, be fully satisfied and paid, and from
and after the determination or expiration of the said term of years so lastly
limited unto the use of the said L. the younger, either by the decease of the
said W. S. or by effluxion of time, then to the use and behoof of the said W.
S. and of the Heirs Males of the body of the said W. lawfully begotten and to
be begotten, and for default of such issue then to the use and behoof of the
said L. the younger, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, and to
be begotten, and for default of such issue then to the use and behoof of the
said E. S. and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, and to be
begotten, and for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the said
S. and the Heirs Males of of his body lawfully begotten, and to be begotten,
the said Estates of the said E. and S. to be nevertheless charged and
chargeable in such manner and form as thereof is in these presents hereafter in
that behalf mentioned, and for default of such issue, then to the use and
behoof of the said L. the elder and his right Heirs for ever.

Provided nevertheless, and it was, and is concluded, and fully agreed, by and
between the said parties to these Presents, for themselves, their Heirs and
Assigns by these Presents, and the further use, intent, and purpose of these
presents, and of the said Fine and Covenanted or Indented Conveyances and
Assurances, and of every of them, was, and is and so for ever shall be adjudged
and taken to be, that if it fortune the said R: S: to decease and die not
having then in full life any issue male of his body, upon the body of the said
M. nor upon the body of of any other wife which he shall hereafter fortune to
marry, and leaving the said M. or such his other wife for the time then being,
nevertheless with child at the time of such his decease with one or two sons or
more, that then the said Fine, Recovery, and other the said Conveiances, and
Assurances before mentioned, and every of them, was and is intended and meant,
and so for ever shall be adjudged, construed, and taken to be, and also that
the said W. D. and E. I. and the Survivor of them, his or their Heirs shall be
seized respectively, of and in the Reversion and Remainder of all and singular
the said Manors, Lordship, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and
of every part thereof with the appurtenances, as the same shall severally and
respectively happen or come in possession by the several deceases of the said
L. the elder B. M L. and A. S. and of every of them, to and for the several and
only uses, behoofs, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents expressed,
mentioned or declared according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, that is to say, if the said M: or such said other wife of the said R.
as aforesaid upon such her childbirth, so happen to have, and be delivered of
one son only, then and from thenceforth to the use and behoof of such said son,
and the Heirs males of his body lawfully to be begotten, charged and
chargeable, nevertheless as of the estate of the sons of the said R. which
shall be born in his life time, is formerly appointed, and if the said M. or
such said other wife so happening with Child as aforesaid, shall happen upon her
Childbirth, after the decease of the said R. to have, or be delivered of two
Sons or more, then to the use and behoof of the first and elder Sons and the
Heirs Males of his body lawfully to be begotten, charged, and chargable as
aforesaid, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of the
younger Son, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully to be begotten, charged
and chargable as aforesaid, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and
behoof of such other Son of the said R. wherwithall the said M. or such said
other wife shall so be with Child with all, and the Heirs Males of his body
lawfully to be begotten, charged, and chargable as aforesaid, and for default
of such Issue, then to the several and only uses behoofs-intents and purposes
of such person and persons, and for such Estate and Estates, as in case of the
decease of the said R. without any Issue Male of his body lawfully begotten, is
formerly in or by these presents limited expressed or specified, and to no
other use intent or purpose whatsoever.

Povided nevertheless, and it is concluded and fully agreed by and between all
and every the said parties to these presents, for themselves their Heirs and
Assigns by these Presents, and also the true use intent and meaning of these
Presents, and of the said parties hereunto, and of the said Fine Recovery, and
other the Covenanted or Intended Coveyances and Assurances, is and so for ever
shall be adjudged and taken to be, and also the said W. D. and E. I. and the
Survivor of them, his and their Heirs, and all and every other person and
persons, his and their heirs which now are or stand seized or herafter shall
stand and be seized of and in the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements
Hereditaments and Premises, and every or any part thereof by force of these
presents, and of the said fine and covenanted or intended Coveyances and
Assurances before mentioned, and every or any of them, and their and every of
their Heirs, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part thereof with
the Appurtenances, to and for such further use Intent and purpose
notwithstanding any the use or uses formerly in or by these Presents limited
declared or contained, as well that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said L. the elder, at any time or times during his natural life, by any his
Deed or Deeds in Writing, or by his last Will and Testament in Writing, to
grant convey assure bequeath limit or appoint such and so much of the said
Hereditaments and Premises, not exceeding in the whole, one full third part
thereof, as to himself shall seem meet and convenient unto, or for the use of
any the lawful wife or Wives of the said Leo. the elder whom he shall
hereafter fortune to marry, for and during the Term of the natural life or
lives of such Wife or Wives, for and in the name of her or their Jointure and
dower, of and in the said Hereditaments, and premises, the said four Closes
charged with the Jointure of the said M being, during her only natural life
(excepted and foreprized.) And likewise that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said R. S. after the decease of the said L. the elder, at any time or
times thenceforth, during his natural life of any his Deed or Deeds in
Writing, or by his last Will and Testament in Writing Respectively, to grant
convey assure bequeath limit or appoint one annual or yearly Rent of fifteen
pounds of good and lawful money of England, with or without clause of Distress
to be issuing and going out of all or any the said Hereditaments and Premises,
or out of all or any part or parcells thereof, as to himself shall seem meet
and convenient, unto, or for the use of the said M, or for the use of any other
the Wife or Wives of the said R. whom he shall hereafter fortune to marry, for
and during the term of the natural life or lives or the said M. or of such
said Wife and Wives, for and toward her or their Jointure and Dower, of and in
the said Hereditaments and Premises the said several Lands and Hereditaments
so limited, to or for the Joyntures of the said Bridget and Mary, as aforesaid,
and the several Tenements formerly in or by these Presents limited unto the
said L. the younger, and A, for their several lives as aforesaid, during the
several lives of the said B. and M. A. and L. the younger, always excepted
and foreprised, as also that it shall and may be in like manner lawful to and
for the said L. the elder at any time or times during his natural life; and
also to and for the said R. at any time or times after the decease of the said
L. the Elder during his natural life by any his their or either of their Deed
or Deeds in Writing at any time or times respectively and successively to
demise grant lease or limit the use or uses of all such or any such part of the
said Manors Messuages lands Tenements Hereditaments and Premises heretofore
usually demised or leased, which at the time or times of such limitation of use
or uses Lease or leases shall happen respectively to be in the lawful actual
and Real possession of Estate of freehold in such of them, as shall so make
such Lease or Leases, Limitation of the use or uses, for the time being to any
person or persons whatsoever, for term of one and twenty years or under, or
for three lives or under or for any number of years determinable upon three
lives or fewer in possession and not in reversion so that in by or upon every
such demise lease or limitations of use uses or so to be made as aforsaid the
old ancient accustomed Rents duties and Services, or more be reserved to be
therefore respectively yearly due and payable during the continuance of such
several lease, and leases.

Provided also, and it is further covenanted concluded and fully agteed by and
between all and every the said parties to these presents for themselves their
Heirs and Assigns by these presents, and the use intent and meaning of these
presents, and of the parties hereunto, and of the said covenanted or intended
Conveyances and Assurances is, and so for ever shall be adjudged and taken to
be, and also the said W. D. and E. J. and the Survivor of them, his and their
Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in the said Hereditaments and Premises
to such further use intent and purpose, notwithstanding any the use or uses
before specified or declared, that if the said R. shall hereafter fortune to
decease and die, having one or more Son or Sons, and one Daughter only, and no
more, that then such said Daughter and her Assigns, shall and may annually and
yearly from and after the decease of the Survivor of the said R. and of the
said L. the elder, perceive receive take, and enjoy one annual or yearly Rent
of forty pounds by year, of good and lawful money of England, to be issuing and
going, and payable out of, and in the said Hereditaments and Premises the
Estates for life of the said B. L. the younger, A. and M. always excepted and
foreprised at the two several yearly feast days of the Nativity of Saint John
Baptist, and Saint Martin the Bishop in Winter, by equal portions, for and
during, and until that such said only Daughter and her Assigns, shall and
may, or otherwise might have fully levied received or had the full sum of two
hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England, to and for the maintnance
and preferment of such said Daughter, and if the said R. shall fortune to
decease and dye having one or more Sons, and two or more Daughters, then to the
use intent and purpose, that such said Daughters and their Assigns shall and
may annually and yearly, from and after the decease of the Survivor of the said
R. and L. the elder, perceive receive take and enjoy one annual yearly Rent of
forty pounds by year of good and lawful money of England to be issuing and
going out of and in the said Hereditaments and Premises, (the said several
Estates for lives of the said B. M. L. the younger, and H. always excepted and
foreprised) at the two several yearly Feast days of the Nativity of St Jo.
Bap. and M. the Bishop in Winter by equal portions for and during, and until
that such said Daughters and every of them shall and may, or otherwise might
have fully levied received or had, every one of them the full sum of one
hundred pounds a piece of good and lawful money of England, to and for the
maintenance and preferment of such said Daughters, And also further to such use
intented purpose, that if the said R. shall happen to decease having more Sons
then one, that then every the then younger son of the said R. shall and may
respectively from and after the decease of the Survivor of the said L, the
Elder, and of the said R. annually, severally, and yearly perceive receive and
have, during his several natural life one annual or yearly Rent of four
pounds by year, to be issuing and going out of all and every the said
Hereditaments and premises, (the said several Estates for lives of the said
B. L. and A. only foreprised and excepted) and the same to be yearly payable at
the several yearly Feast days of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, and St.
Martin the Bishop in Winter, by even and equal portions, and in default of
payment of the said several sums or of one of them or of any part thereof, at
any the days or times aforesaid, contrary to the tenor and true meaning of
these presents, that then and so often the said younger Son and Sons, Daughter
and Daughters, and every of them, shall and may severally and respectively
distrain therefore and for the Arrerages thereof, if any such there be in all
or any the said Hereditaments and premises (except before in that behalf
excepted) and the distress and distresses therein or thereupon taken or had, to
lead drive, take and carry away, impark impound, and with them to detain and be
until they and every of them, of the said yearly Rents or sums and every of
them and of the arrerages thereof, if any be behind and unpaid, or fully
satisfied and paid, and from and after the said several sums received or had,
then to the several and only uses behoofs intents and purposes in or by these
presents limited or appointed, according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, any thing in these Presents contained, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and it is further covenanted concluded and fully agreed by and
between all and every the said parties to these presents for themselves their
Heirs and Assigns by these presents and the further use and intent and meaning
of these presents and the said parties to the same and of the said intended or
covenanted Conveyances and Assurances, is and so for ever shall be adjudged and
taken to be, and also the said W. D. and E. I. and the survivor of them and his
and their heirs shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manors messuages
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and premises to such further use intent and
purpose notwithstanding use or uses before specified or declared, that if the
said L. the elder R. S. L. the younger, W S and every of them shall fortune to
die and decease without Issue male on their or any of their bodies lawfully
begotten, that then and from thenceforth A. A. C. M C. A. S. and B. her and all
and every such daughter and daughters as the said R. S: shall hereafter have of
the body of the said M. and their Assigns and Daughters of the said Leo. the
elder shall and may annually and yearly receive perceive and take to them and
their Assigns one yearly rent of two hundred pounds for and during such time
and until that thereby and thereupon they or some of them their or some of
their Assigns shall have received and had the full sum of one thousand pounds of
good and lawful money of England, over and above all Charges and Reprises, and
the same to be issuing and going out of all and every the Manors Messuages
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments aforesaid, the several Estates for lives
which the said B. and M. or either of them or any the wife or wives of the said
L. the elder and R. or either or any of them have or hereafter shall or may
have of or in all or any the premises only excepted and foreprised, and the
said yearly Rent of 200 l. to be yearly paid, from and after the commencement
thereof as aforesaid, at the several yearly seast days of the Nativity of St.
John Bapt. and St. Martin the bishop in winter by even portions. And if the
said yearly Rent of two hundred pounds or any part thereof shall be behind and
unpaid by the space of ten days next ensuing any of the said Feast days in
which the same shall grow due or payable, that then and from thenceforth all
and every the said Intended Recoverors Feoffees and Conysees, and every of them
their and every of their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of and
in all and singular the said Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments and
Premises, (except lastly before excepted) to the only use and behoof of the
said A. A. M. C. and A, and of the said B. and of such said Daughter and
Daughters of the said R. as before in or by these presents are limited or
intended to have any part or portion of the said yearly two hundred pounds
Rent, and of their Assigns for and during such time and until that thereof and
of and with the profits thereof they or their Assigns or some of them shall be
well and truly satisfied the saidfull sum of 1000 pounds of good and lawful
money of England over and above all Reprises Expenses and Charges, by Suit in
Law or otherwise in any wise to be sustained. And moreover it has pleased the
said L. the elder, and he heartily desires that N. C: of the Goat-houses in
the said County of D. and A. his wife should from henceforth quietly have and
enjoy one Message or Tenement at G. aforesaid wherein he the same N. C, and
A. now dwells, and all the lands thereunto belonging or therewith all
occupied, for and during all the natural lives of the same N. and A. and the
survivors of them, for the yearly Rent of thirteen shillings four pence of
lawful money of England at the Feasts or days their usual, and other tenant
service for the same accustomed, and after the decease of the said N. and A.
and the survivor of them, then that A. with C. son of the said N. and A. in
like sort for the said Rent and Services shall have occupy and enjoy all the
last mentioned Premises, for and during all the term of the natural life of
the said A according to the intent and true meaning of him the said Leo. the
elder.

Provided always nevertheless, and the further use intent and purpose of the
said Intended Conveyances, is and for ever shall be, that if the said R. or any
of the Heirs males of his body or any other Heir male to whom (in and by these
presents) any use or estate is limited appointed mentioned or intended, or any
other person or persons whatsoever hereafter having claiming or pretending any
estate term title or Interest in by from through or under any such Heirs males,
do or shall at any time hereafter sue molest disturb enter upon eject remove
expel or put out the said N. C. A. or A. or any of them of and from the quiet
occupation of the last mentioned message and tenement at G. aforesaid or of or
from any part or parcels thereof, that then and immediately after such suit
disturbance entry eviction expulsion or putting out of the said N. A. and A. or
any of them, of and from the said last mentioned premises or of or from any
part or parcels thereof thenceforth the said Feoffees Recoverors and Cognizees
and their heirs and the survivor of them and his heirs, shall stand and be
seized of and in the full moiety or one half of all that Message or Tenement
seituate and beingin F. aforesaid, and now or late in the tenure or occupation
of the said L. the elder, and likewise of and in the full moiety or one half of
all the Lands Tenements meadows Leasows Pastures and Hereditaments thereunto
belonging, being parcel of the premises to the use, and behoof of the said N.
and A. his wife for and during all their natural lives and the life of the
survivor of them and immediately after their deceases then to the use and
behoof of the said A. for all the term of his natural life yiedling and paying
during all the said estates or terms to the heirs males of the said L: the
elder for the time being the yearly rent of forty shillings at the Feast their
usually by even portions and after the estates aforesaid so limited to the use
of the said N. A. and A. C. as aforesaid ended and determined then to the use
of the said R. S. for term of his natural life with like limitation of
remainder further as aforesaid in and for the same tenement in Flagg as is
formerly in or by these presents limited or appointed In witness etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to levy a Fine, and suffer a Recovery in Ancient
Demesne.
THis Indenture tripartite etc. Between F. C. of the first party, R C and T. B,
of the second party, and I. H. and F. P. of the third party witnesses, that it
is covenanted, condescended and agreed unto, by and between all and every the
parties to these presents in manner and form following, that is to say, That
whereas the said F. C, the day of the date of these presents, is lawfully
seized in his Demesne as of Fee-tail to him and the Heirs males of his body, of
and in diverse Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments within the Liberty of
Havering at Bower in the County of Essex; hereafter in these presents
particularly mentioned and expressed, and being now fully resolved and
determined how and in what manner his said Messuages Lands Tenements and He
editaments should be established and continued hereafter by the Grace of God in
the name of the Parties hereafter mentioned; being of his blood, and alliance,
he the said F. R. as well for the considerations aforesaid, as also for the
better maintenance of M. C. his mother, and for diverse other good causes and
considerations, the said F. G. hereunto especially moving, does for himself and
his Heirs covenant grant and agree with the said R. C. T. B. I. H. and F. P.
and to and with every of them, their and every of their Heirs Executors and
Administrators by these Presents, that he the said F. C. at his own proper cost
and charges in the Law, before the thirtieth day of September next ensuing the
date of these presents, shall and will in due form of Law, acknowledge and levy
one or more Fine or Fines in the Court of ancient Demesne within the said
Liberty of Havering at Bower, according to the course and common usage for
levying of Fines for lands and Hereditaments within the said Liberty unto the
said R C and T B. and the heirs of the said R. of all that Message, etc.

And it is further covenanted condescended, and agreed unto, by and between all
the said parties, to these presents, that the said Fine or Fines so to be
levied and acknowledged as aforesaid, by the said F. C. to to the said R. C.
and T. B. and the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. shall be levied and
acknowledged by the name of three messuages, three gardens, forty acres of
Land, twenty acres of pasture, forty acres of Wood, and fifty acres of Furze
and Heath, and one hundred shillings Rent with the Appurtenances in Havering at
Bower, R. and H. or by such other name or names as shall be thought meet, and
that the said Fine or Fines so to be had and levied of the said Premises.
shall enure, and be adjudged deemed and taken to be, that the said R. C. and T.
B. and the heirs and Assigns of the said R. from and immediately after the
levying and engrossing of the said Fine and Fines, shall stand and be seized of
the said Messuages, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and of every part and
parcel thereof, with their and every of their Appurtenances, to the use of the
said R. C. and C. B. and their Heirs, shall stand and be adjudged perfect
Tenements of the Freehold of the said messuages Lands and Premises, and of
every part and parcel thereof, with their and every their Apurtenances until
a perfect Recovery, according to the usual course of common Recoveries for
Assurances, of Lands Tenements and hereditaments within the said Liberty of
Havering at Bower, shall and may be lawfully had and executed against the said
R. C. and C. B. and their heirs of the said messuages Lands and Premises.

And it is further covenanted condescended and agreed unto, by and between all
the parties to the presents that the said I. H. and F. P. or any other person
or persons which the said F. C. shall nominate and appoint shall and may at the
Costs and Charges in the law of the said F. C. before the said day of next
ensuing the date thereof purchase one or more writ or writs of Right Close
directed to the Judges Bailiffs or others that have power to hold Plea in suits
real arising within the said Liberty and shall prosecute the writ or writs in
the same nature of his highness writ or writs of entry Sur Desseisin Sur le post
at the common law after the manner and course of common Recoveries there used
and accustomed against the said R C. and T B. whereby they shall demand against
the said R. C. and T. B. by the name or names and quantity or quantities of
acres in the said fine or fines to be contained or by any other name or names
quantity or quantities whatsoever the said Messuages Lands Tenements
Hereditaments and premises with their and every their appurtenances before
mentioned to be situate lying and being within the said liberty of Havering at
Bower unto which writ or writs, the said R. C. and T. B. shall appear in their
proper persons or by their Attorney or Attorneys lawfully and sufficiently
authorized, who shall vouch to warranty the said F. C. and that the said F. C.
shall appear upon the said voucher in the said court in his proper person or by
his Attorney lawful authorized by the course and custom of the said court, and
shall vouch to warranty the common vouchee, and that the said common vouchee
appear and imparl, and afterward make default, whereby a perfect Judgment may
be had and given for the said demandants in the writ or writs against the said
R. C and T. B. for the said recovery of the said Messuages Lands Tenements and
premises, and upon the said Recovery so to be had and made against the said R.
C. and T. B. that they the said R. C. and T. B. shall recover in value against
the said F. C. and the said F. C. shall thereupon have judgment to recover in
value over against the said common vouchee after and according to the manner
and course of common Recoveries in such Cases used in the court of the said
liberty of Havering alias Bower; and it is fully covenanted condisended and
agreed unto by and between all the said parties to these presents, and all the
said parties for themselves and their several Heirs, do severally covenant and
agree, to and with the others of them, and with their several Heirs, that the
said Recovery and Recoveries, and the said Fine and Fines after the said
Recovery and Recoveries shall be had and executed, and the full execution
thereof, of for and concerning the Premises therein to be contained, shall be
and enure, and be adjudged, deemed, expounded, and taken to be and enure, that
the said Conuzees and their Heirs, and the said Recoverors and their Heirs, and
all and every other person and persons, which shall then be seized of the said
Messuages Lands Tenements, and all other the Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, shall stand and be seized of the said Messuages Lands Tenements
Hereditaments and Premises in the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries
to be mentioned, with their and every their Appurtenances, and of every part
and parcel thereof, to the several uses intents and purposes in these presents
hereafter expressed and declared, and to none other use intent or purpose, that
is to say, of, for, and concerning all the said Messuages Lands Tenements
Hereditaments and Premises, with their and every their Appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of the said F. C. for and
during the term of his natural life, and after his decease, then to the use of
the first Son of the said F. C. to be begotten on the body of any woman, or
women, which he shall from and after the day of the date of these presents,
marry and take to wife, and to the Heirs Males of the body of such first Son to
be begotten etc.

Provided always, and it is fully agreed by and between all the said parties
to these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said F. C.
at any time or times hereafter, and from time to time, during his life, at his
free will and pleasure, by any his Deed or Writing, or last Will and Testament,
by him to be sealed and published, in the presence of three credible Witnesses
at the least, to alter change determine revoke or make void, all or any the Use
or Uses, Estate and Estates, in these presents before declared mentioned or
limited of the Premises, or any part thereof: And that at all times, from and
after such time as the said F. C. shall by any such his Deed or Writing, or
last Will, so express and declare his pleasure and mind to be to alter and
change determine revoke or make void, all or any the Use or Uses, Estate or
Estates, in these presents before declared mentioned or limited of the said
Premises, or any part thereof, that then and from thenceforth such of the said
Estate and Estates, Use and Uses, here in these presents declared, as shall be
so declared by such Deed, Writing, or last Will of the said F. C. to be altered
changed determined or made void, shall cease determine and be void And that then
and from thenceforth the said Fine and Fines, and the Conuzees therein to be
named: And the said Recovery and Recoveries, and the Receivers therein to be
named, and all other person and persons which shall then happen to be seized of
the said Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, as shall be so altered
changed determined revoked or made void, shall thereof stand and be seized, to
the use of such person and persons, and to and for such Use and Uses, and in
such manner and form, as by such Deed Writing, or last Will of the said F. C.
sealed and published as aforesaid, shall be declared by and expressed, and not
to any other person or persons, use or uses whatsoever: In Witness etc.

A Covenant to stand seized:
THis Indenture made etc. between C. M. and A. his wife, of the one party, and
R. F. etc. on the other party, witnesses, That they the said C. M. and A. his
wife, for diverse good causes and considerations, them thereunto moving and
especially that they having been married the space of many years, and have had
no Issue, and in case the said C. N. should dye without Issue of his body
lawfully to be begotten, that then the Messuages Lands etc. herein after
mentioned, with their and every of their Appurtenances, shall and may so long
as it shall please the Almighty God, to remain and continue in the blood and
kindred of the said C. M. and for the natural love and affection which the
said C. M. bears to I. F. wife of the said R. F. and Sister to the said C. M.
It is now therefore covenanted, granted, promised and agreed by and between all
the parties to these presents: And the said C. M. and A. his wife, for
themselves and their several Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them, do covenant grant promise conclude and absolutely agree, to and
with the said R. F. his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and to and
with every of them by these presents, that they the said C. M. and A. his wife,
and the Survivor of them, and the Heirs of the said C. and their and every of
their Assigns, and every other person and persons now standing, or being seized
of or in all that Message etc. or any part or parcel thereof, for the
considerations here in these presents before expressed, at all times, from and
after the making of these presents, shall stand and be seized of all and
singular the said Premises with the Appurtenances, and of every part thereof,
and of all the Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits, and Commodities of the
same, or to the same in any wise belonging or appertaining, to the uses and
intents hereafter in these presents expressed; That is to say, To the use and
behoof of them the said C. M. and A. his wife, for and during their natural
lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, and after the decease of the
Survivor of them, for and as concerning the Reversion or Reversions, Remainder
or Remainders, of the said Messuages etc. and other the Premises, with their
and every of their Appurt. as the said Uses Estates and Interest thereof herein
before expressed, shall be fully ended and determined, then to the use of the
first Son, lawfully to be begotten by the body of the said C. M. and of the
Heirs of the body of the said first begotten Son, lawfully to be begotten, and
for default of such Issue, then to the use of the second Son, lawfully to be
begotten by the body of the said C. and of the heirs of the body of the said
second Son lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the
use and behoof of the third Son, lawfully to be begotten by the body of the
said C. and the Heirs of the body of the said third Son lawfully to be
begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of every
other the Sons, lawfully to begotten by the body of the said C. successively,
as they shall be in Seniority or Age, and of the Heirs of their several bodies
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue Male, then to the use
and behoof of all and every the daughters lawfully to be begotten by the body
of the said C. and of the Heirs of their bodies lawfully to be begotten, and
for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of I. F. Sister of the
said C. and the Heirs of her body lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and for
default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of the said I. F. her Heirs
and Assigns for ever.

And the said C. M. for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
further covenant grant promise and agree, to and with the said R. F. his Heirs
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, that all and every Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, hereafter
to be acknowledged had or suffered, by the said C. M. shall be and enure, to the
only uses intents and purposes, as in these present Indentures are mentioned
and expressed, according to the true intent and meaning hereof, and no
otherwise: In witness etc.

An Indenture where Land having been forfeited upon an Indenture of Mortgage,
the Mortgager assures the same to the Mortgagee by raising of use upon a
Covenant if the Mortgager pay a certain sum of money at a day.
THis Indenture etc. between T: R: of C: in the County of C: Esquire; on the one
party, and Sir G: B: of S. in the County of D. Knight, on the other party
Witnesses, That the said T. R: for, and in consideration of a certain sum of
money to him now paid by A: B: Servant to the said Sir G: for and in his
Masters name, and for and in consideration of 566 l. 13 s. 4 d. more of lawful
etc. to the said T: his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by the said Sir
G. his Executors or Assigns, to be paid on the 20th. day of November next
ensuing the date of these Presents, at the now dwelling house of A: B. in E:
between the hours of etc. has Covenanted, Granted and Agreed, and Covenant etc.
by these presents for him his Heirs and Assigns, does Covenant, Grant, and
Agree to and with the said Sir G: his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them in
manner and form following that is to say, That if the said Sir G: his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, do well and truly pay, or cause etc. the said sum
of etc. to the said T. his certain Attorney, Executors, or Administrators, in
manner and form above said, and at the day and time above limited, that then
and from thenceforth, he the said T: R: his Heirs and Assigns, and all other
person and persons, which by any Grant, or Conveyance, of or from the said, T:
R. now be, or then shall be seized of and in the Lordships or Manors of I.
with the Appurtenances, in the said County of D: aforesaid, and of and in all
those Messuages etc. set and being etc. which the said T. late had to him and
his Heirs, of the Bargain Sale and Conveyance of the said Sir G. by virtue of a
pair of former Indentures, dated the 5th. of Dec. An: 11. Reg: Eliz. made
between the said Sir G. on the one party, and the said T: R. on the other
party, as by the same former Indentures enrolled in the High Court of Chancery
may appear, shall thereof and of every part thereof, stand and be seized to the
only use of the said Sir G: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none other
use or uses whatsoever: Le Uses. Redeliver.
And that then leson after payment made to the said T. his Heirs Executors or
Assigns, of the said Sum of etc. in manner and form aforesaid, he the said T.
R. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, at and upon the reasonable request of the
said Sir G. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall and will deliver, or cause
etc. to the said G. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, one Recognizance of the
Statute-staple of the Sum of etc. bearing date etc. wherein the said Sir G.
stands bound to the said T. for performance of the Covenants of the said
former Indentures with Recognizance after such a delivery thereof made, may then
and thereafter, at the pleasure of the said Sir G. his Heirs or Executors, be
lawfully defaced and cancelled.

And further, that in case the said Sum of etc. shall be paid in form To make
further assurance.
aforesaid, and at the time therefore limited as abovesaid, that then by and
during the space of one whole year, from thence next following, the said T. and
his Heirs, and all other person and persons, having any lawful Right Estate
Interest Use Possession or Demand, of, in, to or out of the Premises, or any
part thereof, by or from the said T. R. at and upon the reasonable request and
costs and charges in the Law only of the said Sir G. his Heirs Executors or
Assigns, shall and will do, make, knowledge, and suffer, all and singular such
lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things in the Law, for the
conveyance and assurance of the Premises, and every part thereof, to the said
Sir G. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in Fee-simple absolutely, to the only
use of the said Sir G. his Heirs and Assigns, without any manner of Condition
Defeazance or Limitation of any other Use or Uses, as by the said Sir G. his
Heirs Executors or Assigns, or his or their learned Council, shall be
reasonably and lawfully devised, with warranty only against the said T. and his
Heirs, so always as the said T. and his Heirs, be not compelled Condition for
traveling about the Assurance. Discharge of Encumbrances.
for the executing and accomplishing of any the acts or things aforesaid, to
travel from the place where such request shall be made.

And also that in case, that the said Sum of etc. shall be paid in form
aforesaid, at the time aforesaid, that then at all times hereafter, the said T.
his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns or some of them, shall from time
to time keep harmless and indamnified* as well the said Sir G. his Heirs
Executors and Assigns, as also the said Manor and all other the Premises,
with their appurtenances, of and from all manner of former Bargains Sales Gifts
Grants Leases Annuities Joyntures Dowers Uses Wills Intails Statutes-Merchant,
and of the Staple Recognizances Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made,
done, or knowledged, or to be had etc. by the said T. his Heirs or Assigns, or
by his or their assent, consent, means, or procurement of such Grants and
Bargains, as the said T. heretofore has, of or for the Premises, or any part
thereof made, to or with the said Sir G. B: only except.

Provided always, that in case it do happen that the said Sum of etc.
Condition.
be not paid in form aforesaid at the time therefore limited as aforesaid that
then and from thenceforth these presents as to the raising of any use or uses
of or in the premises or any part thereof unto the said Sir G. and his heirs
and assigns shall be clearly and utterly void and frustrate and then and
thereafter the said T. R. and his heirs and all other person and persons seized
or to be seized of the said premises or any part thereof shall thereof stand
and be seized to the only use of the said T. and of his heirs and assigns for
ever and to non other use or uses, these presents or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding, In witness etc.

An Indenture for raising of Uses in land with condition that if any of the
Uses go about to alter the Estate tail, his Estate shall cease and the next in
remainder enter, and condition also that the Donor may alter the Uses at his
pleasure.
THis Indenture Tripartite etc. Between F. W. Esquire. one of the principal
Secretaries of our Sovereign Lady the Queen of the one party and Sir W. M.
Knight and W. D. Gentlemen on the other party witnesses that the said F. W.
for and in consideration of the great love zeal and affection which he bears
to V. now his wife and for her preferment and advancement in living by him and
for the good zeal love and affection which he bears unto F. W. and M. W. his
daughters and as yet heirs apparent unto him, and for the great love zeal and
affection which he bareth unto E. W. Dame M. M. wife of said Sir W. M. B. S.
and C. D. sisters to the said F. W. and for the preferment in living of the
said F. the daughter and M. and their heirs and of his the said F. W. sisters
and their heirs and for the continuance of the Manor Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter expressed in the blood, and kindred of the said F. the
father and for diverse other good causes etc. does covenant and grant by these
presents for him and his heirs to and with the said Sir W. M. and W. D. their
heirs and assigns that he the said F. W. the father and his heirs and all and
every other person and persons and their heirs and assigns that now stand or be
seized or that hereafter shall stand or be seized of and in all that the Manor
and Lordship of B. and hundred of B. with all the rights members and
appurtenances in the county of W. And of and in whatsoever the Messuages Lands
Tenements etc: and Hereditament whatsoever, of the said F. the Father, with all
and singular their appurtenances in the towns parishes hamlets and feilds of
etc. in the said county of W. or else where in the same county of W. in which
the said F. the father has any estate of inheritance shall from henceforth
stand and be seized thereof and of every part and parcel thereof to the uses
behoofes intents and purposes hereafter expressed limited and appointed and to
none other use behoof intent or purpose that is to say to the use and behoof of
the said F. the father and V. for and during the term of their lives and the
life of the longer live r of them without impeachment of any manner of wast
during the life of the said F. the father and after their decease and the
decease of the longest liver of them then of and in the one moity of the said
manor etc. to the use etc. and of and in etc. to the use etc. Here let the
uses be raised, Provided always and it is covenanted granted concluded Proviso
^o extinct the Estate of the parties going about to discontinue the Estate
Tail.
and agreed between the said parties that if the said F. the daughter and M. or
either of them shall be fully and finally resolved and determined and shall
willingly and wittingly attempt or go about to suffer any recovery levy any
fine or to make any discontinuance of the whole premises or of any part or
parcel thereof or to do or cause to be done any act or thing whereby the
estate tail limited appointed or intended by these presents to them the said
F. and M. or either of them and to the several heirs of their several bodies
lawfully begotten or whereby the Fee-simple of the premises or any part
thereof shall or may be barred defeated undone determined discontinued altered
or changed that then and from thenceforth the use in tail and estate before to
her or him limited or which be by the intent and meaning of these presents, the
same person or persons shall be inheritable o^ and in so much of the premises
of or in the which she or he shall be fully and finally resolved and
determined and willingly and wittingly shall attempt or go about to suffer any
Recovery, levy any Fine, or to make any Discontinuance, or to do any other act
or acts thing or things whereby the estates tail or any of them limited
raised or appointed by these presents or any of the reversions or remainders
limited in these presents should or shall by any ways or means be defeated
avoided undone discontinued barred altered changed or determined shall cease
and be void touching her or him and the heirs of her or his body lawfully
begotten to all intents and purposes as the same person or persons were dead
without any heirs of his or their body and then the same shall be and go to the
other uses limited in these presents according to the intent of these presents
in such sort as it should, if she or he had died without issue of her or their
body lawfully begotten, and for as much as the said F. W. has Reasons condu*
the conditio is following.
not as yet any issue male of his body lawfully begotten and for that God may
hereafter send him some issue male in which case the said F. may be desirous to
undo the assurance thereby made and to convey the inheritance of the premises
or suffer the same to dscend to such issue male and for that also the said two
daughters of the said F. be as yet children and of tender age so as the proof
of them is not as yet seen in case it may chance that the said F. shall
hereafter mislike of the conditions of his said daughters or one of them when
they come of greater years (which God forbid) and for that it may be that the
said V: may die, leaving the said F. and that after the said F. may take any
other wise to whom it shall be necessary to make a Jointure of the premises
therefore and for other occasions that may chance. Proviso to make void the
Estate tail Supra or any part thereof upon a w^^ting to be ^^er^^fore enrolled
in the Chancery.


Provided always, and it is covenanted etc. between the said parties and
either and every of them, for him his and their heirs, does covenant and grant
by these presents to and with the other and his heirs, that if the said F. do
at any time hereafter during his life upon whatsoever occasion by his Writing
sealed with his seal, and enrolled in any Court of Record of the Queens
highness, her heirs or successors signify and declare that his Will and
pleasure is, that the uses or Estates limited or appointed in these presents,
shall be void and of none effect as touching or concerning all the said Manor,
etc. or touching some or any part thereof, that then and from thenceforth the
uses estates and limitations conveyed raised or made by or in these presents,
touching all the said Manor, etc. and other the Premises, whereof or in the
which, the uses Estates and limitations, limited or expressed in these presents
shall be so signified to be void and of none effect, or touching or concerning
such or any part of the same premises, whereof or in the which the uses estate
and limitations limited or expressed in these presents shall be also signified
or declared to be void and of none effect, shall from thenceforth cease, be
clearly void and of none effect. And that then and from thenceforth the said F.
his heirs and assigns, and all and every person and persons, their heirs and
assigns that now stand, or that hereafter shall stand seized of or in the said
Manor of etc. or of or in any such part parcel or member thereof, of in or
touching which the said uses etc. shall be so signified or declared to be void,
shall from thenceforth stand and be seized of and in the same premises, of or
in the which the uses etc. limited or expressed in these presents, shall be so
signified or declared to be void, or of or in such part of the same premises,
of or in which the uses, etc. to the use and behoof of the said F. and of his
heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use behoof intent or purpose: And
that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful unto the said F. and to his
heirs, into the said Manor, etc. whereof or in the which the uses etc. or into
such part parcel or member of the premises thereof, and enjoy as in their
former estate: This Indenture, etc. In witness, etc. To one part, etc. And to
another part, etc. And to the third part, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to suffer a Recovery in London whereby the Land
recovered is assured to the Bargainer, in case a sum of money (being the
purchase money) be not paid, albeit the rest of the Assurances to the Vendee be
absolute.
THis Indenture tripartite, etc. Between T. G. on the first party, G. L. etc.
on the second party, and A. B. and C. D. on the third party witnesses, That
whereas the said T. G by good and sufficient conveyance, to him heretofore
made, by and from the said G. L. is lawfully seized in his Demesne as of fee,
of and in all that message, etc. A bargain and sale of a Feofment with
livery, and a Release enrolin London, all absolute with out Conditiot.
and of and in all shops, etc. It is now fully covenanted granted concluded
condescended and agreed between the said parties to these presents in manner
and form following, that is to say, that the said A. B. and C. D. or the
survivor of them before the first day of Oct. next ensuing the date of these
presents, shall pursue and bring the Kings Majesty's Writ of Right Patent, out
of his Highness Court of Chancery against the said T. G. to be directed to the
Mayor and Sheriffs of the City of London, By which Writ of Right Patent, the
said A. and C. or the Survivor of them in the Guildhall of London, before the
said Mayor and Sheriffs in the Court of Hustings according to the custom of
the same City, shall demand against the said T. G. the said Message or
Tenement, or other the Premises by the name of one Message and one Curtilage
with the appurtenances in London or by such other name or quantity, as the said
T. or his learned Council shall think meet, and that the said T. in his own
proper person, or by his sufficient Attorney, shall appear to the said Writ,
and after declaration thereupon made, shall make defense and vouch over to
Warranty the said G. L. who shall appear and enter into Warranty, and vouch
over the common Vouchee, which common Vouchee shall imparl, and after make
default, and depart in contempt of the Court whereby Judgment shall be given in
the said Writ against the said T. G. and Execution thereof shall be had. And
now it is by these presents fully and expressly witnessed and declared, and also
it is covenanted granted condescended expressed and agreed by and between all
and every the said parties by this present Indenture, that the said Recovery in
what manner form, or by whatsoever Name or Names, the Use of the recofy, and
of all other assurances
same shall be had and passed, and the Execution thereof, and that the true
intent and meaning of the same is, and that all other Recoveries, and all Fines
Feofments and other conveyances and assurances whatsoever, at any time since
the first day of this instant month of July, suffered levied executed or made
to be, etc. hereafter of the said Message Tenement and premises or any part
thereof, and that the said A. B. and C. D. and the Survivor of them and their
heirs, and all and every other person and persons which now be, or at any time
hereafter, shall be seized of the said Messuages etc. shall thereof, and of
every part thereof stand and be seized to the uses and intents hereafter Uses.
in these present Indentures mentioned and expressed, and to no other use or
intent: that is to say, To the only use of the said T. G. and of his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, so always, and upon condition, that Conditions.
said T: G: his Heirs, Executors, etc do pay etc. to the said G. L. the sum of
246 l. of etc. at the said Message etc. in form following, viz. on the etc. 76
l. thereof etc.

Provided always, and it is moreover Covenanted, Granted and Agreed Proviso to
change the use.
by and between the said parties to these presents, that if default be made of,
or in payment of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof contrary to the form
before mentioned, that then the said recovery to be suffered and executed by
reason of these presents, and all and singular other the said Recoveries etc.
shall be, and all persons that now be, or hereafter shall be seized of the said
Message etc. shall from time to time, and at all times after such default had
or made, stand, and be thereof and of every part thereof to the only use of the
said G: L: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none other use intent or
purpose whatsoever. And also the said T: G: Covenanteth etc. that within three
months Covenant to redeliver Writings.
after such default, as aforesaid, made of and in payment of the said sum etc.
contrary to the form aforesaid, he the said T: his Heirs or Assigns, shall at
the Message aforesaid, well and safely redeliver, or cause etc. to the said G:
his Heirs or Assigns, all such Deeds, Evidences or Writings, as the said G: or
his Heirs, or of any of them has now made or delivered, or hereafter in the
mean time shall make or deliver to the said T: G: or his Heirs concerning the
Premises, or any part thereof. A Covenant for giving Acquittances at every
payment, etc. In witness, etc.

A Covenant to suffer a Recovery of Copyhold Land by a Plaint in a Court
Baron, after the order of a Recovery at the Common Law.
THis Indenture tripertite etc. between R. H. Citizen and Inholder of L. on the
first party; and H. L. of H. in the County of M. and E. his wife, on the second
party, and W. W. of L. Inn, in the County of M. Gentleman, on the third party,
witnesses, That for diverse considerations moving the said parties, It is
covenanted, granted, and agreed, by and between the said R. H. H L. and E his
wife, and the said Covenant to suffer a Recovery of etc.
W. and every of them, in manner and form following, that is to say, The said
R. H. does covenant and grant, that he the said R. before the 20. day of J.
next etc. shall permit and suffer the said W. W. to bring and pursue against
the said R: H. in the Court Baroa of the Manor of H. in the said County of M.
one Plaint in the nature of a Writ of Entry sur Disseisin, in le post, of all
and singular those his Message, one Cottage, and twenty acres of Meadow, with
the appurtenances, which said Message etc. being situate together, and do
abutt upon etc. and which said Message etc. the said R. H. late had in
Remainder of the Surrender of M: H: his Father, by the names of one Tenement
herietable, and two Crofts thereunto appertaining, containing in the whole by
estimation nine acres, sometime I: H: and an acre etc. lying between etc. as by
the Court Roll of the general Court of the said Manor, holden at H. on
Thursday being the 17. day of N. in the first year etc. amongst other things
more fully and plainly does and may appear. And that the same Plaint, in the
nature of the said Writ of Entry in the Post, shall he entered commenced and
sued, of all and every the Premises, with the appurtenances, by the names of
etc. with the Appurtenances in H. within the Jurisdiction of the Court of the
said By the name.
Manor of H. to the which Writ the said R. H. also promises, that he shall
and will appear in his own proper person, or by his Attorney in such behalf
lawfully authorized: And thereupon shall make his defense, according to the law,
and thereof shall Vouch to Warranty, of and for the Premises one I: M: and that
the said I: M: shall enter into the Warranty of the Premises, and after shall
make default according to the manner and form of common Recoveries in Writs of
Entry sur disseisin in le post, whereby the said W: W: shall have Judgment to
recover the said two Messuages, and twenty acres of Meadow, and other the
Premises, against the said R: H: and the said R: H: to recover over in value,
against the said I: M: according to the manner and form of common Recoveries in
Writs of Entry etc. which said Recovery the said R: H: covenanteth promises
and grants, to suffer to be executed by Precept and Warrant out of that
Court, in the nature of a Writ Le use.
of Habere facias seisinam, according to the order of the Law.

And it is further in like manner covenanted, granted condescended, and agreed
between the said R: H: H. L: and E: his wife, and the said W: W: that the said
Recovery and the Estate of the Premises, to be had and to be recovered and
obtained by reason thereof, shall be to the only use behoof intent and meaning
hereafter in these presents expressed and declared, and to none other uses
behoofs intents and meanings, that is to say, To the use and behoof of the said
E. L. the Daughter of the said R. H. and of her Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And moreover it is covenanted, granted condescended, and agreed between the
said parties to these presents, and the same parties for them their Heirs
Executors and Assigns; and for the Heirs Executors and Assigns of every of
them, do covenant, promise, grant, condescend, conclude, and agree, by these
presents, that the said W. W. and his Heirs and Assigns, after the said
Recovery of the said Premises and execution thereupon had by the said W.
accordingly shall thereupon and thereto stand and be seized of the said Message
etc. to the only use and behoof of the said E. L. and of her Heirs and Assigns
for ever; And to no other use or uses: In witness etc.

An Indenture for knowledging of a Fine and Recovery of Land, and leading the
Use thereof with Covenants of Warranty and discharge of Encumbrances.
THis Indenture etc. between T. S. of West A. in the County of S: Gentleman,
Son and Heir of I: S: late wife of C: S: deceased, Father of the said T: which
I: was Daughter and Heir of R: P: the younger, which was Son and Heir of R: P:
the elder, on the one party, and N. B: Citizen and Grocer of L: and S: B:
eldest Son of the same N. on the other party, witnesses, That for and in
consideration of the Sum of etc. to the said T: before the ensealing etc. paid
and contented by the said N: B. whereof etc. It is now covenanted concluded and
agreed between the said parties.

And the said T: S: for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every
of them does covenant and grant, to and with the said N: B: and S: B: their
Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, in manner etc. That he the said T. S: and A. now his wife, before the
27th. day of June, now next coming, at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said N: and S. shall and will knowledge one Fine sur Conizance de droit come
ceo qui ad de Son done in due form of Law, and according to the usual course
of Fines unto the said N: and S: as well of all that Message, with all and
singular Barns Stables Houses Buildings Lands Tenements and other Appurtenances
thereunto belonging, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of etc. or of his
Assigns, situate etc. in T. in the County of M. with one W: R: by his
Indenture of Lease, dated etc. did demise and let to Farm to one R. F: for a
certain Term of years, yet not expired, and of one Close etc. containing by
estimation 0. acres of Land and of a Field called etc. containing etc. and of
one Meadow etc. to and with the Message aforesaid, now occupied and belonging;
As also of all and singular other Messuages Lands Tenement Rents and Services,
and the Reversion and Reversions thereof whatsoever, which the said T. has or
ought to have in T. aforesaid; And the same by the said Fine shall remise and
quite claim from them and their Heirs to the said N: and S: and the Heirs of
the said N: for ever, with Warranty of the said T: and A: against themselves,
and the Heirs of the said T: for ever, which Fine so had and levied, shall be
to the use of the said N. and S: and their Heirs for ever.

And moreover it is agreed between the said parties, that immediately or soon
after the said Fine shall be knowledged and recorded, one N. N. shall bring and
pursue one Writ of Entry in the Post, in the Kings Court of Common Pleas at W.
before his Justices there, and thereby shall demand the Premises by words of
Course, against the said N. B: and S. or the Survivor of them, to which Writ
the said N: and S. or the Survivor of them, shall appear gratis, and Vouch to
Warranty the said T: S.

And the said T: S: for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
covenant and grant, to and with the said N: and S: their Heirs Executors and
Administrators, by these presents, That he the said T: upon reasonable
premonition and request thereof to him before hand to be given and made, will
thereupon appear in the said Court, and there enter into the said Warranty
gratis, and after Vouch over the common Vouchee, who may them likewise enter
into the Warranty and Imparl, and after Imparlance depart in contempt of the
Court, so as a perfect Recovery with double Vouchee may then be had and passed
of all the Premises in due form of the Law, and Seisin thereof had and executed
accordingly, for the perfect executing and performing of which said Recovery
with double Voucher, as before the said T: S: for him his Heirs and Assigns,
does covenant and grant upon reasonable request, to do all such reasonable act
and acts, as before is limited, or otherwise shall b^ meet and convenient by
him to be done and executed concerning the Premises, the same to be done at
the costs and charges in the Law only of the said N: or S. their Heirs or
Assigns.

And it is further covenanted concluded and agreed, between the said parties to
these presents, for themselves, their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them for
himself and his Heirs, does covenant grant and agree to and with each other of
them, and his and their Heirs by these presents, that as well the said Fine and
Recovery aforesaid, and either of them to be levied or had of the Premises, or
of any part thereof, as also all and every other Conveyances and Assurances
whatsoever, thereof or of any part thereof to be knowledged had or made at any
time hereafter between the said parties, their Heirs or Assigns, shall be, and
by these presents are fully and plainly expressed, declared, and agreed to be
to the only use and behoof of the said N: S: and of their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, and to none other use behoof intent or purpose whatsoever.

And the said T: S. covenanteth etc. to and with the said N: and S: etc. in
manner etc. viz. That he the said T: S. now is and stands, and until the
levying and engrossing of the Fine aforesaid, shall be and stand lawfully and
solely seized, of and in all and singular the Premises, of a good perfect and
sure Estate in the Law in Fee-simple or Fee-tail; And that the same Premises
are and stand, and at the engrossing of the Fine aforesaid, shall be and stand,
and for ever thereafter shall abide and continue, clear and freely discharged
and acquitted, or otherwise by the said T. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, at all times sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all and
singular former Bargains Sales Leases Bonds Statutes Recognizances Rents
Arrerages of Rents Forfeitures Re-entries, and Causes of Forfeiture or
Re-entry, and all other Estates Rights Titles Grants Charges or Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, caused, procured or agreed unto by the said T. S. or any
of his Ancestors, or of any other person or persons, by his or their Means
Title or Procurement one yearly Rent of five pounds sixteen shillings, eight
pence, and sur to the Court of the Manor of T. reserved, of and for the
Premises, yearly to be paid and done, to the Heirs and Assigns of W: C:
Knight, deceased, and the said Lease made by the said W: R: to the said W: F:
as aforesaid, always except and fore prised.

And also that the said N: and S: their Heirs and Assigns, shall and lawfully
may from henceforth have hold and enjoy the Premises, and have take perceive
and enjoy all the Rents Revenews Issues and Profits thereof, to their own use,
without any let disturbance or Eviction, of or by the said T: S: his Heirs or
Assigns, or of or by any other person or persons, by his Means Title or
Procurement.

And moreover, that he the said T. and his Heirs, at all times, during five
years next after the date of these presents, at and upon every reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law only of the said N: and S:
their Heirs Executors or Assigns, or any of them shall and will do make
knowledge and suffer all and singular act and acts, thing and things in the
Law, with Warranty only against the said T. and his Heirs, for the further or
better conveyance, assurance, and sure making, of all and singular the
Premises, to be had, conveyed, and made sure to the said N: and S: and their
Heirs, and the Survivor of them, his Heirs and Assigns, for his and their own
use, clearly and absolutely, without any manner of Condition for ever, as by
the said N. and S. or the Survivor of them, his Heirs Executors or Assigns, or
by his or their Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully
and reasonably devised or advised: In witness etc.

An Indenture for acknowledgement, and leading the use of a Fine and Recovery.
THis Indenture Tripartite made etc. Between H. G. Esquire; on the first part A. G.
natural Mother of the said H. on the second part, and T. G. Gent on the third
part witnesses, That it is Covenanted and Agreed, by and between the said
parties for themselves, their Heirs and Assigns, in manner and form following,
that is to say, That the said H. G. and A. his wife before the end of
Michaelmas Term next coming before the Kings Majesty's Justices of his Common
Bench at Westminster shall leavy one Fine with Proclamations according to the
Statute in that behalf provided unto the said T. G. and his Heirs of all those
two Messuages with their appurtenances in F. and W. in the County of M, now or
late in the several Tenures or Occupations of etc. or their Assigns, by the
name of two Messuages, two Barns, two Gardens, sixteen acres of Meadowe,
seventy acres of Pasture, and six acres of Wood, with their Appurtenances in F.
and W. and that after the said Fine shall be recorded before the said Justices,
T: W: Gentleman, and R: C: by the Kings Majesty's Writ of Entry sur Disseisin
in le post shall by the names aforesaid, demand the said Messuages with their
Appurtenances, in the said Court, before the said Justices, against the said T.
G. on this side the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle next ensuing, to which Writ
the said T. G: shall appear in his proper person, and make defense by words of
course, and shall vouch to Warranty the said H: G: who also shall appear in his
proper person, and vouch over the common Vouchee, who shall also appear and
join the Mise, and after Imparlance shall depart in contempt of the Court, so
as a perfect Recovery shall be had by the said T: G: and thereof Seisin execuned
upon the Premises, according to the usual manner of common Recovery.

And further that the said Recovery and the Seisin thereof had as aforesaid, and
all other former Conveyances of the Premises shall be, and all persons seized
or to be seized thereof, or of any part thereof, shall stand thereof and be seized,
to the only uses and intents following, and to none other use or intent
whatsoever. That is to say, Of the said Message with the Appurtenances, in the
Occupation of the said W: S: to the only use of the said H: G: and of his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, and of the said Messu^ge with the Appurtenances, in the
occupation of the said G. N. to the use of the said A. G: for and during all
the term of the natural l^fe of the said A. and after her decease, to the use
of the said H. G. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said H: G: for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators and every
of them do covenant and grant, to and with the said A. G. her Executors etc. in
manner etc. viz. That the said Message with the Appurtenances, in the
Occupation of etc. and mentioned to be conveyed by the Fine and Recovery
aforesaid, now is, and during the natural life of the said A: G: shall be, or
lawfully may be and continue to the said A: and her Assigns, during the
natural life of the said A. of the clear yearly rent and value of 13 l. 13 s.
4 d. of lawful etc. above all Charges and Reprises.

And that the said A. G: and her Assigns, may lawfully and quietly have hold
and enjoy the said Message with the Appurtenances, in the Occupation of the
said etc. and mentio^^d to be conveyed by the Fine and Recovery aforesaid,
during the natural life of the said A: clearly discharged and acquitted, or
otherwise at all times by the said H: G: and and his Heirs, sufficiently keep
harmless, of and from all former Bargains Grants Sales Bonds Charges Estates
Titles Interests and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, caused, or
procured by the said H; G: or by W: G: late Father of the said H: or by their,
or any of their act, knowledge, consent, or procurement: In witness, etc:

An Indenture for acknowledging of a Fine of Rent.
THis Indenture Tripertite made etc. Between W: G: of B: in the County of W.
Esquire; and E. his wife on the first part, and R: P: Citizen and Merchant-Tailor
of L: on the second part, and S P. eldest son of the said R. P. on the third
part witnesses, that it is Covenanted, Granted and Agreed between the said
parties, for them, their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents. That the said W: and E: for themselves their Heirs and Assigns, and
every of them do Covenant and Grant to and with the said R: and S: their Heirs
and Assigns, and the heirs and assigns of every of them by these presents, in
manner and form following, that is to say, That they the said W: and E: before
the Feast of All Saints next coming at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said R. and S: or of one of them, or of their Executors Administrators or
Assigns, of one of them, shall and will in due form of Law knowledge and levy
such a Fine or Fines with Proclamations before the Justices of our Sovereign
Lo. the King of his Common Bench at Westminster, according to the common and
usual order of Fines, and of the Statutes in that Case provided of 9 l. 13 s.
4. d. going out of two Messuages and two Shops, and of one yearly Rent of 6 l.
13 s. 4 d. going out of one other Message, and one Shop, with the
appurtenances in W: in the Parish of St. M: of L: at the Feasts of the Birth
etc. the Annunciation etc. the Nativity etc. and St. Michael the Archangel by
even portions to be paid, and also of 13 s. 4 d. to be paid in the name of a
Pain for not paying of the said yearly Rent of 9 l. 13 s. 4 d. and of 10 s. to
be paid in the name of a Pain for not paying the said yearly Rent of 6 l. 13
s. 4 d. then and so often when and as often as the same Rents in any Feast of
the Feasts aforesaid shall be unpaid, and by the same Fine and Fines shall
knowledge the said yearly Rents, and the said sums in the name of a Pain to
be paid in manner and form aforesaid, to be the right of the said R. as those
that the said R. and S. then shall have of the gift of the said W: and E: and
the same by the said Fine or Fines shall remise and quite claim from them the
said W: and E^ and their Heirs to the said R: and S. and the Heirs of the said
R: for ever.

And moreover the said W: and E: shall by the said Fine and Fines, grant for
them, and the Heirs of the said W: that they shail warrant to the said R: and
S: and to the Heirs of the same R. the said Rents, and the said sums to be
paid in the name of a Pain in manner and form aforesaid, against them the said
W. and E. and the Heirs of the said W: for ever, or otherwise by any other Fine
in any other manner only, with such warranty as is aforesaid, as by the learned
Council of the said R: and S: or either of them shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised or advised at the only costs and charges of the said R: and
S: or of one of them or of the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of one of
them, and the parties aforesaid, do Covenant, Grant and Agree together for
themselves their Heirs and Assigns, and for every of them, and the Heirs and
Assigns of every of them by these present Indentures, that the said Fine, and
every other Fine and Fines as aforesaid to be knowledged between the said
parties, or their Heirs of and for the said yearly Rents aforesaid going out of
the said Messuages and Shops aforesaid, and of the said sum to be paid in the
name of a Pain, in manner and form aforesaid, shall be, and from thenceforth
shall be deemed and taken to be, and also that then and from thenceforth the
said R. and S. and the Heirs of the said R. and they the said R. and S. and the
Heirs of every of them shall be and stand seized of the said yearly Rents, and
other the Premises with the appurtenances, to the only uses, intents and
purposes hereafter expressed in these Indentures, and to none o^ her use or
uses, intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, Of the said yearly Rent of
9 l. 13 s. 4 d. and of the said sum of 13 s. 4 d. to be paid in the name of a
Pain for not paying thereof, in manner and form as aforesaid, as of en as the
said Pain shall be payable to the only use and behoof of the said S. P. and of
the Heirs and Assigns of the said S. for ever, and of the said yearly Rent of 6
l. 13 s. 4 d. and of the said sum of 10 s. to be paid in the name of a Pain
for not paying thereof in manner and form aforesaid, as often as the said Pain
shall be payable to the only use of the said R. P. and of the Heirs and Assigns
of the said R: P: for ever. In witness etc. to one part of these present
Indentures, remaining to and with the said R. P. the said VV. and E have set
their Seals, and to one other part thereof remaining, to and with the said S.
P. the said VV. and E. have likewise set their Seals, and to the third part of
the same Indentures remaining to and with the said VV. and E. the said R. and
S. have set their seals, etc.

A Covenant to convey Land and Rent to the Use of a College.
THis Indenture Quadripartite, made etc. Between W. F. Citizen, and M. of L. on
the first party, A B. etc. on the second party and the Master and Wardens of
the mystery of Merchant Tailors, of the Fraternity of St John Baptist, in the
City of L. on the third party, and the President, and Scholars of the College
of Saint John Baptist, Recitalls.
in the University of O. on the fourth party, witnesses, that whereas our said
Sovereign Lady the Queen, by her Highness Letters Patents, under her great Seal
of E bearing date at Westminster, the thirtieth day of October, now last past,
for the causes, and for the Purpose in the same Letters Patents expressed, has
given and granted unto the said W. F. by the name of her welbeloved Servant W:
F: and to his heirs and Assigns for ever, all that yearly Rent or stipend of
seven pounds, and that yearly Rent of six shillings eight pence, which were
sometime given and granted by Sir W. Fitz. W. Knight, deceased, to certain
superstitious uses in the Church of M. in the County of N, and which were
appointed by the said Sir W. to be issuing and going out of the Lands and
Tenements of the mystery or fraternity of Saint John Baptist, in the City of L.
and to be paid by the Master and Wardens of the mystery aforesaid, and also by
the same Letters Patents, has given and granted unto the said M. F: his
Executors and Assigns, all the arrerages of the said several yearly Rents of 6
l and 6 s 8 d, concealed and unpaid from the Feast of Easter, in the second
year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King E. the 6. until the Feast
day of Saint Micbaell the Arch Angel in the 19th year of the Reign of our said
Sovereign, etc. and one Writing obligatory of two hundred marks remaining in
the custody of her Majesty's Remembrances, bearing date the twentieth day of
March. now last past, wherein the said Master and Wardens, stood bound to her
Majesty for the payment of 103 l. 6 s. for the arrerages of the said yearly
Rents, as by the said Letters Patents, etc. and whereas the said W. F. in his
own Right, Recital of the seizure.
and to his own use, is lawfullly and sole seized, of and in one Message or
Tenement with the appurtenances lying and being in C. street, in the Parish
etc. in L. now in the Occupation of R. T. and which the said W. lately
purchased to him and his heirs of I. M: of L: Draper, Intention donato^^s.
Now the said W. F. minding not only to employ the said message or Tenement
with the appurtenances ^or ever, to the Help and Releif of poor Scholars for
the time being Students in Saint John's College, in Ox. Covenant to make
Assurance by a day to A. B who shall make his will thereof to make certain uses.
aforesaid, but also intending duly to perform the purpose and intent of the
said Letters Patents for him and his heirs, does covenant and grant to and with
the said Master and Wardens, and their Successors by these Presents, that he
the said W. or his heirs, on this side, the Feast of Pentecost next coming,
shall and will grant convey and assure from him the said W. and his Heirs unto
the said A. B. and his Heirs for ever, as well the said capital Message, with
all and singular the Appurtenances in as large and ample manner, as the said
VV: had the same of the said I. M as also the said yearly Rent or stipend of 7
l. and the said yearly Rent of 6 s. 8 d. and all the Arrerages thereof
aforesaid, and also the said Writing obligatory and sum of money therein
specified in as large and ample manner as our said Sovereign Lady has given
and granted the same to the said W. and his heirs as aforesaid. Yet
nevertheless, upon and under such Condition that the said A. B. shall forthwith
make and declare his last Will in Writing under his hand and seal of and for
all and singular the Premises, and by the same his last Will, shall devise
give and bequeath all and singular the said premises to the said Master and
Wardens and their Successors for ever, to the intent, that they for ever
hereafter shall employ pay and distribute yearly, or cause, etc. yearly, the
clear yearly Rent and profit of the said Message or Tenement with the
Appurtenances, between five poor Students and Scholars of the College
aforesaid for the time being, and which shall most like to bend their studies
to Divinity, to be yearly divided them in five equal parts, that is, to every
of them one equal fifth part, toward the amendment of their Batelings.

And further also to the intent that the said Wardens and their Successors
shall for ever hereafter yearly employ distribute and bestow the said yearly
rent stipend of seven pounds and the said yearly rent of six shillings eight
pence in such manner and form as hereafter in these presents is expressed, that
is to say, the said yearly rent of six shilling eight pence yearly to be paid
and given in two equal moyeties viz on the 27 day of October the one half
thereof to the Clark of the mystery aforesaid and the other half of the same
day to the Bedle of the same mystery for the time being, and the said yearly
rent or stipend of 7 pounds from thenceforth yearly on the said twenty seventh
day of October to be distributed part and part like to and amongst the poor
Almesmen of the livery of the said mystery to the augmenting of their pencions
and so to have continuance from time to time forever. And the said W. F. does
by these presents ordain and of one assent consent and agreement amongst all
the said parties it is by them ordained and established for a perpetual
ordinance for and touching the said Dividends or portions of the said clear
yearly rent and profit of the said Messuages or Tenements with the
appurtenances in manner and form following, that is to say that the said
dividends or portions shall be called and named by the name of F, his Bateling
and the said Master Covenant by the company to make payment, etc.
and Wardens of the mystery aforesaid for them and their Successors do covenant
and grant to and with the said W. F. etc. that they the said Masters and
Wardens and their Successors shall and will yearly distribute and pay the said
several yearly rents of seven pounds and six shillings and eight pence and
every part and parcel thereof yearly for ever, as they shall have and receive
the same to the use and behoofes aforesaid and in such manner and form as is
aforesaid and according unto the true meaning of these presents without any
manner of default fraud or covin. A like covenant for the rent of the said
Messuages etc. In witness etc.

Covenants between a high Sheriff, and his under Sheriff.
THis Indenture made the day of etc. in the year of our lord God and between
A. B. of W. in the county of E G Esquire. (now high Sheriff of the County of E. of
the one part and C. D. of etc. in the County of etc* Gent. of the other part.
Whereas his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of the Common wealth of England
Scotland and Ireland etc. by his Highness Letters Patents under the great seal
of E bearing date the 17th. day of this instant No. have made named assigned
and appointed the said A. B. to be high Sheriff of the said county of E, during
his pleasure. Now this Indenture witnesses that the said A. B. for the good
opinion which he has conceived of the said C. D. and of the trust and
confidence which he reposeth in him has deputed assigned constituted and
ordained and by these presents does depute assign constitute ordain him the
said C. D. to be his Under Sheriff of for and in the said County of E. during
all the time that he the said A. B. shall be and remain Sheriff of the said
County by force of the Letters Patents aforesaid and does hereby authorize the
said C. D. to serve exercise and execute the said office of Under Sheriff of
the said County under him the said A. B. in his name during all the time
aforesaid and the said A. B. as far as in him is does also by these presents
grant unto the said C. D. that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
C D. by force hereof to appear answer and serve and minister as under Sheriff
of the said County of E. for and in the name of the said A. B. as well in all
places in the said County of E. as in all and every the Court and Courts as
within the Commonwealth of England and before all and every the Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize and Goal delivery Justices in Eyer and of
the forest Officers Justices of the peace Coroners and Eschetors and other
Officers and Commissioners of this Commonwealth and the Forest Officers where
the said A. B. by virtue of the said office of Sheriffwick for the said County
of E. shall be bound or ought to appear answer serve or be attendant and to
break open answer return and execute for him the said A. B. in his name all
Processes Writs Precepts Warrants Mandates and Commandments to the Sheriff of
the said County directed or hereafter to be directed out of any the Courts
aforesaid or from any the Justices Comissioners Coroners or Eschetors aforesaid
and to do perform and execute for him the said A. B. and in his name all and
every thing and things which by him the said A, B. by virtue of his office of
Sheriffwick of the said County of E. is to be performed executed and done
saving always and excepting the said C. D. shall not by virtue thereof be
authorized to open return send execute any writ or writs for electing any
Knights of Sheir or burgesses of the Parl. for the said County of E. or any
other Borough within the said county, nor to open execute or answer any the
letters of his Highness the Lord Protector or the Council to be directed unto
the said Sheriff of the said County of E. without the special warrant
direction Commandment of him the said A. B. for that purposes.

And further the said A. B. does by these presents grant unto the said C. D.
for the executing of the said office all the fees duties and profits to him due
arising and growing by the County Courts to be kept within the said County of
E. and all other fees rewards duties allowances and profits incident to the
office of Sheriffwick or thereunto belonging for which the said A. B. is or
shall be allowed by the Common laws of this realm or customs of the said
County either for the opening returning or executing of any writ precept or
process warrant or Command whatsoever or for other executing of the said office
and which have not been accepted heretofore the ordinary fees of any other his
Bailiffs or other officers to have and enjoy the said duties fees rewards
allowances and other profits to his own use without an account to be rendered to
the said A. B. his Executors Administrators for the same.

And the said C, D. for and in consideration of the Benevolence aforesaid, and
for the free gift and grant of the said A. B. does for himself his heirs
Executors Administrators* and Assigns, and every of them, covenant promise
grant and agree to and with the said A. B. his Heirs Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, by these presents, that he the said C: D. shall and will at all
times from and after the day of the date of these presents, duly diligently
lawfully and carefully serve the said A. B. as his Deputy and under Sheriff, of
in and for the said County of E. without doing or committing any kind of
Extortion or wilful mis-beleiving of himself in the said Office, and shall
and will duly, and respectively execute the said Office of Sheriffwick, under
the name of the said A, B. in all poines so far forth, as these presents, the
Laws of the Land or other license or commandment of the said A, B. shall
warrant or give Liberty, and shall and will in the name of the said A. B. and
as his Deputy in the said Office of undersheriff of the said County of E. be
answerable, attendant, and minister in all Courts of his highness the Lord
Protector by and before the said Justices of Assize, Justices of Eyer, and of
the forest and all Commissioners Escheators Coroners and other Justices, and
Officers of his highness the Lord Protector, before whom the said A. B. shall
be bound or required to minister answer or be attendant in respect of the said
Office of Sheriffwick for the said County of E. and shall and will execute and
make answer, true and sufficient Return of all such Processes Writs Precepts
and Commandments, directed from the Keepers of the Liberties of England, or
from every or any of the said Courts Justices Commissioners Escheators and
other Officers aforesaid as shall be delivered to, or come to the hands of him
the said C. D. his Deputy or Deputies, Assignee or Assigns, or shall and will
discharge and save harmless the said A. B. his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and his and their and every of their Lands Tenements Goods and
Chattels, off and from all Fines Issues and Amerciaments, and other penalties
Forfeitures pains corporal, and pecuniary whatsoever, whereby or wherewithal
the said A: B. his Heirs Executors or Administrators or his or their Lands
Tenements Goods or Chattells shall or may be charged or chargeable, for his the
said A. B. or the said CD. not excuting, not fileing neglecting misexecuting
evil, returning not serving mis-returning or mis-fileing any of the said Writs
Processes Precepts Warrants or Commandments aforesaid, or for the absence, ill
attendance, or not attendance of the said A. B. or of the said C. D. or his
Deputy as aforesaid, or other misdemeanors, in the executing, not executing or
mis-executing of the said Office in any thing which the said C. D. might by
virtue of these presents by himself or his deputies execute or perform other
then from such fines issues and Amerciaments and other penalties as shall be
imposed or adjudged upon or against the said A. B. for or in respect of any
offense fault or negligence by the said A. B, at any time after the day of the
date of these presents committed omitted or done or to be committed omitted or
done by himself in his own person or by any other (except the said C. D. by his
the said A. B. his Commandment or appointment without the consent of the said
C. D: And that the said C. D. shall himself or his sufficient deputy or
deputies duly and lawfully keep or cause to be kept within the said County of
E, all and singular County Courts of the said County at such times and places
as heretofore has been accustomed and that he the said C. D. shall and will
make and appoint one or more Attorney or Attorneyes deputy or deputies of
record in the Courts of Record now commonly called the Upper Bench, Com. Bench,
and Exchecquer and in all other Courts and Offices wherein Attorneis are
commonly appointed and so shall and will ordain appoint and make one or more
able deputy or deputies for him the said A. B. in every hundred within the said
County of E. according to the Laws and Statutes in these cases provided, so
that the said A. B. shall not hereafter be liable to any penalty or Forfeiture,
for want of any such Attorney or Deputy, and shall and will at his own proper
costs and charges, appear and make ready all such place and places, where the
Assizes Gaol Delivery or Sessions, shall be from time to time holden meet and
convenient Courts, Bars, and all other things necessary and convenient, for the
Justices of Assise, and other Justices to keep their Assizes and Gaol
Deliveries and Sessions in, and shall and will from time to time, give notice
in convenient time to the said A. B. of all and every such time and times,
place and places, where the personal attendance of the said A B. shall be
requisite and necessary, so as the said A. B. may be personally present at such
times and places when and where his personal appearance and attendance shall
be necessary.

And furthermore that the said C: D: by and during the continuance of the said
Office, shall and will well and truly collect, leavy, gather, and seize to the
use of his Highness, the Lord Protector, all the goods and chattels of Felonies
and Fugitives, and of all persons Outlawed and put in Exigent, and of all
persons Attainted and Convicted of Treason, Murder or Felony, which shall
happen within the said County of E. during the time aforesaid, which shall be
due or forfeited to his Highness the Lord Protector by any ways or means
aforesaid, and shall and will from time to time, well and truly collect and
gather up all Fines, Amerciaments, Extracts, Certainties, Fee-Farms,
Pipe-silver for License, Concord for Fines, Greenwax, and all other sum and
sums of money which to the Collection of the said A. B. by reason of the
Sheriffwick of the said County shall appertain or belong and which the said C.
D. shall have Warrant or lawful Authority to seize, leavy, or collect, or which
he shall have notice of, and may reasonably come by, and thereof, and of every
part thereof, and of all other the Issues and Revenues of the said County, and
of all sums of money due, or hereafter during the continuance of the said
Office of Sheriffewick of the said County, does or may appertain, shall and
will to his Highness the Lord Protector in the Court of Exchecquer aforesaid,
yield and give just account, and also that he the said C: D: his Executors,
Administrators, at such days and terms as he the said A. B: is or shall be
required to enter into account of the Court of Exchecquer, for or touching the
said Office. The said C: D: shall and will enter into account in the said Court
of Exchecquer, in the name of the said A: B. for and concerning the said
Sheriffwick of the said County of E. in and upon which account the said C: D:
his Executors, and Administrators, shall and will truly answer all such debts,
duties, and sums of moneys, as the said C. D: his Deputies, Officers or
Servants, or any of the Bayleiffs of any of the Hundreds of the said County
shall have received, or might have received, or wherewith the said A: B: as
Sheriff of the said County shall be any ways charged or chargeable with upon
the same account, and the same account shall and will, at his the said C: D:
his own costs and charges prosecute with effect until the same account be
fully finished and concluded without demanding any allowance or allowances of
the said A: B: his Heirs Executors oe Administrators for the same; and also
that the said C. D. his Executors, and Administrators, shall and will pay into
the Receipt of Exchecquer all such sums of money as upon the said account
shall be found in Arrerages within one year next after the Feast of St. Michael
next ensuing the date hereof and in the name of the said A. B. obtain a lawful
discharge and Quietus est out of the said Court of Exchecquer for him the said
A. B. and the same shall and will deliver unto the said A. B. his Heirs
Executors or Assigns, for a full discharge of him the said A. B. his Heirs
Executors Administrators and Assigns, of and concerning the said Sheriffwick of
the said County of E. within one year next after the said Feast of St. Michael,
and that the said C. D. his Heirs, Execucutors Administrators and Assigns, or
some, or one of them, shall and will at some or one of their own proper costs
and charges, disburse and pay for the said A: B: all and all manner of Fees,
Duties, Charges, sum and sums of money, Rewards, Gratuities and Demands
whatsoever which shall be required, demanded or demandable of the said A. B: as
due or accustomed to be paid or given by the Sheriff of the said County for or
by reason of the said account without demanding any allowance or allowances
therefore of the said A: B: his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, and
the said C. D. does further for the consideration aforesaid, for himself his
Heirs Executors Admininistrators and Assigns, and for every of them Covenant,
Promise, Grant and Agree to and with the said A: B. his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, That he the said C. D. his
Executors or Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter well duly and truly satisfy and pay all and singular such sum and
sums of money as he the said C. D. or any deputy Clerk or Clerks, Bailiff or
Bailiffs Substitute or Substitutes under him, shall at any time and times, and
all times leavy or receive, by virtue or reason of any Writ or Writs, Process of
Extent Liberate Capias ad satisfaciendum, fieri facias, eleget, distringas
nuper Vice comes, against any former Sheriff, or any other writ or writs of
execution or Warrants whatsoever according to the purport and true tenure of
any such Writ o Writs, Warrant or Warrants respectively and in such manner as
by the same respectively shall be limited, required, or appointed, and shall
from time to time sufficiently save harmless and defend the said A B. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, of, for, and from all and every such sum
and sums of money as aforesaid.

And further, that he the said C: D: his Heirs Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall and will at his and their own proper costs and charges, conduct
and safe delivery of all such Prisoners as are, or hereafter shall be in the
custody of the Gaol for the said County of E: to such person and persons, and
to such place and places, as the said A: B: shall by Writ, Warrant, or other
Precept, or Commandment, or by virtue and in respect of his said Office, be
commanded or bound to deliver the same. And further shall and will also at his
and their own proper costs and charges, execute or cause to be executed, all
such persons as at any time during the time aforesaid, shall be convicted and
put in execution, according to their several Judgments, if the same person or
persons be not by any lawful authority reprieved into the said Gaol.

And the said C: D. does further for himself, his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, covenant grant promise and
agree, to and with the said A. B. his Heirs Executors Administrators and
Assigns by these presents, That he the said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and will upon the discharge and giving up of the said
Office, to such as shall succeed in the said Office of Sheriffwick, of and for
the said County of E. in due form of Law deliver, or cause to be delivered by
Indenture to be made between the said A. B. and his Successors, in the said
Office to the said Successor of the said A. B. in the said Office, or to his
Deputy for the time being, all such Prisoners as then shall be in the Custody
of the said A: B: or of any of his Deputies, or Ministers, with the Causes of
their Detainments and Imprisonments, and all such Iron Implements and Things,
as shall be in the Custody of the said C. D. belonging to the Common Gaol of
the said County, or to the Officers of the same: And also all Writs Processes
Warrants and other things, which then shall be in his hands and custody, in
respect of the Office of Sheriffwick, of in and for the said County of E.

And the said C. D. does further for himself, his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, covenant promise grant and agree, to and with the
said A* B. his Heirs Executors and Administrators by these present, That he the
said C. D. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, shall and will from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, discharge defend and save harmless as well
the said A. B. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and his and their Lands
and Tenements Goods and Chattels, as well against his Highness the Lord
Protector, and all other persons whatsoever, of for and from all manner of
Pains Corporal and Pecuniary, Forfeitures Fines Amerciaments Debts Accounts
Duties and Demands whatsoever, hereafter lawfully to be commenced prosecuted
imposed demanded or demandable of or against the said A. B. his Heirs Executors
or Administrators, or his or their Lands Goods Tenements and Chattels, for or
by reason of any escape of any Prisoner or Prisoners whatsoever, now under
execution or under arrest, or hereafter to be had in execution under Arrest,
for any manner of Debt Damage Trespass Account or other Duties or Wrong, or
for any Treason Felony or other Offense whatsoever, or for any or by reason of
not appearance of any person arrested at the day limited, for the appearance in
any Court or Courts, or before any Judge, or Judges, or Justices whatsoever, or
for or by reason of any False Return, not Return or Mis*return of any Writ,
Warrant or Process, or for any other mis-behaviour, negligence, or larges, of
the said C. D. his Bailiffs or Officers in executing, or negligence in
executing, or not in executing of the said Office of Sheriffwick, for the said
County of E. of or for, or by reason of the not levying answering or not paying
of any Sum or Sums of money, which shall, or may, or ought to be collected or
received by virtue or reason of the said Office of the Sheriffwick of the said
A. B. or having relation thereunto, or by reason of any Writ or Writs of
Assistance, for the levying of any Sums of money, wherewith the said A. B. shall
or may be charged or chargable, of or for any matter, clause or thing, having
relation to the said Office, and to the intent that the said C. D. may the
better perform the execution of the said Office, the said A. B. is contented
and pleased, and does hereby grant unto the said C. D. that he the said C. D.
shall have to his own use, the benefit of such Bonds and Covenants as shall be
taken of any person or persons, wherein the same person or persons shall become
bound unto the said A. B. as Sheriff of the said County of E. with condition
for their or any of their appearances in any Court, or elsewhere, before any
Commissioners of the Keepers of the Liberties of Eng. by Authority of
Parliament: And of all Obligations taken or to be taken of any Bailiffs or
their Sureties, and of all other Bonds and Covenants, which are or shall be
made to the said A. B. as the Sheriff of the said County of E. (except the
Covenants herein contained) and the Bonds and Obligations taken or to be taken,
for the performance of the said Covenants, and every of them (except before
excepted) and shall and may sue and prosecute the same in the name of A. B. his
Executors and Administrators, at the proper costs and charges of the said C. D.
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and the moneys thereof and thereby
recovered to have, take, and detain, to his and their own use and uses, without
any account thereof, to yield or make to the said A. B. his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, all which said Bonds and Covenants (except before
excepted) he the said A. B. does for himself his Heirs Executors Administrators
and Assigns, covenant promise gran^ and agree, to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, that neither he the said A. B.
nor his Heirs Executors or Administrators, or any of them, shall release acquit
nor discharge the said Bonds or Covenants, nor any Action, Plaint, or Suit
thereupon to be brought, or any Judgment or Execution thereupon to be had,
without the assent of the said C. D. his Executors Administrators or Assigns,
unless he the said A. B. his Heirs Executors or Administrators shall be
enjoined thereunto, by order or course of Law or Equity.

And the said C. D. does for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators,
covenant promise and grant, to and with the said A. B. his Heirs Executors and
Administrators by these presents, that he the said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
save defend and keep harmless the said A. B. his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and his and their Lands Tenements Goods and Chattels, of and
from all costs and charges and damages which may arise or happen, by reason of
any Bill in Equity or of any Nonsuit or Judgment obtained by any person or
persons, of or upon any of the said Covenants Obligations or Bonds, to be taken
for appearance as aforesaid, or by reason or means of removing any Action or
Suit in the name of the said A. B. his Heirs Executors or Administrators,
against any person or persons upon the same Covenants Obligations, or any of
them.

And whereas it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
that the said C. D. shall come bound by Obligation to the said A. B. in the
penal Sum of 500 l. conditioned for the true performance of the Covenants
Articles and agreements, in these presents contained on the part and behalf of
him the said C. D. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, to be performed, and
shall also procure five sufficient Sureties, before the 30 day of January next
ensuing the date hereof, to become bound unto the said A. B. in the several
penal Sums of 100 l. a piece, with the like conditions as aforesaid.

Now the said C. B. is contented and pleased, and does by these presents, for
himself, his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, covenant Promise and
grant, to and with the said C. D. his Heirs Executors Administrators and
Assigns by these presents, that he the said A. B. his Heirs Executors or
Administrators or some, or one of them, shall and will within the space of one
year next after the said C. D. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, shall
deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said A. B. his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, the said Quietus est before in these presents
mentioned, the said A. B. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, being first
sufficiently and reasonably discharged and saved harmless, of and from all the
Payments, Penalties, Fines, Amerciaments, Damages, Dangers, and other Demands
before in these presents mentioned, upon the reasonable request of the said C.
D. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, shall deliver, or cause to be
delivered up the said Obligations so to be made by the sureties of the said A.
B. as aforesaid, to such Surety or Sureties respectively, and to their
respective Heirs Executors or Administrators, to be cancelled: In witness
whereof, etc:

An Indenture for building of a House, both Carpenters work and Bricklayers
work.
THis Indenture etc. between T. A. of etc. and R. A. of the same Parish of B.
on the one party, and T. A. of L. Skinner, on the other party, witnesses, that
the said T. and R. as well in consideration of the Sum of 20 s. of lawful etc.
to them in hand, before the ensealing and delivery hereof paid by the said T.
A. as also in consideration of the Consideration.
Sum of 100 l. more of like money to be paid by the said T. A. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, to the said T. A. and R. A. their Executors
Administrators or Assigns, in manner and form hereafter in these presents
expressed, do covenant promise and grant, and either of them Covenant etc.
covenanteth promises and grants for themselves, and for either of them, and
for the Heirs Executors and Administrators of them, and of either of them, and
for every of them, and with the said T. A. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them by these presents, in manner and form following;
That is to say, That they the said T: A. and R. A. their Executors
Administrators and Assigns, at their own proper costs and charges, at or before
the last day of March, next ensuing the date hereof, in such place within the
Parish of H. within the County of M. as the said T: A: has already limited
assigned or appointed, Build and set up a new house with rooms limited in the
several Sto^ies.
or he, his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall limit assign or appoint,
hereafter shall and will make, build, erect, set up, and perfectly finish, to
and for the use and behoof of the said T. A. his Heirs Executors Administrators
and Assigns, one new Frame, Edifice, Building, and House, and in the same all
such several Rooms, and other things, as hereafter in these presents are
expressed; that is to say, One Hall, one Parlour, and one Kitchen in the first
Story thereof on the ground, and in the second Story thereof two Chambers over
the same Hall and Parlour, and one Chamber over the said Kitchen, and two
Garrets in Stories over the said Story, and that the said Hall and Parlour
shall contain in length, from outside to outside 28. foot of assise, and in
breath from outside to outside 16. foot of assise: Length and breadth of the
Rooms.
And that the said Kitchen shall contain in length from outside to outside 16.
foot of assise, and in breadth from outside to outside 16. foot of assise: And
all the said first Story shall contain in height 9. foot of assise; and that
all the said second Story shall contain in height 8. Height of the Stories.
Largness of the Rooms.
foot of assise, and that the said half Story shall contain in height 3. foot
of assise, and that the said Chamber to be made over the said Hall shall be as
near as may be equal in largnesse, length, and proportion to the same Hall,
over and besides the Implements hereunder specified; And that the said Chamber
to be made over the said Parlour, shall be as near as may be equal in
largnesse, length, and proportion to the same Parlour, over and besides the
Implements hereafter expressed. And that the said Chamber to be made over the
said Kitchen, shall be also as near as may be equal in largnesse, length and
proportion to the same Kitchen over and besides the said Implements hereafter
specified. And that the Garrets aforesaid; shall be as near as may be equal in
largnesse, length and proportion to the said Chambers, over the which the
Windows to the several Rooms.
same shall be made.

And that the said T: A: and R: A: their Executors Administrators and assigns,
shall in the said several Rooms, make all such Windows, clear Stories and
other things as hereafter are expressed; That is to say, In the said Hall one
fair Bay Window, as shall be most fair and proportionable for the same Room and
clear Stories, on either side of the said, by Window as shall fall out most
conveniently for that Room, and in the said Parlour, two fair bay Windows, as
shall be most fit for the same Room, and in such places thereof as the said T:
A: his Executors or Assigns shall appoint, and in the said Kitchen one
partition for a Buttery and clear Stories for light, as shall be most meet for
the same Kitchen and Buttery, and in the said two Chambers over the Hall and
Parlour aforesaid, four fair bay Windows, as shall be most convenient for the
same Chambers, and that in such several paces thereof, as the said T. A. his
Executors or Assigns shall appoint; And two fair by-Windows in the said Chamber
over the Kitchen as shall be most fit for the same Room and in the Garrets
aforesaid fair Dormant Windows, and Lights in and upon the same, as shall be
most fit for those Rooms, and in the Garrets aforesaid, fair Dormant Windows
and Lights in and upon the same, as shall be most fit for those Rooms: And
shall also Perements.
make good meet and sufficient Court-houses and Perements to all the said
Windows which shall be made in the said Hall, Parlour, and Kitchen, Floors.
and in the said three Chambers over the said Hall, Parlour, and Kitchen. And
also that they the said T. and R. their Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall make and board all the Floors of the said Hall, Parlour, Chambers, and
Garrets, of and with good and seasonable narrow Deal Bords, or Oak. And shall
also make one pair of Stairs, and one stair close without the said house, which
shall lead ascend and Stairs.
serve for passing unto all the chambers and Garrets afore-specified, and shall
also make Rear and set up suff^ciently, between the said Hall and Parlour in
convenient places, 4. new good strong and sufficient chimneys of Brick, with 4.
parols of stone, which shall conveniently serve for the Brick work.
said Hall and Parlour, and the said two chambers over them, whereof the 2
chimnies for the said Hall and Parlour to contain five foot in widenes a piece
on the inside of the same chimnies, and the other two chimnyes for the said
chambers over the said Hall and Parlour, to be four foot and one half foot a
piece in wideness, within the same chimnies, and shall also sufficiently make
Rear and set up in the Kitchen aforesaid, one good strong and sufficient
chimney of Brick, containing in widness seven foot, and one mantle tree of wood
for the same: And shall also make in the same Kitchen one fair Oven, the floor
and forepart whereof shall be of free stone, and shall also make and rear in
the said chamber over the said Kitchen, one other chimney of Brick-work with a
Paroll of stone thereto in the breast of that chimney, which shall ascend, out
of the said Kitchen, and shall make and find all but ments meet for the said
chimney.

And further that the said T. A. and R A their Executors and Assigns Foundation.
shall make a good and sufficient foundation of Brick, to and for the said new
frame and house, which foundation shall be sixteen inches above the ground, and
shall also sufficiently tile and cover all the said new frame and house with
sufficient tiles, and make all Doors Walls Floors Tiling doors,
and partitions which shall be needful meet or convenient in and about the
said new frame and house, and that all the said walls shall be made on the
inside with Lome, and on the outside with Lime and hair, and that all the
Timber of the said new frame and house shall be covered on the outside with
Lime and hair, and that the said Chambers over the said Hall Parlor and
Kitchen, shall every way jut out forward and backward by the space of 16 inches
beyond the said several Rooms under Jutments.
them, And that they the said T. A. and R. A. their Executors Administrators
and Assigns, shall make two seelings of Lime and hair, through all the first and
second stairs of the said new frame and house, and shall find and provide all
timber-stuff, workmanship and other things whatsoever, Seelings. Premises of
good stuff and work manly to be wrought.
meet or needful for the said premises or any of them (all iron work, other
then nails only except) and that all the said frame building house Rooms
Chimnies, and other things before specified, shall be made of and with goodstrong
seasonable and sufficient timberstuff, and shall be well and workmanly made and
done, and shall be fully and perfectly finished, at or before the said last day
of March next coming, for and in consideration of which said new frame and
house, and of all other the premises to he done performed and accomplished
Consideration money to be paid in a form limited.
on the part and behalf of the said T. A. and R. A. their Executors
Administrators and Assigns, in form aforesaid, the said T. A. for him his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them does covenant and grant
to and with the said T. A. and R. A. and either of them, and the Executors
Administrators and Assigns of them and of either of them by these presents,
that he the said T. A. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at or before
the said new frame and other the premises, shall be made set up and
accomplished in form aforesaid, shall pay or cause to be paid to the said T. A.
and R. A. their Executors Administrators or Assigns for the making and
accomplishing of all the said work and premises as aforesaid, the sum of 100
l. of lawful etc. whereof the said T. A. and his assigns, to have to his and
their own use 57 l. and the said R. A. his Executors and Assigns, to have to
his and their own use 43 l. In witness; etc.

An Indenture of Covenants where Carpenters have bargained to pluck down an old
house and build a new by a day in a certain form prescribed.
THis Indenture etc. Between R. P. Cit. and Letherseller of L. on the one
party and T. P. and T. M. Cit. and Carpenters of L. on the other party
witnesses that it is Covenanted Granted Bargainted Concluded and agreed by and
between the said parties in manner and form following that is to say, that the
said T, and T, for them their Executors and Administrators and every of them do
Covenant etc. in manner and form as hereafter in these presents from article to
article does ensue and follow that is to say that the said T. and T. their
Executors or Assigns at their own proper costs and charges before the sixth of
March next etc. shall take down to ground all the timber Take down the old
building.
and Carpenters work of all that old frame of those tenements of the said R.
in B. street in the parish etc; now in the occupation of the said P. containing
in length from north to the south 50, foot or there abouts, and then shall
assign the plat to the Bricklaiers for the foundation of a new building in the
same place to be erected, and on the said Assign the plat to the Bricklayers
for the foundation.
plat at their said costs and charges shall before the sixth of June next etc.
well and work manly and of good sound and strong Timber of Ork competent and
sufficient for such a building and of convenient scantling and in good
proportion erect build and set up and fully finish Set up a new frame.
one new frame entire and perfect in all things belonging to Carpenters work
of the length of 50. foot as aforesaid or their abouts as shall Length.
fitly and aptly supply the place wherein the said old frame does stand and to
be in height two stories and one garret with two floores of Two stories and
(...) high.
good and found summers and joists of Ork well framed and laid (boords for the
said floors only to be found at the charges of the said R. his Floores. widnes
and height of the sto^^es. Div^sion of the stori^^ into room (...) according to
a plat dra^n W^ndow^s in the Hall and Parlour.
Executors Administrators) And the nether story of the said new frame to be in
widnes from the outside plat to plat 17. foot and in height 9. foot or above
and the 2. story to Jutty to the street one foot and eight inches and to be in
widnes 18. foot and 8 inches and to be in height 8 foot and the nether story to
be divided into an entry a kitchen and Hall a Buttery and a Parlour and the
upper story into three chambers according to a plat which the said T. and T.
have thereof delivered to the said R. drawn in paper and that their shall be in
the said Hall-roome toward the street one bay window of eight foot broad of
fair wrought marvills with a transent and of convenient height and one other
like bay window in the same room toward the West of six foot in breadth and a
clear story adjoining to the north side of the said bay window toward the
street and one other bay-window Staire out of Hall to ascend. Light to the
staire.
in the said parlour room which fair wrought marvills and a transent toward
the street to be eight foot broad and a clear story with a transent in the west
side of the same parlour room of four foot in breadth and also that the said
T. and T. at their like charges as aforesaid shall make one staire to lead out
of the said Hall room into the story above with one clear story of two foot
and a half in the frame to give light to the same staire and another clear
windo was to the Kitchen and Chambers.
story of two foot in breadth to give light to the buttry aforesaid and in the
street side of the kitchen one clear story with a transent of 9. foot in
breadth and in the chamber over the kitchen on the street side one bay window
with transent and wrought to be of six foot wide and a clear story adjoining to
the north side thereof of four foot The thickness and breadth of the ground
plats and quality of the principalls.
wide and one other like clear story on the west side of the same chamber of
four foot wide and in the chamber over the hall toward the street one bay
window etc. and in the chamber over the parlour 2. fair shutting windows etc
and it is bargained and agreed between the said parties for them their
Executors and Administrators that the ground plats of the said frame to be
newly built shall be eight inches thick or above and in breadth 9^ inches or
above and all the principalls shall answer accordingly and that there shall be
three dormants in the east Dormants and windows in the garret.
side of the garret seiling directly over the bay windows of the second story
containing eight foot in widnes apeece and the windows in the said dormants to
be four foot wide apeece and also falling windows to shut in the same and all
the east side of the same new frame from the The street side of the building to
be punchon^ and space. The frame to answer the plat Doors and paritions.
ground to the top of the dormants to be punchiond and space of good order and
well framed and also the neither story of the said new building on the west
side to be punchiond and space as aforesaid and all the said new frame duly to
answer in all things to such a plot as aforesaid which the said T. and T. have
already thereof delivered ready drawn to the said R. P. as aforesaid, all the
partitions and doors to be necessary into the said new frame likewise to be
made and finished in the same by the said T. and T. or their Assigns at their
own costs and charges aforesaid before the sixth of June next etc, for and in
consideration of Consideration for the Building.
which said Bargains Covenants Promises Articles and Agreements of the part
of the said T. and T. by them their Executors and Administrators well and truly
to be performed fulfilled and kept the said R. has paid in hand to the said T.
and T. at the ensealing A Sum in hand. Therest at days.
hereof 25. pounds etc. of and for the which 25. pounds the said T. and T. does
release and acquit the said R. and his Executors by these presents and the said
R. P. for him etc. does Covenant etc. to pay moreover the said T. and T. their
executors or administrators other 2^ l. in form etc. that is to say at the
first erecting of the said new frame 12. pounds 10. shillings and at the clear
finishing of the premises other 12, pounds 10, shillings the full and clear
agreement for the bargain above specified. Saving only that is agreed between
the said parties that if the said T. and T, or the survivor of them will upon
their If the Wokmen be loosers, then to have 4 l. more given them.
Faith and consciences say and affirm at the clear finishing of the premises
in form aforesaid, that they then are losers by the said Bargain, that then
upon such saying and affirmation of the said T. and T. or of the Survivor of
them, he the said R. P. his Executors or Administrators, upon reasonable
request therefore made, shall and will freely give to the said T. and T. or to
the Survivor of them, the sum of 4 l. of etc. as of the clear gift and free
good will of the said R.

And the said T. and T. covenanteth etc. That they the said T and T. or the
Survivor of them, shall begin to erect and set up the said new frame, at or
before the last of April next etc. without fraud or further delay: In witness
etc.

Articles of agreement amongst Creditors for levying their debts due by their
Debtor.
ARticles Tripartite Indented of Agreements made and agreeed upon the 16th. day
of March in the 23. year etc. Between the Creditors of M. F. late Citizen and
Mercer of L. deceased, whose names together with their debts to them severally
owing by the said M. are specified in a several Schedule to every part of
these presents severally annexed on the first part, and A. M. Citizen and
Mercer of L. a Creditor also of the said M. on the second part, and E: F: of L.
Widow, late wife of the said M. F. on the third part in manner and form
following, That is to say;

1. First the said Creditors, and every of them have agreed, and by these
presents do agree to and with the said A. M. and E. F. that the said A: shall
and may have and take the Administration of all the Goods, Chattels and Credits
which were of the said M. F. deceased, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of
this Realm, thereof to dispose and Administer according to the tenure of these
present Articles and not otherwise. 2. Item. That in consideration of such
Pains as the said A. shall take about the said Administration, upon his true
and reasonable account thereof making before such Auditors as the said
Creditors, or the more part of them shall assign to take the said account,
shall have allowance of all his reasonable costs and charges, as well by Suits
of Law as otherwise by him to be defraied about the said Administration, and
moreover 4 d. of every 20 s. in value whereof he shall Administer; and also that
the said A. at every Dividend making shall and may retain for his own debt to
him owing by the said M. F. such rate and portion according to the quantity of
his debt, as he shall divide and pay to the other Creditors according to the
quantity of their debts severally. 3. Item. Whereas there are two several
Recognisances of 400 l. a piece wherein the said M. and others for the only
debts of the said M. did stand bound to W. L. alias I. deceased, for payment of
600 l. and one other Recognisance wherein the said M: stood bound to Sir L. D.
Knight and Alderman of L. for discharging of 200 l. That first before any
Dividend making, and so soon as money may and shall be made of the goods,
chattels and debts, of the said M. F. deceased to be Administered, the said A.
M. shall pay to the Administrators of the said W. L. toward the satisfaction
of the said 600 l. two shillings of every pound thereof, that is to say 60 l.
and to the said Sir L. toward the satisfaction of the said 200 l. 2 s. of
every thereof, that is, 20 l. over and above their several portions upon the
Dividend to be had, with the several Creditors aforesaid. 4 Item. That the said
A. shall likewise before any Dividend pay to the said E: F: for satisfaction of
her Title of Dower in the late Mansion House of the said M: F. situate in St.
L. Lane in L. 40 l. or so much Stuff to that value, and for the Funeral charges
of the said M: 38 l. 12 s. 6 d. and also shall deliver to the said E. to her
own use, or suffer her to detain and keep to her own use and behoof all her
Apparel and Ornaments belonging to her body, and such other things as she and
the Creditors have agreed, as may appear by Writing under their Hands. 5. Item.
That before any Dividend, the said Creditors or some of them, with the said A:
M: do pay, or take order with Master C. for the debt to him owing by the said
M: F: for the duty of the Kings Majesty's Custom. 6. Item. That the said A: so
soon as reasonably may be, after the Letters of the said Administration to him
had, with and by the consent, and in the presence and oversight of W: S:
Haberdasher, H: R: Mercer, ^. C. Haberdasher, and R: B. Marchantaylor, or three
of them shall cause all the goods, chattels and debts within the Realm of
England which were of the said M. at his decease to be veiwed, cast and prised
by indifferent persons, and a true Inventory thereof to be made according to the
usual Custom, in such cases used in the City of London. 7. Item. The said E.
for her part shall and will use all her best endeavor to the revealing of all
and singular the Goods, Chattels, and Debts of the said M. to the said A. M.
and the other persons aforesaid without any default or delay on her behalf. 8.
Item. That after the said Goods, Chattels and Credits of the said M. shall be
so viewed, cast and praised, and an Inventory thereof made as aforesaid, and by
the first five Articles of these presents considered of, and provided for,
according to the true meaning thereof: That then as well first to the satisfying
of the Contents of the said five Articles, and the Contents of every of them,
as then afterward toward the equal payment of all the said Creditors, the said
A. shall by the consent and oversight of the said W: S: H. R: I: C: and R: B:
or any two of them, make such speedy sale to the best value of all the Goods
and Chattels which were of the said M. within the Realm of England other then
of such as be appointed for the said E. as aforesaid, and make such speed to
gather in, and get such debts as were owing to the said M. as he reasonably can
or may do, and then the Contents of the first five Articles first provided
unto, and satisfied, according to the true meaning of the same, shall from time
to time proportion and divide all the rest that shall be come to his hands at
any time, of the Goods, Chattels and Debts of the said M: unto every of his
said Creditors rate and rate-like according to the quantity of their several
debts, and upon reasonable request and proof of their several reasonable
acquittances for their particular Receipts, shall and will make to every of them
undelaied payment accordingly from time to time as often as he the said A.
shall have any thing whereof such Dividend may be made, till all the said
Credirors shall be paid and satisfied of their said debts, if the Goods,
Chattels and Debts of the said M. will so far extend. 9. Item. It is agreed
that the said H: R. shall enjoy all such goods and debts which were of the said
M. F. and which the said H. has now attached beyond the seas, the same to be
toward the payment of such debts, as the said M: did owe there to be paid to
the said H: and thereof the said H. so soon as may be, to show the account to
the said A. M: and six, four or three of the said Creditors at the least, and
if more be recovered beyond the seas by the said H. of the goods or debts of
the said M. then the debt which the said M. did owe, to be paid there to the
said H: that then he will accept the overplus in part of payment of his debt in
England, and remain Creditor here in England for so much the less to charge the
Administrator of the said M* F. 10. Item. That none of the parties aforesaid
shall or will do or procure any thing to be done by any Suit, Action or
Attachment against the said Administrator, or any other within the Realm of
England, whereby the performance of these agreements shall or may in any part
be impeached, Troubled, Let, or Hindered, and that every of them shall dissolve
and relinquish all and every former Suits and Attachments whatsoever had or
made, which shall or may let or prejudice the true fulfilling of the said
Agreements contained in these presents, or any of them. 11. Item. The said A:
M: does agree to take upon him the said Administration, and thereof to
Administer truly and faithfully according to these present Articles. And that
if there shall come sufficient to his Hands to satisfy all the Creditors of
the said M: F: that then if any thing shall remain to him moreover and above
this Agreement, that then upon reasonable request and discharge thereof to him
given, he will truly yield all that so remaining moreover unto the said E: F:
for her own use, the said E: F: upon the receipt thereof putting in reasonable
Surety to the said Administrator with her own Bond to repay the same, or so
much thereof as shall be lawfully and truly recovered by any other Creditor of
the said M. 12. Item. If any other Creditor or Creditors of the said M. F: not
party to these Articles of Agreement, do at any time Commence any Action or
Suit against the said A: M: as Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of the
said M: F: and that the said Creditor or Creditors shall thereby lawfully
without practice, fraud or covin, recover any of their debts against the said
Administrator. Then it is further agreed, that if the Creditors aforesaid,
parties to these presents, whose debts by reason and means of this Agreement
shall be in part paid accordingly shall then out of their several Dividends,
allow, satisfy and pay part and part-like unto the said A: M: so much of their
parts, purpart and proportion as shall be received upon this Agreement, to
sati^fie and discharge the said debt, damages and costs thereof, so to be
lawfully recovered whatsoever the said A, contributing according to his rate
toward the same. 13. Item. It is further agreed, that if any other the
Creditors of the said M: F: not party to this Agreement, do Commence any Suit
or Suite against the said Administrator, then the said Administrator shall
thereof give notice and Certificate unto the said Creditors parties to this
present Agreement, or to two of them at the least, to the end they may join
with the said A. in defense of the said Suit whatsoever for the best and common
commodity of all the said Creditors.
All and singular which agreements aforesaid, and every article and clause
thereof, every one of the parties aforesaid on their several behalfs, as far
as in them reasonably shall be for them and their several executors and
administrators, do covenant grant and promise to and with all and every other
of the parties aforesaid, and their several Executors and administrators, well
and faithfully to hold, do accomplish and perform without any fraud or deceit.
In witness whereof to one part of these presents remaining toward the said
Creditors, the said A. M. and E. F. have set their seals, and to the second
part thereof remaining with the said E: F: the said Creditors, and the said A:
M: have, etc: And to the third parts, etc: The said Creditors, and E. F: etc.

Articles of Agreement between Debtors and their Creditors, about Composition
for Debts.
ARticles of Agreement indented had and made the sixteenth day of December,
etc. Between G: H. of the City of B. Merchant, and H. I. partner with the said
G. in their Trade and Traffic on the one party, and all those their Creditors
Inhabitants of the City of L. who have subscribed their names to these presents
on the other party, for and touching the several Debts which the said G. and
H. or either of them do owe unto their said Creditors, or to any of them, as
hereafter in these presents is particularly expressed and declared, viz.

FIrst where the said G. H. has constantly affirmed and alleged unto the
said Creditors, that the said G: and H: have lately lost in their said Trade
and Traffic to the value of 3629 l. 15 s. 4 d. and have showed forth
particulars thereof in writing with further affirmation also, that their
Creditors in the North parts of this Realm, already have agreed, and those
their Creditors of the West parts, will also immediately conclude and agree with
them for all their Debts in like form and manner to the agreement made by these
presents, upon and under condition, that the Affirmations and Allegations
aforesaid, shall be found to be true and in no part fained and untrue: All the
said Creditors of the City of L: and every of them severally, have agreed to
accept and take only after the Rate of 10 s. upon every pound of the several
Debts to them severally owing by the said G: and H: to be paid to them in form
following, viz: One third part thereof the six and twentieth of January, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God according to the computation, etc: The
second third part thereof on the twenty sixth of January, etc: and the last
third part thereof on the twenty sixth of January, etc:

Item, the said G: and H: have promised and agreed to and with the said
Creditors, parties to these presents, and to and with every of them, that they
the said G: and H: before the last day of January next coming, shall make seal
and deliver to every of the same their Creditors of L: several bonds by their
lawful and sufficient Obligations, with penalties of double the value of their
several Debts, according to this present agreement, to be paid in manner and
form aforesaid, and that every of the said Bonds, and the Conditions of the
same, shall be to such effect in Law, that upon default of any of the several
payments therein to be mentioned, or of any part thereof, the same Obligation
shall become forfeit.

And further the said G. and H: have agreed and promised that they nor either
of them shall at any time before full payment had and made of all their Debts,
according to their Agreement made by these presents, sue or procure, receive or
put in practice any manner protection prohibition, stay or defense, which shall
bar prejudice or hinder the said Creditors or any of them, to have recover or
receive, their several Debts according to this agreement, and the several
penalties of the several Bonds to be made as aforesaid, if they or any of them
shall fortune to be forfeit as well against the said G: and H: as also against
their Heirs Executors and Administrators.

Item, The laid G: and H. have further promised and agreed, that they nor
either of them shall depart this Realm, nor in any place within this Realm,
conceal or keep themselves secret, or use the defense of any privileged place,
against their said Creditors of the City of L: or any of them, but from time to
time shall be ready upon Request or other notice, to yield their bodies to
their said Creditors, or any of them until they shall have duly paid and
contented to them and every of them their several Debts to them severally
growing, payable by force of this agreement. And that for the performance of
this article the said G, and H: before the second day of February next coming
shall become bound to the same their Creditors, with sufficient Sureties with
them of etc: by their lawful and sufficient Writing Obligatory to the said
creditors or some of them, before the said second day of February, whole and
safe to be delivered.

Item The said creditors of the city of L: have agreed severally every one for
his own part, that the said G. and H: and their Executors from the sealing and
delivery of these new Bonds by them severally to be sealed and delivered as
aforesaid, shall stand acquitted and discharged against every such creditor
upon his Receipt of the new Bond, of and for all the old debt to him due by the
said G. and H: or either of them, and that then every of the same creditors so
receiving such new bond, shall deliver to the said G or H all such old Bonds as
they now have of the said G and H or either of them to be cancelled, and also
that the said creditors or any of them in the mean time, shall not between this
and the said second day of February, sue vex or molest in the Law, the said G:
and H: or either of them:

Item, For and in consideration of so great pity and favor by the said
Creditors, extended toward the said G: and H: in the premises, they the said
G. and H: and every of them have agreed and promised for themselves their
Executors and Administrators, that if ever hereafter it shall please God to
make them able thereunto, that they will make full Recompense to all and every
their said creditors, of and for so much of their several Debts aforesaid, as
now by force of this agreement, and tenor of these presents do stand to them
acquitted and discharged.

And finally, as well the said creditors of the City of L. parties to these
presents, as also the said G. and H. for themselves their Heirs Executors and
administrators, and every of them, have agreed and promised together every of
them severally for his own part one to another, that they and every of them his
heirs executors and administrators for his own part, so far as touches and
concerns the same, shall and will truly and uprightly perform fulfill and
accomplish the agreements promises and conclusions specified in these presents,
according to the true meaning hereof without any manner of Fraud or covin.

In witness whereof to one part of these presents, remaining with the said G.
and H. the said Creditors of the City of L. so many as has agreed to the
premises, that is to say, F. B. and A. N. Citizens and Aldermen of L. Dame I.
W. of L. widow. A. G. Citizen and Ironmonger, of L. W. R. C. H. etc. citizens
and Marchant-Taylors of L. R. H. and T: B. citizens and cloathworkers of L. F.
H. and I. R. citizens and Drapers of L. and G. H. of the same city Salter, have
severally subscribed their names and set their seals, and to the other part of
these presents, with the same Creditors remaining, the said G: and H. have set
their Seals: Given, etc.

An Indenture where a Citizen of London dies, having diverse Debts owing him
beyond the Sea, his Executor covenanteth with his wife (who is to have a third
part thereof) to set his Factor to gather them in, and always as they shall be
gotten, to answer the woman her part accordingly.
THis Indenture, etc. between A. C. of L: Widow, late the Wife of J. C. Citizen
and Iron-monger of L: deceased on the one party, and H. S. Executor of the last
Will and Testament of the said I. C. on the other party, witnesses, That where
there are Debts which were owing to the said I C at the time of his decease,
and payable at of Hamburgh. in the parts beyond the Sea in Flemish money,
amounting to the sum of 1879 l. and 4 s. of that money, which is all grown due
to have been paid before this time, whereof one full third part, that is to say
626 l 8 d. Flemish, by the custom of this City of L. does belong and appertain
to the said A. It is now covenanted concluded and agreed between the said A. on
the one party, and the said H. S. on the other party, for themselves their
Executors and Administrators, Factors Deputies and Attorneys in manner and form
following, that is to say, That the said sum of 1879 l. 4 s. Flemish, shall be
set down and rated in the Inventary to be made here in England, of his Goods
Chattells and Debts, at 24 s. Flemish, to every pound English. In consideration
whereof, the said H. S. does covenant and promise to give present and direct
order, to T. B. who has now the doing of the business of the said A. at
Hamburgh aforesaid, to collect and gather in the said money there payable with
all expedition, and that upon request, the said T B, shall weekly from week to
week, declare and give true Report to such person or persons, as the said A.
shall appoint to require the same, how much of the same debt he has received
the week before, or otherwise at any time and the day of the Receipt thereof,
and of whom the same and every part thereof was received, and what there does
remain thereof unpaid, to the intent the same A. may have plain understanding
to require her just part thereof, to her due as aforesaid.

And further that he the said H. S. his Executors Administrators Agents
Deputies, or Attorneys shall from time to time upon every particular Receipt of
the said Debt 1879 l. 4 s. Flemish, or any part thereof, content or pay, or
cause to be contented and paid to the said A. her Executors or Administrators,
here in this City of L. at her dwelling house, her full third part of all and
every such sum or sums so received as aforesaid, within two months next after
any several Receipt of the same in lawful English money; That is to say, For
every 23 s. 8 d. Flemish, 20 s. English: Provided always, and yet
nevertheless it is further covenanted and agreed between the said parties,
that if at any time after the expiration of two months next following, from the
date of these presents, the said A. C: shall lawfully constitute and appoint
her Attorney for her and in her name, to take and receive of the said T. B. or
of any other Deputy or Attorney, to remain for the said H: at H: aforesaid, the
residue of such part of the said Debts as then shall be due and remain unpaid
to the said A: or for her use, that then the said T: B: or other said Deputy or
Attorney of the said H: shall upon reasonable request to be made by the said
Attorney of the said A. well and truly content and pay to the same Attorney,
for the use of the same A. all the said residue of her part aforesaid, of the
said Debts in Flemish money there in H. from time as it shall be received,
without fraud or covin: In witness etc.

An Indenture between the Overseers of a Will, and one that marries the Wife,
and Executrix of the deceased, concerning the Childrens Portions.
THis Indenture etc. between I. C. Minister of the French Church, and L. H. of
L. Stationer, Overseers of the Testament of G G. deceased, on the one party,
and I. de H. of L. Hat-maker, on the other party, witnesses, That where the
said G. on the 25th day of June, in the seventh year of the Reign etc. did make
and declare his last Will and Testament in Writing, and thereby amongst other
things after his Debts, Funerals, and Legacies paid, did give the one Moiety of
all his Goods, as well on this side as beyond the Seas, to his Son I. (who is
now deceased) and to the Child which his wife then went with (who now is
living, and is named E.) willing that if one of those Children did decease,
that then the other should inherit the part and portion of the so deceasing;
willing moreover, that if his wife should marry again, that then the Childrens
Portions should be at the disposition of the Overseers; And that if both his
Children should decease, that his wife should have all, and that she should
show her self pitiful to the Poor of the French Church, as by the said
Testament amongst other things will appear.

And now for and in consideration of Marriage to be had and solemnized between
the said I. de H. and E. G. late the wife of the said G: G: and Executrix of
his last Testament aforesaid, and for the faithful performance of the said
Testament of the said G. duly to be performed, according to the tenor and
effect thereof.

The said I. de H: for him etc. covenanteth etc. to and with the said I: C: and
L: H: their Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents,
That he the said I. de H. at or before the 29. of Sep: now next coming, shall
well and truly deliver, or cause etc. into the Ordinaries Court (where of right
it belongs) a true and faithful Inventory of all the Goods, Chattels, and
Debts whatsoever, and whersoever that were of the said G: or to him were owing
at the time of his decease: And also a true Copy of the said Inventory, to the
said I: C. and L: H: before the same day, plainly and legibly written.

And that he the said I: his Executors or Administrators, shall and will well
and truly pay, or cause etc. to the said E: Daughter of the said G: and of the
said E. his wife, in good and lawful money of Eng: at the day of her Marriage,
or of the age of 21. years, first happening, or sooner, to any other person or
persons for her use, and to such further use as is appointed by the Testament
of the said G: if the said I: C: and L: H: shall think it so meet, and so
assign and appoint the full Moiety, and one half of the full value of all the
said Goods and Chattels which were of the said G: (the Debts by him owing, and
the charges of his Funeral, and his Legacies given by him in his said
Testament, first being deducted and abated from all the whole Goods which were
of the said G. And that if it do fortune the said I: de H: to decease, and the
said E. the Mother him to survive; That then he the same I: shall leave to the
said E: the Mother, so much in Goods Chattels and read money, of the proper
Goods of the same I. de H. which shall come to the hands, custody, use, and
free enjoying of the said E: to her own use and commodity, as by the least
shall amount and come to the value of one full Moiety, of all the said Goods
and Chattells which were of the said G: her late Husband. And if it do fortune
the said E: the Mother to decease, leaving no more or other Children of her
body begotten, then only the said E: her Daughter, that then the said I: his
Executors or Administrators shall further yield and deliver to be paid to the
same E: the Daughter, at the said time of her Marriage, or age of 21. years
first happening, 20 l. of etc. over and above her part and portion aforesaid, and
then immediately upon the decease of the said E: the Mother, or within six
months after the same decease, shall deliver and bestow the same E: the
Daughter, and all her said part and portion, where the said I: and L: or the
Survivor of them, or their Executors shall appoint and think convenient: And
that then also the said I: his Executors or Administrators, shall moreover give
and pay unto A: B: etc. Sister of the said E: the Mother, of the same A. be
then living 10 l. of etc. and other 10 l. to etc. if the same etc. be then
living: And that if it do fortune the said E. the Daughter to decease, and the
said I. de H. and the said E. his wife her to survive, that then the said I. de
H. or the said E. his wife, or their Assigns, shall within etc. next following
the decease of the said E. the Daughter, give and pay to and amongst the poor
people of the French Church of Lon. 20. Marks of etc. And also that if it do
fortune both the said E. the Mother, and E. the Daughter to decease, and the
said I: de H: them to survive, that then he the said etc. shall and will give
and pay unto etc. and unto etc. In witness etc.

An Indenture of Covenants amongst three persons having a Lease, that every of
them shall bear a third part of Rent and all Charges. etc.
THis Indenture tripartite made etc. between P. C: Citizen and Skinner of L: on
the first party, and T: L: Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of L: on the second
party, and T: R: Citizen and Skinner of L. on the third party, witnesses, That
whereas the said parties are and stand possessed of and in the Message, Inn,
and Tenement called the Ship, situate and being in the Parish of St. C. nigh
the Temple Bar, in the County of M: and of and in all and singular Houses
Buildings Shops Cellars wast Grounds Entries Issues Ways and other
Commodities, Rents and Profits to the same belonging: That is to say, Every of
them, of a full third part of all and singular the Premises, into 3. equal
and even portions to be divided, for and during the several terms hereafter
mentioned; That is to say, For and during the term of 13. years mentioned and
granted in and by a certain Indenture of Lease, dated etc. made by one M: M:
Widow to the said P: C. of and touching the Premises, which term did commence
at the Feast of Christmas etc. then last past, before the date of the said
term, and for and during the term of thirty years, mentioned and granted in and
by the Letters Patents of our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, under his
Highness great Seal of England, dated etc. granted by our said Sovereign the
Kings Majesty, to C: H: Esquire, of and in the Premises, as by the said
Indenture of Lease, and Letters Patents aforesaid, and sundry other Conveyances
thereupon had and made, more at large it does and may appear.

It is now covenanted granted concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties, and every of them, and every of them severally by himself and for
himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant and grant, to
and with each other of them, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by
these presents, That they and every of them for himself, and the Executors
Administrators and Assigns of every of them, for his their and every of their
parts, shall not only well and truly content and pay, or cause etc. the full
third part and portion of all and singular such yearly Rents, as are reserved
in and by the said Indenture of Lease, and Letters Patents aforesaid, or either
of them, at the days times and places limited and appointed for the payment
thereof, and that from time to time, for and during the said several Estates
and terms of years before mentioned; But also shall at all times hereafter, and
from time to time, for and during all the terms aforesaid, pay bear, allow, and
disburse every one of them, the full third part and portion of all such Sum and
Sums of money, and other charges whatsoever, as shall grow due or payable, or
shall be convenient or necessary to be born or paid, for the reparations of the
Premises, or for recovery or defense of the Title thereof, or of any parcel
thereof. And also shall condescend and agree to all and every such Actions Suits,
and other Act and Acts which shall be necessary or convenient to be attempted
prosecuted or done, for touching or concerning the Premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, tending to the profit or benefit of the said parties: And shall
not do procure or cause to be done, any act or acts, thing or things, whereby or
by reason whereof, the Estate Interest Title or Term of years, of the said other
parties, or any of them, of and in the Premises, or any percell, shall or in
any wise may be impaired, hindered, determined, avoided, or forfeited, except it
be by and with the consent and agreement of each other of them, in that behalf
first had and obtained in Writing, under his or their hands and Seals: In
witness etc.

An Indenture of Covenants, where five persons have laid out a sum of money
upon a Lease in Mortgage; That every of them shall have equal and rateable
benefit in the Lease etc.
THis Indenture quinque-partite made etc. between W: D: of L: Alderman, on the
first party M: C: of L: aforesaid Alderman, on the second party, A: S: of L:
aforesaid Mercer, on the third party, T: A: of L: aforesaid on the fourth
party, and W: G: of L: aforesaid Iron-Monger, on the fifth party, witnesses,
That whereas the Right Honorable H. Earl of H: by his Indenture of Lease, dated
21. July, now last past, for and in consideration of making assurance to the
parties aforesaid, their Executors and Assigns, for the payment of 6000 l. of
etc. to them to be paid at any time, within six years next after the date of
the same Indenture of Lease, has demised, granted, and to Farm-letten unto the
said parties, all that his Manor and Lorship of A. alias A: in the County of
A: with all and singular the appurtenances, and all Lands Tenements Rents
Reversions Services and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Manor belonging
or appurtaining, or occupied, used, demised or leased, as part parcel or
member of the same, or reputed, taken, counted, or known, as any part or member
thereof: To have and to hold the said Manor etc. unto the parties aforesaid,
their Executors and Assigns, from the day of the date of the said Indenture of
Lease, for and during the term of 100. years, without any manner of Rent
therefore paying, under the condition in the said Indenture mentioned and
declared, which is for the sure payment of the said Sum of 6000 l. to the
parties aforesaid, their Executors or Administrators to be paid, as by the said
former Indenture plainly and at large may and will appear.

And whereas the said Sum of 6000 l. is not yet fully paid by the said parties
to the said Earl, or his Deputy or Deputies, in his name to his Lordships use,
as he shall have need thereof, or of any part thereof, either of the said parties
themselves, or some of them, or else of some other unto whom the said parties,
or some of them shall become bound for the payment thereof.

Now to the intent it may always appear, what and how much the said Earl, or
any for him, or in his name heretofore has had or received, or hereafter shall
have or receive of the said Sum of 6000 l. at the hands of the parties
aforesaid, or any of them; They the said parties have accorded with the said
Earl, to make a several Roll indented betwixt every of the said parties solely
by himself, on the one party, and C: S: Gentleman, Servant of the said Earl,
and now Agent of his business here in L. on the other party. In which several
Rolls shall be severally expressed, all such Sum and Sums of money, as such
party keeping such Roll has lent, delivered, or been bound for, or hereafter
shall lend etc. in the behalf of the said Earl, as shall be otherwise payable
by the said Earl, to such party to such Roll as aforesaid. And to the intent
that the said parties amongst them all, shall not defraud or charge themselves
for the said Earl, upon the assurance of the Lease aforesaid, with any more
money or further then the said 6000 l. shall suffice to satisfy all and every
the said parties, their Executors and Administrators, as well for the
principal Debts and Bonds by them made or to be made as aforesaid: As also for
all Interests for the forbearing of any the Sum or Sums of money aforesaid,
the said parties and every of them, for himself, his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, does covenant and grant, to and with all and every the; other of
the said part^es, and their several Executors and Administrators, in manner
and form following, That is to say, That every of them for his several party,
upon every reasonable request and requests of any other of the said parties,
his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall and will show forth to the
party, his Executors Administrators or Assigns, making such request his part
of the Roll indented aforesaid, so as he or they making such request may see,
peruse and read the Contents thereof. And that none of the parties aforesaid
shall defray upon the Assurance of the said Lease for his one several part
above the sum of 1000 l. until he shall first have made the said other parties
privy thereof. And also they the said parties or any of them, or their several
Executors or Administrators shall not make any Surrender of the said Lease, To
make no Surrender.
or any Release, Acquittance or other discharge, of, or for the said sum of
6000 l. or any part thereof, or knowledge any Receipt thereof, or of any part
thereof, in or to the avoiding or determining of the said Lease without the
joint assent and consent, in and by Writing of all the other parties their
Executors Administrators or Assigns.

And also that if any of the said parties do happen to decease before he shall
be fully and truly paid and satisfied by the said Earl, h^s Heirs Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, of and for all and every sum and sums of money to
be contained and expressed in his part of such Roll indented as aforesaid
towatds him the same party remaining, That then the Survivors, and the Survivor
of all the said parties! his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall
assent, agree, and suffer, that the Executors and Administrators of every such
patty so deceasing having any sum or sums of money unpaid and expressed in
such his part of such Roll Indented with him remaining as aforesaid shall and
may have and enjoy, such Benefit, Advantage and Commodity, of and by the said
Lease, and the Manor and Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments with
their appurtenances thereby demised as aforesaid, as the said party so deceasing
should and might, or in right and equity ought to have had or taken thereof or
thereby, if all the said parties should have lived together, and they, and any
of them had made no manner of Grant, Alienation or Encumbrance of the Premises
ot any part thereof: And finally every party of the parties aforesaid, for
himself etc. does Covenant etc. to, and with etc. Vt pre antea None to do any
thing to prejudice the other.
Convent. est. That they the said parties nor any of them their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall do, knowledge or consent unto, or cause to be
done, knowledged or consented unto any act or acts thing or things, which shall
or may hinder, bar or prejudice the other parties, or any of them, or their
several Executors or Administrators from the Premises or any part thereof which
they or any of them in equity and conscience might or ought to have, to all and
every which said Covenants, Articles and Agreements aforesaid on the Obligation.
several behalfs of every of the said parties his Executors and Administrators
truly to be kept with every other of the same parties their several Executors
and Administrators of every of the same Parties, does bind himself unto every
other of the said parties in the sum of 2000. Marks of etc. by every other of
the said parties, by their Executors and Administrators severally to be had and
recovered against him of the said parties aforesaid, his Executors and
Administrators, which for and on his or their own part shall make default to
perform the Covenants, Articles and Agreements aforesaid, or any of them
according to the intent and true meaning of these Presents. In witness, etc.

An Indenture where one having taken a Lease of a Shop, and bought a stock of
Wares therein upon Credit, for which Wares A. B. gives his Bond; the Buyer for
A: B: his Indemnity Assigns him the Lease, and enters Covenant, that if he
himself make default in payment A. B. shall enter into the Shop and seize all
the Wares for payment of the Debt.
THis Indent. etc. between T: C: and W: C: Citizens and Haberdashers of L. on
the one part and I. C: Cit. etc. on the other part witnesses, that whereas W:
S: Merchantaylor of L. by his Indenture of Lease, Recitation of the Demise made
to the assignors.
bearing date etc. Has Demised etc. unto the said T. and W: C: all that Shop
with a little Yard, and two Warehouses lying behind the same, late in the
Occupation of R. N. Leatherseller, and now in the tenure of the said T. and W.
which have been parcels of the now Mansion or Dwelling House of the said W. S.
set, lying and being in W. alias C. in the Parish of A. within the City of L.
together with certain Implements, Ware-chest, Shelves and leaden Weights at
this present remaining within the aforesaid Shop and Warehouses particularly
expressed and mentioned in a Schedule indented to the said former Indenture
annexed, except as in the said former Indenture is excepted, To have and The
Habend.
to hold the said Shop, little Yard, Warehouses and Implements, except before
excepted, unto the said T: and W: their Executors and Assigns, from the day of
the date of the said former Indenture unto the last day of December, then and
now next coming; and from the same last day of December unto the end and term
of four years from thence etc.

And whereas also the said W. by the said former Indenture has Recitation of
the Bargain and Sale of the stock of Haberdasher Wares made to the assignors
Recitation of the payment for the stock.
bargained and fold to the said T. and W. a stock of Haberdashers wares
amounting to the valve of two hundred pounds for and in consideration whereof
and of the demise aforesaid and other things in the said former Indenture
specified the said T. and W. C. have by the same Indenture Covenanted and
granted to pay to the said W. S. and his Executors diverse sums of lawful etc.
at diverse several days yet to come at the said mansion house of the said W.
that is to say on the last day of December now next coming seven pounds and
yearly Recital of an Obligation made by the assignee for performance of the
Covenan^s of the Lease and payment for the stock. Assignment of the lease for
the saving harmles the Obligation. Covenant by the assigns to pay the money for
the stock without default. And yet the assignee may from time to time enter
into the Premises and see the wares. And they show him their estate and
accounts* And in default of payment for the stock or finding the estate
insufficient for the pointment the assignee shall enter and be seized of the
shop and wares for the payment for the stock. Defeasance of one single
obligation for performance of these Covenants.
after the same last day of December during four years from thence-next
following for the rent of the premises demised by the said former Indenture 42
l. of etc. on the feast days of the Annunciation, etc. or on the 20th. day
always next and immediately ensuing every of of the feast days aforesaid by
even portions and in full recompense satisfaction and payment of and for all
the said stock of wares 200 l. of etc. in manner and form following etc. as by
the said former Indenture containing diverse other Covenants and articles more
at large will appear and whereas the said I. C. at the special and earnest
request of the said T. and W. with them by one obligation bearing date as the
said former Indenture is become jointly and severally bound to the said W. S.
in the sum of etc. of lawful etc. for the performing fulfilling and observing
of all and singular Covenants Grants Articles and payments mentioned in the
said former Indenture for or on the part of of the said T. and W. their
Executors and Administrators to be observed performed or fulfilled as by the
same obligation and condition thereof more plainly may and will appear, now
the said T. and W. for and toward the indemnity and clear keeping harmles of
the said I C his heirs executors administrators and evry of them of and for the
said obligation and of and from all Demands Costs Leases Damages and troubles
thereby or thereof to grow or a rise to or against them or any of them by
reason or means of the said Obligation, have given granted aliened bargained
and sold and by etc. do give etc, unto the said I. C. and his Assigns for their
own use all the Estate Right Title and Interest whatsoever which they the said
T. and W. C. have or either of them has of in and to the said shop etc. in as
large and ample manner as they the same had of the demise of the said W. S. as
above in these presents is recited together with the said former Indenture
containing the same demise and the said T. and W. Covenant etc. in former etc.
that they the said T. and W. their Executors and Administrators shall and will
from time to time truly pay or cause etc. to the said W. S. his etc. all and
singular the said sumes of money at the place day and time wherein the same
shall be severally payable in manner and form above recited without any
default to be made of or in payment of any of the same sums of money or of
any part thereof contrary to the tenor and effect of the said former Indenture
and that the said I. C. his Ex ecutors and dministrators shall and may lawfully
and quietly from time to time from henceforth till the end of the said four
years enter into the said shop yard and warehouses see to and peruse all the
wares in the same and that as often as the said I. C. his Executors or
Administrators shall make request therefore at the said shop the said T. and W.
or the survivor of them shall show and manifest to the said I. C. their whose
estate and all their books of accounts without any fraud or covin and that if
the said T. and W C. their Executors and Administrators shall make default in
payment of any payment aforesaid or of any part thereof to the said W. S. his
Executors etc: when the same shall be due or if upon view of the estate and
accounts of the said T. and W. or of the survivor of them it shall appear that
they or the survivor of them shall be insufficient to observe and keep their
payments then behind to the said W. and his Executors that then it shall and
may be lawful to the said I. his Executors and Administrators to enter into
and possess the said shop yard warehouses implements warechests and weights and
to seize and possess all the stock of wares in the said shop and warehouses
then to be found for and toward the satisfaction of such of the sums of money
aforesaid as then shall remain unpaid to the said W. S. his Executors and
Administrators without any let resistance fraud decept or covin therein to be
don or used to the contrary by the said T. and W. or either of them their
Executors Administrators or any of them and if the said T. and W. their Heirs
Executors and Administrators and every of them for his and their part shall
hold keep and fulfill toward the said I. C. his Executors Administrators all
and singular Covenants Grants Articles and Agreements abovesaid on their or any
of their parts to be holden kept or perfomed according to the tenor and and
true intent of these presents the said I. C. Covenanteth etc. to and with etc:
that then one single obligation of o o o of the date of these Indentures
wherein the said T. and W, are bound to the said I. C. shall be clearly and
utterly void and frustrate and of no manner of force strength or effect, In
witness etc.

An Indenture of Covenants, between a man and a woman to be married, where the
Husband does Covenant not to defeat the Wife of a third part of Goods after the
custom, and to suffer her to make a Will dying before him, and where the woman
has assured copyhold land, and enters Covenants for warranty.
THis Indenture Tripartite etc. between E. E. Cit. and Grocer of L. on the
first party and E. H. and H. I. Cit. and Mercers of L. on the second party and
E. F. of L. widow on the third party witness: that for and in consideration of
a marriage to be shortly had and solemnised between the said E. E. and E. F. it
is Covenanted Granted concluded condescended and fully agreed by and between
the said parties to these presents in manner and form following, that is to
say, That the said E. for him his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns,
and every of them covenanteth, etc. to and with the said E. H. and H. I. and
either of them their and either of their Executors and Administ. and every of
them by these presents, that he the said E. E. has not at any time heretofore
done, nor shall at any time hereafter do or consent to any Act or thing upon
f^aud or Covin, to the intent to defeat the said E. of such part and portion of
the Goods Chattels and Debts of the said E. E. as by the Law and Custom of the
City of L. to her, should or might have been due incident or belonging, as Wife
to the said E. if the said Act or thing had not been had or done.

And further, that she the said E. shall or may at any time during the
Coverture between her and the said E. without any let or disturbance of the
said E. or any other by his means make and declare her will or Testament, and
thereby or by any other Writing by her subscribed, give bequeath assign or
appoint to any person or persons, any sum or sums of money, so as the same
exceed not in the whole the value of 500 Marks, of, etc. And that if he the
said E. do overlive the said Elizabeth, that then he his Executors or
Administrators, shall and will within convenient time next after reasonable
Request in that behalf to be made, execute and perform, or cause etc. the same
her Will or Testament gift bequest assignment or appointment to any value not
exceeding in the whole the sum of 500 marks according to the true meaning of
the said Will or Writing. And whereas she the said E. for and in consideration
of the premises, has heretofore surrendered all that the customary Message or
Tenement with the Appurtenances, now being in the Tenure or Occupation of M. C.
Citizen and Alderman of L. or his Assigns situate lying and being in H. in the
County of M. and all and sigular other her customary Messuages Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments whatsoever with their Appurtenances, in H. aforesaid, being
parcel of the customary Lands of the Manor of H. Parsonage into the hands of
the Lord of the said Manor to the use of the said E. E. for and during all the
term of hls natural life, and from and after his decease, to the use of the
said E. F. for and during all the term of her natural life. And from and after
the deceases of the said E. and E. to the use of the Right heirs of the said
Edward for ever.

And whereas it is further agreed between the said E. and E. that all other
Lands Tenements or Hereditaments, either Freehold or Coppy-hold, whereof she
the said E. has or shall have any Estate of Inheritance, shall be assured to
the like uses, as have been before mentioned.

Now the said Elizabeth does covenant, etc. That she the said E. shall and will
at all times, during the life of the said Edward, at such time and times
whenever the said Edward shall think meet, upon reasonable Request in that
behalf to be made, and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the said Edward,
sufficiently convey and assure to such person or persons and their Heirs, as
the said Edward shall name or appoint to the only use and behoof of the said
E. and E. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the same Edward for ever, absolutely
without any condition, all such Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, either
Freehold or Copy hold, whereof she the said E. has, or is entitled to have
any Estate of Inheritance, by custom or otherwise, accordingly, as by the said
Edward or his Learned Council shall be devised or advised.

And further the said E. F. covenanteth etc. with the said E. E his, etc. that
all and singular the said Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, as well
Freehold as customary with their Appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof; now be, and from time to time and at all times hereafter shall remain
and continue clearly discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved harmless, of
and from all Gifts Grants Bargains, Sales Leases Surrenders Forfeitures
Seisures, cause and causes of Forfeiture or Seizure, and of and from all other
Charges, etc. had made done or consented unto, or to be had, etc. by the said
E. F. or by any other person or persons by her assent consent means
commandment or procurement, except one hease by her made to the said M. C. for
one term which shall expite within one year now next ensuing of the said
Message or tenement with the appurtenances now in his occupation.

And also that if she the said E. do overlive the said Edward, that then she or
any other person or persons by or under her Assent, Consent, Means, Title,
Commandment or Procurement, other then the Heirs and Assigns of the said
Edward, shall not at any time, during her natural life, do commit or consent
unto any manner of Act or Acts, Thing or Things whatsoever, either directly or
indirectly, whereby all or any of the said Customary Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any Part or Parcel of any of the same, shall
or may be forfeited lost or encumbered.

And morover; the said Elizabeth, for her, etc. Covenanteth with the said
Edward, his etc. That if after the said Marriage had and solemnized, she the
said Elizabeth, do overlive the said Edward, That then she shall not have or
claim, nor go about to have or obtain at any time during her natural life,
any manner of Dower, Jointure or Estate, by Reason of the said Marriage
between her and the said Edward, of or in any of the Lands which the said
Edward now has, and is presently seized of or any part or parcel of the same,
In Witness,

DEFEAZANCES.
A Defeazance upon sundry Assurances had for payment of a sum of money,
extending (gradibus) to extinguish the same Assurances, as the Debt from time
to time shall be cut off and satisfied.
THis Indent. etc: between I: P: of B. in the County of Y: Gent. and C: P: one
of the Sons of the same I: on the one party, and A. C. Cit: and Salter of L: on
the other party, witness. That whereas the said I: together with one R: B: of
etc. by their single Obligation, hearing date etc. do stand bound to the said
A. C. in the Sum of 300 l. of etc. to have been paid in the Feast of St. M.
etc. then next ensuing, as by the same Obligation will appear.

And where also the said A. by force of one Indenture of Lease, hearing date
etc. now last past, is clearly and absolutely without any Condition from
henceforth lawfully possessed, of all that Message or Tenement etc. to hold
for the term of 40. years next following, from the date of the said Indenture
of Lease, by the pay of one Pepper Corn only every year during the same term,
as by the same Indenture will also appear.

And the said I. and C. P. on the day of the date of these presents before our
said Sovereign Lord the King, in his High Court of Chancery, have knowledged
themselves to owe to the said A. C. the Sum of 1000 l. of etc. to be paid in
the Feast of St. James etc. next now coming, as by the same Recognizance does
appear.

Yet nevertheless the said A. C. for himself, his Executors etc. does covenant
grant and agree, to and with the said I. and C. and every of them, and to and
with their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these
presents, in manner and form following, That is to say, That if the said I. and
C. or either of them etc. do pay etc. to the said A. C. etc. the Sum of 590 l.
of etc. at the now Mansion etc. in manner and form following; That is to say
330 l. thereof, on the 24. of Aug. next ensuing the date of these presents,
between the hours etc. of the same day, or at any time before, and 260 l.
residue and in full payment of the said Sum etc. on the 22. Oct. now also next
following the date of these presents, between the hours etc. of the same 22. of
Oct. or at any time before, that then after payment had and made to the said A.
his Executors or Administrators, of the said Sum of 330 l. the first payment
aforesaid, he the said A. his Executors and Administrators, upon reasonable
request, shall and will not only deliver or cause to be delivered to the said
I. and C. their Heirs Executors and Administrators, the said single Obligation
of the said I. P. and R. B. and the said Indenture of Lease made by the said I:
to the said A. as aforesaid, together with one Recognizance of 600 l. wherein
the said I. is bound to the said A for the performance of the Covenants of the
said Indenture clearly to be cancelled, defaced, and made void. But also after
full payment had and made to the said A. etc. of the said whole Sum of 590 l.
in form aforesaid, upon like request as aforesaid, shall deliver or cause etc.
to the said I. or C. etc. the said Recognizance of 1000 l. wherein the said I.
and C. are bound to the said A. as aforesaid, and that then and at all times
within the space of six months, next after the said payment wholly made of the
said Sum of 590 l. in manner. and form aforesaid, he the said A. C. his
Executors and Administrators at like request as aforesaid, and at the costs and
charges of the said I: and C, their Executors and Administrators, shall and
will do knowledge and execute within the Cities of L. and W. all and every
lawful and reasonable act and acts thing and things in the Law, which shall be
lawfully and reasonably devised and required by the said I. and C. etc. or the
learned Council etc, as well for the making void, determining, releasing, and
clear extinguishing and annihilating of the said Lease made to the said A. as
aforesaid, and of all his Estate, Title, Interest, Possession and term of years
whatsoever, which he has in the Premises, or any part thereof to him demised
by the said Lease, as also for the frustrating and clear releasing, cancelling,
and acquitting of the said Obligation, and of both the Recognizances before
recited, and of every of them.

Provided always, and it is agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, for themselves, and their Heirs that if the said I. and C. their
Heirs Executors and Administrators, or some of them, do not pay, or cause etc.
to the said A. etc. the said Sum of 330. on the said 24* of Aug. and 260. on
the 22. Oct. in manner and form as is above limited and appointed by these
presents, that then these present Indentures, and all and every thing and
things in them contained, shall be so clearly and utterly void and frustrate,
to all intents and purposes, as though the same had never been had, made, or
spoken, any thing etc. In witness etc.

An Indenture of Defeazance after land mortgaged is forfeited upon the
Indenture of Mortgage, with Covenants that if the Mortgagor pay the money at
the new day agreed upon, then he to stand seized to his own use, and the
Mortgagee to do all things required for re-assurance.
THis Indenture etc. between W. D. Citizen and Alderman of L. on the one party,
and Sir W. P. Knight etc. on the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said
Sir W. by his Indenture, bearing date etc. Recital of an Indenture of Bargain
and Sale conditional.
for the surety of payment of the Sum of 845 l. 7 s. to the said W. his certain
Attorney Executors or Administrators, to have been paid on the nineth day of
this present month of Feb. did mortgage bargain and sell to the said W. and his
Heirs eight Messuages or Tenements, with all and singular their Appurtenances
in L. Street in the Parish of St. M. in L. and the Advowson of the said Parish
Church, by such form of words, and in such manner, as in the said former
Indenture is mentioned. And as by the said Indenture whereunto relation be had
plainly appears.

And whereas by means that the said Sum of etc. or any part thereof Forfeiture
for default of the Condition.
was not paid to the said W. or to any other to his use, at the day and place
in the said former Indenture limited for the payment thereof, the said eight
Messuages or Tenements, with all and singular their Appurtenances, and the said
Advowson, and all other Lands Tenements Profits and Hereditaments, bargained
and sold by the said former Indenture, are clearly and absolutely forfeited
unto the said W. and his Heirs. Yet nevertheless the said W. D. is contented
and pleased, and Coven^nts to stand seized to the use of the first Grantor upon
the payment of a sum of money at a certain time.
by these presents for him etc: covenanteth etc: in form etc: That if the said
Sir W. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, do pay etc. to the said
W. etc. at etc. the Sum of 867 l. 12 s. 4 d. of etc. on the 10. day of Aug:
next ensuing the date hereof, between the hours etc: that then in consideration
of the said Sum of etc. so then being truly paid to the said W: his etc. as in
these presents is aforesaid, he the said W: and his Heirs, and all and every
other person and persons, having any Estate by or from the said W. his Heirs or
Assigns, from and after the said Sum of etc. so paid as aforesaid* shall stand
and be seized, of and in the said eight Messuages etc. and all other the Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments by the foresaid former Indenture bargained, to the
only use of the said Sir W: and of his Heirs and Assigns, and not to any other
use whatsoever.

And that then also after such payment made of the said Sum of etc. A fair
Ulterior assurance.
to the said W: his etc. in form aforesaid, he the said W: and his Heirs,
during six months then next following, at the reasonable request and charges of
the said Sir W: his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will do and knowledge all such
acts and things, for the clear determining of such Right and Title as the said
W. D: and his Heirs can or may claim to have in the Premises, or for the
re-conveying or re-assuring of the same, from and against the said W. D. his
Heirs and Assigns, and from A. now wife of the said W. as by the said Sir W:
his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council learned, shall be reasonably
devised or advised, with Warranty only against the said W: D: and his Heirs.

And the said Sir W. P: for him etc. covenanteth etc. That if the said Sir W.
or his Heirs, shall be disposed to leave the Fee and Inheritance of the
Premises, that then the said W: D: shall have the Preferment, for the having
and quiet enjoying thereof, better cheap by 20 l. at the least, and with like
speedy payment, then the same may be sold for to any other person, without any
fraud or covinable dealing.

And the said W: D: for him etc. covenanteth etc. That if the said Sir W. his
Heirs or Assigns, do redeem the Premises by the payment of the said Sum of
etc. according to the true meaning of these presents, That then the said W. D:
and his Heirs shall allow back again to the said Sir W: and his Heirs out of
the said Sum, all such Rents as the said W: D: his Heirs or Assigns, shall in
the mean time receive or levy of or for the Premises, or any part thereof.
Provided always, that if default be made of or in payment of the said Sum of
etc. or any part thereof, at the day and place limited for the payment thereof
in these presents, contrary to the true meaning of these presents: That then
and from thenceforth the said former Indenture, and the Bargain and Sale thereby
made, of all and singular the Premises, with their Appurtenances, shall stand
good indefeazable and effectual in the Law, to the only use of the said W: and
his Heirs: And that then and from thenceforth the said W: and his Heirs, shall
be and stand seized in the Premises to their own use, these presents, or any
thing in the same contained, to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And that then thereafter it shall and may be lawful for the said W: his Heirs
and Assigns, to use and take all such advantage and benefit of and by the said
former Bargain, as he or they might have done, if these presents had not been
made, These presents etc. to the contrary etc. In witness etc.

A Defeazance of a Statute for payment of money tripartite, where the Statute
being made to two, the one Covenanteth with the other, not to release, nor do
any prejudice whereby each party may not receive his Moiely.
THis Indenture Tripar tite etc. between A. G: Citizen and Alderman of L. on
the first party, and W. D. Citizen and Alderman of the same City on the second
party, and R: H: Citizen and Marchant-taylor of L. on the third party:
witnesses, That whereas the said R. H. is and stands indebted unto the said
A. and W. in the sum of 1000 l. of etc. to be paid to them as Administrators
of the goods and chattels of R. C. late of L. aforesaid Salter deceased. And
whereas for the sure and true payment of the said sum of etc. truly to be paid
unto the said A. and VV. their Executors or Administrators, he the said R. H.
is become bound to the said A. and W. in the sum of 2000 l. of etc. to be paid
as by one Recognisance or Statute staple thereof to them made according to the
form of the Statute provided for the Recovery of debts, and bearing date etc.
knowledged and sealed before Sir C. W. Knight, Lord chief Justice of England,
does and will appear.

Nevertheless it is Covenanted, Concluded and Agreed, by and between the said
parties, and the said A. and W. for themselves, and for their several Executors
and Administrators, do severally Covenant and Grant, to and with the said R. H.
etc. That if the said R. etc. do pay etc. to the said A. and W. or to either of
them, their certain Attorney, Executors or Administrators, for and in
contentation of the said sum of 1000 l. to them the said A. and VV. owing as
aforesaid, by reason that they have the Administration of the goods and
chattels of the said R. C. the sum of 1000. l. of etc. at the Mansion House
etc. in form following, that is to say, on etc. and on etc. that then the said
Recognisance or Statute-staple shall be clearly and utterly void, frustrate and
annihilate, to all intents, construction and purposes as though the same had
never been had or made, but if default do happen to be had or made in payment
of the said sum of etc. or any part or parcel thereof contrary to the true
meaning of these presents, then the said R. H. for him, his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, does Covenant etc. to and with the said etc. that
the said Recognisance or Statute-staple shall stand and remain in all his full
strength, force and virtue, any thing abovesaid to the contrary etc. and the
said A: G: for him etc. Covenanteth etc. to and with the said VV. etc. that he
the said A: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall not at any time or
times hereafter, discharge, release or make void the same Recognisance or
Statute-Staple or sum of money therein specified, or any part thereof, or do, or
commit any other act or act, thing or things, whereby the said VV. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them shall or may be defeated of the
moiety of etc: to them growing due as aforesaid by the true meaning of these
presents without the special request consent and agreement of the said W: his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns. The like Covenant verbatim on Mr.
Alderman D's party. In witness, etc.

A Defeazance of a Statute made to three to save them harmles of bonds entered
into Conuzor where the Conuzees promise to deliver in the Statute wbere all
payments are made and where the Conuzees Covenant one with another not to
discharge the Statute without consent.
THis Indenture Quadripartite made etc. between B. W, on the first part T. W.
on the second part I. W. on the third part and R. W. on the fourth part
witnesses that whereas the said B. W. T: W. and I. W. together with the said
R. W. stand jointly and severally bound to I. A. of L. Draper by 74 several
obligations the penalties of every of the same obligations being severally of
73 l. 10 s. of etc. and every of them for the payment of a several sum of 30
l. of like money to be paid at the Message etc. at such days and times as by
the said several obligations all bearing date the twenty eight day of Feb. now
last past with their several conditions upon them severally endorsed more
plainly may appear and whereas also the said R. W. is Statute.
become bound to the said B. W. T. W. and I. W. in and by one recognizance or
Statute-Staple bearing date the 18 th. of June now last past made according to
the form of the Statute made and provided for the Recovery of debts knowledged
and sealed before Sir I. D. knight Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas of
his Majesty's Bench at W. in the sum of 2000 l. of etc. payable as by the said
recognizance or Statute-Staple does appear yet nevertheles the said B. T. and
I. for them and their several heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns
Deseazance. to save harmles. or Recompense.
do Covenant promise and grant to and with the said R. W. etc. that if the said
R. his heirs etc. do from time to time and at all times hereafter acquit
discharge exonerate or well and sufficiently save and keep harmless the said B.
T. and I. their Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns and every of them
and all their Lands Tenements Goods and Chattells against the said I. A. his
Executors and Administrators and all other person and persons of for and
concerning the said recited obligations and every of them and all and singular
sum and sums of money in them and every of them contained and also of and
from all and all manner of acts Suits Costs Damages Judgments Executions and
Demands whatsoever which at any time or times hereafter shall lawfully come
arise or grow to or against the said B. T. and I. or any of them or the heirs
executors administrators or assigns, of them or any of them by reason or means
of the said obligations or any of them Or else within the space of twenty days
next after request in that behalf Or Recompense
to be made by the said B. etc. or any of them or the heirs Executors etc of
them or any of them to the said R. W. his Executors Administrators or Assigns
do fully and sufficiently satisfy and recompense to the said B. T. and I,
their Executors Administrators and assigns and to of them all and singular such
Losses Charges Costs and Damages as the said B. T. and I. or any of them or the
heirs etc. shall sustain or suffer by reason of the said recited obligations
and every or any of them or of or for any sum ot sums of money in them or
any of them contained That then etc.
that then the foresaid recognizance or Statute-Staple shall be clearly void
and of none effect to all intents constructions and purposes as if the same had
never been had or made, but otherwise the same Recognizance to stand and
remain in all strength and virtue and the said B. T. and I. for them etc.
Covenant etc. with the said R. W. etc. that at all times after such time as the
said several sums of money severally mentioned in the said obligation shall
be satisfied and paid and the same obligations discharged and cancelled they
the said B. T. and I. their Heirs Executors Administrators or some of them upon
reasonable request to them or any of them to be made by the said R. W. his etc.
shall and will deliver or cause etc. to the same R. W. his etc. the said
recognizance to be defaced and cancelled without fraud or covin and the said B.
W. for him etc: covenanteth etc: with the said T. W. and I. W. and to and with
either of them severally, and their several Heirs, etc. and every of them by
these Presents that he the said B. W. his Heirs Executors Administrators or
Assigns heretofore have not discharged released or acquitted the said
recognizance or Statute-Staple neither at any time or times hereafter shall
acquit discharge or release or do commit or agree to the doing of any act or
thing which shall or may in any wise frustrate or make void the said
recognizance or Statute-Staple or sum of 2000 l. therein specified or any part
thereof without the consent and agreement of the said T. W. and I. W. their
Executors Administrators or Assigns Covenant from T. W. to B W. and I. W. and
the like from I. W. from B. W. and T. W. In witness etc.

A Grant of the Rent and Reversion of a house during the Grantees life with
Condition that if the Lease in esse determine before the Grantees death that
then the Grantor may let the Premises reserving so much Rent to the Grantee
during his life.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, H. Earl of R. Knight of the most
noble order of the garter Lord of H. T. and B: sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting; Whereas I. the said Earl have demised granted and letten to Ferme
to M: C: etc: all that tenement situate in L: etc: to have and to hold to the
same M: for the term of certain years yet to come for the yearly rent of 20 l.
as by an Indenture in that behalf made unto the said M: C: at large may
appear, know ye that I: the said Earl as well in consideration of the good
and faithful service done to me and my Ancestors by one I. B: my servant as in
consideration that the same I: at the ensealing of these presents has released
surrendered and yielded up to me the said Earl an yearly rent or annuity of 20
l. by me payable during his life, I the said Earl have given and granted and
by these presents, do fully and clearly give and grant unto the said I: B: the
Reversion and Rent of the said Mansion house and all and singular the Premises
with the Appurtenances demised and letten to the said M. C: as aforesaid to
have hold and enjoy the aforesaid Reversion and Rent and all and singular the
said Premises with the Appurtenances to the said I: and his Assigns to the
proper use of the said I: and his Assigns for and during all the natural life
of the said I: and further know ye that I the said Earl and my heirs do and
shall warrant and defend the said Reversion and Rent and other the Premises
with the Appurtenances to the said I. and his Assigns against me the said Earl
and mine heirs during the natural life of the said I: B: provided always that
if it shall fortune the said I B to be over live after the full end and term of
years aforesaid granted to the said M. of the said mansion house that then it
shall be lawful to the said Earl his Heirs and Assigns to let and demise the
same Mansion house with the Appurtenances for term of years at the liberty of
the said Earl and his heirs saving and reserving always the yearly rent of 20
l. to the said I. and his assigns to be paid by the hands of the tenant or
tenants there from time during all the natural life of the said In witness etc.

A Deputation of a Clark-ship of the Peace.
TO all etc. Whereas our late Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, by her Letters Patents,
bearing date etc. Did of her special Grace and mere motion, give and grant
unto the said I: D: the Clark-ship of the Peace of VV. in the County of Y:
together with the Office of the Clark-ship of the Crown, for all Sessions and
Meetings touching the Commission of the Peace, as well general as special
there to be holden. And also for all Presentiments Inditements Arraignments
Recognizances Processes whatsoever, to be presented, made, taken, exhibited,
begun, followed, or by any ways or means to be pleaded or done, before her
Graces Justices of the Peace, or any of them, or before the Justices of the
Peace, of her Heirs or Successors, or any of them within the said Liberties of
the VV: R during the life natural of me the said I: D: as by the said Letters
Patents etc.

Now know ye me the said I: D: to have by these presents constituted,
ordained, and made my well beloved Kinsman R: H: of L. Inn, in the County of
M. Gent. my lawful Attorney and Deputy, to execute for me and in my name the
said Offices of Clark-ship of the Peace, and the Crown, and of either them
within the said VV: R in the County aforesaid.

And also to do for me and in my name, all and every act and acts, thing and
things concerning or belonging to the said Offices of etc. and either of them,
in as large and ample manner and form, as I the said J. should, may, or might
lawfully do, by virtue of my said Grant, if I my self were personally present.

And also I the said I: do by these presents clearly give and grant to my said
said Kinsman R: H: all such Fees and Duties as of right do belong, or by any
lawful ways or means may be had or taken, to and for the due executing of the
said Offices and either of them; To have perceive and take the same to his own
proper use and behoof, without any account making or to be made to me the said
I: mine Executors or Assigns for the same, and without lawful let or
interruption of me the said J: or any other for me, or in my name, during the
natural life of me the said J. In witness etc.

An Indenture for a Woman's Jointure, containing Covenants for gift of Money,
Apparel, and Marriage dinner.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W. S. of the City of W Gent. on the one party,
and N K of Graies Inn in the County of M Gent. and A. P. Citizen and Goldsmith
of London on the other party. Witnesses that whereas the said W S and R K
Gent. natural Brother of the said N K have concluded and agreed for a marriage
to be had between the said R and A S the only child and Daughter of the said W.
The said W for and in consideration of the said marriage so between the said R
and A to be had does covenant and grant to and with the said N K and A P their
Executors and Administrators and every of them by these presents in manner and
form following, that is to say, That whereas the said W S now is, and stands
lawfully and solely seized of a good and perfect estate in Fee-simple of and in
certain freehold Lands and Tenements with their appurtenances in L marsh of
the yearly value of ten pound or above, and of and in oo. Messuages or
tenements with their appurtenances in M Lane in L now or late in the several
tenures, etc: extending to the yearly value of 12 l. or above. That after the
said marriage shall be had and solemnised between the said R and A the said M S
and his heirs, and all other person and persons seized or to be seized of the
premises or any part thereof shall thereof, and of every part thereof stand
and beseised to the use of the said W S. for and during the natural life of
the same W: And after his decease then to the use of the said R K and A S and
the heirs of the body of the said A by the said R K lawfully to be begotten,
and for lack of such issue to the next and right heirs of the said W S for
ever, and to none other use or uses whatsoever. And the said W S for him, etc.
covenanteth with the said N K and A P etc: that the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments with their appurtenacces shall or lawfully may
stand continue and abide for ever to the uses abouesaid clear and free
discharged and acquitted or at all times sufficiently kept harmless by the
said W his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of and from all and singular
former bargains, etc. had made, procured, knowledged or agreed unto, or to be
had, etc. by the said W S or his Heirs Leases, for term or terms of years,
whereupon the said former usually yearly Rents are reserved only except. And
also that he the said W. S: and all other persons having, or which shall have
any right, title, or interest, in or to the freehold of the premises or any
part thereof, by or from the said W S: at all times during one year next after
the said marriage had and solemnised between the said R and A: at the
reasonable request, and costs and charges of the said R. shall and will make,
do knowledge and suffer all and singular Act and Acts, thing and things with
warranty only against the said W and his heirs, as by the said R or his learned
Council, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised, for the better
or further assurance of all and singular the premises to be had conveyed and
made sure to the uses abovesaid, without any fraud or covin, and also that for
the consideration aforesaid, he the said W at or before the day of the
solemnization of the said marriage, shall and will give and deliver to the said
R and A so much Plate, Jewels, Household Stuff and apparel, as being
reasonably and indifferently prised, shall amount to the sum of 60 l. of etc:
and shall pay, moreover to the said R and A 25 l. of like money, at or before
the day of the same marriage and other 25 l. within one year then next
following, and shall procure that the said R and A: by the space of two years
next after their marriage, shall and may have and occupy Rent free all that
Tenement Situate, etc: if A B. Widow whom the said W by Gods favor shall
shortly take to Wife do live so long, and shall also give moreover to the said
R: and A their Marriage Dinner, at the costs and charges of the said W S.
Provided always, and the said parties to these presents for them and their
heirs do conclude and agree together, that if the said W at any time during his
life, shall be minded to alienate, grant, bargain or sell away one of the said
Messuages Situate in M Lane in L aforesaid which now is in the occupation of A
B or his Assigns for the yearly Rent of 4 l. That then it shall be lawful to
and for the said W S to alienate, grant, bargain, sell and assure the same to
any person or persons, and their heirs in Fee-simple or otherwise as to the
said W shall seem convenient, and that then from the time of such bargain and
sale thereof, the said Message with the appurtenances shall remain and be to
the use of such person and persons, and their heirs as the said W shall bargain
and sell the same unto.

These presents to the contrary, etc: In witness etc.

A Woman's Jointure in Land, where if any of the Land be evicted from the woman
use is raised to her in other Land during her life.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W. B. of L. Marchant-taylor, of the one party,
and R. S. etc. and G. P. of etc. on the other party, Witnesses, That where by
the grace of God there is a Marriage to be had and solemnized, between the said
W: B: and one S: S. daughter of the said R: The said W: B: for and in
consideration of the same Marriage, and for the tender love and affection that
he the said W: bears to wards the said S. and for a competent Jointure and
stay of living for the said S. during her natural life after the decease of the
said W. and in full satisfaction and recompense of the Dower of the said S.
does for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenant and Grant by
these presents, to and with the said R. and G: and either of them, their, and
either of their Executors, that he the said W: before the etc. To convey land
by a day.
next coming after the date hereof shall lawfully assure and convey, or cause
etc. to be lawfully etc. unto the said R: and G: and either of them, and their,
or either of their Heirs, or to the Heirs of the said R: and G: one Capital
Message with the appurtenances, together with two Houses thereto adjoining in
or near unto R: in the County of M: and also 56. acres of Land, Meadow and
Pasture in W. K. R. By the name.
and C: in the said County of M. by the name of three Messuages, one
Dove-House, three Gardens, forty acres of Land, twenty acres of Meadow and ten
acres of Pasture with the appurtenances in W: R: R: and C: aforesaid; which
said Assurance and Conveyance so to be made as is aforesaid, shall be and
remain; And the said R. and G. and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of the
said Premises with the appurtenances, to the only uses, purposes, limitations
and intents hereafter in these presents limited and declared, and to none other
uses, intents or Use of the Conveyances.
purposes, that is to say, to the use of the said W. and S. after the said
Marriage had and solemnized between them according to the Laws Ecclesiastical
of this Realm for the term of their two lives, and the longest liver of them.
And after the decease of the said W. and S. and the longest liver of them to
the use of the Heirs of the body of the said VV. B. and the said S. lawfully
begotten and to be begotten, and for default of such issue to the use of T. B.
brother of the said VV. and of the Heirs males of the body of the said T.
lawfully begotten, and to be begotten, and fot default of such issue to the use
of such and so many of the Sisters of the said VV. that is to say S. now wife
of R. V. E. B. M. B. and M. B. Sisters to the said VV. and of their Heirs for
ever, as at the time of such deceasing without issue, as is aforesaid shall be
in life.

And further, the said W: for him etc. Covenanteth etc. with the Cov^nant for
the va^ue.
said R: and G: etc. That the Premises, and every part and parcel thereof with
their appurtenances shall at the time of the said Assurance and Conveyance of
the Premises to be made as is aforesaid, and so from thence forth shall from
time to time continue, remain, and be of the clear yearly value of 30 l. of
etc. above all charges and reprises, notwithstanding any act or or acts, thing
or things, had made, done, or willingly suffered to be had etc. by the said W:
B: or any person or Discharges of encumbrances. Further Assurance.
persons by his assent, means or procurement; and that all and singular the
Premises with the appurtenances shall at the making of the said Assurance and
Conveyance be discharged or otherwise sufficiently saved harmles, of and from
all, and all manner of former Bargains etc. had made, done, or willingly
suffered or to be had, made, or done, or willingly suffered, by the said W: B:
or his Heirs or by T: B: father of the said W: or by any other person or
persons whatsoever, having or claiming to have or which at any time hereafter
shall have or pretend to have any interest, estate, right, title, or demand, in
or to the Premises with the appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, by,
from or under the said W. and T: and their Heirs or any of them; and also the
said W: Covenanteth etc. that he the said VV: and his Heirs shall at all times
hereafter, and from time to time upon reasonable request or demand to be made
unto the said VV: B: or his Heirs by the said R: and G. or either of them at
the costs and charges in the Law of the said R: and G: or either of them make,
do knowledge and suffer, or cause etc. all and every such further act and acts
etc. as shall be reasonably devised, advised or required by the said R: and G:
or either of them for the better Assurance, Conveyance and sure making of all
and singular the Premises with their appurtenances according to to the several
uses, limitations, purposes and intents before in these presents limited and
declared, and to none other uses intents or purposes, be it by Fine, Feofment,
Recovery, Release, Deed Enrolled, or otherwise with Warranty only against the
said W: and his Heirs, and T. B: father of the said VV. and his Heirs.

And further, for and upon the considerations aforesaid, the said VV. Use to be
raised in other Land in case of Eviction.
Covenanteth etc. that if at any time after the decease of the said VV. the
said S. shall be lawfully evicted, or put out, or from the said Message and
other the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof* that then and from
thenceforth the said VV. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of
and in such and so much of one Message now called the Crane, and of all and
all manner of Collers etc., to the said Message last mentioned belonging,
situate in the Parish of St. M of L. as shall amount to the clear yearly value
of such and so much of the said Messuages and other the Premises first
mentioned as shall be evicted or taken away to the use of the said S. for term
of her natural life. and after her decease to the use of the right Heirs of the
said VV. for ever.

And finally the said VV. Covenanteth, etc. that at the time of such eviction
or taking away of the said Messuages, and other the Premises first named, or
any part thereof. The said Messuages and other the Premises last mentioned,
shall remain and be clearly discharged, or during the natural life of the said
S. shall be sufficiently kept and saved harmless of and from all, and all
manner of estates, interests, charges, and encumbrances whatsoever, had made,
done, or willingly suffered, or to he had etc. by the said VV. B. or any person
or persons having or claiming, or which hereafter shall or may have or claim
any thing by, from, or under ehe said VV. In witness, etc.

A Defeazance of a Recognizance in Chancery.
THis Indenture etc. Between H. H. of L. Inholder, of the one party, and S. S.
of London, Gentleman, of the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said H.
H. at the instance and request of the said S. S. and for his cause together
with him the said S. S. in and by one Recognizance, bearing date etc.
knowledged to be enrolled in the Court of Chancery, became bounden unto T. S.
of P. in, the County of S. Esquire, in the Sum of 1700 l. of etc. as in and by
the same Recognizance does and may appear.

And whereas also by one Indenture, bearing date etc. made between the said S.
S. and H. H. on the one party, and the said T. S. on the other party,
witnessing, That whereas a Marriage was then intended (and now is Solemnized)
between the said S. S. and E. S. the Sister of the said T. S. And for the
settling of a competent and sufficient Jointure for the better maintenance and
living of the said E. if she happen to survive and over-live the said S. S. and
that some stay and estate might be had to the Heirs of the said S. on the body
of the said E. lawfully to be begotten, the said S. S. and the said H. H. at
the instance and request of the said S. S. together with the said S. for
themselves and either of them, their and either of their Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, did covenant promise and grant, to and with
the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, by the said Indenture, that the said S.
S. and H. H. or one of them, their, or one of their Heirs or Assigns, shall and
will within four years next ensuing the date of the said Indenture, well and
sufficiently convey and assure, or cause and procure to be well and
sufficiently conveyed and assured, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, within
the Realm of England, of the clear yearly value of 100 l. by the year, over and
above all and every yearly Charges Deductions and Reprises, clearly acquitted
and discharged, of all Titles Troubles and Encumbrances to the said E. during
her life, and after her death, to the use of the said S. S. and the Heirs of
his body on the body of the said E. lawfully to be begotten, and for default of
such Issue, to the Heirs and Assigns of the said S. for ever. And that the
person and persons, which shall so convey and assure the said Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments, shall be at the time of the conveyance thereof, lawfully,
rightfully, and absolutely seized of the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
(in manner and form as aforesaid to be conveyed) of a good and perfect Estate
in the Law in Fee-simple.

And further the said S. S. and H. H. for themselves and either of them, their
and every of their Heirs and Assigns, did covenant promise and grant, to and
with the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, by the said Indenture, that if the
said S. S. shall decease within the said four years, and before such assurance
had and made, that then the Executors or Administrators of the said S. S. shall
from the day of the death of the said S. until such assurance as aforesaid
shall be made, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said E. if she be
living, and if she be deceased, to such Children as shall be in the mean time
begotten on her body, and then living, one yearly Rent of 100 l. by the year,
of lawful money of England, at four Feasts or Terms in the year, that is to
say At the Feast of the Annunciation etc. the Nativity etc. St. M. etc. the
Birth etc. or within twenty days next after every of the same Feasts, by even
Portions, the first payment thereof to begin at such of the same Feasts as shall
next ensue the decease of the sad S: S.

And whereas also by the same Indenture it was covenanted and agreed between the
said parties.

And the said T: S: for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and
every of them did covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said S: S. and
H: H: their Heirs and Assigns, by the said Indenture, That if the said S. S:
and H: H: their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them do and
shall well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep, all and every the
Covenants Grants Articles and Agreements in the said Indenture contained, which
on his or their parts and behalfs are, or ought to be observed and kept,
according to the tenor, purport, and true meaning of the said Indenture; That
then the said Recognizance should be void, frustrate, and of none effect, and a
Vacat entered upon the Record thereof, any thing in the said Indenture to the
contrary notwithstanding. Otherwise the same to stand and abide in full force
and strength, as by the said Indenture at large does and may appear.

And whereas also the said S: S: in and by one other Recognizance, bearing date
the said etc. knowledged to be enrolled in the Court of Chancery, became
bounden unto the said H: H: in the Sum of 1800 l. of etc: as in and by the
same Recognizance it does and may appear.

Now it is covenanted and agreed between the said parties to these presents,
and the said H: H. for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and
every of them does covenant promise and grant, to and with the said S: S: his
Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That if the S: S: his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, or any of them do, and shall well and truly observe, perform,
fulfill, and keep all and every the Covenants Grants Articles and Agreements
contained in the said recited Indenture, which on the parts and behalf of the
said S. S. and H, H: or either of them are, or ought to be observed and kept,
according to the tenor, purport, and true meaning of the said recited
Indenture, and thereby do acquit, discharge, and at all times hereafter save
harmless the said H: H: his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, of and from the said recited Recognizance of 1700 l. and of and from the
said Covenants contained in the said recited Indenture, that then the said
Recognizance of 1800 l. acknowledged by the said S. S. to the said H. H. shall
be void, frustrate, and of none effect, and a Vacat entered upon the Record
thereof: Otherwise the same to stand and abide in full force and strength: In
witness etc.

A Defeazance of a Statute Staple.
THis Indenture etc. Between I: H: of T: in the County of B: Esquire of the one
party, and S: A. of the Parish of St: K: of L: Merchant of the other party,
whereas the said S: A: in and by one Recognisance or Writing Obligatory of the
nature of a Statute Staple made and provided for the Recovery of debts, bearing
date with these presents taken and acknowledged before I: K: Mayor of the
Staple at Westminster, and W: S: Serjant at Law, Recorder of the City of London
is, and stands bound to the said J: H: in the sum of 3000. of etc. to be paid
to the said J: in such manner as therein is mentioned, as in and by the said
Recognizance, or writing Obligatory of the nature of a Statute Staple more
fully and at large appears.

It is now nevertheless Covenanted, Granted, Concluded and Agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents, and their true intent and meaning
of the said Recognizances and of these presents, and of the parties herunto is,
and the said J: H. for him his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, is
contented and pleased, That if the said S A. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, do, and shall well and truly
observe, perform, fulfill and accomplish all and singular the Covenants, Grants,
Articles and Agreements, which on his and their parts and behalfes, are or
ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, comprised and specified in
a certain Indenture of Articles of Agreement, bearing date with these presents,
and made between the said I: H. of the second part, the said S: A: and K: H:
eldest daughter of the said I. H: of the second part, and G: L. and I: H: of L.
Merchants, of the third part according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Indentures of Articles of Agreement, that then the said Recognizance or
writing Obligatory above recited or mentioned, shall be utterly void and of
none effect, and then also the said I. H: party to these presents, his
Executors, and Administrators, or some of them shall and wil-deliver or cause to
be delivered up the said Recognizance or writing Obligatory to the said S. A.
his Heirs, Executors or Administrators to be cancelled, vacated and made void,
otherwise the same shall stand and abide in full force and virtue. In witness,
etc:

A Defeazance of a Judgment in the upper Bench.
THis Indenture, etc. Between E: C: of W: in the County of K: Gent. of the one
party, and T: R: of S. in the County of K. Gent. on the other party witnesses,
that whereas the above named T: R: before the Ensealing and delivery hereof,
has acknowledged and suffered one Judgment to be entered upon Record in his
Majesty's Bench at Westminster in Easter Term now next ensuing for 100 l. debt,
and 20 s. costs of Suit thereupon assessed at the suit of the said E: C:
Nevertheless it is Agreed, Conditioned, Covenanted and Granted by and between
the said parties to these presents either to other, That if the said T: R: his
Heirs, Executors, Andministrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly
satisfy, content and pay, or cause to be well and truly satisfied, contented
and paid unto the said E: C: or his Assigns, the sum of 7 l. of etc. yearly,
and every year during the natural life of him the said E: C: at the four most
usual Feasts or Terms in the year (viz.) at the Feasts of St. John Baptist, St.
Michael the Archangel, the Birth of our Lord God, and the Anuntiation of our
blessed Lady Mary the Virgin* or within fourteen days next after any of the
said Feasts by even and equal portions, the said payments to be made at or in
the now Hall of Cliffords Inn London, that then the said Judgment shall be
utterly void and of none effect, and that then after the decease of the said E.
C. (the said quarterly payments being duly made, or by him the said E:
accepted) the Executors or Administrators of him the said E. C. shall upon
request give sufficient warrant for the acknowledging made of satisfaction upon
Record for the said Judgment; and in the mean time he the said E: nor his
Assigns, shall not sue forth, nor prosecute any manner of execution upon the
said Judgment against the said T. R. his Executors or Administrators, nor
against their or any of their Goods, Lands or Tenements. But if default shall
be made of any the said payments, at the days and place aforesaid, and other
good satisfaction not given, that then, and at all times after the said E. C.
his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall and may take his or their due
course of Law upon the said Judgment in that behalf provided. In VVitness, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Judgment.
THis Indenture etc. between G. A. Gentleman of the one party, and I. A. of L:
Inn, in the County of M. Esquire, and D. R. of W. in the said County of M.
Esquire, of the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said I. A. and D. R.
have confessed and suffered one Judgment of 120 l. debt, and 16 s. 8 d. costs
of Suit thereupon assessed unto the said G. A. in his Majesty's Bench at W.
this present term of St. M. as by the Records of the said Court it does and
mayappear.

Nevertheless it is agreed by and between the said parties. And the said G. A.
does by these presents, his Executors and Administrators, and every of them
covenant and promise, to and with the said I. A. and D. R. their and every of
their Executors and Administrators, that if the said I. A. and D. R. or either
of them, their or either of their Executors Administrators or Assigns, do well
and truly pay or cause etc. unto the said G. A. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, the full and whole Sum of 70 l. of lawful etc. in manner and form
following; viz 35 l. in or upon the Feast day of the Annunciation of our
blessed Lady St. Mary the Virgin, next ensuing the date hereof, and 35 l. more,
residue of the said 70 l. in or upon the Feast Day of the tivity of St. John
the Baptist then next ensuing after the date hereof both several payments to
be made in or at the Middle Temple Hall, London, That then the said G. A. his
Executors or Administrators shall give sufficient warrant for the acknowledging
of satisfaction upon Record upon the said Judgment, and in the mean time the
said G. A. his Executors nor Administrators, shall not sue forth or prosecute
any manner of execution upon the said Judgment against the said I. A. or D. R.
their or either of their Executors or Administrators, nor against their or
either of their Lands Goods or Chattels: But if default of payment shall be
made of the said Sum of 70 l. or any part thereof, at the several days and
place aforesaid, that then the said G. A. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall and may take his or their due course in Law upon the said
Judgment in that behalf provided: In witness etc.

A Defeazance upon an assignment of a Lease, and a Recognizance for money lent
for certain years, where after the rate of 10 l. per cent. is yearly reserved
payable, during the Borrowers having of the money lent.
THis Indenture, etc. witnesses, that whereas the said A. B: by his Poll Deed.
dated, etc. has given granted bargained sold assigned and set over to the said
R: W: for the only use of the said R. and of his Executors and Assigns, as well
all that Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, etc. as the Original
Lease thereof made and granted by the said J: H: etc: as by the Deed more
plainly and at large may and will appear. And where also the said A: B: by one
Recognizance or Writing obligatory etc. as by the said recognizance or writing
obligatory does appear.

And whereas moreover the said R: W: after the making sealing and delivery of
the said Deed, has demised and and letten to farm all the said Message with
the appurtenances to the said A: to have and to hold the same to the said A:
and his assigns, from the making of these presents, for by and during the term
of six years from thence next ensuing, reserving thereof yearly to be paid,
during the said term to the said R: W: his Executors and Assigns 10 l: of
lawful, etc: on the fourth day of July, and on the fourth day of January, that
is to say, 5 l. on every of the said days, at the now Mansion house of the
said R: W: situate etc: between the hours etc: of every of the same several
fourth days of J: and J: and charging the said A: his Executors and assigns
with the payment and performance of all other Rents payments Charges and
Covenants otherwise to be born for or out of the Message, and other the
Premises during the said term of six years, yet nevertheless the said R. VV
for him, etc. covenanteth, etc: that if the said A: be now at the ensealing and
delivery of their presents, so the owner and proprietor of the said Lease and
term of years in the said Message, and other the premises now to come as that
he has lawful and absolute Right to bargain sell and assure the same to the
said R VV: in form aforesaid, from all former bargains forfeitures, and
Encumbrances made by the said A.

And further, that if the said A: B. his heirs executors administrators or
assigns, do as well content or pay, and cause, etc, to the said R: VV. his
executors or administrators, the said yearly Rent or payment o^ 10 l: yearly
during the said term of six years in manner and form aforesaid, and do save
and keep harmless the said R. VV: his executors administrators and assigns, of
and for the yearly Rent and Covenants specified in the said original Indenture
of Lease made of the said Messuages and other the premises to the said R. C,
as abovesaid, and of and from all losses and damages to grow thereof, as also
do well and truly content or pay or cause etc: to the said R: VV. his certain
Attorney Executor or Administrator, the Sum of 100 l. of lawful etc. at one
entire payment, on the sixth day of Ian: which shall be in the year of our
Lord, according to the account etc. 1581. between the hours etc. at etc. that
then as well the Deed and the grant bargain sale and assignment therein
specified, As also the said Recognizance, or Writing Obligatory shall be
clearly and utterly void and frustrate, as the same or either of them had never
been had or made, the same Deed and Writing Obligatory, or any thing in them or
either of them contained or specified, to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And also the said R. VV. covenanteth etc, That when and as often as the said
R. VV. his Executors or Administrators, or any for him or them, or by his or
their. or any of their appointment, shall have or receive any payment of the
said yearly Rent of 10 l. or any part thereof, according to the tenor and
purport of these presents; That then and so often upon reesonable request, the
said R. his Executors or Administrators, shall deliver to the said A. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, a reasonable acquittance in Writing, for
the sufficient discharge of the said A: his Executors and Administrators, of
and for such particular payment so made, without any fraud or covin: And that
if the said A. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, do also pay or cause to
be paid to the said R. VV. bis certain Attorney Executor or Administrator, the
said Sum of 100 l. in manner and form aforesaid, That then upon reasonable
request after the said 100 l. so paid, the said R: his Executors or
Administrators, shall deliver, or cause etc. to the said A: his Executors or
Administrators, the said Original Indenture of Lease, and such other
Conveyances as he has therewith of the said A. whole, safe, and uncancelled.
And also the said Deed and Recognizance or Writing Obligatory aforesaid to be
cancelled, without any manner of fraud or covin: In witness etc.

A Defeazance upon a Statute-Staple.
THis Indenture* etc. between T: A: of H: in the County of S: Esquire; of the one
party, and R: C: of C. in the County of S. Gent. of the other party,
witnesses, That whereas the said R. C. has acknowledged before the Right
Honorable Sir E. C. Knight, one of his Majesty's most Honourabe privy
Council; Lord chief Justice of England, one Recognizance, or Statute-staple,
of the Sum of 500 l. unto the said T. A. bearing the date of these presents.

Nevertheless it is agreed between the said parties. And the said T. A. does
for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant, to and
with the said R: C. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, by these presents,
that if the said R: C: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of them,
do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T: A. his Executors
Administrators Assigns, the Sum of 260 l: of lawful etc: at or in the now
Hall of Cliffords Inn, London, in and upon the last day of July, next ensuing
the date of these presents, then the said Statute shall be utterly void
frustrate and of none effect, any thing therein contained, to the contrary
notwithstanding:

And also that then he the said T. A: his Executors Administrators or Assigns,
shall and will deliver the said Statute to the said R: C: his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, to be cancelled and discharged: But if default of
payment be made of the said Sum of 260 l: in form aforesaid, then the same
Statute to remain in full force and effect: In witness etc:

Upon a Statute for the warrant of an Annuity.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. B. of etc. of the one part and C. D. of
the other part witnesses, that whereas the aid A. by one writing or deed of
annuity of the date of these presents has given granted and confirmed unto the
said B. for the consideration therein specified one annuity or yearly rent of
etc. issuing and going out of all and singular the Lands Tenements etc. To have
hold and enjoy and yearly to receive the said annuity or yearly rent of etc. as
by the said deed of annuity more at large it does and may appear, and whereas
also the said A. by one Statute or recognizance of the date also of these
presents taken knowledged and sealed etc. is holden and stands bound to the
said B. in the sum of etc. payable as by the said Statute or Recognizance may
also appear nevertheless the said B. is contented and agreed, and by these
presents for him his Executors Aministrators and Assigns does Covenant and
grant to and with the said A. his Heirs Executors and Assigns and to and with
every of them, that if the said A. the day of the date of these presents be and
stands soly seized of a good and perfect estate of inheritance in Fee-simple
of and in all the said lands and all other the Premises before in the said
deed of annuity mentioned and has full power and authority in his own right to
give and grant the said annuity of etc. to the said B. his Executors and
Assigns for and during the said term of years in the said deed limited and
expressed, And also if the said B. his Executors and Assigns and every of them
do or may from henceforth peaceablely and quietly have receive take levy and
enjoy the said annuity of etc. out of the lands etc. and all other the
premises expressed in the said deed at the days and times of payment appointed
in the said deed for and during the term of years above specified without any
let trouble denial disturbance or contradiction of the said A. his Heir
Executors or Assigns or any of them or any other person or persons whatsoever
they be, And without any act or acts or other Encumbrance committed or done or
to be done by the said A. his Heirs Executors or Assigns which shall or may in
any wise during the said term be or grow to the prejudice hurt or hindrance of
the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns in having receiving or enjoying the
said annuity or any part thereof according to the true meaning of the said
deed, And also if the said annuity shall begin and be made at the feast of etc.
next coming, that then the same Statute or Recognizance shall be void etc.

Upon a Statute for payment of money.
THis Indenture made the day etc. Between A. B. of etc. of the one part, C. D.
of etc. of the other part witnesses that whereas the said C. D. by his
Recognizance writing Obligatory or Statute-Merchant taken sealed and
acknowledged at S. before R. F. major of the said Town of S. and T. O. Clark of
the said town assigned for the taking and knowledging of Statutes there is and
stands firmly holden-and bound unto the said A. B. in the sum of etc of good
and lawful money of England payable unto the said A. B. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns in or upon the feast day of etc. next ensuing the
date of the said recognizance writing Obligatory or Statute-Marchant more fully
appears now the said A. B, for him his Executors and Assigns does covenant
grant and fully agree to and with the said C. D. his Executors etc. and with
every of them by these presents that if the said C. D. his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns or any of them shall and do well and truly without
any fraud deceit or collusion content satisfy and pay or cause to be contented
satisfied and paid unto the said A B the several sums of money hereafter in
these presents mentioned at such days places and times and by and under such
condition and conditions as hereafter in these presents are expressed and
mentioned that is to say in or upon the feast day of etc. if E: B. daughter of
the said A. B. or any issue of her body lawfully to be begotten by N. D, son
and heir apparent of the said C. D. shall be then in full life the full sum of
etc. that then the said recognizance writing Obligatory or Statute-Marchant
taken sealed and acknowledged as aforesaid shall be merely and utterly void
and of none effect or else to stand remain continue and be in full power force
strength and virtue.

Hesketh.

Upon a Recognizance with a Condition.
THis Indenture, made the day etc. between the right honorable Sir W. C. Knight
of the most honorable order of the Garter Baron of B: etc. of the one part and
the right honorable E: Earl of O. etc. of the other part witnesses that
whereas the said Earl stands bound to the said W. Baron of B. by one
recognizance bearing date etc. and enrolled in the Queens Highness Court of
Chancery in the sum of 4000 l. of good and lawful money of England to be paid
to the said Baron at the day limited and expressed in the same as by the same
recognizance more at large appears the said Baron of B. for him his Executors
etc: does covenant grant and agree to and with the said Earl his Heirs etc.
that if the said E. his Heirs Executors and Adminstrators shall and do well and
truly observe perform fulfill and keep all and singular Covenants Grants
Articles and Agreements comprised and specified in one pair of Indentures
bearing date etc. made between him the said Baron of B, and the said Earl his
Heirs Executors or Administrators are and ought to be observed performed
fulfilled and kept according to the true intent and meaning of the said
Indentures that then the said recognizance shall be utterly void and of none
effect.

And further the said W. Baron of B. for him his Executors etc. does Covenant
Grant and Agree by these presents to and with the said E. Executors and
Administrators that if the Lady A: now Countess of O, wife to the said E. and
daughter to the said Baron. of B. do die no action suit or execution thentofore
at any time Commenced taken or sued in or upon the said recognizance for the
said sum of 4000 l: nor any parcel thereof, that then and from thenceforth
the said Recognizance shall be utterly void and of none effect, In witness, etc.

Upon an Indenture to which it relates.
THis Indenture of Defeazance made, etc: between W. L: of H: in the County of
L: yeoman of the one party, and J: P: of B. in the said County yeoman of the
other party, witnesses; that whereas the said I: P: by his Indenture of
Assignment, bearing date, etc: For the consideration in the said Indenture of
Assignment, specified and declared, did demise grant set and let over unto the
said VV: L. and his assigns, one piece or parcel of pasture Land, called or
known by the name of etc, containing by estimation five acres, be it more or
less in B aforesaid, together with all ways entries passages ways, waters
watercourses etc: thereunto belonging, or at any time heretofore known reputed
or taken as part or parcel thereof, to have and to hold the said piece of
pasture Land, with all and singular the Appurtenances thereof unto the said VV
L his Executors Administrators and assigns, from and immediately after the day
of the decease of the said I P for and during all the Term time and space, and
unto the full end and term of sixty years, then next following, to be fully
complete and ended. If the Remainder or Remainders of the natural life or
lives of W P. G P. and J P. sons of the said J P. party to these presents or
any of them do fortune so long to live, as in and by the said recited Indenture
of Assignment relation thereto being had more plainly and at large it does and
may appear. Now this Indenture of Defeazance does further witness. That the
true intent and meaning of the said Indenture of assignment, and of the said
parties thereunto was, is, and shall be. That if the Executors, Administrators
or Assigns of the said J P. party to these presents, or any of them do and
shall well and truly content, satisfy and pay or cause to be well and truly,
etc. unto the said W L. his Executors or Administrators or any of them, the
full and just sum of 40 l. of good and lawful money of England within one
year next after the decease of the said J P. party to these presents, at or in
the Church porch of W. in the said County of L. If J P. Wife of the said J P
be then living: But if the said I. be then departed this life, then the said
40 l. to cease to be paid, And that then and from thenceforth after the day of
the decease of the said I. or the payment of the said 40 l. which shall first
happen. That then the said Indenture of Assignment, and every Covenant Article
and Clause therein contained to be utterly void and of none effect. And that
then and from thenceforth the said W L his Executors or Assigns are to
surrender and redeliver the said Assignment to the Executors, Administrators or
Assigns of the said J P. party to these presents. And that also the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of the said I P. are then to stand and be lawfully
seized, possessed, estated, and interessed, of and in the said piece of
Pasture-Land with the appurtenances thereof, during the remainder of the said
Indenture of assignment, any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc.

Upon a Statute Staple.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A B of etc. of the one part and C D. of etc.
of the other part. Witnesses that whereas the said C D. by his Recognizance in
the nature of a Statute Staple bearing date with these presents, and taken and
acknowledged before Sir T L Knight, Mayor of the staple, and I G Esquire
Recorder of the City of London, is and stands bound to the said A B. in 4000
l. of lawful etc. payable as by the Statute or Recognizance appears. Now
this Indenture witnesses that the said A B. is contented and agreed and by
these presents for themselves their Heirs, etc. Do promise, grant, and agree to
and with the said C D. That if the said C D his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them do and shall well and truly
observe, pay perform, fulfill and keep, all and singular the Covenants,
Grants, Articles payments, promises conditions and Agreements, and all other
things which on his or their part, and behalf, are to be observed, etc.
mentioned and contained in one pair of Indentures, bearing date, etc. made
between the said, etc. according the tenor, effect and true meaning of the said
Indenture without fraud or guile. That then and at all times then after the
said A: B: his heirs, executors, and administrators, at the request of the said
C. D. his heirs, etc. shall deliver up the said Statute or Recognizance to be
cancelled and made void. In Witness, etc.

To save harmless a Suerty.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B: of etc. of the one part, and C. D.
etc. of the other part: Witnesses that whereas the said A. B. has upon his
credit the first day of this instant month of M: at the special instance and
request of the said C: D. taken up by way of exchange for the furniture of the
affairs and business of the said C. D. the sum of 100 l. of lawful English
money. And all the said sum of 100 l. has before the insealing and delivery
hereof fully paid and delivered to the said C. D. whereof and wherewith the C.
D. acknowledges himself well and truly satisfied, contented and paid, and
thereof and of every part and parcel thereof clearly acquiteth and discharges
the said A B his executors and administrators, and every of them by these
presents. And whereas also the said C. D. by one writing Obligatory made
according to the Statute l^tely provided for the recovery of Debts taken
knowledged and sealed before Sir J. D, Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas at Westminster bearing date, etc. stands bound unto the said A B. in
the sum of 200 l. of lawful English money payable at the Feast of etc. next
ensuing the date hereof, as by Bond Obligatory or Statute more at large it does
and may appear. Nevertheless it is covenanted, granted, condescended and
agreed by and between the said parties to these presents in manner and form
following. (That is to say) The said A B. for him his heirs, etc. does
Covenant, etc: to and with the said C D. That if the said C D. his heirs
executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them, Do well and truly pay
or cause to be paid unto the said A B. his executors, administrators or
assigns or any of them, in or upon the twentieth day of M: next coming after
the date hereof, at the now dwelling house of the said A B. Situate etc. all
the said sum of 100 l. of good and lawful money of England: Together with all
sums o money, costs charges, losses and damages that shall arise, grow come
or be payable by reason of the taking up thereof in exchange or otherwise
without fraud, Covin or delay. That then the said writing Obl^gatory or Statute
to be void. etc. Or else, etc. In witness, etc:

Upon performance of Covenants upon marriage:
THis Indenture made, etc. Between E of VV. D. in the County of O. Esquire of
the one part, and VV D. of C. in the same County Esquire, T H. son and heir
apparent of R H. of S. in the same County Esquire, and D: H. of London Gent: of
the other part. Witnesses that it is covenanted concluded and agreed, by and
betwixt the said parties for diverse urgent and weighty causes and
considerations in manner following. That is to say: That he the said E: VV.
shall and will on this side, and before the Feast day of Saint Michaell The
Arck-Angell next ensuing the date hereof knowledge in due form of Law, and
become bounden unto the said T H. and D H. in one single Obligation or Bond of
Statute Merchant in the sum of 8000 l. of good and lawful money of England
without Condition therein or thereupon included, subscribed or indorsed: And
yet nevertheless the said VV D. T H and D H. and every of them for them and
their Joint and several executors and assigns, do covenant and grant to and
with the said E VV. his heirs and assigns: That if the marriage of espousalls
heretofore incepted and had betwixt I VV: son and heir of the said E VV: and
A. the now Wife in facto of the said I. and Daughter of G O, of P. in the
County of VV Esquire, shall be hereafter lawfully and perfectly consummate at
or after such time as he the said I: VV shall accomplish, and be of his lawful
age to consent to the said marriage, viz. of or above the age of fourteen
years, and that the said G O has heretofore and shall hereafter observe,
perform and keep all and singular the Covenants, grants and agreements of his
part to be observed and kept, mentioned in one pair of Indentures, made
betwixt the said E VV. and the said G O. for and touching the payment of such
sums of money as were agreed to be paid by the said G O. for, or in respect
of the said marriage. Or otherwise if the said now incepted marriage or
espousalls shall be hereafter dissolved by any means whatsoever, Then if the
said E VV. shall and do permit and suffer.

A Deputation of a Steward-ship.
THis Indenture made etc. between W: K: Esquire, Steward of the Honor of B. in
the County of H: and the Manors and Courts thereunto belonging, of the one
party, and I: H: Gent. of the other party, witnesses, That the said VV: K.
has made, ordained, constituted, and appointed, and by these presents, does
make, ordain, constitute, and appoint the said I. H. his Deputy, Steward of the
Honor aforesaid, and the several Manors and Courts thereunto belonging, and
by these presents does give and grant unto the said I. H. the Deputation and
execution of the said Office of Steward of the Honors and Manors aforesaid;
To have, hold, enjoy, and exercise the said Office to the said J: H. for and
during the natural life of the said VV: K: together with all Fees Regards
Profits Allowances Preheminences Commodities and Advantages whatsoever to the
said Office in any manner of way belonging or appertaining, so long as the said
J: H shall have and exercise the said Office, in as large and ample manner as
the same is granted by G. F. and G: P. by their Indenture bearing date etc. to
the said W: K: except the Fee of 5 l. to the said W. K. granted by the said
Indenture, for the execution of the said Office: In witness etc.

FEOFMENTS.
A Feoffment toward the performance of the Covenant of further assurance in an
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, with a Letter of Attorney* in the same to
deliver Seisin.
THis Indent. tripar. made the etc. between T: L: the Feoffor of the first
part, I: P: the Feoffee of the second part, and I: H. the Attorney of the third
part, witnesses, That the said T: L: toward the performance of the Covenant
of further Assurance, contained, specified, and declared, in one Indenture of
Bargain and Sale, of the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments herein after
mentioned, bearing date etc. and made between the said T: L: of the one party,
and the said I: P: of the other party; And for diverse other good causes and
considerations him the said T: L: thereunto especially moving; Has granted,
aliened, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents does grant, alien,
enfeoff, and confirm unto the said I: P: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all
that Close etc. And the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of
all and singular the said before granted, aliened, enfeoffed, or confirmed, or
heteby meant, mentioned, or intended to be hereby granted, aliened, enfeoffed,
and confirmed Premises, and every part and parcel thereof. And also all the
Estate Right Title Interest Claim and Demand whatsoever, of him the said T: L:
of in and to the same, and of in and to every part and parcel thereof: And also
all Woods Under-woods and Trees now growing, standing, or being, or which at
any time hereafter, shall stand, grow, or be upon the same Premises, or any
part or parcel thereof: To have, and to hold the said Closes etc. and all and
singular the Premises hereby granted, aliened, enfeoffed, and confirmed
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, unto him the said I: P: his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the
only and proper use of the said J: P: his Heirs and Assigns for ever: And to
and for no other use intent or purpose whatsoever.

And the said T. L. for him and his Heirs, the said Closes etc. and al and
singular other the Premises hereby granted or mentioned or intended to be
hereby granted, aliened, enfeoffed, and confirmed, with their and every of
their Appurtenances, unto the said I: P: and his Heirs, unto the use of the
said I: P. his Heirs and Assigns, against him the said T: O: and his Heirs,
shall and will for ever warrnat and defend by these presents: And to the end
intent and purpose, that the Estate in and by this present Indenture granted
may be fully executed, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents; The said T. O. has nominated, constituted, ordained, and appointed,
and in his place and stead put, and by these presents does nominate,
constitute, ordain, appoint, and in his place and stead put the said I: H: his
true and lawful Attorney, and by these presents does give and grant unto the
said I: H: his said Attorney, full power and authority for him and in his name
and stead, into all and singular the said Closes etc. and Premises herein
before meant, mentioned, or intended to be he hereby aliened, enfeoffed, and
confirmed, and into every or any part or parcel thereof, in the name of the
whole to re-enter and limit, and peaceable possession and Seisin thereof, or of
any part or parcel thereof, in the name of the whole to take and receive: And
after peaceable possession thereof had and taken as aforesaid, to deliver quiet
and peaceable possession and seisin thereof, or of any part or parcel thereof,
in the name of the whole to the said I: P: his Heirs or Assigns, or to his or
their lawful Attorney or Attorneys, sufficiently authorized to receive and
take the same, and him or them to leave in the quiet and peaceable possession
thereof, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

And the said T: L: does hereby allow of, ratify and confirm whatsoever the
said I. H: his said Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done in and about
the Premises, by virtue of these presents, to be as good effectual and
available in the Law, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as if he the said
T: L: had done the same in his own person, or had been present at the doing
thereof: In witness etc.

The indorsement of Livery of Seisin upon his Deed.

Memorand: That full and peaceable possession and Seisin, of all and singular
the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments within granted or mentioned to be
granted, was had and taken by the within named I: H: for and in the name of the
within named T: L: And also for and in the name of the within named T. L:
delivered by the said I: H: unto the within named I: P. according to the
authority within given; To hold to him the said J. P. his Heirs and Assigns,
according to the form and effect within written; In the presence of etc. A
Feoffment of Land for performance of a Will, and after to the use of a man's
Children with a Proviso to defat the Devise, if the Feoffor will, penned by
very Good Council.
THis Indenture tripartite, made etc. between the Right Honorable W: Viscount,
H: etc. on the party, and the Right Honorable A. Lord G: Sir P. C: Knight, T:
W. etc. on the other party, witnesses, That the said Viscount, for and in
consideration of the Fatherly good will and affection which the Viscount
bears toward R. and W. the two Sons of the said Viscount, and for the
advancement and preferment of the said R. and W. and the Heirs Males of their
bodies lawfully to be begotten, and for the advancement and preferment of the
Heirs Males of the body of the said Viscount H. lawfully to be begotten, and
for the considerations hereafter in these presents expressed, has given
granted enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents does give etc. to the
said A. Lord G. etc. all those his Manors of W: L: M: P: and B. in the County
of H. etc. and two parts of the Manors of N. V. etc. in the County of L: with
all and singular Liberties, Courts Views of Frank-pledge, Fairs, Commodities,
Franchises, Privileges, Jurisdictions, Preheminences, Emoluments and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to or with the said Manors Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments, belonging, used or enjoyed, or in the same or any of them, or
any part or parcel thereof, issuing, arising, happening, used, or exercised; To
have and to hold as well all and singular the said Manors Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments which were before specified to be entirely granted: As also the
said two parts of the said Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof
the two parts only are specified to be granted. And all other the Liberties
Preheminences Franchises Jurisdictions Commodities and other the Premises
whatsoever, with all and singular the Appurtenances, thereof to the said A: Lord
G. etc. and their Heirs for ever, to the use and behoof of the said Viscount,
for term of his life, without impeachment of Wast, and after the decease of the
said Viscount, and during the time that the said R. D. Son and now Heir
apparent of the said Viscount, or any other being Heir of the said Viscount,
shall be under the age of two and twenty years, and until some Heir of the
said Viscount shall have accomplished the full age of two and twenty years, to
the use of the said A. Lord G. etc. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and
the Executors and Administrators of the Survivor of them, to the intent and
purpose, that the said A Lord G. etc: and the Survivors and Survivor of them,
and the Executors and Administrators of the Survivor of them, and shall take
perceive levy possess use and enjoy the Rents Issues Profits Revenews
Commodities and Emoluments, of all and singular the said Lordships Manors
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, and the same employ during such minority and minorities as is
aforesaid, for and toward the performance, payment, and satisfying of all the
Legacies and Bequests of money, Annuities of years, and Debts of the said
Viscount, to be mentioned in the Testament and last Will of the said Viscount,
according to the tenor purport and true meaning of the said Viscount, in his
said Testament and last Will to be declared, and to the use and intent that the
said Feoffees, and the Survivors und Survivor of them, and their Heirs, shall
with the Profits Revenews Commodities Issues and Emoluments, coming, growing,
and arising, of and in all and singular the said Lord-ships etc. bestow
disburse and expend from time to time, the competent and necessary charges in
the Law, and otherwise for the defense and maintenance of the possession and
title, of all and singular the Premises, and every or any part thereof, and for
the reparations and defense of the Buildings Edifices Houses and Severalls, in
and upon the Premises or any part thereof, from time to time, necessary meet
and competent to be disbursed and expended, until such time as the Legacies
Debts and Bequests of the said Viscount to be mentioned in his said Testament,
shall be performed, and until some Heir of the said Viscount, shall have
accomplished the full age of 22. years, and after satisfaction of the said
Legacies Debts and Annuities, and for the Surplusage that shall surmount the
same Debts Legacies and Annuities, and other the charges aforesaid satisfied,
to the intent that the said A. Lord G. etc. shall employ and suffer the
Premises and Surplusage thereof, to go remain and come to the use profit and
benefit of the Heir of the said Viscount, and after the said R: D: being Heir
of the said Viscount, or other Heir of the said Viscount, shall accomplish the
full age of 22. years, that then the said A: Lord G: etc. and their Heirs shall
stand and be seized of and in all and singular the said Manors etc. to the use
of the said R. D. and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten; And for
default of such Heir Male of the body of the said R: D: lawfully begotten, to
the use and behoof of the said W: D: second Son of the said Viscount, and the
Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Heir Male of
the body of the said W: lawfully begotten, to the use and behoof of the Heirs
Males of the body of the said Viscount lawfully begotten and to be begotten,
and for default of such Heirs to the use of the Heirs of the body of the said
Viscount, and for default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the
said R. D. for ever.

Provided always, and the true meaning use and intent of these presents is;
That if the said Viscount at any time hereafter during his life time, shall
demise, grant, or lease the said Manors etc. or any part or parcel thereof, by
his Deed indented under his Seal, and with subscription of his name with his
own proper hand, for term of any year or years, life or lives, that then and
immediately from and after every such Lease Demise and Grant, or such Leases
Demises or Grants so to be made by the said Viscount. The said A. Lord G. etc.
and their Heirs shall stand and be seized, of and in the said Manors etc. so
to be leased or granted, to the use and behoof of the same Leasees and
Grantees, and every of them, and of their Executors Administrators and Assigns,
during the term and space mentioned in the same several Leases Grants and
Demises so to be made, according to the tenor, form and effect of the same
Lease, Grant, or Demise, Leases, Grants or Demises, so that the yearly Rent or
Rents mentioned or reserved by the said Viscount, in such Lease Demise or
Grant, Leases Demises or Grants, be yearly paid to the said Viscount, during
his natural life, and after his decease, to such person or persons, as by the
purport and true meaning of these presents, ought to have the Reversion or
Remainder, Reversions or Remainders of the Lands Tenements or Hereditaments so
to be leased or granted within the space of twenty days next after reasonable
request to be made for the payment thereof; And so that the same Leasees and
Grantees, their Executors Administrators and Assigns do well and truly perform
the Conditions to be comprised in the said Indenture or Indentures of their
said several Demises or Grants according to the effect and true meaning of the
same Indenture or Indentures.

And that the said A. Lord G. etc. shall stand and be seized of the Reversion
or Remainder, Reversions or Remainders, of the Manors Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments, so to be leased or granted, during the continuance of the same
Leases or Grants, and after the determination thereof, then also of the said
Manors etc. so leased or granted to such uses and intents, as they the said A.
Lord G. etc. should have, stand, or been thereof seized, by the purport and true
meaning of these presents, if no such Lease or Grant had been thereof made. And
that of and for such Estate and Estates, in such order and degree with the same
Remainders, and in such manner and form to all intents and purposes as they
should have stand, or been thereof seized by the purport and true meaning of
these presents, if no such Lease or Grant, had been thereof had or made. Here a
Letter of Attorney comes into certain persons made for the Livery of Seisin to
the Feoffees.

After follows a Proviso, that if the Viscount by his Writing signed and
sealed in the presence of three Witnesses, shall repeal, and determine or
declare to be determined all or any the use aforesaid, or of the premises or
any part thereof, that then and from thenceforth, the said uses so to be
determined or declared to be repealed for all such Lands and the uses thereof
so to be declared and determined, shall be void and of none effect. And that
then the Feoffees shall thereof stand seized to Viscounts use and his Heirs.

Then follows a Covenant on the Viscount his part, That if the Estate of the
premises be not effectually conveyed from him by Force of this Grant to the
said Feoffees to the Uses before specified on this side the last day of October
now next coming, that then and from thenceforth, the Viscount and his Heirs,
and all other to be seized of the premises, so not sufficiently conveyed,
shall be thereof seized to the uses above specified, and to such Uses and with
such Remainders, as the said Feoffees or Survivor of them should have stand
seized thereof by the purport of these presents, in case the Estate thereof,
had been perfectly assured to them or any of them according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents, In witness whereof, as well the said Viscount
as the said Feoffees to every part of these Indentures Tripartite, have set
their several Seals etc.

A Note of one of the Liveries of Seisin, with the Attornment of the Tenants of
one of the Manors.
MEmorandum, That the fifteenth day of July, in the fourteenth year, etc.
Livery of seisin was delivered and given by W. W. one of the Attorneys
mentioned in the Indentures hereunto annexed, of in and upon the Lands of the
Ferm of Guildshill-Hall, parcel of the Manor of T. mentioned in the said
Indentures, and also of in and upon the Manor house and Demesne Lands of T.
(by the Assent of I. P. Lessee for years of the same saving his Term) and also
of in and upon the Copy woods called T. Park, to R. B. one of the Feoffees
contained in the said Indentures according to the Tenor purport and intent
mentioned in the said Indentures, and for and in the name of the said Manor of
T. with the Appurtenances and all other the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, mentioned in the said Indentures, situate and being within the
said County, and in the name and behalf of all the Feoffees, mentioned in the
said Indentures.

And the Tenants of the said Manor, whose Names are immediately Under written
being present at the same Execution, and hearing the said Indentures read, did
attorn, and fully assent to the same, according to the Tenor Purport, intent,
and uses mentioned in the same Indentures.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M.
THE Viscount himself did make some of the other Liveries of the other Land to
one of the Feoffees in stead of the first of them, and Attorment was every
where made.

GRANTS.
A Grant of Lands in Exchange, Penned by Edmund Plowden Esquire.
THis Indenture, etc. Between E. M. etc. of the one part, and I. P. on the
other part witnesses, That the said E: M: has given and granted, and by these
presents, does give and grant unto the said I. P. one Croft or Close of
Freehold Land, called or known by the name of the Breach etc. with all and
every of their appurtenances, situate lying and being in W: in the County of
B: for and in exchange for all the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the
said I. P. called or known by the name of etc. in W. aforesaid in the said
County of B: to have and to hold the said Croft, or Close, etc. to the said I.
P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, for, and in exchange, of and for the said
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments called Whitelands with the appurtenances,
and the said E. M. does Covenant etc. to free it from Encumbrances; and the
said I. P. has likewise on his part given and granted, and by these presents,
does fully, freely, and absolutely give and grant unto the said E: M: his Heirs
and Assigns, all those Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid with the
appurtenances commonly called or known by the name of Whitelands, situate
lying and being in VV: aforesaid in the said County of B. to have and to hold
the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments etc. to the said E: M. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, for and in exchange of and for the said Croft or Close of
land called the Breach. etc.

A Covenant that it is free from Encumbrances, etc. A Grant of a Freehold
estate in Land for term of life.
THis Indent. made, etc. Between M. L. and I. his wife, late the wife of T. D.
of the one party, and I: F. of the other party, Whereas A J. natural Mother of
the said M: by Indenture Tripartite, etc. for and in consideration of a
Marriage then to be had between the said M. and J. and toward the
accomplishment of certain Bonds, Promises, Covenants and agreements made upon
consideration of the said marriage, and for diverse other considerations, as in
the said Indent. Trip. is expressed, has Covenanted and Granted, to and with
R: S: and VV: F. their Heirs Executors and Assigns, that she the said A. and
all persons that then were seized, etc. should stand and be of the same
Messuages, Tenements and Premises with their appurtenances seized, to the use
of the said A: for and during her natural life, and after her decease to the
use of the said M: and I. his wife, for and during the natural lives of the
said M: and I: and of the longer liver of them, and afterward to such further
uses as in the said Indenture Tripartite are declared.

Now the said M: and I: his wife, for and in consideration of the sum of 100 l.
of etc. whereof etc. have given, granted, aliened, bargained and sold, and by
these presents etc. to the said I. F. and his Assigns, all the said two
Messuages, etc. and all other the Premises, and the said Indenture Tripartite,
and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Demand whatsoever which they the
said M. C. and I. his wife, or either of them, have or has, or ought to have,
to, of, and in the said two Messuages and Tenements, and all other the
Premises with the appurtenances or any part or parcel thereof, to have and to
hold the same two Messuages In this Habendum the word (Heirs) is good to be
used and warrantable by a Case 24. H. 8 in Brook. Title forfeiture of Lands. 87.
and Tenements with the appurtenances, and all and singular other the Premises
to the said I. F. and his Assigns, immediately from the day of the date of these
Presents, by and during all the terms of the natural lives of the said M. and
I. his wife, and of the life of the longer liver of them. And the said M. for
himself and for the said J. his wife his Executors, and Administrators, does
covenant, etc. that the said two Message and other the Premises, are, and
from henceforth during the lives of the said M and S I. and the life of the
longer liver of them shall abide and continue to the said I. F. and his Assigns
clear and free See Dyer 321. Part. 22. Grant by Fine by Tennant for life of his
Estate.
discharged and acquitted of, and from all and every former grants, charges, and
Encumbrances whatsoever before the ensealing, knowledging and Inrolling of
these presents, made, done or agreed unto, or to be had etc. by the said M: and
I: or either of them. In witness, etc.

The Grant of a Reversion.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I: B: etc. of the one part, and I: N: of the
other part. Whereas the said I. B. by his Indenture bearing date the first day
of A: last past, for the considerations in the same Indenture expressed, did
Grant, Bargain and sell to C. VV. etc. all those parcels of Land in B:
aforesaid etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder, and Remainders,
Rents and Services of all and every his Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments before mentioned, to have and to hold the Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments. and other the premises unto the said C: W. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the Ensealing and Delivery of the
said recited Indenture, until the first day of May now next following.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said I. B: for and in consideration of
a marriage already had and solemnized between him the said I. B. and M: his now
wife, and for a competent Jointure to be made and provided for the said M: does
by these presents give and grant to the said I: N: the Reversion of all and
every the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Heredita. with their, and every
their appurtenances, so granted bargained and sold, in, or by the said recited
Indenture to the said C: W:, to have and to hold the said Reversion of the said
Messuages Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments unto the said I: N. and his Heirs,
to the only uses, intents, and purposes herein after particularly following,
that is to say, of, for, and concerning all and every the said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in B: aforesaid, to the use and behoof of I.
B. and M. his wife for and during their natural lives, and the life of the
longest liver of them for the Jointure of the said M: and from and after their
decease, then to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the said I: B: which he
shall beget on the body of the said M: and for want of such issue, to the use
and behoof of the right Heirs of the said I. for ever; and of, for and
concerning the said Messuages and Tenements in C. aforesaid to the use and
behoof of the said J. B: and M: for the Jointure of the said M: and after their
decease, to the use of the right Heirs of the said J: B: for ever; and the said
J: B: for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administtators, and for every of
them, does by these presents Covenant and Grant to and with the said J. N. his
Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, that if she the said M:
shall happen to survive him the said J. B. that then she the said M. and her
Assigns, shall, or lawfully may, for and during all the term of her natural
life, have, hold, and quietly and peaceably enjoy the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Heredita. aforesaid, and every of them with their and every of
their appurt. according to the effect and true meaning of these presents
without any the lawful let, trouble, molestation, charges or eviction, of or by
any person or persons, any thing therein having or lawfully claiming by, from or
under the said I, B: the several Leases now in being to any the said Tenants of
any part of the said Premises, not exceeding the term of 21. years only
excepted. In witness, etc.

The Indorsment upon this Deed.

MEMORANDUM, That the recited Deed within mentioned made from the within named
J. B. to the within named C W. was this present sixth day of April 1615:
Sealed and delivered by the said I B. as his Deed: And afterward the said C W.
did enter into every several parcel of the Messuages and Lands within
written. and did take full and peaceable possession thereof, which being due.
These presents were sealed and delivered by the said J B. to the said J N. And
the said C W. did Atturne to the said Grantee by delivery of one penny to the
said J N. Witness of all the premises A Grant of a Clarkeship of a Court.
HEarle of D. Lord St: and St. Lord of Man etc. To all to whom these presents
shall come sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye that I the
said Earl, for diverse considerations me thereunto moving, and specially for
and in regard of the good and faithful service heretofore to me done, and
hereafter to be done to me and my heirs by my servant J D. Gent. Have given and
granted, and by these presents do give and grant unto my said servant, the
office, room and place of Clark of all and singular her Majesty's Courts,
Hallimotes, Leets, Wapentakes, hundred, Swanimots, and all other Her Majesty's
Courts, whatsover within the hundred and Forest of M. in the said County of
Chester. Together with the fees and allowances thereto belonging in as large,
ample and beneficial manner as R. H. now Clark, there holds or enjoys the
same. To have hold, exercise and enjoy the said office, room and place of
Clark of the said Courts, Halimots, Leets, Wapentakes, Hundreds, Swanymotes,
and other Courts whatsoever within the said Hundred and Forest of M aforesaid
unto my said servant and his assigns to be kept by his sufficient Deputy or
Deputies to be named by the said J D. by and with the consent of me the said
Earl or my heirs Together with the said Fees and allowances immediately from and
after the expiration, and, forfeiture or making void, by any lawful way or
means of one grant thereof heretofore made by the said R H. for a certain
Term yet enduring, unto the end of the Term of 21 years from thence next
following, and fully to be complete and ended, if he the said J D so long shall
live. Willing and commanding as well all and every my Deputy Stewards, as also
all Bailiffs and other Officers, Tenants, Resiants and Inhabitants, within the
said Hundred of M. and every of them to be aiding and assisting unto my said
Servant and his sufficient Deputy or Deputies (to be allowed as aforesaid) in
the due execution of the said Office, as to them and every of them (in respect
of my service shall appertain. Always Provided that if it fortune the said J
D. to dye before such time as he or his Deputy, be by any lawful manner of
means admitted to the exercise of the said Office. Then I the said E. do
Covenant, promise and grant for me my heirs executors and administrators by
these p^esents, to and with the said J D. his executors and Administrators and
every of them to pay, or cause to be paid unto the Executor or Administrator of
the said I. the sum of 10 l. of lawful English money within one year next
after the death of the said I. And this shall as well be a sufficient warrant
and discharge to all and singular my Bailiffs and other Officers within the
said Hundred and Forest, as also to every my Aud^tor and Auditors for the time
being for payment and allowance of the said Fees and allowances from time to
time during the said Term to my said servant or his sufficient Deputy as
aforesaid. Given under my hand and Seal, etc.

A Grant of a Leet, Park and free Warren.
HEnry the Eight by the Grace of God of England and France King, and Lord of
Ireland. To all to whom these our present Letters shall come, Greeting. Know ye
that we of our special grace, and of our certain knowledge and mere motion,
Have given and granted and by these presents, do give and grant for us and our
heirs unto our welbeloved in Christ R A. Esquire, a Leet or view of
Franck-Pledge within the Town of M. in and through this whole Lordship and
Manor of M. in the County of Lancaster of all his Tenants, their heirs and
assigns there being, and of all Resiants and Inhabitants which. now are or
hereafter shall be within the said Lordship, Manor and Town aforesaid with
Courts of view and Franck Pledge there yearly to be holden. We do also grant
unto the said R A. his heirs and Assigns, all and singular Fines and
Amerciaments, and also all other things which to such Leet or view of Franck
Pledge do belong, or may or ought to belong by any means within the Manor and
Town aforesaid. To have, receive, and exercise the Leet, view of Franck Pledge
and Court aforesaid, and all other the premises whatsoever to the said R. his
heirs and assigns without any account or Rent, or any other thing to us our
heirs or successors to be yielded paid, or made, besides one Red-Rose only to
be paid unto us our heirs or successors, at the Feast of the Nativity of Saint
John Baptist. We will also that the said Richard or his heirs by pretext of the
occupation or use of the Leet aforesaid or other the premises by us or our
heirs or successors, or by any of our Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators; Bailiffs
or other our Ministers whatsoever be prosecuted in any of the Courts of us, or
our heirs, nor troubled, molested or vexed, nor that any Minister of us or our
heirs into the Lordship or Manor aforesaid for the premises or any of them
for us, our heirs or successors in any wise do meddle: And moreover of our
greater special Grace, We do by these presents give and grant for us and our
heirs to the said R A. that he and his heirs for ever, have the liberty of one
Park for wild beasts, and also free Warren in all his Demesne Lands of and
within his Manor or Lordship of M. aforesaid with all liberties, which to such
liberty of Park and Warren do belong or appurtaine. To have enjoy and exercise
the said liberty of Park and Warren to the said R A. and his Assigns in all
his Demesne Lands aforesaid. Provided so, that the same Lands be not within the
bounds of our Forest. So that no man may enter into those Lands to hunt in
them, or to take any thing in them which to a Park or Warren do belong without
the License and good will of the said R. and his heirs, under the pain of
forfeiting to us 10 l. Wherefore we will and Command for us and our heirs that
he and his heirs have free Warren in all his Demesne Lands aforesaid. Provided
nevertheless that the same Lands be not within the Bounds of our said Forest
as is aforesaid. So that no man may into the said Lands to hunt in them, or to
take any thing which to a Warren belongs without the leave and goodwill of
the said R. and his heirs under the forfeiture of 10 l. to us as is aforesaid*
For that there is no express mention of the true yearly value, or any
certainty of the premises or any of them, or of any Grant or Grants heretofore
to the said R. by us, or by any of our Progenitors appears to be made. Or any
Statute, Act, Ordinance, or Provision to the contrary published, made or
provided, or any other Cause or matter to the contrary notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Witness
our self at Lancaster the tenth day of May in the 15 year of our Reign.

Of a Steward-ship.
TO all to whom these presents shall come. I. Lord Marquess W. and C: Lord
Stafford his Son and heir apparent sent Greeting. Know ye that the said Lord
M. and C. Lord Saint John. In consideration of the good and acceptable service
already done and performed and hereafter to be done and performed to them, and
either of them, and for diverse other good Causes and Considerations, therein
thereunto especially moving. Have for them their heirs and assigns, and the
heirs and the assigns of the Survivor of them. Give and grant unto D W: of
London Gent. the office of chief Steward, and the place and execution of
chief Steward-ship of all and singular the Lordships Manors, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments of them the said J. Lord M. W. and C. Lord. Saint J. or
either of them within the Realm of England and Dominion of Wales, whereof they
or either of them are now seized, or here after shall be seized. Or whereof any
person or persons whatsoever are now seized, or shall hereafter be seized for
the use and trust for them, or any of them, their or either of their Heirs
Executors, or Assigns of any estate whatsoever. And the holding and keeping of
all Courts, Courts Leet, views of Franck-Pledge, and of all other Courts of
what kind soever the same be now belonging or appertaining to them the said
Lord M: W: andC. Lord Saint J. or either of them, or which hereafter shall
belong to them, or either of them as being seized thereof, or to them or either
of them upon any use* or by reason of any Trust of any estate settled in any
other person or persons for their use, or in trust for them, or either of them.
And which have been accustomed or used to be holden and kept within all and
every, or any of the Lordships Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of
the said J. Lord M W. and C. Lo. Saint J. or either of them which they now
have, or shall hereafter at any time have or which any other person or persons
now have or shall have in trust for them, or either of them, their or either of
their Heirs, Executors or Assigns within the Realm of England or Dominion of
Wales or either of them in such sort, manner and form, and at such place and
places, and at such days and time at such Courts or any of them, have
heretofore been usually kept and holden. And also the said I. Lord M. W. and C.
Lord Saint J. do further by these presents for them, and either of them, and
their heirs, constitute, ordain and depute the said A W. to be Solicitor for
them and every of them, with full and absolute power hereby given to the said
D. W. for them, and in their and every of their names and steads to solicit,
prosecute and follow all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Troubles, and
Affairs whatsoever, whether in Law or equity which now do, or in any sort
whatsoever hereafter shall or may concern the said J. Lord M W. and C. Lord
Saint J. or either of them for or by reason of any Lordships, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of them or either of them within the Realm of
England or Dominion of Wales, whereof they or either of them are poffessed or
seized or any person or persons for them: Or any other cause whatsoever, as
well in all and every such Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, of or in any kind
whatsoever either in law or equity as shall be brought by the said Lord M: W:
and C. Lord Saint J. or either of them against any person or persons
whatsoever, as also in all Actions and Suits of any kind to be brought against
them or either of them, in any Court or Courts of Justice, and before any Judge
or Judges for any cause whatsoever, for his reasonable Salary and allowance in
that behalf. To have hold occupy, exercise and enjoy the aforesaid Office of
chief Steward, the place and Execution of the chief Stewardship oversight and
government in that behalf, of all and singular the Lordships, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of the said J: Lord M: W: and C. Lord Saint J. or
either of them which they or either of them or any other person or persons
whatsoever, now have or hereafter shall have in Trust, or to the use of them or
either of them, their or either of their heirs, or for any other estate
whatsoever, and the holding and keeping of all and all Manner of Courts usually
held and kept within the same: Together with all and all manner of Fees, Wages,
Rewards, Profits, advantages and emoluments to the said Office of chief
Steward or chief Stewardship of all the Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments of them the said J. Lord M: of W. and C: Lord St. J. or
either of them, which they now have or which any other person or persons now
have or hereafter shall have for them or either of them belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, or at any time heretofore accustomed and used to be paid,
rendered or received to, or by the chief Steward, or Stewards there for the time
being, for, or by reason of the said Office of Steward ship or being chief
Steward of the same.

Of the Clark-ship of the Peace by a Custos Rotulorum.
TO all to whom this present writing shall come A* E: of N. Lord of the Honors
of C. and P, Lord P. L. P, F: P. B. and L: Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, and Custos Rotulor. of the County of N. sends greeting, Know ye
that I the said E. relying upon the faithfulness diligence and circumspection
of S. L. of etc. in the County of N Gentleman, in and about the Execution of
the Office of the Clarkship or Clark of the peace of the said County of N. And
also, for diverse other good causes and considerations me thereunto especially
moving, have assigned given granted and appointed, and by this my present, have
confirmed to the said S. L. the Office of Clarkship, or Clark of the Peace of
the said County of N. and him the said S. L. Clark of the said Office of
Clarkship, or Clark of the peace of the County aforesaid, from time so long as
he shall be have himself well in the said Office, I do make ordain and constitute
in these presents, To have enjoy execute and occupy the said Office of
Clarkship, or Clark of the peace of the said County by himself or his
sufficient Deputy or Deputies, so long as he shall behave himself well therein,
with all and singular Fees Preheminences Allowances, Profits Emoluments and
Commodities whatsoever, to the said Office any way belonging or appertaining,
in as full and ample manner and form, as any other heretofore executing and
having the said Office of Clarkship or Clark of the peace had enjoyed received,
or ought to have enjoy or receive for the Execution of the said Office, In
witness whereof, etc.

Of an Extent.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I. D. of the Town of S. in the County of S.
Gentleman, and W. D. of, etc. witnesses, that whereas E. S. by the name of E:
S. Esquire, the first day of May in the year, etc. by one Recognizance taken
knowledged and sealed before Sir R. K. Knight, Lord chief Justice of England,
according to the form of the Statute for recovery of Debts in that case
provided, stands bounden to the said A: B: in the sum of 400 l. of lawful
English money, payable at the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord then next
following, as by the said Recognizance more at large it does and may appear.

And whereas also, the said I. D. has extended, and to him delivered in
Execution the Manor of N. with the Appurtenances in the County of M. at the
yearly Rent for the non-payment of the said sum of 400 l.

Now the said J: D: for diverse good causes and considerations, him thereunto
especially moving, has granted assigned and set over, and by these presents
does grant assign and set over unto the said VV: D: his Executors, etc: all his
Estate Right Title Interest and Demand, which he has by reason of the said
Extent and Liberate, of in and to the said Manor of N: with the Appurtenances,
and of and in every part and parcel thereof, and of in and to all and singular
Messuages Lands Tenements Meadows Leazows Pastures Rents Reversions and
Hereditaments with the Appurtenances so extended and delivered in Execution as
aforesaid: And the said J: D: for him, etc: does covenant etc: to and with the
said W, D. his heirs, etc: by these presents in manner and form following, that
is to say, That neither he the said J: D: nor his Executors, etc: at any time
hereafter shall do any Act or Acts, thing or things, whereby the said Extent or
the Estate Title or Interest of the said W D his Executors; etc: by reason of
the said Extent, may in any wise hurt, impeached, discharged, undone, or made
void:

And further, that he the said I. D. his Heirs, etc: shall and will at the
reasonable request Costs and Charges in the Law of the said W D. do suffer to
be done made and knowledged all and every such further and reasonable Act and
Acts thing and things, devise and devises in the Law, for the further assurance
surety and sure making and conveying of the premises, for and during the term
of the said Extent and Execution unto the said W D as by the learned Council
of the said W: D: shall be reasonably devised or advised, In witness, etc:

Of the next Avoyder of a Parsonage.
TO all to whom this present Writing shall come, A: B: Doctor in Divinity
sends greeting. Whereas our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth by her gracious
Letters Patents under etc. bearing date at etc. did give and grant for her and
her Heirs and Successors unto me the said A B the first and next Advowson
Donation Collation Presentation and free disposition of the Parish Church of H
in the County of S. and the right of Patronage thereof to have and to hold the
said first and next Advowson Donation Collation and free disposition to me the
said A. B. and my Assigns for the only and next vacation thereof, so that it
might be lawful for me the said A. B. and my Assigns by virtue of the said
gift and grant of the said Queen, any fit person to the said Church to the
Diocesan thereof or any other competent Judge in that behalf to present so soon
as the said Church as aforesaid by death Resignation privation Cession or by
any other way shall happen to be void and all and singular things which shall
be necessary to do and accomplish as fully and freely and entirely as the said
Queen her self might have don if her Majesty's said grant had not been made
unto me as by the said Letters Patents more at large it does and may appear now
know ye that I the said A. B. for diverse good causes and Considerations me
thereunto specially moving, have given granted and assigned unto C. D. the said
Letters Patents, and the the next Advowson Donation Collation Presentation and
free disposition of the parish Church aforesaid to the said C: D: and his
assigns for the next Avoidance and next Advowson of the same only, so that it
shall be lawful to and for the said C. D. and his Assigns, as well by the
authority of the said Letters Patents as by force and virtue of these presents
any fit person to the said Church to the diocesan of the same or any other
competent judge in that behalf to present when the same Church as is aforesaid
by death Resignation Privation Cession or by any other means shall happen to be
void and all and singular things which shall be necessary to be done in and
about the Premises to do and accomplish as fully free and entirely as I my
self might have done if this present grant had not been made, In witness etc.

Of a Presentation from the King.
JAMES by the Grace of God, etc.
To the Reverend Father in Christ T. by Gods permission Bishop of D. or to his
Vicar General, or other competent Judge in that behalf, having power to admit
this our Presentation whatsoever greeting.
To the Rectory of the Parish Church of B. in the County of S. within your
Diocese by the free and voluntary Resignation of the worthy man T. N. Clerk,
Doctor in Divinity last, and immediate Rector and Incumbent there by Law or in
Fact, or by any other lawful way or means now void, and in full right to our
Presentation belonging. Our Welbeloved in Christ W. P. Clerk Bachelor in
Divinity to your Fatherhood by virtue of these presents, we do present
requiring as much as to you belongs the said W. P. to the said Rectory of the
Parish Church of B. Rector to admit him Rector of the same, and of and in the
same, wih all the rights and appurtenances thereof whatsoever, rightly and
Canonically to institute and invest, and all other things to do and fulfill,
which to your Pastoral Office belongs, that you will do with favor. In
witness, etc.

Of an Advowson from a Common Person.
TO all, to whom these Presents shall come, A. B. the true and undoubted Patron
of the Rectory of the Parish Church of D. in the County of S. and Diocese of C.
and L. Greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye that I the said A. B. have
Given Granted, and by this my present Writing have confirmed unto C. D. of etc.
Esquire, the first and next Advowson, Nomination, Presentation and free
Disposition of the foresaid Rectory of the Parish Church of D: with all the
Members and Appurtenances whatsoever, willing, and by this my present Writing
Granting, that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said C D. his
executors and administrators to the said Church, with all rights and
appurtenances whatsoever, whensover, and howsoever, by Death, Resignation,
Deprivation, Cession, Permutation, Dismission, or any other way he same Church
first and next shall happen to be void, any honest and learned Clerk to
present, and all other things which to the said Charge or Office belonging to
do and fulfill for the first and next avoidance only as fully, etc. as I my self
might do, etc.

Of a Presentation by a private person.
TO the Reverend Father in Christ, T. by Divine permission Bishop of C. and L.
or to his Vicar General T. N. of etc. Esquire; sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting, to the Rectory of the Parish Church of P. within your Diocese by
the death of R. A. last Incumbent there being now void and in my Gift, by
virtue of a Gift and Grant thereof to me the said T. N. made by T. O. Esquire; the
true and undoubted Patron of the same Parsonage by a sufficient Writing under
his Seal at Arms, bearing date etc. by which the said T. O. the first and next
Advowson, Donation, Nomination, Presentation, and free Disposition of the same
Parsonage, with its Rights and Appurtenances whatsoever, did Give and Grant my
Welbeloved in Christ T. L. Clerk to your Fatherhood, I do present, Humbly
beseeching you so far forth the said T: L: to the said Rectory of the Parish
Church of P: aforesaid to admit him Rector of the same Church to cause to be
instituted and inducted with all its Rights and appurtenances whatsoever, and
all other things to do and fulfill, which to your Pastoral Office belongs, you
will vouchsafe with favor to do. In witness, etc.

An Indenture between the Patron and Vicar.
Witnesses, That H. B. Patron of the Vicaridge of P. Have had and received
before the Ensealing hereof of VV: S: Clerk, Vicar of P, aforsaid the sum of
etc. given unto me the said H. B. by him upon mere good will, and not by any
promise or agreement to be paid by the said W. S. either directly or indirectly
to me the said H. B. or to any other to my use before the Admission,
Institution and Induction of the said W. S. whereupon I the said H. B. for me
and my Heirs etc. do Covenant etc. to and with the said W. S. by these
presents, that he the said W. S. shall or may from time to time, and at all
times hereafter during the term of his natural life peaceably and quietly,
have, hold, and enjoy, the said Vicaridge of P. together with all Oblations,
Obventions, Tithes, Glebe-Lands, Rights Profits and Appurt. to the same
belonging, without any Let, Hinderance or Disturbance of me the said H. B. or
of any other person or persons claiming, by from or under me the said H. B. or
by my consent or procurement.

A Covenant that it shall continue discharged of Pencions, etc. Of a
Manumission.
TO All to whom these Presents shall come, etc. T: L. Lord of the Manor of D:
sends Greeting Whereas A. B. otherwise called A: B: our native Son of C: B:
otherwise called C: B. our Native belonging or appendant to our Manor of D: in
the County of E: was begotten in Villanage, and for such a one, and as such a
one was commonly called, held, had and reputed openly, publicly and privately.

Know yea that I the said T: H. for diverse good and lawful causes me thereunto
moving for me and my Heirs for ever have manumitted, released, and from the
yoke of Servitude and Villenage discharged, and by these my Letters Patents do
Manumit free, and discharge the said A: B. with all his Sequels begotten or to
be begotten, with all his goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements by him
already bought, or hereafter to be bought whatsoever:

Know ye also that I the said T: H: to have Remised, Released, and for me my
Heirs etc. has quite claimed, and by this my present Writing do remit release
and quite claym unto the said A: B: and his Heirs and all his Sequels, all and
all manner of actions real and personal, Suits, Quarrels, Services, Challenges,
Trespasses, Debts and Demands whatsoever, which against the said A: B: or any
of the Heirs of his Sequels, or any of them, I have or had, or which I or my
Heirs hereafter might have by reason of the Servitude and Villenage aforesaid,
or for any other cause whatsoever, from the beginninng of the world until the
day of the making of these presents; so that neither I the said P: L. nor my
Heirs, nor any other by or for us or in our names, any action right, title,
claim, interest or demand of Villenage or Servitude by the Kings Writ, or by
any other means whatsoever against the said I. B: or his Sequels begotten or to
be begotten, or against the Goods, Chattels, Lands and Tenements purchased or
hereafter to be purchased from henceforth may exact, claim or challenge at any
time hereafter, but that we be wholly and for ever thereof barred by these
presents. And I the said T: L: and my Heirs, the said A. B. with all his
Sequels begotten or to be begotten free men against all men will warrant for
ever by these presents: In Witness whereof.

Of the Office of a Receiver and Surveyor.
TO all to whom, etc. E. Earl of D. sends Greeting. Know ye that I the said
Earl have given and granted, and by these presents, do give and grant unto A.
B. Gent. the Office of Receiver of all the Rents, issues, profits, sums of
money arising growing, renewing or coming out of all my Manors, Lands and
Tenements whatsoever in the County of B. And also the Office of Surveyor, of
all and singular my foresaid Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever. And him the said A B Receiver and Surveyor of the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid have ordained and appointed, and by
these presents do ordain and appoint. To have and to hold the said Offices of
Receiver and Surveyor in as ample manner and form, as any other or others the
foresaid Offices or either of them have at any time heretofore have used and
had the same: Know ye also, that I the said Earl, Have given and granted unto
the said A B: for the execution and performance of the said Offices an Annual
or yearly Rent of 20 l. To have take, receive and levy, for term of his
natural life by his own hands out of the Rents, Issues, and profits of the
said Manor Lands, etc: at the Feast of etc. by equal portions: And if it
happen the said Annual rent of 20 l. to be behind and unpaid -- Then as in
other distresses.

Of a Keeper of a Park.
KNow all men, etc. That I A B. Knight, Lord of the Manor of D. Have given and
by these presents have granted to my faithful servant C D. the custody or
Office of keeper of my Park of E in the County of S. and have made and
appointed him my Parker of my Park aforesaid. To have and to hold the said
Custody or Office by himself or his sufficient Deputy (for whom he will be
answerable unto me) during the natural life of the said C. with the wages of 4
d. for every day yearly during his life: to be taken by the hands of the
Receiver, Bailiff, Farmer of my Lordship, or Manor of E: aforesaid for the
time being yearly, during the life of the said C: out of the Rents and profits
of the said Manor with the appurtenances: At the Feasts, etc: by even and
equal portions. And one Robe, such as my Servants have at the feast of the
Nativity of our Lord when I or my Heirs shall be pleased to give such Liveries:
And if it shall happen, etc: To distraine, and the distresses so taken lawful
to carry away lead, or drive, and the same with him to retain, until of the
wages aforesaid, And all arrearages thereof (if any be) be fully satisfied and
paid: Wherefore I do will, and command the Receivers, Bailiffs, Farmers and
other occupiers of my said Manor of E. both now and hereafter to be. That out
of the Rents, Issues, Farms and profits of my foresaid Manor with the
appurtenances, that he or they pay or cause to be paid to the said C. D. or his
assigns, the wages aforesaid of 4 d. for every day at the Feasts aforesaid, by
equal portions from year to year, and Term to Term, during the life of the
said C, Know ye also that I have more over given, and by these presents, have
granted unto the said C. pasture for one horse and five Kine within the Park
aforesaid, during the life aforesuid, to be depastured: To have to the said C:
during his life with free ingresse and egresse and regresse, to drive the same
in and out of the said Park without any contradiction whatsoever. So as
nevertheless the said C D: by himself or his sufficient Deputy do well and
faithfully keep and exercise the said Office, for whose doings he will answer.
In Witness, etc.

Of an Auditor-ship.
TO all to whom these presents shall come. H. Earl of D. sends Greeting.
Know ye that I said Earl. Have made ordained, constituted and appointed A B.
Gent. our Auditor to hear and determine, all and singular the accounts of all
my Receivers and Bailiffs, Farmers, and other my Officers and Ministers of all
and every my Manors, Lordships, Lands and Tenements to me accomptable within
the Kingdom of England, and to do and execute all and every thing which the
nature of accounts does exact and require. To have hold execute and occupy the
Office aforesaid for term of his life by himself or his sufficient Deputy for
his yearly fee of 10 l. and for Paper, etc. for writing the Rolls of account 13
s. 4. d. to be taken out of the issues, profits, and Revenews of my Manors,
Lordships, Lands and Tenements aforesaid by the hands of my Bailiffs and
Farmers for the time being. And I do also grant by these presents unto the said
A B. or his Deputy, who in the exerciseing of the said Office shall be employed
in going, riding, or returning for every day 12 d. and for every servant of the
said A. or his Deputy 12 d. requiring and commanding all my Officers and
Ministers etc. -- Vt supra.

Of a Bayliwick.
TO all, to whom this present writing shall come. A B. of C. in the County of
D. sends greeting. Know ye that I the said A. in the fidelity Circumspection
and due diligence of my beloved servant G H. to me and my posterity hereafter
to be done and performed, very much relying and confiding. Have made ordained,
and by this my present writing, constituted the said G H. of the Town, Manor,
or Lordship of R. in the County of L. and Collector and Receaver, of all and
singular my Rents, Fines, Amerciaments and Estreats of Court Leets, or views of
Franck-Pledge there: And of all other profits by reason of the said Courts
Leet, or view of Franck Pledge, any way arising emergent or coming. To have
hold, exercise and occupy the said Office to the said G. by himself so long
as he shall well behave himself toward me, and shall a true and just account
of his Receipts make unto me, and the same shall well and truly pay and
satisfy. Taking of me for his yearly wages 5 l. at the Feasts, etc. by equal
portions by mine own hands after his account and full payment at every half
year, and the gifts, rewards, and emoluments to the same Office due and
accustomed. Requiring, etc. Vt supra.

Of a Deputation or Vnder-Steward ship.
TO all, etc. A. B. etc greeting. Whereas C D. for etc. Esquire by his writing,
bearing date, etc. Has appointed and ordained me the said A. his Steward of
his Lordships and Manors of D. and S. and of all Courts of view of
Franck-Pledge and Leets within the Manors aforesaid. To have hold occupy and
exercise the office aforesaid by me or my sufficient Deputy or Deputies for
term of my life with the Fees, Wages, Rewards to the same Office belonging or
anciently due and accustomed, together with the yearly Fee of 5 l. for the
exercise and occupying the said Office as by the said writing more at large
appears. Now know ye me the said A B. to have made* ordained, and by these
presents to have constituted my welbeloved R S. my Deputy or Under-steward of
the Manors or Lordships aforesaid, and of all and every Courts of view of
Franck-Pledge and Leets within the Manors or Lordships aforesaid. To have,
hold, occupy and exercise the said Office of Deputy Steward of me the said A.
for term of natural life. Taking and having yearly, during the said term for
exercising and occupying the said Office all Fees, Wages, Rewards and Profits
to the same Office belonging, or auntiently due or paid. Together with the said
annual Rent or Fee of 5 l. and fully and wholly, and in as ample manner and
form. As I now, or heretofore have had received, have used, or to do have
accustomed. In Witness.

Of a Ward within age.
TO all, etc. T E. of A. sends greeting: Know ye, That I the said Earl, for
and in consideration of a certain sum of money to me by R H: Gent. before
hand paid. Have given, and by these presents have granted to the said R: the
custody of W. B. Son and Heir of T W. now deceased, and of all his Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments which of right ought to come into my hands, by
reason of the minority of the said W. after the death of the said T. who held
off me at the day of his death by Knights service To have and to hold the
custody aforesaid, and the marriage of the said W to the said R H. and his
assigns until the said W. shall attain to the full age of 21 years, and so
long as it shall happen the said W. to die before he shall accomplish the age
of twenty one years his heir being within age. Then know ye, that I the said
Earl for the consideration aforesaid. Have given and by these presents have
granted unto the said R. the custody of the same heir and of his Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid, together with the Marriage of the same
Heir, and so from Heir to Heir, u^till one of them shall attain to the age
of twenty one years. Given under my hand, etc.

Of an Advowson of a Parsonage in Fee.
THe King, etc. Know ye, That we of our special Grace and mere motion: Have
given, and by these presents have granted unto our beloved Subject T T. the
Advouson, donation, fee, disposition and Right of Patronage and Presentation of
and to the Rectory and Parish Church of D. in the County of S. To have and to
hold the said Advouson Donation free disposition and right of Patronage unto
the said T T. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. In witness whereof, etc.

Of a Donation of a Free Chapel.
TO all, etc. A B. of, etc. Greeting, Whereas the free Chapel of R: in the
Diocese of L. is known to be void and of right does belong to my gift. Know
ye me the said A B. the said Chapel with all its Rights and Appurtenances
whatsoever to have given and granted to my welbeloved in Christ C D. Clerk an
honest and learned man, And by virtue of these presents, the said C. in bodily
possession of the said Chapel have inducted. In Witness, etc.

Of an Annuity given to a Servant for promotion in Marriage.
TO all, etc. A. B. of C. in the County of D. Esquire sends greeting. Whereas
there is a great hope of a marriage between J S my servant, and one E. G: Know
ye, that I the said A. B. being willing to augment the Commodity and profit of
my said servant in respect of his diligence in his service well and faithfully
performed: That he may be the better enabled to live. Have given granted, and
by these presents have confirmed to the said J. S. and E. an Annuity or yearly
Rent of etc. issuing out of the Manor of Dale in the said County of D. etc. To
have and hold, and enjoy unto the said J S. and E. and the longer liver of
them, and their Assigns, for and during the natural life of me the said A B.
At the Feasts, etc. and if it shall happen, etc. (ut alibi.) Provided always
that if the said marriage shall not succeed or be consummated, or if the said J
S and E. by me or by my means shall any way be preferred, or either of them,
shall obtain any Annuity or Annual Rent, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
or any certainty of livelihood, to have and to hold during my life of the
yearly value of 10 l: or more. That then and from thenceforth these present
writing shall be void and of none effect, any thing therein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc:

Of a Chief Rent, Homage, and Service.
KNow all men, etc. That I A. B. of etc. Have given and granted, and by this my
present writing have confirmed unto C. D: of etc. all that my Rent of twenty
shillings homage and free services issuing out of one Tenement, and four yard
Land of J. Saint in D. in the said County withal and every the appurtenances,
which tenement and four yard Land were heretofore the Lands of J. N. To have,
hold, receive and take the said 30 s. rent, homage and services to the said C
D: his Heirs and Assigns for ever: Paying doing and yiedling in the same
manner and form as the said J. S. and his Ancestors to me and my Ancestors
were accustomed to pay, do and yield. And if it shall happen the said yearly
rent of twenty shillings, etc. to behind, etc. That then it shall be lawful to
and for the said C D. his Heirs and Assigns into the foresaid, etc. to enter,
etc. In Witness.

Of an Annuity for Council not to be charged upon the Person of the Grantor.
TO all to whom, etc: A. B. of C. in the County of D: sends greeting. Know ye
that I the said A. have given and granted, and by this my present Deed, have
confirmed unto E F. Gent. for his Council already given, and hereafter to be
given an Annuity or Annual Rent of 5 l: issuing out of all my Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in S in the said County of D. To have and hold to
the said E F. for and during the Term of his natural life. Provided always,
That this my present writing, nor any thing therein specified, shall any way
extend to charge my person by Writ of Annuity, or any other way whatsoever, but
only to charge my said lands and tenements aforesaid, with the Annual Rent
aforesaid. In Witness, etc.

Of an Annuity to the use of a Woman, to begin after the death of the Grantor.
TO all to whom, etc: A B. of etc. Yeoman sends greeting. Know ye that I the
said A: have given and granted, and by these presents to give and grant unto C
D. and E. F. an Annuity or Annual rent of 10 l. issuing out of all my Message
and Tenement and Lands thereto belonging with the Appurtenances in S.
aforesaid, to have and to hold to the said C. D. and E. F. and their assigns,
for and during the term of the natural life of R. S. to the use of the said R.
S. whom I do purpose by the Grace of GOD, to take to wife, to be paid at the
Feasts of etc. by equal portions, the first term of payment thereof to begin
at such of the said Feasts as shall next happen after the death of me the said
A B. and not before, and if it happen the said yearly Rent, etc. In witness,
etc.

Of a Reversion.
TO all to whom etc. A. B. of etc. greeting, Whereas T. B. my Father has and
holds for term of his life, a certain Tenement with the appurtenances in G,
called or known by the name of H. the Reversion whereof to me and my heirs
belongs, Know ye that I the said A have given, and by this my present
writing, have confirmed unto J. N. the Reversion of the forsaid Tenement with
the Appurtenances when it shall happen after the decease of my said Father, to
have and to hold the said Reversion with the Appurtenances when it shall happen
to the said J N his Heirs and Assigns for ever, In witness, etc.

Of an Annuity with Condition, that the Wife shall claim no Dower.
TO all to whom, etc. A. B. of C. in the county of D: Gentleman, sends
greeting, Know ye, that I the said A B have given and granted, and by this my
present writing have confirmed unto T. G. and H. I. one annuity or anuall Rent
of 20 l. issuing out of all and every those my Messuages Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments in C: aforesaid in the county aforesaid, with their and every of
their Appurtenances, to have and to hold to the said T: G: and H I and their
Assigns for and during the term of the natural life of E. B. my wife, to be
paid at the Feast of, etc. by equal portions the first day or term of the
payment thereof to begin at such of the said Feasts, as shall first and next
happen after the death of me the said A, to have and receive the said annuity
or annual Rent of 20 l. at the Feasts aforesaid in form aforesaid, to be paid
to the said T. G. and H. I. their Executors and Assigns for and during the
natural life of the said E. for and in consideration, and in the name of the
whole Dower of the said E. to be had out of all the Manors Lands and Tenements
which late were, or now are the Manors Lands and Tenements of me the said A B.

And if it happen the said annuity or annual Rent of 20 l, or any part or
parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid at any of the said Feasts etc, that then
it shall be lawful, etc, to distrain etc.

Provided always, that if the said E. or any other person or persons in her
name and by her affent act or procurement at any time after the death of me the
said A. any right title claim or demand in the name of her dower, of and in the
said Messuages Lands Tenements and other the premises, or in any part or
parcel thereof, shall claim or demand to have by any way whatsoever, that then
and from thenceforth, the payment of the said annuity or annual Rent of 20 l.
or any part or parcel thereof shall cease, and that this Grant thereof, shall
cease determine and be void, this my present Writing, or any thing or matter
therein contained specified or expressed in any wise notwithstanding, In
witness, etc.

JOYNTURES:
A Woman's Ioynture of Land in London, passed by way of Recovery.
THis Indenture tripartite, etc. Between W. I. of L Gentleman, on the first
party, and R. P. Citizen and Leatherseller of L. and A P of the same City
Goldsmith on the second party, and E. P. and C. P on the third party;
witnesses, That the said W. I. for and in consideration of a Marriage to be
had and solemnized between the said W I on the one party, and F. P. Daughter of
the said R. P. on the other party, and for a Jointure to be made to the said F.
and for diverse other good considerations, the said W. especially moving, does
covenant and grant for himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators to and
with the said R. P. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, by these presents.

And it is covenanted granted and agreed by and between all the said parties to
these presents in manner and form following, That is to say, That he the said
W. I. within (...) days next ensuing the date of these presents, shall make
and execute or cause etc. unto the said R. P. and A. P. and to their heirs, a
good lawful perfect and absolute Estate in the Law in Fee simple, of and in
all that Message, etc. All which said Tenements and premises aforesaid, are
situate within the parish, etc. and also of and in the Reversion and
Reversions of all and singular the same premises, to the intent that the said
R. P. and A. P. and their Heirs shall and may stand seized of the same
premises, whereby within one month, next after the making and Execution of
the said Estate, of all and singular the said Messuages and Tenements, and
other the premises to the said R. and A. and their Heirs in form aforesaid,
the said E. P. and C. P. or the Survivor of them, shall pursue and bring the
Kings Majesty's Writ of Right Patent, our of his Highness Court of Chancery
against the said R. and A. or the Survivor of them, to be directed to the Mayor
and Sheriffs of the City of L. By which Writ of Right Patent, the said E. andC.
or the Survivor of them in the Guild Hall of L. before the said Mayor and
Sheriffs in the Court of Hustings, according to the custom of the said City,
shall demand against the said R. P. and A. P. or the Survivor of them, the said
Messuages and Tenements, and all and singular other the Premises with their
Appurtenances by the names of, etc. in L. or by such other Names or quantities,
as shall be reasonably devised: And that the said R. P. and A. P. or the Survivor
of them in his or their own persons, or by his or their sufficient Attorney
shall appear to the said Writ, and after Declaration thereupon made, shall make
defense and vouch over to warranty the said W. I, who shall appear and enter
into warranty, and vouch over the common Vouchee, which common Vouchee shall
imparl, and after make default in contempt of the Court, whereby Judgment shall
be given in the said Writ against the said R. and A. or the Survivor of them,
and Execution thereof shall be had and sued in such sort, that a perfect
Recovery with a double Voucher shall be had and perfectly executed of all and
singular the premises.

And further, it is by these presents, fully and expressly witnessed and
declared.

And also it is covenanted granted condescended and agreed by and between all
the said parties by these present Indentures, that the said Recovery to be had
and executed as aforesaid, and the Execution thereof shall be: And that the true
intent and meaning of the same is, and that all other Recoveries to be had,
suffered, levied, or executed, of the Premises or any part or parcel thereof
within one year after the making and executing of the said Estate of the
Premises, to the said R. and A. and their Heirs as aforesaid shall be, and
that the said E. and C. and their Heirs, and all and every other person and
persons, and their Heirs, which at any time hereafter shall be seized of the
said Messuages and Tenements, and other the Premises, with their
appurtenances, and of every or any part thereof, by virtue of any Recovery or
Recoveries aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of all and singular the
Premises, with the appurtenances to the only uses and intents hereafter in
these presents expressed and mentioned, and to none other use intent or purpose
whatsoever; That is to say, To the use of the said W: and his Heirs, until
Marriage shall be had between him the said W: and the said F: P: And from and
after Marriage had between the said W: and F* then to the use of the said W.
and F. for and during all the term of their natural lives, and the natural
life of the longer liver of them two, and after their deceases, then and from
thenceforth to the use of the Heirs of the bodies of the said W. and F. between
them two lawfully to be begotten; And for lack of such Issue, then to the use
of the Heirs of the body of the said W. I. and for lack of such Issue, then to
the use of such person and persons, and his, her, or their Heirs, as the said
W. hereafter by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise by writing, under his
hand and Seal, fealed and delivered in these presence of three Witnesses at the
least shall name or appoint: And for and in default of such nomination or
appointment, then to the use of the next right Heirs of the said W. I: for ever.

And moreover ^he said W. I. for him etc. covenanteth with the said Yearly
value.
R. P: his etc. That the said Message Tenements and other the Premises now
be, and from henceforth for ever shall or may remain, come, continue and be to
the uses before in these present Indentures expressed and mentioned as well of
the full and clear yearly value of 20 l. of etc. over and beyond all Charges
and Reprises whatsoever; as also free and Discharge of Encumbrances.
clearly discharged exonerated and acquitted, or otherwise by the said W: his
Heirs Executors or Administrators, well and sufficiently saved and kept
harmless, of and from all and singular Bargains etc. had, made, done, or
suffered, or hereafter to be had, made, done, or suffered, before a perfect
Recovery shall be had and perfectly executed, of all and singular the
Premises, with their Appurtenances, to the uses before in these presents
expressed; According to the true intent and meaning of these present Indentures
(the chief Rents and Services hereafter to grow due for the Premises, to the
chief Lord or Lords of the Fees of the same, and all Leases for years
heretofore made and granted, not exceeding the term of 21. years now to come,
not hurtful or prejudicial to the clear yearly value of 20 l. before
specified; and whereupon the old usual yearly Rents or more, been reserved or
shall be yearly due and payable, during the continuance of the same Leases, to
the uses before in these presents expressed, only except and fore-prised.

And furthermore the said W. covenanteth with the said R: his etc. Further
assurance.
that for the better assurance of all and singular the Premises, with all and
singular their Appurtenances, to be had and made sure, to the uses before in
these Indentures specified and limited, he the said W. and his Heirs, and all
and every other person and persons, and their Heirs, any thing lawfully having,
or lawfully claiming in or to the Premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or
under the said VV: or the said P: I: his Father, or M. I his Mother, or any of
them (other then only the Leases, and their Assigns, claiming for or by reason
of their Leases before excepted in these presents) shall and will upon every
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said R: P:
his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, do make knowledge and suffer to
be done, all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, be it by Fine Feoffment, Recovery with Voucher or Vouchers, single or
double, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, with warranty against them
and their Heirs only, as by the said R. his etc. shall be devised etc. at any
time or times, within the space of five years, next after the day wherein
marriage shall be had between the said VV. I. and F. P.

And the said R. P. for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenant
for a Child's Portion (besides the present advancement) at the death of the
Father.
and every of them, does covenant annd grant to and with the said VV. I. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents; And by these presents does
declare his mind and pleasure to be, that after the decease of the said R. P.
the said F. his Daughter (if she be then living) at or upon reasonable demand,
shall or may have a reasonable and rateable Child's Portion, agreeable to the
ancient use and custom of the City of L. of all such Goods Chattels and Credits
as shall be of the said R. P. at the time of his decease in such manner, as any
other Child or Children of the said R. P. shall or ought to have, by virtue or
means of the same custom; Any advancement received before or at time of
marriage of the said W. and F. or after their marriage by or from the said R.
P. in any wise notwithstanding: In witness, etc:

LEASES.
A Lease of VVoods with diverse good Covenants.
THis Indenture between E. I. of L. in the County of S. Gent. on the one party,
and G. K. Cit. etc. of L. on the other party, witnesses, That the said E. I.
for and in consideration of the sum of 50 l. of etc. whereof and wherewith etc.
Has demised granted betaken and to farm letten, and by these presents etc.
unto the said G. K. his Executors Administrators Demise.
and Assigns, all that Wood and parcel of Wood ground, called All that Wood
Ground.
and known by the name of W. otherwise W. containing by estimation 25. acres,
be it more or less, lying in L. in the County of K. now or late in the tenure
or occupation of the said E. I. and his Assigns, and every or any of them
abutting etc. or by whatsoever bounds the same is set forth or known, Together
with all Profits Benefits Commodities and Advantages of the And all Woods
Copices, etc.
said Wood and Wood-ground, Underwoods Coppises Springes Thorns Tennets Bushes
and Things in the same being, or to the same Wood or Wood-grounds Underwoods
Tennets Spraies Bushes Commons Hereditaments and Appurtenances thereof
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and all the Herbage and Pannage
Pasturing Feeding and other the Commodities, of all and singular the said
Premises, during the term of 61. years, hereafter in these presents mentioned,
that shall grow in or about the said Wood and Wood-grounds, and all and every
other the Premises with the Appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, and
all and singular Woods Underwoods Copices Springs Bushes Spraies Timber Trees,
and all other Trees great and small, and things whatsoever, as at any time
after the last day of April, which shall be in the year of our Lord God etc.
shall be standing, growing, increasing springing, lying, and being, or which
then ought to be left standing growing, and being upon and about the said
Premises, or any part thereof; To have and to hold the said Woods and
Underwoods, Habend.
and all and singular other the said Woods Underwoods, Coppices Springs Bushes
Spraies Things Profits Commodities Benefits and Advantages, and all other the
Premises, unto the said G. K. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from
the said last day of April, which shall be etc. unto the end and term of 61.
years, from thence etc. and fully to be complete and ended, to use and dispose
at the free liberty, most commodity, benefit and profit of the said G. K. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every Redend.
of them, yiedling etc. unto the said E I. his Heirs or Assigns 20 s. of
lawful etc. at two Terms etc. That is etc. at the Feasts of St. Michael etc.
and the Annunciation etc. or within six weeks next ensuing either of the same
Feasts by even portions, at or before the Mansion House of the said E. I. in L.
in the County of K. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of 20 s. to be
behind and unpaid, in part or in all, over or after any Feast or And if it
happen etc,
Term of payment thereof aforesaid, in which it ought to be paid by the said
space of six weeks, and lawfully asked at the house aforesaid, and no
sufficient Distress on the demised Premises to be had; That then it shall be
lawful unto the said E. I. his Heirs and Assigns, into all and singular the
said Ground to enter and the same to have again and retain, as in his or their
former Estate. And the said G. K. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and
all other Occupyers thereof, out and from the same utterly to expel amove and
put out, any thing herein comprised, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And the said E. I. for and in consideration of the said 50 l. as above now
Bargain and Sale.
paid, has etc. And by this Indenture, does fully clearly and absolutely
bargain and sell, give and grant unto the said G. K. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, all and singular the said Timber Trees Pollards and
all other Trees great and small, now standing, growing, springing, increasing,
lying, and being, or that hereafter shall stand etc. and which otherwise are or
ought to be reserved by the said E. I. in one Indenture dated etc. made between
the said E. I. on the one party, and I. G. of P. in the County etc. on the
other party, as all the Woods Underwoods Hedgerows great Timber, and all other
Timber Trees, and all other Trees Pollards* Tennets Spraies Bushes Thorns and
Commodities, that after the said last day of April, shall stand, grow, and be,
in and upon, or about the said Woods and Wood-ground, during the said term of
61. years (except and always reserved unto the said E. I. his Heirs and
Assigns, all Pollards, Elmes, and other Trees, which shall grow increase and be
in the Fences of the demised Premises, the Loppings and Toppings of which said
Pollards, Except etc. all Trees in the Hedges.
Elmes and Trees, so by these presents excepted, which has heretofore been
used to be lopt and topt; The said E. I. does likewise by these presents give
grant bargain and sell unto the said G* K. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, to have and to hold the said Hedge-rows, great Timber Trees and all
other Timber Trees, and other Trees Pollards Thorns and Commodities, Habend.
and all other the bargained Premises (except above by these presents
excepted) unto the said G. K. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, to the
only proper use and behoof of the said G. K. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns for ever. And the said E. I. covenanteth etc. in manner etc. viz. That
he the said G. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and may as well
between the day of the date of these presents, and the said last day of April,
during the said term of 61. years, at his and their free liberty and pleasure,
have peaceable free and quiet liberty, ingresse and regresse, course recourse
and passage into and from the Ingress and Regress.
said Wood and Wood-gound, and every part and parcel thereof, at all time and
times, for himself, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, Servants,
Workmen Horses Carts Cattle and carriage for to have, take, fell, cut down,
lop, top, carry away, make up, use, dispose, and convert to whatsoever use and
commodity he or they the said G. K. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
or any of them shall think good, all and singular the same timber Trees, and
all other the said Trees, Timber, Pollards, and all and singular other the said
Premises by these presents demised and bargained, and every part and parcel
thereof, during the said term of 61. years above demised (except the said Timber
and Pollards in the said Fences above herein excepted.) The loppings and
toppings whereof the said G. K. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, freely
and quietly at his and their pleasure, as above to lop and top; The said G. K.
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, not willingly hurting the said Woods
of the said I. G. mentioned in the fore recited Indenture.

And the said E. I: does covenant etc. in manner and form etc. That he Covenant
for enjoyance.
the said G. K. his Executors and Assigns, all and singular the said Premises
above by these Indentures demised, given granted bargained and sold, and every
part thereof, shall and may peaceably and quietly hew, fell, cut down, convert,
and dispose, have hold and demise in manner above expressed and declared,
during the said term of 61. years, without any lawful let interruption or
eviction of the said E. I: his heirs executors administrators or assigns, or of
any other person or persons: And that the said I. G. his Executors
Administrators Workmen and Officers, shall leave the said timber Trees, and all
other the said Pollards above by the said I. G. in and by the said Indenture
covenanted to be left: And the said G. K. covenants (...) Vendee to (...)
Standils (...)
etc. That he the said G. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall at
the felling of the said Woods and Underwoods which after the said last day of
April etc. shall be felled and cut down, leave standing in and upon the said
Grounds sufficient Standils, according to the Statute and custom of the Country
in that case used and accustomed. And further the said G. K. covenants etc.
sufficiently to hedge and enclose the said Wood-ground, (...) the (...) etc.
(...) Fee
during the said term of 61. years. And the said E. I. covenants etc. in form
etc. That he the said E. I. at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is
now very true sole and lawful Owner of all and singular the demised and
bargained Premises, and of every part thereof, of a good and perfect Estate in
Fee-simple, without any condition or alteration of use, and has now good right
full power and lawful authority to demise grant let to farm alien bargain
sell warrant and defend the same in manner Has good right to demise bargain
etc.
and form, according to the tenor of this Indenture, unto the said G. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns. And that the same demised and bargained
Premises, and every part thereof, are and be, and so shall continue Discharge
of Encumbrances.
during the said term of 61 years, unto the said G. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, free clear and clearly acquitted discharged or upon
request sufficiently saved harmless, and cleared of and from all and singular
former Bargains Sales Gifts Grants Annuities Rentcharge Rentseck Arrerages of
Rents Fines Forfeitures Mortgages Recognizances Statutes Condemnations
Judgments Executions Joyntures Dowers Troubles Titles and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had made committed executed caused procured done or suffered by the
said E. I. or his Assigns, or any for him or to his use, or by his means, or
otherwise the said yearly rent of 20 s. herein reserved, only except. And that
the said E. I. and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, and
their heirs, in whom any Further assurance.
lawful Right Reversion Remainder Estate Use or Title now is, shall be, or
remain, shall at all and every time and times hereafter upon request execute
eseal deliver and do unto the said G. K. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said G. his Executors and
Administrators, all and every such lawful Writing Obligation Conveyance Act
Devise and Assurance of and in the Premises, for and during the said 61.
years, or such term of years then to come of the said 61. years, to the use and
behoof of the said G. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, for the
further, more better and perfect assurance of all the said Premises, and every
part thereof unto the said G. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, clear
and clearly discharged as above, as by the said G. his Executors Administrators
or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
advised or devised: In witness etc.

A Lease of Herbage and Pawnage of Wood-Ground, the VVoods being formerly
granted.
THis Indenture, etc. Between I. M. of L. Gent. on the one party, and F: M: of
L. Gent. on the other party, witnesses, That the said I: M: for diverse
considerations him thereunto moving, has demised, granted, betaken, and to farm
letten, and by etc. unto the said F: M: all the Herbage, Pawnage, Pasturing and
Feeding, and other the Commodities of all that Wood-ground, commonly called or
known by the name of T: Park, with the appurtenances, set, lying and being in
the Parish of T. in the County of S: and also all that Meadow containing by
estimation eight acres be it more or less, lying Except Standers, etc.
and adjoining next to the North side of the said Wood-ground (except and to
the said I: M: his Heirs or Assigns, always reserved all such Trees, Standards
Storeers as are mentioned to be excepted or Covenanted to be left by the said
F: his Executors and Assigns in one pair of Indentures, between the said I: M:
and F: M. made, bearing date etc. now last past with free ingress, egress and
regress at all times, for the felling, cutting down, and carrying away of the
same Trees, Habend.
Standers and Storiers, and every or any part thereof) to have and to hold all
the said Herbage, Pannage, Pasturing Feeding, and other the commodities of the
said Wood-ground with the appurtenances, and also all the said Meadow, except
before excepted to the said F: M: his etc. from the Feast of the Annuntiation
etc. last past etc: unto the end and term of 21. years, from thence etc.
yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the first five years of the said
term unto the said Reddend.
I: M: his Heirs and Assigns 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. of etc. and yearly after the end
of the same five years during all the residue then to come of the said term of
21. years to the said I. M. his Heirs or Assigns 20 l. of like lawful money at
two Feasts or terms of the year, that is to say etc. And if it happen the said
yearly rent of 13. l. 6 ls 8 d. or any part or parcel thereof at any time during
the said five years, or the said yearly rent of 20 l. at the end and expiration
of the said term of five years to be behind and unpaid by the space of 30.
days next over or after, either of the said Feasts wherein the same ought to be
paid being lawfully asked, that then and from thence forth this present Lease
shall be utterly void and of none effect, any thing in these presents contained
to the contrary notwithstanding

And the said F. M. Covenanteth, etc. That he the said F. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges from
time to time, shall and will well and sufficiently repair, fence, scour and
amend all the Hedges, Ditches, Fences, Gates and Enclosures of the said
Wood-ground and Meadows as often, and when need shall require during the said
term, and the same upon the determination of this present Demise so
sufficiently repaired, senced, scoured and amended, shall leave and yield up.

Provided always that if the said I: M: his Heirs or Assigns, at any time
after the end and expiration of the first term of years of the said term of 21.
years shall be minded or disposed to resume, have, or take again the Premises
before by these Presents Demised, and thereof do give public notice and
knowledge at the Parish Church of T: aforesaid upon either of the Feast days
aforesaid, that then and immediately from, end after the end of one whole year
next after such notice given as aforesaid, the Lease shall cease, determine and
be u^terly void and of none effect. This Indenture, or any thing in these
presents contained to the contary thereof in any wise notwithstanding In
consideration whereof the said I. M. Covenanteth etc. that he the said I. M. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall well and truly content and pay or
cause etc. to the said F. M. his Executors or Assigns, the sum of 40 l. of
etc. at the Shop now in the tenure of I. W. Scrivener, situate in F. of L.
within one month next after, that the said F. M. his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, shall after such determination of this present Lease, leave and
depart from the Possession of the before letten Premises, and upon reasonable
demand to him the said I M. his Executors, or Administrators, thereof made.

And the said I: M: Covenanteth etc. That he the said F: M: his Executors and
Assigns, for the several yearly rents in form aforesaid, reserved and to be
paid and under other the Covenants aforesaid, on the part and behalf of the
said F: and his Assigns to be performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said Herbage, Pannage, Pasturing, Feeding,
and otherthe Commodities of all the said Wood-grounds, with the appurtenances,
and also the said Meadow except before excepted, for, by, and during all the
said term of 21. years according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, without let, disturbance, molestation, or interruption of the said I.
M. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, and without any lawful let etc. of
any other person or persons whatsoever by his assent or procurement. In
witness, etc.

A Lease of Copy hold Land, with recital of the Lords License Ad dimittend.
THis Indenture, etc. Between J. L. Citizen and Cloth-worker, etc. on the one
party, and S. M. Citizen and Haberdasher, etc. on the other party, witnesses,
that the said I. L. by virtue of a License by him before the ensealing of these
presents, procured and obtained of the Queens Majesty, Lady of the Manor of W.
in the County of S. for the granting and setting to farm of the Tenements, and
parcel of Ground hereunder demised to the said S. M. according to the Tenor
and true meaning of these presents, has demised, etc. and by these presents,
etc. to the said S. M. all those two customary Messuages or Tenements with
their Appurtenances and one little parcel of Ground thereunto adjoining,
holden by copy of Court Roll, of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, as of her
said Manor of W. and all and singular Houses Edifices Orchards, Gardens,
Cartilages, Profits, Commodities, Easements and Hereditaments whatsoever, to
the said Messuages or Tenements belonging or appurtaining, which Tenements and
other the demised premises are situate and lying in P. in the said County of
S. that is to say, Between the great house there of the said J. L. now in the
holding of Sir E. B. Knight, toward the West, and another Tenement or the said
J. L. now occupied by A. L. toward the East, and upon the River of Thames
toward the North, and upon the commonfeild of P. aforesaid toward the South. To
have and to hold the said two Tenements with their Appurtenances, and the said
parcel of ground, and all other the above demised premises to the said S. M.
his Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of the birth, etc. next, etc. unto
the end and term of fifteen years, from thence etc. yiedling and paying
therefore yearly during the said term unto the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns
30 s. of etc. in the Feasts of the Nativity etc. and the birth, etc. by even
portions. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of 30 s. or any part
thereof to be behind unpaid over or after any of the said Terms or Feasts of
payment thereof by the space of twenty days, it being in the mean time lawfully
asked, that then or at any time after it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns into the said Tenements and other the
premises, to enter and distrain, and the Distress or distresses there found,
lawfully to take lead drive and carry away, and with him and them to retain and
keep until the said yearly Rent with the arrerages thereof (if any be)
together with all their costs and damages in that behalf to be sustained, shall
be fully satisfied and paid to the said I: L: his Heirs or Assigns:

And the said S: M. covenanteth, etc: that he the said S: M. his Executors and
Assigns, shall and will at their Costs and Charges from time to time during the
said term of fifteen years, well and sufficiently uphold repair sustain
maintain and amend the said two tenements with their Appurtenances, and all new
Building whatsoever upon the premises to be builded during the said term, and
the pales hedges walls and enclosures of the said parcel of ground, and other
the demised premises in and with all manner of Reparations thereunto to be
needful, so often as need shall require, and shall and will also cleanse scowre
and purge the sieges gutters and widraughts of the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances when like need shall require, during the said term of fifteen
years; and the said two Tenements with their Appurtenances, and new buildings
to be made as aforesaid, and other the premises by these presents demised so
well and sufficiently repaired upholden and kept in reparations as aforesaid,
and all the Glass Wainscot Windows Doors Locks Keys Casements and such like
in the premises to be made or set, during the said term, in the end of the
same term, shall leave and quietly yield up. And that he the said S. his
Executors nor Assigns, shall do or cause to be done any Act or Fact, or other
thing or things whatsoever, which may forfeit lose or impair the estate or
interest which the said J. L. has in the premises or any part thereof, or
which may otherwise be hurtful or prejudicial to the said I his heirs or
assigns for or concerning the having holding or enjoying of the same or any of
them, and the said J: L covenanteth, etc: that he the said S, M. his Executors
and assigns for and under the payment of the said yearly Rent of 30 s. and
performance of the covenants and articles aforesaid, on his and their part to
be paid kept and performed according to the true meaning of these presents,
shall or lawfully may have hold and enjoy the said two Tenemeuts and other the
premises by these presents Demised during the said term of fifteen years,
without any let, molestation, eviction or impediment of the said I: L: his
Heirs or Assigns, and without any lawful let, molestation, eviction or
interruption of any other person or persons, and that he the said I: L: his
Heirs or Assigns, shall from time to time discharge, or upon reasonable request
save harmless the said S: M: his Executors or Assigns, of, and for all
Quit-rents, Payments, Duties and Services to be had or done, for or out of the
Demised Premises, or any part thereof to the Queens Majesty her Heirs or
Successors, and also of and for all Rent, Charges and Annuities heretofore
going or issuing out of the said Demised Premises or any part of the same (The
yearly rent of 30 s. by these presents reserved only, except and fore prised)
In witness, etc.

A Lease to one during the life of himself, his wife, and their child unborn,
or another to be nominated in stead thereof, with provision that the husband
shall leave his wife his Land, if he dye before her.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between I: L: Citizen and Clothworker of L: on the
one party, and R: S: of H: in the County of G: Clother on the other party,
Witnesses, That the said I: L. for and in consideration of a Marriage already
had and solemnized between the said R: S: and M: now his wife, one of the
daughte^s of I: L: late of H: aforesaid Gent. deceased, brother unto the said
^: L. and for the preferment, of the said M: Has Demised, Granted, and to
farm, letten, and by these presents etc. unto the said R: S: all that dwelling
House with the appurtenances lately new builded and adjoining to, etc. and all
and singular Barns, Stables etc. saving, and always except out of this present
Lease and Demise all that etc. To have and to hold the said etc. except etc.
unto the said R. S: his Executors and Assigns, Habend.
from the Feast etc. last etc. for, by, and during all the term of fourscore
and nineteen years from thence etc. and fully etc. if the said R. S: and M. his
wife and such child as shall be begotten of the body of the said M: by the said
R. and in this behalf specially to be named to the said I: L: by Writing under
the hand and Seal of the said R. before the end of nine years next following
(or in default of any such child) such other person as the said R. by Writing
signed with his Hand, and Sealed with his Seal at any time within ten years
next ensuing the date of these presents shall in that behalf nominate and
appoint to the said I. L. do or shall live to the end of the said 99. years and
not otherwise yielding, reserving and paying therefore yearly to the said I. L.
his Executors and Assigns 6 l. of etc. in the Feasts etc. by even portions. And
if it shall happen the said yearly rent of 6 l. or any part thereof to be
behind, and not paid by the space of 28. days next after any time of payment
thereof, wherein the same ought to be paid as aforesaid (it being in the mean
time lawfully asked at the dwelling house aforesaid and no sufficient distress
in and upon the Premises above Demised can be had and found overt (...) and
quietly to be taken away and impounded, that then, and from thenceforth it
shall or may be lawful to the said I: L: and his Heirs and Assigns, into all
and singular the Premises above Demised by these presents wholly to re-enter,
and the same to have again etc. and the said R: S: his Executors and Assigns,
from thence to expel etc. any thing to the contrary etc. And the said R: S: for
him, his Heirs Executors etc. Covenanteth etc. with the said I: L: his
Executors etc. in manner etc. that is to say, That if the said R: do happen to
decease before the said M: his wife, that then he shall leave lawfully assured
to the said M: all and singular the above demised Premises free from all
Forfeitures, Charges and Encumbrances to be done by the said R. to the contrary
only and solely to be had, enjoyed, and holden to the said M: and her Assigns,
under the payment of the yearly rent aforesaid, and doing the reparation
hereafter specified in these presents, by and during the natural life of the
said M: if the said term of years shall so long endure.

And also that he the said R: and his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall and will from time to time maintain, repair, sustain, keep and defend
the said dwelling House, Barns, etc. and all other the Premises, except before
excepted, in and with all manner of reparations whatsoever in all things
thereunto at any time to be needful or necessary to make it Tenentable, and the
same, and every of them, so well and sufficiently repaired at the end of the
said term or sooner determination of this present Lease shall so leave and
yield up. And the said I: L. Covenanteth etc. with the said R. S. etc. that
when as the next Heir of the said I. L. late of H: deceased, shall have
accomplished his full age of 21. years, that within one month next after such
his coming to full age upon any reasonable request of the said R: his
Executors or Assigns, he the said I: L: his Executors or Administrators shall
cause and procure the same next Heir so far as in him the same Heir shall be
lawfully and reasonably to Demise, Grant and Assure, all and singular the said
demised Premises by these Presents, according to the true meaning hereof unto
such of the said R. and M. now his wife, as then shall be living, or to such a
child Male or Female to be begotten of the body of the said M. by the said R.
as the said R: and M: or the Survivor of them, or the Executors of the said R.
shall at any time during nine years from the date hereof, nominate and appoint
in Writing under their, or any of their Hands and Seals, or in default of any
such child unto such other person as the said R: and M: or the Survivor of
them, or the Executors of the said R: by Writing Signed and Sealed with their,
or any of their Hands, and with their Seals at any time within one year next
after the said nine years ended shall in that behalf nominate and appoint to
the said I: L: or his Executors or Assigns, to have and to hold the said
Demised Premises unto the said R: and M. the said child or other person
aforesaid in Reversion or Remainder one after another, that is to say, first to
the said R: then to the said M: and last to such child or other person
aforesaid, according to the meaning hereof, and during all the said term of
ninety nine years if the said R: and M: and such child or other person
aforesaid to be nominated as aforesaid, or any of them do live so long and not
otherwise reserving by such Demise and Grant for the Premises yearly to be
paid and done such yearly rent, and such Covenants, Grants and Agreements, as
before is specified in these presents to be contained, limited and set down in
the said Lease, Demise, and Grant, so to be made in accomplishment of these
presents, and according to the true meaning hereof, so always as the said R.
his Executors or Assigns, upon due notice first to them given of the Re-demise
of the same Lease, Demise, Grant, and Assurance will take and receive the same
at the now Mansion House of the said I: L. situate in M. of L. In witness etc.

A Lease in Reversion, after the expiration, surrender, or forfeiture of
another former Lease.
THis Indenture etc. Between etc. witnesses, That the said I. N: in
consideration etc. whereof and wherewith etc. has demised etc. unto the said C.
C. all that Message or Tenement, with Shops etc. to the same belonging, set in
C. Street L. now in the Tenures and Occupations of one I. C. and E. his wife,
which they hold by Indenture, dated etc. of the Demife and Grant of F. C. for
40. years beginning from the Feast of Saint Michael then last past (if the said
I: C: and E: do so long live) To have and to hold the said Message or
Tenement, with all Shops etc. unto the said C. C. his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, from the end, expiration, or whatsoever surceasing or
determination of the said Indenture of Lease, be it by surrender, forfeiture,
or otherwise, which first and next ensuing the date of these presents, shall
happen unto the end and term of 31. years, from thence next ensuing, and fully
to be complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said
term of etc. unto the said I. N. his Heirs and Assigns 40 s. of etc. at four
Feasts etc. or within fourteen days etc. by even portions, the first payment
thereof beginning at such Feast of the said Feasts, which shall first and next
after the death or decease of the said I: C: and E. happen, or within fourteen
days then next following And if it shall heppen the said yearly Rent of 40 s.
to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all, over or after any Feast or Term of
payment thereof aforesaid, in which it ought to be paid by the space of two
months, and lawfully asked, that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be
lawful, to and for the said I. N. his Heirs and Assigns, into all and singular
the said demised Premises, with the appurtenances, wholly to re-enter, and the
same to have again etc. And the Tenant to expel etc.

And the said C. C. covenanteth etc: that he the said C. C. his Executors or
Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges during the said 31:
years, the said C: C. his Executors and Assigns, enjoying the said demised
Premises, at the said Message or Tenement, as well in tyling boording leading
cleansing draughts ferming, as all manner paving lathing dawbing and lyming,
necessary and needful to the same demised Premises, belonging or
appertaining, as often and when as need shall be, or at the furthest within six
months, next after warning given by the said I. N. his Heirs or Assigns, to the
said C: C: his Executors or Assigns, shall repair sustain, keep and maintain,
and in the end of the said term of 31. years, shall so leave and yield up the
same, (principal Timber only excepted) which principal the said I. N. for him,
his Heirs Executors and Administrators, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, covenanteth and grants by these presents, to find prepare set up and
finish in and upon the said demised Premises upon request, during the said
term of 31. years, as often as need shall be or require.

And the said I: N: covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said I. N. the
day of the date hereof, and at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is
very true sole and lawful Owner of the said Message or Tenement, and of all
and singular other the Premises, with their appurtenances, above by these
presents demised, and of every part and parcel thereof, and is thereof lawfully
seized of a good and perfect Estate in Fee-simple, to the use of him the said
I. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any manner of entail
condition alteration or limitation of use: And by reason of such Estate, has
now good rightful power and lawful authority to demise and grant the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the Premises above by these
presents mentioned to be demised, for and during the said Term of 31. years,
unto the said C: C. his Executors Administrators and Assigns. and that he the
said I. N. his Heirs Exe^rs and Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and
charges shall, during the said term of etc. pay and bear all chief and
quit-rents growing due and to be paid and born out of and for all the said
Message or Tenement, and all other the Premises with the Appurt and of every
part thereof: And also that he the said C: C: his Executors Administ. and
Assigns, at the end expiration surceasing, or other determination of the said
Indenture of Lease above recited, shall and may lawfully peaceably and quietly
enter into the said Message or Tenement, and all other the said Premises,
with their appurtenances, above by these presents mentioned to be demised, and
into every part thereof, and the same for the said yearly Rent of 40 s. shall
and may from thenceforth, for and during the said term of 31. years, lawfully
peaceably and quietly, have hold occupy and enjoy, without any manner of let
trouble denial interruption or eviction of the said I: N: his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever.

And moreover that he the said J: N: his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them
shall and will at all and every time and times hereafter, and from time to
time, upon request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said C: C:
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and of every or any of them,
acknowledge confess make execute and do, or cause to be made etc. all and
singular such further act and acts, devise and devises, assurance and
assurances unto the said C. C. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, of and
in the said Message etc. for the further more better and perfect assurance and
sure making of the said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, unto the
said C: C. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, for and during the said
term of etc. as by the said C: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or his
or their Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully devised
or advised. In witness etc.

A Lease of a house in London, where part of the Rent is taken up by way of
Fine, and where the house having been the Leassors place of occupying, the
Leassees are bound to gather in certain the Lessors Debts.
THis Indenture etc. between A. H. of L. Widow, sole Executrix of the last Will
and Testament of W. H. late Citizen and Salter of L. deceased, on the one
party, and I. S. Citizen and Salter of L. on the other party, witnesses, That
for and in consideration of a Fine or Income 120 l. of etc. to be paid to the
said A. her Executors Administrators or Assigns, at the ^uage or Tenement
hereunder by these presents demised by the said I: S: his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, in manner and form following; That is to say, 20 l.
thereof yearly, during six years now next ensuing, in the Feasts of the Birth
etc. the Annunciation etc. or within the space of 30. days, next after every
of the same Feasts, by even Portions every year, until the said Sum of 120 l.
shall be well and truly paid, the said A: H: has demised etc. unto the said I:
S: all that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances called the Morions
head, situate in B: Street, in the Parish etc. and all and singular Rooms,
void Grounds, and Buildings, with their appurtenances, to the said Message and
Tenement belonging or appurtaining, which the said W: H: had, and the said A.
now has, or occupies with the same, to have etc. to the said etc. from the
Feast of St M. etc. last etc. for and during all the term of six years, from
thence etc. yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during all the said term to
the said A: her Executors Administrators or Assigns, at the said Tenement 4 l.
of etc. in the Feasts of the Birth etc. the Annunciation etc. the Nativity etc.
and St. M. etc. by even portions: And if it do happen either the said yearly
Rent of 4 l. or any part thereof, or the said yearly payment of the Fine and
Income aforesaid, or any part thereof, to be behind and not paid, within the
space of 30. days next ensuing, from the Feasts aforesaid, wherein the same or
any part thereof ought to be paid as is aforesaid, the same being lawfully asked
at the said Message, that then and from thenceforth, this present Lease made
and granted of the Premises by these presents, shall clearly cease determine
and become utterly void, any thing contained in these Indentures, to the
contrary thereof in any wise, notwithstanding.

And the said I. S. covenanteth etc. in form etc. that he the said I: S: his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, shall and will well and sufficiently repair, keep, maintain, and
sustain, all and singular the Premises, with all manner of Reparations, and
the pavements thereof, and in the Street before the same and all the Sieges
Sincks Gutters and Widraughts thereof, shall cause to be paved purged and
emptied, as often as need shall be during the said term of 6 years; And so
shall leave and yield up all and singular the Premises, into the hands and
possession of the said A: H: or of her Executors Administrators or Assigns, in
the end of the said term, if any of them will then accept and receive the same.
And also that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said A. H: her
Executors Administrators or Assigns, at all reasonable times and upon
reasonable request to enter into the said Message and other the Premises, to
search and view the reputations thereof. And that if upon such search and view
thereof, there shall be any part of the same which shall have need of amendment
and warning then and there given or left by the said A. her Executors
Administrators or Assigns, for the amendment thereof, that then he the said I:
S: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at his or their own costs and
charges, shall cause every part of the Premises (according to the form of
every such warning to be given or left as aforesaid) to be competently and
sufficiently repaired within the space of three months, next after every such
warning so thereof to be given or left as aforesaid. And further, that the said
I. S. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall and will yearly with the
several payments of the said yearly Rent of 4 l. content and pay, yearly
during the said term of 6. years unto the said A. her Executors Administrators
or Assigns, 46 s. of lawful etc. by even and equal portions, for and toward
the full discharge of all Quit-rents and Out-rents, during the said term, to be
going or issuing out of the Premises.

And the said A. covenanteth etc. That she the said A. her Executors and
Administrators, at their own charges, shall and will save and keep harmless the
said I. S. his Executors and Administrators and every of them, of and for all
and singular Rents, Rent-charges, Quitrents and Annuities whatsoever, to be
paid for or out of the said Message and other the Premises, during the said
term, except only the said Fine and Income, and the said yearly rent of 4 l.
and yearly payment of 46 s. abovesaid, reserved and payable to the said A: her
Executors Administrators and Assigns, by virtue of these presents, and all
Church duties whatsoever.

And further that he the said I: S: his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall or lawfully may have hold occupy and enjoy the said Message and
Tenement, with their appurtenances, and all and every other the Premises, by
and during all the said term of years, according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents, without any let or interruption of the said A. her Executors
Administrators or Assigns, and without any lawful let molestation or
interruption of any other person or persons. And whereas diverse and sundry
persons, do owe diverse several sums of money to be paid to the said A: or to
her lawful Attorney Executor or Administrator, which are expressed in a
Schedule indented, annexed to these presents; And which the said I. S. has
agreed to take, gather, and receive, to the use of the said A: and her
Executors, as he or they can or may lawfully obtain and get the same, or any
part thereof. The said J: S: covenanteth etc. That he the said J. S. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns (so long as it shall please the said A:
her Executors or Administrators, and the said term endures) shall and will
upon lawful warrant from the said A. or her Executors, do their best diligence
at the costs and charges in the Law of the said A. and of her Executors and
Assigns, to gather and receive the said Debts mentioned in the said Schedule,
to and for the use of the said A: and of her Executors and Administrators: And
that the said J. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, upon reasonable
request monthly, or at any time after the end of every month, shall and will
truly account with the said A: her Executors and Administrators, of and for all
the several Receipts of the Debts aforesaid, from month to month by the said
J: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, to be received, and shall and will
within 30. days next after his or their Receipt thereof, upon reasonable
request therefore to be made by the said A: her Executors Administrators or
Assigns, as well content and pay to the said A: her Executors or
Administrators, so many Sum and Sums of money, as the said J: S: his
Executors or Assigns, shall have so received of the Debts aforesaid, and as
then shall be remaining in their or any of their hands before not paid or
satisfied to the said A, her certain Attorney Executor or Administrator; As
also shall and will upon like request as aforesaid deliver to the said A: her
Executors or Administrators, a true note in writing, of what person and persons
the Sum and Sums aforesaid, so were received by the said J: his Executors or
Assigns, and at what time: In witness, etc.

A very good Lease of a Brew House and Brewing-Vessells with very good
Covenants, and a Covenant to stand to award if any Controversy rise between
the parties upon any matter in the Lease.
THis Indenture, etc. Between I. S. Citizen, and Cloath-worker of L: and A. his
Wife, late wife of W. C. Citizen and Haberdasher of L. deceased on the one
party, and W. W of the Parish of Saint G. in S. etc. Brewer on the other party,
witnesses, that whereas one H. L. late of L. cloath-worker deceased. and also
late Husband of the said A by his Testament and last Will in Writing bearing
date, etc. did will that all his Brewhouse, wherein he did then inherit
situate and standing in the parish of Saint G. etc. with all brewing Leads,
Vessels Utensills and necessaries, and the final tenement in the tenure of D.
S. and other the small tenements then and yet adjoining and annexed to the said
Brewhouse, should be and remain in the government and disposition of the said
A. his wife until the said H. his Son, should accomplish his full age of one
and twenty years. And after in the same Testament and last Will, did devise the
said Brewhouse and other the premises to the said H. his Son, and to the heirs
of his Body lawfully begotten, with diverse Remainders over, to diverse of his
Children yet living; willing further, that if all his Children should decease
without heirs of their bodies, that then the said A. his wife should have all
the said Brew House and other the premises during her natural life the
Remainder thereof to the right heirs of the said H. the Father for ever, as by
the said Testament, etc.

Now the said I. S. and A. now his Wife for and in accomplishment of a certain
order of award, made and taken by the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of the
said City of L: have demised, etc. unto the said W. W. his Executors and
Assigns, the said Brew House with all and singular the appurtenances, and all
houses of offices storehouses, stables yards orchards gardens wharfs, and all
other easements and commodities to the same Brew House belonging or
appertaining, or with the same occupied, with all and singular their
appurtenances, and all Brewing vessels Utensills and implements contained in a
schedule annexed to these presents, now in the occupation of the said W. W. and
the said tenement, late in the occupation of the said D. S. and also the
orchard belonging to the said premises, and also one Wharf with the
appurtenances, in the tenure or occupation of one W. V. to have and to hold,
etc. to the said VV. from the Feast of Saint Michaell, etc. last past, etc.
until the said H. L. the Son shall accompl^sh his full age of one and twenty
years, and if it shall fortune the said H. the Son, and other the children of
the said H L. the Father at any time hereafter to decease without issue of any
of their bodies, and the said A. then being in life, then to have and to hold
the said Brew House, etc. to the said W. W. etc. from the day of the decease of
the said H. L. the Son and other the children of the said H. L. the Father
without issue of any of their bodies, for and during all such further Estate
and interest as the said A: has or had, or hereafter shall have by force or
virtue of the devise of her said husband by his last Will and Testament
aforesaid, yiedling and paying therefore yearly to the said J. and A: for and
during such of the said several term and terms wherein the said W. W. his
Executors or Assigns, shall have hold occupy or enjoy in possession the said
Brewhouse, etc: by force and virtue of these presents, the sum of 130 l. of
etc: in the Feast of the Annunciation, etc. The Nativity, etc. or within the
space of eight and twenty days next ensuing after every of the same Feasts
yearly by even and equal portions and if it happen the said yearly Rent of 130
l. or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of eight and twenty
days next after any of the Feasts aforesaid, and the same being in the mean
time lawfully asked, That then it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
I. and A. and their assigns into the said Brewhouse, and into all and every
other the premises, to enter, and there quietly to distrain and the distress
and distresses there found, to take lead drive and carry away, and the same
with them lawfully to detain and keep until they shall be fully satisfied and
paid the said yearly Rent with the arearages thereof, (if any be) and if it
happen the said yearly Rent of 130 l. or any part thereof to be behind and
unpaid by the space of six and fifty days next after any of the said feast
days of payment thereof aforesaid, the same being lawfully asked as aforesaid,
that then and at all times after it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said I: and A and their Assigns into the said Brewhouse with the Appurtenances,
and all other the premises to re-enter, and the same together with the said
Utensils and brewing vessels, and all other implements in the said Schedule
specified, to have again and repossess as in their former Estate: And the said
W. W. to expel, etc. these presents, etc. And the said W. W, covenanteth to
and with the said I and A their Executors and Administrators by these presents,
that he the said W: W: his Executors Administrators or Assigns at their costs
and charges, at all times convenient, from time to time from henceforth for and
during the said term and terms wherein the said W: etc: shall have, etc: Vt in
reddendum: shall and will, well and sufficiently keep maintain and sustain the
said Brewhouse, and all the brewing vessels aforesaid, mentioned in the said
Indented Schedule and all other the Premises, in and with all manner of
needful Reparations, when and so often as need shall require. And the same
Brewhouse and all the brewing vessels, Utensils and implements contained in
the said Schedule to these Indentures annexed with all other the premises so
well and sufficiently repaired kept and maintained in all things in the end of
the first term above mentioned or any sooner determination thereof, shall leave
and yield up, and the said W. VV. covenanteth, etc. that without the let
trouble or interruption of the said W. W: his Executors Administrators os
Assigns or any of them, so as he or they be reasonably requested thereunto by
the said I. or A. or their Assigns, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said I. and A. and either of them and their Assigns, and the Assigns of any of
them, with the number of three persons or under, with them or any of them at
two several times of every year at their pleasures, at any time between eight
of the clock in the morning, and four of the clock in the afternoon, to enter
into the said Brewhouse and Tenements aforesaid, and all other the Premises
and into every part of the same, there to view and search how the same and also
the said Implements and utensills been repaired and kept. And that if upon such
view and search, any lack of Reparations shall be found in the premises or in
any part of them or any of them which shall have need of amendment and
admonition then there openly given and left in Writing by the said I or A. or
their Assigns for the amendment thereof, that then he the said W. W. his
Executors or Assigns at his or their, or some of their own charges within six
months next after every such admonition, shall and will sufficiently repair and
amend every such lack so found, and wherein warning shall be given, as
aforesaid. And also that if it do fortune the said VV. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns upon such admonition at any time so to be given as is
aforesaid, do not sufficiently repair and amend every such lack of Reparation,
in or upon the premises or any part thereof to be found and admonished as is
aforesaid, within the said space of six months before expressed, that then the
said I and A. his wife or their Assigns at the end of the said six months,
before expressed or at any time after shall give advertisement of all such
Defaults as then shall remain of the said Reparations to the Wardens of the
company of Cloath-workers of the city of L. and to the Wardens of the Company
of Brewers of the same City for the time being, and that thereupon it shall be
lawful to the said Wardens or to any four of them whereof two to be
Cloathworkers, and the other two to be Brewers, to appoint viewers at their
discretion, to view and search the said Reparations, which the said I. or A. or
their Assigns from time to time so often as any such shall be to them given,
and the said parties for them their Executors and Administrators do further
accord and agree by these presents, that the said Wardens or such four of them
as aforesaid, shall have power and authority to appoint such viewers as
aforesaid, and that the Viewers by them from time to time by them to be
appointed, shall have authority by these presents to judge and determine of the
said defects according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents.

And the said W. W. covenanteth etc: That he the said W. his Executo. and
Admin. so often as any such advertisement, be given shall upon like request to
be made as is aforesaid, shall peaceably and quietly permit and suffer the said
viewers, together with the said I and A. and their assigns, or any of them, to
enter into the said Brewhouse and other the premises, and there by the showing
or Demonstration of the said I. or A. or of their assigns, or o^ the assigns of
any of them, to take and have plain and full view and survey of all such lacks
of the said Reparations left unrepaired upon the said former admonition given
by the said I. or A. or their assigns, or the assigns of any of them: To the
intent that the same viewers from time to time so to be sent as aforesaid, by
the said Wardens or such four of them as aforesaid, may leave behind them
plainly expressed in writing, what further Reparations shall then in their
consciences and ind^fferent Judgments be thought needful to be done upon the
premises or any part thereof, and that then if within the space of other six
months, next after every such admonition last above mentioned to be given by
such viewers aforesaid in form aforesaid, all such reparations whereof they
shall so give admonition shall not be done and finished accordingly. That then
a Re-entry, etc. and an expulsion of the Tenant, any thing etc. And the said J.
and A. for themselves their Executors and Administrators do covenant, etc. in
form, etc. That the said I. S. and A. their Executors and Administrators at
their own proper costs and charges, shall from time to time, and at all times
well and sufficiently discharge save or keep harmless as well the said W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as also the said Brewhouse and all
other the premises by these presents mentioned to be demised with all and
singular their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, of and from
all and singular former Grants, Burgains, Sales, Leases, Charges and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, granted, done or knowledged by the said I.
or A: or by any other by their or any of their assent in any wise. And also
shall save harmeless the said W W: his Executors and Administrators and the
said Brew House, etc. of and from all and all manner of qu^t-rents, Annuities
and Rents, charges whatsoever, issuing or going out or to be issuing or going
out of the same or any part thereof, other then only the said yearly Rent of
130 l. reserved by these presents yearly to be paid for the said Brewhouse and
other the premises. And further that the said I. and A their Executors and
Administrators shall and will from time to time, and at all times save harmless
the said W W: Son his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and against said
H L: the Son his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and against all other
the children of the said H L. the Father of and for the said yearly Rent of 130
l. and of every part and parcel thereof to be received by the said I: or A:
their Executors Administrators or Assigns. And that upon every payment made of
the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof, to the said I or A their Executors
or Assigns by the said W W. his Executors or Assigns according to the tenor
and true meaning of these presents: The said I or A their Executors or Assigns
shall and will subscribe to such a reasonable Writing, or Acquittance as the
said W: his Executors, or Administrators shall reasonably require, testifying
and declaring the receipt of the said payment. And moreover that he the said W.
his Executors and Assigns, by and under the payment of the said yearly Rent of
130 l. in manner and form aforesaid, and by and under the performance of al
and singular the Covenants and Articles in these presents contained on his and
their part to be performed, according to the tenor and true meaning of these
Indentures shall or lawfully may have, hold, and enjoy the said Brew House and
the said Tenements, with all and singular their appurtenances, and also all the
Brewing vessels expressed and mentioned in the said Schedule hereunto annexed,
and all and every other the premises with the appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, until the said H L. the Son shall accomplish his full
age of 21 years. And in case the said second demised interest into the said
Brew House and Tenement, shall accrue to the said A: by the said Will and
Testament, then the said W W. his Executors or Assigns, shall and may likewise
have, hold and enjoy the said Brew House and Tenements and every of them,
without any lawful let, interruption, or eviction of the said I or A. or of
their Assigns or any other person or persons, having, or which shall have or
claim any estate, right title or interest of either of them in any wise. And
furthermore it is Covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and fully agreed
by and between the said parties to these presents. And every of the said
parties for themselves, their Executors and Assigns do by these presents
Covenant, grant, conclude, condescend and agree, to and with the other of them,
their Executors and Administrators: That if it shall fortune at any time
hereafter any manner of strife, variance or contention to arise betwixt the
said parties, there or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them of, for, or upon any matter, cause or thing specified or mentioned
in the Indentures, or for or upon any matter or thing to arise or grow thereof
(other then for non-payment of the said yearly Rent of 130 l.) That then the
said parties and every of them, before any Suit in Law be taken, commenced, or
prosecuted by them or any of them, of, for, and upon any Article, clause, or
agreement in these presents declared; as is aforesaid, shall first therein from
time to time stand to abide, obey and perform, all and every such decree,
order and Judgment, Decrees, Orders and Judgments as from time to time, and
at any time shall be made and given up by the said Wardens of the company of
Clothworkers of the said City of London, and the Wardens of the Company of
Brewers of the same City for the time being, or by any four of them, so as two
be Clothworkers, and the other two Brewers, and so as the said Wardens or such
four of them as aforesaid, from time to time, upon any complaint to them made
by the said parties, or by any of them, do make and publish their Decree, order
and Judgment in the premises within the space of two months next after such
complaint to them made. And if the said Wardens in form and time aforesaid
make no Order or Decree as is aforesaid. Then they or either of them at their
pleasures, shall and may take their remedy by Law against one another, any
thing in these presents to the contrary notwithstanding. In Witness. etc.

A Lease of a House in the Country in Reversion with Covenant to pay Herriots.
THis Indenture, etc. Between H: H: of H in the County of S: Gent: and E his
Wife of the one party, and W W: of M in the said County Husbandman of the other
party, Witnesses that whereas the said H and E together with one T H: Father
of the said H: deceased for a certain sum of money to them by the said W W:
Recital of the former Lease.
before hand paid by their Indenture bearing date, etc: did demise, grant, set,
and to farm let unto the said W W all that their Message or Tenement with all
edifices and buildings thereunto belonging together with all Lands, Meadows,
Leasowes and Pastures, Commons of Pasture, Commodities and feedings to the said
Message or Tenement belonging or appertaining with all and singular their
appurtenances, Situate, lying and being in the Town and fields of M. aforesaid
in the County aforesaid, and then in the tenure and occupation of the said W W.
To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Lands, Meadows, Leasowes,
Pastures, Commons, Commodities and feedings, and all other the premises with
their appurtenances unto the said W W: his Executors and Assigns, from the
Feast of the purification etc. last past before the Date of the said Indenture,
unto the full end and term of 24 years from thenceforth next and immediately
ensuing fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly
during the said term to the said H H: and E his wife or to one of them, or to
their Heirs 20 s: of lawful money of, etc. as in the said Indenture is
contained at large: And Demise in Reversion.
now the said H: H: and E his wife of one assent and consent for and in
consideration of the sum of 20 l: of current money, etc: to the said H and E:
by the said W W: before and at the ensealing hereof, well and truly contented
and paid for and in the name of a Fine whereof the said H and E and either of
them do knowledge themselves to be fully satisfied and paid, And the said W. W.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns thereof to be acquitted, exonerated
and discharged by these presents: Have demised, granted, set, and to farm
let, And by these presents, etc: unto the said W W: all the foresaid Message
or Tenement edifices, buildings, with all Lands, Meadows, Leasowes Commons of
Pasture to the said Message or tenement belonging, with all other the
premises and their appurtenances, Situate, lying and being in the Town and
fields of M aforesaid in the said County, in as large and ample manner as the
said W W: heretofore has occupied the same. To have hold occupy, Habend.
and enjoy the said Message or tenement, Lands, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures,
Commons, Commodities and all other the premises and every part thereof with
the appurtenances to the said W W. his Executors or Assigns from the end and
expiration of the foresaid Indenture, that is to wit, from the Feast of the
Purification, etc: which shall be in the year of our Lord God, one thousand
etc. unto the full end and term of 21 years then next ensuing, to be fully
Reddend:
completed and ended: Yiedling and paying yearly therefore during the said
term to the said H H. and E. his wife, or to any of them, their Heirs or
Assigns, the sum of 23 s. of etc. at two feasts in the year usual, that is
to say, at the Feasts of the Annunciation, etc: and Saint Michaell, etc. by
even portions. And if it happen the said yearly Rent of 23 s. to be behind and
unpaid in part or in all by the space of one Month, after either of the said
payable Feasts wherein it ought to be paid being lawfully demanded, And by all
that time no sufficient distress can be found upon the premises, then For
repossession upon non-payment.
it shall be lawful for the said H and E. or their Heirs into the said
Message or Tenement, Lands, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances to re-enter and the same to repossesse and
have again as in their former estate, And the said W W. his Executors and
Assigns, and all other Occupiers of the same to avoid, expel, and put out.
These Indentures, or any thing therein Covenant for reparation.
contained to the contrary, notwithstanding. And the said W W. does Covenant
and grant for him his Executors and Assigns, to and with the said H H. and E.
his wife the said Message or Tenement and all edifices and buildings to the
same belonging sufficiently to repair, maintain and sustain* together with
all Hedges and Ditches, in and about the said Lands during all the said term
upon his own proper costs and charges. And at the end of the said term the
said buildings, hedges and Ditches sufficiently repaired, shall yield and give
up: And also the said VV VV. his Executors or Assigns shall And repaired to
yield up.
pay to the said H and E or their Heirs, at the death of every person dying
tenant, in and upon the premises during the said term, his or their best
beast in the name of an Herriot. And also the said VV: To pay the Herriot at
the death of any Tenant.
VV: does covenant and grant to and with the said H and E. that he the said VV
VV. shall not at any time hereafter during the said term bargain. sell, or
assign his interest or term of years of in and to Leasee not to sell his
interest without License
the said Message and other the premises with the appurtenances to any person
or persons, other then to his wife or to one of his Sonns without the special
License of the said H. and E. his wife or their Tenant to pay quit-rents.
Heirs upon pain of forfeiting his or their estate. And that the said VV VV.
his Executors or Assigns during all the said term, shall yearly pay all chief
Rents, and all other services due or to be due to any person or persons out of
the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises. Moreover the said H H.
and E. his wife do Tenant to have house-boot, and fire-boot, etc.
covenant and grant for them and their Heirs, to and with the said VV VV. his
Executors or Assigns. That it shall be lawful to the said VV VV. his
Executors or Assigns, during all the said term to have, take, hew and carry
away sufficient House-boot, Hey-boot, Fire-boot and Plough-boot, in and upon
the premises, growing or being, doing no wilful wast. Provided always that
the said VV VV. Condition for not cutting or topping the Oaks.
his Executors or Assigns shall not fall, nor hew any Oak by the But nor cut
of the top of any Oak growing in Sage lee, during the said term without the
consent and License of the the said H and E. And also the said VV. VV. does
covenant and grant. That his Son to whom he shall assign the premises with
this Indenture shall not assign his interest in and to the premises to any
person or persons but to his wife as long as she remains Widow, without the
consent and license of the said H and E. and their Heirs, upon pain of
forfeiting their estate: And the said H and E. do Covenant and grant for them
and their Heirs, to and with the said VV VV. his Executors Covenant for
enjoyance.
and Assigns: That the said VV VV. his Executors and Assigns during all the
said term, shall peaceably and quietly, have hold, occupy and enjoy the said
Message or Tenement, Lands, Meadows, Leasowes and Pastures, with all and
singular their appurtenances, in manner and form above written without let,
interruption or againsaying of the said H and E. his Wife or their Heirs or of
any other person or persons claiming in their name or names interest or
behalf: In Witness, etc.

H H: bound to VV W. in 50 l. for performance of Covenants.

W: W. by his will, dated etc. after diverse Legacies concludes and finisheth
thus, viz. The residue of all my Goods, Chattels, Debts and Leases
unbequeathed, my Debts paid, and Funeral discharged, I give wholly unto the
foresaid I. W. of W. in the Parish of B: whom I make my full and whole
Executors In Witness, etc.

MORTGAGES.
A Good Mortgage.
THis Indenture made etc. Between G: F: of L. Son of G. W. late of B. in the
County of K. Gent. deceased, of the one party, and J: C: C: and F. of L.
aforesaid, of the other party, witnesses, That the said G. F. for and in
consideration of the Sum of etc. of lawful money of England to him paid, at
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said J. C. whereof and
wherewith he the said G. F. does acknowledge and confess himself to be fully
satisfied, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly
acquit and discharge the said J. C. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and
every of them by these presents, has aliened granted bargained sold conveyed
assured and confirmed, and by these presents does fully clearly and absolutely
alien grant bargain sell convey assure and confirm unto the said J. C. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, all those five Messuages or Tenements, with all the
Cellars Shops Sollers Entries Houses Stables Buildings Chambers Rooms Yards
Back-sides Gardens Grounds Lights Easements Profits Commodities Hereditaments
and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the same belonging or appertaining, or to or
with the same usually occupied used demised or enjoyed, now or late in the
several Tenures Possessions or Occupations of J. C: R, P. W* C. and R. W.
their Assignee or Assigns, situate lying and being etc. which said 5.
Messuages or Tenements, were late but 3. Messuages or Tenements, and were
sometime in the several Tenures Possessions or Occupations of M. M. deceased,
the said R. P. and J. C. their Assignees, or under-Tenants: And all and
singular other the Messuages Gardens Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, whereof or wherein the said G. F. has any Estate of Inheritance or
Freehold, situate lying and being in the said Parish etc. And the Reversion
and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of all and singular the before
mentioned bargained Premises, and every part and parcel thereof: And also all
and all manner of Rents Duties Services and Profits reserved or payable, for or
in respect of every or any of the said bargained Premises. And also all the
Right Estate Title Interest Possession use Claim and Demand whatsoever, which
he the said G. F. now has, may might should or ought to have, of in to or out
of the Premises before bargained and sold, or of in to or out of any part or
parcel thereof. And also all and singular Deeds Evidences Charters Writings
Fines Escripts and Minuments, touching or concerning the said bargained
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, to have and to hold the said
Messuages or Tenements, and all and singular other the premises before by
these presents granted, or meant mentioned or intended to be granted bargained
sold and confirmed, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said
J. C. his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only proper use and behoof of him
the said J. C. and of his heirs and assigns for ever.

Provided always nevertheless, and upon this Condition, That if the said G: F.
his heirs executors administrators or assigns, or any of them, do and shall
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said J. C. his heirs or
assigns, or to any of them, at or in the now dwelling house of the said J. C.
situate and being etc: the several Sums of lawful money of England,
hereafter in these presents mentioned, at the days and times here limited and
appointed, that is to say etc. without fraud covin or further delay, that then
and from thenceforth this present Indenture of bargain and Sale, shall cease
determine and be utterly void and of none effect, to all intents constructions
and purposes: And that then also it shall and may be lawful for the said G. F.
his Heirs and Assigns, into and upon all and singular the said bargained
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, wholly to re-enter, and the same
to have again, retain, and repossess, as in his and their former Estate, any
thing in these presents contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And the said G. F. for himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and for
every of them does by these presents, covenant and grant, to and with the said
J. C. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them in manner and form following;
That is to say, That he the said G. F. his Heirs Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said J.
C. his Heirs or Assigns, all the aforesaid several Sums of money in the said
Proviso mentioned, at the days and times in the said Provisoes limited and
expressed, without fraud or delay. And also that the said G. F. at the
enfealing and delivery of these presents, is and until a good and perfect
Estate shall be made and executed, of the said Premises unto the said I. C. and
his Heirs as aforesaid, shall continue and be feised of all and singular the
before mentioned bargained premises, and every part thereof, of a good lawful
perfect absolute sole and indefeasible Estate in Fee-simple (without any other
precedent Estate) to his own proper use and behoof, without any condition
mortgage limitation of use or uses, or other thing, to alter change determine
or incumber the same, or any part thereof: And also that the said G: F: at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, has, and until all and singular the
premises shall be well and sufficiently had, made, assured, and executed to the
said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns, as is aforesaid, shall have any right, full
power, and lawful authority, to alien grant bargain sell convey assure and
confirm, all and singular the said recited Premises, with their appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

And also that the said G. F. has not made any former Estate, Grant, Charge,
or Encumbrance, of in or out of the said premises, or any part thereof, other
then such as hereafter are mentioned to be excepted.

And further that the said Messuages or Tenements, and all and singular the
before mentioned bargained premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, shall remain and continue unto the said J. C. his Heirs and
Assigns, under and upon the Condition or Proviso aforesaid, free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted exonerated and discharged by him the said G. F.
his Heirs Exec^tor Admin. or some of them, of and from all and all manner of
former or other Bargains Sales Gifts Grants Leases Joyntures Dowers Intails
Estates Uses Wills Limitations of use, Statutes Recognizances Judgments
Executions Seisures Titles Troubles Charges Encumbrances Claims or Demands
whatsoever, had made committed done or suffered by him the said G. F. or by any
other person or persons whatsoever, except a Rent of 50 l. per a n. and granted
to E. W. and his Heirs, by Indenture bearing date etc. mentioned to be made
etc. And also except one Lease by Indenture dated etc. from the said G. F. to
the said J. C. of all the said Messuages or Tenements, and other the before
mentioned bargained premises, for the term of etc. whereupon it is to be paid
etc.

And the said G. F. for him etc. does by these presents further covenant and
grant, to and with the said J. C. That the aforesaid Annuity or yearly Rent of
etc. before in the said Indenture, dated etc. has been duly paid, according to
the tenor of the said Indenture, until the day of the date of these presents.
And also that the same Annuity or yearly Rent of etc. shall be hereafter well
and truly paid, or cause to be paid, at the days and times in the said
Indentures mentioned and expressed, according to the true intent and meaning of
the same Indenture, until etc.

And also that the said bargained premises, at the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, are, and so for ever hereafter, under or upon the Proviso or
Condition aforesaid, shall continue and be to the said J. C. etc. for ever, of
the full and clear yearly value of etc. over and above all Charges and Reprises
whatsoever.

And further that the said G. F. his Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other
person and persons whatsoever, having and claiming, or which ought to have or
shall claim, or pretend to have any manner of Estate Right Title Interest Use
Possession Interest claim or Demand, of in, to, or out of the said bargained
premises, or any part or parcel thereof (except as is before excepted) shall
and will at all times and from time to time, during the term of etc. at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said G. F. etc. before the breach of the
Proviso or Condition aforesaid, and after breach thereof, at the proper costs
and charges in the Law of the said J. C. his etc. shall and will well and truly
do make execute and suffer, all such further lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things, Deeds Devises and Assurances in the Law whatsoever, for
the further better more clear and perfect assuring surety sure making and
conveying, having holding and enjoying of all and singular the before mentioned
bargained premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of
their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said J, C. etc. to the only
proper use and behoof of him the said J. C. etc. be it by Deed or Deeds,
enrolled or not enrolled, Enrolements of these presents, Fine Feoffment
Recovery with Voucher or Vouchers over Release and confirmation with Warranty
or without Warranty, and by all and every or any or so many of the said ways,
or means, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said J. C. etc.
shall be reasonably devised advised or required. And also that if at any time
hereafter default of payment of the said several Sums of lawful money of
England,, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them, shall fortune to be
made at any of the days and times before limited for payment thereof, that then
and in every such case the said I. C. etc. shall and lawfully may for ever,
well and in peace, have hold occupy possess enjoy and keep all the said
bargained Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their
appurtenances, and the Rents Issues and Profits thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, receive and take, to and for his and there own proper use and
behoof (except before excepted) without the let trouble eviction expulsion
disturbance claim or demand of the said G. F. etc. And it is by these presents
concluded and agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents,
that all and every Fine and Fines, Recoveries Feoffments Conveyances and
Assurances whatsoever, that shall hereafter be had made done levied knowledged
executed or suffered by the said G. F. etc. unto the said I. C: or to any other
person or persons, of the aforesaid bargained premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, shall be and enure, and shall for ever hereafter be deemed expounded
construed adjudged reputed and taken to be and enure, to the use and behoof of
the said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the tenor intention and
meaning of these presents: And the said I. C. for himself etc. does by these
presents covenant and grant to and with the said G: F: W: etc. That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said G. F. W. his Heirs etc: as well to have
and enjoy all and singular the before mentioned bargained Premises, as also to
take and receive all the Rents Issues and Profits of the same, until default
of payment of the said several Sums before mentioned, or any of them, or any
part or parcel of them, shall be made in part or in all, at any of the days
and times before limited for payment thereof, without the let trouble eviction
expulsion disturbance or interruption of the said I. C. his Heirs or Assigns,
or any of them, and without any account thereof, or for any part thereof to be
had or made to the said I. C. his Heirs or Assigns. And whereas the said G. F.
at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, has delivered to the said I.
C. certain Deeds Evidences Fines and Writings, which he has concerning the
said bargained Premises, containing in all etc. he the said I. C. for him etc.
does by these presents further covenant and grant to and with the said G. F. W.
his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, that if the said G. F. W. Heirs
Executors etc. do or shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said
I. C. his Heirs or Assigns, all the several Sum and Sums of money in the
said Proviso mentioned, at the days and times therein limited for payment of
the same as aforesaid, that then he the said I. C. his etc. shall deliver or
cause to be delivered unto the said G. F. W. his Heirs or Assigns, all and
every the Deeds Evidences Fines and Writings being mentioned whole safe
uncancelled and undefaced, and in as good plight as the said J: C. received the
same from the said G. F: W: as aforesaid. And lastly the said G: F: W: etc.
does by these presents further covenant and grant to and with the said I: C:
etc. that if default of payment shall be made of any of the Sum or Sums of
money, in the said Proviso mentioned, or any part thereof, at any of the days
or times therein limited for payment thereof, that then he the said G: F: W: his
Heirs or Assigns, shall deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said I: C:
his Heirs or Assigns, all and singular other Deeds Evidences Fines and Writings
concerning the Premises, which he the said G: F: W: now has, or may lawfully
come by without Suit in Law: In witness, etc.

A Release upon a Mortgage forfeited, and a further day given.
THis Indent. made, etc. between G: F: Citizen and Grocer of L. of the one
part, and T. M. of L. Gent. and H. G. of H. in the County of H. Gent. of the
other part witnesses, That the said G. F. W. for and in consideration of the
sum of etc. to him the said G: F: W. in hand paid at or before the Sealing and
Delivery of the said T: M: the receipt whereof the said G: F. does hereby
acknowledge and confess, and thereof, and of every part thereof does acquit,
exonerate, release and discharge the said T. M. his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and every of them for ever by these presents, has Granted,
Remised, Released, Quit-claimed and Confirmed, and by these presents does for
him and his Heirs for ever, Grant, Remise, Release, Quit-claime, and Confirm
unto the said T. M. and H. S. in their full, quiet, and peaceable Possession
and Seisin being, and unto their Heirs and Assigns for ever, all the estate,
right, title, interest, use possession, reversion, conditions, limitation and
limitations, of estate or estates, and all manner of benefit and advantage,
whereof and all and all manner of Claim and Demand whatsoever, which he the said
G. F. has, may, can might, should, or of right ought to have or claim in Law
or Equity, of in, or to all those five Messuages or Tenements, with all the
Cellers, Shops, Sollors, Entrys, Houses, Stables, Buildings, Chambers, Rooms,
Yards, Back-sides, Gardens, Grounds, Lights, Easements, Profits, Commodities,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever to the same belonging or
appurtaining, or to, or with the same usually occupied, demised or enjoyed,
now, or late in the several tenures, possessions or occupations of I. C. R. P:
W. C. and R. W. their Assignee, or Assignees, situate lying and being in the
Parish of St. C. in the County of M. which said five Messuages or Tenements,
were late but three Messuages then the several tenures, possessions or
occupations of M. M. deceased, the said R: P. and J. C. (their Assigns, or
undertenants; and also of, in, or to all and singular the Messuages, Lands and
Hereditaments whatsoever, situate in the said Parish of St. C. and which are
mentioned to be bargained and sold by the said G: F: unto the said I: C:
Citizen of L. his Heirs and Assigns, in and by one Indenture of Grant, Bargain
and Sale, bearing date etc. and made between the said G: F: of the one part,
and the said I: C. of the other part and enrolled in his Majesty's High Court
of Chancery, so that neither he the said G. of W: nor his Heirs or Assigns, or
any other person or persons, for him or them, or in his or their name, has, or
hereafter may have any right, title, interest, claim and demand, in or to the
Premises or any part thereof; but that he the said G: F: W: and his Heirs,
shall be from all right, title, interest, claim and demand, in or to the
Premises, or any parcel thereof utterly and wholly excluded, and for ever
debarred by these presents.

And further witnesses by these presents, that the said G. F. W. and his Heirs
shall and will warrant, and for ever defend the premises, and every of them
unto the said T: M: and H. S. and their Heirs against the said G. F. and his
Heirs, and against all and every person and persons lawfully having or
claiming, or which may hereafter lawfully have or claim or demand the
Premises, or any part thereof, or any right, title* interest, claim or demand
into the Premises, or into, or out of any parcel of the the same, from, by, or
under the said G F. W. his Heirs or Assigns, and against the Heirs and Assigns,
of E: W: deceased, late eldest brother of the said G: F: W: and the said G. F.
W. for him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to
and with the said T. M. and H. G: their Heirs and Assigns, in manner and form
following (that is to say) that the Premises, with their Appurtenances shall
for ever hereafter remain and continue unto the said T. M. and H G. their Heirs
and Assigns, to the use and behoof of them and their Heirs, free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged or otherwise well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, from, for and concerning all, and all
manner of former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, estates, mortgages,
dowers, joyntures, uses, wills, entails, issues, seisures, amerciaments,
rentseck, rentcharge and arrerages of rent, limitation of uses, Statutes
Merchant, and of the Staple Judgments, Recognizances, Extents, Executions,
Intrusions, Titles, Troubles, Charges, Encumbrances, Claim and Demand
whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered by him the said G. F. W. or
by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, by, from, or
under him his Heirs or Assigns.

And further, That the said T: M: and H: G: their Heirs and Assigns and every
of them, shall and may from time to times and at all times hereafter lawfully,
quietly and peaceably, have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the Premises,
with their Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof without the let,
denial, disturbance, expulsion or eviction of him the said G. F: W: his Heirs
or Assigns, or of any other person or persons, lawfully claiming or deriving,
or which shall or may lawfully claim or derive any estate, right, title or
interest, by, from or under him the said G: F. W: his Heirs or Assigns, or in,
by, from, or under the said E: W. deceased, the said eldest brother of the said
G. F. W.

And further, That he the said G: F: W: and S. his wife, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said G: F: W: and all and every other person and persons which
now have, or which at any time after shall or may have any lawful estate,
right, title or interest, of, in, or to the Premises, or unto any part or
parcel thereof, by, from or under the said G. F. W: his Heirs or Assigns, or,
by, from, or under the said E: W: the said eldest brother of G: F: W: shall all
and will from time to time, and at all times herafter during the term of seven
years now next ensuing the date hereof upon reasonable request to be made by
the said T: M, and H: G: their Heirs and Assigns, or any of them in that
behalf, and at his and their proper costs and charges in the Law, do make,
suffer, acknowledge and execute all and every such other and further lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises in the Law
whatsoever, for the better Assurance, Surety, sure Making, Conveying, and
Assuring of the Premises, and every part thereof, unto the said T: M: and H. G:
their Heirs and Assigns, to the use and behoof of them, and of their heirs and
assigns for ever, as by his and their Council in the Law shall be reasonably
devised or advised and required.

Provided always nevertheless and upon condition, that if he the said G. F, W:
his Heirs Executors and Administrators, or any of them, do and shall well and
truly pay, and cause to be we well and truly paid unto the said T. M. and H. G,
their Heirs Executors or Assigns at the now dwelling House of the said H: G.
situate in F: etc. the several sums of lawful money of England hereafter in
these presents mentitioned and expressed at the days and times hereby limited
and appointed in manner and form following, that is to say, the sum of etc.
without fraud, covin or further delay, that then the said T: M: and and H: G:
for them their Heirs Executors and Administrators, do Covenant and Grant to and
with the said G: F: W: his Heirs and Assigns, that they the said T. M. and H,
G. and the Survivors of them, and his and their Heirs shall, and will upon
reasonable request to be made by the said G: F: W. his Heirs or Assigns, and at
his and their proper costs and charges, within forty days next after such full
payment of the said several sums of money in manner and form aforesaid
sufficiently convey and assure the Premises, and every part thereof unto the
said G. F. W. his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, or to such other person or
persons, as he the said E: F: W: his Heirs or Assigns, shall by his or their
Writing under his or their Hand and Seal, direct, limit or appoint, freed and
cleared, of, and for all estates, charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had
made, done, committed, suffered, or executed to them, or either of them, their,
or either of their Heirs or Assigns, and the said G. F. W. for him his Heirs
Executors and Admininistrators, does Covenant and Grant to and with the said T:
M: and and H: G: their Heirs Executors and Assigns, that he the said G: F: W:
shall and will, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said T: M: and
H: G: their Heirs Executors or Assigns, the several sums of money in the said
Proviso and Condition mentioned at the several days and times in the said
Proviso limited and appointed.

And lastly, It is Covenanted, Granted, Condescended, Concluded and Agreed
upon, by and between the said parties to these present Indentures, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said G: F: W: his Heirs and Assigns, to
have, take, and receive, all and singular the rents, issues and profits of the
Premises, to his or their own proper use and behoof until default of payment
of the said several sums of money before mentioned, or any of them, or any
part or parcel of them in part, or in all at any of the said days and times
before limited for payment thereof without the let, trouble, denial eviction,
interruption, or disturbance of the said T. M. and H. G. their Heirs or
Assigns, and without any account thereof, or for any part thereof to be had or
made to the said T: M: and H: G: or either of them, their, or either of their
Heirs or Assigns; He the said G: F: VV. his Heirs and Assigns, paying and
discharging in the mean time, as well the yearly rent charge of 50 l. issuing
out of the Premises and payable yearly unto the Heirs and Assigns of E: VV:
late Citizen and Clothworker of L: deceased, as also all such Taxes, Rates,
Payments and Duties whatsoever, which shall from time to time happen to be
taxed, rated, imposed or otherwise become due and payable, for and in respect
of the Premises, or any part thereof. In witness, etc.

Of a Demise of a Message, etc,
THis Indenture made, etc. Between I. F of the one part; and G. S. of the other
part, witnesses, That whereas the said G. S. by Deed indented under his hand
and seal bearing date, etc. has bargained sold demised granted, and to farm
letten unto the said I. F. his Executors, etc. All that Message, etc. To have
and to hold the message etc. from the date of the said Indenture for ninty
nine years, under the yearly Rent of one Pepper corn, as by the said recited
Indenture, relation being thereunto had, more at large appears.

Now this Indenture Witnesses, that the said I, F. for diverse good causes and
considerations him thereunto moving, has bargained sold betaken, and to farm
letten, and by these presents, does bargain sell betake, and to farm let unto
the said G: S. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, the said Message,
etc. and the Reversion and Reversions Rents Issues and profits of all and
singular the said Messuages and premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, to have and to hold the said Message, etc, unto the said G. S. his
Executors, etc. from the ensealing and delivery of these Presents, unto the end
and term of ninty nine years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended. Provided always, and these presents are, upon this
condition, nevertheless that if the said G. S. his heirs etc. do not or shall
not from henceforth yearly, and from year to year, for and during the natural
lives of R F. and S. F. children of the said I: F: and the longer liver of
them, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J: F: his Executors,
such a sum or yearly Rent at such a place and days in every year by equal
portions without any deduction allowance abatement or defalcation whatsoever,
that then and from thenceforth this present Lease of the same premises, shall
cease determine and be utterly void and of none effect to all intents and
purposes as if these presents had never been made, and then and at any time
afterward it shall and may be lawful unto, and for the said J: F: his
Executors, etc: to enter into, and upon the said messuages and premises, or
any part thereof in the name of the whole, and the same to have again retain
and repossess as in his and their first and former Estate. and the said G: S:
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and all other occupiers of the
Premises there out and from thence utterly to expel put out and amove, this
Indenture or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And the said G: S: etc: does covenant with the said J: F: etc: that the said
G: S: his heirs, etc: or some of them shall and will from time to time and at
all times hereafter, during the natural lives of the said R. F. and S. F.
children of the said J. F and the life of the a longer liver of them well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said I. F. his Executors etc. the said
annual sum, or yearly payment of etc. at the place days and times above
mentioned for payment thereof, and in manner and form aforesaid without making
default of payment, of or in any one point thereof, and without any deduction
allowance abatement or defalcation whatsoever, and that he the said G. S. his
Executors; etc. shall from time to time and at all times during the natural
life and lives of the said R. F. and S. F. and the life of the longer liver of
them, well and sufficiently repair uphold support sustain and maintain and keep
the said message etc. in by and with all and all manner of needful and
necessary reparations and amendments whatsoever, when where or as often as need
shall require. And also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
I: F: his Executors or Assigns with workmen or others; in his their or any of
their companies, or without twice in every year, yearly during the natural
lives and life of the said R: F: and S. F. and the life of the longer liver of
them, to enter and come into the said Message or Tenement in every or any part
thereof there to view search and see the state of the reparations of the same
of and every part thereof, and all such defaults and wants of repair as upon
every such view or search shall be found to give or leave notice or warning in
writing at the same premises, or some part thereof unto, or for the said G S.
his heirs or assigns, to repair or amend the same defaults and wants of
Reparations within the space of six months then next ensuing.

And it is lastly the agreement of the said I. F. for himself his Executors, to
and with the said G. S. his heirs, etc, by these presents, that the said G. S:
his heirs, etc: paying the said yearly sum of etc: in form aforesaid, and
performing fulfilling and keeping all and singular other the covenants grants
clauses and agreements therein contained on his and their parts, to be done and
performed, shall and may peaceably and quietly have hold occupy possess and
enjoy all and singular the messuages and premises above herein and hereby
granted, and to farm letten with their appurtenances, and every part thereof
during the said term thereby granted without any let trouble interruption
encumbrance or disturbance, of or by the said I: F: his Executors, etc: or any
of them or any other person or persons lawfully claiming, or which shall or may
lawfully claim by from or under him them or any of them, In witness etc:

A good Mortgage by Deed enrolled, and Defeasance thereupon, with a clause if
the money be not paid according to the Proviso, that the Mortgagee paying a
further sum shall have the Land established.
THis Indenture, etc: Between P. R. Citizen and Draper of L. and W. D of C. in
the Parish of L. in the County of L. Chapman on the one party, and J. S. of S.
in the county of L. Esquire son and heir of I. S. late of S. aforesaid Esquire,
deceased on the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said I. S. party
hereunto by Indenture of bargain and sale under his hand and seal bearing the
day of the date of these presents and sealed and delivered at one instant of
time, together with these presents and intended to be enrolled in the High
Court of Chancery for and in consideration of the sum of 500 l. of etc.
therein mentioned to be to him paid by the said P. R. and VV. D. has granted
bargained sold aliened enfeoffed and confirmed unto the said P. R. and VV. D.
and to their heirs and assigns for ever, all that capital message and
Tenement etc. as by the said recited Indenture of bargain and sale (Relation
being thereunto had) more at large appears.

It is nevertheless provided covenanted granted concluded conditioned
condescended declared and agreed, by and between all the said parties to these
presents, for them their Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and each
and either of them the said P. R. and VV. D: severally and respectively by and
for himself his respective Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and not
jointly nor one for another, nor one for the act of another, does covenant
promise grant condescend and agree to and with the said I. S. party hereunto
his heirs and Assigns and every of them by these presents, That if the said I.
S. party hereunto, his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, do and shall yearly and every year for and during the space of seven
years, to be accounted from the day of the date of these presents, well and
truly pay or cause etc. unto the said P: R: and VV. D. or either of them, their
or either of their Executors Administrators or Assigns, at the now dwelling
house of etc. the yearly sum or annual payment of 40 l. of etc. on the
fifteenth day of December, and the fifteenth day of June in every year by
equal portions without any deduction allowance abatement or defalcation to be
had made or claimed* for or by reason color or means of any taxes or
assessments to be laid or set upon the Message Lands and premises aforesaid
or any part thereof, or by color or means of any Order or orders, Ordinance or
Ordinances, Act or Acts of Parliament made or to be made or otherwise
howsoever. The first payment thereof to begin and be made on the December next
ensuing the date of these presents.

And also if the said I. S. party hereunto his Heirs Executors Administrators
or Assigns, do well and truly pay or cause, etc. unto the said P. R. and VV. D.
or either of them, or to the Executors Administrators or Assigns of them, or
either of them, at the place of payment aforesaid, the sum of 500 l: of like
etc: on the twentieth day of June, which shall be in the year, etc, and do make
no default of payment of or in any one payment of the sums of money aforesaid.
And also if upon convenient notice given or left at the said Capital message
after the expiration of two years now next ensuing, he the said I. S. his
Executors or Administrators shall within six months next after such notice pay
or cause to be paid to the said P. R. and W. D, or either of them their or
either of their Executors or Administrators, the said sum of 500 l. and such
Consideration as shall be then behind and unpaid according to the rate of use,
that then and from thenceforth the said recited bargain and sale and the uses
therein limited, shall cease determine and be utterly void and of none effect.
And that then or at any time after wards, the said P. R. etc. their Heirs or
Assigns shall and will upon the reasonable request of the said I. S. party,
etc. his Heirs or Assigns yield and deiver up the said Indenture of bargain and
sale, and that part of these present Indentures which is under the hand and
seal of the said I. S. party, etc. if the same be not in the mean time casually
lost destroyed cancelled or defaced by fire or otherwise unto him the said I.
S. party, etc. his Heirs or Assigns, to be cancelled and made void, together
withal and singular the Deeds and Evidences mentioned in the Schedule or
inventory hereunto annexed, saving in case of casualty as aforesaid safe and
uncancelled, and then also or at any time afterward, the said P. R. etc. their
heirs or Assigns, shall and will upon the like reasonable request and at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said I. S. party etc. his Heirs or Assigns
grant reconvey and reassure all and singular the capital Message Tenement or
Mansion house Lands and Hereditaments in and by the said recited Indenture of
bargain and sale granted bargained sold and conveyed with their Appurtenances
and every part and parcel thereof unto the said I. S. party, etc. his heirs
and assigns or to such other person or persons, as he or they shall in that
behalf direct and appoint freed and discharged of and from all and all manner
of former Estates Leases Dowers Titles Troubles Charges and Encumbrances had
made committed or done by them the said P, R. etc. their heirs and assigns or
any of them at any time or times before the making of such conveyance or
reassurance, as by the said I. S. party, etc, his heirs or assigns, or his or
their Council lerrned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised and
required, so, that in such Reassurance, no greater or other warranty be
included then only against the said P R. etc. respectively their respective
heirs and assigns: And so as for the doing thereof, the parties who are to
join therein be not compelled to travel further, then the Cities of L. and W.
or one of them. And the said J. S. party, etc. for himself his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does covenant promise grant
and agree to and with the said P. R. etc. and either of them, their and either
of their Executors Administrators and Assigns by these presents that he the
said J. S. party; etc. his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns or some
of them shall and will from time to time well and truly pay, or cause, etc.
unto the said P. R. etc. their Executors Administrators or Assigns, the said
yearly sum or annual payment of 40 l of etc. for and during the said term of
five years, and the said sum of 500 l: of etc. at the place and several days
and times above mentioned for payment thereof and in manner and form
aforesaid, without making default of payment, of or in any one payment thereof,
and without any deduction abatement allowance or defalcation to be had made or
claimed for or by color or means of any taxes or assesments to be laid or set
upon the Message Lands and premises aforesaid, or for or by reason of any Act
Order or Ordinance of Parliament or otherwise howsoever.

And that in case the said I. S. party, etc: his Heirs Executors Administrators
or Assigns, do or shall make any default of payment of or in any one payment of
the yearly sum of 40 l. above mentioned or of the said sum of 500 l. or any
part thereof, contrary to the form of the covenant or condition above
expressed. Then if the said P. R. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, do
and shall at any time afterward within the space of six months next after any
such default of payment as aforesaid, well and truly pay or tender to be paid
unto the said I. S: his Heirs or Assigns, at etc. a further sum of 500 l. of
etc. (deducting and defalking out of the same, all such sum and sums of
money, as shall then be due and payable for the interest of the sum of 500 l.
first above mentioned, that then or at any time afterward, he the said J. S.
his Heirs or Assigns shall and will upon the reasonable request, and at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said P. R: etc. their Heirs or Assigns, or
any of them well and sufficiently and in due form of Law, grant, release,
convey and assure all and singular the said Capital Message, Tenement or
Mansion house, Lands and premises above mentioned with their appurtenances,
and all his and their Estate, right, title, interest, power and benefit of
redemption, claim and demand whatsoever, of into and out of the same, and
every part thereof unto the said P: R. etc. their Heirs or Assigns or such
other person or persons as they either or any of them shall in that behalf
direct and appoint, freed and discharged of the Provisoe, Condition or
agreement above mentioned, and of all power and benefit of redemption; by such
assurance and conveyance in the Law: As by the said P R. etc. And further that
in case the said P R. etc. their Executors or Assigns shall at any time
hereafter before the end of the said Term of five years be compelled or
compellable by any act or Ordinance of Parliament made or to be made or
otherwise to accept and take after the rate of 6 l. per cent. for the
forbearance of the sum of 100 l: for one year or less then the sum of 8 l.
per cent: for the 500 l. above mentioned. That then he the said J: S. party,
etc. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will at the end of six months after
notice or warning in that behalf, given or left by the said P. R: etc. their
or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in the said
capital Messuages well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said P: R:
etc. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns at the place of payment
aforesaid the said sum of 500 l. and all such part, and so much of the said
annual sum of 40 l. above mentioned, as shall be then in arreare unpaid and
unsatisfied. Aad it is lastly the agreement of the said P. R. etc: for
themselves, their Executors and Assigns that the said I. S: party etc: his
Heirs and Assigns, shall and may have, hold and enjoy all and singular the
said Capital Message, Tenement or mansion house, Lands, and Hereditaments and
every part thereof and receive and take the Rents and profits thereof to his
own proper use until default of payment made of or in some one payment of the
payments aforesaid contrary to the form above declared without any let,
hinderance or impediment, of or by the said P R. etc. or either of them, their
or either of their Heirs, Executors or Assigns or any of them: In witness,
etc.

A good Mortgage by way of Lease for five hundred years.
THis Indenture, etc. Between T P. of I. in the County of S. Gent. Son and Heir
of T P. late of N. in the same County, Doctor of Physic deceased on the one
part, and T. B. of the City of London Merchant on the other party: Witnesses
that the said T P. party to these presents, for and in consideration of the
sum of 800 l. of etc. to him in hand paid by the said T: B: at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents. The receipt whereof the said T P.
party to these presents, does hereby acknowledge, and himself therewith fully
satisfied, and thereof and of every part thereof does clearly acquit, exonerate
and discharge the said T B. his Executors and Administrators by these presents.
Has bargained sold, demised, granted and to farm letten, and by these
presents does, unto the said T B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns.
All that the manner of H. in the County of S. with the Rights, Mem, bers, and
Appurtenances thereof, and all Messuages, houses, waters, Mills, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods Underwoods, Commons, Heaths,
Furs, Mooress, marches, Wastes, Profits and Perquisits of Courts rent of
Copyholders, and Freeholders, chiefe-rents, quit-rents Rents of Assize,
fines, herriots, amerciaments, services, reversions, royalties, privileges,
franchises jurisdictions, profits, commodities, hereditaments and appurtenances
whatsoever to the said Manor belonging or appeataining, or accepted, reputed
or taken; as part; parcel or member thereof: And also all that Tenement with
the close or parcel of Pasture, wherein the said Tenement stands containing
by estimation, etc. be the same more or less, Situate, lying and being in the
Parish of H. in the County of S. now or late in the several tenures or
occupations of etc. or of their Assigns. And also all that piece, etc. And all
woods, under-woods, timber and trees standing, growing, or being in upon or
about the several Closes, pieces or parcells of Ground abovementioned, and
every or any part thereof. And all ways, waters, commons, and common of
Pasture, profits, commodities, hereditaments and appurtenances whatsoever to
the said tenement and several closes ot parcells of Land or ground and every
or any of them belonging or appertaining or with them, or any of them used,
occupied or enjoyed. And all other the Messuages, Lands, tenements and
hereditaments which were conveyed and assured by and from G. S. of etc: and I.
W. of etc. to the said T P. deceased in and by a certain Indenture of bargain
and sale under their hands and Seals bearing date, etc. and enrolled in the
high Court of Chancery. And the Reversion and Reversions, Rents, Issues and
profits, of all and singular the Manor, Tenement, Lands and premises above
mentioned, and every part thereof. To have and to hold all and singular Habend.
the said Manor, Tenement and several Closes and parcells of Land and all
other the premises above, in and by the these presents demised, granted,
bargained and sold with their and every of their appurtenances, and the Rents
and Reversions thereof unto the said T B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns from the ensealing and delivery of these presents unto the end and
term of 500 years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and
ended without impeachment of or for any manner of Wast, strip, or spoil,
Redend.
yiedling and paying, therefore yearly and every year during the said term
unto the said T P. party hereunto his Heirs and Assigns the yearly Rent of
one Pepper corn, on the Feast day of All Saints in every year (if it be
demanded, and no more) Provided always and these presents are upon this
condition, Nevertheless, that if the said T P. party hereunto his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall yearly and
every year from henceforth for and during the term of five years now next
ensuing, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T. B. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns. At the etc. in London the yearly sum or
annual payment of 48 l: of etc. on the 26th. day of January, and 26th. day of
July in every year by equal portions. The first payment thereof to begin and
be made on the 26th. day of January now next ensuing. And also if the said T P.
party hereunto his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do and shall,
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T B. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, at the place of payment aforesaid, the sum of 800
l. of like good and lawful money of England on the last day of July, which
shall be in the year, etc. And in case the said T P. party hereunto shall be
minded to repay the said 800 l. before the end of the said five years, and do
and shall give or leave notice or warning thereof in writing, at the now
dwelling house of the said T. B. in etc. on any twentieth day of January or
twentieth day of July, within the last two years of the five years aforesaid,
and do and shall truly pay to the said T B. his Executors or Assigns at the
place of payment aforesaid, the sum of 800 l. of etc. at the next half years
day of payment then ensuing, together with all such part and so much o^ the
said yearly sum of 48 l: as shall be then due and payable: And do make no
default of payment of or in any one payment of the sums of money aforesaid,
That then and from thence forth this present grant, bargain, sale and demise
of all and singular the same premises shall cease, determine, and be utterly
void and of none eflect, to all intents and purposes, as if the same had ^ever
been made, This Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And the said T P: party hereunto for
himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and for every of them does
covenant promise grant and agree to and with the said T B. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns and to and with every of them by these presents, in
form following. That is to say. That he the said T. P. party hereunto at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, is the very true lawful and
rightful owner of the said Manor, Tenement, Lands, and all other the
premises above herein, and hereby demised, granted, bargaind and sold or
meant, mentioned or intended to be hereby demised, granted, bargained and sold
with their appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof. And now is and
stands lawful seized in his demeasne, as of Fee, of and in all and singular
the said Manor, Tenement, Lands, and premises with their appurtenances, and
of every part thereof, of a good, sure, lawful perfect, rightful, absolute and
indefeazable estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple, without any reversion,
remainder, limitation of use or uses, power of revocation, or other matter or
thing whatsoever, of or in any person or persons, to alter, change, or
determine the same. And that he the said T. P. party to these presents, now
has in himself full power, good and perfect right, and lawful authority, to
demise grant, bargain and sell, all and singular the said Manor, Tenement,
Lands, Hereditaments and premises, above mentioned with their appurtenances,
and every part thereof unto the said T B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and during the said term of 500 years in manner and form
aforesaid, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. And
also that the said T B: his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and
may from time to time, and at all times (from and after default of payment made
of the several sums of money aforesaid, or any of them, or any part thereof)
peaceably and quietly enter into have hold, occupy, possess, and enjoy the
said Manor, Tenement, Lands, Hereditaments and premises above, in and by
these presents demised, granted, bargained and sold with their and every of
their appurtenances and every part and parcel thereof for and during the said
term of 500 years, without any let, trouble, inter^uption, encumbrance or
disturbance of or by the said T P. party hereunto, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or of or by any other person or
persons whatsoever.

And further that the said Manor Tenements Lands Hereditaments, and all other
the Premises above in and by these presents mentioned or intended to be herein
and hereby demised etc. with their and every of their appurtenances, now are,
and be, and so from time to time and at all times hereafter, for and during the
said term of 500 years, shall be remain and continue, and be had holden and
enjoyed unto and by the said T. B. his Executors Administrators and Assigns
(subject to the Proviso or Condition above mentioned) free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted exonerated and discharged, of and from all and all
manner of former, and other Gifts Grants Bargains Sales Leases Joyntures Dowers
U^es Wills Entails Statutes-Merchant and of the Staple Recognizances Judgments
Extents Executions Rentcharge Rent*seck Annuities yearly payments Fines Issues
Amerciaments Seisures Sequestrations, and cause and causes of Sequestration.
And of and from all other Estates Titles Troubles Charges and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had made committed suffered by the said T: P. party hereunto, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever, the Rents and Services from henceforth
to grow due and payable to the chief Lord and Lords of the Fee and Fees of the
Premises, in respect of his and their Seigniory and Seigniories excepted and
foreprised. And except one annuity or yearly Rent charge of 10 l. per annum,
issuing and payable out of the Premises, or some part thereof, unto E: M:
Mother of the said T. P. party hereunto, for and du^ing the term of her
natural life, and no longer. And also except one Lease or Grant made of
parcel of the Premises, by the said T, P. party etc. unto the said T. L. for
a certain term yet enduring, at and under the yearly Rent of 42 l: And also
except one other Lease made of other parcel of the Premises, by the said T.
P. party etc. to the said etc. for a certain term yet unexpired, whereupon the
yearly Rent of 16 l. is reserved and payable, which said several yearly Rents
of 42 l. and 16 s. in and by the said several excepted Leases reserved, shall
from and after default of payment made of the Sums of money aforesaid, or any
of them become due and payable unto the said T: B. his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, for and notwithstanding any act or thing, had made or done, or to
be had etc. by the said T. P. party etc. or by any other person or persons.

And moreover that the said T. P. party etc. and his Heirs, and all other
person and persons, and their Heirs, having claiming deriving or pretending, or
which can or may hereafter have or claim any manner of Estate Right Title
Interest Claim Benefit or Demand, of into or out of the said Manor Lands
Hereditaments and Premises above mentioned, to be herein and hereby demised
granted bargained and sold, with their appurtenances, and every or any part or
parcel thereof (except as aforesaid) shall and will from time to time and at
all times (from and after default of payment made of the Sums of money in the
Proviso and Condition aforesaid expressed, or any of them, upon the reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said T. B. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, make do knowledge levy suffer and execute,
and cause and procure to be made etc. unto the said T: B: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, all and every such further lawful and reasonable
Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Deeds Devises Grants Releases Conveyances and
Assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further and better more perfect and
absolute granting conveying and assuring of the said Manors Tenements Lands
and Premises, above herein and hereby demised granted bargained and sold, with
their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said T. B. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, for and during the said term of 500.
years, discharged of the Proviso or Condition aforesaid, and of all power and
benefit of redemption: As by the said T. B. by his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised or advised and required.

And it is lastly agreed by and between the said parties to these present^, for
them their Heirs Executors and Assigns: That the said T. P: party etc: his
Heirs Executors and Assigns, shall and may have hold and enjoy the premises,
and receive and take the Rents and Profits thereof, to his and their own proper
uses, until the first default of payment shall be made of the Sums of money,
in the Proviso and Condition aforesaid expressed, without any let hinderance or
denial of or by the said T. B. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any
of them. Any thing herein contained, to the contrary notwithstanding etc. In
witness, etc.

In a Bond to pay the money.
In a Bond for performance of Covenants.
A Lease of a Garden for 1000. years, with Covenant to convey over the
Fee-simple of the Premises to the Leassee, or his Heirs, if they require it.
THis Indenture etc. Between M. B. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. on the one
party, and H. W. of the City of L. aforesaid, Son of W: W: Citizen and
Painter-steyner of the same City, on the other party, witnesses, That the said
M. B. for and in consideration of the Sum of 45 l. of etc. whereof etc. Has
given granted demised betaken and to farm-letten, and by these presents etc.
unto the said H. W. his Executors and Assigns, all that Garden and Garden
ground, and the Lodge therein builded, and the one half of the Well in the West
end thereof, and all Buildings within the same Garden, and all the Hedges Fences
and Enclosures thereof, with all and singular the Appurtenances and Commodities
thereof, now being in the proper holding and occupation of the said W. W.
situate lying and being on the West side of M: without Mortgage of the City of
L. between M. aforesaid on the South side, and the Garden in the holding etc.
on the North side, and does contain in length by the North side, from East to
West 128, foot of assize, and by the South side in length as aforesaid, 113.
foot of assize, Habend.
and in breadth etc. To have and to hold the said Garden and Garden ground, and
the Lodge Buildings Hedges Fences and Commodities thereof aforesaid, with all
and singular their Appurtenances, to the said W: W: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, by and
during all the whole term of 1000. years, from thence next following, and fully
to be complete and ended, without impeachment of any manner of Wast, yiedling
and paying therefore yearly to Reddend.
the said M. and his Heirs, one silver penny in the Feast of All saints (if it
be asked) And the said M. B. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators,
Covenant for Seizure in see.
and every of them, covenanteth and grants, to and with the said W. W: his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, in
manner and form following; That is to say, That he the said M. B. now at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, is by good and sure Title in the Law,
lawfully and solely seized of the said Garden, and all other the above demised
Premises, in his Demesne as of Fee simple, without any limitation of Use
Defeazance Mortgage or Condition, to and for the only use of the said M. and
his Heirs for ever.

And that he the said M. B. has good right and lawful power and authority And
power to assure the premises.
to give grant demise and assure all the said Garden and Garden ground, and all
and every other the Premises above demised to the said W: W: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns in manner and form aforesaid. And that the said
Garden and Premises, now are and from Discharge of Encumbrances.
henceforth from time to time and at all times, unto the end of the said term,
shall be and continue unto the said W. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, free and clearly discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by the said M.
and his Heirs saved harmless, of and from all and singular former Gifts Grants
Bargains Sales Leases Statutes Recognizances Annuities Fees Joyntures Dowers
Entails Fines Amerciaments, Fines for alienation and license of Alienation
Intrusions, and all other Estates Titles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had made
done or suffered by the said M: B: or Sir M. B. Knight, his Father deceased, or
T: B: his Brother, Son and Heir of the said Sir M: or by any other person or
persons, claiming or having any Estate Title or Interest in or to the said
Garden, or any other the Premises, by from or under the said M: B: and Sir M:
B: Knight, and T. B. or any of them (The chief Rents from henceforth to be due
to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee: And one Lease made and granted of the
said Garden by Except a Lease
the said Sir M. B: to A. B. by Indenture, bearing date etc. (only except and
foreprised.)

And moreover the said M. covenanteth etc. That he the said W: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, from henceforth unto the end of For enjoyance.
all the said term of 1000. years shall or lawfully may not only have hold
occupy and possess all the said Garden and Garden ground, and all and every
other the above demised Premises: But also shall or may lawfully have take
perceive receive and enjoy, all the Issues Profits Rents Revernews and
Commodities thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, without any let
molestation interruption or resistance of or by the said M. B. or his Heirs, or
of or by any other person or persons, which shall have or make any Title in or
to the said Garden and Premises, or any part thereof, by from or under the said
Sir M. B. Knight, T. B. and M B. or by from or under them or any of them, or by
or through any act or acts, thing or things done or occasioned by them or any
of them, the said former Lease made to the said A. by Indenture as is
aforesaid, only except.

And further that if at any time hereafter, the said W. W. or his Heirs, shall
require the said M. B. or his Heirs, to convey and assure the said Garden and
Garden ground, and all other the above demised Premises, with their
Appurtenances unto the said W. or to his Heirs or to any other person or
persons, or their Heirs in Fee-simple, that then upon such request made, the
said M. B. and his Heirs, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said W: W:
or of his Heirs, shall make do knowledge and finish and suffer to be done, all
and every such act and acts, conveyance and conveyances, assurance and
assurances, for the conveyance and assurance in the Law of all the said Garden
and Garden ground, and of all other the above demised Premises in Fee-simple
to the said W: and his Heirs, or to any other person or persons and their Heirs
therefore to be named by the said W. W. or his Heirs, or to such use and uses,
and in such manner and from, as by the said W. or his Heirs, or by his or their
learned Council, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised and appointed, so as
it be with warranty only of the said M: B: and of his Heirs against him and
them, and his and their Heirs; and no further. And that then at the time of
such conveyance and assurance making thereof, the said Garden and Premises
shall be and from henceforth continue clear and free from all former Grants
Bargains Sales and Encumbrances whatsoever, made done or suffered, or to be
made done or suffered by the said Sir M. B. Knight, M. B. and T. B. or any of
them, or by any other person or persons, by or under their Estate or Estate of
any of them, this present Lease, and the other former Lease above specified and
excepted, only excepted and foreprised: In witness etc:

A Lease of Land for 500. years for Assurance of payment of a of a sum of
money, with Covenants for Atturnment of the Tenants of the Premises, and for
the assuring of Land to the Leasee and his heirs for ever, and request if
breach of payment be made, etc. A Lease devised to avoid Bargain, Livery, and
Enrolling, etc.
THis Indenture etc. Between the Right Honorable H: Earl of H. Lord H. etc. on
the one party, and H. B. Haberdasher of etc. on the other part witnesses, That
the said Earl for and in consideration of the sum of 2650 l: of etc. whereof
etc. has Demised etc. all and singular those the Manors of S: M: H: C: and H:
in the County of S. with all and singular their appurtenances whatsoever, and
all and singular those Messuages, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments with their
appurtenances in the said County of S. commonly called or known by the several
names of S. M. H. C. and H. and all and singular Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Profits, and other Hereditaments to the said Manors and
Lordships and other the Premises, or to any of them belonging, or in any wise
appertaining or occupied used, demised, or Leased as part, parcel or member of
the same, or any of them, or reputed, taken, counted, or known as any parcel or
member of them or of any of them, and all and singular other Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever of him the said Earl with their
appurtenances, situate lying being, coming, growing, or renewing, of or in
the Towns, Parishes, Hamlets and Fields of S. M. H. C. and H. in the said
County of S. and the Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the
Premises, and all and singular rents and Profits whatsoever, incident unto the
same Reversion and Reversions; To have and to hold etc. unto the said Habend.
H: B: his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the day of the date of
these presents unto the end and term, and for and during all the term of five
hundred years, from thence etc. and fully to be complete and ended, under the
condition hereafter in these Presents mentioned and declared. And the said Earl
for himself, Owner in Fee.
his Heirs Executors, etc. does covenant etc in form etc. That he the said Earl
now is the very true, sole and lawful Owner of the Fee and Inheritance of all
and singular the Premises, and thereof, and and of every part thereof now is,
and stands ^olely and lawfully seized, of a good, sure, perfect, and absolute
estate in the Law in Fee-simple, to the only use of the said Earl, and of his
Heirs and Assigns, for ever absolutely without any Defeasance, Condition, or
Mortgage and that of such estate he the said Earl has good, right, and lawful
authority Authority to Let.
to Grant, Lease, and Demise all and singular the Premises with their appurt.
to the said H: B: his Executors Admin. and Assigns, in manner and form
aforesaid. And that all and singular the same Premises at Discharge of
Encumbrances.
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, are, and at all times hereafter,
for and during the said term of etc. under the Condition hereafter in these
Presents expressed, shall be discharged, acquitted, or otherwise by the said
Earl, his Heirs Executors or Administrators, at all times as well and
sufficiently saved harmless of, and from all and singular former Bargains,
Sales, Leases Grants, Statutes, Recognisances, Estates, Titles, Charges, and
Encumbrances whatsoever, the chief Rents and Services etc. and all Leases not
exceeding three Lives, or 21. years, and all estates by Copy of Court Roll made
by the said Earl of the said Manors, Lordships, and other the Premises, or any
part thereof, whereupon the old usual yearly Rents or more are reserved, yearly
to be paid during the said Leases and Estates, only except and foreprised. And
also that he the said H. B. his Executors and Assigns, during all the said term
of etc. upon and under the Condition aforesaid, shall or may have, hold, occupy
and enjoy all the said Manors, Enjoyance.
etc. and all and singular other the Premises, and the Rents, Issues, and
Profits thereof to their own use, shall or may lawfully perceive, receive, and
take without any Let, or interruption, of any other person or persons
whatsoever, except before excepted.

And further, that the Premises by these presents mentioned to be Yearly Rent.
Demised, now are, and from henceforth, for and during all the said term of
etc. shall or may continue, remain, and be to the said H. B: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, under the Condition aforesaid, of the full and
clear yearly value of 70 l. of etc. or above, over and beyond all charges
whatsoever.

Provided always, That if the said Earl, his Heirs Executors, etc. do Proviso.
pay etc. to the said H. B. etc. at the House etc. the sum of 2650 l. of etc.
in manner and form etc. That is to say on the 25th. of August etc. next etc.
1050. thereof (and ever after 400 l. till the whole be paid) That then and from
thenceforth these Presents, and the Lease, Demise, and Grant, thereby made of
all and singular the said Premises, and all the Covenants, therein contained,
and all Bonds and Statutes, made, or to be made, for or concerning the
performance of the Covenants herein contained, or any of them shall be utterly
void and of none effect. And then also, and from thenceforth it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said E: his Heirs etc. to reenter etc. and the same to
have again etc. as in his and their former estate. These presents Tenants to
atturn.
etc. And the said Earl Covenanteth etc. That he the said Earl within the space
of seven months next ensuing the date hereof shall and will procure and cause,
that all and every the Tenants, Farmers, and Occupiers of all and singular the
said Manors and Lordships, and other the Premises with their appurtenances,
and of every, or any part thereof, do, and shall every of them for his
particular estate, atturn and become tenants upon this demise and a Lease unto
the said H: B: his Executors or Assigns, under the Condition aforesaid for
payment of their several Rents therefore unto the said H: B* his Executors and
Assigns, and also that if default be made of or in payment of the said sum of
etc. or any part thereof to the said H: B. his Executors or Administrators
contrary to the form aforesaid, that then at all times during three years next
after such default made, the said Earl and the right Honorable Countess K. now
his wife, and all and every other person and persons, having or lawfully
claiming any estate in the Premises, or any part thereof by from or under the
said Earl, or any of his Ancestors (other then only such Leassers and
Coppyholders as aforesaid for their estates and interests before excepted) at,
and upon the reasonable request; and at the costs and charges in the Law only
of the said H: his Executors or Assigns, shall and will, do, make, knowledge
and suffer, and cause etc. all and every such lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things in the Law, either for the further and better
confirmation and assurance of this present Demise and Lease, or else for the
clear and absolute conveying of the Fee and Inheritance of all and singular the
Premises, with their appurtenances to the said H* B: his Heirs and Assigns for
ever absolutely without any condition, as by the said H: his Heirs or Assigns,
or his or their counc^l learned in the Laws of this Realm shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised or advised. Nevertheless the said Earl, or any other person
to make any such Assurance or Conveyance shall not be required or compelled for
the making thereof to travel above three miles distance from the place where
they so required shall be when such request to them shall be made. In witness,
etc.

A Lease of a Windmill.
THis Indenture made etc. between H: E: of M: of the one part and T. P. of K.
in the County of H. yeoman, of the other part witnesses, That the said H. E.
as well for and in consideration of the yearly Rent hereafter in and by these
presents reserved, as for diverse other good causes and considerations, the said
E. thereunto especially moving, has demised granted set and to farm-letten, and
by these presents does demise grant set and to farm let unto the said T. P. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, all that piece and parcel of ground,
lying and being in N. Field, within the Parish of K. aforesaid. And all that
the Mill, called K. or N. Windmill, situate standing or being in or upon the
said piece or parcel of ground, together with all and all manner of going and
running Geers, belonging and used to and with the same Mill. And also all and
all manner of other Goods and Chattels Utensils Implement and Tools whatsoever,
of his the said H. E. now standing remaining or being, of in or upon the same
piece or parcel of ground, or within or upon the same Windmill: All which now
are more particularly set down and expressed in a Schedule indented, to these
presents annexed; Together with all ways passages and common use of passing to
and from the said Wind Mill, heretofore usu^lly accustomed and enjoyed, with
all and every the appurtenances, to have and to hold ^he sa^d piece and parcel
of Ground Windmill, and all and singular the before mentioned Premises, with
their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said T: P: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, from etc. for and during, and until the full end
and term of etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete finished
and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term, unto the
said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns, the sum of etc: of good and lawful money of
England, at the etc. by even and equal portions: And if it shall happen the
said yearly Rent of etc. to be behind or unpaid, in part or in all, by the
space of etc. days next after any of the said Feast-daies of payment, wherein
the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, being lawfully demanded, that then it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns, into
the said piece or parcel of Ground and Windmill and othet the Premises, to
enter and distrain, and the Distress and Distresses so had and taken, to bear
and carry away, and the same to withold and keep, until the said H. E. his
Heirs and Assigns, shall of the same Rent, and of every part and parcel
thereof, with the arrerages thereof (if any happen to be) be fully satisfied
contented and pa^d.

And the said T. P. for himself, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them does covenant promise and grant, to and with the said H. E. his
Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, That he the said T. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall and will at all times needful during the said term, grind to and for
the said H. E. his Household and Family, All such Grain of Wheat, Rye, and
Barley, as shall be by the Servants or Assigns of the said H. E. brought to the
said Mill, and spent for the convenient maintenance of him the said H. E. his
household and Family, if the said H. E. etc. shall so long dwell and inhabit in
K. aforesaid, and the same Grain shall grind without any delay, and so soon as
the same may be conveniently ground by the said W^n^ Mill and that without
claiming or taking any manner or Toil or custom for the same, the Griest of
Grain not exceed^ng six bushels weekly.

And the said T. P. for the said T. P. for himself, his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, does covenant promise and grant, to and with the
said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns, by these presents, That he the said T. P. and
his Assigns, shall and will for and during all the foresaid term, at all times,
when and as often as need shall require, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, well and sufficiently amend maintain and keep in repair the said
Windmill, and every part thereof, with all manner of needful and necessary
Reparations, the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns, finding, providing, and
allowing all such and so much great Timber, as shall be meet and convenient,
for the upholding, repairing, and amending of the same Mill: As also bringing
the said Timber to the said Mill, at all times when need shall be for amending
of the same. All which the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns, do covenant and
grant, to and with the said T. P. his Heirs and Assigns, to do, fulfill, and
perform.

And the said H. E. for himself his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns,
does covenant promise and grant, to and with the said T. P. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, That if it
shall fortune at any time within the said term (which God forbid) that the said
Windmill by violence of weather or tempest to be overthrown, or by any other
casualty to perish; And that not by the carelessness or negligence of the said
T. P. his Executors or Assigns, that then the said H. E. his Heirs or Assigns,
shall and will at his and their own proper costs and charges, within etc. next
after such overthrow or other casualty erect re-edifie and build again the
said Windmill and place the same within the said compass of the same ground
whereon it now stands, to the use of the said T. P, his Executors and Assigns.

And the said T. P. for him, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant promise and grant, to and with the said H E. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, That if it shall fortune the said Windmill, by violence of
weather, or otherwise, to be overthrown or perish, and that by the negligence
and carelessness of the said T. P. his Executors or Assigns, that then the said
T. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and will before the end
of etc. next after such overthrow or other casualty, erect, re-edifie, and
build again the said Windmill, and place the same where now it stands, at
his and their own proper costs and charges, he the said H. E. finding providing
and allowing such and so much Timber, of all sorts needful as will serve for
the re-edifying and building the same again, the said T. P. being allowed all
the Chips and of all wood thereof, for and toward his charge of the same.

And further that he the said T. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
shall and will at the end of the said term of years hereby granted, leave and
yield up the said Windmill in good and sufficient repair, together with such
Implements Utensels Tools, and going or running Geeres, belonging to or used
with the same Mill, and of so good value and price, as they be now valued at,
as appears in the Schedule to the^e presents annexed, as shall be adjudged
meet, by the judgment of two indifferent men to be chosen by the said parties
equally to view and value the same.

Provided always, and it is nevertheless covenanted granted condescended and
agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, that if it shall
happen the said Implements Utensils Tools or running Geeres in the said
Schedule expressed, not to be found by the said two men to be of so good value
at the end of the said term, as they now are rated at, that then he the said T.
P. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall and will content and pay unto
the said H. E. his Heirs or Assigns, so much lawful money, as the said
Implements Utensils Tools and running Geeres shall be less worth, then they
are in the said Schedule valued: Or if it shall happen the said Implements
Utensils Tools or running Geeres, to be found by the said two men, to be of
better value then they are now expressed in the said Schedule to be of, that
then the said H. E. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will content and pay unto
the said T. P. his Executors or Assigns, so much lawful money as the same
Goods shall be better worth by the judgment of the same two men.

And the said T. P. for himself, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant promise and grant, to and with the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns,
that he the said T. P. his Executors Administrators nor Assigns, shall or will
demise let or set the said piece of ground or Windmill, or any part thereof, to
any person or persons, during the said term, without the consent of the said H.
E. his Heirs or Assigns, first had and obtained in writing.

And the said H. E. for himself, his heirs executors administrators and
Assigns, does covenant promise and grant, to and with the said T. P. his
executors administrators and assigns, and every of them by these presents, That
he the said T. P. his Executors administrators and assigns, shall and may at
all times hereafter, and from time to time during the said term, for and under
the yearly Rent Covenants Reservations and Agreements above specified,
peaceably and quietly, have hold occupy possess and enjoy the said piece or
parcel of ground, Windmill, and other the above demised premises, with their
and every of their appurtenances, without any lawful let trouble denial
expulsion eviction encumbrance or interruption, of or by the said H. E. his
heirs executors administrators or assigns, or any of them, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming from by or under him, them, or
any of them: In witness etc.

A very good President of a general Letter of Attorney, drawn and penned by
Council, as well concerning the disposition of Lands as Goods.
TO all true Christian people to whom this present writing shall come I F. W of
L: Esquire send greeting in our Lord God everlasting, whereas it has pleased
the Queens Highness to appoint me her Ambassador Leiger in France for a
certain time: And whereas I think it needful in mine absence to put some
person in trust for mine affairs here in England. Therefore know ye that I the
said H W. have made constituted, ordained, authorized, appointed, and in my
place by these presents, have put my well beloved in Christ W D: the elder of
L. Gent: my true, sufficient and lawful Attorney and Commissioner, as well to
enter for me and in my name into all and singular my Manors, Lordships,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Woods, underwoods, and all other my possessions
and Hereditaments, with all and singular their Rights, Members and
appurtenances in the Counties of Essex, Hertford, Somerset, S K. M: and W. and
every of them and elsewhere, wheresoever with in the Realm of England and
possession and seisin thereof for me and in my name and to my use to take. And
also to view and survey for me and in my name, all the said Manors, Lordships,
Lands, Tenements, Woods, Under-woods, possessions and Hereditaments, and other
the premises with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof as
also to ask, gather, levy, recover and receive for me and in my name, and to
my use of all and singular my Auditors, Bailiffs, receivers, Farmors or Tenants
and all other Occupiers whatsoever of the aforesaid Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and other the premises or of any part thereof, all and singular
Farms, Rents, and Services, Arrearages, Profits and sums of money whatsoever
which are or shall be to me in any wise due. And an account or accounts of
them, and of all other my Officers, Ministers, Servants and other accomptants
whatsoever of any of them to require and take for me and in my name mine
allowances of their accounts to allow or disalow as the case requires, and as
by my said Commissioner and Attorney shall be thought meet and convenient, and
all several my Auditors Bailifs Receivers, Officers, Ministers and Servants
whatsoever, or any of them upon any reasonable cause or causes at the
discretion of my said Attorney, to displace and put out of service and office
and to retain receive and put other in their, and every or any of their place
or places so put out of service, and this as often as it shall be thought
requisite to my said Attorney. And also the Farmors Tenants, and Occupiers of
all and singular my said Manors Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments and other
the premises, and every or any of them for none payment of their or any of
their Farms Rents, Revenews, Profits, and other things whatsoever, due to, or
to be due for the same Manors, Lordships, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and
other premises and every or any parcel thereof, by all or any their Goods,
and Chattels found in and upon the same Manors, Lordships, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other the premises, or in any or upon any parcel thereof
to distreine. And the distresses there so had or taken lawfully, to lead,
drive, carry away and impound, and deteine with old, and keep the same, until
the said Farms, Rents, Issues, Profits, and the Arrears thereof being hind, be
fully satisfied and paid. And if need be, and the Law will it permit all and
singular the same Goods so distrained to sell and put in sale, and the money
thereof coming in the hands of my said Commissioners or Attorney, to retain
hold, and keep as the Law in that behalf shall permit. And also all and
singular the same my Farmors, Tenants, and other occupiers of the premises not
well and truly paying their Farms, and Rents at the accustomed days and
Feasts or not well and truly observing, performing and fulfilling all such
Covenants, Grants, Conditions, Customs, and charges, as they ought to do,
observe, keep, perform and fulfill by virtue of their Leases, Grants,
Customs, or upon any other reasonable cause or causes whatsoever at the
discretion of my said Commissioner from their Farms and tenures to expel and
amove if lawfully that may be or deserve to be expelled or amoved. And the same
premises, and every or any parcel thereof to other Farmors, Tenants and
occupiers in my name, to demise, grant, and to farm to my most profit and
commodity for term of 21 years or under, or for life or lives by Copy or
Coppies of Court-role according to custom or manner where the same shall lie
or by Deed or Deeds or otherwise in may name, and this as often and when as
need shall require, at the discretion my said Attorney, And also for me, etc:
and to my most profit and commodity to sell and put in sale all and singular my
Woods, underwoods and Trees whatsoever, or any part thereof growing or being
of, in or upon the foresaid Manors, Lordships, Tenements, Lands, Hereditaments
and other the premises, or parcel thereof, to any person or persons, as to my
said Attorney shall be thought meet and requisite. And also all and every
writing and writings in this behalf requisite and necessary in my name to make
seal and delivery, and also to set, rate, receive and take Fines and Incombs,
of and for the said Leases and Copies to be made as aforesaid. And also to
assign appoint and allow unto the said Tenants, Leassees, Farmors and
occupiers, sufficient Timber Trees, as often as need shall be, for the
necessary reparations of all and singular their several Farmeshouses and
Tenements. And also I do give and grant unto my said Commissioner and Attorney
full power and authority for me and in my name to commence and prosecute before
any whatsoever Judge, Justice, or Justices of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, her
Heirs or Successors in any whatsoever Court or Courts, or other place or places
whatsoever, action or actions, Pleas, Processes and Suits real, personal or
mixed and to appear for me and in my name in all such actions and Suits as be
or shall be commenced taken or sued against me: And to proceed, answer,
prosecute and defend all and every of the same Action and Actions, Pleas,
Processes and Suits, as well by me as against me moved or commeneed or to be
moved or commenced and to win or loose the same as the case shall require.
And also to ask, levy, recover and receive, for me and in my name, and for my
only use and behoof, not only all and singular such Debts, sum or sums of
money, Fines, amerciaments, fees, annuities (...) and other profits whatsoever,
which by any means now be or shall be due or payable unto me by whatsoever
person or persons for whatsoever matter or cause. But also to receive of the
Queen our Sovereign Lady her Heirs and Successors, during the time I shall be
out of this Realm, and the parts of beyond the Seas, all the Diet money or
moneys for mine entertainment to be allowed to me during my time of living
beyond the Seas. And also to satisfy pay and allow, for me and in my name, all
and all manner of sum and sums of money, Annuities, Rents, Fees, pencions,
wages, reparations and all other charges and duties whatsoever which I do owe
or ought to pay or allow by Law or conscience to the Queens Majesty either that
now is her Heirs or Successors, or to any other person or persons whatsoever.
And further I do give and grant unto my said Commissioner and Attorney full
power and lawful authority, for me and in my name to keep or cause, etc. All
and all manner Courts, Leets and Lawdaies whatsoever, within any the said
Manors, Lordships, Land or other the premises or any of them according as
they have been accustomed heretofore to be there holden and kept, And also from
time to time, when and as often as any Rectory, Church vicaridge or Parsonage,
or other spiritual promotion whatsoever of the Parsonage whereof I am or shall
be seized, or which be or shall be of or in my gift or disposition shall by any
means become or be void to name and present for me and in my name any able
person or persons unto the same Rectories Parsonages, Vicarages or Churches, or
other spiritual promotions so being vacant in such like, and in as large and
ample manner and form as I my self might or should do, if I were then and
there personally present. And also for me and in my name to take, buy or
compound for new Leases or Grants, as well of the Queens Majesty that now is,
her Heirs and Successors, as of any other Person or Persons whatsoever. And to
compound, give or pay such Fine or Fines, incommes, sum or sums of money
for the same new Leases or grants. And to sell any of my Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments or Leases and Chattells real and personal, or any part of them
as to my said Attorney shall be thought meet: And also for me and in my name to
accept and take all and every surrender and surrenders of and whatsoever Lease
or Leases, Demise or grant Demises or grants by me or any my Ancestors
heretofore made or granted. And upon the Surrender or Surrenders to make gtant
or cause, etc: other Lease or Leases for me and in my name to any whatsever
Person or Persons for term of 21 years or under or for life or lives and for
such yearly Rent and Rents, and for such some and sums of money Fines or
incomes to be paid for the same as to my said Attorney shall likewise be
thought meet to my most commodity and profit: And also for me, etc: to cancel
and make void upon good and reasonable causes and considerations, all every
such of my Indentures, Bonds and other Writings whatsoever, or any of them as
to my said Commissioner and Attorney shall be thought good. And also for me and
in my name to make, seal and deliver, as my sufficient Deed or Deeds in the
Law all and singular such Indentures, Bonds, Leases, grants, Deeds, Releases,
Acquittances, as well general as special, and other writings whatsoever, as
my said Commissioner and Attorney shall think requisite touching and concerning
the premises or any of them or otherwise. And further any Attorney or
Attorneys in all and every of the causes or matters aforesaid, under him or me
to substitute, depute make and appoint, and at the liberty and pleasure of the
same my Commissioner or Attorney, the same to revoke, And finally for me and in
my name to compound for, and, follow exercise, speed, execute, accomplish and
finish all and every Suits and matters already resting in controversy or moved
or hereafter to be moved between me only or me, and others. And any other
person or persons, and all and every other thing and things, acts and act
whatsoever as well touching or concerning the premises or any parcel thereof,
as otherwise for me and in my name, to do and cause to be done, as fully and
wholly as I might should or ought lawfully to do, if I were then and there
personally present holding firm and stable, all and every act and acts, thing
and things, that my said Attorney and Commissioner shall do, cause, or procure
or suffer to be done for me and in my name, in and about the premises, or any
of them by virtue of these presents. Provided always that the power, liberty
and authority given to my said Commissioner and Attorney by these presents
shall endure until my departure out of this Realm into the parts beyond the
Sea and my return again into this Realm and no longer, any thing abovesaid
to the contrary, etc. In Witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney for a Wood-sale with allowance for the Attorneys pains.
BE it known, etc. That I I. L. Knight Lord L. do hereby appoint and give
warrant and authority to F. M: of L: Gent. to make sale of all my Woods,
Under-woods, Hedgerowes, shawes and Trees. of or in the great Park of N. in
the County of S. (except such of the same as I have appointed, or hereafter
before the same sale be fully complete, shall appoint the said F. to leave
there standing or grow^ng. And the same and every of them to make, convert,
employ, use and dispose after his discretion for my profit and commodity, by
all such ways and means as he shall think convenient for me. And all and
every the sums of money to be due for the same and every or any part thereof
to receive and take up: And a true account thereof, and of all his employment
of the said Woods or any part thereof to make unto me when he shall be
reasonably called thereunto: And I do not only for me mine Heirs and Executors,
covenant and promise to and with the said F: and his assigns as well to
ratify and allow as well all his and their bargains, dealings and disposition
of the said Woods and other the premises or any part thereof, and to suffer
the same and every of them quietly to be had taken and accomplished to all
intents and purposes. As also that be the said F. and all other Persons that he
shall appoint, shall and may until the said Woods and other the premises be
fully made, sold, removed and carried away out of the said Park, have free
ingresse, egresse and regresse into and from the same Park for the making,
buying, se^ling, ordering, coverting, disposing, removing and carrying away of
all and every of the same Woods and other the premises, in manner and form as
by the said F: shall be thought meet and convenient. But also for me mine
Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, I do grant, promise and covenant to and with
the said F. his Executors and Assigns, as well to save him and them harmless
of all such promises and Bonds, as he the said F. shall make or enter into, to
any person or persons concerning the said Woods and other the premises or any
part or parcel thereof, or for the accomplishment of any bargain, matter or
agreement to be by him made, concluded or taken in hand, touching the same or
any part thereof. As also to maintain and suffer this present warrant and the
authority given and limited thereby to stand and continue in force and effect
from henceforth in such sort and until thar he the said F. only shall and may
accomplish the said Wood-sale, and the making and ordering of the said Wood,
and other the premises and all things that he shall take upon him concerning
the effecting or performance thereof, by reason or occasion of these presents
according to the intent or limitation of the same. And that in consideration of
the pains and travel of the said F. to be taken about the said Woods and other
the premises he shall have allowance and recompense at the hands of me the
said Lord L. and my assigns in form following. That is to say a shilling upon
every pound of all and every the sums of money that shall or may be made or
due for the said Woods and other the premises or any part thereof over and
besides the wages and charges to be disbursed to Workmen or Laborers, for and
about the making, ordering, or coverting of the said Woods and other the
Premises, or any part thereof. And further that in respect of the disbursements
made and to be made by the said F. for me the said L. L. of his own proper
money, I will make and give unto him some convenient recompense and allowance
upon his account aforesaid, over and beyond the payment of all the Sums of
money by him disbursed or to be disbursed for me or that I owe or shall owe
unto him by any means: All and every which Allowances Recompenses and Payments
aforesaid, I grant and promise to allow and rebate unto the said F. in his own
hands, out of such Sums of money, as he is or shall be accountable to me, for
by reason or in respect of the said Woods and other the Premises, or any part
thereof, or by means or occasion of these presents, or any thing in them
contained or specified: In witness etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive the Profits of a Parsonage.
BE it etc. That I G. B. Clark, Parson of the Rectory and Parish Church of St.
D. B. in L. Street of L. have made etc. I. H. Haberdasher, and W. M. Scrivener,
Citizen of L. my true and lawful Attorneys, jointly and severally for me and
in my name, to ask levy gather recover and receive, all and all manner of
Titles Fruits Profits Oblations Casualties Commodities Emoluments and
Advantages whatsoever, of the said Rectory Church and Parsonage, or in any wise
due, coming renewing or growing, or which hereafter shall come etc from time to
time, to me the said G. by reason and means of the said Rectory Church and
Parsonage aforesaid, or in the right of the same. And also al and singular the
Church-books, and other books of the said church and rectory for me and in my
name, to view peruse and see as often as need shall require. And moreover to
pay and disburse out of the Receipts by them or either of them to be had, by
reason of these presents, all and singular Sums of money, which I the said G.
am chargable to disburse or pay for, or by reason of the said Rectory Church
and Parsonage: Giving, and by these presents granting to my said Attorneys, and
to either of them jointly and severally, full power and authority for me and in
my name, by all and singular ways and remedies of the Law, to sue and implead,
and cause etc. all and every person and persons whom it shall touch and
concern, for the said Tithes Fruits Profits and other the Premises, and every
or any of them, or any part or parcel of any of the same: And to recover in
all and every the same Suit and Suits, and to sue execution etc. And also to
answer and defend in all and singular Actions and Suits for me, with me, or
against me, for and concerning the Premises, and every or any of them, and in
the same, or any of them, to win or lose: And also to acquit etc. one Attorney
etc. and all etc. ratified etc. In witness etc.

A Letter of Substitution.
TO all men, to whom these presents shall come, W: D: the elder of L: Gent.
sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting, Where when it pleased the Queens
Highness, to appoint F. W. of L. Esquire, her Ambassador Leiger in France,
then the said F. thinking it meet in his absence to leave some person in trust
for his affairs here in England, did thereupon by his writing under his Seal,
bearing date 23. Novem: An: 13. R. Eliz. make constitute authorize, and put in
his place me the said W. D. his true sufficient and lawful Attorney and
Commissioner general, either by my self or by my lawful Substitute or
Substitutes, as to me should seem most convenient, to execute do and finish,
and cause etc. all and singular his affairs and businesses during his absence,
and until his return again into the Realm of E. as in my said Commission at
large is contained and expressed.

Now know ye, that I the said W. by warrant and authority of the same
Commission, have named ordained appointed and substituted in my place touching
the matter only in these presents expressed. A. B. and C. D. Gent. my true
lawful and sufficient Deputies and Substitutes, for and in the name of the
said F. W. and to his use, to demand etc. Ici metter ce qu'est destre faiet
parles Substituts, for me, to the doing and executing of all and singular the
Premises, I the said W. D. by warrant of my said Commission, do give and grant
unto the said A. B. and C. D. full power and authority, and also like power and
authority to do all acts and things, to be needful to be done, in or about the
Premises, or any of them: And to make several Acquittances if need be for the
acquital of every receipt of the Premises, to be received by the said A. B.
and C. D: by virtue of these presents, in as ample manner and form, as I the
said W. D. might do my self rating and allowing all and whatsoever that my said
Substitutes, for or in the name of the said F. W. shall do or cause to be done
in the Premises, or any of them by these presents. Provided always, that it
shall be lawful to me the said W. D. to revoke and annihilate these presents,
and the power and authority thereby granted at my will and pleasure: And that
from the time of such Revocation thereof to be made, these presents, shall be
clearly void and of none effect, any thing above mentioned, to the contrary
notwithstanding: In witness etc. An. 14. Eliz

A Lease of a House in London, by a man and his Wife who have two parts thereof
in the Wifes Right during her life, and by the son of the Woman, who has the
third part thereof in Fee, and the Reversion of the other two parts after the
Woman's decease.
THis Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Between R. S. of A. in the County of H.
Gentleman, and C. now his Wife, and late the Wife of E. I. late of A, aforesaid
Esquire, deceased, on the first party, and B. I. of A. aforesaid Gentleman, Son
and Heir apparent of the said E. I. on the second party, and J. P. Citizen, and
J. of L. on the Recital of the Husband and Wives Freehold Estate in two parts.
third party; witnesses, That whereas the said R: S. and C. his Wife are
lawfully seized in their Demesne as of Fee-hold in the Right of the said C. for
and during the natural life of the said C. of and in two parts in three parts
to be divided of all that Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances sometimes
called or known by the name of O. house, late in the Tenure of, etc. and now in
the Tenure of the said J P. or his Assigns, situate, etc. in T. street, on the
North side of the same street, against the Capital mansion house called B.
Castle, in the parish of Saint B. alias B. nigh unto P. Wharff within the City
of L: and of all Shops Cellars Chambers Rooms Yards Gardens Backsides and other
Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever, to and with the Recital of the Sons
seizure in Fee of the thir^ part piesently, and of the two parts in Reversion
after the woman's decease
said Message or Tenement, now or heretofore used demised let set occupied and
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, which said Message or Tenement with
the Appurtenances sometime called, etc. does abut etc. And where also the said
B. I: is lawfully seized in his demesne as of Fee, of and in the third part of
the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, sometime called etc. and
of all Shops, etc. And is also seized as of Fee and Right. of and in the
Reversion or Remainder of the said two parts of the said Message or Tenement
with the Appurtenances sometime called or known by the name of, etc: and of all
other the Premises with their Appurtenances immediately after the Death and
Decease of the said C. S. his Mother.

Now the said R. S. and C. his Wife, for and in consideration of the Demise by
the Man and Wife of their two parts for 21. years if the woman so long live.
sum of 00 l. of etc. to them in hand etc. whereof etc. have demised etc. and
by these presents do demise, etc. unto the said I: P. all those their said two
parts of the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances sometime called,
etc. And of all and singular Shops, etc. To have and to hold the said two parts
in three parts to be divided of the said Message or Tenement with the
Appurtenances, and of all the said shops, etc. to the said J: P: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns from the Feast of the birth. etc: last past etc:
unto the end and term of one and twenty years from thence, etc: And fully to be
complete and Reddend.
ended, if the said C: shall happen so long to live, yiedling and paying
therefore yearly to the said R and C: and to the said C: if she happen to
survive the said R: during so many years of the said term of one and twenty
years, as she the said C: shall happen to live, 53 s. 4 d of etc. at four
Feasts, etc: by even portions:

And the said B I for and in consideration of the sum of etc, whereof Demise by
the Son of a third part and the Reversion of the other two parts.
etc, has, etc, and by these presents does etc. unto the said I. P* all that
his third part or the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, and of
all and singular other the Premises with their Appurtenances, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the said two parts of the
same Message or Tenement, and of all and singular other the Premises with
their Appurtenances before by these presents mentioned to be by the said R and
C demised to the said J P To have and to hold the said third part of the
Message or Tenement Habend. the third part for 31 years.
with the Appurtenances, and of all and singular other the Premises with their
Appurtenances to the said I P his Executors, etc, from the Feast of the birth,
etc, last etc, unto the end and term of one and twenty years from thence, etc,
and fully to be complete and ended. And to have and to hold the said Reversion
and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the said two parts of the said
Message or Tenement Habend. the reversion of the two parts after the woman's
deccase for the residue of the
with the Appurtenances, and of all and every other the Premises with their
Appurtenances unto the said J: P. his Executors, etc. immediately after the
death of the said C: until the end and term, of the said one and twenty years
next ensuing from of the Feast of the Birth etc: last etc. yiedling and paying
therefore yearly to the said B I his Heirs and Assigns, during the life of the
said C: 26 s. 8 d: of etc: 21 years. Reddend. etc.
at four Feasts etc: and yiedling and paying for the said Message or Tenement
and other the Premises, from and after the decease of the said And Redden.
C: to the said B: his Heirs and Assigns during the then residue of the said
term of one and twenty years, the yearly Rent or 4 l: of, etc: at the said four
Feasts, etc. And also the said R: S: C: his Wife and B. Demise by the man his
Wife and the son of the implements.
I. do by these presents demise etc. unto the said I. P. all and singular the
Implements Utensills Furniture and Necessaries whatsoever remaining in the
Premises, and mentioned and expressed in a schedule indented to these Presents
annexed. To have and to hold all the said Implements etc. to the said I his
Executors, etc. from the feast etc, last, etc. unto the end and term of one and
twenty years from thence etc. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of 53
s. 4 d. reserved and agreed in and by For non payment,
these presents to be paid to the said R. and C. his Wife, during the life of
the said C. or the yearly Rent of 26 s. 8 d. reserved and agreed to be paid to
the said B. his Heirs and Assigns during the life of the same C or the said
yearly Rent of 4 l. reserved to be paid to the said B if it happen the said C
to dye during the said term of one and twenty years to be behind unpaid in part
or in all by the space of fourteen days next after any of the said feasts or
terms of payment wherein it ought to be paid, being lawfully demanded by the
said R and C and B I or his heirs or any of them by the Assignee or Assignees
of them or of any of either or any of them, that then it shall be lawful to
and for the said R S and C. his Wife or their Assigns, and to and for the said
B I his Heirs For entrance upon the premises to distrain.
and Assigns or for such of them as shall have lawful Right and Authority to
demand have take and receive the said Rents or any of them or any part or
parcel of them or any of them which shall be left unpaid by the space of
fourtteen days after any of the said feasts or terms of payment thereof into
the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the Premises by
these presents demised, to enter and distrain, and the distress so there taken
from thence lawfully to bear lead drive and carry away And the same to detain
and keep until the said yearly Rent and Rents so being bebind unpaid with the
Arrerages thereof, if any such shall be unto the said R S and C his Wife or
their Assigns and the said B his heirs or assigns or to such of them, as shall
have lawful Right and authority to have take demand and receive the the same
as aforesaid shall be fully satisfied, contented and paid; and the said I: P:
for him etc. does Covenant etc. to and with the said R. Covenant touching
reparations.
and C. his wife, and their Assigns, and to and with the said B: I: his Heirs
and Assigns, and to and with every of them severally by these presents, that he
the said I. P: his Executors and Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, all the said messuages or tenements, with the appurt. by these
presents, demised, in and by all things well and sufficiently shall repair,
sustain, support and maintain, and against Wind and Rain shall make defensible
as often and when as need shall require, during the said term, or upon such
warning, and within such space after warning as is hereafter mentioned in these
presents, and all the Privies or Widraughts to the said Demised Premises
belonging, shall cause to be purged, cleansed, and made clean, and all the
Pavements, as well the said Demised Message or Tenement, as also in the street
to the same Tenement belonging shall cause to be paved, repaired and amended as
often as need shall require during the same term, or within such space after
warning as hereafter is limited and mentioned. View for reparations.


And also the said I: P: Covenanteth etc. ut antea, that it shall be lawful to
and for the said R: and C: and either of them, or their Assigns, or the
Assignees or Assigns of either of them, and to, and for the said B: I: his
Heirs and Assigns twice in the year, every year yearly during the said term at
their liberty and pleasure to enter into all the said parts of the said
messuages or tenements, with the appurt. by these presents demised, and there
to view and search what Reparations shall be needful to be made and done; and
that if, and as often as any default or lack of neeful Reparations shall there
happen to be found, that then, and so often from time to time the said I: P:
his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at his or their own costs and charges,
within one half year next after monition or warning thereof to him, or them
given by the said R: and C. his wife, or by either of them, or by their or
either of their Assigns, or by the said B: his Heirs or Assigns, or by any of
them, shall and will repair, new make, and mend all and every the the same
defaults or lacks of needful Reparations without fraud or covin, and in the end
of the said term, the said Message or Tenement, or other the Premises, well
and sufficiently repaired, amended cleansed, scoured and paved, shall leave and
yield up to the said R: C: and The Lords to pay quitrent.
B: and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said B: And the said R: S. for himself,
and the said C: his wife, and either of them, and the Executors and Assigns of
them, and of either of them, Covenanteth with the Tenant etc. That they the
said R. and C: and their Assigns, and the Assigns of either of them at their
own proper costs and charges shall bear and pay two parts, in three parts to be
divided of all manner of chief rents and quit-rents due, to be due born or paid
by reason of the said Message or Tenement, or of any part thereof, if any such
be; and of and for the same two parts thereof shall clearly acquit and discharge
as well the said I. his Executors and Assigns, as all and singular the
Premises, from time to time, and at all times during the said term of 21.
years, if the said C: shall happen so long to live.

And the said B. for him etc. Covenanteth with the said Tenant etc. that he the
said B. his Heirs and Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges,
shall bear and pay the other third part of all the said chief rents and
quit-rents due, or to be due born or paid out of for or by reason of the said
Message or Tenement, and other the Premises, or any part or parcel of the
same, if any such be; and if the same third part thereof shall acquit etc. the
said I. etc. during etc. if the said C. shall so long live; and if the said C.
shall depart this present life before the end of the said 21. years, that then,
and from thenceforth the said B. his Heirs and Assigns, at his and their own
proper costs and charges, shall bear and pay all manner of chief and quit-rents
due, or to be due born or paid out for or by reason of the Premises, or any
part thereof, if any such be, and thereof shall clearly acquit etc. as well the
said I. his Executors and Assigns, as well and singular the said Premises from
time to time during all the residue of the said term of 21. years; and if it
happen the rents etc. to be unpaid by the space of For re-entrance in case of
no distress to be found. Warranty by the man and woman.
a quarter of a year after any Feast or Term of payment thereof aforesaid, in
which it ought to be paid being lawfully asked, and no sufficient distress for
the same can be found within the said Demised Premises, that then a re-entry
etc. and a expulsion of the Tenant. And the said R: S. for himself, and the
said C. Covenanteth with the Tenant etc. that he the said I. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, paying the several rents aforesaid at such days
and times, and in such manner and form, as the same are reserved, limited or
agreed to be paid and performed all and every the Covenants, Grants, and
Agreements, contained and mentioned in these Presents, which on his or their
part or behalf are to be performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly have,
hold, occupy and enjoy all the said two parts, of all and singular the
Premises, with the appurtenances, for and during all the said term of 21:
years, if the said C. shall so long live without let interruption or
disturbance of the said R. and C. or either of them, or of the Assignee or
Assignees, of them, or of either of them, and without any lawful let, etc. of
any other person or persons whatsoever. And the Warranty by the Son.
said B. I. Covenanteth with the said tenant etc. that he the said I. paying
the several rents aforesaid, at such days etc. shall or may peaceably enjoy
etc. the said third part of all and singular the Premises with their
appurtenances, and Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of all
and singular the Premises with their appurtenances, for and during the said
term of etc. next ensuing from the Feast etc. without any let etc. general
warrranty etc. In witness etc.

A Lease made to the intent the Lessee with the Rents and Profits of the Land,
shall pay the Leasors Debts.
THis Indenture, etc. between etc. witnesses, That whereas the said I. M. is
now lawfully seized in fee, of and in one Message with the Appurtenances,
situated, etc. of the yearly value of 25 l. of lawful, etc. and also of and
in one message with the Appurtenances situate, etc. of the yearly value of 26
s. one of which said Message with the appurtenances E. now wife of the said W.
S. has for her Dower for the term of her life one yearly Rent of 8 l. 7 s, of
like money as aforesaid, and also whereas the said J. M. is indebted and does
owe unto diverse persons the sum of 178l. 6 s. of such money as is aforesaid
accordingly, as is expressed in one schedule annexed to these presents, which
sum the said J. is not able presently to pay, and yet minding faithfully that
the same shall be paid with such speed as he conveniently may, therefore for
and in consideration the said W. S. has undertaken of the Rents and profits
arising of the said Message and other the Premises, to pay and satisfy the
Debts aforesaid, owing by the said J. M. rateably to any of his Creditors an
equal part according to their several Debts, as that shall be yearly raised
of the said clear yearly profits of the premises, he the said J. M. has
demised, etc. And etc. to the said W. S. both the said Messuages with their
Appurtenances, and all houses etc. and the Reversion and Reversions thereof, to
have and to hold the said etc. to the said W. S. his Heirs Administrators and
Assigns from etc, by and during the term of eighteen years from thence, etc:
yiedling etc. 21 s. at Michaelmas and our Lady Day, by even portions:

And the said VV: S: covenanteth, etc: that he the said W S his Executors
Administrators and Assigns during all the said term of yers, all the premises,
of and with the said Rents and profits of the said Premises shall and will
maintain and sustain in and with all necessary reparations whatsoever thereunto
to be needful from time to time, and that as soon as the said W: S, his
Exeentors Administrators and Assigns shall have had and levied the sum of 278l
6 s 8d aforesaid upon the premises in clear profit beyond all Charges
thereof, that then and from thenceforth he the said W: S: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns; shall and will well and truly account to and with
the said I M his Heirs and Assigns, of and for all the residue of the said
clear profits, and thereof shall make due satisfaction to the said I M his
Heirs and Assigns without any Fraud or Covin.

And the said I M covenanteth, etc: that he the said I to and for his own use,
^ now stands lawfully sole seized of and in all and singular the Premises of
a good perfect pure and abs^lute Estate in the Law of Fee-simple, and that the
said Premises are and from henceforth shall continue clearly and freely
acquitted of and from all former bargains sales Leases Grants and Encumbrances
had made or granted by the said I M And also that the said VV S his Executors
Administrators and Assigns shall or lawfully may during the said term of
eighteen years hold and enjoy the said etc, according to the true meaning of
these Presents without any manner of lawful let molestation or eviction to
come or happen to the contrary by the means occasion or procurement of the said
I M in any wise, In Witness, etc:

A Lease of a House in the Country for Life, with Covenant by the Tenant to
pay herriots, bear Charge in time of War, and do other Services, which for
the Premises formerly had been accustomed.
THis Indenture etc. Between N. L. of etc. in the County of D. Esquire on the
one party, and M B. Daughter of etc. deceased, on the other party, witnesses,
that the said N. for diverse considerations, etc. has demised etc. to the said
M. all that his Message or Tenement, etc. and all Lands, etc. To have and to
hold the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, and all and every
other the Premises above demised to the said M, and her Assigns, from the
feast of etc. last etc. for and during all the term of the natural life of
the said M: yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term of the
natural life of the said M. 25 s. 4 d. of etc. in the feasts of etc. And if it
shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. or any part thereof, to be behind or
unpaid in part or in all by the space of one month next after any day of
payment thereof as is aforesaid being lawfully demanded, and no sufficient
Distress in and upon the Premises then and there can or may be had or found,
that then and from thenceforth a Re-entry etc. And the said M. covenanteth,
etc. that she the said M and her Assigns at her and their own proper costs and
charges from time to time and at all times during the natural life of the said
M. the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances in and with all manner
of needful and necessary reparations, shall cause to be repaired maintained
and amended as often and when as need shall require: And all the same Premises
so being well and sufficiently repaired in the end of the said term shall so
leave and yield up.

And the said M covenanteth, etc. That she the said M. her Executors
Administrators and Assigns, shall and will not only yield give and pay unto the
said N. his Heirs Executors or Assigns, her or their best quick Beast, or the
best of her Gods, (if there be no Beast) for and in the name of an Herriot, at
the death and departure of every Tenant of the Premises during the said term,
but also shall and will yearly from time to time during the said term yield,
do, pay and perform to the said N his heirs and assigns, all such customs
services and duties, as the Tenants of the Premises or any of them, have
heretofore been accustomed to yield do or perform for the same premises or
any part thereof, and shall also from time to time during the said term, so
often as the said N. his heirs or assigns shall be charged for the Wars of
the Kings Majesty his Heirs or Successors bear and pay such portion and part
toward the same, as the tenants of the Premises heretofore have been
accustomed to bear and pay. A Covenant for general warranty, A Letter of
Attorney to deliver possession in.

A Lease of a Rectory and Parsonage for 300. years conditional for payment of
money, containing very good Covenants, amonst which, one to convey the Fee in
case of breach of payment, if the Mortgagee will.
THis Indenture etc. between W: C: of B: in the County of H. Esquire, on the
one party, and R: M: Citizen and A. of L on the other party, witnesses, That
the said W. C. for and in consideration of the Sum of 800 l. of etc. whereof
etc. has demised betaken and to farm-letten, and by these presents etc. unto
the said R. M. all that the Parsonage Rectory and Church of S. with all and
singular the Appurtenances, in the County of E. And the Advowson Gift
Presentation free disposition and right of Patronage of the Vicaridge of S
aforesaid, and all and singular Messuages Houses Edifices Barns Stables
Dove-houses Orchards Gardens Lands Tenements Meadows Feedings Glebe-lands,
Tithes of Corn, Grain, Hay, and Wood, and all other Tithes of what kind or
nature soever, or by what name or names, they are called or known, Pentions
Portions Rents Reversions Services Courts-Leets Views of Frankpledge,
Franchises Goods Waifes and Straies Liberties and Privileges, and all other
Rights Profits Commodities Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all
and singular their rights members and appurtenances, set lying and being,
growing coming or renewing, in the Town Field Parish or Hamlet of S. aforesaid,
in the said County of E. or elsewhere in the same County, to the said Parsonage
Rectory and Church of S. belonging or in any wise appertaining, or as part
parcel or member of the same, now lawfully accepted reputed taken used demised
or enjoyed, together with the Reversion and Reversions whatsoever, of all and
singular the Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof: And also all
Rents and yearly Profits whatsoever reserved upon any whatsoever Demise or
Grant, Demises or Grants of the Premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, to
have and to hold the said Parsonage Rectory and Church of S. Advowson, Lands
Tenements Hereditaments, and all and singular other the Premises, with their
appurt. above by these presents mentioned to be demised to the said R. M. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of etc. last etc. unto the
end and term of 300. years, from thence next following, and fully to be
complete and ended, and without impeachment of or for any manner of Wast to be
done, of in or upon the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, at any time
from or after the 24. of Dec: which shall be etc. yiedling and paying therefore
yearly during the said term, unto the said W. C. his Heirs and Assigns 40 s. of
etc. payable at the Feasts of etc: by even and equal portions.

And the said W: C: for him etc. does covenant with the Lessee in form etc.
That is to say, That he the said W. C: the day of the date of these presents,
is the very true lawful and sole Owner of the said Parsonage and Church of S.
aforesaid, and of the said Advowson Message Lands Tenements Tithes, and of and
in all and singular other the Premises above by these presents demised, and of
every part thereof, with their appurtenances, and thereof and of every part
thereof, now is and stands lawfully and sole seized of a good perfect and
absolute Estate in the Law, in Fee-simple, without any Condition or Mortgage.
And that he the said W: has full power and lawful authority to convey and
assure all and singular the Premises and every part thereof to the said R. his
Executors and Assigns, during the said term, according to the intent and true
meaning of these present Indentures; And also that the said Rectory Parsonage
and other the Premises above by these presents mentioned to be demised, now
are and be, and during the said term of 300 years, upon and under the Condition
hereafter in these presents expressed, shall be and continue, clearly
discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by the said W: his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, or some of them, at and upon a reasonable request, from time to
time to be made, sufficiently saved or kept harmless, of and from all former
Bargains Sales Leases Grants Estates Titles Joyntures Dowers Recognizances
Statute-Merchant and of the Staple, Condemnations, Judgments Executions Fines
Wills Amerciaments, and of and from all other Estates Charges Titles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had made done caused or knowledged by the said W. or
by Sir J. C. Knight, Father of the said W: or by any other person or persons,
by his or their, or any of their title assent means or procurement, or lawfully
claiming from by or under them, or either of them, the rents and Services from
henceforth to be due to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or any of
them, for the Premises or any part thereof, and one Lease made by the said W:
C: to one N: T: of etc. parcel of the Premises, whereof there is not to come
above three years to be accounted from the Feast of etc. next etc. And whereupon
the yearly Rent of 13 l. is reserved, and shall be yearly due and payable
during the said term: And also one Grant made to one J. G. of the Advowson,
Donation, and free Disposition of the said Vicaridge, together with certain
Springs and Copices, parcel of the Premises, to endure for and until the
24th. of December. etc. only foreprised and excepted.

And also that he the said R. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall
or may by and during all the said term of 300. years, upon and under the
Condition hereafter in these presents expressed, according to the intent and
true meaning of these presents, have hold occupy and enjoy the said Parsonage
Rectory or Church of S. and the said Advowson Message Lands etc. and every
part and parcel thereof, excepting always in these presents excepted, without
lawful let or interruption of the said Sir J. C. and W: C: their Heirs an
Assigns, and every of them, and without any lawful let etc. of all and every
other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by from or under the said
Sir J: and W. or either of them, other then such person and persons for the
time being, as shall have or claim to have the said Estates and Interests
herein before excepted, or any of them, or any part or parcel of any of them,
for and concerning the same Estates and Interests so excepted, and every of
them.

Provided always, that if the said W: his etc. do pay to the said R: M: etc.
the said etc. the Sum of etc. at etc. on the 24th. day of December: Condition.
etc. that then and from thenceforth these presents, and every Covenant Grant
and Article therein contained, on the part of the said W: his Heirs Executors
and Administrators, or any of them to be performed or kept together with these
presents, Demise and Grant made of the Premises in manner and form aforesaid,
shall be clearly void frustrate and of none effect: And that then and from
thenceforth after such payment made, it shall be lawful etc. A rentry in Mr.
C. etc. only without words of expelling the Tenant: Any to the contrary etc.

And the said W: C: for him etc: covenanteth etc: that if default be made of or
in payment of the said Sum of 800 l. or any part thereof, that then and at all
times during the space of three years, next after such default made in payment
of the said Sum of etc. he the said W. his Heirs and Assigns, and all and
every other person and persons, any thing lawfully having or claiming, of in or
to the Premises, or any part thereof, by or from the said W: C: (except only as
before excepted) at and upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges in the Law only of the said R: his Heirs Executors or Assigns, or some
of them, shall and will do make knowledge and suffer, and cause to be done etc.
all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things in the
Law, either for the better confirmation and further assurance of this present
Lease, or else for the absolute conveying and assuring of the Fee and
Inheritance of the said Rectory etc. to be had and made sure to the said R. his
Heirs and Assigns, to and for his and their own use absolutely, without any
Condition, as by the said R. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council
learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised and
required.

And the said R. M. covenanteth etc. That he the said R. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and will permit and suffer the said W: his Heirs and
Assigns, to have the use and occupation of the tithe Barn and Grainers, and of
the Yard to the same adjoining, and of the long Hay-house, for and until the
28th. day of June, next coming, after the date hereof, without any Rent
therefore, paying together; also with free ingresse egresse and regresse, into
and from the said demised premises, and every parcel thereof only, for the
repairing and amending thereof, until the said 24th of December. etc: And that
also in the same 24th. day of December. all and singular the said demised
premises, with their appurtenances, shall be in as good case and state of
reparations, as the same shall be at the Feast of Pentecost next coming after
the date hereof, and that in the mean time, until the said 24th of Dec. etc.
neither he the said R. his Executors Administrators nor Assigns, nor any of
them, shall or will at any time fell, cut down, or carry away, neither cause or
willingly suffer to be felled etc. any of the Woods under-Woods or Trees
growing, or being in and upon the premises, or any part thereof, other then
such as shall be necessary and convenient to be had or taken for House-boot,
Hedge-boot, and Fire-boot, to be spent employed or occupied of in or upon the
Premises, or some part thereof, and not elsewhere: In witness etc.

Escrytt au fyn du trait per A. P.
You must levy the Fine before the ensealing hereof.
A Lease of Freehold land for lives, also a Letter of Attorney to surrender
Copyhold land for the same lives, and to deliver possession.
THis Indenture etc. between Sir L: D: Knight, Citizen and Alderman of L: on
the one party, and J: E: of L: in the County of Y: Gent, and E. his wife, on
the other party, witnesses, That the said Sir L. for good considerations him
moving, has demised granted and to farm-letten, and by these presents etc.
unto the said I: and E. all and singular the Freehold, Messuages Lands
Tenements Rents Reversions Services and Hereditaments of the said Sir L: within
the Lordship and Parish of L: in the said County of Y. now being in the tenure
manurance or occupation of the said J: and one A: B: or of their several
Assign or Assigns: And the Reversion and Reversions of the Premises, and all
Rents Issues and Profits whatsoever, reserved upon any former Demise Lease or
Grant made or granted of the Premises, or any part thereof; To have and to hold
all and singular the said Messuages etc. unto the said J: and E: and their
Assigns, from etc. by and during all the term of the natural lives of the said
J: and E: And by and during the term of the natural life of the longer liver
of them, yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the continuance of this
present Lease unto the said Sir L: his Heirs and Assigns 561. of etc. in the
days of the Feasts of etc. or within the space of twenty days next ensuing,
after every of the said Feast-daies, by even portions, and if it happen the
said yearly Rent of etc. or any part thereof, to be behind unpaid by the space
of twenty days, over or after any Feast wherein the same, or any part thereof
ought to be paid as is aforesaid, it being lawfully demanded, and no sufficient
and overt Distress can or may be found in and upon the Premises, or any part
thereof, in Money Corn or Cattle, which may be lawfully had taken and carried
away for the said Rent, that then and from thenceforth a reentry in Sir L. etc.
and a disposition of the Leases and their Assigns etc: any thing to the
contrary etc.

And the said J: and E: for them their Executors and Administrators, do
covenant etc. in form etc. That they the said J: and E: their Executors and
Assigns, at their own proper costs and charges, shall and will well and
sufficiently uphold repair sustain maintain and amend all the Houses Edifices
and Buildings to the said demised Premises, or to any part thereof belonging or
appertaining, in by and with all manner of needful and necessary Reparations
whatsoever, at all times, and from time to time, as often and when need shall
require, during the continuance of this present Lease: And also at their like
costs and charges, shall and will well and substantially Hedge Fence Ditch
Scour Cleanse and Amend all and every the Hedges Fences Ditches and Enclosures
to the Premises, or any part thereof belonging, from time to time likewise, as
often as need shall be, during the continuance of this said Lease. And all and
singular the Premises in such Reparations being in the end or determination of
the same Lease, shall and will quietly leave and yield up to the said Sir L:
his Heirs and Assigns. And also that they the said I: and E: their Executors
and Assigns, by and during so long time as this Lease shall endure, shall and
will discharge and pay all the chief and quit-rents, and other Services and
Duties hereafter to grow due to be paid and done, for and in respect of the
said Premises, or any part thereof as aforesaid: And of and for all the same
Rents Services and Duties hereafter to be due, shall and will at all times
hereafter sufficiently save and keep harmless the said Sir L. his Heirs and
Assigns, and every of them.

And the said Sir L: D: for him his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them does
covenant promise and grant to and with the said I: E: and E: their Executors
and Assigns by these presents, That they the said I. and E. their Executors and
Assigns, by and under the payment of the said yearly Rent of etc. and
performance of other the Covenants Grants Articles and Agreements above
expressed, on the behalf of the said J. and E. their Executors or Assigns, or
any of them to be done and performed, shall or may by and during the term of
the natural lives of the said J and E: and the longer liver of them, have hold
occupy and enjoy the said etc. without any let trouble or interruption of the
said Sir L. his Heirs or Assigns, and without any lawful let etc. of any other
person or persons, having or lawfully claiming, or which shall have or lawfully
claim to have any former Estate Right or Title in or to the Premises, or any
part thereof, by or from the said Sir L. In witness etc.

The Letter of Attorney depending upon the former Indenture:
TO all to whom Sir L. D. etc. sends geeeting etc. Know ye, that I the said
Sir L. have made ordained and appointed, and by these presents do make etc. J.
L. Gent. my true certain and lawful Attorney for me and in my stead and name,
as well to make a lawful and sufficient Surrender of all my Copyhold
Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, in the Lordship of L:
in the County of Y: unto the use of I. E: and E. his wife, for and during the
natural lives of the said J: and E. and the longer liver of them, upon
condition that the said J. and F: and the Survivor of them, shall well and
truly content and pay unto me the said Sir L. D. mine Heirs and Assigns, the
yearly Rent of 56 l. mentioned in an Indenture dated etc. and perform such
Covenants and Agreements as in the same Indenture are contained, in manner and
form as in the same Indenture is mentioned and specified: As also for me and in
my name and stead, to deliver quiet and peaceable Possession and Seisin to the
said J. and E. and their Assigns, of and in all and singular the Messuages etc.
demised by the said Indenture, or of, or in any part or parcel thereof, in the
name of the whole; to hold to them the said J. and E. their Executors and
Assigns, according to the tenor purport and true meaning of the said Indenture;
Giving and granting to my said Attorney, all my whole power and authority, for
the doing and executing of the Premises, in as large and ample manner and
form, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present, ratifying,
and by these presents holding firm and stable, all and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall do or cause etc. in or about the Premises, or any matter or
circumstance thereof: In witness, etc.

A Mortgage of Land to two in Common.
THis Indenture between the Right Honorable F. Earl of B. etc. on the one part,
and R. M. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. and I: B: Citizen and Merchant of L. on
the other part witnesses, that the said Earl for and in consideration of the
sum of 1000. pounds Consideration 1000 l.
of lawful etc. to him the said Earl, before the ensealing of these presents,
paid by the said R: and I: whereof etc. has bargained, given, sold, Sale to two
of a Rectory, etc.
and granted, and by these presents, for himself and his Heirs does fully,
clearly and absolutely bargain, etc. unto the said R. and I. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that the Rectory, Parsonage, Sheafe, Tithe, grain and
corn of C. in the County of B: and all the Mansion House and other Buildings of
the said Rectory and Parsonage, and all the Gleeb-Lands, Meadows and Pastures,
with the appurtenances whatsoever to the same Rectory or Parsonage belonging,
or in any wise appertaining; and also all that the Manor of W: in the said
County of B: with the appurtenances, and all Houses, Buildings, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, and
Hereditaments whatsoever to the same Manor belonging or appertaining or
accepted, reputed, taken, known, used or occupied, as part, parcel, or member
thereof, together with all and singular other Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments of him the said
Earl whatsoever in C: and W: aforesaid in the said County of B: and all and
singular Courts-Leets, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Profits, Commodities
and Jurisdictions, which he the said Earl has or had, or may or ought to have
in or upon the Premises, or any part thereof, to have, hold, occupy and enjoy
Habend of the one moiety to the one in Fee.
the one moiety of all and singular the said Rectory, Parsonage, Garb, Sheaf,
Tithe, Grain and Corn of C: aforesaid, the Gleab Land, and other the Premises
to the same Rectory or Parsonage belonging, and also the one moiety of all the
said Manor of W. with all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the same
Manor belonging, with all Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments and other the Premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances before bargained and sold to the said R. M. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, to and for the only use and behoof of the same R: M: and of his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, and to have and to hold one other moiety of the said
Rectory and Parsonage with the appurtenances, and of the said Manor of W: with
the appurtenances, and of all and singular other the above bargained premises
to the said I: B: his Habend. of the other moiety to the other in Fee.
Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to the only use etc. to be holden of the chief
Lord and Lords, of the Fee and Fees thereof by the Rents and Services thereof
before due and accustomed.

And the said Earl for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, does Covenant and Grant to and with the said Covenants with the Grants
jointly for Seizure in Fee.
R. M. and I. B: and either of them severally, and severally to and with the
Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, of either of them, in manner and
form following, that is to say, That he the said Earl at the sealing and
delivery of these presents is lawfully sole seized of and in the said Rectory,
Parsonage, Manor, Lands, Tenements and all other the premises with the
appurtenances before bargained and sold, of a good, perfect, sure, and
indefeasible estate in the Law in Fee-simple, to and for the only use of the
said Earl, and of his Heirs and Assigns, without any Defeasance, Condition or
Mortgage.

And that he the said Earl of such estate, has full power, and lawful
Authority to sell.
right to bargain, sell, give, grant, convey, and assure all and singular the
said Parsonage and Manor, with their appurtenances, and all other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, unto the said R: and I: their Heirs and
Assigns in form aforesaid for ever; and that the said Rectory, Manor and
Premises, now are, and during such Leases and Yearly value during the present
Leases.
Terms of years as are therein, or in any part thereof yet to come, shall
continue of the clear yearly value of 80 l. of etc. by the year, over and above
all charges, reprises and deductions, and of the same clear yearly value, or of
the clear yearly value of 100 Marks of etc. by the Lease Coninuance of the
value to the Owners of the Reversion. Discharge of Encumbrances,
shall or may lawfully remain and continue unto the owners of the Reversion or
Reversions thereof and to their Heirs for ever.

And also the said Earl Covenanteth etc. That as well the said Rectory and
Parsonage, Manor, and all other the Premises with the appurtenances, as also
the said R: and I: and every of them, their and either of their Heirs Executors
and Administrators, for and in respect of the same Rectory and Manor, and
other the Premises, now be, and from time to time, and at all times from
henceforth shall and may be, remain and continue for ever, full and clearly
acquitted and discharged, or otherwise by the said Earl his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, at all times well and sufficiently saved harmless, of and from
all and all manner of former Bargains, Sales, Feoffments, Gifts, Grants,
Leases, Demises, Wills, Devises, Uses, Entailes, Jointures, Dowers, Titl^s and
Rights of Dowers, Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple Recogn sances, Writings,
Obligations, Judements, Condemnations, Executions, Penalties, Forfeitures,
Issues, Amerciaments, Intrusions, Rents Charge, Rent seck, Fines for Alienation
without License by these Presents or otherwise, and of and from all other
charges burdens and Incumbranc^s whatsoever they be had made done or committed
by the sa^d Earl, or by any other person or persons, at or before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents all and every Lease and Exception of Leases, and
of the chief rents.
Leases, Grants, and Estatets, before this time made to any person or persons
of the Premises, or any part thereof, upon which Leases, Grants and Estates the
old yearly Rents, or more are reserved, and during the continuance of the same,
and every of them shall be yearly due and payable to the Owners of the
Reversion of the same Premises without fraud or covin, and the chief Rents and
Services hereafter to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees
thereof in respect of their Seignories, only always except.

Provided always, That if the said Earl, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
Conndition to have again the estate for the payment of 500 l. to one and 500 l.
to the other.
or Assigns, do pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R. M. his certain
Attorney, Executors or Administrators, the sum of 500 l. of etc. at etc. of
the said R. etc. on the first day of March next, etc. between the hours of
etc. That then this present bargain and sale, and all uses raised or conveied
by this present Deed, and all estates passed and transferred from the said Earl
to the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, by virtue and effect of these presents,
of all that one Moiety of all the said Rectory or Parsonage with the
appurtenances, and of the said Manor with the appurtenances, and of all and
singular other the Premises with their appurtenances. shall utterly cease and
be void, and that then, and from the time of the said 500 l. to the said R. M.
his certain Attorney, Executor or Administrator, or any of them so paid as
aforesaid it shall be lawful to the said Earl, his Heirs and Assigns, into all
that Moiety of all and singular the Premises before by these presents conveyed
to the said R. M. and his Heirs to re-enter, and the same to have again, as in
his or their former estate, these presents, or any thing therein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And also provided always, that if the said Earl, his Heirs etc. do pay to the
said J: B: etc. 500 l. of etc: at etc. on the said first day etc. between the
said hours etc. that then etc. Viz: Defeazance of the Estate of J. B. of the
other Moiety of the Premises.

And the said Earl covenanteth etc. That if he b^eak the Condition Farther
assurance in case of breach. In case of payment the Mortgagees to stand seized
to the Mortgagors use and do acts for releasing etc.
etc. then to make several further assurances etc.

And the said J. B. covenanteth etc. That if the said Earl, his Heirs Executors
or Assigns, do pay or cause to be paid unto the said J: B. his certain Attorney
Executor or Administrator, the sum of 500 l. of etc. in manner and form before
appointed in these presents* that then and from thenceforth the said J his
Heirs and Assigns, shall be and stand and be seized of all that Moiety of all
the Premises conveyed to the said J. B. and his Heirs as abovesaid, to the
only use of the said Earl, his Heirs and Assigns: And that then also and from
thenceforth the said J. his Heirs and Assigns, at all times during six months,
from thence next ensuing, at the reasonable request and costs and charges of
the said Earl, his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall and will do make knowledge
and execute, all and every such act and acts, thing and things, devise and
devises whatsoever in the Law, as by the said Earl his Heirs or Assigns, or by
his or their learned council in the law, for the better releasing and having
back again, of all the said Moiety of all and singular the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, before conveyed to the said I. B. and his Heirs, shall be
rasonably and lawfully devised or advised, with warranty only against the said
J. B. and his Heirs. The like Covenant on the part of R. M.

And also the said R: and J: for them, their Heirs and Assigns, do The
Mortgagees to permit the Mortgagor to enjoy the Rents of the Premises, till
the time of Redemption.
grant and agree by these presents, that the said R. and J: their Heirs and
Assigns, shall permit and suffer the said Earl his Heirs and Assigns, to have
take and enjoy the Rents and usual Profits of the Premises, from henceforth,
until the first day of March, now next coming, without any account thereof, or
of any part thereof, to be made or given to the said R: and J. their Heirs or
Assigns, or any of them: In witness etc. A Recognizance of 1000 l. to R. M: and
another of another, 1000 l. to J. B. from my Lord, made for performance of
these Covenants.

A Mortgage of Land to save harmless of certain Bailes and Suretiships.
THis Indenture etc. between I: B: Citizen and Grocer of L. on the one party,
and R. B. etc. on the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said R. B. with
the said J. B. and at his special request, and for the only Debt of the same
J. by one Obligation dated etc. did become jointly and severally bound unto A.
M. etc. in the sum of 120 l. of etc. for the payment of 100 l. of like money
to have been paid at a day now past, as by the said Obligation and Condition
thereof more plainly may appear.

And whereas the said R. and one J. S. Salter, at the entreaty, and by the
special means of the said R. B. have taken the said J. B. to bail in an Action
of Trespass, the damage laid at 224 l. brought against the said I: B: in the
Compter in W: in L: at the suit of M. S. Goldsmith, and W. C. Grocer, as by the
Records remaining in the Compter aforesaid will appear.

And where also the said R. B. and J. S. at the entreaty, and by the means of
the said R. B. have taken the said J. B. to bail in the Compter in the Poultrey
in L. in an action of Deb^ of 89 l. 12 s. 7 d. there brought against the said
J. B. at the Suit of one R. T. etc. as by the Records etc.

And whereas moreover one M. C. of the Town of S. Draper, by an Attachment made
in London, as of Goods of the said M. S. and W. C. supposed in the hands of the
said J. B. had recovered against the same J. 47 l. 2 s. 6 d. of etc. whereupon
the said J. has now brought a Writ of Error, and upon allowance of the same
Writ, the said R. B. and J. S. as in that case is accustomed, are become
Sureties for the said I. B. and where also the said R. B. has under-taken to
save harmless the said I. S. of and for all the Premises.

Now the said J. B. for and in consideration, that the said R. B. his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, and all the Lands Tenements
Goods and Chattels of the said R. B. his Heirs Executors and Administrators and
every of them, from time to time and at all times hereafter, shall as well be
clearly saved and kept harmless, of and for all and singular the Bonds Bails
Suretyships and other charges whatsoever, here above in these presents
expressed and recited. As also thereof and therfrom shall be clearly discharged,
at or before such time as thereto is hereafter assigned in these presents; Has
given granted bargained and sold, and by these presents etc. to the said R. B.
and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that Message and Tenement with the
appurtenances, some time in the tenure and occupation of one T. R. late parcel
of etc. situate in the Parish of St. B. in L. commonly called the Griffin, and
now or late being in the proper occupation of the said J. B. And all and
singular Houses Buildings Yards void Grounds Profits Commodities Easements and
Hereditaments to the said Message and Tenement belonging or appertaining, or
therewith as any part thereof, now or at any time heretofore had used or
occupied; And the Reversion and Reversions, of all and singular the Premises:
And all the Estate Right Title and Interest of the said I. B. of in and to the
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, and all and singular Deeds
Evidences and Writings, touching or concerning the premises, or any part
thereof: To have and to hold the said Message and Tenement, with their
appurtenances, and all and singular the premises above bargained and sold,
with their appurtenances, to the said R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the
only use etc. And whereas the late Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of
St. P. in L. by their Indenture of Lease under their common Seal, bearing date
etc. did demise and let to Farm the said Message and Tenement, with the
Appurtenances, unto one R. D. then Citizen etc: to hold to him and his Assigns
from the Feast of etc. unto the end of 98. years, from thence next following,
for the yearly Rent of 5 l therefore yearly to be paid, as by the said Indenture
of Lease etc. the residue of which Lease and term of years now to come, by
lawful conveyance in the Law, by means of the said I. B. and entrust to be
assigned and conveyed, at the pleasure and appointment of the said I. B. and of
his Assigns, is to come unto M. C. of etc. J. C. and W. C. etc. The said J. B.
for the better surety and assurance to save and keep harmless the said R. B:
his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, of and for the Bonds
Bails Suretyship and Charges aforesaid, has delivered bargained and sold to
the said R. B: the said Indenture of Lease, and all conveyances thereof. And by
these presents covenanteth etc. That the said M. C. I. C. and W. C. or the
Survivors or Survivor of them, on this side the 24. day of June, which shall be
in the year of our Lord God etc. shall plainly and lawfully convey assign and
set over all their Estate Interest and Term of years, of and in the said
Message and Tenement, with the appurtenances yet to come, and the said
Original Indenture of Lease thereof, and all conveyances of the same, unto such
person or persons as the said R. in that behalf shall name and appoint.

Provided always, that if the said I. B. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall as well procure and cause that the said R. B. his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, on this side the said 24. day, which shall be
etc. shall be clearly and absolutely acquitted and discharged, of, from, and
from all the Bonds Bails and Suretyship aforesaid, and all other Charges
wherewith the said R. B. has charged himself from the said J. B. as aforesaid,
as also in the mean time, from time to time, do well and sufficiently save
harmless the said R. B. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and all his
and their Lands Tenements Goods and Chattels of and for the Bonds Bails
Suretyships and Charges aforesaid, wherewith they or any of them may be charged
as aforesaid, that not only the Gift Grant Bargain and Sale of the said
Message and Tenement and other the Tenements above made by these presents to
the said R. B. and his Heirs: But also the said Grant and Assignment of the
said Lease, and of all other the Premises above bargained, or covenanted to be
bargained, shall be utterly void and frustrate. And that then and from
thenceforth it shall and may be lawful as well to and for the said I. B. his
Heirs and Assigns, into the Freehold of the above bargained Premises, wholly
to re-enter, and the same to have again, as in his or their former Estate, as
also for the said M. C. etc. or the Survivors or Survivor of them, their
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, at and by the appointment and
agreement of the said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns, into the said Message and
Tenement, with the Appurtenances, for the residue of the term of years
aforesaid then to be to come also to re-enter, and the same as in their former
Estate to have again, these presents or any thing therein contained, to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And also the said I. B. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said I. B.
now at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully
and solely seized, of and in the said Message and Tenement, with the
Appurtenances, of a good perfect sure absolute and rightful Estate in the Law
in Fee-simple, either in possession or in Reversion, immediately expectant upon
determination of the Lease and term of years abovesaid, without any condition
or limitation of use or uses, and that of such Estate, the said J. B. has good
lawful and absolute right and authority to give grant bargain sell and assure
the said Message and Tenement, with the appurtenances, to the said R. B. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to and for the only use of the said R his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And that the said Message and Tenement, with the
appurtenances, now are, and from henceforth shall be stand and continue unto the
said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, clear and clearly discharged and
acquitted, or otherwise at all times sufficiently saved harmless, of and from
all and singular former Bargains Sales Gifts Grants Leases Estates Titles
Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, the old accustomed Rents and Services
hereafter to be due, to be paid and done to the chief Lord of the Fee or Fees
of the Premises, in respect of their Seigniory only, and the said Lease for
years to be conveyed and assigned over, at and by the appointment of the said
R. B. his Heirs and Assigns as aforesaid, only except and foreprised.

And also that if it do happen the said Message and Tenement, with the
appurtenances, upon the condition aforesaid, shall be forfeited to the said R.
B. and his Heirs, that then and at all times during three years then next
following; the said J. B. and M. now his wife, and the Heirs of the said I. B.
at and upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law
only of the said R. B. his Heirs Executors and Assigns, shall and will do make
knowledge suffer and execute, and cause, to be done etc. all and every such
further act and acts thing and things in the Law, for the further and better
conveyance assurance and sure making of the said Message and Tenement, and
other the above bargained Premises, with their appurtenances, to be had
conveyed and made sure to the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, for their own
use for ever, as by the said R. B. his Heirs or assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably
devised or advised, be it by Fine Feoffment, Deed or Deeds enrolled, release
with warranty against all men, or without warranty, Recovery with Vouchers or
Voucher, or by any other lawful way o^ means whatsoever. And the said R. B:
covenanteth etc. to permit and suffer the said I. B. and his Assigns, to occupy
the said Message and Tenement, with the appurtenances, keeping the same well
and sufficiently repaired in all things, until the said etc. which shall be
etc. so as the same Message and Tenement be not in the mean time forfeited to
the said R. B. and his Heirs, upon the condition above in these presents
expressed, and not otherwise: In witness etc.

A Lease of a house by Tenant in Tail well passed.
THis Indenture, Between R. H. Son and Heir, etc. on the one party and T W.
Citizen and Stationer of L. on the other party, witnesses, that the said R. H.
as well for and consideration of the sum of 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. of etc. to him,
etc. truly paid by the said T. W: (of which sum the said R: H. acknowledges
the Receipt by these presents, and also for and in consideration of the sum of
60 l: of like lawful money, etc. by the said T. W. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns to be paid to the said R H his Executors
Administrators or Assigns at the shop now in the occupation of the said T. W.
situate, etc. within twenty days next after the said R. H, shall have
accomplished his full age of one and twenty years, and have without fraud or
covin made and delivered unto the said T. W. his executors administrators or
assigns one good lawful and sufficient confirmation in Writing of this present
demise and Lease at the said shop; has demised granted and to farm letten, and
by these presents does, etc. unto the said T. W. all the said shop now in the
Tenure or occupation of the said T. W. set and being in P. Church yard
aforesaid, and all those yards and hedges with their Appurtenances late in the
tenure or occupation of etc. and now in the tenure or occupation of one R. B.
etc. set and being in P. Church Yard aforesaid on the back side of or near unto
the shop, late in occupation of the said etc. and now in the tenure or
occupation of the said R. B. set and being in or near the said Churchyard.

And moreover all those two upper Chambers or rooms with the appurtenances
late in the tenure or occupation of the said T. W. or his assigns, and now in
the tenure or occupation of the said R, B. set and being over or near unto the
said shop, now in the occupation of the said R. B. except and always reserved
out of this present demise, and grant the Cellar under the said shop with free
ingresse, egresse and regress, into and from the said Cellar by the way and
door which is now used to the same Cellar for and during all the term of years
hereafter in these presents mentioned for him the said R. his Heirs, Tenants,
farmors and Assigns of the same Cellar* and his and their Servants and family:
To have and to hold all and singular the premises above by these presents
demised or mentioned or to be demised with the appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said T. W. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from
the sealing and delivery of these presents unto the end and term of 21 years
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and
Paying therefore yearly during all the said term unto the said R. H: and to
the Heirs of his Body lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue to
such other person or persons unto whom the next and immediate remainder or
reversion of the premises, shall for the time being, during the said term of
21 years of right belonging or appertaining 6 l. of etc. at four terms ot
Feasts of the year, that is to say, at the Feasts of etc. or within 28 days
next after every of the same Feasts by even portions: And if it shall happen
the said yearly Rent of 6 l. to be behind unpaid in part or in all by the space
of 28 days next after any of the said Feasts of payment, being lawfully
demanded (and no sufficient distress for the same Rent, so being behind unpaid,
in or upon the said demised premises can or may be found) Or if default shall
be made of or in payment of the said sum of 60 l. or any part thereof within
the time before limited That then or at any time after it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said R. H. or the Heirs of his Body lawfully to be
begotten, and for default of such issue to such other person or persons unto
whom the next and immediate remainder, or reversion of the premises shall for
the time being belonging and appertaining into all and singular the above
demised premises with the appurtenances wholly to reenter, and the same to
have again and re-enjoy, as his or their former estate. And the said T: W. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and all other Tenants and occupiers of
the premises, from thence utterly to expel and amove: These presents or any
thing therein contained to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding. And the said
T: W. for him his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenanteth and
grants, to and with the said R. H. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them
by these presents in form following, that is to say, that he the said T W. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, all and singular the said demised premises in by and with all manner
of needful and necessary reparations, thing and things whatsoever, well and
sufficiently shall repair, support, sustain, maintain and amend from time to
time, as often, and when as need shall be or require, during the said term, or
from time to time within the time after warning in that behale to be given as
is hereafter limited, during the continuance of this present Lease and demise,
to enter into all or any the said demised premises there to view and use and
oversee the estate of the reparations of the said demised premises and of
every or any part thereof, and of all decays and lacks of needful reparations
upon any such view or views found to give monition and warning to the said T.
W. his Executors Administrators or Assigns to repair and amend the same with
in three months then next following. And the said R. H: for him his Heirs
Executors and Administrators, and every of them Covenanteth and grants to and
with the said T: W: his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents in manner and form following that is to say, that he
the said R: H. his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, at his and
their own proper costs and charges shall and will from time to time during the
said term of 21 years pay bear and discharge all chief and quit-rents and all
other Rents whatsoever (except only the Rent above in these presents reserved
to be due issuing or going out of the premises above by these presents
mentioned to be hereby demised or any part thereof at any time or times during
the said term. And of for and concerning the same chief and quit-Rents, and
all other Rents aforesaid (except before excepted) shall and will well and
sufficiently discharge, accquit or save harmless the said T: W. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and the said demised premises from
time to time, and at all times during the same term: And also that he the said
T. W: his Executors Administrators and Assigns for the said yearly Rent of 6
l. in form aforesaid to be paid and under and according to the other
Covenants, Grants, Atticles, and agreements in these presents contained on the
part and behalf of the said T. W: his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns
to be observed, performed, and kept, shall or may lawfully, peaceably, and
quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular the premises above by
these presents demised or mentioned to be demised by and during all the said
Term of one and twenty years without any let, disturbance, eviction,
molestation, or interruption of the said R. H. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them or of the Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of the said J. H. and S: his Wife, or either of
them, or of any other person or persons, by the means assent, consent or
procurement of the said R. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns
or any of them, or claiming, or that shall claim by through or under the
estate, right, title or interest of the said J. H. and S: his Wife and R. H. or
any of them, or of the Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns of them or
any of them, other then only the said W. A. and his assigns claiming only by
virtue or color of a Lease by the said J H. heretofore to him the said W: made
and granted of the said Yard and sheds, which Lease shall expire and end within
one year now next coming, the Rent upon which Lease during the continuance
thereof shall be due and payable to the said T. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns: And moreover that he the said R. H. his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, and all and every other person and persons, having or
claiming, or that shall have or claim any estate, right, title or interest, in
or to the premises above by these presents mentioned, to be demised or any
part thereof by from or under the said R: H. (other then only the said W. A.
and his Assigns claiming only by force of the said excepted Lease, and for,
and concerning the title, and interest only of the same Lease, shall and will
from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the said term of 21
years, at and upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in
the Law of the said T. W: his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do make,
knowledge, and suffer to be done, all and every such further act and acts,
thing and things, devise and devises, in the Law whatsoever, for the
confirmation, ratification, and corroboration of this present Lease and demise,
or for the further or better assurance, or sure making of all and singular the
premises to be had and made sure to the said T. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the Residue of the said term
of 21 years then to come and unexpired, and for and under like Rent, Condition
and covenants on the part of the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, as in these presents are expressed and specified. As by the said T:
W: his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or his or their Council learned
in the Laws of this Realm, shall be devised or advised and required. And
further that he the said R: H: nor his Heirs nor any other person or persons
for him or in his name, or by his means assent, consent or procurement, shall
at any time or times hereafter, do or make any entry, act or acts, thing or
things, devise or devises whatsoever, directly nor indirectly, to defeat,
frustrate or make void this present Lease, demise or grant, contrary to the
tenor, intent and plain meaning of these presents In Witness, etc:

Foster Consultor:

LEASES.
A Lease by a Master and Fellows of a College.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between the right Worshipful A. B. Doctor of
Divinity and Master of the College of etc: in the University in Oxford and the
fellows of the same College of the one part, and C. D. E. F. and G. H. of etc.
of the other part. Witnesses, That the said Master and fellows, as well for
and in consideration of the Surrender of a Lease, bearing date, etc. made and
granted by J. D. then Master of the said College and the Fellows of the same to
one T: H. of the Rectory and Church of G. in the County of York, for the term
of 41 years, as by the same Lease more at large it does and may appear, whose
estate in the same the said C: D. E. F. and G. H. had at the time of the said
Surrender. As also for diverse other good causes and considerations them moving,
Have demised, granted and to farm let unto the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. All
that the said Rectory and Parsonage of G. with all Gleeb Lands, Tenths, Tithes,
oblations, obventions, profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever to
the said Rectory or Parsonage belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
accepted, reputed, taken, known used or occupied as part, parcel or member of
the same (The Advowson, Presentation and avoidance at all time of the Vicaridge
of the same Church, whenever it shall happen to the said Master and fellows
and their Successors only excepted and foreprized) To have and to hold the said
Rectory and Parsonage, Tithes, Glebe Lands, Tenths, Oblations, Obventions,
Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever with all and singular the
appurtenances unto the said C: D: etc. their Executors and Assigns, from the
Feast day of etc: next ensuing the date hereof, unto the full end and Term of
21 years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding
and paying therefore yearly during the said Term unto the said Master and
Fellows and their Successors and Assigns 20. l of lawful money of England,
and more six Quarters of good Wheat, and 28 quarters of good Malt at one Term
in the year, that is to say, on the second day of March yearly in the said
College at their own proper costs and charges during the said Term. And for
default of delivery of either the said Wheat or Malt, in the time appointed to
be paid in manner as is before specified to the said Master and Fellows and
their Successors, so much ready money as the best Wheat and Malt, rateably
shall be worth in the Market of Oxon, the next Market day before the second day
of March aforesaid: And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of 20 l. the
said six Quarters of Wheat the said 28 Quarters of Malt, or any part or
parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid in part, or in all by the space of 22
days next after the said second day of March, in which it ought to be paid at
the place aforesaid. That then this present Indenture shall cease and
determine, and be utterly void and of none effect.

A Covenant for the Lessees to pay all duties, and Church-charges, against the
Q. and Bishop.
A Covenant to repair the houses, etc.
To preserve the ancient liberties.
Not to set or let without consent of the Master and Fellows, etc.
In witness whereof the said Master and Fellows to that part of these present
Indentures remaining with the said C: D. etc. Have set their Common Seal, And
to that part remaining with the said Master and Fellows the said C: D. etc have
set their Hands and Seals, the day and year first above written:

An Indenture whereby the Lessor demiseth another Tenement, if the Less be
evicted of the first.
THis Indenture, etc. Witnesses, That the said A. B. Has demised, granted,
set, and to farm let, and by these presents for him his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, does demise, grant, set and to farm let unto the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, All that Message or
Tenement, Situate and being in L. in the said County of etc: commonly called
or known by the name of etc: with the appurtenances, together with two Orchards
and certain closes, clausures and parcells of arable Land, Meadow, Pasture and
Turbary with the appurtenances hereafter in these presents particlarly named
and set, lying and being in etc. To have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said
Message, Closes, Clawsures and parcells of Land, and all other the premises
with all and singular their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof to
the said C. D. his Executors, etc, from the feast etc. last past before the
date hereof, for and during, and to the full end and term of, etc. years then
next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore
yearly during the said term unto the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns the
sum of etc. at the two usual Feasts, etc. for all manner of Rents, Duties,
services, boones, taxations, charges and impositions whatsoever: And further
This Indenture witnesses. That if it fortune the said Message, Closes,
Clausures and premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof at any
time or times hereafter during the said term of etc. before by these presents
granted and demised as aforesaid, by order and due course of Law, or otherwise
to be lawfully recovered, evicted or taken from or out of the possession or
occupation of the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns without any Covin or
Collusion of the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns. So that the said C: D.
cannot or may not occupy, enjoy and take the profits thereof by virtue of
these presents, for all the said term of etc. years: Then the said A. B. does
by these presents demise, grant, set and to farm let unto the said C. D. all
that capital Message or Tenement, commonly called or known by the name of,
etc. with the appurtenances, Situate and being in the Parish of B: in the said
county of etc. To have, hold occupy possess and enjoy the said capital
Message and premises with their appurtenances, from and immediately after such
eviction, ejection recovery or taking away of the said tioned premises in etc:
aforesaid or any part thereof from or out of the possession of the said B. C.
or other lawful disturbance of his possession for and during, and unto the
end, expiration and determination of the said Term of etc. years before by
these presents granted of the said Message or Tenement, and premises in etc,
aforesaid, for and during all the residue, such part and so many of the said
years, as at the time of such Recovery, eviction, ejection, taking away
disturbance or molestations shall be unexpired, not ended or determined to the
sole and proper use and behoof of the said C: D his Executors and Assigns,
without any account thereof, or therefore to be yielded, paid, given or made
for the same. And also without any let, trouble, denial, vexation,
interruption, eviction, ejection, Suit in Law or other disturbance whatsoever
of him the said A: B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or of
any other person or persons whatsoever in any wise. And the said A: B. does for
him etc. Covenant, etc: to and with the said C. D. by these presents. That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. D: and his Assigns yearly from
time to time, and at all times hereafter during the said Term of 21 years
before by these presents granted and demised as aforesaid. To cut down, fall,
take and carry away sufficient and necessary Hedge-boot; Cart-boot, Plow-boot,
Gate-boot etc. Under-wood to be standing, growing, and being in or upon such,
of the said premises as the said C. D: for the several times being shall be in
possession of or have in his occupation by virtue of these presents: So as the
same be and shall be employed, used or spent from time to time in or about the
necessary or needful reparations of the hedges Gates, Styles, Bars and
Fences, standing or being in or upon the premises only: And the said A. B. for
him his Heirs, etc: does Covenant, etc. to and with the said C. D. by these
presents: That the said Message, Capital house, and all other the houses,
closes, clausures and parcells of Land, Meadow and Pasture, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances in L. and D: aforesaid, and every part and
parcel thereof are the day of the ensealing and delivery of these presents.
And so shall remain and continue from time to time, and at all and every time
and times hereafter during the said Term of 21 years before by these presents
mentioned to be granted and demised as aforesaid, according to the true intent
and meaning of these present Indentures, free and clearly acquitted, exonerated
and discharged, or otherwise saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all
manner of former Bargains, sales, Jointures, Feoffments, Dowers, Assignments,
Leases, etc: and all other encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, knowledged
or suffered, or hereafter to be had made, done, knowledged or suffered by the
said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns or any of them, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever:

A Covenant for further Assurance.
ANd the said C. D. for him, etc: does Covenant, etc. to and with the said A.
B. his Heirs, etc. That he the said C. D. shall and will from time to time, and
at all times during the said Term well and sufficiently repair, maintain and
uphold, all such the said houses, edifices, buildings, closes, clausures, lands
and premises, as he the said C. D. from time to time to have in his possession
and enjoy by virtue of these presents. And all Hodges, fences, gates, and
ditches, standing and being in and upon the same in all necessary reparations
according to good Husbandry. And if it happen the said yearly Rent of etc: or
any part or parcel thereof at any time or times hereafter, during the said
Term before by these presents granted as aforesaid to be behind in part or in
all by the space of 20 days next ensuing, after any of the said feasts wherein
the same ought or is limited and appointed to be paid or is payable by these
presents being lawfully demanded at such of the demised house as the said C: D.
shall then possess by virtue of these presents. That then and so often as the
said Rent shall be behind and unpaid as aforesaid the said C. D: his Executors
or Assigns shall loose, forfeit and pay to the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns the sum of etc. Nomine poenae: That then and so often it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns into the said
Message and Lands which the said C: D. shall then hold by virtue of these
presents and other the premises and into every or any part or parcel thereof,
to enter and distraine, as well for the said Rent of, etc. or such part thereof
as shall be behind and unpaid as aforesaid, and also for the arrerages thereof
(if any fortune to be behind) as also for the said sum of etc: so to be
forfeited: Nomine poenae toties quoties as aforesaid, and the distress and
distresses so thereof and therein taken and had as aforesaid to lead, drive,
and carry away and the same with him or them to detain, keep and withold
until he the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns of the said Rent of etc. and of
the said penalty of etc. to be forfeited Nomine poenae as aforesaid, and of the
arrerages thereof (if any shall be) be well and truly contented, satisfied and
paid. And if the said yearly Rent of etc. or any part thereof shall be behind
and unpaid by the space of 40 days and no sufficient overt distress can or
may be found in or upon such of the premises as shall then be in the
possession of the said C: D: during the said space of etc: That then and from
thenceforth it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said A: B. his Heirs
and Assigns into the Message, etc. to reenter, and the same to have again
repossesse and enjoy as in his or their former estate any thing in these
presents to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc.

A Cease for 100 years in Reversion after a life.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R: B. of S. in the County of W. Gent. of the
one part, and I. L. of etc. Gent. of the other part: Witnesses that the said
R. B. for diverse good causes and sundry reasonable and weighty considerations
him thereunto moving. Has demised, granted, set and to farm let, and by these
presents does demise, grant set and to farm let unto the said I: L: all and
singular his Manors, Messuages, Houses, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions and Services whatsoever, in the several Towns,
Hamlets, Fields and Territories of A B. C. and D. in the said County of W. or
in any of them. To have and to hold the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and all other the premises, with all
and singular their appurtenances to the said J: L: his Executors and Assigns
immediately from and after the death of M. B. now Wife of the said R. B. for and
during the Term of 100. years then next following fully to be complete and
ended: Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term of 100. years
unto the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, the Rent of 12. d: of good and
lawful money of England, at the Feasts of etc. by even portions, if the same
be lawfully demanded for all manner of Suits, services, exactions and demands.
Provided always and upon condition, that the said J: L. shall not at any time
hereafter, give, grant, bargain, alien, sell or lease the premises or any part
thereof to any person or persons, or incumber or charge the same without the
license and consent of the said M. B. her Executors or Administrators. Aed also
upon condition. That that the said I: L. at all and every time and times
hereafter upon the request or demand of the said M B. shall lawfully convey and
assure all and singular the premises with their appurtenances, or any part or
parcel thereof to such person or persons as by the said M. her Executors or
Administrators, shall be named or appointed, for and during all such interest
and term as shall then be unexpired of the said 100 years or for such part and
portion thereof as by the said M. shall be limited, nominated or appointed. And
provided also and upon condition, that if the said M: her Executors or
Administrators, at any time hereafter do satisfy, content and pay or cause to
be satisfied contented and paid, or tendered to be paid unto the said I. L. his
Executors Administrators or Assigns or to any of them the sum of 10 s. of
lawful money of England in the Parish Church porch of W. in the County of W.
That then this present Lease Demise and Grant, and every thing therein
contained, and the term and interest of the said I. L. of and in the premises
and overy part thereof to be void and of none effect: These presents or any
thing in the same contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And the said R. B. and his Heirs, and and singular the
premises, with all and every their appurtenances unto the said I. L. for and
during the term aforesaid in manner and form aforesaid and under the several
conditions before expressed against all people shall and will warrant and by
these presents defene, In Witness, etc.

Of a Hundred Court or leet by the Queen.
ELizabeth by the grace of God etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come greeting.
Whereas we by our Letters Patents under the Seal of our Court of Exchequer
bearing date at Westminster (such a day and year) etc. Did demise, grant and
Ferme let unto J. M. Esquire, alll that our Hundred of B. with all its rights,
members and appurtenances in our County of C. and all those our Annual Rents
to the said Hundred paid, and also all and all manner of Courts Leet, view of
Franck Pledge and Perquisits and profits thereof; And also the Fines and
Amerciaments in the Court of the Sheriffs Turn in the Hundred aforesaid made.
And also Suit of Court to the Hundred aforesaid. And also all goods, chattels,
waived Estrayes, and all other our liberties, privileges, Franchises Rights,
Jurisdictions, Profits, commodites, Advantages and Emoluments whatsoever to the
said Hundred belonging or appertaining, or within the said Hundred happening,
coming, or or renewnewing or arising: And for and under the yearly Rent of 40
s. demised in as full and ample manner, and for me as any Earl or Earls of W.
in right or by reason of the said Hundred, as any time had held or enjoyed the
same, or ought to have held or enjoyed the same, And as all and singular the
premises, did come or ought to have come to our hands; and in our hands now
are or ought to be (except nevertheless always to us and our Successors, all
and all manner of Fues Ammerciaments and Issues yearly, and from time to time,
coming, growing or renewing in any of Court or Courts of Record of us or our
Successors, or before the Justices of the Assise, of us or our Succssessors or
before the Justices of the Peace of us or our Successors, or before our or our
Successors, Clerk of the Market, coming, growing, happening, arising or
renewing, or liberty for the levying, and gathering thereof with in the Hundred
aforesaid.

To have and to hold the said Hundred of B. certain Rents of Court, and profits
of the same, and all and singular other the premises whatsoever (except before
excepted) to the said J. M. his Executors and Assigns from the Feast of, etc.
for and during the term of one and twenty years then next following, and fully
to be complete and ended yiedling yearly to us and our heirs and successors 40
s. of lawful money of England, as by our said Letters Patents, more fully it
may appear. Which said Letters Patents, and all the Right Title Estate Interest
and Term of years yet to come of and in the Premises, our welbeloved Subject
R. B. of W. in the said County of W. Esquire, having holding and by due course
of Law enjoying and being our Tenant has surrendered the same unto us, and
rendered up to be cancelled, yet nevertheless with intent that we would vouchsaf
to grant our Letters Patents concerning the Premises to the said R. and his
Assigns for the term of the lives of him the said R. T. E. Esquire. and R. E.
Gentleman and the longer liver of them, which surrender we accept by these
presents, Know ye that we as well in consideration of the surrender aforesaid,
as for a Fine of etc. of lawful money of England at the Receipt of our
Exchequer paid to our use by the said R. B. by the advice of our trusty and
beloved Councillors W. Baron of B. our Treasurer of England, and Sir J. T. Knight.
Chancellor and Under Treasurer of our Court of Exchequer have demised granted
and to farm let, and by these presencs do demise grant and to farm let unto the
said R. B. all that foresaid Hundred of B. with the Rights and Appurtenances
thereof in our said County of W. and all those certain annual Rents to the
said Hundred paid, and also all and all manner of Courts Leets, view of Franck
Pledge and perquisites and profits of the same, And all Fines and Amerciaments
in the Court if the Sherffs Turn in the Hundred aforesaid done, and also Suit
of Court at the Hundred aforesaid. And also Goods and Chattels, waived
estraies, and all other our Liberties, privileges, Franchises, Rights,
Jurisdictions, Profits, Commodities, advantages and emoluments whatsoever to
the said Hundred belonging or appertaining, or within the said Hundred
happening, coming, renewing or arising, and for and under the foresaid yearly
Rent of 40 s. demised in as ample manner and form as any Earl or E. of W: in
right, or by reason of the said Hundred everhad held or enjoyed, or ought to
have holdor enjoy and as all singular the premises did come or ought to have
come to our hands, and now are or ought to be in our hands, and heretofore
parcel of the possessions of the E. of W. (except nevertheless and always to
us and our Heirs and Successors, all and all manner of Fines, Amerciaments and
Issues yearly and from time to time coming, growing or remewingin in any Court
or Courts of Record of us or our Heirs and Successors, besides in the Court of
the Hundred aforesaid, or before Justices of Assise of us our Heirs or
Successors, or before our ad our Heirs and Successors. Justices of the Peace
and Clerk of the Market to us or our Heirs and Suceessors reserved with liberty
for the levying and collecting of the same: To have and to hold the said
Hundred of B. the certain Rents of the Court and the profits of the same, and
all and singular other the premises above by these presents demised with the
rights, members, liberties thereof with the appurtenances whatsoever (except
before excepted) unto the said R. B. and his Assigns, for the term of the
lives of him the said R: B. T. E. and R. E: and the longest liver of them,
yiedling and paying therefore yearly to us and our Heirs and Successors 40 s.
of lawful money of England, at the Feasts of etc. at the receipt of our
Exchequer, our Heirs and Successors, or to our Bailiffs or Receivers of the
premises for the time being by equal portions to be paid during the term
aforesaid. And after the decease of every of the aforesaid R. B. T. E. and R.
E: then yiedling and paying to us our Heirs and Successors, 20 s. of lawful
English money in the name of a Herriot. Provided always, That if it shall
happen the Rent before by these presents reserved to be behind and unpaid in
part, or in all, by the space of 40 days after any of the said Feast days at
which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid. That then and from thence forth
this Grant to be void and of none effect, any thing in these presents to the
contrary notwithstanding: Any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation
or restrain to the contrary heretofore had made, published, ordained or
provided, or any other cause or matter whatsoever, in any wise notwithstanding.
In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Pattents,
Witness our beloved and faithful Councellor, W: Baron of B. Treasurer of
England at Westminster the etc. day of, etc.

A Lease made for indemnity of Sureties.
THis Indenture made etc. Between T. H. of, etc. Esquire of the one part, and
W. T. W. D. and E. W. on the other part witnesses, That whereas the said W. T.
W. D. and E. W. at the instance and special request and for the only Debt of
the said T. H. now are, and stand bounden unto B. G. in four several
obligations of diverse great sums of money conditioned for payment of the
several sums of money in the conditions of the said obligations mentioned,
which said several Obligations now are and remain forfeited, and have also
compounded and agreed with diverse persons to whom the said T. H. was indebted
in diverse great sums of money and have taken order for the satisfaction and
payment thereof amounting in all to etc.

Now the said T. H. for the better securing and saving harmless of the said W:
T. W. D. and E. W. and every of them, their and every of their Heirs Executors
and Administrators of for and from courtimg and concerning all, and every the
said Obligations or Writings Obligatory, and the Penalties Forfeitures and
sums thereof and therein contained, has demised granted and to farm let, and
by these presents, etc. all those his Messuages, etc. lying and being, etc. To
have and to hold to the said W. T. etc. their Executors and Assigns for and
during all such term and time, and until that the said VV. T. etc. their
Executors or Assigns, shall and may or otherwise might without fraud or covin,
have fully and wholly levied received perceived and taken out of and in the said
Messuages, etc. or out of or in the Fines Rents Issues or Profits thereof
yearly arising growing or coming, and all and every such sum and sums of
money, losses costs charges and damages whatsoever as they the said VV. T. etc.
and every or any of them, their or any of their Heirs Executors or
Administrators have heretofore or shall hereafter Bona fide disburse, defray,
satisfy sustain or pay for or by reason of the said several Obligations, or
the forfeiture thereof, or of any action suit process Writ judgment or
Execution heretofore commenced, or hereafter to be in any sort commenced
prosecuted or pursued against them or any of them, their or any of their Heirs
Executors or Administrators, or against their or any of their Goods Chattells
Lands or Tenements in any wise, yiedling and paying therefore yearly, so long
as the Premises or any part thereof, shall be and remain in their or any of
their possession or occupation, or in the occupation of their or any of their
Assignee or Assignees Vnder-Tenant or Vnder-Tenants, one Pepper Corn only at
the Feast of etc. if it be demanded.

A Covenant for the quiet enjoying and to remain discharged of all
Encumbrances -- Vt in aliis. A Lease in Reversion after two lives.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Sir T. I: of etc. Knight. of the one party, and
R. P. of etc. yeoman of the other party, witnesses, that the said Sir T. I,
for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to him by the said R. P. before the
ensealing and delivery hereof paid in the name of a fine or income, the receipt
whereof, the said Sir T, I. holds and acknowledges himself fully satisfied
and paid, and thereof etc. has demised, etc. and by these presents does demise
etc. unto the said R P. his Executors etc. all that one message or tenement of
the said Sir T. I. now in the tenure or occupation of the said R P. situate in
etc: and also all the Houses Edifices Buildings Yards Orchards Gardens Lands
Tenements, etc. and Hereditaments to the said Message or Tenement belonging,
or in any wise appertaining. To have and to hold occupy and peaceably enjoy the
said Message or Tenement houses, etc. and all other the demised premises with
their appurtenances unto the said R: P: his Executors etc. immediately after the
decease of A. B. for and during all the term and space, and unto the full end
and term of one and twenty years, from thence next and immediately following,
fully to be complete determined and ended with all and all manner of Tenantly
profits Commodities and advantages, during the said term yiedling and paying
therefore yearly during the said Term unto the said Sir T: I: his Heirs and
Assigns, the annual or yearly Rent of etc: of lawful, etc: at the Feast days
etc: by even portions with all such suits services boons arrerages and duties,
as other the Tenants of the said Sir T. I. within his Manor of D. shall and
use to do for their like Rent.

A Clause for Distress for Non-payment of the Rent.
A Covenant for Reparations --
A general Warranty from the Lessor, In Witness, etc.
A Lease with many Reservations besides the Rent.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. B. of etc. Esquire, of the one part, and
S. P. of etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said R. B. for and in
consideration of etc. has demised granted set and to farm let unto the said S.
P. his Executors etc. all that Message or Tenement, etc. situate in, etc. now
or late in the Tenure of, etc. To have and to hold to the said S. P. his
Executors, etc. from the Feast of, etc. last past, for and during the term of
one and twenty years, yiedling and paying therefore yearly etc. during the said
term unto the said R. B. the yearly Rent of etc. of good and lawful etc. at
the Feast days of etc. by even portions. And likewise yiedling paying and
doing the boones arrerages duties and services of three days shearing or
reaping of Corn in the time of Harvest with able persons. And also making
providing and finding one good and sufficient Musket with all things thereunto
belonging, as namely Bandaliersr, est etc: and an able man to bear the same,
and to wait upon the said R. B. or his heirs so often as the said R. B. or his
heirs shall be employed in his Majesty's service, with all other duties suits
and services as heretofore of Right have been used, and accustomed to be
yielded and done for the said Message Tenement and Premises: And if it happen
the said yearly Rent of etc. to be behind and unpaid by the space of twenty
days next after either of the said Feasts etc. being lawfully demanded, that
then the Estate Right Title Interest claim and demand of the said S. P. her
Executors Administrators or Assigns to the before demised premises, and to
every part and parcel thereof, to cease determine and be utterly void.

And likewise if it happen the said boons arerages duties and services before
mentioned and specified, or any part thereof to be detained and not yielded in
time convenient, being likewise lawfully demanded, that then, and from
thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. B. his heirs and
Assigns into the before demised premises, and into every or any part thereof
to enter and distrain, and the Distress and Distresses there taken, to lead
drive chase carry and take away, and with him his Heirs or Assigns to impound
detain and keep until the said Boons, etc: be well and truly done satisfied
and paid.

A Covenant of the Lessee for Reparations.
A Covenant of the Lessor for the Enjoying.
A Lease made in consideration of the Surrender of a former Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between T. I. of etc. Esquire of the one part, and
L. M. of etc. of the other part Witnesses, That the said T. I. as well for and
in consideration, that the said L. M. has Surrendered and given to the said T.
I. one Indenture of Lease formerly made by T. S. late of etc. deceased to the
said L. M. for the term of three lives yet in being, of all that part and
portion of him the said T. S. of and in all that Message or Tenement, Lands
and Heredita. hereafter in these presents specified, mentioned, and thereby
demised as also for and in Consideration of the sum of etc. lawful English
money, has demised, granted, set, and to farm, let, and by these presents does
demise etc. unto the L. M. and his Assigns, all that part, purpart and portion
of the said T. I. of and in one Message or Tenement lying and being in N,
aforesaid in the said County of L, now or late in the tenure or occupation of
the said L. M. his assignee or assignees, together with all Houses, Building,
Orchards etc. with their, and every of their Appurt. whatsoever to the said
Message or Tenement belonging or any wise appertaining to have and to hold all
and singular the said part and portion of the said Message etc. to the said L.
M. and his Assigns, from and immediately after the date of these presents, for
and during all the term of the several natural life and lives of the said L: M.
E. M. and D. M. the natural sons of the said L: M: party to these presents, and
for and during all he term of the natural life of the Survivor and longest
liver of them, to and for all Tenantly profits, uses, and commodities, and with
free liberty to digg, get, and take Marle, Clay, and Stones, and every or any
of them, and to cut down, and take any Woods, or Under-Woods in any part or
parcel of the hereby demised Lands belonging to the said part or portion of the
said Message or Tenement grounds, or other the Premises without impeachment
of any manner of waste, yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said
term to the said T. I. his Heirs and Assigns, the ancient yearly rent of etc.
of lawful etc. at the Feast days etc. by even and equal portions, together
with such Duties and Services as have heretofore been used and accustomed to be
paid and done for the said part and portion of the said Message etc. at the
days and times usual and accustomed.

A Covenant with Warranty by the Lessor that the Lessee shall quietly enjoy.
A Covenant that the Lessee shall do service at the Lessors Court Baron, and
grind at his Mill.
A Lease of a Moss Room.
THis Indenture etc. witnesses, That the said A. B. for, and in consideration
of the sum of etc. to the said A. B. by the said C. D. paid, the receipt whereof
the said A. B. acknowledges, has demised etc. unto the said C. D. his
Executors etc. all that Moss Room with the appurtenances, lying and being in R.
Moss in the said County of L. containing by estimation two Roods of Ground, be
it more or less, now in the tenure of the said C. D. or his Assigns, together
with all Ways, Entries, Passages, Liberties, Easements, Commodities and
Advantages in or to belonging, or to, or with the same heretofore used or
enjoyed or at any time accepted, taken, reputed or known, as part, parcel, or
member thereof, with all and singular the appurtenances thereof, to have and to
hold the said Moss Room, with the appurtenances unto the said C. D. and his
Assigns, for and during all the term of the natural life and lives of him the
said C. D. and of M. and E. the daughters of the said C. D. and of every of
them, and the longest liver of them, to and for the most gain, profit, and
advantage of him the said C. D. and his Assigns, for and during all the said
term, for the digging, getting, drying, leading, and carrying away of Turves,
yielding and paying therefore yearly during all the said Term to the said A. B.
his Heirs and Assigns, the yearly rent of 12 d. of lawful etc. at, in, or upon
the etc.if it be lawfully demanded, for all manner of rents, suits, levies,
taxations, impositions and demands whatsoever due for the said Moss Room.

A Covenant for the Lessor to warrant the Enjoyment.
A Letter of Attorney to give Livery and Seisin.
A Lease of Tithes belonging to a Free School.
THis Indent. etc. Between the Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Town of S. in the
County of S. and T. A. Clerk, late Head, or Cheef Schoolmaster of the free
Grammar School of the late King Ed. 6. in the said Town of S. on the one part,
and D. L. of the said Town of S. Bailiffe or Receiver of the Rents and Revenues
of the same School of the other part, Witnesses, That the said Bailiffs,
Burgesses, and T. A. by and with the assent and consent of T. L. now Chief or
Head Schoolmaster of the said School, have Demised, Granted, Leased, Set, and
Let, and by these presents do Demise etc. unto the said D. L. all those the
Tithes of Corn and Hay yearly growing, increasing, or arising in the Township
of Betton and the Fields thereof in the said County of S. lately belonging and
being parcel of the Possessions of the same School, to have and to hold the
said Tithes of Corn and Hay to the said D. L. and his Assigns, from and
immediately after the end, determination and expiration of one Lease heretofore
made of the Premises to one T. R. or from the time that the same Lease by
Surrender, Forfeiture, or by any other means shall happen to be expired or
determined, unto the end and term, and for and during the term of 21. years,
from thence next following, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and
paying therefore yearly during the said Term to the Bailiffs and Burgesses, and
to their Successors for the time being, the sum of 20. Marks of lawful English
money at the Feasts of etc. by even portions for all and all manner of Rents,
Services, and Demands whatsoever, to be paid within the Boothall, otherwise
called the Guild Hall of the said Town.

And if it happen the said yearly Rent of 20. marks, or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid in part, or in all, by the space of one month next after
either of the said Feasts, in which the same ought to be paid, that then it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Bailiffs and Burgesses and their
Successors into the said Tithes, and every part and parcel thereof to re-enter,
and the same to have again repossess and enjoy as in their former estate any
thing in this Indenture here before mentioned to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And the said D. L. for him etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said etc.
by these presents, that he the said D. L. his etc. shall and will yearly during
the said term of one and twenty years, well and truly content and pay, or
cause to be contented and paid to the said B. and B. and their Successors for
the time being at the Boothall aforesaid, at the Feasts aforesaid, or within
one month next after either of the said Feast days aforesaid the said yearly
rent of 20. Marks by even portions, according to the true intent, meaning and
effect of these presents.

And the said B. and B. for them and their Successors, does covenant etc. to
and with the said D. L. his Executors etc. by these presents, in manner and
form following, that is to say, Tbat he the said D. L. and his Assigns shall or
may during the said term of 21. years, peaceably and quiely, have, hold, etc.
the said Tithes etc. without any lawful let etc. of any person or persons; and
that the said B. and B. and their Successors for the said yearly rent, so by
these presents reserved as aforesaid, shall and will from time to time during
the said term of 21. years, acquit and discharge, or save or keep harmlese as
well the said D. L. his etc. as the said Tithes, and every part and parcel
thereof, from, and concerning all other rents, payments, and charges whatsoever,
issuing out of the Premises, other then the yearly rent of 20. marks foresaid,
by these presents reserved, other then such duties etc. as shall happen to be
due by the only act or acts of the said D. L. or his Assigns In witness, etc.

Of a Rectory Impropriate.
THis Indenture etc. between A. B. of etc. of the one part, and C. D. of etc.
of the other part, witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in consideration of
etc. the receipt whereof the said A. B. acknowledges, and thereof does acquit
etc. the said C. D. his Executors etc. by these Presents, has demised etc.
unto the said C. D. and his Assigns, all that the Parsonage Parish Church of
St. J. in the Town of S. sometimes appropriate united belonging to or
appertaining, unto the late dissolved Chantry or College of St. Mary Magdalen,
near S. otherwise called the College of Batlefield, with all Lands Tenements;
and all manner of Tithes and Tenths, Reversion or Reversions of Tithes or
Tenths of Corn Grain and Hay Wool Lamb Flax Hemp Honey, and all manner of
prediall personal and mixed Tithes or Tenths whatsoever, yearly coming arising
growing and renewing, within the said Parish of St. J. within the Town of S.
aforesaid, or in any other place or places, Townships or Hamlets, to the said
Rectory Parish Church or Chapel of St. J. belonging or appertaining, or being
reputed taken or known, as part parcel or member thereof, or to the same
belonging or appertaining, or used to be set demised or let, as part parcel or
member of the said Rectory Parsonage Parish Church or Chapel of St. J.
aforesaid: To have and to hold etc. to the said C. D. and his Assigns, from the
day of the date hereof, for and during the term of etc. yiedling and paying etc.

A Covenant for the quiet enjoying etc. ut in aliis. Of a Parsonage for term of
life.
THis Indenture made etc. between A. B. Clerk, Parson of etc. of the one part,
and C. D. of etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. whereof and wherewith the said A. B.
acknowledges himself satisfied etc. Has demised granted set and to farm-let,
and by these presents does demise etc. unto the said C. D. his Executors and
Assigns etc. all that his Rectory or Parsonage of E. in the said County of etc.
with all and singular Houses Gleab Lands, with all and singular the
appurtenances, set lying and being in E. aforesaid, together with all manner of
Tithes, as well personal as prediall, and all Oblations Profits and
Commodities, growing arising or yearly coming, in or out of the said Recotry or
Parsonage, (the Profits arising and coming, by reason of or for any burial of
Corpse unto the said Parson, only excepted, and to the said Parson always
reserved:) To have and to hold and enjoy the said Rectory or Parsonage of E.
with the Houses and Gleab Lands thereunto belonging, together with all and
singular the Tithes of Corn Grain and Hay and privy Tithes Offerings Oblations,
and all other Profits and Commodities, coming growing or yearly arising, or of
right belonging to the said Rectory or Parsonage (except before excepted) unto
the said C. D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the day of the
making hereof, for and during so long time as the said A. B. shall remain in
his natural life, yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said A. B. or to
his Assigns, the sum of etc. of lawful money etc. at the four usual Feasts
in the year; That is to say, At the Feast of etc. by even and equal portions.

And for non-payment a clause for Re-entry.
ANd it is covenanted granted and agreed, by and between the said parties by
these presents; And the said A. B. for himself etc. does covenant and grant, to
and with the said C. D. his Executors etc. not only from time from henceforth
during the said term, serve or say within the said Parish Church of E. all
manner of Divine Service, and administer unto the Parishioners there, all
manner of Sacraments and Sacramental Duties, during this present Lease, or
else shall at his proper costs and charges, find a lawful and sufficient
Priest or Minister in his stead or place, which from time to time, during the
time aforesaid, shall well truly and lawfully execute accomplish and perform
and do the same, in such manner and form as the said A. ought to do. But also
to exonerate and discharge the said C. his Executors or Assigns, of and from
all other Charges Tenths Subsidies Proxies: And also all manner of
Dilapidations, and all other Encumbrances, as well ordinary as extraordinary,
due or going out of the Rectory or Parsonage, or wherewith the same may be
charged or chargable to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors,
or to the Ordinary, or to any other person or persons whatsoever, during the
time aforesaid.

And the said C. D. does for him etc. covenant etc. that he the said C. shall
yearly and every year, deliver or cause to be delivered, at the Feast day of
the Nativity of our Lord God, eight bushels of good clean and merchantable
Wheat. And further, that neither he, nor his Executors or Assigns, shall
surrender or leave up into the hands of the said A. the said Rectory or
Parsonage, but shall hold the same for and during the term aforesaid, and also
shall and during all the said time, well and sufficiently repair the said
Parsonage Houses and all Edifices thereunto belonging, and the same so
sufficiently repaired and amended at the end or other determination of this
present Lease, shall leave and yield up.

And the said A. B. for him etc: does covenant etc. to and with the said C. D.
by these presents, that he the said A. will during his natural life keep and
hold the said Rectory or Parsonage in his own right and title, and shall not
surrender or resign the same unto the Patron or Ordinary, nor do any act or
thing whereby he may forfeit or be legally deprived of the same: In witness etc.

Of a Manor for years.
THis Indenture etc. between R. B. of S. in the County of Y. Esquire; on the one
part, and the right honorable G. Earl of S. of the other party, witnesses,
That the said R. B. for diverse and sundry good causes and considerations him
thereunto moving, has demised granted set and to farm-let, and by these
presents does demise etc. unto the said Earl and his Assigns, all that his
Seigniory or Lordship of S. and the Rectory and Church of S. with all their
Rights Members and Appurtenances whatsoever, in the said County of Y. and the
View of Frankpledge to be holden within the said Manor, and all Fairs and
Markets to be holden from time to time, within the said Manor or Town of S.
And one passage over the water of O. near unto S. aforesaid, with all and
singular the appurtenances. And all and singular his Messuages Houses Mills
Lands Tenements Rents Reversions and Services Tithes Court-Leets View of
Frankpledge Franchises Liberties Privileges Royalties Commodities Waters
Fishings, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, in the Town Fields Hamlets or
Territories of S. aforesaid, S. and T. or any other place within the said
County of Y. to the said Manor Seigniory or Lordship, or Rectory, or any of
them, by any ways or means belonging or appertaining, or as part parcel or
member of them, or any of them, heretofore had taken known accepted reputed or
used: And all that Site and Precinct of the late dissolved House or Monastery
of S. aforesaid: And all that his Park called S. Park, and all other his
Messuages Lands Tenements Liberties Franchises Commodities Fairs Markets, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, situate lying and being, perceived had or used
within the Town Feilds or Parish of S. aforesaid. And also all those his
several Manors of S. and A. S. or to either of them appertaining or
belonging, or being accepted reputed known or taken to be, as part parcel or
member of them, or either of them; And all those his Manors Seigniories or
Lordships of F. and L. with their Rights Members and Appurtenances, in the said
County of Y. and all and singular the Messuages Cottages Lands Tenements
Meadows Leasues Closes Pastures Feedings Woods Under-woods Rents Reversions
Services Courts-Leet View of Frankpledge, and Profits of Courts-Leets, and
other Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said several Manors Seigniories or
Lordships of F. and H* or either of them belonging or appertaining, lying
reputed accepted or taken, as part parcel or member of the same, or any of
them. And all other the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of the said R. B.
situate lying and being, perceived or used in the Towns Villages or Hamlets of
F. and H. o^ in any or either of them, in the said County of Y. (except and at
all times foreprised) out of this present Lease and Grant, all such Lands
Grounds and Hereditaments in F. aforesaid, as I. C. Esquire did lately purchase
of the said R. B. for the sum of etc.

And the said R. B. has also demised granted etc. and by these presents does
demise grant etc. unto the said E. all his Reversion and Reversions of all and
singular the said several Manors Rectory Messuages Cottages Lands Tenements
Tithes Woods Under-woods Franchises Liberties Hereditaments, and other the
Premises here before demised (except before excepted) together with all manner
of Rents reserved upon all and every Lease Demise or Grant made of the said
Manors Rectory Messuages Tithes Lands Hereditaments, and other the demised
Premises, except as aforesaid: To have and to hold the said several Manors,
together with the Site and Precinct of the said late dissolved Monastery, and
all and singular other the said Rectory Tithes Messuages Lands Grounds
Hereditaments, and all and singular the other demised Premises, with the
appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said E. his Executors and
Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, for and during, and unto
the full end and term of etc. years, fully to be complete and ended, yiedling
and paying therefore yearly and every year during the said term, to the said R.
B. during his life, if he shall so long live, and after his decease, then to
such person or persons, his or their Heirs, to whom the Reversion and
Inheritance of the said several Manors Lands etc. does or shall appertain,
the several yearly Rents hereafter ordained and limited: That is to say. For
the said Manor or Lordship of S. and the said Site Circuit and Precinct of
the said late dissolved Monastery Rectory and Church of S. and all other the
demised Premises in S. T. and T. afo^esaid, the yearly Rent or Sum of etc.
And for the said Manors of S. and A. S. and other the said Grounds Lands etc.
in S and A. S. aforesaid, the yeary Rent or Sum of etc. And for the said
Manors of F. and H. aforesaid, and other the demised Premises in F. and H.
aforesaid, the yearly Rent or Sum of etc. of lawful money of England, at two
days or Feasts in the year: That is to say, at the Feast of etc. by even
portions, And if and as often it as shall happen or fortune the said several
yearly Rents before hereby reserved, or any of them to be behind and unpaid, in
part or the whole, by the space of twenty days, next after either of the said
Feast days of payment, at which the same ought to be paid, that then and so
often it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said R. B. during his life,
and after his decease to such person and persons to whom the Reversion or
Inheritance of the demised Premises, does or shall then appertain, into the
said demised Premises, to enter and distrain etc.

A Covenant of the Lessor for the quiet enjoyment and discharge of all former
Encumbrances.
Except and always foreprised, all and every Lease and Leases made of the said
demised Premises or of any part and parcel thereof, for the term of 21. years
or under and not above, whereupon the Rent most usually paid for the same,
within the space of etc. years last past, or more is reserved, the same being
paid yearly, during the continuance of such Lease or Leases: And except also
one Lease made by the said R. B. of one parcel of the demised Premises, unto
one B. for 40. years and except also the right and title of Dower of E. the
Daughter of etc. whom the said R. B. heretofore espoused and took to wife, and
except also all Rents and Services from henceforth to be due or payable, and
not before due for the demised Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, unto
our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, and other the
Lord and Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof.

A Covenant by the Lessor for further assurance.
ANd furthermore the said R. B. for him etc* does covenant etc. To and with the
said E: his Executors etc. by these presents, That the said R. B. shall and
will at all and every time and times hereafter, when and as often he shall be
thereunto reasonably required by the said E. his Executors or Assigns, and at
the costs and charges in the Law of the said E. his Executors etc. by his
sufficient Deed or Deeds indented, make unto the said E. his Executors and
Assigns, being in possession of the said demised Premises, by force of these
present Indentures, such Lease and Leases Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants of
the said several Manors Rectory Lands Tenements Hereditaments, and other the
said demised Premises, for the term and space of 21. years, from the day of
the date of every of the same Indentures, or Deeds indented so thereof to be
made as aforesaid, as by the said E. his Executors or Assigns, or by his or
their learned Council shall be reasonably advised or devised: And that in and
by the same, all and every such new Lease or Leases there shall be reserved,
the several Rents aforesaid, and the same to be paid yearly, in such manner
and form as is limited in and by these presents, and that therein also shall be
contained such like Covenants Grants Exceptions Reservations and Agreements, in
effect and substance as be contained in these Indentures, and not otherwise,
nor in any other manner and form: In witness whereof etc.

A Lease of a Manor, with a Covenant that the Land only by Distress, and not
the person of the Lessee shall be liable to the rent reserved.
THis Indenture made etc. between A. B. of etc. Gent. of the one part, and C.
D. of etc. of the other, witnesses, That the said A. B. has demised etc. the
Manor of S. etc. to the said C. D. his Executors etc. To have and to hold to
the said C. D. his Executors etc. for 21. years, yiedling and paying therefore
yearly the sum of etc. at the two Feasts of etc.

Provided always, and it is so concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties, for themselves and either of them, their and either of their Heirs
Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents. And the said
A. B for him etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said C. D. his Executors
and Assigns by these presents, that neither the reservation of the said Rent,
nor any thing in these presents contained, shall by any ways or means extend
to charge the person of the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns, by occasion of
Debt, or any other ways, with or for the said yearly Rent, or any parcel
thereof, or the arrerages of the said yearly Rent, but only to charge the said
several Manors and other the Premises, by way of Distress for nonpayment of
the said Rent before reserved, and not otherwise.

A Covenant like to that in the former Precedent for renewing of Leases of the
Premises; In witness etc. A short Lease of lands for a term, the rent to be
paid after the Lessors decease to his Heir in tail.
THis Indenture etc. between A. B. of etc. Gent. of the one part, and C. D. of
etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said A. B. for diverse good causes
etc. has demised granted etc. unto the said C. D. all that the Manor of S.
with the appurtenances etc. to have and to hold etc. unto the said C. D. and
his Assigns, for and during the term of 21. years etc. yiedling therefore
yearly, during the said term unto the said A. B. and to the Heirs of the body
of the same A. B. which he shall hereafter have and beget, of such woman as he
shall hereafter marry and take to wife, and for default of such Issue, then to
R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, the old and accustomed Rent, at such days and
times as the same has been accustomed to be paid etc.

A Lease of a House in London.
THis Indenture made etc. Between D. F. of W. in the County of B. Widow, and J.
S. of W. aforesaid, Gent. of the one part, and D. T. Citizen and Haberdasher of
London, of the other part, witnesses, That the Consideration.
said D. and J. S. for and in consideration of the sum of 100 l. of current
English money, to them in hand paid by the said D. T. at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, the receipt whereof they do hereby
acknowledge, and themselves therewith satisfied, and thereof and of every part
thereof do clearly acquit and discharge the said D. T. his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents, have demised granted set
and to farm-letten, and by these presents do demise grant set The Demise.
and to farm-let unto the said D. T. all that Message or Tenement, with the
Appurtenances, situate lying and being in Cornhill London, commonly called or
known by the name of the Red Lion, now in the Tenure or Occupation of the said
D. T. Together with all Shops Cellars Sollers Chambers Rooms Easements
Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said demised Message or
Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining: To have and to hold the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular Habend.
the Premises, with the Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof to
the said D. T. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast Day of
the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, next coming after the date hereof,
unto the end and term of 21. years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said D. F. for
so many years of the said term as she shall Reddend.
live; And then afterward to the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, during the
said term, the yearly rent of 30 l. of current English money, at the four
usual Feasts or Terms in the year: That is to say, At the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist, St. Michael the Archangel, the birth of our
blessed Savior, and the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by even and
equal portions. And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of 30 l. to be
behind unpaid in part or in all, by the space of 14. days next after any of
the said Feasts, at which as aforesaid the same ought to be paid: Or if the said
D. T. his Executors or Administrators, shall or do at any time hereafter, let,
assign or set over any part or parcel of the said Message or Tenement, or any
part thereof, to any person or persons whatsoever, without the special license
of the said D. F. and J. S. their Heirs or Assigns, or some of them in Writing,
under her his or one of their hands and Seals.

And further if the said D. T. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall
alter and change any part of the said Message or Tenement, to or for the
weakening or impairing of the same, or shall remove any principal Timber or
Supporters of the said Message or Tenement, without the leave and consent of
the said D. F. and J. S. their Heirs or Assigns, or some of them Clause for
Re-entry.
first had and obtained in writing under their hands, that then and so often it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said D. F. and J. S. their Heirs and
Assigns, into the said demised Premises, and into every part thereof, to
re-enter, and the same to have again re-possesse and enjoy, as in her his or
their former Estate, this present Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein
contained, to the contrary therein in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said D. T. does covenant promise and grant, for him his Executors
Covenant for Reparations.
Administrators and Assigns, to and with the said D. F. and J. S. their Heirs
and Assigns by these presents, that he the said D. T. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, at his and their proper costs and charges, the
Message or Tenement here before by these presents demised, with the
appurtenances, shall and will repair sustain support amend and maintain; and
all the privies Sieges and Wydraughts, of or belonging to the Premises, and
the Glass Windows, as also the pavements as well within the said Message, as
without in the high Street, before or belonging to the same, shall at his or
their like costs and charges, well and sufficiently repair purge scour pave
glaze cleanse amend and maintain from time to time, as often as need shall
require, during the said term:

And furthermore the said D. T. for himself, his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant promise and grant, to and with the said D. F. and I. S.
their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That he the said D. T. will at his
own proper costs and charges, before the Feasts day of St. Michael the
Archangel, next coming, after the date hereof, lay out and bestow upon the
repair of the above demised Premises, the sum of 40 l. of current English
money, in such place and places, part and parts thereof, as the Workmen
assigned and appointod by the said D. F. and J. S. or one of them, or the Heirs
or Assigns of them or one of them, shall order and appoint him, his Executors
or Assigns to bestow the same. And the said Message or Tenement and Premises,
so well and sufficiently repaired paved scoured cleansed glazed purged
sustained and amended, together with all the Wainscot in any part of the
Premises, now being or remaining, with all Doors Locks Keys Glass and Glass
Windows in or about the said Message or Tenement and Premises, in good
sufficient and Tenantable reparations, at the end of the said term or any other
determination of this Lease, shall leave and yield up unto the said D. F. and
J. S. or one of them, their or one of their Heirs or Assigns.

And the said D. T. does covenant promise and grant for him, his Executors
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that it shall and A Covenant to
come into the p^emisses to vi^w reparations.
may be lawful to and for the said D. F. and J. S. their Heirs and Assigns,
with Workmen and others, to have and take free liberty of Ingress Egress and
Regress in and to, and from the above demised Premises, and every or any part
thereof, four times a year yearly during the said term, to view search and see,
whether the said Message or Tenement and Premises, be well and sufficiently
repaired cleansed scoured paved amended and maintained, as the same ought to
be, by the true meaning of these presents, or not, and to give or leave warning
in writing at the said demised Premises, to and for the said D. T. his
Executors or Assigns, to repair and amend the defaults therein specified within
three months then next ensuing,

And it is further agreed, and the said D. T. for him, his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, does covenant and grant, to and with the said D.
F. and J. S. their and either of their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, to
pay all manner of Taxes Assesments Quit-rents and Duties whatsoever, which
shall grow due from the demised Premises, during the said term hereby letten.

And the said D. F. and J. S. do for themselves, their Heirs Executors A
Covenant that the Lessee shall enjoy the premises.
Administrators and Assigns, respectively, and for every of them, covenant
promise and grant, to and with the said D. T. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and with every of them by these presents, that he the said D: T. wis
Executors Administrators and Assigns, paying the said yearly Rent of 30 l.
respectively and successively, in manner and form aforesaid, and doing and
performing all the other Covenants Grants Articles Conditions and Agreements
above in these presents declared and specified, which on his and their parts
and behalf are to be performed and kept; shall or may according to the true
meaning of these presents, peaceably and quietly have hold occupy and enjoy the
said Message or Tenement, and all and singular the demised Premises with the
Appurtenances, without any let trouble or interruption of the said D. F. and J.
S. or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, or any of
them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, by from
or under her, his or their Right Title or Interest, during the said term of 21.
years, by these presents granted: In witness etc.

A Lease of Lands revocable upon payment of a sum of money to a Daughter.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. R. of R. in the county of L. Esquire of the
one part, and J. C. of etc. Esquire, and A. H. of, etc. in the said County
Gentleman of the other part witnesses, that the said R. as well for and in
consideration of the natural love and affection which he Consideration.
has and bears unto M. R. one of the Daughters of the said R. R. as yet
unpreferred in marriage, and for raising of a competent marriage portion to and
for the said M. in case she should survive the said R. and be unmarried at the
time of his death, or do marry with his consent and good liking in his life
time as also for diverse other good causes and considerations him thereunto
especially moving, has demised granted and to farm letten, and by these
presents does demise unto the said I. C. and R. H. Demise.
All that the scit and capital Message called by the name of B. and all
Outhouses Barns Stables and other Edifices and Buildings Yards Orchards
Gardans Tofts Crofts Curtilages Lands Tenements Meadows Leasowes Pastures
Feedings Woods Underwoods Ways Waters Watercourse Fishings Ponds Pools
Commons Common of Pasture Moss room Heath Turbary Profits Commodities and
Emoluments with their and every of their Appurtenances whatsoever to the said
capital Message and Site belonging, or in any wise appertaining. or with the
same heretofore used occupied or enjoyed or accepted executed known or taken,
as part parcel or member of the same, containing by estimation 70 Acres of the
large measure or thereabouts be the same more or less, all and singular which
said Site Capital Message and other the Premises with their and every of
their Appurtenances, are situate lying and being in R in the said County of L.
and are now in the tenure or occupation of the said R. R. or his Assignee or
Assignees, being also parcel of his Inheritance. And the said R. R. for the
consideration aforesaid, has also demised granted and to farm letten, and by
these Presents does demise, etc. unto the said JC. and A. H and R. H. all those
several closes and parcells of ground with their Appurtenances hereafter
parcicularly mentioned, that is to say etc. with all manner of Ways Entries
and Passages to and from the said Closes and parcells of ground severally and
respectively belonging, Waters Watercourse, etc. with their and every of
their Appurtenances whatsoever to the said several closes of ground, and every
or any of them belonging or appertaining, all and singular which said premises
last mentioned to be demised, are situate lying and being in the towns
territories liberties hamlets or feilds of C. and R. in the said County of L.
and now are or lately were in the tenure or occupation of the said R: R. or of
his assignee or assignees, and are parcel of his inheritance, to have and to
hold Habend.
all and singular the said several closes and parcells of ground, and all
other the demised Premises with their Appurtenances unto the said J C and A H
and R H. and to the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Executors
Administrators and Assigns of the Survivors and Survivor of them from and
immediately after the death of the said R. R. for and during and until the full
end and term of ten years from thence next following and fully to be complete
and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said Term unto the
said R. R. his Heirs and Assigns one Pepper corn only at the Feast of Saint
Martin in Winter, (if it shall be lawfully demanded) for all Rents, Suits,
Services and Demands whatsoever.

Provided always, and the true intent and meaning of this present demise The
trust declared.
and grant, and of the parties thereunto is, That they the said J C etc. and
the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Executors Administrators and
Assigns of the Survivor of them being hereby nominated and appointed Leasees
in trust and confidence, shall out of the yearly Rents Issues Profits, and
Emoluments of the said demised Premises with the Appurtenances well and truly
pay or cause to be paid unto the said M or her Assigns yearly and every year
until the sum of 200 l. of lawful etc. be satisfied and paid after the rate
or sum of 40 l. a year of like lawful English money, at two feasts or days
of payment in every year, that is to say, at the Feasts of etc. or within one
and twenty days after either of the said Feasts, by even portions at the South
Porch of the Parish Church of W. in the said County.

Provided also nevertheless, That if the Heirs or Assigns of the said A
Proviso upon payment of 40 l. yearly till 200 l. be paid, this demise to end.
R. R. do and shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said M. R. or
her Assigns at the place of payment aforesaid, the said yearly sum of 40 l.
until the said sum of 200 l: be fully satisfied and paid as aforesaid at the
several Feasts and times limited for payment thereof, and in such manner and
form as is before declared, that then they the said J. C. etc. and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Executors Administrators and Assigns of
the Surviuor of them, shall utterly and for ever be barred and excluded from
any further occupation or intermedling with the said demised Premises or any
part or parcel thereof, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary
thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided further that if the said R. R. do or shall at any time during his
natural life, pay or tender, or cause to be paid and tendered unto the And also
upon tender of 12 d. to the Court.
said J. C. A. H. and etc, or to any of them or the Survivors of them or to the
Executors Administrators or Assigns of the survivor of them, the sum of 12 d.
of lawful etc. and thereupon do immediately declare and signify in the
presence of two or more credible Witnesses, that his intent and meaning is by
the tenor thereof to have this present demise and grant to be for ever in all
constructions frustrate and void. Or if the said M. R. shall in the life time
of the said R. R. entermarry with any person without the good liking and
consent of the said R. R. that then and from thence forth after such payment or
tender of twelve pence, with the intent Or the Daughter marry without her
Fathers Consent.
and in such manner and form as aforesaid, and for ever after this present
demise and grant, and every clause sentence and word therein contained, shall
cease determine and be utterly void frustrate and of none effect to all intents
constructions and purposes as though the same had never been acted intended or
done, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, In Witness.

A Re-demise of a M^ssuage.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A: B. of etc: of the one part, and C. D: of
etc: of the other part. Witnesses. That whereas the said C: D: by his Deed
indented under his Hand and Seal, bearing Date, etc. Has bargained, sold,
demised, and to farm letten unto the said A. B. his Executors, etc. All that
Message or Tenement, etc. Situate, etc. To have and to hold the said Message
or Tenement etc. with all and singular the appurtenances from the date of the
said Indenture, for and during the Term of 99 years under the yearly Rent of
one Pepper Corn. As by the said recited Indenture, relation thereto being had
more at large appears: Now this Indenture Witnesses. That the said A. B: for
diverse good Causes and considerations him there unto moving. Has bargained,
sold, betaken, and to Farm Letten; And by these presents does bargain, sell,
betake, and to farm let unro the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, the said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Rents, Issues and Profits, of all and singular the
said Message and premises, and of every part and parcel thereof. To have and
to hold the said Message or Tenement with the appur^enancss thereof unto the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, unto the end and Term of 98 years from thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended. Provided always, and these
presents are upon this condition, nevertheless, that if the said C. D: his
Heirs, etc. do not or shall not from henceforth yearly and from year to year,
for and during the natural lives of R. B and S: B. Children of the said A. B.
and the longer liver of them (if the said Lease do so long continue) well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A B. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, the sum of etc. lawful money of England on the Feast days of
etc. by even and equal portions. At or within the Porch of the Church, etc.
without any deduction allowance, abatement or defalcation whatsoever. That then
and from thenceforth this present Lease of the same premises shall cease,
determine and be utterly void and of none effect to all intents and purposes as
if these presents had never been made: And then and at all or any time
afterward. It shall and may be lawful to and for the said A B: his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns or any of them to enter into and upon the said
Message or Tenement and premises* and into every part and parcel thereof in
the name of the whole. And the same to have again repossess and enjoy as in
his or their first and former estate, and the said C. D. his Executors, etc.
and all Occupiers of the premises thereout, and from thence utterly to expel,
put out and amove, this Indenture or, any thing therein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And the said C. D. for him, his
Executors, etc. does Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said A: B. his
Executors, etc. by these presents. That he the said C. D. his Heirs Executors,
etc. or some of them shall and will, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, during the natural lives of the said R. B. and S. B. children of
the said A. B. and the lives of the longer liver of them (if the said Lease
shall so long continue well and truly pay or cause to be paid udto the said A:
B: his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said Annual sum or yearly
payment of, etc. of lawful money of England, at the days, times and place
above mentioned for payment thereof, in manner and form aforesaid without
making default of payment of or in any one payment thereof. And without any
deduction, allowance, abatement or defalcation whatsoever. And that he the said
C. D. his Executors, etc. shall from time to time during the natural lives and
life of the said R. B. and S. B. well and sufficiently repair, uphold,
support, sustain, amend, maintain and keep the said Message, etc: in, by and
with all and all manner of needful and necessary reparations and amendments
whatsoever.

A Covenant that the lessor may come into the premises to view the
Reparations. Et ut antea.
ANd it is lastly the agreement of the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators, etc to and with the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns by these presents: That he the said C. D. paying the said yearly
sum of, etc. in form aforesaid, and performing, fulfilling and keeping all
and singular other the Covenants, Grants, Clauses and agreements herein
contained and on his behalf to be done and performed, shall or may peaceably
and quietly have hold occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message and
premises with the appurtenances above herein and hereby granted and to Farm,
letten and every part and parcel thereof, for and during the said Term,
hereby granted and demised without any let, trouble, interruption, encumbrance
or disturbance of or by the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators,
or any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever. In Witness etc.

LETTERS OF ATTORNEY.
To sue for a Debt due by a Bill of Exchange, to the Attorneys own use with a
Covenant that the Debt is un-discharged.
TO all to whom these presents shall come G. L. of London Merchant, sends
greeting. Know ye that I the said G. for diverse good causes and considerations
me thereunto espeally moving. Have ordained, assigned and deputed, and by these
presents do ordain, assign and depute, and in my place, put my welbelovied
friend A. S. Citizen and Grocer of London, my true and lawful Attorney
irrevocable to demand, levy, recover and receive in my name and stead, to the
only proper use and behoof of the said A. S. of one M: W. Citizen and Draper
of London, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, the sum of 100 l: of good
and lawful money of England, in which said sum the said M. W. is indebted to
me the said G. by a certain writing or Bill of exchange, bearing date at
London the etc. Know ye also that I the said G. have by these presents given
and granted to my said Attorney my full and whole authority, for default of
payment of the said sum or any part or parcel thereof, him the said M. W:
his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, by their bodies to Arrest and imprison,
and out of Prison again to deliver and release, and the Goods and Chattells,
Lands and Tenements of him the said M. W. his Heirs Executors or Administrators
to the use and behoof of the said A: S. in my name and stead, to cause to be
attached, seized or extended, and Pleas prosecutions, and Suits whatsoever
against the said M. W. his Heirs Executors or Administrators or any of them, or
against the Goods, Chattells, Credits, and Debts of the aforesaid M. W. for the
Debt aforesaid, in my name and place, to commence, maintain and prosecute in
any Court or Courts, and before what Judge or Judges soever, as firm and
lawful ways and means as the Laws of the Land will permit: And upon
recovery and receipt of the said money or any part thereof, acquittance or
acquittances, Release or Releases, or other discharge in my name, and stead to
seal and deliver, and one or more Attorney or Attorneys under him to
substitute, and at his will again to revoke, and further to do, etc.
Ratifying, etc. and I the said G: L. do further Covenant and grant for me my
Executors and Administrators, to and with the said A. S. his Executors and
Administrators by these presents That the said Writing or Bill of Exchange is
in full strength and validity, and that I the said G. L. before the making of
these presents, have not remitted nor any way released the said Debt, nor any
part or parcel thereof. And that he the said A S. his Executors Administrators
or Assigns, shall or may have and enjoy all and singular sums of money and
other profits whatsoever which by virtue or pretext of the said writing or Bill
of Exchange shall happen to be levied to the proper use and behoof of the said
A. S. his Executors or Administrators without any account to be given or
rendered by him for the same, In Witness etc.

To Deliver a Deed.
BE it known unto all men by these presents. That whereas I A. B. of C. in the
County of S. Gent. I. L. Gent. his wife and S. Sister, of the said A. B. have
set our hands and Seals to a writing hereunto annexed, mentioning that we have
granted to E. S. Esquire, certain Tith, Lead-Oare, within the high Park or
else where, within the County of D. which Tithe was granted unto us the said A:
B. and S. my said Sister by Sir F. L. Knight for certain years yet to come and
unexpired, as by the said writing hereunto annexed appears. Now know ye that
we the said A. B. I. L. and S. his wife have constituted, ordained and made,
and in our stead and place by these presents have put our welbeloved friends H.
M. and N. O. our true and lawful Attorneys, for us and in our names jointly
and severally to take possession of the said Tithe, Lead-Oare, or of some part
thereof in the name of the whole by clayming of the same or by seizing or
taking in our names some parts thereof in the name of the whole, and also for
us and in our names as our Deed to deliver the said writing hereunto annexed to
the said E S. or to any other person or persons to his use as fully wholly and
amply as we the said A. B. I. L and S. could or might do the same in our own
persons: Ratifying, etc.

From several Executors, and Administrators to sue, Undersheriffs and
Bailiffs of hundreds or for Goods, etc. wrongfully taken, by color of their
Office.
KNow all men by these presents, That we A. B. Widow, Executrix of the last
Will and Testament of R. B. late of M. in the County of S. Gent: C. D. Widow,
Executrix of the last Will, etc. of E: D: of etc. yeoman and E. F. G. H. and I.
K. of M. aforesaid. Have made ordained constituted and in our places by these
presents have put our welbeloved in Christ Sir R. H. Knight our true and
lawful Attorney to demand levy and receive for us and every of us of F: C.
Gent late Deputy, Sheriff to E. C. Esquire late Sheriff of the said County of
G. L. late Deputy Sheriff to F. L Esquire; late Sheriff of the said County, and
after Deputy Sheriff to R. C: Esquire; late Sheriff of the said County of G: F.
late Bailiff of the Hundred of F. in the said County, and of I. K. late Bailiff
of the said Hundred, and of every or any of them, all and singular the sums
of money, Goods and Chattells whatsoever, which they the said late late Deputy
Sheriffs or Bailiffs, or any others there, or any of their under. Officers or
Ministers, or any other person or persons by their, or any of their, have or
had received, levied or taken wrongfully by color of their said several
Offices of or from us, or every or any of us or of and from the Testators and
Intestates above named, and of and from them and every, or any of them by the
said Deputy Sheriffs and Bailiffs, or by any of them, and from us as yet
wrongfully sustained. Giving and granting to our said Attorneys, our full and
whole power and Authority in the premises, to Arrest, Sue, Implead, Imprision
and Convent the said late Deputy Sheriffs and Bailiffs in all or any of the Q:
Court or Courts, before all or any of her Majesty's Judges, Justices or
Commissioners or before any of them, for the wrongful taking, levying,
detayning and with holding of the said sums of money, Goods and Chattells or
of any part thereof, and them and every of them in that behalf to condemn, and
the said sums of money, Goods and Chattells to recover and receive to the
proper use and behoof of the said Sir R. H without giving or rendering to us or
any of us any account for the same. It being in full recompense and
satisfaction of diverse great sums of money by the said Sir R. H: paid and
defrayed for us and the said Testators and Intestates, to our Sovereign Lady
the Queens Majesty. And upon such recovery, or recoveries so had or made, or
other payment or payments or satisfaction in that behalf, to be made to the
said Sir R: H: by the said late Deputy Sheriffs and Bailiffs, or by any of
them, to compound, release or agree with them, or every or any of them, and
acquitance or acquittances, release, or releases, or any other discharge in
that behalf, as to our Attorney shall seem convenient respectively to Seal and
Deliver for Us, and in our Names and Places at the Will and pleasure of our
said Attorney, and further to do and execute etc. Ratifying etc. In witness
whereof, etc.

To receive the Rents of a Manor, and for non-payment to re-enter.
BE it known unto all by these Presents, That I A. B. of etc. have made,
ordained, deputed and constituted my Welbeloved and faithful Servant C. D. my
true and lawful Attorney to demand, ask, levy and receive for me, and in my
name, and to my use of E. F. and all other the Farmers and Occupiers of all and
every my Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments within my Manor of N.
in the County of L: for the time being, all such rents and sums of money, as
now be, or which hereafter shall be due, and payable to me of, and for the
Rents of the said Manor of N. and of all other Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in S. in the said County of L. by force of a certain Indenture of
Lease, bearing date etc. made between etc. and upon receipt thereof to make,
seal and deliver for me and in my name acquitance or acquitances, or other
lawful and sufficient discharges to make as occasion shall serve and require;
and for non-Payment thereof, or any part thereof into into the said Manor,
Messuages and Premises, or any part or parcel thereof to re-enter, and the said
E: F. and all other the Farmers and Occupiers thereof to expel and amove, and
all other things in that behalf to do and execute in as full and ample manner
as I my self could or might, if I were there personally present Ratifying etc.
In witness, etc.

To enter into Land for non-Payment of a rent reserved upon a Lease.
KNow all Men to whom these Presents shall come, I. M. H. of London Widow, send
greeting. Whereas by Indenture of Lease, bearing date etc. made between me the
said M. H. of the one part, and one J. W. of etc. and R. A. of C. etc. of the
other part, I the said M. H. did demise and to farm let, unto the said I. W.
and R. C. the Manor or Chantry of S. with the appurtenances and the dissolved
Chantry of S. with the appurtenances, and the dissolved College of S. with the
appurtenances, late parcel, of, or belonging to the College of R. M. the
County of Y. among other things, all lying and being in the said County of N.
to hold from the Feast day of the Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary then last
past for the Term of 7. years if the extent mentioned in the said Indenture of
Lease should so long continue, yielding and paying therefore yearly during the
said term unto me the said M. H. my Executors and Assigns, the full, just and
entire sum of 3000 l. of lawful English money, in, or upon the first day of N.
and the first day of M. at, or in my then or late dwelling House in M. Lane in
London by even and equal portions, with a Proviso or Condition therein
contained, that if it should happen the said yearly rent, or any part thereof to
be behind and unpaid, by, and during the space of 21. days next after such
days, time or times as the same shall grow due or ought or are appointed to be
paid by even and equal portions, that then and from thenceforth after such
default of payment without any demand to be made by me the said M. H. my
Executors or Assigns, of the sa^d Rent, or the Arrerages thereof at any other
place, then only at my said dwelling House in M. Lane in London aforesaid, it
should and might be lawful for me the said M. H. my Executors and Assigns,
wholly to re-enter in to all and singular the demised premises, with the
appurtenances, and into every or any part thereof, and the same to have again
and repossesse, as in mine and their former estate and right, any thing in the
said Indenture contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding

And whereas the said I. W. and R. A. upon the 21. of this instant May, being
the last day of payment of the said rent, according to the Proviso above
mentioned to be contained in the said Indentures of Lease, have made default of
payment, and have not satisfied or paid all the rent reserved to be paid by the
said Indenture of Lease, and the Proviso and Condition mentioned and cont^ined
in the said Indenture of Lease at the place aforesaid, notwithstanding, I the
said M. H. did demand the said rent, at, or in my said dwelling House upon the
said 21th. day of May, before the Sun set of the same day, and did continue my
demand according to the Law in such cases used, and the purpurt and effect of
the same Indenture of Lease, and no person or persons came then and there to
make payment of all the said rent unto me the said M. H. according to the
purpurt and effect of the said Indenture of Lease and Proviso aforesaid.

Now this I present Writing witnesses, That I the said M. H. do hereby
Constitute and appoint T. S. of F. in the said County of N. Gent. my lawful
Attorney and Deputy for me, and in my name and place in respect of the non
payment of the said rent, and Proviso aforesaid to re-enter into all and
singular the said Manor or Chantry and dissolved College of S. aforesaid, and
into all and singular the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto
belonging, lying or being in the said County of N. or into such or so many
parts or parcels thenof in the name of the rest, as to my said Attorney shall
be thought meet, and convenient.

And further, to expel and put out of the Possession of the said Premises, or
of such parts thereof as my said Attorney shall please the said I. W. and R. H.
or their Assigns. or Under-tenants, and to hold the Possession thereof to my
use, according to the purport, effect, intent, and true intent and meaning of
the Proviso and contained in the said Indenture of Lease, and what my said
Attorney shall lawfully do in the Premises, I do ratify, and hereby allow and
confirm, etc.

To receive the Profits of Lands extended.
TG All to whom these Presents shall come, I. A. B. of etc: send greeting,
Whereas W. P. Esquire, now Sheriff of the County of C. by virtue of the Kings
Majesty's Process or Writ of Extent and Liberate to him directed, has charged
and sworn one sufficient Jury or Inquest of twelve men within this County of C.
who by virtue of their said Oath and Charge have found that C. B. G. H. and I.
L. Esquires were severally seized and possessed of diverse Manors, Messuages,
Lands Tenements, Goods and Chattels within the said County of C. as by an
Inquisition under the Seals of the said Jurors, bearing date etc. more plainly
and at large it does and may appear, which Manors, Lands and Tenements, Goods
and Chattels are to be delivered to me the said A. B. in Execution until
certain debts due unto me from the said C. B. G. H. and I L: shall be levied
and satisfi^d.

Now know ye that I the said A. B. have made, authorized, deputed and assigned
my servant T. M. my true and lawful Attorney for me and in my name, and to my
only use and behoof to take and receive possession and seisin of and in all and
singular the said Manors, Messuages, Goods and Chattels specified and
contained in the said Inquisition at the hands and delivery of the said Sheriff
or his Deputy, and every part and parcel thereof, and so many parts and parcels
thereof, as to my said Attorney shall happen to be delivered to my use,
according to the tenor, form and effect of the said Writ, and the same Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to use and dispose to my most
profit and commodity in as large, ample, and effectual manner, as I my self
might or could do being personally present ratifying and confirming, etc.

To Surrender Copyhold Land.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I A. B. of etc. Have made, ordained,
constituted, and appointed, and by these Presents in my place and stead have
put my Welbeloved C. D. and E. F. two Copyhold, or Customary Tenants by Copy
of Court-Roll, according to the Custom of the Manor of G. my true and lawful
Atturneys jointly and severally to Sur^ender for me, and in my name, into the
hands of the Lord of the Manor of G. aforesaid, one Message, and twenty acres
of Land, be it more or less, commonly called or known by the name of Bartons to
the use and behoof L. M. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the
Custom of the said Manor, to be holden by the Rents and Services of right due
and accustomed Ratifying and confirming etc. In witness whereof, etc.

Another of the same.
TO. All Christian people to whom this present shall come, R. M. of P. in the
County of C. Esquire sends greeting, Know ye, That I the said R. for and in
part of performance of certain Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements,
specified and expressed in certain Articles Indented, bearing date the the 10th
day of May, in the 20th. year of the Reign of C. late King of England, and made
between the said R. M. of the one part, and T. S. of S. in the said County Esquire;
of the other part, and for diverse other good causes and considerations, me
hereunto especially moving, Have made, ordained, constituted, and by these
Presents in my Place, have put my Welbeloved Friends G. H. and I. K. my true
and lawful Atturneys, for me, and in my name and place jointly and severally to
Surrender into the hands of the King as Lord of the Manor and Forest of M. in
the said County of Chester by his Steward there at the next Halimote or Court
of the Manor and Forest aforesaid, or at any other Court or place within the
Manor and Forest aforesaid, all and singular those Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Medows, Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, situate
lying and being within the Manor and Forest of M. aforesaid, now or late in
the several joint occupations of I. L. R. T. etc. or any of them, to the intent
and purpose, that the said King having possession and Seisin thereof by his
Steward of the Manor and Forest aforesaid, will Give and Grant the foresaid
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises to R. S. and T. W. to hold
to them the said R. S. and T. W. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to
the Custom of the Manor and Forest by the Rents and Services heretofore due,
and of right Accustomed, Ratifying etc. In witness etc.

To make Entry into Lands.
BE it known unto all men by these Presents. that we H. D. of G. in the County
of Middlesex, Esquire, and M. his Wife, and A. S. sister of the said M. have
authorized and appointed, and by these Presents do authorize and appoint J. R.
and J. T. and either of them jointly and severally for and in the name and to
the use of us the said H. D. and M. as in the Right of the said M. and for and
in the name, and to the use of the said A. and of F. M. Son and Heir apparent
of P. M of C. in the County of Y. and for, and in the name and names, and to
the use of all and every of us the said H. and M: and in the Right of the said
M. and the said A. and F, to enter into all and every the Messuages Mills Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments situate or being in F. G. and H: in the County of
N: and in every or any of them, which at any time heretofore was or were the
inheritance, or did appertain or belong unto F. S. of S, Esquire late deceased
Father of the said M: and A, and Grandfather of the said F: M: in whose
several or other tenures or occupation soever the same or any of them now are,
or heretofore have been, and all and every the said Hereditaments for and in
the name and names, and in the right of us the said H. D. M A: and F: as
aforesaid to claim challenge and demand as the proper and lawful Inheritance
of the said H: M: A: and F: M: And furthermore for us the said H. M: F: and A:
S: and for every of us aforesaid, in and upon all and every or any of the said
Hereditaments, jointly and severally to claim and demand in the name and names
of us the said H. and M, as in the Right of the said M. and in the name and
names of the said A. and of F: M. and of every of us, all and every such the
Reversion and Reversions Remainder and Remainders, of and in all and every or
any of the said Hereditaments which do or does lawfully or rightfully unto us
the said M. A. and F. or to any of us, and did heretofore appertain or belong
to R: S: Esquire, the late deceased Brother of the said M and A. and uncle to
the said F. M. and lastly jontly or severally to do and make all and every such
Entry and Entries Claim and Claims in or upon all and every or any the
premises, for and in the names and right of us the said H, M: A, and F. M. and
for the reducing settling or revesting unto us the said H and M. as in the right
of the said M: and the said A: S: and F: M: and to every of us, all such estate
possession reversion and remainders as to the said M A and F: M: did or does
lawfully appertain or belong; of or in the premises as to the said J. R. and
J: T: or to either of them, shall at any time or times seem expedient and
convenient, In witness etc.

Davenport:

To Sue for Lands.
TO all to whom these Presents shall come, A: B of C. etc. Gentleman sends
greeting, Know ye that I the said A. B: have constituted and ordained, and by
these presents in my place, have put my welbeloved Friend E: F: of etc. my true
and lawful Attorney for me and in my name and stead to enter into one capital
Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances commonly called G: situate lying
and being, in etc: and into every part and parcel thereof, and full and
peaceable possession and seisin thereof and therein for me and in my name to
take and after such possession and seisin for me and in my name so had and
taken, then for me and in my name place and stead, to expel remove and put
forth the Tenants and Occupiers of the said Message or Tenement with the
Appurtenances, and every or any part thereof, and the same and every part
thereof to my use, to keep occupy and enjoy, and also giving, and by these
presents granting to my said Attorney full power and lawful authority for me
and in my name to commence begin sue implead and prosecute any action or
actions suit or suits as well real as personal whatsoever, in any Court or
Courts, and before any Judge or Judges whatsoever against the persons Tenants
and Occupiers of the said Message or Tenement and other the premises, and
against all and every other person or persons whatsoever of for and concerning
the wrongful withholding and detaining of the said Message and Tenement and
other the premises, or any part thereof: And the said Suit and Suits for me
and in my name to prosecute and follow, and in my Right and Title of in and to
the premises before the said Judges to proceed to trial, and to do appoint
and limit to be done, all other acts and things concerning the recovery of the
premises or any part thereof, and the said A. B. that he his Executors and
every of them shall and will from time to time and at all times here after avow
and justify all and every lawful action and actions suit and suits whatsoever
to be commenced pursued and taken in his or their name or names for or
concerning the said Message or Tenement and other the premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, in manner and form aforesaid, and that the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators nor Assigns nor any of them, shall at any time or
times hereafter release any Action or Actions suit or suits commenced or to be
commenced as aforesaid, or to be non suit, or to suffer any discontinuance or
Retraxit thereof to be made without the assent and consent of the said A. B.
his Executors or Administrators in any wise ratifying, etc. In Witness, etc:

Hesketh.

To receive money.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that T. B. of H, in the County of
L. Gentleman, has made ordained constituted and deputed, and in his name place
and stead, has put his beloved friend R S of P. in the said County Gentleman,
his true and lawful Attorney irrevocable to ask require demand and receive to
and for his own use and behoof of H. I. of N. in the said County Yeoman, the
sum of 20 l. of current money of England, and for non-payment thereof to
arrest attach sue implead and imprison him the said H. I. his Executors or
Administrators for the said sum or any part thereof, and upon receipt and
payment there of him the said H. I. his Executors or Administrators out of
prison to deliver and release, and to make seal and deliver acquittance or
acquittances or other sufficient discharge and re lease to and for the same and
the said T B does also herby authorize him the said R. S. to make constitute
and depute one Attorney or more under him as in his discretion shall be thought
needful for the better doing effecting and accomplishing of the Premises.

And further he the said T. B. does hereby promise to ratify confirm allow and
establish whatsoever his said Attorney or his deputed Attorneys, shall lawfully
do or cause to be done in and about the Premises, for the obtaining of the
said sum as fully and absolutely as if he himself were personally present.

And lastly he the said T. B. does hereby covenant promise conclude and agree
to and with the said H. I. his Executors or Administrators, that neither he nor
any other in his name with his consent and privacy heretofore has made, nor
that he his Executors or Administrators hereafter shall make any release
acquittance or discharge of the said Debt or of any part thereof, nor that he
the said T. B. his Executors or Administrators, or any person or persons shall
or will make any Retraxit or discontinuance of any Action Suit Plaint Plea
Judgment or Execution in any Court where the cause or matter shall be
depending but shall and will maintain avow and justify all and every Action
Suit Plaint Plea Judgment and Execution, to be commenced had taken or sued
forth by him the said H. I. or his substitute Attorneys for or concerning the
same, In Witness whereof, etc.

TO all to whom these Presents shall come, I E. F. of G. in the County of H.
sends greeting, Whereas R. H. of etc. Gentleman by his certain Letter of
Attorney bearing date, etc. has made ordained constituted, and in his place
put me the said E. F. his true and lawful Attorney irrevocable, to ask levy
recover and receive in the name of the said R. H. to the proper use and behoof
of me the said E. F. from A R of etc. the sum of 20 l. due unto him the said
R. H. by virtue of an Obligation wherein the said A. stands bound to the said
R, as by the said Obligation dated etc. more fully my appear.

And the said R. H. by his said Letter of Attorney, gave and granted to me the
said E. F. his full and whole power for the Execution of the Premises, and for
and in default of payment of the said sum of 20 l. or any part thereof, the
said A. R. his Executors or Administrators in his name to arrest and imprison,
and upon payment thereof him out of prison again to deliver, and Acquittance or
Acquittances, Release or other lawful discharge in the name of the said R. H.
to make seal and deliver, and to substitute under me one Attorney or more for
the better effecting of the Premises, and the same at my Will and pleasure to
call again and revoke, as by the said Letter of Attorney, relation thereto
being had, more at large it does and may appear.

Now know ye that I the said E. F. by force and authority of the said Letter of
Attorney so to me made, have ordained substituted, and in my place put my
welbeloved friend C. D. of E. etc. my true and lawful Deputy and Attorney, as
well to ask levy recover and receive in the name of the said R. H: or in the
name of me the said E. F: to the use and behoof of my said Attorney and his
Assigns, the said sum of 20 l as also for default of payment thereof, or any
part thereof, the said A. R. his Executors Administrators or any of them to
arrest, implead and imprison, and pleas and prosecutions against him or them to
maintain in any Court or Courts whatsoever, and upon receipt thereof in the name
of the said R: H: or me the said E: F: to make seal and deliver:

And further to do or cause to be done, any other lawful act in or about the
Premises, as I the said E: F: by virtue of the said recited Letter of Attorney
may or might have done therein, without any account thereof or in any part
thereof to be rendered to me, my Executors etc. ratifying confirming and
allowing, etc:

For collecting Debts.
KNow all men by these presents, That I A. B. Citizen and Grocer of L. have
made ordained constituted, and by these presents do make ordain and appoint my
trusty and wel-beloved Friends C. D. and E. F. of etc. yeoman, my true and
lawful Attorneys, jointly and severally, to ask require recover and receive,
for me and in my name and to my use, all and singular sums of money, Goods
Chattels Debts Duties and Demands whatsoever they be, of all person and persons
in any wise due to me within this Realm of E. giving and granting to my said
Attorneys and to every of them, my full power and lawful authority for
non-payment of the said sums of money, Debts Demands and Duties, to arrest sue
and implead imprison and condemn, all and every such person and persons as
shall deny or do not upon demand pay or satisfy all such sums of money, Debts
and Duties as are in any wise due unto me, and upon receipt of the said sums
of money, goods and debts, several and respective Acquittances, or other
sufficient discharge for me and in my name, to make seal and deliver, and one
Attorney or more under them, to make and at their pleasure to revoke again: And
further to do all other things needful for recovery thereof, as I my self might
do, ratifying and confirming whatsoever my said Attorneys or either of them
shall lawfully do in my name concerning the premises by these presents: In
witness whereof etc.

To receive Writings and seal a Counter-part of a Deed.
BE it known to all men by these presents, That A. B. of etc. have assigned
made ordained constituted authorized, and in my place by these presents have
assigned made ordained constituted, and in my place put my well-beloved Friend
C. D. of etc. my true certain and lawful Attorney and Deputy in this behalf;
that is to say, for me and in my name and to my use to receive of E. F. of etc.
one Indenture to be made sealed and delivered by the said E. F. and for the
recovery of the sum of 100 l. to the said E. F. by G. H. of etc. Gent. and
also in my name and to my use as aforesaid, to take and receive of the same E.
F. an Obligation wherein the said E. F. shall stand bound to me in the penal
sum of 500 l. for the performance of the Covenants Grants Articles and
Agreements, which on his part are to be performed by force of the said
Indenture: And also for me and in my name, to seal subscribe and deliver as my
act and deed, the Counterpart of the said Indenture to me the said A. B. to be
made as aforesaid, giving, and by these presents granting to my said Attorney
my full power and authority, all and every thing and things, requisite
necessary and lawful in and about the premises, to do and execute for me and
in my name, as well as I my self might or could do if I were personally
present, ratifying and confirming whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do
or cause to be done in or about the premises to my use etc.

To take possession of Lands upon a Liberate.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I A. B. of etc. Gent. have
made ordained constituted, and in my stead and place by these presents do make
ordain constitute, and in my place put my well-beloved Friend C D. and E. F. of
E. in the County of D. Gent. my true and lawful Attorneys, jointly and
severally for me and in my name, and to my only use and behoof, to enter in and
upon all such Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of Sir E. M.
Knight, within the said County of D. as were lately extended at the Suit of me
the said A. B. and to me assigned by R. H. Sheriff of the said County of D. and
full and peaceable possession and seisin thereof, and every part and parcel
thereof, by force and virtue of a Writ of Liberate in that behalf to me granted,
and for me and to my use to hold detain and keep, and to put and place in
possession thereof to my use, such person and persons, as to them or either of
them shall seem meet, giving and granting to my said Attorneys, jointly and
severally my full power and lawful authority for me and in my name, to do all
and every such other act thing or things whatsoever, in and about the
Premises, as to them shall seem necessary and meet, as fully and effectually
as if I my self were present etc.

MORTGAGES.
A Mortgage of one piece of Land to make assurance of another piece of Land by
a day, and a Covenant that if the Land mortgaged be redeemed, and after sold,
the Vendee shall have the preferment to buy it before another.
THis Indenture etc. between E. P. of E: in the County of L. Gent. and H. P.
Son and Heir apparent of the said E. P. on the one party, and R. L. of T. in
the County etc. Gent. on the other party, witnesses, That the said E. and H.
for and in consideration of the sum of 2400 l. of etc. whereof etc. Have
bargained and sold given and granted, and by these presents do bargain etc. to
the said R. and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that the Manor of S.
with the appurtenances in M. in the County of L. or elsewhere within the same
County of L. and all other Messuages Tofts Mills Lands Tenements Meadows
Pastures Feedings Woods Under-woods Rents Reversions Services Courts-Leets view
of Frankpledge Waifes Straies Heriots Relief Escheats Profits of Courts and
Leets, and all other common Advantages and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their
appurtenances to the said Manor belonging or in any wise appertaining, or
which at any time heretofore have been reputed accepted taken, demised occupied
or esteemed, as part parcel or member of the said Manor: And all that Close
or Pasture called etc. And also all other the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
Rents Reversions and Services within the Parish of M. aforesaid, which late
were the Inheritance and Possession of one E. H. Esquire: And all other the
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, which the said E. P. and H. P. or either of
them, now ha^h, or at any time had in S. aforesaid, in the said County of L.
together with all and singular the Evidences etc. as many of which said
Evidences as be in the hands or custody etc. and also true Copies of all other
Evidences touching the above bargained Premises, or any part thereof jointly
with other Lands and Tenements; the said E. and H. for them, their Heirs and
Executors, do covenant to deliver or cause etc. to the said R. his etc. on this
side the Feast of Easter next coming: To have and to hold all the said Manor
of S. with the appurtenances, and the said Close of Pasture called etc. and all
and singular other the Premises, with their appurtenances, to the said R. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use etc.

And the said E. and H. and either of them, for themselves, their Heirs
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them do covenant and grant,
to and with the said R. L. his etc. in manner etc. That is to say, That they
the said E. and H. so far as is not let by such former conveyance, as the said
E. has heretofore made to the said R. now are, or one of them now is lawfully
seized of the said Manor Lands Tenements etc. above by these presents
bargained and sold, of a good perfect absolute and pure Estate in Fee-simple,
without any condition or limitation of use or uses: And of such Estate have, or
one of them has good and lawful right and authority to bargain sell and
assure all and singular the Premises above bargained and sold to the said R.
his Heirs and Assigns, for the only use of the said R. and of his Heirs and
Assigns for ever.

And that the same Premises now are, and for ever hereafter shall stand and
continue to the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, clearly discharged, or otherwise
from time to time, and at all times saved harmless by the said E. and H. their
Heirs Executors and Assigns, of and from all and singular former Bargains etc.
except such Leases for term or terms of years etc. upon which Leases the
accustomed Rents or Services, or more been reserved, and shall be yearly
payable to the said R. etc. during the same Leases: And except also such
Bargains and Encumbrances* as the said E. has heretofore made of the
premises, or of any part thereof, to the said R. and except moreover the Rents
Customs and Services hereafter to grow due to be paid and done to the chief
Lord or Lords of the fee or fees of the premises in respect of their
Seigniories only.

And also the said E. and H. do covenant etc. that the said Manor and other
the above bargained premises, now are, and from henceforth shall or lawfully
may be and continue to the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, of the clear yearly
value of 100 l. of etc. above all tharges and reprises. And that he the said R.
his Heirs and Assigns, shall or lawfully may have hold occupy possess and
enjoy, all and singular the above bargained premises, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents. And lawfully have take perceive and
receive, all the Rents Issues and Profits thereof, from time to time, to their
own use for ever, without any lawful challenge eviction recovery or expulsion,
by any person or persons. And that the said E. H. and K. now wife of the said
E. and all having any Estate of Freehold or Inheritance, of or in the said
Manor and other the Premises above bargained and sold, at the reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said R. his Heirs
Executors or Assigns, shall and will do make knowledge suffer and execute, and
cause etc. all and every such act and acts, thing and things in the Law, for
the further assurance and sure making of all and singular etc. to be had and
made sure to the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, for their own use for ever; as
by the the same R. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the
Laws of this Realm, from time to time, and at all times during 7. years, next
after the date of these presents, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or
advised and required: be it by Fine Feoffment, Deed or Deeds, enrolled
Enrolements of these presents, release with warranty against all men, Recovery
or Recoveries, with Voucher or Vouchers, or otherwise in any other lawful and
reasonable manner whatsoever, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents.

Provided always, and the said R. L. for himself, his Heirs and Assigns,
Condition.
and for every of them, does covenant grant and agree, to and with the said E.
and H. their Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs and Assigns of every of them by
these presents, That if the said E. H. or either of them now be, or if on this
side the 24. day of March, which shall be etc. the said E. and H. or either of
them, shall be and stand lawfully and absolutely seized in their Demesne as of
Fee, of a good perfect lawful and rightful Estate in the Law, by good and
just Title, to the proper and only use and behoof of the said E. and H. their
Heirs or Assigns, or of one of them, their Heirs and Assigns, absolutely
without any condition of Redemption or Mortgage, as well of and in one Close of
Meadow ground called etc. containing by estimation etc. late in the occupation
etc. in the Parish of M. aforesaid, butting etc: And also of and in that Close
etc. And if then the said Close of Meadow, containing etc. and the said Close
etc. and every part and parcel thereof be, and stand and from thenceforth for
ever shall be and stand clearly acquitted and discharged, or else at all times,
from time to time for ever saved harmless by the said E. and H. their Heirs
Executors and Assigns, of and from all and singular other former Bargains etc.
and of and from all and all manner of other former Estates Titles Charges and
Encumbrances whatsoever (the Rents Customs and Services thereafter to be due to
the chief Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof, in respect of their Seigniories,
only except: And then if the same E. and H. and their Heirs and Assigns, or
either of them, his Heirs or Assigns, so being seized of the said Close of
Meadow etc. and of the said Close etc. do at any time on this side the said 24.
day of March etc. at the costs and charges in the Law of the said E. and H. or
of one of them, or of the Heirs or Assigns of one of them, well and
sufficiently, by good lawful sure and perfect assurance in the Law, convey and
assure in possession the said Close etc. and the said Close etc. unto the said
R. his Heirs and Assigns in Fee simple, to and for the proper and only use and
behoof of the said R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: That then immediately from
and after the said conueyance and assurance made by the said E. and H. or
either of them or the Heirs or Assigns of either of them, to the said R his
Heirs and Assigns in form aforesaid, of the said Close etc. so discharged and
saved harmless as is aforesaid; The Bargain and Sale of all and singular the
Premises above made by these present Indentures, and every thing therein
comprised touching the Premises, so above in and by these presents bargained
and sold, and all and every other Conveyances Bonds and Assurances thereupon
made, shall be utterly void and frustrate. And also that then and from
thenceforth, the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them shall stand
and be seized of the said Manor of S: with the appurtenances, and of all and
singular the Premises above by these presents bargained and sold, to the only
and proper use and behoof of the said E. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And whereas heretofore by one pair of Indentures, dated etc. made between the
said R. on the one party, and the said E. on the other party; There are diverse
Covenants Grants and Agreements made between them touching the Premises The
said E. P. and H. P. for their part, and the said R. L. for his part, and every
of the same parties for himself, his Heirs Executors Administrators and
Assigns, do covenant grant and agree, to and with the other of them by these
presents, that the said Covenants Grants and Agreements, contained in the said
former Indentures, on either party to be done or performed toward the other,
except that which concerns the payment of 2500 l. by the said E. his Heirs
Executors or Assigns, to the said R. his etc. to be paid: And except all Uses,
and all Covenants and Agreements there made for any use or uses to be raised in
any Lands or Tenements, by reason of payment of the said 2500 l. shall be and
stand in their full force and strength, truly to be kept and performed, as if
these presents or any other assurance to be made, by virtue thereof had not, or
should not have been had or made, any thing in these presents contained, to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And the said E. P. covenanteth with the said R. his etc. That if hereafter the
Inheritance of the Premises by these presents above bargained, at any time
during the lives of the said E. and R. shall return to the said E. and H. or to
either of them, that then, and at any time whilst the said E. and R. shall be
living, the said E and H. or either of them, shall not bargain sell, or
otherwise put away the said Premises above by these presents bargained, or any
part thereof, or the Manor of E. with the appurtenances, or any part thereof of
any estate of Inheritance, or make, or grant any Rentcharge ou^ of the same,
or any part thereof, above the yearly value of ten pounds, to any person or
persons, unless the said E. and H. do first tender thereof to the said R. and
then will grant and assure the same to the said R. and his Heirs for ever, as
good cheap, and at as low price as they will sell or grant the same, at any
time, to any other person or persons uprightly and simply, without any fraud or
covin, so as the said R. may then have the same for such price as aforesaid, if
he will then so take and accept it: In witness etc.

A very good Mortgage of a Grand Lease, and of the rent of an under Lease
ther-out made, with Covenats to transferr the benefit of a Bond and Covenants,
and a Covenant that the Mortgagor shall deliver the possession of the Premises
Mortgaged, if he fail in payment.
THis Indenture etc. between E: N. of L: Clothworker, on the one party, and R.
B. of L. Merchant on the other party, witnesses, That whereas A: M: of L.
Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir R. M. Knight, late Citizen and Alderman of L.
deceased, by his Indenture of Lease, dated etc. did demise grant and to
farm-let unto the said E: N: all that Message or Tenement called etc. and all
Warehouses Shops etc. situate etc. except etc. To have and to hold etc.
yiedling and paying etc. as by the said former Indenture etc.

And where the said E. N. sithence by his Indenture bearing date etc. Has
demised and letten to farm to J. W. etc. one little Shop parcel of the said
Message etc. To have and to hold the said little Shop to the said J. W. from
the Feast etc. until the end and term of etc. yiedling etc. to the said E. N.
etc. 6 l. etc. as by the said last recited Indenture of Lease mo^e plainly etc.

Now the said E. for and in consideration of the sum of 226 l. 13 s. 4 d. of
etc. whereof etc. and thereof and therefore etc. has given granted etc. to the
said R. all the said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and all and
singular other the Premises, with their appurtenances, demised to the said E:
N: as abovesaid, and the Reversion and Reversions thereof, and all the said
yearly Rent reserved upon the said Lease, made to the said J: W: as above said:
And also the said original Indenture of Lease made to the said E: W: and the
counterpart of the said Lease which the said E. made to the said I. W. and one
Obligation of 300 l. wherein the said A. M. stands bound to the said E. for
the performance of the Covenants of the said Original Lease, on the part of the
said A. his Heirs and Assigns to be performed, and all the Estate etc. To have
and to hold the said Message and other the Premises, with the appurtenances,
by these presents bargained and granted: And all the Estate etc. of the said E.
of in and to the same to the said R. B. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, for by and during all the residue of the said term of thirty years now
to come and unexpired.

And the said E: N. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said E: now is
the true and sole Owner and Proprietor of the said Original Indenture of Lease,
and of all the Premises thereby demised, for all the residue of the said term
of 30 years yet to come, except only such interest as the said I: W: has in
the said little Shop, by virtue of the said Lease to him thereof made as
aforesaid; And that he the said E. now has lawful right and authority, to
give grant bargain and sell the said Premises above bargained, and every part
thereof to the said R: B: and his Assigns, according to the tenor and purport of
these presents, and that the said message or tenement, and al other the above
bargained Premises, with their appurtenances now are, and during all the
residue of the said term of 30. years now to come, shall be stand abide and
continue clear and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by the said E.
his Executors or Administrators, sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all
and singular former bargains etc. had made done knowledged procured or suffered
by the said E: or his Assigns, or by his or their means knowledge consent or
procurement, the yearly Covenants and Agreements expressed in the said Original
Indenture of Lease, hereafter for the part of the said E. and his Assigns, to
be paid and performed. And the said Lease made to the said J: W: whereupon the
yearly Rent of 6 l. aforesaid is reserved, and from henceforth during the same
Lease, shall or may be yearly payable to the said R. and his Assigns, only
except.

And further that by the said Original Indenture, there is a good perfect sure
and lawful Lease of all and singular the said Message and other the Premises
therewith demised as aforesaid (except only therein excepted) which shall have or
lawfully may have endurance and continuance in the said R. and his Assigns, by
and during all the residue of the said term of etc. now to come: And that as
occasion shall be given from time to time, the said R his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, at their own costs and charges, in the name and
names of the said E. his Executors and Administrators, shall and may have and
prosecute, all and singular such Actions Suits Recoveries Advantages and
Executions against the said A: M: his Heirs Executors Administrators, and every
of them, of and upon the Covenants and Agreements contained in the said
Original Indenture, and the Obligations aforesaid, and upon every or any of
them, as by course of the Laws of this Realm may be had: And all Advantages and
Profits thereof, shall and may have detain keep and enjoy to the only use of the
said R. his Executors and Assigns, without any account making thereof, or of any
part thereof, and without any let denial hinderance or impeachment of the said
E. his Executors or Administrators; And that he the said E. N. his Executors
and Administrators upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges
of the said R. B. his Executors or Assigns, shall and will vouch maintain and
justify, all and singular the said Actions Suits Recoveries and Executions,
and shall not willingly do or knowledge, or cause to to be done or knowledged,
any thing in prejudice or hinderance of the said R. B. his Executors or
Administrators, in or touching the said Suits Actions Recoveries and
Executions, or in or touching any of them.

Provided always, that if the said E. N. his etc. do pay etc. to the said etc.
at the now Mansion House etc. the sum etc. in manner and form following; That
is to say, 17 l. 15 s. 4 d. thereof, on the 22. of Aug: etc. and 108 l. 18 s.
residue and in full payment of the said sum of etc. on the 22 of Aug: which
shall be etc. that then and from thenceforth, these present Indentures, and the
Gift Grant Bargain and Sale aforesaid, of all and singular the Premises, shall
be clearly and utterly void and frustrate, as though the same had never been
had or made.

And the said R: B: covenanteth etc: in form etc. viz. That when as the said E.
N: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall have paid or cause to be paid
the said sum of 226 l. 13 s. 4 d. and every part thereof to the said R: his
etc. in form aforesaid, or otherwise before hand, that then and at all times
after, upon reasonable request, the said R. his Executors or Administrators or
shall re-deliver, or cause etc. to the said E. N. his etc. the said O^iginall
Indenture of Lease, and the said Obligarion and the counterpart of the said
Lease made to the said J. whole safe and uncancelled; And then shall agree and
consent that that part of these presents under the Seal of the said E. N:
together with the other part thereof, under the Seal of the said R. shall be
cancelled without any delay, fraud or covin: And also that the said R. B. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and will permit and suffer the said
E. his Executors and Administrators, quietly to have hold and occupy the
premises, and to take have and enjoy the said yearly rent reserved upon the
said Lease made to the said J. W. from henceforth, until the said 22. of Aug:
etc. without any set trouble or eviction of the said R. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, so as the said E. his Executors or Assigns, do in
the mean time, as well satisfy and pay the Rent and keep the Covenants of the
said Original Indenture of Lease, which by virtue thereof shall be due to be
paid and done, as also do in form aforesaid, satisfy and pay to the said R.
his certain Attorney Executors or Administrators, so much of the said sum of
226 l. 13 s. 4 d. as by the true meaning of these presents shall in the mean
time be due and payable.

And the said E. N. covenanteth etc. That if the said E. N: his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, shall make default, and shall not pay the said sum
of etc: and every part thereof to the said R: his Executors etc. in manner and
form aforesaid, that then from time to time and at all times, after such
default made, the said E. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, upon
reasonable request, shall and will undelayedly yield up and deliver all the
said Message etc. except only the said little Shop demised to the said J: as
aforesaid, into the hands and possession of the said R. his Executors and
Assigns, clear and free acquitted of all arrerages of the said yearly Rent
reserved by the said Original Lease, and of all Forfeitures Re-entries Cause
and Causes of Forfeiture and Re-entry, and all other Damages hurts and
Encumbrances, had or made, or in the mean time to be had made done or suffered
in any wise: In witness etc.

A Mortgage of a grand Lease, with the Rent reserved upon an Vnder-lease
thereout made also an Assignment of the Covenants and Bond made by the
Vnder-lessee.
THis Indenture etc. Between I. H. etc. on the one part, and T. W. etc. on the
other part witnesses, That the said I. H. for and in consideration of 60 l.
whereof etc. Has given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and
by these Presents etc. to the said T. all the estate, right, title, reversion,
interest, charge, term and terms of of years and demand whatsoever, which he
the said I: has or ought to have, or may lawfully claim to have, of, in, or to
the Site of the late Monastery of etc. and of and in one Message etc. All
which Premises A: B: by Indenture, dated etc. Demised to the said I: from etc.
for and during the term of of 21. years then next ensuing, and fully to be
complete, and for the yearly Rent of 19 l. of etc. payable, as by the said
Lease etc. And also the said I: H: for the consideration aforesaid, does by
these Presents, give, grant, bargain, etc. unto the said T: W: the said
Indenture of Lease, and all the now Residue of the term of years therein
specified, and also the yearly rent of thirty pounds reserved or agreed to be
paid to the said I: his Executors and Assigns, in, by, or upon one Demise by
him the said I. H. made and granted of diverse parcels of the Premises to A: B:
etc. by Indenture dated etc. And also that part of the same last mentioned
Indenture of Lease made to the said A: which is under the Hand and Seal of the
said A: together with all other Conveyances, Deeds, Mynuments, Escripts, and
Writings, which he the said I: has, or ought to have for or touching or by
reason or means of the Premises, or any of them. To have and to hold all the
said estate, interest, reversion, term and terms of years and all and singular
other the Premises, with their appurtenances to the said T: W: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, immediately from henceforth unto the end and term of
the said 21. years mentioned in the said Indenture of Lease made by the said A:
to the said I: as aforesaid.

And the said I: for him etc. Covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said I:
at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these Presents is true and lawful
Owner of the said Original Indenture of Lease, and that he the said I: now also
is true, full, absolute, and perfect Owner and lawfully possessed, as well the
said yearly rent of 30 l. for the term of 15. years next ensuing from etc. as
also of the Reversion of all and singular the Premises demised to the said A.
B. as aforesaid, with their appurtenances for all the term of 15. years
specified in the said Indenture of Demise made to the said A: B: to the only
use of the said I: and his Assigns, without any manner of Condition whatsoever.
And that the said yearly rent of 30 l. and all other the Premises above
limited or mentioned by these Presents, to be bargained etc. to the said T. now
are and from henceforth shall continue, remain, and be to the said T. W. his
Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the said 15.
years specified in the said Indenture of Lease made to the said A. B: free and
clearly discharged etc. of and from all singular former bargains, etc Releases
and Encumbrances whatsoever had made or done by the said I. or in his default,
or by his means, knowledge, consent, or agreement. And that the said yearly
rent of 30 l. from henceforth until the end of the said 15. years next ensuing
from the first of September. last past before the date hereof, shall or may
lawfully be due and payable to the said T. his Executors and Assigns, according
to the tenor and purport of the said Indenture of Lease made to the said A: B:
as abovesaid, and according to the true meaning of these Presents.

And whereas the said P. S. and G. S. of etc. C: F: and R: F: of etc. by their
Obligation, dated etc. do stand bound to the said I. in the sum of 200 l of
etc. with a Condition thereupon endorsed touching the payment of the said yearly
rent of 19 l. reserved upon the said Original Indenture of Lease to etc. and
for, and touching such other matters, as in the same Condition are expressed.
And where also the said P. S. P. A. I. S. and G. S. by their Obligation, dated
etc. do stand bound to the said I. H. in the sum of 100 l. of etc. with a
Condition there underwritten touching the performance of the Covenants,
Clauses and Agreements which are to be performed, on the behalf of the said P.
his Executors or Assigns specified and comprised in the said Indenture of
Demise made to the said P. as abovesaid, the said I. H. for him, his Execut.
and Admi. does by these Presents give transport and set over unto the said T.
his Executors and Assigns, the said several obligations, and the said several
sums of money in them severally specified; and all actions, rights and demands
to and in the same, and every of them, to have, take, recover, and enjoy the
same, to the use of the said T: W. his Executors and Assigns, without yielding
any account of or for the same, or any part thereof in as large and ample manner
and form, as the said I. ought, or he his Executors or Administrators, may
recover or obtain, or might have recovered or obtained the same if this present
Indenture been had never had nor made to, in for and about the recovering
obtaining, getting and discharging of which said several sums of money
contained or specified in the said several Obligations, and the prosecuting and
suing out of all Actions, Suits, Judgments and Executions in that behalf, and
the doing and executing of all things to or for those effects. The said I. H.
for him etc. by these Presents does clearly, fully, and absolutely, give, grant,
and transferr unto the said T. W. his Executors and Administrators, full and
irrecoverable power and authority in as ample, and in such manner as shall be
requisite in the Law.

And further the said I. for him etc. Covenanteth etc. That he the said I.
heretofore has not acquitted, discharged, or made void. And that he the said I.
his Executors or Administrators, or any of them shall not acquit etc. the said
Obligations or sums of money, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them,
or of any of them, or of the Covenants, Grants Articles or Argeements mentioned
in the said Indenture of Lease made to the said P. S. as aforesaid, or any of
them without the special consent and request in Writing of the said T. his
Executors or Administrators first therefore had and made. And that the said I.
his Executors or Administrators at any time without like request and consent as
aforesaid shall not receive, take, or otherwise discharge or acquit the said
several sums of money contained the said several Obligations, or any part or
parcel of them, or of either of them; and also that the said T. his Executors
and Administrators without let or interruption of the said I. his Executors ar
Administrators, or any of them, or of any other by the means of any of them,
shall and may recover and obtain the said several sums of money specified in
the said several Obligations, and every part etc. and take, retain and enjoy
the same, and every part of them, from and after the recovery and obtaining
thereof, to the use of the said T. etc. without any account of or for the same,
or any part thereof to be yielded or demanded, to or by the said I. his
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, and that the said T. his Executors
and Assigns, shall and may in the name and names of the said I. his Executors
and Administrators, or of any of them, release, acquit and discharge the said
several Obligations, and all Articles and Covenants to the said J. made
touching or concerning the premises or any of them, And also that he the said
J: his Executors and Administrators, from time to time and at all times
hereafter, at the request and Charges of the said T: his Executors or Assigns,
shall and will ratify avow justify maintain and allow all and singular such
lawful Actions Suits Judgments Executions acts and attempts, as in his or
their Name or Names, shall be commenced had taken or attempted for or about the
Recovery or obtaining of all and singular the said sums of money or of them or
any part or parcel of them, or any of them.

Provided always, and it is agreed, etc, That it shall be lawful for the said
J. etc. without any let of the said T: etc. To take and receive of the said P.
S. his etc. to the use of the said J. his etc. on the first of September, next
etc. or at any time before or after all that Rent of 30 l. of etc. which for
the premises demised to the said P. as aforesaid shall be due for one whole
year on the same first day of September next coming.

And that provided etc: That if the Vendor pay the Vendee 60 l. of etc. the
19th. of January next etc. That then this Indenture of bargain and sale shall
be void, and the said T. shall re-deliver the writings safe, etc. In Witness
etc.

A Mortgage of a Reversion of Land in London, passed by way of Recovery, the
same Reversion being in the Mortgagor, and the heirs of his body, and the
recovery being brought also against the Tenant for life, (a woman and her
husband.)
THis Indenture tripartite, etc. Between A. C. Citizen and Salter of L: and K.
his wife, late wife of R C: late Citizen and Draper of L: deceased on the first
part, and I: C: eldest son of the said R. C: on the second part; and I: D: and
W: G. of L: yeomen on the third part, witnesses, That where the said A. and K:
as in the right of the same K. do now hold and are lawfully entitled to hold
and enjoy for and during the term of the natural life of the said K: one
Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, late parcel of the possessions of
the said R: C: which Message with the appurtenances now is in the several
Tenures of etc. and is situate and lying in etc. The Reversion of which said
Message with the appurtenances after the decease of the said K: does lawfully
belong and appertain to the said I. C: and his Heirs or the Heirs of his body,
and whereas the said I: C: before this time has had and received of the said
A: C: the sum of etc. of lawful etc. for and in consideration of an estate
and assurance according to the tenor and purport of these Presents to be had
and made of the said Message or Tenement with the appurtenances unto the said
A. and his heirs, from and after the decease of the said K for ever.

Now for the Executing and making of the said Estate and Assurance accordingly,
It is covenanted and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
for themselves and their Heirs in manner and form following, that is to say,
That the said A. and K. his Wife, and the said J. C. shall before the Feast of
Easter now next coming, permit and suffer the said A. B. and C. D. in a Writ of
Right Patent, according to the custom of the City of L. in due form with
voucher or vouchers to recover against the said A. and K. and I. C. the said
Message and Tenement, and all other the premises with their appurtenances, in
such manner and form as by the learned Council of the said A. shall be
lawfully and reasonably devised or advised. And the said parties for them and
their Heirs, have further agreed by these presents, that the said Recovery
shall be, and that the said A. B. and C, D. and their Heirs, from and after the
said Recovery so had and passed of the said Message and Tenement aforesaid
with the appurtenances, shall thereof and of every part thereof stand and be
seized to and for the only Uses and intents hereafter in these Presents
expressed, and to none other use intent or purpose whatsoever; that is to say,
To and for the use of the said K, for and during the term of her natural life,
and after her decease to the only use and behoof of the said J. C. his heirs
and Assigns for ever, upon and under the condition following, that is to say,
That the said I. C. his Heirs Executors or Assigns shall well and truly pay, or
cause etc. to the said A. C. his Executors or Administrators the sum of etc:
of lawful etc. at etc. on etc.

Provided always, that if the same I. C: his Heirs Executors and Assigns or
some of them do not well and truly pay or cause etc. to the said A. his etc.
at etc: the said sum of etc. on, etc. That then and from thenceforth the said
A: B: and C. D. and the Survivor of them and their Heirs, shall stand and be
seized of the said Message etc: to and for the use and behoof of the said K.
only for and during the term of her natural life as aforesaid, and from and
after her decease to and for the only use and behoof of the said A. C: and of
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any manner of condition, and to none
other use intent or purpose whatsoever.

And the said I: C: for him etc. covenanteth with the said A: etc: in form etc.
that he the said I. C: now is, and at the time of the knowledging of the said
Recovery, and until the same shall be clearly passed and finished, and the
seisin thereupon shall be executed, shall stand and be seized of the said
Message, etc. of an Estate in Reversion immediately after the death of the said
K. to the only use and behoof of the same I. C. and his heirs or the heirs of
his body, without any condition and other limitation of use whatsoever, and
that he the said I. C: has good Right and lawful Authority and Power in and
by the Law, to convey and assure the said Message etc. to the said A. C. his
Heirs and Assigns in form aforesaid, and that if the said I. C. his Heirs
Executors or Assigns, do not pay to the said A. his Executors or assigns the
said sum of etc, in form aforesaid, that then the said A his Heirs and Assigns,
shall or may lawfully without any condition, have hold occupy and enjoy the
said Message etc, for ever, and take perceive receive and enjoy all the issues
Rents and profits of the same for ever according to the true meaning of these
presents And that then and from thence forth the said Message, etc. shall be
and stand to the said A his Heirs and Assigns clear and free discharged and
acquitted or otherwise from time to time and at all times sufficiently saved
harmless by the said I. etc. of and from all and singular former bargains etc.
at any time heretofore had knowledged suffered made done or procured or
hereafter before the seisin executed upon the said Recovery to be made done
knowledged procured or suffered by the said J. C. or by any other person or
persons by or under his estate, or by his means Consent or Procurement (the
Chief Rents and Services, etc. except.)

And further the said J: C. covenanteth with the said A. C. etc. that he the
said J. C. and his Heirs, at the request and charges in the Law only of the
said A. his Heirs or Assigns, from time to time and at all times during two
years next after default shall be made in payment of the said sum or any part
thereof contrary to the form above limited, shall and will not only do suffer
knowledge and execute, and cause etc. all and every such further act and acts
assurance and assurances thing and things for the further assurance and better
conveying of the premises to the said A: his Heirs and Assigns, according to
the true meaning of these presents, as by the said A. etc. shall be devised,
but also upon like request as aforesaid, at any time after the said Recovery
passed, shall and will by his or their sufficient Deed release to the said
Recoverers and their Heirs or to the Survivor of them and his Heirs all Errors
Defaults and Mis-pleadings whatsoever, to happen in the process of Recovery
aforesaid, or in the Execution of the seisin upon the same, In witness, etc.

A very good Mortgage of Land with a Revocation of Uses thereof declared in a
former Indenture, where also it is provided, that if the money be paid
accordingly, then the Land to be to the uses contained in the said former
Indenture.
THis Indenture, etc. Between the right Honorable W. Earl of E. etc: on the
one party, and W. D. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. on the other party,
witnesses, that the said Earl for and in consideration of the sum of 642 l.
of etc. whereof etc. Has given etc. and by these presents does fully and
clearly give grant bargain and sell unto the said W. D. his Heirs and Assigns
all that the Manor of S. in the Parish of L. in the County of E with all and
singular the appurtenances, and all that the Manor of L. with the
appurtenances in the parish of T. in the same County of E. and all and singular
Messuages Lands Tenements Meadows Pastures Feedings Rents Reversions Services
Woods Underwoods and all other Profits Commodities and Hereditaments
whatsoever to the said Manors or either of them belonging or appertaining, or
as part parcel or member of the same Manors or either of them had used
occupied or enjoyed, or so being usually granted demised or letten to farm, and
all and singular Manors Messuages Lands Tenements Rents Reversions and
Hereditaments whatsoever in the said Parishes of L. and T. or either of them
commonly called or known by the name or names of S. and L. or by all or any of
the same names, and all and singular Courts Courts Leetes, Viewes of Francke
pledge, Profits, and Perquisites of Courts, Privileges Franchises
Jurisdictions Liberties and Royalties whatsoever, which the said Earl has or
ought to have in the said Manors or any other the premises before bargained
and sold or any part thereof, and all Rents reserved upon any Lease or Leases
made of the premises or any part or parcel thereof, and also all the Estate
Right Title Interest Reversion Remainder Use possession Propriety Claim and
Demand of the said Earl of in and to all and singular the Premises, together
with all and singular Deeds Evidences Charters Letters Patents Writings Copies
of Court Rolls Terrors Esctipts, and Mynuments only touching the Premises or
any part thereof: To have and to hold the said Manors of S. and L. with all
and singular their Appurtenances, and all other the Premises bargained and
sold by these Presents to the said W D his Heirs and Assigns to the only use
etc.

Provided always and nevertheless the said W: D: for him his Heirs, Executors
etc. does covenant grant and agree to and with the said Earl his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, that if he the said Earl his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns or any of them do pay or cause etc. to the said W.
his Executors or Administrators, or to his or their lawful Deputy or Attorney
at etc. the sum of 642 l. of etc. on the first of December next coming after
the Date hereof, between the hours of etc. That then and from thenceforth the
gift grant bargain and sale made of all and singular the premises by these
presents to the said W D and all Covenants and Articles comprised in these
Presents on the part of the said Earl and his Heirs to be performed, and all
Bonds made or to be made for performance of the Covenants thereof, shall be
utterly void and of none effect. And that and from thenceforth (a Re-entry in
the Earl etc.) any thing etc. to the contrary etc.

And the said Earl for the making of a good assurance of all and singular the
Premises to the said W: D: and his heirs for ever under the Condition
aforesaid by this Writing sealed with the seal, and signed with the hand of the
said Earl, in the presence of those three Witnesses whose names are to these
presents subscribed, does repeal revoke determine and declare to be repealed
revoked and determined all and every the uses intents gifts and grants
whatsoever, which the said Earl by his This Indenture is contained in this
book entitled (for the conveyance of Land for performance of a will etc.)
Indenture Tripartite bearing date, etc. has made declared or agreed unto
only concerning the premises bargained by these Presents to or with the right
honorable A. Lord G. and his Co-feoffees.

And the said Earl Covenanteth etc. in form, etc. That he the said Earl at
the sealing delivery and knowledging of this Indenture is by good sure and
lawful Right and Title in the Law, sole seized in his Demesne as of fee
simple, of and in all and singular the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments by these presents bargained and sold to the only use of the
said Earl and his heirs absolutely without any condition, and of such estate,
has full power and lawful right and authority in the Law to give grant
bargain sell and assure the same Manors with their appurtenances, and all
other the above bargained Premises, to the said W. his Heirs and Assigns in
manner and form aforesaid, and that if the said Earl his heirs executors or
administrators do not pay or cause, etc. the said sum of, etc. to the said W.
D. etc. in such manner and form as to the payment thereof is above limited in
and by these presents, that then and from thenceforth the said A Lord G. and
his Co-Feoffees, and all and every other person and persons by reason of any
former estate seized or to be seized of the said Manors and other the premises
or any part thereof, shall thereof and of every part thereof stand and be
seized to the only use of the said W. and of his heirs, and to none other use
whatsoever, and also that then and at all times during the said space of 3.
years next following the time of such default made in the said payment of the
said sum of etc. or any part thereof, he the said Earl and the right honorable
Countess now his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said Earl, and all and
every other person and persons which then shall have or lawfully may claim to
have any former interest right title or estate in or to the premises or any
part thereof by or under the estate or interest of the said Earl or any of his
Ancestors (all and singular person and persons claiming only by Lease or Leases
for the term of years or under now to come, or by copy of Court Roll made
according to the several customs of the said Manors or any of them,
whereupon the ancient and old yearly Rents duties and services or more been
reserved from henceforth to be paid and done to the owner or owners of the
reversion of the premises only except) shall and will upon reasonable request
therefore made, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said W: his
heirs or Assigns, do make knowledge and suffer and cause to be done, etc. all
and every such further act and acts thing and things, assurance and assurances
whatsoever, for the better conveyance assurance and sure making of all and
singular the Premises bargained and sold by these presents, to be had and made
sure to the said W his Heirs and Assigns to the only use of the said W. his
heirs and assigns for ever, without any condition with warranty against all
men, or otherwise without warranty, as by the Council learned in the Laws of
this Realm of the said W his heirs or assigns shall be reasonably devised or
advised, and that at all times after any such default of payment of the said
sum etc. or any part thereof had or made as aforsaid, the Premises by these
presents bargained and sold, shall be or lawfully may be and abide to the said
W: his heirs and assigns from thenceforth for ever of the clear yearly value of
etc. over and above all charges and reprises. And also that the said Manors
etc. now are, and at all times after such default happening in payment of the
said sum of etc. or of any part thereof as abovesaid, shall continue to the
said W. his heirs and assigns clearly acquitted and discharged, or by the said
Earl his Heirs Executors or Administrators or by some of them sufficiently
saved harmless from time to time of and from all and singular former bargains,
etc. and of and from all other former titles estates charges and encumbrance
whatsoever (the chief Rents and services from thenceforth to become due, etc.
in the respect of their Seigniories only) and such Leases and Copies as have
been above excepted, only except and foreprised.

And further also that after such default of payment made as aforesaid, of the
said sum of etc. or any part thereof, he the said Earl his Heirs Executors
or Assigns shall and will within the space of six Months then next following,
at the said mansion house of the said W. well and safely deliver or cause, etc.
to the said W. his heirs or assigns all and singular the Deeds etc. above by
these presents bargained and sold, or all such and so many of them as the said
Earl now has, or which he or his Executors or Administrators then shall have
or may lawfully come by without suit in the Law.

And the said VV. D, covenanteth etc. that he the said VV. D. his heirs and
assigns shall permit and suffer the said Earl his heirs and assigns to have
and take to the only use of the said Earl his heirs and assigns all and
singular Commodities Rents and profits of all and singular the Premises from
the day of the date of these Presents until the said first day of December
next coming as abovesaid, so as no stroy or wilful wast be done or committed
in or upon the premises or any part thereof. Provided alwais and nevertheless
it is agreed condescended and covenanted between the said Earl and W. for them
their heirs and assigns by these presents, That if he the said Earl his heirs
etc. do pay etc. the said sum etc. to the said W: etc. according to the form
and manner therefore above limited in these presents that then and from
thenceforth for ever the said A. Lord G. and his said Co-Feoffees and the said
W. D: and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons by reason of
any former Estate seized of the said Manners and other the premises or any
part thereof by or from the said W. D. shall thereof, and of every part thereof
stand and be seized from thenceforth for ever to the only uses intents and
purposes expressed and declared in the said former Indenture tripartite, above
in these presents recited, and to none other use or uses intent or purpose
whatsoever, any thing, etc. in Witness.

PARTITION.
An Indenture Tripartite for division of Land holden by Lease into four parts
by lotts with very good Covenants.
THis Indenture tripartite etc. Between W. G. Citizen and Vintner of L. on the
first party, and H: P: etc. on the second party, and J: S: Citizen and Salter
of L: on the third party, Recitantur hic dimiss. et relex. ut in prox. preced.
preceden. recitantur mutatis mutandis, tumque dicatur. And where also the said
W. W. the Son has aliened assigned bargained sold and set over, all and
singular the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and all
other the Premises demised by the said Original Indenture of Lease together
with all his Estate Right Reversion term of years and Interest of in and to the
same, to the said W. G: H: P: and J: S: That is to say, to every of them one
third part of all and singular the said Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, and of all other the Premises, with their appurtenances, as by
his several Deeds of the same severally made to the said W: G: H: P: and J: S:
bearing date etc. now last past, will also appear.

Now the said W: G: H: P: and J: S: do covenant grant and agree Covenant
between these parties every one to choose a several person for the division
together, and every of them severally for himself, his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, does covenant grant and agree, to and with every
other of them severally, their several Executors Administrators and Assigns by
these presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, that they the
said W: G: H: P: and I: S: their several Executors Administrators or Assigns,
for every of their several parts, within the space of one month next after
they or any of them shall be in possession of the Premises, or any part thereof
to them assured and conveyed, by virtue of the Interest or Title growing by the
Original Indenture above recited, shall name and choose a several person for
the dividing of the Premises into three equal parts, and the same several
persons so being chosen and named, every of the said parties for their several
part, shall procure to come, repair to and be at the Mannor-House The parties
procure those persons to meet at a certain time and place, and to go in hand
with the Division etc.
of the said Manor of H: on the fifth day next after the end of the said
month, or sooner, as they in the mean time shall fortune to agree thereof
together: And that then with all reasonable expedition, and without further
putting of every of the said parties, shall procure the person for their party
brought to the said Manor House, to go in hand with the other persons to be
brought thither by other parties, to survey and indifferently to part and
divide all the Premises as near as they can into three equal parts. And that
every of the said parties, his For a Writing indented.
Executors and Assigns, for their several part shall procure that the person
on their part to be chosen for the division aforesaid, within forty days next
after such their survey shall be first begun, shall assent and agree to the
making, and to seal and sign with his hand three several Writings indented,
containing in them those three parts, wherinto the Premises shall be divided
as aforesaid; That is to say, Every of the same Writings shall severally
contain name and express by it self one such several third part of the
Premises, as thereof shall be made in the said division. And the same
Indentures, after they shall be so made and sealed, shall be put together under
a Cap or Cloak, from thence to be The Lots shall be put under a Cap or Cloak,
and drawn out by the parties interested. Every party shall hold for his third
part that which shall be contained in his Lot. Words endorsed on the Lots before
the opening.
drawn out by every of the said parties severally one part thereof. And that
every of the said parties for their several part, shall accept receive and
hold for his full part of all the Premises only that part thereof, which shall
be contained and expressed in that Indenture, which shall be by him drawn as
aforesaid: And before the opening of the same Indenture so by him to be drawn,
then immediately upon the drawing thereof, shall in the presence of the said
Dividors suffer words of effect as follows, to be endorsed on the said
Indenture, That is to say, words expressing the name and surname of him that
drew the same Indenture, and how that his part and purpart of all the Premises
to him fallen upon the division thereof, is contained and limited in and by the
same Indenture, and also shall suffer to be endorsed the names of such persons
as then shall be present at the same, for testifying and witnessing of the same.

And further that after such division made, every of the said parties Every
party shall be charged with a third part of the rent and Covenants in the Lease
contained.
for their several parts shall be charged as well to contribute and bear one
equal third part of the said yearly Rent of 50 l. 13 s. 4 d. reserved yearly to
be paid by the said Original Indent. of Lease, as also to keep and fulfill the
Covenants and Agreements contained in the said Original Indenture of Lease
thereafter, for the parts of the said W. W. the Father, and W: W. the Son, and
their Assigns, to be kept for so much severally of the Premises, as shall come
to the part of such party, by reason of the said division to be made as
aforesaid.

And moreover it is agreed and covenanted by and between the said W: G: etc.
and every of them severally for himself, his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant promise grant and agree, to Each party shall release and
confi^m the Estate of the purparty of the other.
and with every other of them, their Executors Administrators and Assigns by
these presents, in manner etc. That is to say, That every of the said W. H: and
J. their Executors Administrators and Assigns, for their several part, after
such division made of the Premises as aforesaid, and upon reasonable request
of any other of the said parties, or of the Executors Administrators or Assigns
of any of them, shall and will release and confirm the Estate Right and
Interest to them making such request of all that part and purpart of the
Premises to their part fallen by such division as aforesaid, as by the party
making such request, or by the learned Council in the Law, of him, his
Executors or Assigns, at any time during one whole year next after the said
division made, shall be resonably devised or advised.

Provided always, that the party making such request as aforesaid, shall bear
and pay the charges of the said confirmation, and release to be made as
aforesaid. And provided also that the same confirmation or release do not
extend to bind the party which shall make the same to any further warranty then
only against himself, his Executors or Assigns.

And further the said W: G: etc. for themselves and for their several
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them do covenant grant and
agree together by these presents, in manner etc. That is to say, That every of
the said W: H: and J: their several Executors and Assigns, for their several
parts, shall and will from time to time, during all the said term of 20. years,
mentioned in the said Original Indenture of Lease, be ready to yield and pay
one equal third part of the said yearly Rent of etc. at the place and last time
limited to the payment thereof, or any part thereof, in and by the said Original
Indenture of Lease, so often as the said yearly Rent or any part thereof, shall
happen so long to be behind, and shall not be paid in the mean time before hand.

And further the said parties have agreed, and by these presents, do covenant
grant and agree, together for themselves etc. severally in manner and form
following; That etc: That the said Original Indenture of Lease, and the said
release or Deed of Conveyance thereupon made by the said W. W. the Father, to
the said W. W. the Son, shall from thenceforth during all the said term of 20.
years, lie and remain in the custody and keeping of etc. indifferently for the
common use and behoof of all the said parties to these presents, and of their
Executors and Assigns from time to time, to be read seen pleaded and showed
forth, in the custody of the said etc: as any of them, shall have any such need
or occasion.

Provided always that the said parties do severally agree by these presents,
that none of the said parties, their Executors or Assigns, or any of them,
shall demand or seek to have the said Indenture of Lease or Deed of Conveyance,
or release aforesaid, out of the hands or custody of the said etc. at any time,
without the consent or good will of the said other parties to these presents,
their Executors or Administrators, by any way or means whatsoever: In Witness
etc.

A Partition between two Brothers, to whom Lands are jointly given by their
Fathers Will.
THis Indenture made etc. between I. B. of L. of one part, and W: B. of L: on
the other part, Whereas J: B: late of L: deceased, Father of them the said J:
and W: parties to these presents, being in his lifetime seized in his Demeine
as of Fee, of and in the several Messuages Lands Tenements Meadows Woods and
Hereditaments herein after particularly mentioned and expressed; That is to
say, Of and in etc. and being so seized of the said Premises, with their and
every of their appur^enances, the said J. B. the Father, did by his last Will
and Testament, bearing date etc. give and bequeath all and singular the said
Houses Lands Tenements Premises and Hereditaments before mentioned, with the
appurtenances to his said Sons J. B. R. B. W. B. and T. B. and to their Heirs
for ever, by the name of all his Lands and Tenements which he purchased of R.
S. lying and being etc. as by the said last Will and Testament of the said J.
B. may appear.

And whereas the said R. B. and T. B. before any partition of the premises, or
any part thereof, and before any Assignment or other Assurance made by them or
either of them, of their said parts or portions, are both dead without Issue,
so as their parts and portions of and in all the said Premises is now lawfully
vested and settled by way of Survivorship in the said J. B. and W: B: parties
to these presents, and they being now fully minded and agreed, that the said
Premises shall be equally divided, and that a just partition thereof by consent
may be made between them, so as each of them the said J: and W: may have in
certainty his own part and portion, and dispose thereof, as to them or either of
them shall seem most convenient: And they the said J. and W. B. with an
unanimous assent and consent, by the view advise assistance approbation and
direction of R. H. J. R. G. M. and H. M. being of the Neighborhood of etc.
and by the joint consent of them the said I. and W: B: thereunto chosen and
requested, have made full and perfect division separation and partition of the
said Messuages Lands and Premises, with their appurtenances, in manner and
form following; That is to say, That he the said J. B. the elder Brother, shall
have hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever in severalty, as his Moiety
Part and Portion belonging to him of the said Premises, all that the said
Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, called etc. And also etc. pounds
of lawful money of England, to be paid unto the said J. B. by the said W. B.
in regard that the said Message or Tenement called etc. and the Lands and
Premises hereafter mentioned to be allotted and appointed to the said W. are
so much more in value then the Premises allotted parted and divided to be the
portion and share of the said I: B: as aforesaid. And that be the said W: B:
the younger Brother, shall have hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever in
severalty, as his Moiety part and portion of all the said Premises, all that
Message, with the appurtenances called etc. And this Indenture witnesses,
That they the said two Brothers J. B: and W: B: are fully satisfied contented
and agreed with the said partition and division so made as aforesaid, and do
hereby for themselves severally, and their several Heirs, assent consent and
agree unto the same accordingly: And for a sure confirmation and ratification
of the said partition and division so made as aforesaid, and for avoiding all
ambiguities doubts variances and contentions which might hereafter chance to
arise, touching and concerning the same, it is hereby covenanted granted
promised and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, for
them, their Heirs Executors and Administrators, in manner and form following;
That is to say, That the said partition and division of the Premises so made
as aforesaid, shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged deemed and taken to be
as good effectual and available in the Law, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, as any division or partition might or could have been made in any
manner of ways whatsoever and how soever. And the said J: B: party to these
presents, for him, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them does covenant and grant, to and with the said W. B: his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
that he the said W: B: his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may
from time to time, and for ever hereafter, have hold and enjoy from him the
said J: B: and his Heirs, divided in severalty and not in jointure, for his
full Moiety part purpart and portion, of all and singular the said Messuages
Lands and Premises so to them the said J: and W: B: given demised and
bequeathed by the said Father J: B. deceased as aforesaid, and in full
recompense and satisfaction thereof and of every part thereof, all and singular
the said Message or Tenement, Lands Tenements and Premises, with the
appurtenances, above in and by these presents recited allotted appointed or set
forth, or meant mentioned expressed to be allotted appointed and set forth for
the Moiety part purpart and portion of the said W: B:

And further also that he the said I: B: party to these presents, and his
Heirs, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the
space of seven years now next ensuing, at the reasonable request, and at the
proper costs and charges in the Law of the said W. B: his Heirs or Assigns, or
any of them do make knowledge perfect execute and suffer, or cause to be made
done knowledged executed and suffered unto the said W. B: his Heirs and
Assigns, or any of them, all and every such further and other act and acts,
thing and things, demise and demises, assurance and assurances in the Law
whatsoever, as by the said W. B: his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised advised or required,
for the further and more perfect assuring and settling of so much of the said
Premises in the said W. B: and his Heirs, as by the said division and
partition above ment^^ned is allotted and appointed to the said W: B: and his
Heirs, be it by Fine Feoffment Recovery, with single or double Voucher or
Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, release confirmation with
warranty against him the said J: W: and his Heirs, or without warranty, or by
all or any of these ways or means, or by any other ways or means whatsoever,
so as the said I: B: and his Heirs for the doing thereof, be not compelled to
travel further then to the Cities of L. and W.

And further also, that he the said I. B. his Heirs Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter upon
reasonable request and requests in that behalf made, not only permit and suffer
the said W. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other person and
persons, by him, them, or any of them, thereunto Deputed and Assigned, to Write
and Copy out true Copies of all such Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Escripts,
Minuments, and Writings whatsoever touching or concerning the Premises with
the appurtenances herein before mentioned, or any part or parcel thereof, but
also shall and will when, and as often as need shall require show forth in any
of his Majesty's Courts of Records or elsewhere, all such Deeds, Evidences,
Transcripts, and Exemplifications of Fines and Recoveries, Charters, Writings,
Escripts and and Minuments whatsoever touching or concerning the Premises, or
any part thereof which shall be in his, their or any of their hands custodies or
possessions, or as many of them as shall be needful to be showed forth for the
manifestation or defense of the estate, title, interest and possession of the
said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, of, in or to the Premises
with the appurtenances herein before meant, mentioned or intended to be
allotted, set forth and appointed to the said W. and his Heirs as aforesaid.

And further also, That he the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will
from time to time, and at all times hereafter satisfy and pay to the Lord or
Lords of the Manor of etc. (of whom all the said Premises are holden) for the
quit-rent of the Moiety of the said Premises the sum of etc. being the Moiety
of etc. yearly due to the Lords of of the said Manor for the quit-rent of all
the Premises herein before mentioned, and the said W. B. for him his Heirs
Executors and Admin. and for every of them does Covenant and Grant to and with
the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them in manner
and form following, that is to say, That he the said I. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, and every of them, shall and may from time to time, and at all times
for ever hereafter have, hold, and enjoy from him the said W. B. and his Heirs
divided in Severalty and not in Jointure for his full Moiety, part, purpart and
portion of all and singular the said Mesuages, Lands and Premises, so to them
the said I. and W. B. given, devised and bequeathed by their said Father I. B.
deceased as aforesaid, and in full recompense and satisfaction thereof, and of
every part thereof, all and singular the said Message, Lands, Tenements and
Premises, with the appurtenances above, in and by these presents, recited,
allotted appointed or set out or meant, mentioned or expressed to be allotted,
appointed and set out for the Moiety part, purpart and portion of the said I. B.

And further also that he the said W. B. and his Heirs shall and will from time
to time and at all times hereafter during the space of etc. at the reasonable
request, and at the proper costs and charges in the Law of the said I. B. his
Heirs or Assigns. or any of them do make, knowledge, perfect, execute and
suffer, or cause to be made, done, knowledged, executed and suffered all and
every such further and other act and acts, thing and things, devise and
devises, assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever as by the said I. B.
his heirs or assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law shall be
reasonably devised advised or required for the further and more perfect
assuring and settling of so much of the Premises first above mentioned in the
said I. B. and his Heirs, as by the said division and partition aforesaid is
allotted and appointed to the said I. B. and his Heirs, be it by Fine,
Feoffment Recovery, with single or double Voucher, Deed or Deeds, Enrolled or
not Enrolled, release, confirmation with warranty, or by all, or any of the
said ways or means, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, so as the said
W. B. and his Heirs for the doing thereof be not compelled to travel further
then to the Cities of L. and W.

And further also that he the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, shall from time
to time, satisfy and pay to the etc. And lastly, it is hereby agreed and
declared by and between the said parties to these Presents, that all and every
Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries and other assurance whatsoever at any
time hereafter to be had. levied, suffered and executed of the said Premises,
by and between the said parties to these Presents shall be and enure, and shall
be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be, and to enure to the uses,
intents and purposes before mentioned, that is to say, of, for and concerning
all that moiety part, purpart and portion of the said Premises with the
appurtenances above mentioned, to be allotted, appointed and set out; to and
for the moiety, part, purpart and partition of the said I. B. to the only use
and behoof of of him the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and of, for and
concerning all that other moiety, part, purpart and portion of the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, with the appurtenances herein before
meant or mentioned to be allotted, appointed and set out to and for the moiety
part, purpart and portion of the said W. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and
to and for no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness, etc:

An Indenture of Partition betwixt Coheirs.
THis Indenture sexti-partite, made etc. between F: P: Cousin An. 1. Eliz.
and one of the Coheirs unto Dame D: B: That is to say. Son and Heir of E: P:
deceased, and whilst she lived wife unto R: P: Esquire, and Daughter and one of
the Coheirs unto the said Dame D. of the first part, M: VV: of H. in the
County of N: Widow, one other of the Daughters and Coheirs unto the said Dame
D. B. of the second part, VV: C: and M. his wife, Cousin and one other of the
Coheirs unto the said Dame D. B: that is to say, Daughter and sole Heir to M.
C: deceased, one other of the daughters and Coheirs of the same Dame D: B: of
the third part, A. L: one other of the Daughters and Coheirs of the same Dame
D. of the fourth part, F. B. Gent. Cousin and one other of the Coheirs unto the
same Dame D: B. that is to say, Son and Heir of A, M. deceased, sometime wife
to H. B. Esquire, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Dame D: of the
fith part, and H. S. Esquire, and G. S Son and Heir apparent, and Cousin, and
one other of the Coheirs unto the said Dame D. that is to say, Son unto I. S.
deceased, late wife unto the said H. S. and one other of the Daughters and
Coheirs whilst she lived, unto the said Dame D. B. on the sixth part,
witnesses, That whereas the said Dame D. B. was seized in her Demesne as of
Fee-tail, that is to say, to her and to the Heirs of her body lawfully
begotten, with the Remainder thereof to her and to her Heirs, of and in the
Manor of B. D. and VV. with their appurtenances, in the County of L. and of
the Manor of B. with the appurtenances in the County of H: and of the Manor
of C. with the appurtenances, in the County of N. and of diverse Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, as well in the said County of L. H.
and N. as also in the County of Y. the whole contents and particulars whereof,
more plainly appears in these presents, by a division thereof made in six
parts, and the said Dame D. so being seized of the said Manors Lands
Tenements, and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances, dyed thereof seized,
after whose death the said Manors and other the Premises, with all and
singular their appurtenances, descended to the said F: P. as Son and Heir unto
the said E. one of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Dame D. and to the
said M. VV. as one other of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Dame D. B.
and to the said M. C. now wise unto the said W. C. as Daughter and sole Heir
unto the said M. G. deceased, late wife of the said R. C. Esquire; one other of the
Daughters and Coheirs of the said Dame D. and to the said A. L. as one other
of the Daughters and Coheirs, unto the said D. B, and to the said F. B. as Son
and Heir unto the said A. M. deceased, sometime wife of the said H. B.
deceased, one other of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Dame D. B. and to
the said I. S. deceased, late wife unto the said H. S. who had Issue between
them the said G. S. as one other of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Dame
D. B. by reason whereof the said F: P: M: VV: VV: C. and M: his wife, A: L. F.
B. and H. S. stand and be seized of the Premises undivided, that is to say,
the said F. P. in his Demesne as of Fee-tail, and the said M. VV. in her
Demesne as of Fee-tail, and the said VV. C. and M. his wife, in their Demesne
as of Fee-tail, in the right of the said M. And the said A. L. in her Demesne
as of Fee-tail, and the said F. B. in his Demesne as of Fee-tail, and the said
H. S. as Tenant by the Courtesy of England, the Reversion thereof in Fee-tail,
to the said G: S: belonging and appertaining, the Remainder thereof immediately
depending upon the said Estate in tail, to the said F. P. M. VV. VV. C. and M.
his wife, as in the right of the said M. L. E. F. B. and G. S. in Copartinary
belonging and appertaining. Be it now witnessed, that it is fully condescended
covenanted concluded and agreed between the said parties, to these Indentures
of their mutual assents consents and agreements, for an even partition to be
had made and contained betwixt them, of the said Manors and other the
Premises, in manner and form following; That is to say, that the said F. P.
shall from henceforth have and hold to him and to his Heirs of his body
lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, the Remainder thereof to the
Heirs of the body of the said E. his Mother, deceased, lawfully begotten, and
for default of such Issue, the Remainder thereof to the Heirs of the body of the
said Dame D. B. and for default of such Issue, the Remainder thereof to the
right Heirs of the said F. P. for ever, for his full part that to him belongs
and appertains of the Premises, the said Manor of C. in the said County of
N. with all Edifices Buildings Dove houses Orchards Gardens Yards Easements
Rents Services Courts-Leets Waifes Straies Cattels of Felons, and Fugitives,
Liberties Privileges Franchises Lands Tenements Meadows Pastures Woods
Under-woods and Commons, with all and singular appurtenances, to the same
appertaining and belonging, set lying and being in C. in the said County of N.
or elsewhere, within the Realm of Eng. to the said Manor belonging, or being
accepted, as part parcel or member thereof, excepted and always reserved, one
Message in C. aforesaid, with all Lands Tenements Meadows Leasues Pastures
Woods and Under-woods, Commons and Feedings to the same belonging, or commonly
letten, now or late in the tenure and occupation of one T. R. And one other
Message there, with all Lands Tenements etc. now or late in the tenure of one
G. H. and one other Message there, with all the Lands Tenements etc. and now
or late in the tenure or occupation of one R. H. which said Messuages etc. now
or late in the several tenures and occupations of the said T. G. and R. are
hereafter by these presents for equality of this present Partition, assigned
and appointed to go with the Manor of VV. after limited to the part of the
said F. B. as by these presents it does plainly appear.

And it is likewise condescended covenanted and agreed between the said parties
to these Indentures, that the said M. VV. shall from henceforth have and hold
to her and to her Heirs of her body lawfully begotten, and for default of such
Issue, the Remainder thereof to the Heirs of the body of the said Dame D.
lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, the Reversion thereof to the
right Heirs of the said M. VV. for her full part, that to her appertains of
the Premises, the said Manor of B. in the said County of H. with all Edifices
Buildings etc. and all other Profits Hereditaments and Commodities whatsoever
they be, set etc. within the Towns Feilds and Parishes of B. O. etc. in the
said County of H. or elsewhere, to the said Manor belonging or appertaining,
or heretofore known reputed taken or letten, as part parcel or member of the
said Manor of B. And one Message or Tenement etc. now or late in the Tenure
or Occupation of E. M. or of his Assigns, and that the said E. VV. C. and M.
his wife, shall from thenceforth have and hold to them, and to the Heirs of the
body of the said M. and for default of such Issue, the Reversion thereof to the
Heirs of the body of the said Dame D. B. and for default of such Issue the
Remainder thereof to the right Heirs of the said M: as in the right of the said
M. for their full part that to them appertains of the Premises, the said
Manor of D. in the said County of L. with all Edifices Buildings etc. and sic
ut supra: And that the said A. shall from henceforth have and hold to her, and
to the Heirs of the body of the said A. And for default of such Issue, the
Remainder thereof unto the Heirs of the body of the said Dame D. lawfully
begotten, and for default of such Issue, the Remainder thereof to the right
Heirs of the said A. for ever, for her full part that to her pertains of the
Premises, the one half of the said Manor of B. with certain Rents Services
etc. and sic ut supra: And that the said F. B. shall from henceforth have and
hold to him and to his Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of
such Issue, to the Heirs of the body of the said A. Mother of the said F. B.
lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the body of
the said Dame D. B. lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the
right heirs of the said F. for his full part that to him appertains of the
Premises, the said Manor of VV. etc. and sic ut supra: And the said H: S:
shall from henceforth have and hold to him for term of his life as Tenant by
the Courtesy of Eng. for his full part that to him appertains of the
Premises, the other half of the said Manor of B: in the said County of L. set
forth in manner and form following; That is to say 16 d. etc. and sic ut supra,
payable to the Owner for the time being, of the Manor last aforesaid, and that
after the decease of the said H: S: the said G: S: shall have and hold the said
half of the said Manor of B. and the said Demesne Lands and Tenements and
other the Premises, as the same is set forth in manner and form afor^said, by
the name of the Manor of B, with the charge going out of the same as is
aforesaid, to him and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Issue, the Remainder thereof to the heirs of the body of the
said J: S: his Mother lately deceased, lawfully begotten, and for default of
such Issue, the Remainder thereof to the heirs of the body of the said Dame D:
B. lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the right heirs of the
said G. S. for ever, for the full and whole part and purparty that to him
belongs of the Premises.

And the said F. P. for himself, and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten,
and for default of such Issue for his right heirs, does by these presents,
according to the agreement aforesaid, accept and take, and also does covenant
and grant for him and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for default
of such Issue, for his right heirs to and with the residue of the said parties
to these Indentures, and to and with the heirs of their bodies; And for default
of such Issue, to and with the right heirs of every of them, to take from
henceforth the said Manor of C. with all and singular the Premises thereunto
belong^ng (except before excepted) in manner and form aforesaid, set forth and
appointed to the said F. P. in full recompense, and for the full and whole part
purpart, and that appertains or ought to appertain to the said F. to the
heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, to the
heirs of the body of the said E. deceased, Mother of the said F. lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue, to the heirs of the body of the said
Dame D. lawfully begotten, and for default of such, to the right heirs of the
said F. P. for ever, of in and to the Premises. The like Covenant for M. W. the
like Covenant for S. VV. C. and M. his wife, the like Covenant for A* L: the
like Covenant for F. B. and the like Covenant for H S.

And the said F. P. does covenant and grant for him and the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue of his right Heirs, to and
with the residue of the said parties to these Indentures, and to and with the
Heirs of their several bodies, and for default of such Issue, to and with the
right Heirs of every of them, that he the said F. P. and the Heirs of his body
lawfully begotten, and his right Heirs, all times during the space of two
years, next ensuing the date thereof, shall do and suffer to be done, at the
costs and charges in the Law, of the residue of the said parties to these
Indentures, or of their Heirs, all such reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, as shall be devised or advised, by any of the residue of the said
parties to these Indentures, or any of their Heirs, or by any of their learned
Council, or by the learned Council of any of them, for the further assurance
and sure making of the Premises, to be had and assured in division, to the
residue of the said parties to these Indentures, of such an Estate, and in like
manner and form as before is declared and appointed, to the residue of the said
parties to these Indentures.

The like Covenant for M. VV. S. W. C. and M. his wife A. L. F. B. and H. S.

In witness whereof to the one part of these Indentures remaining with the said
F. D. P. the said M. W. W. C. and M. his wife, A. L. F. B. H. S. and G. have
put their Seals, and to one other part of the said Indentures, remaining with
the said M. W. the said F. P. W. C. and M. his wife, A. L. F: B. H. S. and G.
S. have put to their Seals, and to one other part of these Indentures,
remaining with the said W. C. and M. his wife, the said F. P. M. W. A. L. F. T.
H. S. and G. S. have put to their Seals, and to one other part of these
Indentures, remaining with the said A. L, the said F. P. M. W. W. C. and M. his
wife, F. B. H. S. and G. S. have put to their Seals, and to one other part of
these Indentures, remaining with the said F. B. the said F. P. M. VV. Sir W. C.
and M. his wife A. L. H. S. and G: S: have put to their Seals, and to one other
part of these Indentures, remaining with the said H: S: and G: S: the said F.
P. M: W: W: C: and M: his wife, A. L. and F: B: have put to their Seals, given
the day and year above written.

Of Partition between three Joynt-Tenants.
THis Indenture made etc. Between M. C. of the Town of Sh. in the County of S.
Gent. of the first part G. C. of L. in the said County Gent. of the second
part, and T. C. of B. in the said County Recital of a Deed.
Gent. of the third part. Whereas H. B. and A. S. of London Gent. by their
Indenture Enrolled, and under their Hands and Seals bearing date etc. for the
consideration therein specified, did grant, bargain, and sell and confirm unto
the said M. G. G. C. and T. C. their Heirs and Assigns, all those Tithes of
Corn, Grain and Hay to the Rectory of L. in the said County of S. belonging and
appertaining then late before to the late dissolved Priory of St. L. of W. in
the said County of S. belonging, and late parcel of the Possessions thereof;
and all and singular Houses, Edifices, Barns, Stables, Dove-Houses, Gardens,
Orchards, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Woods,
Under-woods Gleab-Lands, Tithes of Corn, Grain and Hay Wool, Lambs, Tithes,
other Tithes and Tenths whatsoever as well great as small Oblations,
Obventions, Fruits, Profits, Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever with the appurtenances of whatsoever kind or sort, the
same be situate lying growing, Increasing and renewing within the Towns,
Fields, Places, Parish or Hamlets aforesaid, or in any of them, and the
Reversion and Reversions thereof, as fully, freely and wholly, and in as large
and ample manner as our late Sovereign Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England by
her Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminister the 7th. day of July, in the 44th. year of her Reign did Give and
Grant the said Premises, (amongst other things) to the said H, B and A. S.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, (except and reserved Exception in the recited
Deed
out of the said Grant all Advowsons Donations, free Dispositions and right of
Patronage of Churches, Vicarages, and all other Ecclesiastical Benefices
whatsoever to the Premises belonging or appertaining) to have and to hold to
the said M. C. G. C. and T. C. their Heirs and Assigns, to the use and behoof
of the said M. G. and T. C. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, as by the said
recited Indenture more at large appears; by virtue of which Grant or
Conveyance the said M. G. and T. C. are now jointly seized in Possession in
their Demesne as of Fee of the said Gleb-Lands, Tithes, Tenthes, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the Premises here before mentioned, to be to them
granted.

Now this Indenture Witnesses, that the said M. G. and T. C. do by these
Presents make a full, perfect and absolute partition of the said Glebe-Lands,
Tithes, Tenths, and other the premises aforesaid, to and amongst them, the
said M. G. and T: C. in three parts in manner The partition.
and form following, that is to say, That the said M. C. and his Heirs and
Assigns, shall have, hold, occupy and enjoy to the only use and behoof of the
said M. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever the moiety, or one half of all the
said Glebe-Lands, Houses, Buildings, Tenements, Tithes, Tenths, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever with the appurtenances, situate
lying, being, coming, renewing or increasing, of, or in the Town or Hamlet of
B. aforesaid to the said Rectory of L. now, or at any time heretofore in any
wise belonging, used, occupied or reputed, or taken as any part or parcel
thereof in B. aforesaid for the full part, purpart and portion of the said M. C.
of, in, and to all and every the Premises here before mentioned, to be granted
to the said M. G. and T. C. And the said T. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
have, hold, occupy and enjoy to him the said T. his Heirs and Assigns to the
only use and behoof of him the said T. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, the
other Moiety, or one half of all those Glebe-Lands Houses, Buildings,
Tenements, Tithes, Tenths, Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever
with the appurtenances, situate lying and being, coming, renewing or
increasing, of or in the Town or Hamlet of B. aforesaid to the said Rectory of
L. now or at any time heretofore in any wise belonging, used or occupied or
reputed or taken as any part or parcel thereof in B. aforesaid, for the full
part, purpart or portion of the said T. C. of, in and to all and every the
Premises herebefore mentioned to be granted to the said M. G. and T. C. And
that the said G. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall have, hold, occupy and enjoy
to him the said G. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the
said G. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all those Glebe-Lands Tithes, Tenths,
Houses, Buildings, Profits, Commodities, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with the appurtenances, situate lying, coming, renewing or
increasing, of, or in the Town or Hamlet of L. aforesaid to the Rectory of L.
now, or at any time heretofore in any wise belonging, used, or occupied or
reputed or taken, as any part or parcel rherof in L. aforesaid, for the full
part, purpart and portion of the said G. C. of in and to all and every the
Premises here before mentioned to be granted to the said M. G. and T. And the
said Th. C. and G. C. do by these presents, give, grant, Assigns release, and
confirm to the said M. C. and his Heirs, the said moiety Releases from one to
the other,
or one half of the said Premises in B. aforesaid, and all the estate, right,
titl^, and interest, which the said G. and E. have, or either of them has, or
may o^ ought to have, of, in or to the said one moiety, or one half of all and
every the Premises in B. aforesaid, to have and to hold to the said M. C. his
Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said M. C. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever.

And the said M. C. and G. C. do by these Presents, give, grant, assign release
and confirm to the said T. C. and his Heirs, the said other moiety or one half
of the Premises in B. aforesaid, and all the estate, right, title and
interest, which the said M. and G. have, or either of them h^th, or may, or
ought to have, of, in or to the said other moiety, or one half of all and every
the Premises in B. aforesaid, to have, and to hold to the said T. C. his Heirs
and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said T. C. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever.

And the said M. C. and T. C. do by these presents give grant assign release
and confirm to the said G. C. and his Heirs all and every the premises in L.
aforsaid, and all the Estate Right Title and Interest which the said M. and T.
have or either of them has or may or ought to have of in or to the said
Premises in L. aforesaid, To have and to hold to the said G. C. his Heirs and
Assigns to the only use and behoof of the said G. C. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever.

And the said G: C. by himself for him his Heirs Executors Administrators
Covenants from each to other, for quiet enjoying their parts.
and Assigns, and the said T. C. by himself for him his Heirs Executors
Administrators and Assigns, severally and respectively and not jointly, do
covenant promise and grant to and with the said M. C. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, That he the said M. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall or may from
henceforth for ever well and peaceably have hold occupy possess and enjoy the
said one moiety or one half of all and every the said premises in B. aforesaid
here before limited assigned and granted for the part and purpart and portion
of the said M. free clear and discharged of and from all other Estates Rights
Titles Interests Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever bad made caused or
willingly suffered or herafter to be had made caused or willingly suffered of
or by the said G. C. or T: C: or either of them, their or either of their Heirs
or Assigns, and without any let trouble suit entry disturbance or interruption
of the said G. and T. or either of them their or either of their Heirs or
Assigns or any of them, or of any other person or persons lawfully claiming by
from or under them or any of them.

And the said M. C. by himself for him his Heirs Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and the said G. C. by himself for him his Heirs Executors
administrators and assigns severally and respectively and not jointly, do
covenant promise and grant to and with the said T. C. his heirs and assigns by
these presents, That he the said T* C. his heirs and assigns shall or may from
henceforth for ever well peaceably and quietly have hold occupy and enjoy the
said other moiety or one half of all and every the premises in B. aforesaid
herebofore limited assigned granted for the part purpart and portion of the
said T. C. free clear and discharged of and from all other Estates Rights
Titles Interests Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had made caused or
willingly suffered or hereafter to be had made caused or willingly suffered of
or by the said M: C. and G. C. or either of them, their or either of their
heirs and assigns and without any let trouble suit entry disturbance or
interruption of the said M. and G. C. or either of their heirs or assigns or
any of them, or of any other person or persons lawfully claiming by from or
under them or any of them.

The like Covenant from M. and T. C. that G. C. shall hold the Glebe Lands in
Tithes in L. assigned for his part and purpart. Sir Thomas Harris.

An Indenture of Partition Quadri-partite.
THis, Indenture, made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, That whereas the Manors
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of Sir J. D. Knight deceased, contained and
specified in certain Schedules quadripartite indented unto these presents
annexed, are descended and come in Possession Reversion or otherwise unto K.
now Wife of the said H. L. Son and Heir apparent unto W. L: Esquire, and to A.
now Wife of F. M. Esquire, and to M. now wife of T: G. Esquire, and to F. now
Wife of I. H. the younger, Gentleman, Son of I: H. the elder, Esquire: And
whereas the said H. L. and K. his wife, F. M. and A. his wife. are now seized
in possession and Reversion in the Right of the said K. A. M. and F. of one
Estate or Estates of Inheritance, part in possession and part in Reversion, no
severance yet thereof had or made The said H. L. for him his Heirs Executors and
Administrators for the part of him the said H. L. and K. his wife and their
Heirs, the said I. H. the younger, and F. his wife and their heirs, the said F.
M. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators for the part of himself, and
the said A. his wife and their Heirs and the said I. G. for him his Heirs
Executors and Administrators for the part of him and M. his The Covenants
wife and their heirs, that is, to wit every of the said parties severally for
themselves their heirs executors and administrators only, and not jointly, do
covenant agree conclude and grant severally to and with every of the other
parties, their heirs executors administrators and assigns by these presents, in
manner and form following, that is to say, That the said Manors Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments, as well in possession as Reversion, by four such
several portions as they be now set out in the four several Schedules
quadri-partite, shall within two days next ensuing the sealing and delivery
thereof be put by them in four several Scrowes in writing, that is to say, In
every Scow one of the four portions and parts shall be enclosed in four several
balls of wax The manner of the partition by lots.
so that no part of the said Scrowes may be seen: And that the same four balls
of wax shall be after put in a cap or hat and there shuffled together, and that
then within the said two days, they shall agree upon some indifferent man or
child, and cause him to put his hand into the said cap or hat at adventure, the
said cap or hat being closed, and to take out first one ball of wax alone, and
deliver it to the said H. L. or to the said W. L. his Father, or to some other
for the said H. L. and K. his wife, and after to take out another ball of wax
alone and deliver it to the said F. M. for the said F. and A. his wife; and
after to take out another of the said balls of Wax alone, and deliver it to the
said T. G. for the said T. and M. his wife, and after to take out the fourth
ball of wax and deliver it to the said I. H. the younger and F. his wife and
immediately after such delivery of every of them that so shall receive such
balls of wax, or his Attorney or Deputy shall forthwith open the same balls of
wax, and cause or suffer the Scrow therein contained to be read and openly
declared amongst them, and that the same shall stand and remain as a full and
perfect partition and severance among and betwixt the said Co-parceners of all
the said Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and that after such
partition and allotment made, the said H. and K. his wife and their heirs, the
said F. and A. his wife, the said H. the younger and F. his wife and their
heirs, and the said T. G, and M. his wife and their heirs, shall stand and
agree to the said partition and allotment, and to all things contained and
specified in the said Schedules quadri-partite, indented according to the true
intent and meaning written in the same Schedules, and in these Indentures, and
shall permit and suffer the same to stand remain and abide in its full
strength and force for ever.

And further the said H. L. for him his heirs and executors, for the Mutual
Covenants for further assurance.
part of him the said H. and K, his wife and their heirs, the said I. H. the
elder his heirs and executors for the part of the said I. H. the younger and F.
his wife and their heirs, and the said F. M. his heirs and executors for him
and the said A. his wife, and the said T. G. his heirs and executors for him
and the said M. his wife, that is to say, that every of the said parties
severally by and for themselves and their heirs and Executors only does
covenant and grant to and with every of the other said parties severally, their
heirs and Executors only, that if every of the said parties his wife and heirs
for whom he or any of them covenanteth and grants to and with the other by
these presents, shall for and by the space of seven years next etc. as far as
the Law will permit and suffer, at the reasonable request and costs and charges
in the Law and otherwise of such of the said parties, as shall desire the same,
do knowledge or suffer to be done all and every such reasonable and further act
and acts thing and things, be it by Fine Recovery Deed of Deeds or otherwise as
shall by such party or parties or their Council learned shall be reasonably
devised or advised for the better and more perfect assurance of the said
several Portions Allotments and things in the said Schedules quadri-partite
indented and contained according to the true intent and meaning of all the said
parties: And that every of the said parties their Heirs and Assigns, shall or
may for ever herafter have hold occupy and enjoy their said several Portions
and Allotments acquitted and discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved
harmless, etc. And that the said Co-parceners and their husbands their heirs
and Assigns, shall permit and suffer every of the other Coparceners their
husbands and theirs Heirs and Assigns, to have and keep all such Evidences
Deeds and Writings as concern such Manors Lands and Tenements as are to them
severally allotted as aforesaid alone, and true copies of all other Deeds
Evidences and Writings, a do concern the same Manors Lands and Tenements, the
same to be copied and written out at the costs and charges of such as shall
desire the same. And whereas R. N. Gentleman has an annuity or yearly Rent of
20 l. going out of the premises for the term of his natural life, it is
covenanted and agreed by all the said Co-parceners, that each of them A
covenant that all the Coparceners shall pay an annuicy of 20 l out of their
parts divided.
shall pay to the said R. N. yearly the sum of 5 l. at such time and place as
it has heretofore been used and accustomed to be paid.

And it is further agreed by and between the said parties. That if it shall
hereafter happen, that any of the Manors, Lands or Tenements of any of the
said four portions allotted as aforesaid, unto any of the said Co-parceners,
shall by due order and course of Law or Equity, without fraud or coving be
recovered and lawfully evicted, so that it cannot be held and enjoyed according
to the said partition, and the true intent of all the said Co-parceners and
their Husbands, that then and in such case the rest of the said Co-parceners
and their Heirs and Assigns shall and will recompense and satisfy at their
equal costs and charges unto the party so evicted, so much as the value of the
Land so evicted shall amount unto. And that all the woods and under-woods That
the wood shall be severed and divided.
now standing being and growing upon the premises or any part thereof shall be
severed and equally divided amongst the said Co-parceners and their Husbands
before the Feast of Pentecost next coming after the Date hereof.

And that it shall be lawful to, and for the said Co-parceners their Heirs and
Assigns, to have free ingressegress and regresse in and to all the Lands before
mentioned to be divided and severed, and every or any part or parcel thereof,
where any of the Woods do grow, (and through which they must be carried
therefrom) and to fell cut down and carry away so much thereof as shall be
severally alfotted unto any of them, In Witness etc.

Another Partition between Co-heires of Houses.
THis Indenture made etc. between etc. witnesses, That it is covenanted
granted and agreed, by and between the said parties, for a Partition between
them to be had and made of five Messuages etc. of the Inheritance of the said
A: B: as Daughters and Heirs of the said A: B: And first it is covenanted and
granted by and between the said parties.

And the said I: M: and S: his wife, for them and the Heirs of the said G: do
covenant and grant to and with the said T: S: and E: his wife, and the Heirs
and Assigns of the said E: that the said T: S. and The Partition.
E: in the right of the said E: and the Heirs and Assigns of the same E: shall
have hold and enjoy to the said T, S: and E: in the right of the said E: in
severalty for ever; One Message or Tenement etc. and that other Message or
Tenement situate etc. in as large and ample manner and form as the said etc.
now have hold occupy and enjoy the same in full recompense and allowance, of
and for all the part and purpart that to the said E: appertains, or of right
ought to appertain and belong of all the said five Messuages etc. by and after
the decease of the said A: B: as one of the Daughters and Heirs of the said A:
B.

And the said T: S: and E: for them, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said E:
do by these presents covenant and grant, to and with the said I: M. and C. and
the Heirs and Assigns of the said C. That the said T. S. and E. in the right of
the said E. and the Heirs and Assigns of the said E. shall and will accept and
take the said three Messuages etc. in full recompense and allowance, of and for
the part purpart and portion of all the said five Messuages etc. to the said E.
from and after the decease of the said A. B. as one of the Daughters and Heirs
of the said A B. belonging or appertaining.

And the said J: M: and C: in the right of the said C: and the Heirs and the
Assigns of the said C: shall have hold occupy and enjoy to the said J: M: and
C: in the right of the said C: add the Heirs and Assigns of the said C: in
severalty for ever, the said Messuages etc: in as large and ample manner and
form as the said J. M. and C. now have hold occupy and enjoy the same, in full
recompense and allowance of and for the said part, purpart, or portion that to
the said C. appertains, or of right ought to appertain or belong, of all the
said five Messuages, by and after the decease of the said A. B. as one of the
Daughters and Heirs of the said A. B.

And the said J. M. and C. for them and the Heirs and Assigns of the said C. do
by these presents covenant and grant, to and with the said A Covenant to accept
two Messuages for one part.
T: S: and E: and the Heirs of the said E: That he the said J: M: and C: in
right of the said C: and the Heirs and Assigns of the said C: shall and will
accept and take the said two Messuages, in the tenures of etc. in full
recompense and allowance of and for her part, purpart, and portion of all the
said five Messuages etc. to the said I: M: and C: by and after the death of the
said A: B: as one of the Daughters and Heirs of the said A: B: belonging or
appertaining, and for and in consideration that the said Messuages to the said
P. M: and C. in form aforesaid allotted, be of better value then the said
Messuages, to the said T: S: and E. in form aforesaid allotted: The said J: M:
and C. for them, their Heirs Executors and Administrators, do covenant and
grant, to and with the said T: S: and E: their Executors and Administrators,
that they the said I: M: and C: their Heirs Executors or Administrators, A
Covevant to pay a sum of money to one whose part was less then the other.
shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said T: S: and E: their
Executors or Administrators the sum of etc.

And it is also covenanted granted and agreed between the said parties, and
either of the said parties, do covenant grant and agree for them and their
Heirs and Assigns by these presents, to and with the other of them, their Heirs
and Assigns, that it shall and may be lawful to either of the said parties,
their Heirs and Assigns, from time to time, A Covenant that every of the
parties may enter into any of the others part, for the repairing of the Houses.
and at all times needful, to enter into any parcel of the part or purpart of
the other, for the repairing amending and doing of any thing necessary for the
maintenance and preservation of the Tenements aforesaid to them severally
allotted and appointed by these presents, and that neither of the said parties,
their Heirs or Assigns, at any time hereafter shall make any new Building, or
do any other thing in any part or parcel of the part and purpart of either of
them, that shall or may stop impair or hinder the Light, Gutters, or Kennels of
the part or purpart of the other of them: In witness etc.

A Division of Land between the Owners thereof in Fee-simple, with good
Covenants.
THis Indenture etc. between A: W: Son of W: W: late of L: Carpenter, deceased,
on the one party, and C: W: Citizen and M: of L. on the other party,
witnesses, That whereas by reason of Parliament holden in the first year of the
late Reign of our late Sovereign Lord E: 6. late King of England, Entitled an
Act for dissolving and determining Recitation:
of diverse Chantries, Colleges, Guilds, and Fraternities, amongst other there
did come to the possession of the said late King, all those two Messuages and
Tenements, Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Yards, Chambers etc. then in the tenure
etc. situate in the Parish of St. Peter etc: in the City of L: aforesaid. And
where the said late King E: 6. by his Letters Patents, made under his Great
Seal of Eng: and bearing date etc. amongst other things did give and grant the
said two Messuages and other the Premises, with their Appurtenances to E: E:
then of the City of L: Esquire, and to T: B: of etc. and to their Heirs for
ever, to be holden of the said late King, his Heirs and Successors by Fealty in
free Burgage of the said City of L: and not in chief, for all Services and
Demands whatsoever, as by the said Letters Patents and Record thereof more
piainly etc.

And where the said C: W: and A: W: by good and lawful conveyance are and
stand seized of the said two Messuages and other the Premises, Each seized of
a Moiety.
with their Appurtenances, to them and their Heirs for ever: That is to say,
the said C. is and stands seized of one Moiety thereof, and the said A. of the
other Moiety thereof by good and perfect Estates in Fee-simple; They the said C.
and A. of one assent and consent for them Allotments in severalty.
and their Heirs, have made full and clear division of all the said Message or
Tenement, and other the Premises, with their Appurtenances, in form as
follows; That is to say, the said C: W: his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may
from henceforth have, hold, and enjoy to the said C. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the only use and behoof of the same C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
all that etc. a butting etc. containing etc. And that the said A. W. his Heirs
and Assigns, shall and may etc. all that etc. And for as much as the said part
of the Premises in The one in consideration his part is better allows money
to the other in Consideration.
the Division aforesaid, alloted to the said C. W. is the better part thereof,
the same C. in consideration thereof, before the ensealing of these presents,
has given contented and paid to the said A. W. the sum of etc. whereof the
said A. knowledgeth himself fully and truly paid and satisfied, and thereof
acquitteth etc.

And the said A. W. for him and his Heirs, does by these presents ratify and
confirm to the said C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that part of the
said two Messuages, and other the Premises allotted to the said C. in and by
the Division.

And also the said A. W. covenanteth etc. in form etc. That he the said A: and
his Heirs, and all other having or lawfully claiming, or which may have or
lawfully claim to have any lawful former Estate Right Title or Interest, to
the Premises or any part thereof allotted to the part of the said C: as
aforesaid, from time to time and at all times during three years next etc. at
and upon the reasonable request of the said C: his Heirs or Assigns, to be made
to the said A: or his Heirs, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said C: his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will do make knowledge and suffer, and
cause etc. with warranty only against the said A: and his heirs, all and every
such act and acts, thing and things in the Law, as by the said C: his Heirs or
Assigns, or their Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be lawfully
and reasonably devised or advised, for the further and better assurance surety
and sure making of all the said part of the Premises allotted to the said C: as
aforesaid, to him the said C: his Heirs and Assigns, for their own use clearly
and absolutely without any condition for ever to be made sure. And that he the
said A: W: at the time of the making of the said Division was, and until the
time of the full perfection thereof, and of Further assurance. Seisin in Fee.
good assurance made to the said C: and his Heirs, of that part of the Premises
to them allotted as aforesaid, shall be and stand lawfully seized in his
Demesne as of Fee, of one Moiety of the said two Messuages, and other the
Premises, without any Condition or Defeazance. And that he the said A. at the
time of the said division making, had and Authority to ^ivide.
has good and lawful right authority and power to make and finish the same
division, to and with the said C: according to the true meaning of these
presents.

And further that all the said part of the Premises allotted to the Discharge
of Encumbrances.
said C. and his Heirs as above said, is, and for ever shall be and stand clear
and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise at all times saved harmless
by the said A: his Heirs Executors and Administrators, of and from all and
singular former Grants Bargains Sales etc. had made done or agreed unto by the
said A: W: or by his means knowledge consent or procurement.

And moreover that he the said C: W: his Heirs and Assigns, for For enjoyance.
their own use for ever, shall and may from henceforth peaceably and quietly
have etc. all the said part of all and singular the Premises, to the said C.
allotted as abovesaid, without any let interruption Suit trouble or eviction of
the said A. his Heirs or Assigns, or any other person or persons, by his or
their means title consent or procurement. And the said C. VV. covenanteth as A.
VV. before has covenanted: etc. In witness etc.

Partnership.
A Partnership between two of several Trades, where each several parties
industry used in his several Trade, the gain is to redound to both parties
benefits.
THis Indenture, etc. witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, and agreed
between the said parties to these presents, that they two according to the
intent and tenor of these presents, and not otherwise, shall be and continu^
Joynt-Occupiers and Copartners in both these several Trades of Occupyings,
with they the said A. and B. do now severally use and occupy, as well within
the Realm, as also by any course of Merchandises elsewhere out of the Realm,
from the first day of November next coming, for and during the term of 11.
years, from thence etc. and fully to be complete. If the said A. and B. shall
so long live, and the same their Co-partnership, shall not in the mean time
discontinue, break off, or give over, unless it shall be by the assent of both
the said parties, or for some just cause to be given by either of the said
parties contrary to the true meaning of these presents. And for the
enterprising, maintenance and continuance of the said joynt-Occupying and
Copartnership between the said parties enterchangably in their several Trades
aforesaid. The same parties have agreed to lay down and make their Stocks
together, to the full sum of 1600 l. of etc. whereof the said A. shall employ
in his Trade 800 l. of the same money. And the said B. shall employ in his
Trade the other 800 l. residue of their Stock of 1600 l. for and during the
said joint. Occupying and Copartnership, unless it shall be otherwise agreed
between the said parties. And to the making of the said Stocks, either of the
said parties shall put in thereunto 400 l. apeece, at, or before the first day
of November. next coming, and the other 400 l. apeece, at, or before the 21th.
of March next coming.

And said A. B. for him etc. Covenanteth etc. with the said C. etc. in form
etc. That he the said A. B. shall truly and faithfully, to the best of his Wit,
Knowledge and Power, employ himself in and about the necessary use and
maintenance of that Trade which he now uses. And therein in form aforesaid,
shall employ the Stock aforesaid thereunto limited for the common and equal gain
and advantage of the said Copartners, without any fraud or covin. And also that
he the said A. shall from time to time make and keep, or cause to be etc. truly
and faithfully a good, and perfect account and reckoning in Writing fair and
legible, written in convenient Book or Books for that use to be provided of all
the said Trade and Doings of the said A. B. in the Copartnership aforesaid. And
that the said C. D. and his Assigns, from time to time upon request shall and
may peruse see and cast over the said Books, and the accounts and reckonings
which there shall be contained therein. And also that he the said A. B. or his
sufficient Deputy ftom six months to six months, once in every six months so
long as the said Co-partnership shall endure (if he be thereunto required) shall
make and give up to the said C. or to his Assigns, a true, perfect and whole
account in Writing* of all and every such sum or sums of money, and of all
Wares and Merchandises as the said A. or his Assigns within the compass of the
said account shall have, had or receive in his said Trade of the said
joynt-Occupying and Co-partnership; and also of all sums of money, wares and
merchandises whatsoever, within that time the said A: or his Assigns shall have
paid or delivered, for and touching his said Trade and Co-partnership in any
thing. And the said C: D: for him etc. Covenanteth etc. in form as A. before
with him has Covenanted verbatim etc.

And the said Copartners for themselves, their Executors Administrators,
Factors and Assigns, and every of them have Covenanted and Agreed, and by these
Presents do covenant and agree together, that they the said A: and B:
seeverally, and their several Executors and Administrators shall have several
right and interest in the said Stcoks of 1600 l. and every other sum of money
which the said Copartners shall put into the said Stocks, or either of them,
and in all things which shall come and grow thereof according to the several
sums of money which they shall put into the same Stocks, or any of them, and
in none other manner in any wise, that is to say every of the same A: and B:
severally, and their several Executors and Administrators shall have several
right and interest, either party to one several Moiety, and half part of all
the said Stocks, and in, and to all things which shall come or grow thereof. And
after the same rate and order shall have their several parts and portions of
all the gains and increase of the same Stocks, and of all things which shall
arise or grow thereof, and of every other Stock to be put into the said
Co-partnership by the same Copartners. And after the same rate, and in the
same manner shall bear their reasonable parts and portions of all charges,
losses and adventures whatsoever to grow in the said Trade of joint Occupying.

Provided always that it shall not be lawful to either of the said Copartners,
their several Factors or Assigns in their several Trades aforesaid at any time
during the said Co-partnership in any manner of wise to charge the Stock or
Stocks of this Co-partnership, or his Co-partner, wi^h any sum or sums of
money or other charges over and above the said partable Stocks, unless it be by
a full consent thereunto hereafter to be given by the said partners which
consent shall be contained and Written in some Book of their account whereunto
for that purpose and under that place in the same Book, where the same consent
shall be written down, they both shall subscribe their names, with their own
Hand^.

Provided also, and it is further Covenanted, Bargained and Agreed by and
between the said Copartners etc. in manner and form following, viz, That if it
shall happen, either of the said Copartners to decease within the time of
their said Co-partnership, or before the accounts thereof shall be finished and
cleared between them, that then in such case the Survivor of them shall procure
and cause with all his power and diligence to make and yield or cause etc. to
the Executors Administrators or Assigns of his Co-partner so deceased, as
aforesaid, a plain, true and perfect account of the said stock and gains thereof
then remaining with or toward the said Co-partner which shall fortune to
survive of the said partable Trade by him used. And thereof shall allot and
allow to the said executors administrators or assigns of his deceased
Co-partner the whole part and portion of all the said stock and gains, with or
toward the same Survivor in his said Trade remaining, which to the same
Co-partner deceased in right and equity after the true meaning of these
presents then at his decease shall be belonging.

And that thereupon the same Survivor shall do his best endeavor to call in and
gather all Debts abroad, and which were owning to the said Copartners, in and
by the said partable Trade used by the same Survivor at the time of the decease
of his said Co-partner, and as the same or any part thereof shall or may be had
and received, without Suit, shall make payment of one Moiety thereof, to the
Executors Administrators or Assigns of the said Co-partner deceased, taking
allowance out of the same only of one Moiety of such Debts as the said
Copartners did owe in the said partable Trade used by the said Survivor, and
were unpaid at the time of the decease of the Co-partner so first deceasing.

And that the said Survivor, if it be required of him for the residue of all
Debts whatsoever, owing to the said Copartners, of or by the said partable
Trade used by the same Survivor, whereof the said Executors Administrators or
Assigns, of the said Co-partner deceased, shall not before have had and
received his Moiety, shall make and deliver to the same Executors
Administrators or Assigns of the said deceased Co-partner, at the proper costs
and charges, such conveyance and assurance of one Moiety thereof, as by the same
Executors Administrators or Assigns, or by any of the Learned Council of them,
or of any of them, shall be reasonably devised, be it by Letter of Attorney
Grant Agreement Contract or Covenant, or otherwise by any reasonable mean not
repugnant to the Laws of this Realm.

And moreover that then likewise the Executors Administrators or Assigns of the
said Copartner so deceased as aforesaid, for all the Stock limited to the
Trade, and occupying of the said Co-partner so deceasing, and for all the Gains
thereof, shall make a plain true and perfect account of and for the same, to and
with the said Co-partner surviving, or his Assigns, and thereof shall allot and
allow to the said Survivor and his Assigns, the whole part and portion, which
after the true meaning of these presents shall be coming toward the same
Survivor, of all the Stock and Gain thereof aforesaid, put into the hands of his
Co-partner deceased: And that thereupon also the Executors Administrat^rs and
Assigns of the said Co-partner deceased, shall do their best endeavor to call
in and gather all Debts abroad which were owing to the said Copartners, at the
time of the decease of the same Co-partner so first deceasing, and which may be
gotten without Suit, and as the same or any part thereof shall be had or gotten
without Suit, shall make payment of one Moiety thereof to the said Co-partner
surviving, or to his Assigns. And that for the reason of such Debts as shall be
coming to the said partable Trade and Stock occupied and used by the said
Co-partner so first deceasing, that the Executors and Administrators of the
same Copartner so first deceased, shall have one Moiety thereof; And the
Copartner and his Assigns surviving the other Moiety thereof.

Provided always, that all such Debts as the same Copartners did owe out of
the said Stock and Trade, occupied and used by the said Copartner first
deceasing, shall be deducted and born of the same Stock and Debts owing and
coming thereunto. And that the said Survivor for recovery of the one Moiety of
the same Debts, shall make such conveyance and assurance to the Executors
Administrators or Assigns of the said Co-partner first deceasing, at their
charges and expenses, as the same Executors etc. or their learned Council etc.
shall devise not repugnant to the Laws of this Realm, and according to the true
meaning of these presents; To all and singular which said Covenants Articles
Conditions and Agreements, for the several parts of the said A. and B. their
Executors Administrators Factor and Assigns, well and truly to be performed
holden and kept, according to the very intent and true meaning of these present
Indentures, either of the same parties does bind himself, his Heirs Executors
and Administrators, unto the other of them, in the sum of 3000 l. of etc. to
be had and levied, to the use of his other Co-partner his Executors and
Assigns, of all the Lands Tenements Goods and Chattels of such of the same
Copartners, as shall make default, to perform hold and keep the Covenants
Articles Conditions and Agreements aforesaid, or any of them for his part to be
holden performed or kept: In witness etc.

A Partnership where one alone is bound to follow the Trade.
THis Indenture etc. between W. B. Citizen and Merchant-taylor etc. on the one
party, and E. G: Citizen and Cloth-worker etc. on the other party, witnesses,
That the said W: B: and E: G: of the mutual credit and faithful confidence
that each of them has reposed in the other, have covenanted granted
condescended and agreed together, and by these presents do covenant etc. at
their equal charges to make one Stock of etc. of lawful etc. at their equal
adventure, and for their common and equal gain and loss, to be bestowed
employed used and occupied, by the diligence discretion and labor of the said
E. G: from time to time, in the Trade and Traffic which the said E: G: now
uses and exercises in that Shop which he now occupies; situate in B: of L.
from the day of the date of these presents, by and during all the term of five
whole years, from thence next following.

And the said E: G: does covenant acknowledge and confess, that he at, and
before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, has had and received of
the said W: B: the sum of etc. for the full part of the said W. to the making
of the Stock aforesaid, and thereof is fully and plainly satisfied and possessed.

And also the said E. G. does covenant and promise, to and with the said W: B:
by these presents, that he the said E. shall not only immediately and presently
put in other 00 l. of etc: to make up the said Stock to the full sum of etc.
but also according to his health and ability, from time to time, during the
said Partnership, shall employ his labor knowledge and diligence to bestow the
said Stock in his said Trade, and therein use and occupy the same, for the
common and equal profit of himself, and the said W: B: without fraud or covin,
in manner and form as aforesaid.

Provided always, and it is agreed between the said parties for themselves,
their Executors and Administrators, by these presents: That if it do fortune
either of them to decease, during the said term of their Partnership (their
said Stock and increase thereof, or any part or parcel thereof, or any Debts to
be to them owing, or by them owing by means thereof, not being severed nor
divided) that yet notwithstanding the Survivor of them shall have only interest
and right to the Moiety and one half of the said Stock Increase and Debts owing
to the said Partners, and no more: And upon account to be charged only with the
Moiety of the said debts by the said Partners (in respect of the said
Partnership only) to be owing out of their Stock aforesaid. Any thing to the
contrary etc.

And the said E. G: covenanteth etc. That the said E: from time to time, upon
every reasonable request, and upon one months fore. warning, shall make and
give up to the said W: or to his Deputy or Attorney, a plain and true account
in writing, of all the said Stock, and of all the increase and gains thereof,
together with all Losses grown of the same, and shall then immediately make a
true and equal division and payment to the said VV: B: if it be required, of
all his part of the gains and increase aforesaid, according to the true meaning
of these presents. And that if it do happen the said E: G: at any time during
the said term of five years, to depart this present life, or at any time after
before the clear ending and finishing of the account of the Premises, and full
payment had and partition made of all things put in the said Partnership, or
arising thereof, that then the Executors or Administrarors of the said E: G:
shall make a full and perfect account and ready payment, and delivery to the
said VV: his Executors or Administrators, or to his or their lawful Deputy or
Attorney, as well of all that part of the said Stock to the said VV: or to his
Executors or Administrators (according to the true meaning of these presents) a
part as also of the Moiety and one half of all increase lucre gains and
advantages grown of or from the said Stock, and that to be done within the
space of 2. months, next after the decease of the said E. G. without any
further delay: In witness etc.

A Partnership between Merchants-Adventurers.
THis Indenture tripartite etc Between R. P. of L. Mercer, on the first party,
and W: C. of L. Cloth-worker, on the second party, and H: M: of L: aforesaid,
Cloth-worker, on the third party, witnesses, That for and touching a
Co-partnership and joint occupying in the Trade of Merchants-Adventurers to be
had and continued between the said parties, from the Feast of Easter now next
coming, for by and during the term of three years from thence etc. and fully
etc. the said parties have covenanted and agreed together, and every of them
severally for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does grant
covenant and agree, to and with the other of the said parties, and either of
them, and the several Heirs Executors and Administrators of either of them by
these present Indentures, in manner and form as hereafter particularly on their
behalfs, or on the behalf of any of them in these presents is expressed and
contained; That is to say.

First, That for the making of a Stock for the said Co-partnership and
joynt-occupying the said R, P. for his part shall put into the said Stock 400
l. of etc. and the said W: C: for his part shall put into the said Stock 300 l.
of etc. and the said H: M: for his part shall put into the same Stock 250 l. of
etc. which several sums of money are now at and before the ensealing of these
presents, well and truly put into the Stock aforesaid, by the parties
aforesaid, in form as aforesaid.

Item, That every of the said parties and their several Executors and
Administrators, shall from henceforth have several right and interest in the
Stock aforesaid, and the increase thereof to the values of their several Stocks
put into this Co-partnership, as aforesaid; And for the residue of all increase
and gains to come or grow of or by the said Stock, or joynt-occupying the same
parties severally, and their several Executors and Administrators for every
part shall have right and interest to one equal third part thereof, and not
otherwise, or in any other manner.

Item, That all Losses, Adventures, Costs Charges, and Damages to happen or
arise, in or by the joynt-occupying aforesaid, shall be from time to time
allowed reckoned sustained and born of the whole Stock and Increase, of and by
the Co-partnership and Joyn-occupying aforesaid, all charges of Dyets only
excepted.

Item, That every of the said parties in his place where he shall be abiding
and assigned for the business of the Joynt-occupying aforesaid, shall there
diligently and faithfully employ himself to the profit and commodity of the
said Copartners, and likewise every of them shall keep from time to time, a
plain and true account and reckoning in writing apart by it self from other
reckonings of all his doings and dealings in the premises, which according to
the use of Merchants shall be meet to be entered into account.

Item. That every of the said parties shall make true and perfect account with
his other Copartners of his doings and dealings in the said Co-partnership and
the business thereof, as it shall be reasonably required from time to time by
any of his other Copartners, or by the Executors or Administrators of any of
them.

Item. That none of the said Copartners during the time before appointed for
the continnance of the said Co-partnership shall take any thing out from the
said Stock or increase thereof to his own particular use, except it be for his
own diet or housekeeping without the special agreement of the said two other
Copartners first thereunto had in writing, to be signed with their Hands.

Item, That during the time aforesaid, none of the said Copartners without
such special agreement as aforesaid shall accept any Bil or Bills of Exchange, to
the intent to return the same upon the Exchange for any other person or
persons, other then only to the account of the said Co-partnership; and that
during the said time none of the said Copartners shall enter-meddle or join
himself in Traffic to or with any other Fellowship or Co-partnership; and
that none of the parties to these presents during the said time shall make sign
or deliver any Bond or Bonds, Bill or Bills of debt, as surety for any other
person or persons whereby his other Copartners or other joint Stock shall or
may be further charged then his part that shall make sign or deliver such bond
or bonds, bill or bills, does and shall truly amount unto, except it be by such
agreement as aforesaid.

Item. That the said Copartners, during the said Co-partnership shall for all
other business of the said joint Occupation term and call themselves by the
name of W. C. etc. Company, Writings which they shall make in this
Co-partnership, or otherwise such of the said Copartners as shall so sign any
such Bills or Writings shall make the same in the name of himself and Company.

Item. In consideration that the said H. M. shall be resident beyond the seas
for the business of this Co-partnership, he in respect of the dearness of
victuals there shall have yearly toward his Table in allowance out of the
account aforesaid 10 l. of lawful money of Flanders and also in consideration
that the said W. C. shall keep a man, and use his Warehovse in L. for use of
his Co-partnership, the said W. to have therefore yearly to him allowed out of
the account aforesaid other 10 l. of etc. And that all charges other then
aforesai^ being for Diet shall be born by every Co-partner for his own party,
and not to be put to the said account.

Item. If it fortune any of the said Copartners to decease before the ending
of the said Copartnership, the other two partners then Surviving the Survivor
of them two, and his Executors and Administrators shall make good and true
account and meet and equal contentation and satisfaction to the Executors or
Administrators of such Co-partner so deceasing of and for all his part of the
said Stock, and the gains and increase thereof (charged with his part of the
charges aforesaid) until the day of such decease of the same Co-partner
without any delay, fraud or covin, and without any advantage taking by right of
Surviving or any usage or custom.

Item. That once every year the said Copartners by themselves or their
sufficient Deputies shall conferr together, and make perfect their account to
the day of such their conference, or as near thereto as conveniently by their
estate of their business may be done. And also that by their common consent and
appointment one fair Register Book shall be made and orderly, kept from time
to time of their whole account for their partnership. And that every of them,
and their several Executors and Administrators shall and may have Copies thereof
as to them shall be needful or convenient without denial or impediment of any
of the said Copartners or any other, for or by them, or any of them.

And every of the said Copartners parties to these presents does Covenant and
Grant for himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them by
these Indentures. That he and his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every
of them for his part shall and will well and truly hold, keep and perform all
and singular the Articles aforesaid, and all the Covenants of these presents
toward his other several Copartners, and either of them, and the Heirs
Executors and Administrators, of every of them, as becomes a true and faithful
Co-partner to do without any fraud or deceit in any thing. In Witness, etc.

A Division of Partnership well passed.
THis Indenture etc. Between W. L: Citizen and Grocer of L. on the one party,
and T. H. Citizen and Haberdasher of L. on the other party witnesses, That
whereas the said parties for and by the space of certain years now past, have
had held and occupied a partable stock and have been and continued Copartners
and parting fellows in the the trade of buying selling and retailing of Linen
cloth, and other Merchandises, and now have clerly resolved and agreed together
from henceforth absolutely to all intents to dissolve determine break off and
end the said Copartnership, of and in the premises.

And have further concluded clearly to divide the said partable stock, and all
Debts and Credits thereof and thereby growing arising and being.

And furthermore each of them to hold and retain his several part purpart and
portion to and by himself in severalty to his own sole use and profit and not
in common.

It is therefore covenanted and agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, and either of them for himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators
covenanteth and grants to and with the other of them, his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, in manner and form following, that is to say,
That the said Co-partnership Partnership henceforth to cease.
and parting fellowship and all other partnerships and joint trading, now or at
any time before the Date of these Presents had, used or exercised between the
said parties to these presents, do and shall from henceforth immediately cease
determine and clearly end and have no further continuance or being to any
effect or purpose whatsoever, any Covenant Covenants or other matter agreement
composition promise or thing to the contrary thereof had made concluded or
promised in any wise notwithstanding.

And that all such former Covenants Promises and Agreements as are All
Covenants made for the further continuance of the partnership to be void.
passed, or made by or between the said Parties touching any further
continuance or prolonging of any such partnership or partnerships to be had or
holden between the said parties shall by virtue of these presents be deemed
adjudged void and of none effect. And also it is agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents and the said T. H. for him his Heirs Executors and
Administrators covenanteth and grants to and One of the parties to have all
the money and wares without impediment of the other.
with the said W. L: his executors administrators and assigns, that etc. for
his part of the said partable stock, and other the Premises, shall take have
and enjoy from henceforth to the sole and proper use and behoof of the same W.
L. his Executors Administrators and Assigns all the Linen cloth wares
Marchandizes and ready money whatsoever now remaining in the said stock of the
said Copartnership, or being any Part or Parcel thereof or accepted or taken
as Part Parcel or Member thereof which by estimation is now rated and valued
to the Sum of 1714 l. 10 s. a he same and every part thereof to be, remain
and continue from henceforth to the same W. L. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, discharged and acquitted or else upon reasonable request sufficiently
saved harmless by the said T. H. his Executors and Administrators or some of
them, of for and from all manner of Interests Judgments Charges Forfeitures
Titles and Encumbrances had made or suffered, or to be had made or suffered by
the said T. H. his Executors or Administrators, or by any of them or by any
other in his Right or Title or lawfully claiming in from by or under him or
them or any of them. Release of Right in the money and wares.


And the said T. H. does by these Presents, absolutely and clearly grant assign
release and put over to the said W L. his Executors and Assigns, all the Right
interest and demand of him the same T. of in and to the said Linen cloth
VVares Merchandises and ready money whatsoever, and of in and to every part
thereof.

And moreover it is covenanted granted and agreed by and between The other of
the parties to have for his part certain debts mentioned in a Schedule.
the said parties to these Presents, and the said W L for him his Heirs
Executors and Administrators covenanteth and grants to and with the said T.
H. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That the said TH. for
his part of the said partable stock and other the Premises shall take have and
enjoy to his own proper use and behoof for ever, without any let suit
disturbance or interruption of the said W. L. his executors or administrators
or any other lawfully claiming from by or under him all and every such Debts
and sums of money which a^e now due or owing or to be paid to the said
Copartners, jointly by reason or means of their said Co-patnership, as are
particularly mentioned or expressed in a Schedule indented to these presents
annexed, Together with all Bills Bonds Obligations and specialties only
concerning the same Debts or any of them.

And the said W. L. does by these presents clearly (what in him lies, And all
specialties of those debts. Release of the Dehts.
release and put over to the said T. H. his Executors and Assigns all the
Right Title and Demand of him the said W of in and to all and every the said
Debts in the said Schedule expressed, and of in and to the said Bills and
specialties only touching and concerning the same or any of them.

And also the said W. L. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators.
covenanteth and grants to and with the said T. H. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents in form
following, that is to say, That he the said W. L. his Executors and
Administrators having and enjoying the said Linen cloth The debts to be held
without account.
VVares Merchandises and ready money as aforesaid, according to the said
Allotment and to the true meaning of these presents shall and will from time to
time agree permit and suffer that the said T. H. his Executors and
Administrators to his and their own use, shall and may demand require collect
receive gather and levy by all lawful ways and means all and every the said
Debts in the said Schedule expressed, or mentioned, and every part thereof
without any let denial or gainsaying of the said W: L: his Executors or
Administrators or any of them, and the same shall and may retain and hold to
his and their proper use without any Account or Reckoning thereof, or of any
part thereof, to be made or rendered to the same W. L. his Executors and
Administrators or to any of them. And shall and will also agree, That To agree
that actions shall be (...) with (...) di^cha^ge (...).
if need shall be, any Action or Actions Suit or Suits, for the Recovery of the
said Debts, in the said Schedule expressed, or any of them may be brought or
pursued by and at the Costs and Charges of the said T. H. his Executors and
Administrators in the name or Names of the said W. L. and T. H. their Executors
or Administrators or any of them without any Discharge Revocation or stay of
the said Actions or Suits or any of them to be caused or commanded by the said
W. L: his Executors or Administrators or any of them without the consent of the
said T. H. his Executors or Administrators or of some of them, so as the said
T. H. his Executors or Administrators or some of them, shall from time to time
upon reasonable Request and notice, save and keep harmless the said W L. his
Executors and Administrators and every of them, for and concerning all Losses
Costs and Damages which he the same W. his Executors or Administrators shall
sustain or be at, Bona fide, without fraud or covin by occasion or means of any
such Action or suit prosecuted in his or their Name by the said T, his
Executors and Administrators or by any of them.

And that he the said W. L. has not heretofore, nor that he, his Not to
release the debts.
Executors or Administrators hereafter, shall not Receive acquit Release or
Discharge the said Debts in the said Schedule expressed, or any of them unless
it be by the special consent and agreement of the said T his Executors or
Administrators first in that behalf obtained and had, or unless he the same W.
L. his Executors or Administrators, shall truly pay to the said T. H. his
Executors and Administrators any such sum or sums so by him the said W. L. to
be Received of the same Debts within forty days, next after such Receipt so
thereof by him to be made.

And if the same W. his Executors or Administrators shall hereafter If any of
the debts shall be received ^r acquitted, then the same to be paid to the party
tha^ should have them with^n six weeks.
acquit or discharge any of the said Debts in the said Schedule expressed
without such consent and agreement of the said T. his Executors and
Administrators as aforesaid, that then he the said W. his Executors or
Administrators, within six weeks next after every such Release or Discharge of
any of the said Debts in the said Schedule expressed, shall and will well and
truly pay content and satisfy, or cause to be paid contented and satisfied, at
etc. to the said T. his Executors or Administrators, all and every such Debt or
Debts, in the said Schedule expressed, which he the said W. his Executors or
Administrators shall so Release or Discharge as aforesaid, without any manner
of fraud or covin.

And the said W. L, for him his Executors and Administrators covenanteth One of
the parties to p^y a certain sum toward payment of their debts.
and grants to and with the said T. H. his Executors and Assigns by these
presents, That he the said W. L. his Executors or Administrators, shall and
will well and truly content and satisfy to and among the Creditors of the said
W. and T. in respect of their said Copartnership or joint occupying the sum of
743 l. 4 s. of lawful money of, etc. toward the payment and satisfaction of
such Debts and sums of money, as to the said Creditors are due and owing out
of or in respect of the said Partable stock Co*partnership or Joint Occupying.

And also the said T. H. for him his Heirs Executors and Administrators, The
other party to pay a certain sum toward the debts.
covenanteth and grants to and with the said W. L. his Executors
Administrators* and Assigns by these presents, that he the said T. Executors or
Administrators, shall and will well and truly content and satisfy to and among
the said Creditors, toward the payment and satisfaction of such Debts and Sums
of money as to the said Creditors are due and owing out of or in respect of the
said Partable stock etc. the sum of 492 l. 18 s. of etc. in form following,
viz. 400 l. thereof out of the first Receipts by him the said T. his Executors
or Assigns, of the debts in the Schedule expressed if so much may be levied
gathered and had in and before the first day of etc. next ensuing. And in
Default thereof, then the same Sum of 400 l. to be paid at or before the last
day of etc. next coming at the farthest, and 92 l. 10 s. residue and in full
payment of the said Sum of 492 l. 10 s. at or before the Feast of, etc, next
ensuing the Date of these presents.

And it is also concluded and agreed by and between the said parties If any
privy debt or charge be ^he same to be paid by whom the same grow.
to these presents, and each of the said parties severally for him, his Hei^s
Executors and Administrators, covenanteth and grants to and with the other of
them, his Executors and Administrators by these Presents, That if any privy
Debt Charge or cause of Action be growing or depending by reason or occasion of
the said Co-partnership unto the which the said Copartners are of right liable
and subject unto other then, and except such known debts as are specified or
mentioned to be owing in their common book, that then and in all such cases,
such of the said parties to these presents in whose Default, or by whose Act or
Procurement such Debt or Charge has grown, shall within time conveniently
satisfy and pay the same, and thereof discharge and save harmless the other
of the said parties, his Executors and Administrators.

And morover it is agreed, That if any manner of variance or cause of Sui^ at
any time or times herafter do or shall happen to grow arise or be If any
controversy arise between the parties, the same to be ordered by men now
nominated.
given between the parties or the executors or admin^strators of them or of
either of them by for or upon any Covenant Matter or Thing in these Presents
expressed or mentioned or of forupon or in respect of the said Co-partnership
or joint occupying in any wise, that then and so often the party in that behalf
greived. shall thereof make Declaration to T N. Grocer, and I C. Clothworker,
Cit^zen of L. unto whose Order and Judgment for and touching the premises or
any part thereof from time to time, the said parties and either of them for
their several parts and for their several Executors and administrators do
wholly submit themselves by these Presents, so always as by their order and
judgment be thereof, or of any part or parts thereof made and given up in
Writing indented under their hands and Seals within three months next after
such Declaration to them made as aforesaid, and that during such three months
from time to time or at any time, neither of the said parties their Executors
or administrators shall not directly or indirectly bring or pursue any Suit or
Action against the other of them touching the premises.

And they the said parties and their several executors and administrators on
their several parts and behalfes, every of them for his own part shall stand
to, obey abide and perform all and every such Order and Judgment as the said T.
N. and J. C. shall within such time as aforesaid, make and give up as aforesaid
for and touching the Premises or any part thereof, In witness, etc.

WINTER CONSVLTOR.

A PRESENTATION.
TO all persons who have or shall have sufficient Authority of power in this
behalf I. H. Esquire, the true and undoubted Patron of the Parish Church of C.
in the County of D. sends greeting. I present G. B. Clerk of the Rectory of
C. in the County of D. now void by the death of the last Incumbent there, and
to my Presentation of full Right belonging, requiring you forthwith to admit
the said G. B. to the Rectory of C. aforesaid, and that you truly and lawfully
institute him Rector there, and that likewise you invest him with all his
Rights Members and appurtenances whatsoever, and that you do perform fulfill
and accomplish all and every the singular acts which the Office obliges you to
discharge herein, In Witness etc.

PROVISOES.
PRovided always, and nevertheless it is covenanted granted Power to make
Leases.
condescended and fully agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents; That all and every Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises, Grant or
Grants, to be had or made by the said A. B: during his natural life, by his
Deed or Deeds indented to be made betwixt him the said A. B. of the one part,
and any other person or persons of the other part, the one part whereof to be
signed and sealed with the hand and seal of the said A. B. of the said Manors
etc. or of any of them, or of any part or parcel thereof, for term of year or
years, life or lives, whereupon the old and accustomed yearly Rent or Rents of
the said Manors etc. so to be demised or more shall be reserved and yearly
payable, during such Lease or Leases so to be made, shall be good sure
effectual and available in Law, for and during the said Terms. And that all
and every person and persons, unto whom such Lease or Leases shall be made
their Executors and Assigns, shall or may peaceably and quietly have hold
occupy and enjoy, the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, with their
appurtenances, so to them or any of them to be granted demised or letten,
according to the effect and true meaning of his and their said Leases and
Grants. And that the said C. D. etc. their Heirs, and every other person and
persons, and his and their Heirs shall be then seized of such of the Premises
as shall be so demised or granted from time to time, shall stand and be seized
of and in such part and parts of the Premises, which shall fortune to be so
letten demised or granted as aforesaid is mentioned: And the conveyance and
assurance so to be made as is aforesaid, shall be, and be taken to be to the
use and behoof of such Lessee and Lessees, Grantee and Grantees, their
Executors Administrators and Assigns, for and during such Terms and Interests
as shall be so had or made; to any such person and persons by the said A. B.
according to the true intent and meaning of these present Indentures, etc.

A Proviso to grant any part of the Lands for Wives Jointure, preferment of
Children, or Leases for years, or lives.
PRovided always etc. That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A.
B. at all times, and from time to time during his life, as well to grant convey
and assure the Premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, to any person
or persons whatsoever, to and for the Jointure and Joyntures of any lawful
wife or wives of the said A. B. or to or for the preferment and advancement of
any Son or Sons, Daughter or Daughters of the said A. B. for and during such
Estate and Estates Term and Terms, and in such manner and form, as shall seem
good to the said A. B. And also to grant lease and demise the Premises, and
every or any part thereof, to any person or persons whatsoever, for life or
lives, year or years, or otherwise: And that the said Recovery shall be, and the
Recoverers and their Heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of them and their
Heirs, shall stand and be seized, of and in so much of the Premises, as shall
be so granted conveyed assured leased or demised by the said A. B. to such uses
intents and purposes, and for and during such Estate and Estates, and under
such Conditions Limitations and Determinations, as the same shall be so limited
declared and appointed unto by the said A. B. etc.

A Proviso for liberty to the Son and Heir to make Joyntures, grant Annuities,
and assign Lands for raising Daughters Portions, and that the Son shall not
impeach any Act done by the Father.
PRovided etc. That after the decease of the said A. B. it shall and may be
lawful for the said C. D. during his life, as well to convey and assure any
part or parcel of the Premises, not exceeding the ancient value of by the
year, above all Charges and Reprises (the Capital Message etc. always
excepted and foreprised) to any person or persons whatsoever, for the term of
the natural life only of any the lawful wife of the said C. D. (without any
the Remainder over and dispunishable of Wast) to and for the Jointure of such
his lawful wife. And likewise to convey and assure any part or parcel of the
Premises, not exceeding the ancient Rent and value of etc. above all Charges
and Reprises (except before excepted) to any of the younger Son or Sons of the
said C. D. (without any Remainder over, and not dispunishable of Wast.) And
also to grant assure and convey any part or parcel of the Premises (except
before excepted) to any person or persons whatsoever, for and during so many
years as the Sums of etc. shall or may be levied raised had or taken, of the
Rents Issues and Profits thereof, to the use of the Daughter or Daughters of the
body of the said C. D. lawfully to be begotten, to and for their preferment and
advancement in Marriage: And that the said Recovery shall be, and the said
Recoverers and their Heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of them and their
Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, that shall have any Estate
of Freehold or Inheritance, of in or to the Premises, or any part thereof,
shall stand and be seized of and in such part and parcel of the Premises, as
shall be granted assured or conveyed by the said C. D. for such intents and
purposes, and in manner and form aforesaid, to such uses and intents as the
same shall be limited declared or appointed unto by the said C. D. so that his
said declaration limitation and appointment thereof, be according to the purport
true meaning and intent of this Proviso, and not otherwise.

And so always that any Jointure or Joyntures, Lease or Leases, Estate or
Estates made by the said A. B. in his life time, shall not in any wise be
impaired troubled or hurt, by any such Grant Conveyance or Assurance, so to be
made by the said C. D. etc.

That the Heir may make all Leases, so that the same may not impair any Estate
made by the Father.
PRovided etc. That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. D. from
time to time and at all times, from and after the death of the said A. B. to
lease and demise the Premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof (except
etc.) to any person or persons whatsoever, for and during such Estates only,
and in such manner and form quality condition and degree, to all intents and
purposes, as Tenant in Tail is enabled to do, by the Statute made in the 32.
year of the Reign of the late King H. 8. and not otherwise; So always as
thereby any Jointure or Joyntures, Lease or Leases, Estate or Estates, made or
to be made by the said A: B: shall not in any wise be troubled hurt or
impaired: And that from and after such Demises and Leases so to be made by the
said C. D. the said recovery shall be, and that the said Recoverers and their
Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivors of them, shall stand and be seized of and
in such part, and so much of the Premises as shall be so leased or demised by
the said C. D. to the use and behoof of such Lessee and Lessees, according to
the form and effect of the said Lease and Leases, so long as the said Lessee
and Lessees shall at all times well and truly pay satisfy and do, to such
persons as shall for the time being have the immediate Reversion or Remainder
of the Premises to be leased and demised, all Rents Duties Payments and
Services whatsoever, reserved limited or appointed to be paid or done, in or by
any such Lease or Leases, and so long as any such Lessee or Lessees shall not
commit or do any wilful Wast in or upon the Premises so to be leased or
demised, and after to the uses intents in these present Indentures expressed
and declared, in such manner form order and degree, as they be before expressed
limited and appointed etc.

For liberty to make Leases, with some difference from the former.
PRovided nevertheless, and the use intent and purpose of these presents, and
of the said intended Fine and Fines, Conveyance and Conveyances, is, and so
hereafter shall be and may be taken to be, That it shall and may be lawful, to
and for the said A. and K. at any time or times during their joynt-lives, by
their Deed or Deeds, as also to and for the said K. after the death of the said
A. at any time or times during her life, by her Deed or Deeds, to demise lease
or limit the use of such the Tenements or Hereditaments, parcel of the said
Premises, which within the space of 7. years now last past, have been usually
letten or enjoyed in Farm, to or by any person or persons: To have and to hold
for and during the term of three lives or under, in Possession and not in
Reversion, or for and during the term of 21. years, or under, from the making,
or from the day of the making thereof in Possession, and not in Reversion.

And it is agreed, that the said intended Fine and Fines, Conveyance and
Conveyances before covenanted or agreed to be hereafter had or made, shall
enure and be, and shall be construed and taken severally and respectively, to
make good and effectual all and every such Lease Leases and Limitation of
Uses, according to the several Tenors thereof, for and during such only time
and terms, to be respectively comprised in or by such Lease Leases, or
Limitations of Uses, and so that thereby or thereupon, the yearly Rents Boons and
Services which have been usually and yearly within the space of 7. years now
last past, yielded or done for such Tenements and Hereditaments which shall so
happen to be leased demised or limited in use, be reserved or agreed, on in or
by such Deed or Deeds, to be and continue, during such term and terms so to be
demised or limited in use as aforesaid, yearly due and payable, after the
decease of the said A. and K. unto such person and persons for the time then
being, as shall then be Owner or Owners of the immediate Reversion or
Remainder, for the time being, of such the said Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments so to be demised or limited in use, and so that such Lands and
Tenements so to be demised or limited in use, shall and do during the
continuance of such said several Terms contain and be upon reasonable request
in that behalf sufficient overt and liable to the Distress and Distresses of
every such person and persons, for the time being, so having the immediate
Reversion or Remainder of such said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments so to be
demised or limited in use as aforesaid, for all and every the Arrerages of the
same Rents and Services which shall happen in any wise to be unpaid etc.

A Proviso of Revocation in the same Deed.
PRovided nevertheless, and it is agreed, that if either the said A. R. and K.
his wife, at any time during their joynt-lives, or the said K: after the
decease of the said A. and during her then Widowhood, she the said K. not
having then concluded, o^ or fully; determined to marry with any other person,
shall or do tender or pay in the presence of three Witnesses, unto the said A.
B. and C. D. or to the Survivor of them, or to any of them, or to their or any
of their Heirs, the full Sum of 10 s. at the least, of good and lawful money
of England, of or with intent or purpose, to revoke make frustrate or void, all
or any the uses aforesaid so limited in or by these presents, unto all or any
the Son or Sons, Daughter or Daughters of the said A. and K. begotten or to be
begotten, formerly in or by these presents, in any wise had or made, mentioned
or specified, and shall and do thereupon at any time within six months next
following, after such tender or payment by their joint Deed or Writing under
their hands and Seals during their joynt-lives, or by the Deed or Writing of
the said K. under hand and Seal, during such her Widowhood as aforesaid,
respectively publish signify or declare their or her intention and purpose,
for the revoking making frustrate or void, all or any such the Use or Uses as
aforesaid so limited in or by these presents, unto all or any the Son or Sons,
Daughter or Daughters of the said A. and K. begotten or to be begotten, that
then and from thenceforth all and every such Use and Uses, as shall be so
signified published and declared to be intended or meant to be revoked and made
frustrate. And all and every the Estate and Estates thereby, or by means thereof,
raised had or made, shall absolutely cease be frustrate and void, as if the same
Use or Uses had never been limited mentioned or agreed upon, in or by these
present Indentures, or otherwise any limitation of Uses in or by these
presents, or any other matter or thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding: In witness etc.

DAVENPORT.

A Proviso to make void a Lease for non-payment of Covenants.
TRovided always, That if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of 30 l. or any
part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of 28. days next after any of
the said Feast-daies, at which the same ought to be paid; Or that the said
demised Premises, and every part thereof shall not be repaired, according to
the Covenant in that behalf made: Or if the said A: B: his Executors or
Administrators, do or shall let the Premises, or any part thereof, or shall
Assign his whole Term, or any part thereof, with the license of the said C. D.
his Heirs or Assigns, under his and their hand and Seal; that then it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the said C: D: his Heirs And Assigns, into the
demised Premises to re-enter, and the same to have again repossess and enjoy,
as in his or their former Estate, this Indenture or anything therein contained,
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

RELEASES.
A Lease for a year, whereon to ground a Release.
THis Indenture etc. between A: B: of the one part, and C: D: of the other
part, witnesses, That the said A: B for and in consideration of the sum of 5
s. of lawful money of Eng: to him in hand paid by the said C: D: the receipt
whereof he does hereby acknowledge, has bargained and sold, and by these
presents does bargain and sell unto the said C: D: all that Message etc. and
the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, together with the Rents
and Profits of the Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to have and
to hold the said etc. and all and singular other the Premises herein mentioned
and intended to be hereby bargained and sold, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, unto the said C: D: his Executors and Assigns, from the day
before the date hereof, for and during the term of one whole year, from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore
the yearly Rent of one Pepper Corn, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel
only, if the same be demanded, to the intent that by virtue of these presents,
and of the Statute, for transferring Uses into Possession, the said C. D. may
be in the actual possession of the Premises, and be enabled to accept a Grant
of the Reversion and Inheritance thereof, to him and his Heirs: In witness etc.

The Release.
THis Indent. made etc: between T H. of the Parish of D, in L. Gent. and I* H:
of the Parish of M. in the County of M. Merchant-taylor, and A: his wife I: W:
in the Parish of M: Esquire; and E: his wife of the one part, and K: S: of R: in
the County of L: Gent. on the other part Witnesses, That for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. of lawful money of England to the said T. H.
in hand paid by the said K. S. at and before the ensealing and delivery of
these Presents, the Receipt whereof he does hereby acknowledge, and thereof, and
of every part and parcel thereof does clearly acquit and discharge the said K.
S. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents, and
of the several sums of five shillings of like money of England to the said I. H.
and I. W. in hand, paid by the said K. S. The Receipt whereof they do likewise
hereby acknowledge the said T. H. and the said I. H. and I. W. with the
consent, and at the request and appointment of the said T. H. have granted,
aliened, released and confirmed, and by these Presents do grant, alien, release
and confirm unto the said K. S. in his actual possession, more being by virtue
of a bargain and sale to him, thereof made for one whole year by Indenture,
bearing date the day before the date hereof, and by force of the Statute for
transferring uses into possessions. All those Closes or enclosed Pastures,
Ground, commonly called or known by the name or names, etc. containing by
estimation six score and eight acres, be they more or less, lying and being in
N. in the County of L: now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said K.
S. or his Assigns, and all and singular other the Lands, Tenements, Closes and
Hereditaments whatsoever in N. aforesaid, whereof or wherein the said T. H. I.
H. and I. W. or any of them have any estate of Freehold or Inheritance in
Possession, Reversion. Remainder or Expectance, and all the estate, right,
title, interest, reversion, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said T. H.
I. H. and I. W. and every or any of them, of, in, and unto the Ptemisses, and
every, or any part or parcel thereof, and the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders yearly, and other rents and profits of the Premises,
and of every part and parcel thereof, to have and to hold the said Closes, and
all and singular other the Premises herein before mentioned, and intended to
be hereby granted, with the appur^enances unto the said K. S. and his Heirs, to
the use of the said K. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

And the said T. H. for himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators, does
Covenant and Grant, to and with the said K. S. his Heirs and Assigns, by these
presents, That he the said T. H. and the said I. H. and I. W. or some or one of
them now are, or one of them now is, and stands lawfully and rightfully
seized of and in the said Closes and Premises with their appurtenances, of a
good, sure, perfect, absolute and in defeasable estate in Fee-simple, and now
have, or some, or one of them now has good rightful power and lawful and
absolute authority to grant and convey the said Closes and Premises unto the
said K. S. and his Heirs, according to the purport, true intent and meaning of
these Presents; and that it shall and may be lawful, and to and for the said K.
S. his Heirs and Assigns, from time to time, and at all times for ever
hereafter peaceably and quietly to have, hold, possess and enjoy the said
Closes, and all and singular other the Premises herein before mentioned, and
intended to be hereby granted with their appurtenances, without any lawful let,
suit, trouble or interruption or him the said T. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or
any other person or persons whatsoever, except as is herein after excepted,
discharged of and from all encumbrances whatsoever (the Rents and Services from
henceforth to grow due and payable to the Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of
the Premises for and in respect of his or their Seigniory, and one Lease by
Indenture, bearing date etc. made of the Premises by the said I. unto the said
K. S. for the term of one and twenty years, whereupon the yearly rent of etc. is
reserved, only excepted and foreprized. And the said T. H. for himself his
Heirs Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and Grant, to and with the
said K. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said K. S. his Heirs and Assigns from time to time, and
at all times for ever hereafter peaceably and quietly to have hold and possess
and enjoy the said Closes and Premises, with their appurtenances, without the
lawful let, su^t, trouble or interruption of him the said I. H. his Heirs or
Assigns, or any of them, or any other person or persons lawfully claiming or to
claim, in, by, from or under him, them, or any of them, except before excepted,
the like Covenant for Mr. W.) And the said T. H. I. H. and I. W. for them their
Heirs Executors Administrators, do Covenant and grant to and with the said K.
S. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, that they the said T. H. I. H. and
I. W. and E. his wife, and their Heirs shall and will at any time or times
hereafter during the space of seven years next ensuing the date hereof, upon
the request* and at the cost and charges in the Law of the said K. S. his Heirs
or Assigns, do make and execute, or cause or procure to be made done, executed,
all and every such further and other act and acts, conveyances and assurances
in the Law whatsoever. For the further and better conveying and assuring the
said Closes and Premises with their appurtenances unto the said K. S. and his
Heirs, to the use of the said K. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, by
it by Fine or Fines, or otherwise howsoever, as by the Council learned in the
Law of the said K. S. his Heirs or Assigns, shall be reasonably devised or
required, so as such further assurance contain, no further covenant or warranty
then in these Presents is contained, and so as the parties to make the same be
not thereby compelled or compellable to travel above 14. miles from the place or
places of their usual abode for doing thereof.

And the said T. H. for him and his Heirs, the said Closes and other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, unto the said K. S. and his Heirs against
him the said I. H. and his Heirs, and all claiming or claim in, by, from or
under him, them, or any of them has and will warrant for ever and defend by
these presents, and the said I. W. for him and his Heirs the Closes, and other
the premises with their appurtenances unto the said K. S. and his Heirs
against him the said I. W. and his Heirs and all claiming or to claim, by, from
or under him, them, or any of them, or by, from, or under I. W. Esquire
deceased, late Father of the said I. W. shall and will warrant and defend for
ever by these Presents etc.

A Release of Title to Land.
TO All persons to whom these presents shall come, I. C. of etc. eldest Son of
I. C. late of etc. and E. his wife also deceased, sends greeting. Know ye J
that the said I. C. for and in consideration of a competent sum of money to be
paid by T. C. of etc. F. B. of etc. and S. B. of etc. have remised, released,
and for ever quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me, my Heirs and
Assigns, fully, clearly and absolutely demise, release, and for ever quit-claim
unto the said T. C. F. B. and (in their full and peaceable possession, and
seisin being) and to their Heirs and Assigns for ever, all the estate, right,
title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever, which I the said I. C. now have
or which I or my Heirs at any time hereafter may or ought to have, of, in, or
to all that capital Message and the Lands, Tenements and Heredit. thereunto
belonging, called etc. with the appurtenances containing etc. more or less,
situate, lying and being in etc. late in the tenure or occupation of etc. and
particularly of, in, and to all that and those Close and Closes piece and
pieces, parcel and parcels of Land, Medows, Pasture and Ground in etc.
aforesaid, called or known by the name of etc. with the appurtenances, to have,
and to hold all and singular the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and
every of their appurt. unto the said T. C. and F B. their Heirs or Assigns for
ever, so that neither the said I. C. nor my Heirs, nor any other person or
persons for me or them, or in mine or their name or names, right, title or
stead, shall or may by any ways and means hereafter, have claim, challenge or
demand any estate or interest ^f in or to the same Premises, or any part
thereof, but from all action, right, estate, title, interest and demand, of, in
or to the Premises, and every of them shall and will be utterly excluded and
debarred for ever by these Presents.

And I the said I. C. and my Heirs the said capital Message, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with
their, and every of their appurtenances, unto the said W. C. T. C. F. B. and B.
S. and their Heirs to their own proper use and uses against me and my Heirs,
and all and every other person and persons lawfully claiming, by, from, or
under me the said I. C. shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these
Presents. In Witness, etc.

An Acquittance upon an Indenture of Mortgage, with a Release of all Covenants
in the same, and of the Mortgagees Claim in the Land mortgaged.
TO all etc. T. R. of C. in the County of C. Esquire sends greeting, whereby
a pair of Indentures bearing Date, etc. made between the Right honorable E. F.
Knight of the most noble Order etc. Lord C. etc. on the one party, and me the
said T. R. on the other party, The said Lord C. has given granted bargained
and sold to me the said T. R. and to mine Heirs and Assigns for ever, all those
Lordships Manors and Parsonages of B. and all that the Manor and parsonage of
F of the County of L. with all the Rights Members and appurtenances of the
same, with diverse other things in the said Indentures mentioned upon and under
this Condition, That if the said Lord C. his Heirs or Assigns should pay or
cause to be paid to me the said T. R. mine Executors administrators or assigns
the sum of 780 l. of etc. on the last day of this present month of April, in
this present year of our Lord God etc. at the then dwelling house of me the
said T. R. set and being in the parish of Saint M. in L. within the City of L.
between the hours etc. that then and from thenceforth the said Indenture, and
the enrolment thereof, and all Covenants and Grants therein expressed, should
be void and frustrate, as by the said Indenture now cancelled may appear.

Know ye that I the said T. R. on the day of the Date hereof, have had and
received of the said Lord C. the said sum of 780 l. and every parcel thereof
in full discharge and performance of the Condition aforesaid.

And thereupon I have as well agreed to the said Cancelling of the said
Indentures, as also I do promise for and in consideration of the said sum of
money so to me paid to appear in the High Court of Chancery upon reasonable
Request and at the costs and charges of the said Lord C. his Heirs or assigns
there acknowledging that I am fully satisfied and paid the said 780 l. and that
the Condition aforesaid to me wards is fully and truly discharged and
p^rformed, and there also give my full and plain consent to the cancelling and
making void of the said Enrolment and Record of the said Indentures before the
Master of the Rolls or such other Officer as then shall have authority to take
the same knowledge.

And further I the said T. R. for the said consideration do remise and clearly
release unto the said Lord C. his Heirs and Executors all Bonds Recognizances
and Deeds obligatory whatsoever wherein the said Lord C. is bound to me for
performance of the Covenants and Articles of he said Indenture, and also all
and every the same Covenants and Articles, and all the Right Estate and Title
whatsoever, which I the said T. R. mine Heirs or Assigns at any time hereafter
shall or may claim of or in the premises or any part thereof, of all and
singular which premises the said Lord C. now is fully and peaceably possessed,
In Witness etc.

A Release in Land by one Joynt-Tenant to another.
TO all etc. R. P. of L. gen^. sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting,
Know ye that I the said R. P. for good consideration me moving, have remised
and released, and by these Presents for me and my Heirs do remise release and
altogether for ever quite claim unto H C of L. aforesaid Gentleman in his full
and peaceable possession and seisin being, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the
said H. all the Estate Right Title Interest Use Possession Reversion Claim and
Demand what soever which I the said R. P. ever had, have or which hereafter I
or my Heirs can or may claim to have to of and in all that Message or Tenement
lying and being in C. in the County of E. with the Appurtenances now or late in
the Tenure of, etc, and one Message or Tenement, etc. All which and singular
the premises, our Sovereign Lord etc. by his highness Letters Patents bearing
date, etc. amongst other things, did gtant to me the said R. and to the said H.
C. in Joint-Tenancy, and to our Heirs for ever, or to of or in any part or
parcel of the Premises or any of them, so that neither I the said R. P. nor
my heirs, any Right Estate Title Interest Use Possession Reversion Claim and
Demand to of or in the premises or any part thereof at any time hereafter can
or may claim challenge or require, but of and from all action of Right State
Title Inteest and Demand thereunto, or to any part thereof to be had, I the
said R. and my Heirs be altogether barred and for ever excluded by these
presents, In witness etc.

A Release by one Executor to another of the Debts due to the Testator at his
Decease.
THis Indenture etc. Between B. B. one of the Sons, and one of the Executors of
the Testament of H. B. late Citizen and Alderman of L. deceased on the one
party, and P. B. and W. B. two other of the sons and also two of the Executors
of the Testament of the said H. B. on the other party, witnesses, That the
said B. B. for diverse good and special causes, etc. Has given assigned
released confirmed and delivered up, and by these presents does give etc. unto
the said P. and W. B. all the Right Interest Title Claim and Demand which the
said B. has or which he as Executor of the Testament of the said H. B. or by
virtue of any Legacy Gift Bequest or Appointment to him made by the said H. B.
in or by his last Will or Testament, or by any other way or means whatsoever
hereafter can or may have or claim to have or of in and to all singular Debt
and Debts Sum and Sums of money whatsoever which were of the said H. B. and to
him were due or owing at the time of his decease.

And the said B. B. for him, etc covenanteth etc. in manner, etc. viz. That he
the said B. his Executors or Administrators, shall not at any time hereafter
challenge claim receive take demand or sue for to have any of the Debt or Debts
Sum or Sums of money aforesaid, either of or against the said P. and W. or
either of them, their or either of their Executors or Administrators, or of or
against any person or persons which does owe or detain the said Debt or Debts
Sum or Sums of money aforesaid or any of them. And also that he the said B.
B. heretofore has not discharged or released, or at any time hereafter shall
not discharge or release any Debt or Debts aforesaid or any part or parcel of
the same Debt or Debts, or any Suit Judgment or Execution to be given or had
for the same or any part thereof, unless it be at the special Request and by
the consent and agreement of the said P. and W. or of the Survivor of them
first thereunto had, In witness, etc.

Of Title to Lands:
TO all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, R. B: of C. in the
County of D. Gentleman, greeting, Know ye that I the said R. B. as well in part
of performance of certain Covenants and Agreements contained specified and
declared in certain Indentures bearing date the 20th day of June last p^st,
made between me the said R. B. of the one part, and G. H. of I. in the County
of S. Gentleman of the other part, as ^or diverse other good just and reasonable
causes and considerations me thereunto especially moving, have remised released
and altogether of and for me and my Heirs for ever, quite claymed unto the said
G. H. in his full and peaceable possession, and seisin being, and to his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, all my Right State Title Claim Use Possession Reversion
Interest and Demand whatsoever, which I ever had have, or by any means
whatsoever herafter may have and which my heirs hereafter may have of and in
all that the Manor of C. in the County of Y. and of and in all and singular
Messuages Cottages Houses Edifices Buildings Dove-houses Orchards Gardens Tofts
Crofts Lands Tenements Meadows Feedings Pastures Mills Woods Underwoods arrable
Lands Common of Pasture Rents Reversions Moors Mosses Mines Quarries Waters
Pooles Fishings Courts Leets Profits of Courts Waifes Estraies Franchises
Liberties Ptofits Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and
singular their Appurtenances in C. aforesaid to the said Manor in any wise
belonging or appertaining, or hertofore accepted reputed taken known used
occupied or demised with the appurtenances or any part or parcel thereof, and
also of and in the Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the premises
whatsoever, and of every part and parcel thereof, so that neither I the said
R. B. nor my Heirs, nor any other person or persons for us or in our names, any
Right State Title Claim Use Interest Dower, Title of Dower or Demand, of and in
the aforesaid Manor Messuages Lands Tenements Meadows Feedings Pastures and
Hereditaments and other the Premises with all and singular their Appurtenances
or any part or parcel thereof, may from henceforth require claim or challenge
the same, but from all action of Right State Title Claim Use Possession
Reversion Dower Title of Dower Interest or Demand, to have or seek, shall be
for ever excluded and debarred, by these presents. And I the said R. B. and my
Heirs, all and singular the Premises before expressed and specified, with all
and singular the appurtentnces to the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns against
me and my Heirs will warrant and for ever defend by these presents, In witness
whereof, etc.

Upon a Mortgage.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, I T. H.
Citizen and Grocer of L. send greeting, Know ye that I the said T. H. have
received and had this present day of the Date hereof, of W. L. of F. in the
County of E. Gentleman, the full sum of 100 l. of lawful money of England,
due to me for the Redemption those two Tenements with their appurtenances set
lying and being in S. in the Parish of Saint B. within the City of L. and of
all other the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of the said W. L. which he
lately mortgaged unto me for the said Sum, and which said sum of 100 l. I
have received and had of the said W. L. according to the Condition limited, and
made for the redeeming of the Premises, and I do confess that by the payment
of the said sum, all my Interest Right and Title of in and to the said
Tenements and other the premises, is clearly and absolutely extinguished, and
that the said W. L. is thereof seized to the use of him and his Heirs, as in
his former Estate.

Know ye therefore further, That I the said T. H. have remised released, and by
these presents, for me and my Heirs, do remise release and quite claim unto the
said W. L. in his full and peaceable possession and Seisin being, and to his
Heirs for ever, all my Right Estate Title Claim Use Possession Reversion
Remainder and Demand whatsoever, which I ever had now have or hereafter may
have, or which my Heirs shall or may have of in or to the said two Tenements
and other the Premises, or of in or to any part or parcel thereof, to have
and to hold the said two Tenements and all other the Premises with the
Appurtenances unto the said W. L. his Heirs and Assigns for ever with a
Warranty as in the last precedent.

From a man to his Ward.
TO all to whom etc. R. H. of M. in the County etc. sends greeting, Whereas the
Queens most excellent Majesty that now is, by her Graces Letters Patents under
the great Seal of England bearing date at Westminster, etc. has granted to me
the said R. H. the custody of the Body and Marriage of T. B. Son and Heir of F.
B. Esquire deceased Know ye that I the said R. H in consideration of a certain
Sum of money, and for other good causes and considerations me thereunto
moving, do by these Presents remise and release all Actions Suits Forfeitures
Penalties and Executions and Demands whatsoever which I the said R: H: have or
may have against the said T: B: his Heirs and Executors* by virtue of the said
Grant to me made of the said Wardship and Marriage, or by reason that he the
said T: B: has married himself without my consent, so that the said R: H: my
Heirs Executors or Administrators, shall not at any time hereafter sue trouble
or impeach the said T. B: his Executors or Administrators, for or concerning
the said Marriage, for for or concerning any other matter or thing touching the
said Wardship: In witness whereof etc.

A release of Errors.
TO all to whom these presents shall come T: C: sends greeting, Know ye that
I the said T: C: for diverse good causes and considerations, me thereunto moving,
have remised released, and for me, my Heirs Executors and Administrators, for
ever quit claimed, and by these presents, do remise release, and for ever
quit-claim unto R. C. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, all Actions and
Writs of Error and Errors, and all Errors whatsoever, which I the said T: C: o^
my Heirs might have or prosecute against the said R: C: his Heirs Executors or
Administrators: In witness, etc.

Another Release by Executors.
KNow all men by these presents, That we I: H: of J. in the County of S.
Yeoman, and T: H: of etc. Yeoman, Executors of the last Will and Testament of
H: H: etc: deceased, Have remised released, and for ever quit-claimed unto R:
H: of etc. Yeoman, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, all and all manner
of Actions, Plaints, Writs, Suits etc. that shall or may arise accrue happen or
grow in any wise hereafter, by color or means of any Obligation with
Condition subsequent or indorsed, Bill Obligatory, or single Bill, or other
specialty whatsoever, heretofore made by him the said R: H: upon any Contract,
Covenant, Conclusion, and Agreement in any wise, between them the said R: H:
and H: H. And also know, that neither we the said I: H: or T: H: our Heirs
Executors or Administrators, nor any of us, shall or will commence or cause to
be commenced, any manner of Action or Suit against the said R: H: his Heirs
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, for touching or concerning any
Debt, Duty, or Demand due by specialty or otherwise, unto him the said H: H:
deceased: And if heretofore we have made and delivered any Letter of Attorney,
or other Writing to any person or persons, to sue arrest or implead etc. the
said R: H: we do hereby fully wholly and absolutely retract abrogate and
disannull the same, as if no such Letter of Attorney or other Writing had been
made. And lastly, we the said J: H: and T: H: do further covenant promise and
agree, to and with the said R: H: by these presents, That if any person or
persons whatsoever, shall notwithstanding this Release and Revocation, commence
any Suit in any Court against the said R: H: his Heirs Executors or
Administrators, upon any such specialty, by force or color of the said Letter
of Attorney, that we the said J: H: and T: H: will not only in Court immediately
make a Retraxit and discontinuance of the said Suit, so much as in our power
consists, but will also make any other or further release to this effect,
upon reasonable request unto us made, and at his costs and charges etc.

Of a Jointure and Dower.
KNow all men by these presents, That I Dame D: W: Widow Executrix and late
Wife to Sir G: W: Knight, in consideration that the said Sir P: W: brother of
the said Sir G: W: stands bounden to pay yearly the sum of 300 l: to me
during my life, and for diverse other good and just considerations, me
especially moving, have remised and released, and by these presents for me, my
Executors and Administrators, do remise and release unto the said Sir P: W: one
Recognizance, whereby the said Sir P: W: then Esquire, became bound unto the
said Sir G: W: in the sum of 5000 l. And all Actions, Suits, Executions, and
Demands by reason thereof, or of any other matter, thing, or cause, had, made or
done unto the said Sir G: W.

Know ye further, that I the said Dame D: for the considerations aforesaid,
have granted, surrendered, released, and confirmed, and by these presents do
grant, surrender release, and confirm unto the said Sir P: W: and his Heirs, my
Jointure and Dower, and all my Right and Title of Jointure and Dower* and all
the Estate, Right, Use, Possession, Interest, and Demand whatsoever, which I
the said Dame D: W: had, have, may, or ought to have, in or to all and singular
Manors Lands Tenements and He^editaments whatsoever, in the several Counties
of N. and L. or elsewere, within the Realm of England, which were the Manors
and Lands of Sir N. W. Knight, Father of the said Sir G. and Sir P. by virtue
or means of any Award, Feoffment, Testament, Deed, Writing, or any other way
whatsoever: To have and to hold all and singular the said Manors Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the Premises, unto the said Sir P.
W. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, free and clearly discharged, of and from all
former Estates, Charges, and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or done by me
the said Dame D. W. or any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from, or under me: In witness etc.

Of Lands and Actions.
KNow all men by these presents, That I W. L. of M. in the County of N. Gent.
for diverse good causes and considerations, me thereunto moving, have granted
remised released, and for ever quit-claimed, and by these presents for me, my
Heirs Executors and Administrators, do grant remise release, and for ever
quit-claim unto R. L. Widow, the late wife of T: L: late of M. aforesaid
Esquire, all and all manner of Actions, as well real as personal, Suits
Quarrels Debts Trespasses Complaints and debates whatsoever, which I the said
W. L. my Heirs Executors or Administrators, or any of us heretofore had, or at
any time hereafter, may, might, ought, or could have against the said G. L. her
Executors or Administrators; or any of them, for or by reason of any matter
thing or cause whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, until the day of
the date of these presents.

And also all the Estate Right Title Interest Term and Demand whatsoever, which
I the said W. L. my Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of us now
have, or at any time hereafter may, can, might, should, ought, or could in any
sort, have, pretend, claim, or challenge to have, of in or to one capital
Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances, commonly called or known by the
name of the Vine, situate lying and being in M. aforesaid, and of in and to
all or any the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the said Capital Message or Tenement belonging or in any wise
appertaining, or of in or to any part or parcel thereof* by force of any Lease
parcel or otherwise: In witness etc.

Walmesley.

For receipt of Writings.
KNow all men by these presents, That I A. B. of L. Gent. have had and received
the day of the date of these presents, of C: D: of M. in the County of D.
Yeoman, all those several Deeds Charters Evidences Writings and Mynuments,
which be particularly specified and mentioned in a Schedule or Inventory, to
these presents annexed, being parts and parcels of those Deeds Evidences
Charters Writings Mynuments and Copies which he the said C. by his Indenture of
Bargain and Sale, bearing date with these presents, has covenanted and agreed
to deliver or cause to be delivered to me the said A: B: on this side the last
day of November, now next coming, as by the said Indenture, amongst diverse
other Covenants Grants and Articles therein contained, more plainly at large may
appear.

Of which said several Deeds Charters Evidences Writings and Mynuments, and
every parcel thereof in the said Schedule particularly specified and mentioned.
I do clearly and absolutely acquit and discharge the said C: D: his Heirs
Executors and Administrators by these presents, sealed with my Seal, given the
day etc.

An Acquittance made by an Attorney.
KNow all men by these presents; That I E. F. by virtue and authority of one
Writing or Letter of Attorney made unto me by G: H: of London, Gent. have
received the day of the date hereof, of T. L. of B. in the County of M. Yeoman,
the sum of 40 s. for payment whereof the said T: L. stood bound to the said G:
H: by his Bill Obligatory, of which sum of 40 s. so by me received, I
acknowledge my self in the name of the said G: H: to be truly and fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly
acquit and discharge the said T. L. his Heirs Executors and Administrators, and
every of them by these presents: In witness etc.

Another release of Errors.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I W: F: of W: in the County
of S. Esquire, for diverse good causes and considerations me thereunto moving,
have remised released, and for ever quit-claimed, and by these presents for me,
my Executors and Administrators, do remise release, and for ever quit-claim
unto J: S: of N: in the said County Gent. all and all manner of Error and
Errors, Actions Suites, Process and Writs of Error whatsoever, which I the said
W. F. my Executors or Administrators, or any of us heretofore had, now have, or
at any time or times hereafter, may, can, might, should, or ought to have,
commence, prosecute, or pursue against the said I. S. his Executors or
Administrators, for touching or concerning, or upon or by reason of any
Judgment or Judgments whatsoever, by or in the behalf of him the said I: S: at
any time heretofore had prosecuted or obtained in any of the Kings Majesty's
Courts whatsoever, against the said W F. in any wise, or against any other
person or persons, which were or are in any sort bound for or with the said W.
F. for any matter thing or cause whatsoever, from the beginning of the World
until the day of the date hereof: In witness etc.

A Release of Errors in a Fine.
THis Indenture made the 10th. day of May, An: Dom: 1650. between R. D. of S.
in the County of N. Gent. on the one party, and L. D. Son and Heir apparent of
the said R. J. S. Esquire, Son and Heir apparent of Sir T: S: Knight, and R: H:
of N. in the County of C: Esquire; witnesses, That the said R. D. for diverse and
sundry good causes and considerations him thereunto moving, and especially for
and in consideration of a Marriage already had and solemnized between the said
R. D. and E. the now wife of the said R. and Mother of the said L: D: has
remised released and quit-claimed, and by these presents, does for him and his
Heirs quit claim, as well unto the said L. D and his Heirs, as unto the said J:
S. and R. H. their and every of their Heirs, all and all manner of Errors
Actions and Writs of Errors, Judgments of Errors Executions Rights and Demands
whatsoever, whereunto the said R: D. now is, or he or his Heirs hereafter shall
be in any wise entitled unto by or upon, or by reason means or occasion of any
Fine or Fines heretofore levied, sithence the beginning of his Highness Reign
that now is, unto the said T. S. and R. H. or to either of them, and unto any
person or persons jointly or severally, or by reason of any Error or Errors
whatsoever, therein or therabouts had committed made or suffered; so tha the the
said R. D. and his Heirs, shall be thereof for ever by these presents excluded
and barred: In witness whereof etc.

A general Release touching Evidences and Writings.
BE it known unto all me by these presents, That I R. D. of E. in the County of
W: Esquire, have had and rec^ived the day of the date hereof, of A: G: Widow,
Executrix of the last Will and Testamnnt of T: G: of B: in the said County
Gent. and J. G: Gent. Son and Heir of the s^id T: G: one ancient Chest plated
with Iron bars, containing all and every such Boxes and parcels of Evidences
Mynuments Escripts Court-Rolls Terrars Charters and Writings, concerning the
Lands Possessions and Inheritance of A: B: late of C: in the County of D:
Esquire, deceased, and now the Lands and Inheritance of me the said R: D. as
delivered and referred by the Right Honorable T: late Earl of N: deceased, to
the Custody and safe keeping of the said T: G: and remaining or left upon the
death of the said T: G: in the custody or possession of the said A: G: and J.
or either of them. Of all which said Chest and Boxes, and all other the parceis
of Evidences Mynuments Escripts Charters Court-Rolls Terrars and Writings
aforesaid, and of all and every Action Challenge Suit and Demand whatsoever,
touching the custody detaining safe keeping or delivery of the Chest Boxes and
the said Mynuments Escripts Charters and Writings, and every of them, I the
said R. D: for me, my Heirs Executors and Administrators, do acquit exonerate
and discharge the said A: G: and J: G: their Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and the Heirs Executors and Administrators of them and either
of them, by these presents: In witness wheref etc.

A general Release by Executors.
To all Christian people, to whom this present writing shall come, A: W: of B:
in the County of D: widow, and E: W: of B: in the said County, Yeoman,
Executors of the last Will and Testament of J: W. deceased, send greeting; Know
ye, that we the said A: W. and E: W. and either of us, for diverse good causes
and considerations, us and either of us moving, have remised released and
quit-claimed, and by these presents, of and from us and either of us, our and
either of our Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of us do remise
release and quit-claim unto R. S. of S. in the County of L. Gent. all and all
manner of Actions Suits Quarrels Debts Duties Errors Actions Writ and Writs of
Errors and Demands whatsoever, which we or either of us heretofore had, now
have, or hereafter shall may can might or ought to have against the said R. S.
his Heirs Executors or Administrators, or any of them, for or by reason of any
Action Suit or Judgment heretofore had prosecuted or obtained, by or in the
behalf of the said R. S. against us the said A. and J. or either of us in his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, foror concerning etc. for any matter cause or
thing, from the beginning of the World, until the day of the date of these
presents; In witness whereof etc.

Of Tithe, Lead-Oare.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, J: L: of N: in the County of N:
Esquire, J: I: of etc. Gent. and F: his wi^e, Sister of the said J. L. sends
greeting; Whereas Sir F: L: Knight, did by Indenture or other sufficient
assurance, demise and grant unto the said J: L: and F: his Sister, all that his
Tithe Lead-Oare, within the high Peak, or elsewhere, within the County of D.
with all and singular Commodities and Profits thereof, or thereunto belonging or
appertaining, in what kind or order soever it was paid, with the Appurtenances
thereunto belonging, in such manner and sort, as G: H: his Assignee or Assignees
then occupied the same Tithe Lead-Oare, for the term of 21. years, from the day
of the Feast of Pentecost, next ensuing the date of the said Indenture or
Conveyance, as by the same more fully appears.

And whereas the said J: L: and F: Sister of the said I: before the Marriage
between her and I: I: have heretofore made a Grant and an Assignment in Writing
to G: E: etc. for the conveyance and assurance of the said Tithe Lead-Oare,
with the appurtenances, and all and singular Commodities and Profits thereunto
belonging, for all the term of years which they had or claimed in or to the
same, and of all their and either of their Estates Title or Interest therein, by
virtue of the Lease aforesaid.

Now the said J: L: I: I: and F: his wife, for the further assurance of the
said Oar to the said E: Have granted confirmed remised and released, and by
these presents do grant confirm and release unto the said E: of S: his
Executors and Assigns, all the said Tithe Lead-Oare, and all and every their
and every of their Estate Right Title Interest Claim and Demand whatsoever,
which they the said J: L: I* I: and F: his wife, or any of them have had or may
claim and demand, of in or to the same, by virtue of the Lease aforesaid; To
have and to hold the same to the said E. and his Assigns, for and during so
many of the said 21. years as yet remain unexpired, and during all such term
and interest, and in as ample manner and form as they the said I* I. and F. his
wife, or any of them ought to have and hold the same, by virtue of the said
Lease: In witness etc.

A Release with Warranty.
TO All to whom these Presents shall come, T. F. of G. in the County of H.
sends greeting. Whereas G. F. of L. in the said County Gent. had and purchased
of me the said T. F. one Message or Tenement, situate lying and being in B.
in the said County, and also all Lands, Meadows, Feedings and Pastures, Woods,
Under-Woods and Trees of in and on the Premises, growing and being; and the
Land, Ground and Soil where the said Woods, Under-Woods and Trees do grow, and
the Reversion and Reversions whatsoever, of all and singular the Premises, and
the yearly Rents and Profits reserved upon certain demisses and grants of the
Premises any way made, and to the late dissolved Monastery of B. aforesaid, in
the County aforesaid belonging and appertaining, and part of the Possessions
thereof being, to have and to hold to the said G. F. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, as by the foresaid Deed of Feoffment by me to the said G. F. made,
bearing date etc. more at large appears.

Now know ye, That I the said T. F. to have Remised, Released, and for me, and
mine Heirs for ever, quite-claimed unto the said G. F. his Heirs and Assigns,
all my right, title, interest, claim and demand which I ever had, now have, or
by any ways or means hereafter may have, of and in the foresaid Message or
Tenement and Premises, or any part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances,
So that neither I the said T. F. nor my Heirs, nor any other by us, or in our
names, any right, title, interest or claim in the foresaid Message or
Tenement, or any of the Premises, nor in any part or parcel thereof, from
henceforth may require, claim or challenge, but from all Action of Right,
Title, Interest or Claim, may all be utterly barred and excluded by these
Presents.

And I the said T. F. and my Heirs, the said Message or Tenement, and all and
singular the Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, to the said G. F. his
Heirs and Assigns, against me the said T. F. and my Heirs will Warrant, and for
ever by these Presents defend. In Witness, etc.

By a Substitute to an Attorney.
TO All, to whom these Presents shall come, N. C. of etc. sends greeting.
Whereas A. B. of L. Gent. by his Writing under his Hand, and Seal, dated etc.
did give unto C. D. of M. of T. Gent. full power and authority as his lawful
Attorney, to ask, levy, receive, and take of R. S. of W. in the County of N.
Yeoman, the sum of 40 s. and whereas the said C. D. by virtue of the said
Letter of Attorney, did by his Writing under his Hand and Seal, Constitute and
appoint me the said N. C. his lawful Deputy and Substitute, to ask, levy
receive and take to the use of the said A. B. and did give me further authority
to deal for him in the Premises, in as full and ample manner to all intents
and purposes, as he the said C. D, could or might have done by virtue of the
said Letter of Attorney to him made as aforesaid, as in and by the Writing made
to me by the said A: B: appears.

Now know ye, that I the said N. C. have received the day of the date hereof the
said R. S. the said sum of 40 s. and thereof, and of every part thereof, in the
name of the said A. B. do acquit and discharge the said R. S. by these
Presents. In Witness, etc.

For a Legacy.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I A: B: of P: in the County of S: Yeoman,
have received and had the day of the date hereof, of G. T. Executor of the last
Will and Testament of L. M. the sum of 50 l. of lawful money of England, in
full payment and satisfaction of 50 l. given and bequeathed by the said L. M.
unto me the said A: B: by the said Will of the said L: M: which said sum of 50
l. I acknowledge to have received in full satisfaction of all Bequests and
Legacies to me given by the said Will; and thereof, and of every part thereof, do
acquit and discharge the said G. T. his Executors and Administrators by these
Presents. In witness: etc.

For a Debt.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I A: B: of etc. have received and had the
day of the date hereofof I: L: of etc. Gent. the sum of 20 l. in part of
payment of a greater sum due unto me specified and contained in a certaing
Writing Obligatory, wherein the said I. L. stands bounden with others, unto
me the said A: B. for payment of 40 s. due and payable unto me, on the 10th.
day of May last past, of which said sum of 20 s. I do acknowledge the Receipt,
and thereof, and of every part do clearly acquit and discharge the said I. L.
his Heirs Executors Administrators by these Presents. In Witness, etc.

A Release made by mediatian of Friends to certain Lands, and to certain rent.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between etc. Witnesses, That whereas Suit, variance
and disagreement, has been heretofore had and made between the said parties to
these Presents, of, for and concerning the right, title, interest and
inheritance of certain Lands. Tenements and Hereditaments, lying and being in
W. in the County of N. late in the Possession or Occupation of etc. and which
they the said A: B. and C: D: did challenge and claim to be their several
Inheritance, and to have been held and occupied under the Rent of etc. and
which the said I: S: claimed to be his several and sole Inheritance and
alleged them the said A. B. and C: D: and those whose estate they have only to
have received the sum of etc. as a dry Rent out of the said Premises, which
said matters of variance controversy and debate, were, and are by the
mediation of etc. Friends indifferently chosen, by all the said parties ended
and determined. And all the said parties mutually agreed of, for, and
concerning all the said Causes, Matters and Greevances, and although it seemed
to the said etc. the Mediators that the said I. S. had good Title to the said
Message and whole Tenement and that there was only due to the said A: B: and
C: D: a Rent of etc. yearly; yet notwithstanding for the clear extinguishing of
the said pretended interest of the said A: B: and C: D: as well in and to the
said Tenement, as also in and to the said Rent of etc. And for the continuance
of quietness and friendship between the said parties according to the mediation
of the said etc. It is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between
the said parties, and every of them in manner and form following.

And first the said A. B. and C. D. for them their Heirs Executors and
Administrators, do remise and release unto the said J. S. being in his lawful
and peaceable possession of the said Message and Premises all their and
either of their Right and Interest of in and to the said Rent Message and
Tenement, and do covenant grant conclude condescend and fully agree to and with
the said J. S. his Heirs Executors and Administrators and to and with every of
them by these presents, That he the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns and every
of them shall and may at all and every time and times hereafter lawfully
peaceable and quietly have hold occupy and enjoy a^ their and every of their
sol^ and proper Inheritance of all such Lands Tenements and Hereditaments lying
in W. free and clearly discharged of all Rents issuing out of the same payato
them or either of them.

And further also, that all the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and the
Right Title and Inheritance of the same and every part and parcel thereof, is
and shall be adjudged construed and taken to be in the said J. S. and his Heirs
for ever, as their sole and proper Inheritance without any further claim
thereof or therein to be made by the said A. B. and C. D. or either of them in
any wise.

And further, That all the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments lying in etc.
the day of the date hereof are, and so shall from time to time and at all times
hereafter remain continue and be unto the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, free and clearly acquitted exonerated and discharged or otherwise
sufficiently from time to time hereafter acquitted or demnified and saved
harmless of and from all and all manner of former or other bargains sales, etc.

And lastly for the further and full extinguishment, as well of the said yearly
Rent of etc, as also of all the pretended Interest of them the said B. and C.
D. of in and to the same, they the said A. B. and C. D. for themselves their
heirs and Assigns do further covenant grant conclude and agree to and with the
said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That they the said A: B. and C. D. their Heirs and Assigns and every
of them, shall and will from time to time and at all times hereafter by the
space of three years upon reasonable Request of the said J. S. his Heirs or
Assigns to them to be made, and at and upon his only proper costs and charges
in the Law and otherwise knowledge and levy a Fine sur Release of the said
Message Lands Tenements and Hereditaments before specified unto him the said
J: S: and his Heirs, and for the full explanation of the true intent and
meaning of the levying of the said Fine as aforesaid.

It is further declared by them the said A: B: and C: D: and likewise
covenanted and agreed by and between all the said parties to these Presents,
That the said Fine so before covenanted to be levied unto the said J. S: as
aforesaid shall extend to all the said Message Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments lying in aforesaid, and to all Rents issuing out of the same, and
to no other Lands or Tenements, and that the same shall be for the establishing
of the same to the said J: S: his Heirs and assigns for ever, and to no other
use intent or purpose whatsoever.

A Release by him that suffered a Recovery in Land to the Recoverer after the
Recovery passed.
TO all etc. T. M. etc. sends greeting, where I the said T. in the Term of
Saint Michaell last past, have sued a Writ of Entry Sur disseisin in le post,
out of the Queens Majesty's Court of Chancery returnable before her Justices in
her Court of common pleas at Westminster, against N. M. of etc. by the name of
N. M. of the moiety of one Message, etc. in C. in the County aforesaid, In
which Action the said N. in the same Court did vouch to warranty E. P. N. P.
who appearing in their proper persons, did vouch over T. H. the common vouch
according to the course of common Recoveries had, who afterward made Default,
and thereupon Judgment given and Execution thereof had and executed accordingly
as does appear in the 553 Roll of the common pleas in the said Court, in the
said Term of Saint Michall enrolled; which Recovery so had and executed, was to
the only use of the said N M. and the Heirs of the same N. Know ye that that I
the said T. have remised released and quit-claimed for and from me mine Heirs
and Assigns for ever, do remise release and quite claim unto the said N. M. in
his full and peceable possession and Seisin being and to the Heirs and Assigns
of the same N. for ever all the Right Title Claim Interest and Demand
whatsoever, I had now have or here-hereafter may have of and in the said
Premises, and in every part thereof.

And further I the said T. all the said premises with the appurtenances unto
the said N. M. and to the Heirs of the said N. against the said T. and mine
heirs only shall warrant and defend for ever by these presents, In Witness
etc. dated the sixth day of November Anno R. R. Eliz. 8.

REVOCATIONS.
Of Uses in former Indentures mentioned according to the power thereby given.
THis Indenture, made etc. Between E: S: of S. in the County of L: Esquire of
the one part, and R, H. T. T. J. B. and H: H: of the other part witnesses,
That whereas the said E: S: did heretofore by his Indenture bearing date etc:
made betwixt him the said E: S: of the one part, and J: O: of O: in the said
County of L Esquire of the other part, do covenant grant and agree to and with
the said J: O: his Executors and Administrators That he the said E: his Heirs
in such manner and form as in and by the said recited or mentioned indentures
is covenanted and agreed, should and would convey and assure or cause to be
conveyed and assured unto the Right honorable H: Earl of D: sithence deceased,
and to the said R: H: T: T: etc: and their Heirs and to the Survivor of them
and his heirs, all and singular Manors of S: B: and S: in the said County of
L: and also all and singular Suits Seigniories Services Franchises Privileges
Court-Leetss Perquisites of Courts and Leets view of Frank pledge and that to
view of Frankpledge appertains, and all appurtenances emoluments and
hereditaments whatsoever unto the said Manors and Lordships or unto any of
them belonging and appertaining, and also all and singular his Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, within the several
Towns Townsh^p. Feilds Hamlets precincts and territories of S: H A and O and
elsewhere in the County of L: to the several uses intents and purposes
agreements limitations liberties provisoes and conditions in the said mentioned
or recited Indenture mentioned expressed and declared and to no other use
intent or purpose in any wise.

The particulars of which said uses does more plainly appear in and by the said
mentioned ot recited Indenture, Relation thereunto being had or made.

In which said recited or mentioned Indenture of the 35 year of her Highness
Reign there is nevertheles contained and comprised one Proviso or Clause to the
Tenor or Effect hereafter following, That is to say, Provided nevertheless etc.
(reciting the Proviso of Revocation Verbatim.)

Now therefore it is agreed by and betwixt the parties to these Presents, and
the said E: S. according to the Tenor Power or Liberty of the said Proviso
being fully minded determined and resolved to alter and determine the Estate
and Estates limited in use, in o^ by the said mentioned Indenture of the 35th.
year of her highness Reign, unto T S. of B. and the heirs males of his body,
and also the Estate and Estates limited in use in or by the said recited
Indentures unto J. S. for term of his life without impeachment of wast, and
after his decease, then to E: S: Son of the said I. and the Heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten, does by these presents and by force and according to
the said Proviso before recited, or the power or Liberty thereof, revoke repeal
Revocation.
and determine all and every the said Estate and Estates in any wise limited in
use in or by the said recited or mentioned Indentures unto the said T. S: of B.
and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begootten and also all and every the
estate and estates in or by the said Indentures limited in use unto the said J.
S. for term of his life and all and every the Estate and Estates in or by the
said recited or mentioned Indentures limited in use unto the said E: S: Son of
the said I: and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten of in for and
concerning all and every the Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments with
their and every of their appurtenances in any wise comprised contained or
specified in or by the said mentioned or recited Indentures.

And likewise the said E. S: does hereby limit publish and declare Declaration
of uses.
according to the Tenor of the said recited Proviso, and the power and liberty
thereof, that all and every the Estates in any wise manner and form limited in
use in or by the said mentioned Indenture of the 35th year of her Majesty's
Reign unto the said T. S. and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, as
also all and every the estate and estates in any manner or form limited in use
in or by the said mentioned Indenture unto the said J: S. for term of his life
without impeachment of Wast, and all and every the Estate and Estates in any
wise manner or form limited in use in or by the last mentioned Indentures unto
the said E. S. Son of the said J: and the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, shall from henceforth of in for and concerning all and every the
Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments with their appurtenances in any wise
comprised contained or specified in the said recited Indentute of the 35th,
year of her Highness Reign, shall cease determine, be frustrate void and no
further effect or continuance in the Law. Any the limitation of use or uses in
the said mentioned Indentures or any other matter or thing what soever to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding,

And that all and singular the said Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
aforesaid with their and every of their Appurtenances and the only use thereof,
shall from henceforth remain continue and be unto the said E: S: party to these
presents. and his heirs for ever, and not in any sort manner or form unto the
said T. S, and the heirs males of his body, nor to the said J: S: for term of
his life, nor to the said E: S: Son of the said I. and the heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten, nor to their or any of their Assignee or Assigns, In
witness, etc.

DAVENPORT.

A Declaration of uses upon the Revocation above written.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, E. S: of S: in the County of L:
Esquire sends greeting, Know ye that I the said E: S: (having before the
making hereof) revoked reduced and revested the Estate of Inheritance of all
and singular my Manors Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever
with the appurtenances situate, etc. in and unto me the said E. S. and my
Heirs, for diverse good causes and considerations me thereunto moving, has
given granted and confirmed, and by these presents, do give grant and confirm
unto A. B. of etc. and R. L. of etc. all and singular my Manors Messuages
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever with the Appurtenances, To have
and to hold the said Manors, etc. unto the said A. B. and R. L. their Heirs
and Assigns to the several uses behoofs Intents and purposes hereafter in
these presents specified, and to none other use intent or purpose whatsoever,
That is to say. To the only sole and proper use and behoof of me the said E. S.
and my Heirs and Assigns for ever, In witness etc.

DAVENPORT.

Another Deed of Revocation.
TO all etc. A. B. of etc. greeting, Know ye that I the said A. B. am fully
minded disposed and determined to revoke annull determine and make void all and
every the uses limitations and intents named limited assigned or appointed in
and by the above mentioned or recited Indentures of in or to any Manors
Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments in the said county of S. with their
appurtenances in the said Indenture, specified to any Person or persons
whatsoever, and by this my Writing under my Seal, and signed with my own hand
in the presence of A. B. C. D. and E. F. three lawful and credible Witnesses,
do declare publish limit pronounce and appoint, That all and singular the said
uses declared appointed mentioned and limited to G. H. etc. and all and every
Use and Uses mentioned limited or appointed to any person or persons in and by
the said recited Indenture, of in or to, the said Manors Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments in the said County of S. or of in or to any part or parcel
thereof, shall be void determined revoked and of none effect.

And I the said A. B. determine and revoke by these Presents, all and every the
uses aforesaid, of for or concerning the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments in the said County any thing in the said Indentures contained, or
any Act or Acts Thing or things whatsoever, had made or suffered to be done by
me heretofore to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding etc. In Witness etc.

A Clause of Revocation.
PRovided always and upon Condition, That if the said A. B. shall at any time
hereafter during his natural life, tender or pay unto the above named C. D. or
to any person or to any persons to his use the sum of 6 d. of lawful English
money with intent or purpose to frustrate and make void this present Deed, and
the Estate and Estates thereby conveyed, limited raised or assured, that then
and from thenceforth this present Deed, and all and every the Uses,
Limitations, Estates, Grants, Articles, and Agreements therein or thereby
mentioned, limited, raised, or in any sort appointed, and the Execution thereof
shall be absolutely void frustrate and of none Effect in the Law, any thing
herein contained, etc.

A Proviso for Revocation of part.
PRovided always, and nevertheless it is the true intent and meaning of all
the said partis to these Presents, That if the said E. S. shall be minded to
determine at any time during his natural life, the Estate and Estates limited
in use, in such sort as is aforesaid to the said T. S. and the Heirs males of
his body lawfully begotten, and for Default of such issue to the said J. S. for
term of his natural life without impeachment of wast, and after his decease to
etc. and shall also by his Deed indented at any time hereafter to be made
between the said E. S, of the one part, and the said R. H. T. T. or the
Survivor of them of the other party, or by his last Will and Testament in
Writing under his hand and Seal, declare and limit the same, or such other uses
as shall seem meet and convenient to the said E. S. That then and from
thenceforth the said Estates and uses limited and appointed before by these
presents to the said T. S. to cease and determine, and be utterly void, as
though the same had never been madelimited, or appointed.

SURRENDERS.
Of Tenants for life, to the end a recovery may be had to make Lands in
Fee-simple, with a Reversion of their Estates.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. B. and C. D. etc. Tenants and Farmers unto
E: S. of S. in the County of L. Esquire, of the one part, and the said E. S. of
the other part; witnesses, That the said A. B. etc. for diverse and sundry good
causes and considerations them thereunto moving, have given granted and
surrendered, and by these presents do give grant and surrender unto the said E.
S. his Heirs and Assigns, all and singular their several Estates Terms and
Demands which they or any of them has or have, of in or unto all those
several Messuages Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, or therewith or with
any of them usually occupied, as part parcel or belonging, situate lying and
being in O. and S. aforesaid, and now or late in the several Tenures or
Occupations of the said A. B. C. D. etc. their or any of their Assignee or
Assignees: To have and to hold to the said E. S. and his Heirs for ever, to the
use of him and his Heirs, to the intent and purpose that he may be Tenant of
the Freehold thereof, so as a perfect common Recovery may be thereof (among
other things) had and pursued against him, to and for such uses and intents as
are mentioned and expressed, in one Indenture bearing date etc.

Provided nevertheless, and upon Condition, that if the said E. S. his Heirs
or Assigns, do not well and truly without fraud or covin tender and pay unto
every of them the said A. B. C. D. etc: Tenants and Farmers, parties to these
presents, or to every of their Assigns, the full sum of 1000 l a piece, of
good and lawful money of England, in or upon the 20th. day of A. next coming,
after the date hereof, at the now several dwelling Houses of the said A. B:
and C. D. etc. Tenants and Farmers, parties to these presents) That then and
from thenceforth this present Surrender, and all and every the Estate and
Estates thereby, or by any means thereof in any wise conveyed, shall cease and be
utterly void, and of no further effect: And that then and from thenceforth the
said A: B. C. D. etc. (Tenants and Farmers parties to these presents) and their
Assigns, shall have retain and enjoy from the said E: S: his Heirs and Assigns,
all and every the said Messuages Tenements and Premises, in any wise
surrendered or mentioned to be surrendered in or by these presents, as in his, or
their former Estate, any thing in these presents or otherwise to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And furthermore the said E. S. is contented and pleased, and by these presents
does grant and agree, to and with the said A. B. C. D. etc. and to and with
every of them by these presents, and with their and every of their Assigns,
that they the said A. B. C. D. etc. Tenants and Farmers, parties to these
presents, shall and may have hold occupy and enjoy, the said several Messuages
Lands and Tenements, in their several Tenures or Occupations, from the making
hereof, until the said 20th. day of August, next ensuing, upon and under his
and their such several ancient and accustomed Rents Boons Duties and Services,
as were or are reserved to be due and payable, in or by virtue of his or their
several former Lease or Leases, in as large and ample manner as they might or
ought to be done, at, or before the making of these presents: In witness etc.

Davenport.
In the making of this Surrender, there must be care taken when the Assizes at
which such Recovery is to be suffered, do begin, to the end that the day of
payment may be sure to ten days, or therabouts, after the beginning of the
Assizes. And it will be safest for the Tenant for life or lives before he
surrender to assign over his Lease to some Friend for a 100. years, if the
Lessees so long sball live; And for Tenant for years to assign the residue of
his term -- and then to surrender.
Another shorter Deed of Surrender.
THis Indenture etc. Between T. H. of etc. of the one part, and R. H. of etc.
of the other part; Witnesses, That whereas T. L. Esquire; has heretofore demised
to the said R. H. and his Assigns, one Burgage or Tenement, lying and being in
P. with all Houses Edifices Buildings Gardens Crofts Closes Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging, or to or with the same used or accustomed to
be occupied: To have and to hold to the said R. and his Assigns, for and during
the term of the natural lives of A. B. C. D. etc. And whereas sithence the
making of the said Lease, the said T: L: has granted bargained and sold the
said Burgage or Tenement, and other the Premises, unto the said T. H. and his
Heirs. Now to the end that the said T: H. may have thereof and of every part
thereof, for his further assurance a good and perfect Recovery against the said
T. L. and yet notwithstanding the said Lease to stand and be in its force and
effect, after the said Recoverey suffered.

In consideration thereof, and for that purpose only he the said R. H. at the
special instance and request of the said T. H. is contented and pleased to
give grant and surrender, and does by these presents give grant and surrender
unto the said T. H. and his Heirs, all his Estate in the said Burgage and
Tenement, and other the Premises.

Upon Condition nevertheless, That if the said T. H. or his Assigns, do not
well and truly satitfie and pay to the said R. H. his Executors or
Administrators the sum of 10000 l. of good and lawful money of England, in or
upon the Feast Day of St. Michael the Archangel, next coming etc. That then
this present Gift Grant and Surrender, to be utterly void and of none effect in
Law. And that then and from thenceforth, the said R. H. and his Assigns, to
remain be and continue in the said Burgage or Tenement, and other the
Premises, in his and their former Estate, any thing herein contained, to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding In witness

Hesketh.

A surrender of a Jointure upon Condition.
THis Indenture made etc. Between R: M. of etc. Esquire, and J. his wife, late
wife of R. Lord O: deceased, of the one part, and the Right Honorable C: Lord
O. of the other part; Witnesses, That the said R. M. and Dame J. his wife, as
in the right of the said Dame I: do hold for term of the natural life of the
said Dame I. diverse and sundry Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, within the
Baronies and Manors of O: B. and H. in the County of N: being the late
Inheritance of the said R. Lord Ogle deceased, late Husband to the said I. and
Brother to the said C. Lord O. the immediate Remainder or Reversion thereof
expectant in the said C. Lord O: and his Heirs, or to the Heirs of his body
lawfully begotten for ever.

Now the said R. M. and Dame J. his wife, as well for the consideration
hereafter in this Indenture mentioned; As also for the perfecting of an Estate
or Conveyance to be had and made, in consideration of a Marriage hereafter (by
Gods grace) to be solemnized, between E. T. Esquire, second Son of the Right
Honorable G. Earl of S. and J. O. Daughter of the said C. Lord O. Have given
granted and surrendered, and by these presents, do give grant and surrender unto
the said C. Lord O. and his Heirs, upon condition hereafter in this Indenture
mentioned; All and singular the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, before in
this Indenture mentioned: And all such other Lands and Hereditaments, as the
said R: M: and Dame J. his wife, as in the right of the said J. have, or of
right ought to have, for term of the life of the said Jr being the late
Inheritance of the said R. Lord O. her late Husband: and all the Estate Right
Title and Interest which the said R. M. and Dame J. his wife, as in the Right
of the said Dame J. have or ought to have in or to the said Lands and
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof: To have and to hold the said Lands and
Premises, and the Estates Right Title and Interest of the said R. M. and Dame
J. his wife, in and to the said Lands unto the said C. Lord O. and his Heirs;
Upon condition that if the said C. Lord O. do not well and truly content, or
cause to be contented and paid unto the said R. M. and Dame J. his wife, or
their Assigns, the sum of 10000 l. of lawful English money, upon the
Feast Day of St. Martin the Bishop in Winter, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God etc. at or in the Mansion House of the said R. M. at etc. in the
County of etc. That then and from thenceforth, this present Grant and Surrender
to be utterly void and of none effact, and that from and after such default of
payment of the said sum of 10000 l. at the time and place aforesaid, it shall
and may be lawful to the said R. M. and Dame J. his wife, and their Assigns,
to enter into the said Lands and Premises, and the same to have and enjoy, as
in their former Estate.

And the said C. Lord O. does covenant for him etc. with the said R. M. and
Dame J. his wife, and their Assigns, that they and their Assigns shall take the
Rents and Profits of the said Lands and Premises, to their own use, without
any account thereof making, until the said Feast of St, Martin etc. if the said
Dame J. so long shall live.

A Surrender by Tenant for life to him in Reversion or Remalnder, to the intent
to have a Recovery to pass.
THis Indenture etc. 1. Iunij An. 35. R. R. Eliz. etc. Between L. S. of L.
Widow, on the one party, and E: H: Citizen and Iron-monger of L: on the other
party; Witnesses, That the said L: for the sum of 500 l. of etc. by the said
E: his Executors or Administrators, well and truly to be paid to the said L:
her Executors or Administrators, on the 20. day of Novem: next coming, after
the date of these presents, and for diverse other considerations her moving,
has granted assigned surrendered and set over, and by these presents does etc.
unto the said E: H: his Executors Administrators and Assigns, all her Right
Interest and Term of life, of and in the one Moiety and half part of all that
Message or Tenement, situate and being in the Parish of St. P: in C: L: late
in the Occupation of etc. and of and in all Easments and Commodities
whatsoever, to the said Moiety or half part of the said Message or Tenement
belonging or appertaining: To have and to hold all and singular the Premises,
with the appurtenances, unto the said E: H: his Executors Administrators and
Assigns.

Provided always, that if the said E: H: his Executors or Administrators, do
not pay, or cause etc. to the said L: or her Assigns, the said sum of 500 l.
of etc. upon the said 20th. day of Novem: next ensuing the date hereof,
according to the true meaning of these presents, without any further delay;
That then this Grant and Surrender to be void and of none effect, and that then
and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said L: into
all and singular the Premises to enter, and the same to have again, as in her
former Estate, any thing to the contrary etc. In witness etc.

A Surrender of a Lease.
TO all etc. Know ye that I the said R: for certain causes etc. have given
granted remised released surrendered, and altogether for me, mine Executors
Administrators and Assigns, for ever quit claimed unto I: D: his Executors or
Administrators, all the Estate Lease Interest Claim and Term of years, to come
and demand whatsoever that I the said R: mine Executors etc. had have should
might or ought to have or claim, of in and to all those eight acres etc. which
the said I: by his Indenture of Lease, dated etc. demised and granted to me the
said R. mine Executors and Assigns for the term of etc. from the Feast etc. and
for a certain yearly Rent therein reserved by force of the same Indenture of
Lease, or otherwise. And I the said R: H: do covenant etc. That the said
Indenture of Lease, and all and singular the Premises therein demised, at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, are, and be free and clear of all
former Bargains Sales Gifts Grants Leases Assignments, and all other Charges
Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made or done by me the said R: or by
any other by my means, or under my Right Title or Interest, before the
ensealing and delivery hereof: In witness etc.

A form of a Surrender.
TO all people to whom this present Writing shall come, R. W. Citizen and S. of
L. sends greeting; Whereas I the said R. at this present stand, and am
lawfully and sole seized for term of my natural life, of and in all that
Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances, now being in the Tenure or
Occupation of me the said R. and mine Assigns, set, lying, and being in etc. by
force of one Indenture of Lease, bearing date etc. thereof made and granted by
the right Reverend Father in God E. by the permission of God late Bishop of L.
unto me the said R. W. and to K. then my wife, and now deceased, and to R. W.
the younger, then my Son, and now also deceased, for term of our lives and the
life of the longer liver of us. And whereas the Reversion of all and singular
the Premises, does belong and appertain to the Reverend Father in God I. by
the Divine Providence of God now Bishop of L. and his Successors.

Now know ye, that I the said R. M. for diverse good causes and considerations
me thereunto moving, Surrendered, and do by these presents fully and clearly
Surrender unto the said Reverend Father I. by the Divine Providence of God now
Bishop of L. and his Successors, as well the said Tenement and other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, as also all that my said Lease and Estate
for term of my natural life, of and in the same, together with the said
Indenture, and all my Right Title and Interest of and in all and singular the
Premises, with the appurtenances, to have and to hold the same, together with
the said Estate and Interest, and all and singular other the Premises, unto the
said Reverend Father and his Successors, from henceforth for ever; In witness
etc.

A Surrender of Copyhold Land Conditional.
H. in commitat. M. MEmorand. That on the 10th. day of Septem. in the 24. year
of the Reign etc. R. N. of H. in the County of M. Yeoman, one of the Customary
Tenants of the said Manor of H. has without the Court surrendered into the
hands of the Lord of the said Manor, by the hands of T. K. and I. K. Yeomen,
two of the customary Tenants of the said Manor of H. one Croft, with the
appurtenances, commonly called or known by name of G. Lands, now in the Tenure
or Occupation of the said R. N. or his Assigns, containing by estimation 18.
acres, be it more or less, situate lying and being within the said Manor, to
the use and behoof of T. S. Citizen and Cloth-worker of L. and of his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the said Manor, upon and under
this Condition nevertheless; That is to say, That if the said R. N. his Heirs
Executors Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid
to the said T. S. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, the sum of 44
l. of etc. at one entire payment of the 10th of February, which shall be etc.
at the now Mansion house of the said T. S. situate etc. That then and from
thence forth the said Surrender to be void and of none effect; And that then
and from thenceforth it shall be lawful, to and for the said R. N. his Heirs
and Assigns, to have again and re-enjoy the said Croft, as in the former Estate
of the said R. The said Surrender to the contrary notwithstanding.

TRUSTS.
THis Indenture made etc. Between I: W: of B: in the County of E. of the one
part, and W. H. of G. in the County of M. of the other part, Witnesses, That
the said I. W. for, and in consideration of the sum of etc. of lawful money of
England to him in hand paid by the said W: H: at and before the ensealing and
delivery of these Presents, And for diverse other causes and considerations, him
the said I: W: thereunto especially moving, has granted, bargained, sold,
aliened, released and confirmed; and by these presents, does grant, bargain,
sell, alien, release and confirm unto the said W. H. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, all that the Manor etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders, of all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, and all the
estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever, of him the said J:
W: of, in, to or out of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof; all which said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, the said J:
W: by a certain Indenture, bearing date etc. has for the considerations therein
expressed, granted, bargained, sold, demised, and to farm-letten unto the said
VV: H: his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the time of the ensealing
and delivery of the same recited Indenture, for the term of etc. thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, at and under the rent of etc.
payable etc. if the same be lawfully demanded, as by the said recited Indenture
more at large appears. And all which Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises before mentioned by virtue thereof, and of the
Statute of uses now are in the actual possession of the said W: H: To have and
to hold the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hered^taments and
Prem^sses, hereby granted, bargained, sold, aliened, released, and confirmed or
meant, mentioned or intended to be hereby granted, bargained sold aliened,
released and confirmed, and every part and parcel thereof, to him the said W. H.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only and proper use and behoof of him
the said W. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And it is hereby agreed by and
between the said parties, That the said W. H. and his Heirs shall have and hold
all and singular the Manors, Messuages, Lands and Premises with their
appurtenances, upon this special Trust and Confidence; nevertheless, That he
the said W. H. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may during the joint lives of
the said I. W. and M. his now wife, receive all the benefits, issues, rents and
profits, of all and singular the Manors, Houses, Tenements, Lands and
Premises whatsoever, and employ the same, and every part thereof, wholly for
the use, maintenance, benefit and livelihood of M. now wife of the said I. VV.
and to and for the livelihood, maintenance and education of the children of
them the said I. and M. and for the maintenance, upholding, and reparation of
the Manor and Mansion House of the said I. VV. aforesaid called B: being a
great House, and much decayed, with all the outhouses, barns, stables,
dove-houses and buildings thereunto belonging. And upon this further trust and
confidence, That he the said W. H. and his Heirs, from and after the death of
the said I. VV. shall and will permit and suffer the said M. W: during her life,
to have, take, perceive and enjoy the Moiety, or one half of all the Mansion
House called B. and of all and singular the rents, issues and profits of the
said Manors, Lands, and Premises for her Jointure, livelihood, and
maintenance, and the livelihood maintenance and education of the younger
children of them the said I. and M. And for and during the life of the said M.
shall and will permit and suffer the eldest Son of the said I. and M: then
living, to have, take, perceive and enjoy the other Moiety of the said Mansion
House called B: and of the Rents, Issues and Profits, of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises for his livelihood and
maintenance; and in case the said I: VV. have no Issue male living at the time
of his death, then upon Trust and Confidence, that the said VV. H: and his
heirs, shall and will permit and suffer the daughters or daughter of the said
I: W: and M. his wife, for and during the life of the said M. to have, hold,
take, receive, perceive, and enjoy one Moiety of the Rents, Issues and Profits
of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises for their
and her livelihood and maintenance and in case there shall be no issue of the
body of the said I. VV. and M. his wife living at the time of his death, or in
case the said issue shall happen to die, during the said M. her life then upon.
Trust and Confidence, that the said VV. H. and his heirs shall permit, and
suffer the said M. VV. to have, perceive, take and enjoy all the Rents, Issues
and Profits of all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises during her life for her better livelihood and
maintenance. And in case there shall be any issue of the body of I. W. and M.
his wife, hving at the time of the death of the said M. W. then upon this
further Trust and Confidence that the said VV. H. and his Heirs shall and will
at the request, and at the proper costs and charges in the Law of the Son or
Daughters of the said J: VV: as shall be then Heir or Heirs of the bodies o^
the said J: VV: and M: his wife, grant, alien, convey assure and dispose of the
same Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises unto the
said Heir or Heirs, of the bodies of the said J: VV: and M: his wife their
Heirs and Assigns; and in case there shall be no issue of the bodies of the
said J. VV: and M: his wife living at the time of the death of the said M. then
upon this special Trust and Confidence, and to the intent and purpose, that
the said VV. H. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will sell, or otherwise
dispose of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements Hereditaments and Premises so
Estated upon him the said VV. H. and his heirs by these Presents as aforesaid,
and shall employ and dispose of the same, or of the monyes arising upon the
sale thereof in such manner as the said VV. shall by his last Will and Testament
in Writing limit, direct, and appoint.

And it is further agreed by and betwixt the said parties to these Presents,
and the said J. VV. does hereby declare, That it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said VV. H. and his Heirs to defaulk and deduct out of the monyes shall
be raised out of the sale of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Premises,
all such moneys, charges and expenses as he and they shall lay out expend, or
shall be damnified, in or by the managing and execution of this present Trust.
In Witness, etc.

To sell Land to pay Debts and Legacies.
UPon Trust and Confidence, nevertheless to the intent and purpose, That they
the said A. B. and C: D: and their Heirs shall sell and dispose of the said
Manor of L. and all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments estated
upon them the said A. B. and C. D. and their Heirs by these Presents, and
shall employ and dispose of the of the money arising upon sale of the said
Manors and Premises toward the said satisfying and discharging of all the
proper Debts of the said E. F. and of all such Legacies as the said E: F: shall
by his last Will and Testament in Writing give, devise or bequeath to any
person or persons whatsoever. And to the intent also, and upon this further
Trust and confidence, that after the said Debts and Legacies shall be paid and
satisfied, and after the said A. B. and C: D. shall be satisfied all such
charges and disbursments as they shall lay out, disburse and expend in the
mannaging and executing of this Present Trust, they the said A: B: and C: D:
and their Heirs shall pay over the surplusage of the said moneys that shall be
raised by the sale of the said Manor and Lands if any be unto the said E F.
and the said E: F: does hereby declare that the debts which he does intend,
shall be satisfied out of the moneys that shall be raised by the sale of the
said Manor and premises, are his own proper debts; and not such as he does or
shall stand engaged in as surety for any other, and the said E. F: does here.
by also declare, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A B and
C. D. and their heirs defaulk, and deduct out of the moneys, that shall be
raised by the sale of the said Manor and premises, all such moneys charges
and expenses as they shall lay out expend or be damnified in the mannaging and
execution of this present trust.

A Declaration of a Trust concerning Conveyances taken in other men's names:
THis Indenture made, etc. between etc. now witness these presents and the said
T. A. and R. C, severally and respectively do hereby acknowledge and declare,
That the money and consideration paid and disbursed as well for the Assignment
of the said Lease, as also for the bargain and sale of the said Message or
Tenement and other things therein contained, was the proper money of the said
T. H. and that their names were therein used at the nomination and appointment,
and for the only use and benefit of the said T. H. his Heirs and Assigns,

And thereupon it is agreed by and between the parties to these Presents, and
hereby declared, that the said T. A. and R. C. etc. their heirs Executors or
Administrators, do and shall hold the Estates aforesaid respectively upon these
Trusts, Videlicet, That they shall permit and suffer the said T. F. his Heirs
and Assigns and such persons as he or they shall nominate and appoint to have
hold and enjoy the said Message or Tenement and other things, and the Rents
and profits thereof to take to his own use, and shall and will also at the
Request and Charges of the said T. H. his Heirs or Assigns, grant convey and
assign the said Message etc. and all their Estate therein unto such persons as
the said T. H. or his heirs shall appoint.

An Assignment to Feoffees in Trust:
THis Indenture made, etc. Between T. C. of W etc. of the one part and W. B. of
etc. Gentleman and H. C. of W. aforesaid yeoman,* of the other part,
witnesses, That whereas R. S. of S: in the said County Esquire by his
Indenture of Lease bearing date etc. did thereby (for the considerations
therein epressed) demise grant set and to farm let unto the said T. C. and his
Assigns all that his Message and Tenement with the appurtenances situate etc.
in W. and and in V. aforesaid etc. or in both or either of them, late in the
Tenure etc. of T. L. or his Assigns, and then or then are in the Tenure of the
said T. C. or his Assigns, together with all Houses Edifices Buildings Yards
Orchards Gardens Lands Tenements Meadows, Leasowes Pastures Woods Under-woods
Commons Common of Pasture Mosse-room Ways Waters Easments Liberties Profits
Commodities and Hereditaments to the said Message and Tenement and premises
lying belonging etc. or reputed taken or known as part etc. with all and
singular their Appurtenances to have etc. and peaceably to enjoy the said
Message and Tenement Edifices and Buildings etc. and all other the Premises,
and all and singular their appurtenances unto him the said T. C. and his
Assigns, for and during all the term of the natural life and lives of him the
said T. C. H. C. Brother of the said T. and R. A. of etc. yeoman, and for and
during all the term of the natural life and lives of them longest living,
yiedling etc. unto the said R: S. his heirs and assigns the ancient yearly Rent
of 27 s. 4 d. of etc. at the Feast day of etc. by equal portions, with the
suits services boons arrerages and duties due, and of Right heretofore
accustomed to be yielded paid or done for the said Message Tenement and
premises with diverse Appurtenances as in and by the said recited Indenture of
Lease, Relation etc.

Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said T. C. for and in
consideration of a marriage already had and solemnized between him the said T.
C. and E. now wife of the said T. and of the sum of 60 l. of etc. paid and
given in marriage unto the said T. C. with her the said E. and also for the
better livelihood and stay of living, to and for the said E: if she fortune to
survive and outlive him the said T. C. as also for and to the end, that the
said Message Tenement and premises with the appurtenances may be used occupied
and employed during all the term hereafter specified, according to such and the
same limitations trusts provisoes and uses as hereafter in and by these
presents are mentioned etc, and to and for no other use or uses trusts
limitations or provisoes whatsoever, in any wise, has granted assigned and set
over, and by these presents does grant etc. unto the said W. B: and H. C: their
Executors Administrators and Assigns all the said Message or Tenement Edifices
etc. and hereditaments thereunto belonging with the appurtenances whatsoever,
together with the said recited Indenture of Lease, and all the Estate Right
Title and Interest of him the said T. C: of in and to the said premises and of
in and to every or any part or parcel thereof, to have etc. the said Message
and tenement, and all and singular other the above recited premises with the
appurtenances to the said W: B: and H. C. and their Executors Administrators
and Assigns from etc: for and during all the term of 99. years then next etc.
fully to be etc (if the term mentioned in the said recited Indenture of Lease
so long etc: to stand and be possessed thereof, to and for such and the same
limitations etc: as hereafter in and by these presents are mentioned etc: and
to and for none other limitation what soever in any wise (That is to say) upon
special trust and confidence nevertheless that the said W: B: and T: C: their
Executors etc: shall and will permit and suffer the said T. C. and his Assigns
to have etc: and peaceably to enjoy the said Message or tenement and premises
with the appurtenances from etc. for and during so many years of the sad term
of 99. years as shall expire and run up in the life time of the said T. C. he
the said T. C. and his Assigns, paying and discharging all the Rents Duties and
Services due and payable for the same, and that immediately after the Death and
decease of the said T. C. the said W. B. and H. C. the Execut. Administ. and
As. shall and will permit and suffer the said E. now wife of the said T. C. and
her Assigns to have etc. the moiety and one half part of the said Message or
Tenement and all and singular other the premises with the Appurtenances from
thenceforth during so many years etc. (...) if she the said E. shall keep her
self sole chaste and unmarried and of honest Coversation of her body, and also
if the term etc. Vt supra, but if she shall happen either to marry or miscarry,
then after marriage or miscarriage (whether shall first happen the said W. B.
and H. C. their Executors etc. shall and will permit etc. the said E. and her
Assigns to have the said Message etc. thenceforth during Vt supra, if the
original Lease etc. for and in lieu contentation and full satisfaction of her
right title of Jointure, she the said E and her Assigns paying and discharging
the moiety or one half part of the Rents Duties and services due payable for
the same during such time as she shall keep her self sole, etc. and after
marriage or miscarriage, a full third part of the said Rents etc. from year to
year during, etc. and that immediately after the decease of the said T. C. the
said W. B. etc. their etc. shall and will receive perceive and take the Rents
Issues and profits as well of the other moiety or half of the said Message etc:
until the said E, shall happen to marry or miscarry, as also two parts thereof
after such marriage or miscarriage and the same shall and will convert employ
and bestow to and for the personal sustainance Education and bringing up of
the Children of the said T. to be begotten on the body of the said E
respectively until the eldest of his sonns, and for default of such issue the
eldest of his Daughters, shall accomplish his or her age of one and twenty
years, and immediately after such son and for default of such issue, such
Daughter shall have accomplished the age aforesaid the said W. B, other etc.
shall and will permit and suffer such Son or such Daughter, and their assigns,
to have etc. as well 2. parts of the said Message etc. in the case aforesaid
or else the moiety thereof, as also the whole Message from and after the
decease of the said E: for and during the rest and residue of the said term,
etc. then to come and unexpired fully to be complete etc: if the term in the
etc. for and under the Rents, etc: due for the same, and if it happen the said
T: to dye etc. without issue of his body lawfully begotten that then the
Feoffees shall permit etc. R. S. the son and his Assigns and the issue of his
body lawfully to be begotten to have etc. the said Message etc. from
thenceforth for and during the rest, Vt supra, fully etc. if the term etc. in
such sort manner and form, as the issue of the said T. C. should or might have
had held or enjoyed the same, as above is mentioned and limited, and to and for
none other limitation, etc. or use whatsoever in any wise, In witness, etc.

USES.
An Indenture to deliver the use of a Fine and Recovery levied and suffered.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. M. etc. I. B. and G. B. of the one part,
and R. C. etc. of the other part; Whereas the said A. M. being seized in his
Demesne as of Fee, of and in certain Messuages Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, situate lying and being in W. in the
County of C. And it having been agreed between the said A. M. and the said R.
C. that for valuable consideration of money to the said A. to be paid by the
said R. C. should convey the said Lands and Premises unto the said R. C. and
his Heirs, in such manner as the Council learned of the said R. C. should
advise or require.

And whereas by advice of the Council Learned of the said R. C. in Easter Term
last past, before the date hereof, in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
did commence prosecute and bring one writ of Entry, Sur-disseisin in le post,
against the said R. C. demanding thereby one Message, two Gardens etc. with the
appurtenances in W. aforesaid, unto which Writ the said Richard did appear, and
did vouch to Warranty the said A. M. who being then present in Court, the said
Voucher in her proper person vouched over one Voucher, whereby a good and
perfect common Recovery of the said Premises with double Voucher, according to
the form of common Recoveries, in such case used, was in due form of Law
suffered and executed. And whereas the said A. in Easter Term aforesaid, by
advice of council of the said R. C. did levy and acknowledge in due form of
Law, before his Majesty's Justices of his Highness said Court of Common Pleas,
unto the said R. C. and his Heirs, one Fine, Sur*conusance de droit Come ceo
etc. with proclamation thereupon had, according to the form of the Statute in
that behalf made and provided, of for and concerning the said Premises, and the
manner of one Message, one Garden etc. in and by the said Fine and Recovery,
and relation being thereunto had, more fully and at large appears.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said I B and G B and A O and every of
them, for themselves, their Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, and for
every of them, do covenant promise grant declare and agree, to and with the
said R C his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, that the said recited Fine and Recovery, and the Recoveror and
Recoverors therein named, and their Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs of the
Survivor of them, and all other person and persons, which now are or shall be
seized of the said recited Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, shall
thereof stand and be seized, to and for the only use and behoof of the said R C
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to and for no other use intent or purpose
whatsoever; In witness etc.

The Uses of a Fine and Recovery levied and suffered.
THis Indenture made etc. And whereas the said J: S: in Michaelmas Term last,
did levy and acknowledge a Fine in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
unto I: G: of all the said Messuages Lands Tenements and Hereditaments before
mentioned, to the intent and purpose that the said I: G: might become Tenant of
the Freehold of the said Messuages Lands and Premises, to the end that a Writ
of Entry in the Post might be brought and prosecuted against him, that a common
Recovery might be had of all and singular the said Messuages Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments, according to the course of common Recoveries, used and
accustomed; And whereupon a Writ of Entry was duly sued out and prosecuted
against the said I: G: and thereupon a common Recovery was also had and duly
executed. Now it is agreed by and between all the said parties, and it is
hereby declared, that the said Fine was so had and levied, and intended to be,
to the only use of the said I: G: and his Heirs, to the intent that he might
become Tenant of the Freehold of the said Lands and Premises, until the said
Recovery was so had and executed: And that after the said Recovery was so had
and executed, the said Fine and Recovery, and the Conuzees and Recoverors, in
or by the same was meant and intended to be, and shall be, to the only use
benefit and behoof of the said I: S: his Heirs and Assigns, to the intent that
all former Entails, and every Reversion and Reversions, being barred thereby,
the said I: S: might thereby become seized of an absolute and perfect Estate in
Fee-simple, for the better settling the said Messuages and Premises, to the
uses herein before mentioned, and to none other use intent or purpose
whatsoever.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine levied.
THis Indenture tripartite made etc. Between R: F: sometime of etc. and I: his
wife of the first part, I: W: of etc. and A: his wife of the second part, and
A: M: of etc. and T: S: of etc. of the third part: Whereas they the said R. F.
and I: his wife, and I: VV: and A. his wife, having in the term of etc. last
past, knowledged a Fine in due form of Law, of all those two Messuages or
Tenements called etc. with the appurtenances, and of four Cottages and one
Curtillage, with the appurtenances, in the Parishes of etc. to the said A: M:
and T. S. and to the Heirs of the said A: for ever, which said Premises, were
late the Lands Tenements and Hereditaments of E: M: late of etc. deceased, and
at the levying of the said Fine, were the Inheritance of the said I: F: party
to these presents, Sister of the said E: M.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the true intent and meaning of the said
Fine, and of all the parties thereunto, and of these presents, was, and is, and
it is by these presents, and by all the parties thereunto declared, that the
said Fine and all effects thereof, shall be, and enure, and shall be construed
and taken to be, and enure to the only uses behoofs intents and purposes
hereafter mentioned (that is to say) to the use and behoof of them the said I:
VV: and A: his wife, their and either of their Assigns, for and during the
natural life of the said A: and from and after the decease of the said A: then
to the use and behoof of the said R: F: and I. his wife, their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, and to no other use or uses, intents or purposes, any matter
or thing in the said Fine contained, to the contrary thereof notwithstanding: In
witness etc.

To declare the Use of a Fine levied.
ANd whereas the said T: F: and M: his wife, have last Easter Term levied a Fine
to the said F: T: and H: H: as well of all and singular the said Messuages
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, by the said Indenture, bearing date etc.
mentioned to be bargained and sold to the said H: H: and his Heirs, as also of
all and singular the said Messuages Land Tenements and Hereditaments, by the
said Indenture, bearing date etc. mentioned to be bargained and sold, to the
said F: T: M: P: and T: T: their Heirs and Assigns; And also of two other
Tenements or Cottages, Orchards Gardens and Back-sides, with the appurtenances
thereunto belonging, and therewith used occupied or enjoyed, now or late in the
Tenure Possession or Occupation of E: M: and Eliz. M. near adjoining to the
said Capital Message, or Mansion House.

Now these presents do witness and declare, that the true intent and meaning
of the levying of the said Fine, at the time of the levying thereof, was, and so
is to be taken to be, to the uses intents and purposes following, as for and
concerning the said Messuages Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, mentioned to
be granted bargained and sold to the said H: H: and his Heirs, by the said
Indenture, bearing date etc. To the use of etc.

Uses.
THis Indenture etc. Between A: R: of the one party, and R: G: Citizen etc. and
T: G: etc. of the other party, witnesses; That the said A: R: for diverse
considerations him moving, does by these presents covenant grant conclude
condescend and agree, to and with the said R: and T: That the said A. shall and
w^ll in this present Term of St. Michael, knowledge and levy unto the said T:
and R: one Fine with Proclamations and Cognizances of Right, as that which the
said R. and T: had of the Gift of the said A: of the Manor etc. 53. Messuages,
26. Cottages, 12. Tofts, 800. acres of Land, 400. acres of Meadow, 1000. acres
of Pasture, 100. acres of Wood, and 20 s. Rent, with their appurtenances in
etc. in the said County of S: and of all other the Lands Tenements Rents Titles
Services and other Hereditaments of the said A. set lying and being in the said
County of S: And the said Fine so to be levied, and the Manors Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments in the said Fine expressed, shall be to the use of the said
A: R. hereafter expressed, and to the use and intent that the said A: R: shall
or may at any time hereafter during the life of the said A: make Leases for
term of 21. years, of all and singular the Premises, with their appurtenances,
or of any part thereof, shall remain and come after the death of the said A:
according to the quantity portion or part of the said Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, that so shall remain or come to every such person, and after
such Lease or Leases so made, the said R: and T: and either of them, and all
other person and persons, claiming by from or under them, or any of them, shall
stand and be of the Premises seized to the use of such Leases, during their
several Terms, and no longer. Provided always, that if the said Leases or any
of them shall not content and pay the said Rents and every part thereof, within
fifteen days, the days of payment thereof, that then and from thenceforth the
Uses limited by these presents unto the said Leases, shall be utterly void
cease and determine; And that then and from thenceforth the said R: and T. and
all other persons claiming from by or under the said R. and T: or the said A:
shall stand and be of the Premises seized to other the Uses in these Premises
limited, as if no such Lease had been had or made, any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And if it fortune M: now wife of the said A: to decease and dye, during the
life of the said A: then the said parties do further grant covenant conclude
and agree the one with the other: That the said R. and T: shall stand and be
seized to the use of such person, as the said A: shall take to wife, in such
manner and form, and of so much of the Premises as the said A: shall by his
Deed made, to or with any person, limit declare and appoint to such person as
the said A: shall take to wife.

And it is further covenanted and granted between the said parties, That if the
said A: fortune to decease, leaving the said M: now wife of the said A: that
the said R: and T: and all other claiming by from or under them, shall stand
and be seized of the Moiety and half part of the said Manors Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments, as shall be expressed and nominated in the said Fine, to the
use of the said M: for term of her natural life.

And it is further covenanted granted concluded condescended and agreed between
the said parties, that the said Fine so to be levied, during the life of the
said A: shall be to the use of the said A: for term of his natural life, and
after the decease of the said A: R: the said Fine to be levied of the said
Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and of all other the Premises with
their appurtenances, shall be to the use of the said R: R: Son of the said A:
and M: wife of the said A: and of the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten
(saving and always reserved) the interest and Estail of the said M. and other
the wives of the said A: by these presents limited and appointed, as also the
interest and Estail of such Tenant and Tenants for term of years, as the said
A: shall make, and according to the true meaning and intent of these presents,
as is aforesaid. And if the said R: R: dye without Issue of his body lawfully
begotten, then the said Fine so to be levied, shall be to the use of other the
Heirs Males of the body of the said A: and to the Heirs of their bodies
lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue Males, then to the use of the
Heirs Females of the body of the said A: and the Heirs of their bodies lawfully
begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of T: W. and the Heirs
of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use
of J: W: of H: in the County of N. Esquire, and brother of the said T: W: and
to the Heirs of his body lawfully begoten, and for default of such Issue, then
to the Right Honorable A. B. Earl etc. and the Heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the Right Honorable C. D.
Earl etc. and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such
Issue, then to the use of R: H: Son of Sir O: H: Knight, and the Heirs Males of
his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of
E. T. Son of T. T. of etc. and to the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and
for default etc. then to the use of our Sovereign Lord King James of England,
etc. King, and to his Heirs and Successors for ever.

Provided always, that if our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, or any of his
Successors, shall bargain sell give grant or assign the said Remainder Estate
and Interest of and in the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, otherwise
then for term of life or in tail, to any other then to the Right Honorable the
Earl etc. or his Heirs, that then the use by these presents limited unto his
said Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall cease and determine, any thing to
the contrary notwithstanding. Nevertheless the Premises, notwithstanding it
is covenanted granted concluded and agreed between the said parties, that the
next day after any Grant or Grants that hereafter shall be made of the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, by our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, contrary to the true meaning and intent of
these presents, the Rent of the said Premises, and the Lands in the said Fine
contained, and every part and parcel thereof, the said before limited Estates
shall be again the next day after such Grant, to the use of the said Sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors as aforesaid, or to the use of
such his Majesty's Successors, as shall make any Grant, contrary to the true
meaning of these presents. And if our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs or
Successors, after the said new vesting of the said Estate, shall make any Grant
or Conveyances of the Remainder of the said Premises so to his said Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors limited, or of any part or parcel thereof, then also
the said new Estate, and last will of the Remainder of the said Premises,
shall be again to the use of our said Soverain Lord the Kings Majesty, or of
such his Majesty's Heirs and Successors, and their Heirs, as shall make any
such Grant in Fee-simple of the said Premises, or of any part or parcel
thereof, by our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs or Successors, having any Estate
Right or Title, by force of the limitation of these presents, the use limited
to our said Sovereign Lord and the Estate that his said Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, shall have by reason of such use, at the time of any such Grant,
shall cease determine and be void, and that the next day after such
determination of such Use or Estate, by reason of such Grant or Grants by our
said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs or Successors, the use of the said Premises,
shall be again to our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors.

Provided always, and it is meant, granted, concluded, and declared between
the said parties by these presents, the Premises, or any thing therein
contained, to the contrary, notwithstanding.

That if the said A: R: shall at any time hereafter make or convey any Estate
or Estates in Fee-simple or in Fee-tail, and shall limit and declare any Use or
Uses, in or upon the said Grants and Conveyances, other then is already
contained, limited, and declared in these presents: That then in and upon every
such Grant, Conveyance and assurance, the said Fine shall be to such Uses, as
the said A. shall thereupon limit and appoint: In witness etc.

WILLS.
A Citizens Will with devise of Lands.
IN the Name of God Amen, the 14th. day of etc. I R. C. Citizen and Salter of
L. although sick in body, yet of good perfect and sound memory, praised be
Almighty God, therefore do make and ordain this my present Will and Testament
containing therein my last Will in manner and form following, That is to say.

First, I commend my self and all my whole Estate to the Mercy and Protection
of Almighty God, being fully persuaded by his Holy Spirit through the Death and
Passion of Jesus Christ, and to obtain full pardon and remission of all my
sins, and to inherit everlasting life, to which the Holy Trinity, one eternal
Diety, be all honor and Glory for ever amen.

And I will and ordain, That all such debts as I shall happen to owe Burial.
Debts pain.
at my Decease, shall be truly paid as they shall grow due, and that the
Funerals of my body be only such as shall beseem a Christian after the
discretion of my loving Wife and Overseers, and my said Debts which I then
shall owe, being defalked, and my Funeral Charges deducted, I will that the
residue of all and singular my Goods Chattells Plate Jewels Wares Merchandises
and Debts to me owing and Division of the goods into three equal parts after
the custom of London viz. 1 One to the wife. 2 the other to the children. 3.
for the performance of the Will.
ready money shall be limited and reckoned in three equal parts according to
the Custom of the City of L. one full 3 equal part, whereof I give and
b^queath unto J. my said loving Wife in full Recompense Contentation and
Satisfaction, of and for all such part and portion as she by the said Custom
or otherwise ought to have or can or may claim to have of all my said Goods
Chattells Debts ready money, and other the premises whatsoever, and one other
full equal third part thereof, I give and bequeath to and amongst my five
children, that is to say, R. I. S. A. and E. to and amongst them part and
part-like to be divided, and to be paid and delivered to my Sons severally
their parts thereof, as they severally shall accomplish the age of one and
twenty years, and to my Daughters, their parts thereof as they severally shall
come to the said age or shall be married, as either of the same shall first
happen.

And I Will, That if any of my Sons do decease before the age of one In case
any decease, the other to have the deceasees part amongst them.
and twenty years, and that if any of my Daughters do decease before the same
age, and before their Marriage, that then, in such case the portion of every of
them so deceasing, shall remain and be to the Survivors and Survivor of them,
part and part-like to them to be divided.

Provided always, and I do will, provide and ordain by these presents, That if
hereafter I shall fortune to have any more Child or Children If he have more
children, then they to partake ratably of the said third part.
then above named, then every such Child or Children shall have like ratable
part and portion of and in all my said Goods Chattels Debts ready money and all
other the Premises with those my Children before named, as if they expressly
amongst them had been named by name to have been equal partakers thereof. Any
thing whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding:

And the other full third part and residue of all my said Goods, A third part
for Legacies.
I do will and appoint to and for the performance of this my present Testament.

And first I give thereof to etc. Item I give and bequeath, etc. Item I give,
etc. Item. I give and bequeath to my Servant R. H. and R. A. to every of them
20 l. a piece to the intent and upon Condition, That they and either of them
shall diligently and faithfully help and assist ^o the gathering in of my debts
by the space of one whole year next after my Decease and longer as need shall
require.

Item, I will that my wife shall have all her wearing apparel for Gift to the
wife of wearing apparel etc.
her body as well woollen as Linen, and all her Linen for Children, and all
such Rings and Brasletss as she has.

Item, I give and bequeath to my said wife for and in full Recompense Legacy to
the wife in full recompense of her dower.
of all her Dower Right Title and Interest, and other Demand whatsoever which
she may have or make to all or any part of my Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
or to any Rents or profits thereof or of any part thereof, the sum of 200 l. of
etc.

Provided always, and my will is, That if my said wife in her pure Condition,
that if she deliver not a release for her dow^r to the Overseers of the will
then there Legacy to be void.
widow hood being, do not make and deliver such lawful Release and Releases,
if need be, within the space of three months next after my decease to the hands
of my Overseers herein after named for and to the use of my Children according
unto their several Estate in my lands hereafter as appear in these Presents,
as that thereby all the Estate Right Title Interest and Demand of my said wife
to my said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments aforesaid and all profits thereof
shall be annihilated and determined, saving only to her such Interest as I
shall give her by these presents, that then my said Legacy of 200 l. by me to
my said wife above given, shall be utterly void, and shall not in any case be
demandable or payable before such Releases as aforsaid shall be by her
delivered, any thing abovesaid to the contrary notwithstanding.

Item, I give to A. B. a black Gown; etc. Item, etc. I will there be Legacy of
the rest of the goods and debts to the children.
not spent in my Funerals above the Sum of 200 l. The residue of all and
singular my goods chattells Debts and ready money remaining after this my
present Testament performed and fullfilled, I give and bequeath to and amongst
my three Sons R. I. S. and such other Son and Sons as I may fortune hereafter
to have to and amongst them all part and partlike to be divided.

Provided always, That if my Son R. when he shall come of full age do not
make such surrender of my Coppy-hold Land as hereafter I do appoint him to do
in and by these Presents, that then he shall loose his part of the residue of
my said goods, etc. and the same wholly to remain to and among his other
brethren. Constitution of Executors and Overseers. The Overseers to be
Administrators of the goods to the use of the children Executors till they
atain 21. years. The wife to have the education of the children if she will.
One to have the custody of the childrens portions putting in sufficient
sureties to the chamber of London, and pay 5 l. a hundr^d. Nota. Mr. Fuller
said, that notwithstanding this manner of devising of the custody of an Orphan
to a friend yet the Mayor and Aldermen may if they will) dispose of the custody
of such Orphan, albeit commonly they do not without some good cause of
exception to whom the custody is willed. Nota Mr: Fuller said, that for every
300l. of orphanage portion, the allowance by the custom is 5 l. per ann. for
the first 100 l. 5. marks for the second 100 l. and five nobles for the third
100 l but of later order, 5 l in the hundred is allowed throughout all the
portions of Orphans.


And I make and ordain my said three sons R: I. and S. my Executors of this my
present Testament, and I do appoint Overseers thereof A. G. and W. D. Aldermen,
A. C. Salter, J. H. Grocer, R. H. and and R. P. Goldsmiths of L.

And I do will and appoint that the said A. G. W. D. and A. C. shall be
Administrators, and have the Administration of my Goods Chattells and Debts to
the use of my said three sons, till they or some of them shall attain to the
age of 21. years.

And I will that my said Wife; if she shall so like of it, shall have the
Education of my said Children both Sons and Daughters during their minority so
far forth as she keep them to Learning at the discretion of my Overseers.

And further I do will and appoint, That the said A. shall have the use and
custody of the portion of my Son R. C. during his minority, putting in
sufficient Sureties to the Chamberlain of L. for the same according to the
ancient custom and paying yearly thereof 5 l upon every 100 l. of the same
portion, to the use of my said son R. whereof I will to be paid and allowed
yearly toward his Education and bringing up 15 l. and the residue thereof to
be paid and allowed to him at his full age of 21 years, or if he dye before,
then to be d^stributed amongst other my children, as his Child's portion in that
case is limited to be.

Item, I will that the said W. D. shall have J. C. his portion etc. as before,
the use of S. his portion, bequeathed to J. H. in form aforesaid.

Item, I will and appoint that the said R. H. shall have the custody and use of
the portion of my Daughter A during her minority, or until her marriage
putting in sureties, etc. and paying etc. whereof 15 l. yearly etc. and the
residue thereof to be paid and allowed her at her full age of 21 years, or day
of marriage, that is to say, such of the same times as shall happen first to
come, (E: her portion committed to A P after the form last limited.)

And as touching the disposition of my Lands Tenements and Hereditaments,
Devise of lands
I will and devise thereof and therefore in manner etc.

First, I give grant devise and bequeath to R. C. my eldest son, all that
Entailment of the dwelling house to the Son.
my great Message with the appurtenances wherein I now dwell situate etc.
which I late purchased of G. W, To have and to hold the said Message with the
appurtenances to the said R. my son, and the heirs males of his body lawfully
to be begotten, and for lack of such issue, the remainder thereof to my son J.
G: and the Heirs males etc. and for lack of such issue to my son S. etc. and
for lack of such issue, to the next right heirs of me the said R. C: the
Father, for ever.

Item, I give grant devise and bequeath to J: C: my son, all and singular my
Lands Tenements and Hereditaments in H: and E: in the Entailment of other Land.
If he in his life time surrender not certain Land to the younger son, then his
eldest son to surrender it after his decease. All iron work glass wainscot
etc, to remain with the Freehold of the house. An appointment of a certain
person to have the gathering of Rents during the son^ minority, and to make him
account at his age. Rings to the Overseers.
County of H: or elsewhere in the same County, and all and singular my Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments which I purchased of J. W: to have and to hold all
the same Lands Tenements and Hereditaments to the said J C and the Heirs males
of his body lawfully begotten, and for lack of such issue, the remainder
thereof to etc:

And if I in my Life do not surrender to the use of my said son J: C: and his
Heirs such copyhold Lands as I have in etc: then I will and appoint that my
son within six mrnths after, he shall come of full age shall surrender all the
said Copyhold Lands to the use of his said Brother J: and of his heirs
according to the custom of the Manor there without fraud or covin.

And I do will that all Lead cesterns, wainscot glass: iron-work doors Locks
keys hangings and painted clothes in my said Message in W: shall remain, and
pass with the Freehold of the same without any value or price to be set
thereof.

And I will that the said A: G: shall have the governance and gathering of all
such Rent, as shall be due and payable to my said Son R: during his minority,
and that my said friend W: D: shall have the governance etc. as etc. to my son
J: C: during his minority, and they thereof to account with my said children at
their full age:

Item, I give and bequeath to every one of my said Overseers, one Ring of gold
a piece with the fashion, every of them to be worth five marks and ten pounds
to every of them apeece in money for their pains in the Premises to be taken,
wherein I pray them to deal as becomes faithful Christians as they will answer
therefore before God, In witness whereof hereunto I have subscribed my Name, and
set my Seal in the Presence of these Witnesses, whose names are subscribed.

Witnesses
A. B. C. D. E. F.


A Devise depending on an Indenture to convey Lands and Rent to to the use of a
College.
TO all to whom, etc. I: S: Citizen and Marchant-taylor of L. sends Greeting
in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas our Sovereign Lord etc. by his Highness
Letters Patents, under the great Seal etc. hearing date etc. for the
consideration and purpose in the same Letters Patents expressed, has given and
granted to W. F. etc. all that yearly Rent etc. and also by the same Letters
Patents, has given and granted to the said W. his Executors and Assigns, all
the arrerages of the said yearly Rents of etc. from the Feast etc. And one
Writing Obligatory of 200. Marks etc. as by the said Letters Patents etc. And
whereas also the said W: F: in his own right and to his own use, is lawfully
and solely seized of and in one Capital Message etc. (as is recited in a
former Indenture.) And whereas also in and by acertain Indenture Quadri-partite
bearing date etc. made between etc. It is Covenanted and agreed by and between
the said parties, that the said W. F. from and against him the said W: and his
Hei^s shall grant, convey and assure unto me the said I. G. and mine Heirs for
ever, as well the said Capital Message etc. as also the said yearly rents etc.
and all the arrerages thereof aforesaid; and also the said Writing Obligatory
etc. upon and under such condition as in the said Indenture Quadri-partite is
expressed, that is to say, That I the sa^d J: S: should make and declare my
last Will in Writing etc. as in the former recited Indenture is expressed, as
by the said Indenture Quadri-partite amongst etc. may appear.

And whereas the said W. F. sithence by his Deed, bearing date the 13th day of
this present June, in this present 22th year of the Reign etc. Has given,
granted, conveyed and Assured to me the said J: S. and mine Heirs for ever, as
well the said Message, with the appurtenances, as the said yearly rents, and
the arrerages thereof, together with the Obligation aforesaid upon and under
condition, and to the intent in the said Indenture Quadri-partite expressed and
specified.

Now know ye that I the said I: S: being of perfect mind and memory and
faithfully meaning to keep and perform the Condition aforesaid, and that all
the Premises shall and may be had and enjoyed for ever, and likewise be for
ever employed and bestowed in manner and form aforesaid (according to the
Covenants or Ordinances and Agreements contained in the said Indenture
Quadri-partite) do by these presents declare, and make my last Will and
Testament, of and for the said Message and Tenement, with the Appurtenances,
and of and for the said yearly rents and arrerages thereof, and of and for the
said Obligation in manner and form following, that is to say, I do by this my
present Will and Testament, give, devise, Will, and Bequeath the said Message
or Tenement with the appurtenances and the said yearly rents and the arrerages
thereof, and the said Obligation unto the said Master and Wardens of the
Marchant-taylors of the Fraternity of St. John Baptist. in the City of L. by
whatsoever name they be incorporated, and to their Successors for ever: In
witness whereof to this my last Will so made and declared as aforesaid, of and
for the Premises; I the said I. S. have set mine Hand and Seal the day of
June, in the 22th. year etc.

A Note touching the Disposition of Lands to a Corporation, as the same be not
within the Statute of Mort-main.
THese are to let you understand, That Mr. Recorder is of Opinion as touching
the Execution of Mr. F. his good zeal and meaning of his gift of the Annuities,
and of his House in C. Street, That the same is not to pass in such sort as the
Books are already penned, for the said gifts are within the compass of the
Statue of Mortmain, whereby his honest meaning may in short time be defrauded,
and therefore he thinks it the surest way that the same be done by Will, viz.
that Mr. F. do enfeoff some ancient man that is unmarried upon condition, that
he shall make his last Will and Testament in Writing, and by the same shall
forthwith will and devise the said House unto the Corporation of the
Marchanttaylors, and then a Pair of Indentures of Covenants to pass between
the College and Mr. F. on the one part, and the Master and Wardens on the
other part. By which Indenture shall be expressed all Mr. F. his meaning to
what uses he will have the Profits of the said House to be employed. And the
like devise may there be of the Annuities. This is a good sure way, because the
Custom of the City does warrant the same.

A Citizens Will.
IN the Name of God Amen. The 19th. day etc. In the year of our Lord God etc. I
I. G. etc. being of good and perfect Remembrance, Laud and praise be to the
Almighty God, knowing that I am naturally born, and ordained to die, and to
pass from this mortal World, and transitory Life, minding to put in order, as
well of all and singular my goods and chattels whatsoever I have, and debts
whatsoever to me owing; as also to declare how I have bestowed all my Leases
which I have of my Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments* to the intent there
should be no strife for the same after my decease, do therefore first of all,
after thanks given to Almighty God for his great benefits, desire and pray my
children, and all other to be contented with my last Will and Testament,
without any trouble, business or vexat on of any of them against the other for
any of my said Leases, Goods, Chattels and Debts, as they will answer for the
same before the Judgment Seat of God, who is the rewarder of all good persons,
and a severe Judge and Revenger of all those that do evil.

And to avoid all occasions of charges, I revoke and renounce all former and
other Wills and Testaments whatsoever heretofore by me made by Word, Writing,
or otherwise, and make and ordain this to be my very true last and only Will
and Testament for and concerning all my said goods, chattels debts, and every
part and parcel thereof in manner and form following, that is to say, First, I
commend my soul to Almighty God, and to his Son Jesus Christ my Savior and
Redeemer, and to the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, most humbly
beseeching the most Holy and Blessed Trinity to have mercy on my soul, and to
pardon and forgive me all my sins and offenses, so that I may after this
mutable life arise with the Elect, and have the life and fruition of the
Godhead by the Death and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, according to his
merciful Promise in that behalf. And I Will that my body be decently buried in
the Parish Church in the which it shall happen to decease, and my Funerals to
be ordered by the discretion of my Executors hereunto named.

Item. I Will that my Debts which I shall owe unto any person or persons at the
time of my decease, either by Law or Conscience be well and truly contented and
paid within convenient time. And after my said Debts be discharged, I Will that
all my Moveable Goods Chattels, and Debts to me owing within such convenient
time as mine Execurors may be divided into three equal parts and portions,
according to the laudable Custom of the City of L. of which I am a Citizen,
one equal third part and portion whereof, I Will and appoint to and for the
performance of this may last Will and Testament, and one other equal third part
and portion thereof. I give unto Elizabeth, my well beloved wife, and the other
equal third part and portion thereof, I give and bequeath to and amongst F. T.
and M. three of my Sons yet by me not advanced, and to and amongst A. K. and M.
my three daughters already married, and yet not fully advanced, for whereas I
have given with every of the same my daughters 200 l. apeece in their marriage,
my Will and mind is, that the same shall not be taken or deemed to be a full
advancement to my said three daughters* or any of them; but I do Will and
ordain by these Presents, That first my said three Sons, F. T. and M: shall
have allotted to every of them 200 l. apeece out of that third part of my said
Goods, and other the said Premises, which I have here above given and
bequeathed to them and the^r said three Sisters, and that then the residue of
the said th^rd part shall be divided to the said F. T. M. A. K. and M. part and
part like. As for my eldest Son I. G. he is by me already fully advanced, and I
have of him his clear Acquittance in that behalf.

Also my Will and mind is, that if any of my said children being yet within
age, and not married, do die or decease before they shall accomplish their
several ages of 21. years, that then the part and portion of him, her, or
them, so deceasing shall be equally divided, to and amongst the other of them
my said six children surviving, portion and portion like.

Item. I give and bequeath unto my said daughter K. the sum of 40 l. in money;
and I give and bequeath unto E. and R. children of my said daughter K. ten
pounds in money that is to say, to either of them five pounds to be paid and
delivered unto them, at their lawful age of 21. years, or days of marriage: And
if either of them die before they accomplish their said age of 21. years or
days of marriage, the Survivor to have the others portion of this my Legacy;
and if they both decease before they accomplish their said age or marriage,
then I give and bequcath the same ten pounds to and amongst the children of my
said daughter A. equally to be divided amongst them to be paid and delivered
unto them at their lawful ages of 21. years, or days of marriage, and if any
of them do die before the time limited, then the Survivors or Survivor of them
to have and enjoy the same.

Item. I give and bequeath to the said A. my eldest daughter 46 l. 13 s. 4 d.
in money to be paid unto her, within six months next after my decease.

Item. I give and bequeath unto my said Son T. G. the sum of 40 l. of lawful
etc. over and besides his child's part aforesaid. Also I give and bequeath unto
my Son M. G. the sum of 40 l. of like money over and besides his child's part
aforesaid.

Item. I give and bequeath unto my Son F. G. 40 l. in money over and be sides
his child's part aforesaid. Moreover I give and bequeath unto A. D. one of the
daughters of etc. late of L. Haberdasher deceased, the sum of 100 l. of lawful
etc. to be paid unto her at her age of 20. years, or day of marriage, at the
discretion of mine Executrix. Also I Will and bequeath etc. Moreover I give
unto H. C. my Nephew the sum of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. of etc. Also I give etc. Item
I give etc.

Item. I give unto the two Hospitals in L. the one called Christ's Hospital, and
the other St. Thomas Hospital in Southwark, to either of them the sum of 5 l.

Item. I give unto the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, the Kings Bench, and the
Marshalsy, to every of them 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. Moreover I give to the Worshipful
Company of Marchant-taylors in L. whereof I am a Fellow, toward a Recreation to
be had amongst them at my Burial the sum of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and a cup of
Silver and guilt, of the weight of 40. Ounces to remain in that Company for
ever, and to have graven in the bottom these two Letters I. G. and a Posie
written in this manner; When the Drink is out, and the bottom you may see,
Remember your Brother I. G.
as a Remembrance of my Fellowship amongst them. Also I Will that there be
spice Bread given to the Livery according to the Custom, and to the Clark of
that Company I give 20 s. and to the Beadle thereof 10 s. Also I give to the
Poor A^mes-men of our House, who be of our Livery to each man 20 s. for their
relief. Item I give etc. Item. etc.

Provided always, and my further will mind and intent is, that if at any time
hereafter any strife variance quartel ambiguity doubt or scruple shall arise
happen or grow, for or concerning this present last Will and Testament, or any
devise legacy bequest, or other thing whatsoever contained in the same; Then I
will and ordain, that all and every such strife etc. without any further suit
or trouble, to be heard known examined tried and finally determined by any
Friends hereafter named; that is to say. The Right Worshipful Sir W. C.
Knight, the Master of the Rolls, M. R. H Esquire, Mr. T. A Haberdash^r, and Mr.
R H. Merchant tailor, and I give to the M^ster of the Rolls for his pains 10 l.
in money, and to the other three, to every of them for their pains, 6 l. 13 s.
4 d. and Gowns for them and their wives. And I do charge and command my said
Executrix, and others, named in this my last Will and Testament, to perform
fulfill and obey in all things the orders and determinations of my sa^d Friends
in the Premises as they will answer to Almighty God to the contrary. And as
concerning Gowns of black to be given unto diverse of my Friends and Kinsfolk, I
leave unto the discretion of my said wife and friends. Also I will and
determine that there shall be given out of the third part of my Goods and
Cattels appointed to the performance of this my present Testament, 12. poor
men's Gowns of Manzell Frize, or other Cloth at my said Friends discretion; to
the poorest of St. S. Parish, 6. and in St. A. Parish other 6. And I will that
there be made after my decease 12. Sermons of wise sober and virtuous Learned
men; that is to say. 6. in St. S. Parish Church, and 6. in St. A. Church, at
such times as my Executrix and Friends aforesaid shall think them most
convenient, and the Preacher to have given to him at every Sermon 6 s. 8 d. And
I will that all the charges of my Funerals and Burying shall be paid cut of the
said third part of my Goods assigned to the performance of this my Testament.
And as touching the disposition of all my Leases and Annuities whereof I have
already made any conveyance; I will that the same, and all and every part and
parcel thereof, shall remain and be, according to such Covenants Grants and
Conveyances as is thereof made by me long before the date of these presents. And
for the residue of all my said Leases and Annuities, if any remain by me not
before conveyed, I will that the same be taken and Recovered amongst my other
Goods and Chattels, the residue of al my Goods Chattels and Debts remaining
unbequeathed after my Debts paid and my Funerals discharged, and this my last
Will and Testament in every thing performed, I wholly give and bequeath the one
half thereof to E. my welbeloved wife, and the other half thereof to and amongst
all my Children, equally to be divided to them part and part like. And I
beseech Almighty God, for his dear Son Jesus Christ sake, to grant to the said
E: my wife of his Grace to have good consideration of her self, and well and
soberly to use it and the rest to Gods honor and her own comfort: And I make
and ordain the said E. my wife, my sole Executrix of this my last Will and
Testament, most heartily be seeching her that as she has showed her self
faithful and loving unto me whilst we have lived together so she will continue
a natural Mother toward my Children, and a Friend to my Kindred, according to
her ability and their distress, as my trust is in her she will be. And I do
make and ordain the said Sir W: C. Knight. H. T. A and R. H. Overseers of this my
present Testament and last Will.

Provided always, and I do will and ordain by these presents, that if any of
my Children do make any suit trouble or demand in Law, of or for any part of my
Goo^s or Chattels, otherwise then according to the true meaning of this my last
Will and Testament, that then every of them so doing, shall clearly loose all
such Legacies or other Benefit, as they or any of them might have thereby. And
that all my said Children to any of them made, which shall commence any such
suit trouble or demand as aforesaid, shall be as clearly void, as if the same
had never been to him given or made: In witness whereof I the said J. G. have
subscribed this my last Will and Testament with my own hand, and thereunto put
my Seal, given the day and year first above written.

Sealed declared and delivered up by the said J: G. in the presence of these
Witnesses whose names are subscribed, Witness A. P. etc.

A Will.
IN the name of God, Amen, the 8th. etc. in the year of our Lord God etc. and
in the 17. year of the Reign etc. J I. M: Citizen etc. being in health of body
and of good and perfect memory (thanks be to God) do make this my last Will and
Testament, in manner and form following; that is to say, First J bequeath my
Soul and Spirit into the hands of Almighty God my Heavenly Father, by whom of
his mere and only Grace J trust to be saved and received into Eternal rest,
through the death of my Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, in whose precious
blood J set the whole and only hope of my Salvation, my wretched body in hope
of a joyful Resurrection, I commit to the Earth to be buried with such charges,
and in such place as my dear wife M. shall think good. And touching the
distribution of my mortal goods, J dispose of the same as follows.

First J will that all such Debts as J owe shall be truly paid.

Item, J give to my said wife M: M: 100 l. of etc. upon condition that she
claim no Title or Interest of Dower or thirds of and upon my House and Land in
E. in the County of M. which J have in Fee-simple.

Item etc.

Item etc.

Item, To Mr. J. F. Minister, J do clearly forgive the sum etc. of lawful
etc. which he owes unto me.

Item, J give and bequeath to the Company of F. of the City of L. the sum of 6
l. of etc. in such manner form and condition and to be bestowed as follows;
that is to say, That after my death the Wardens of the said Company for the
time being whatsoever, or any other in that behall having sufficient authority
shall lend it yearly unto 3. such poor men of the said Company as they shall
think to have most need 40 s. a piece, for and during the space of two whole
years next following, so that the said poor men put in sufficient Sureties for
the repaying of the same, at the end of the said two years, and then to be
asked and required again by the said Wardens or others, having authority for
the time being, and forthwith to be delivered to 3. other in manner and form,
and for the term aforesaid. And so I will the said 6 l. to be used from two
years to two years for ever.

Provided always, that the said Company shall put in sufficient Sureties unto
mine Executors, or any other having right to take any such Bond of them, for
the full accomplishing for ever of this my last Will herein, or else this
Legacy to be of none effect: The residue of all and singular my Goods and
Chattels whatsoever herein not bequeathed (the thirds due by Law and Custom
unto my said wife (except the Thirds and Dowry of my said House and Lands in E.
aforesaid) and also the part and portion unto my Son J. M. according to the
custom of the City of L: paid and discharged) I wholly give and bequeath unto
my other two Children T: M: and S. M. equally amongst them to be divided.

Item, I will and ordain that the parts and portions of my said Children, and
all and every other thing and things to them belonging, shall for their behoofs,
during their and every of their several Minorities remain and be in the hands
custody and governing of the said R. M. to employ every of the same as he shall
think good, for the profit and commodity of my said Children; And that if any
of my said Children dye under age, that then the part portion and Legacies of
him or them so dying under age, shall belong and appertain unto the Survivors or
Survivor of my said Children. And I will that my said Children shall be trained
and brought up in virtuous Learning, or such other honest Vocation as it shall
please God to make them apt unto. And I will that A. B. shall have the
education and custody of my said Son J. M. during his Minority: And that C. D.
shall have the education of my said Son T. M. curing etc. And I will that E. F.
shall have the education of my said Son S. M. during etc. And that my Executor
out of this my last Will and Testament out of the Profits to be gotten by the
use and occupying of my said Childrens Parts Portions and Legacies, shall
yearly yield pay and allow to every of the said several persons before
severally appointed to have the several educations of my said Children toward
their finding and School 20. Nobles a piece of lawful etc. during such time
only as they shall go to School, and longer: And if the Charges thereof come to
more, the same to be allowed by my said Executors.

Provided always, and my intent will and meaning is, that my said Executor, or
any other by his title or authority, shall not sell or alienate by any means,
any part or parcel of my Leases Houses or Lands, but shall let them remain in
such sort as they are in at the time of my death, to my Children, and their use
and behoof, in such manner and form as is aforesaid. But as for my Household
Stuff, my will is that it shall be sold to the best advantage, excepting such
parcels of any manner of thing as my wife shall choose out for part of her
portion, if she like of any thing.

Item, I make and ordain the said R. M. to be my full whole and only Executor
of this my last Will and Testament. and my very dear friends C. D. and E. F. J
make and ordain Overseers of this my last Will and Testament, and I give unto
every of them etc. a Piece for their pains, to be taken in the Overseeing
thereof, requiring them in the name of God, to see this my last Will and
Testament performed accordingly: And I do utterly revoke all former Wills and
Testaments by me in any wise heretofore made or declared: In witness etc.

WARRANTS.
A Warrant of Attorney to suffer a Recovery both by the Tenant and the Voucher.
York ss. COmmand Thomas Vintner, that justly etc. he render unto William
Mowbray, Gent. the Manors of T. and S. with the Appurtenances, and 100.
Messuages, 50. Tofts, 10 Mills, 20. Dove-houses, 100. Gardens, 500. acres of
Land, 200. acres of Meadow, 200. acres of Pasture, 100. acres of Wood, 300.
acres of Furze and Heath, 10 l. Rent, and the Rent of 20. Henns, with the
Appurtenances, and also free Fishing in the Water of D. within the Manor of S.
and free Warren within the said Manor of S. And also the view of Frankpledge,
and whatsoever to the view of Frank-pledge appertains, in T. and S. which he
claims etc.

York ss. THomas Vintner puts in his place F. B. and T. C jointly and
severally against William Mowbray in a Plea of Land to gain or loose.

York ss. RIchard Heart and Anne his wife, who Thomas Vintner calls to
Warranty, put in their place I. H. and I. C. jointly and severally against
William Mowbray in a plea of Land to gain or loose.

Taken and acknowledged the 7th. day of May 1654, befoe.
A Letter of Attorney to surrender Copyhold Lands.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A: B: etc. have made
ordained constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make ordain
constitute and appoint, my trusty and wel-beloved Friends C. D. E. F. G. H.
etc. my lawful Attorneys and Attorney for me and in my name, by all lawful
ways and means jointly and severally to surrender, according to the custom of
the Manor of R. in the County of S. All such Copyhold Lands as I have within
the Parish of S: pa^cel of the customary Lands of the said Manor, and all my
Estate Right Title Interest Claim Possession and Demand therein and therout, and
in and to every part and parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of R: B: his
Heirs and Assigns for ever. And further giving and granting by these presents,
that they, or any three, two, or one of them, shall and may do any other lawful
act and acts whatsoever, concerning the Premises, for the better effecting
thereof, as fully and amply, to all intents and purposes, as I my self in person
might do, ratifying and allowing the same by these presents: In witness etc.

A Warrant, or Letter of Attorney, to deliver Possession and Seisin.
TO All Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, M. S: of W:
in the County of H. sends greeting: Know ye, that whereas certain Indentures
are made betwixt M. S: I: S: and I: C: and E: his wife, of the one part, and K:
S: of the other part mentioning or purpurting a Bargain and Sale from them the
said M. G: I: G: and I: C: and E: his wife, to the said K: B: of a Message or
Tenement called W. and diverse Lands Tenements and Hereditaments to the same
belonging in the said Indentures mentioned, as by the said Indentures due
reference being thereunto had, it does and may appear.

Now the said M:.L has constituted, ordained and appointed, and by these
presents does constitute, ordain and appoint R: H: his true and lawful
Attorney for him and in his name quiet and peaceable livery of Seisin and
possession of the said Message, Lands and Tenements, with their appurtenances,
or any piece or parcel thereof in the name of the whole, to give and to grant
unto the said K. B. or her lafwul Attorney or Atturneys in that behalf,
Authorized according to the true intent purpurt and meaning of the said recited
Indentures. In Witness, etc.

A Warrant or Letter of Attorney to receive possession:
TO all Christian people, to whom this present writing shall come, K: B: of N.
in the County of H. Widow, sends greeting, Know ye that whereas certain
Indentures are made betwixt M. S. I: S: and J. C. and E: his wife of the one
part, and the said K. B. of the other part, mentioning or purporting a bargain
and sale from them the said M: S: J. S: and I. C: and E. his wife to the said
K: B: of a Message or Tenement called W. and diverse Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments unto the same belonging in the said Indentures mentioned, as by
the said Indentures due reference thereunto being had, it does and my more at
large appear.

Now the said K: B: has constituted ordained and appointed, and by these
presents, does constitute ordain and appoint F: F: her true and lawful
Attorney, for her and in her name quiet and peaceable Livery of Seisin and
Possession of the said Message Lands and Tenements with their appurtenances or
any part or parcel thereof in the name of the whole, to receive and take of
and from the said M: S. J. S. J. C. and E his wife or their lawful Attorney or
Attorneys in that behalf authorized, according to the true intent purport and
meaning of the said recited Indentures, In witness etc.

A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment in the upper Bench To Mr. A. K. or
any other Attorney of the Upper Bench Court.
I Pray you appear, and file a common bail for me T. G. in the said Court of
Upper Bench, at Westminster, in Michaelmas Term next, and there confess or
suffer a Judgment to pass by default against me the said T. G, at the suit of
W. I. for a 100 l. debt by bond with Costs of suit, and for so doing, this
shall be your sufficient Warrant,

dated t he 10th day of August. 1653.
A Warrant to confess a Judgemen^.
I Pray you appear for me E. A. this present Hillary Term at the Suit of I. B.
and file a Common bail in the Upper Bench at Westminster, at his suit and upon
a Declaration of 800 l. debt upon a Bond, to be put in against me at the suit
of the said J. B. I pray confess the same by Non sum informatus or otherwise,
so that Judgment my be presently entered against me thereupon, and for so doing,
this my hand and seal shall be your sufficient Warrant,

dated the 28th. day of January Anno Domino 1649. Sealed and delivered in the
presence of
A Warrant to acknowledge Satisfaction.
Mr. R. A.
I Pray acknowledge satisfaction upon Record for the Judgment which was entered
in the Kings Bench in Michaelmas Term 17. Car against T. I. gentleman at the
suit of me R: T: for 30 l. debt, and 20 s. for costs of suit, and this shall be
your sufficient discharge therefore, witness my hand and seal

this 10th day of October, 1644. Sealed and delivered in the presence of
The TABLE of the Heads of the several Conveyances and Instruments contained
in this Book.
Annuities and Rent-charges.
A Grant of an Annuity, page 1 An Annuity with power of Revocation, 4 An
Annuity by Deed-Poll, 5 A Rentcharge for Service done and to be done, with
power of Revocation, 5 A Grant of an Annuity to a man and his wife, passed by
Fine and Recovery, 7 A Grant of an Annuity by a Lessee to his Lord issuing out
of a Tenement to him demised, with a clause of Distress, 12 A Grant of an
Annuity to a woman for her life after the death of her Husband, with a Clause
to enter and detain, 13 A Grant of a Rentcharge of 50. marks and a 100.
shillings, Nomine poene, 14 An Annuity for term of years, with liberty to sell
the Distress, 15 An Annuity granted out of a Lease, with good Covenants, 17 A
Grant of an Annuity during the Grantees life, charging only the Grantors
person, 21 An Annuity out of a Lease by Will continuable for life, 24 An
Annuity with the Inheritance of Land assured for the same by Recovery and Fine,
24 A Grant of an Annuity out of Land for term of life, 31 A Grant of an Annuity
to a man and his wife for their lives issuing out of Lands, with very good
Covenants, 32 An Annuity granted for two lives, with the Inheritance of Land
assured for the payment thereof, 35 A Clause in a Deed of Annuity to sell the
Distress, 40 A Clause to give an Acquittance upon every payment of the Annuity,
40 A Clause to put One in possession of an Annuity, 41

Assignments.
AN Assignment of Rent reserved upon a Lease, 41 An Assignment of the Lease of
a Manor of Rents reserved upon under-leases therout made, and of Bonds and
Covenants made to the Vendor, 41 An Assignment of a Statute, 45 An Assignment
of the execution of a Statute after the Liberate sued out, 48 An Assignment of
a Recognizance, 49 An Assignment of a Recognizance for performance of
Covenants, 52 Another execution of a Statute, 54 An Assignment of a Lease in
Reversion well passed, 56 An Assignment of part of a Stock, adventured in a
Voyage for discovery of Cathaia, 58 An Assignment of an Obligation before the
same be forfeited, with good Covenants, 59 An Assignment, or Bargain of two
Annuities granted to a man by a Fine, 61 An Assignment of a Lease by him that
has the same but in Mortgage, before it be forfeited, 63 Also the money
payable for the Redemption assigned, etc. An Assignment of a Lease where the
same is bound for the money to be paid for the same, and where there is an
exception of some part of the Premises, 65 An Assignment by an Executor of an
Executor of Land holden by extent upon a Statute, 68 An Assignment of diverse
debts expressed in a Schedule, in consideration of a sum of money to be paid
by the Assignee to the Assignor, where for better security of the payment of
the consideration money, the Assignee is bound to make the Assignor his
Executor, 70 The Assignment of a Recognizance inserted in an Indenture of
bargain and sale, 72 An Assignment of a Lease and Gift of all the Goods a man
shall have at the time of his decease, if his Daughter the Assignees wife, or
any issue of her body be then living, 74 An Assignment of a Lease for lives, 75
An Assignment of a Rectory or Parsonage, Water-Mill, etc. 77 An Assignment of a
Lease for 100. years, 79 A second Assignment of the same Lease, 81 An
Assignment of a Manor granted by Patent, 82 An Assignment of a Bond, 88 An
Assignment of a Lease, 92 An Assignment of a Lease with Covenants to transfer
the benefit of the Covenants in the Lease, and of the Bond upon the same, 97 An
Assignment of two Leases, 99 An Assignment of a Lease not in Esse, 100 An
Assignment of several Terms in a Ferry granted by Letters Patents, 102 An
Assignment of Lands granted by Letters Patents, 105 An Assignment of a Lease,
108 A Fine being levied for 100. years, the Fine recited and the Lands
assigned, 109

Awards.
AN Award in a controversy between parties, concerning the Administration of a
Deceaseds Goods, 112 An Award between Executors at strife about their Testators
Goods, 115 The form of an Award indented, 116 An Award in a controversy
growing, by means of a Copartnership, 117

Bargains and Sales.
A Bargain and Sale of Copyhold Lands by Commissioners of Bankrupt, 120 A
Bargain and Sale of Lands, with general Warranty and good Covenants, 123 A
Bargain and Sale of Copyhold Land and of Freehold Land, with Covenants for
assurance of each accordingly, 127 A Bargain and Sale of Copyhold Lands, 130 A
Sale of a certain quantity of Iron to be delivered at several days, 131 A
Bargain and Sale of Lands with the Tenants Attornment to the same, 132 The
Attornment of the Tenant, 132 A Bargain and Sale by a Factor of his
Constitutors Goods, to the use of whose Agent the Constitutor had taken up
money by exchange on the other side of the Sea, 135 A Bargain and Sale by
Brewers of their Stock in Brewing, as well Implemenes, Corn, Grain, Casks, etc.
as Debts upon Tallies and Scores, with Covenants for transferring of the Debts,
135 A Wood-sale, and a Covenant to make free Copyhold Land, 137 A very good
Bargain and Sale of a Lordship and Manor from a man and his wife, the wife
having Jointure, 139 A Bargain and Sale by a man and his wife of Land in
London, 142 A Bargain and Sale of a Manor or Farm, with transferring of the
benefit of the Covenants, and of a Recognizance for performance of the
Covenants, 144 A Bargain and Sale by a man and his wife of a house in London,
with Covenants to transfer the benefit of the Bond and Covenants, 147 A Bargain
and Sale of Land by a Company in London, where the Grantee charge back the
Land, with an Annuity to the Company for ever, 150 A Bargain and Sale of the
Moiety of a Manor and of an Advowson, 153 A Sale by Executors of Land
belonging to their Testator, 157 A Bargain and Sale by an Assignee of a
Patentee of concealed Lands, 159 A Bargain and Sale of a Remainder to three
persons, each to have a third part, with Covenants that the Heirs of the
Vendors (who may have Interest) shall not go about to reverse or adnul any Fine
or Recovery by the Vendors for assurance of the Land, 161 A Bargain and Sale of
the Reversion and Remainder of the fourth part of a Parsonage, 162 An Indenture
where one having had a Lease mortgaged unto him and forfeited, he now conveyeth
the same back to the first Vendor, conditionally he pay a sum of money by a
day, [Note good Covenants in this Indenture.] 164 A Sale of Corn, 167 A Bargain
and Sale of Felts, where the Vendor during the continuance of the Bargain is
always to have 20 l. before hand, 168 A Bargain and Sale by a Merchant of part
of his Adventure in a Ship to Brasile, 169 A Bargain and Sale of a Freehold
Estate in Land for term of life, 170. A Bargain and Sale of Land where
notwithstanding it is provided, that if the Vendor do pay the Vendee a certain
sum of money within ten years, and a yearly Rent for the Premises, the sale
shall be void, 171 A Bargain and Sale both Freehold and Copyhold, with
liberty that if the Vendee dislike the Purchase by a day, then the Vendor to
repay the Vendee his money, and if he like then to pay more money, 175 A
Bargain and Sale of all benefit growing due to one by means of an
Administration, and the Vendee is to save harmless the Vendor of whatsoever he
may be charged with as Administrator, 176 A Bargain and Sale of the Moiety of a
Ship, 180 A Bargain and Sale of Land in London by the Mother who has a
Freehold therein for her life, and the Son in whom the Reversion is, 181 A
Bargain and Sale of Land where the same is bound for the payment of part of the
Purchase money left unpaid, 184 A bargain and sale of an Annuity granted by a
Fine, 188 A bargain and sale by a man and his wife, she being a Coheir of a
third part of Land in possession, and of a Moiety of another third part of the
same Land in Reversion after the death of the late Husband of one of the
Coheirs, Tenant by Courtesy, 189 A sale or transport of Goods arrested and
staid in Flanders by the King of Spains Authority, and of all recompense which
may be had for the same, 190 A bargain and sale of a Reversion and Remainder of
Land well passed, 192 A bargain and sale by Executors of a house which is
devised to be sold, 193 A bargain and sale of Wool, 195 A bargain and sale of
two Coheirs of a Reversion in Land, 196 A Bargain and sale of a Reversion, or
Remainder of the third part of certain Lands, 198 A bargain and sale of an
Annuity by him that has the Grant thereof from another, under condition, 201 A
bargain and sale by a Coheirs Son and Heir, of his purparty in certain Land,
202 A bargain and sale of a Rentcharge, 204 A bargain and sale of a Reversion
or Remainder in Land, well passed, 207 A bargain and sale of Land upon
condition for payment of a sum of money, 210 A bargain and sale of Goods, with
condition for Redemption, 211 Another of Goods etc. with some difference in the
form. 213 A bill of sale of Goods for payment of debts, 214 Of Goods and
Chattels to a man's Son, ibid. A Deed of Gift referring to a last Will, with a
clause for power of Revocation, 215 Bills of sale and Deeds of gift by
Indenture, 216

Covenants and Conveyances for settling of Lands by Fine, Recovery, etc.
A Covenant for a Recovery by a Writ of right Patent in London to strengthen a
Lease where the Land is entailed. 218 An Indenture tripartite for settling of
Lands upon a Marriage, 219 Covenants, Conditions, and Provisoes in Conveyances
for settling of Estates, 229 An Indenture to lead the use of Recovery, 238 For
suffering a Recovery to make a Fee-simple, 239 For the keeping of a Child and
his Portion, 241 For levying of a Fine to strengthen a Lease before made in
Reversion, 243 Whereby the Father covenanteth with his Son and Heir apparent, to
Estate him and his wife in certain Lands before a day limited, 244 An Indenture
of limitation of Uses upon a Marriage, 247 An Indenture of Covenants of
Marriage for assuring a Jointure, 260 Covenants for settling Estates, 266
Settlement of Estate, 287 Assurances, 290 Settlement of an Estate, 296 An
Indenture of Covenants to levy a Fine, and suffer a Recovery in ancient
Demesne, 310 A Covenant to stand seized, 313 An Indenture where Land having
been forfeited upon an Indenture of Mortgage, the Mortgagor re-assureth the
same to the Mortgagee by raising of use upon a Covenant, if the Mortgagee pay a
certain sum of money at a day, 315 An Indenture for raising of Uses in Land,
with condition that if any of the Vsees go about to alter the Estate-tail, his
Estate shall cease and the next in Remainder enter, and condition also that the
Donor may alter the Uses at his pleasure, 317 An Indenture of Covenants to
suffer a Recovery in London, whereby the Land recovered is assured to the
Bargainer, in case a sum of money (being the Purchase money) be not paid,
albeit the rest of the assurances to the Vendee be absolute, 320 A Covenant to
suffer a Recovery of Copyhold Land by a Plaint in a Court Baron, after the
order of a Recovery at the common Law, 321 An Indenture for knowledging of a
Fine and Recovery of Land, and leading the use thereof, with Covenants of
Warranty and discharge of Encumbrances, 323 An Indenture for acknowledgment,
and leading the use of a Fine and Recovery, 326 An Indenture for acknowledging
of a Fine of Rent, 327 A Covenant to convey Land and Rent to the use of a
College, 329 Covenants between a high Sheriff and his under Sheriff, 331 An
Indenture for building of a house, both Carpenters work and Bricklayers work,
339 An Indenture of Covenants where Carpenters have bargained to pluck down an
old house, and build a new by a day in a certain form prescribed, 342 Articles
of agreement amongst Creditors for levying their Debts due by their Debtor, 344
Articles of agreement between Debtors and their Creditors, about composition
for Debts, 348 An Indenture where a Citizen of London dies, having Debts owing
him beyond the Sea, his Executor covenanteth with his wife (who is to have a
third part thereof) to set his Factor to gather them in, and always as they
shall be gotten, to answer the woman her part accordingly, 351 An Indenture
between the Overseers of a Will, and one that marries the wife an Executrix of
the deceased, concerning the Childrens Portions. 352 An Indenture of Covenants
amongst three persons having a Lease, that every of them shall bear a third
part of Rent and all Charges etc. 354 An Indenture of Covenants, where five
persons have laid out a sum of money upon a Lease in Mortgage, that every of
them shall have equal and ratable benefit in the Lease etc. 355 An Indenture
where one having taken a Lease of a Shop and bought a stock of Wares therein
upon Credit, for which Wares A. B. gives a Bond; the Buyer for A. B. his
Indemnity assigns him the Lease, and enters Covenant, that if he himself
make default in payment, A. B. shall enter into the Shop, and seize all the
Wares for payment of the Debt, 358 An Indenture of Covenants, between a man and
a woman to be married, where the Husband does covenant not to defeat the wife
of a third part of Goods after the Custom, and to suffer her to make a Will
dying before him, and where the woman has assured Copyhold Land, and enters
Covenants for Warranty, 360

Defeazances.
A Defeazance upon sundry assurances had for payment of a sum of money*
extending (gradibus) to extinguish the same Assurances, as the Debt from time
to time shall be cut off and satisfied, 363 An Indenture of Defeazance after
Land Mortgaged is forfeited upon the Indenture of Mortgage, with Covenants that
if the Mortgager pay the money at the new day agreed upon, then he to stand
seized to his own use, and the Mortgagee to do all things required for
re-assurance, 365 A Defeazance of a Statute for payment of money tripartite,
where the Statute being made to two, the one covenanteth with the other not to
release, nor do any prejudice, whereby each party may not receive his Moiety,
367 A Defeazance of a Statute made to three, to save them harmless of Bonds
entered into by the Conuzor, where the Conuzees promise to deliver in the
Statute when all payments are made, and where the Conuzees covenant one with
another not to discharge the Statute without consent, 368 A Defeazance of a
Recognizacce in Chancery, 376 A Defeasance of a Statute-staple, 378 A
Defeazance of a Judgment in the Upper Bench, 379 A Defeazance upon a Judgment,
ib. A Defeazance upon an assignment of a Lease, and a Recognizance for money
lent for certain years, where after the rate of 10 l. per cent. is yearly
reserved, payable during the Borrowers having the money lent, 308 A Defeazance
upon a Statute-staple, 382 Upon a Statute for the warrant of an Annuity, 383
Upon a Statute for payment of money, 384 Upon a Recognizance with a Condition,
384 Upon an Indenture to which it relates, 385 Upon a Statute-staple, 386 To
save harmless a Surety, 387 Upon performance of Covenants upon a Marriage, 388

Deputations.
A Deputation of a Clerk-ship of the Peace, 371 A Deputation of a Steward-ship,

Feoffments.
A Feoffment toward the performance of the Covenant of further assurance in an
Indenture of bargain and sale, with a Letter of Attorney in the same to deliver
Seisin, 390 The indorsement of livery of Seisin upon his Deed, 391 A Feoffment
of Land for performance of a Will, and after to the use of a man's Children,
with a Proviso to defeat the Devise, if the Feoffor will, penned by uery good
Council, 392 A Note of one of the Liveries of Seisin, with the Attornment of
the Tenants of one of the Manors, 395

Grants.
A Grant of the Rent and Reversion of a house during the Grantees life, with
condition that if the Lease in Esse determine before the Grantees death, that
then the Grantor may let the Premises, reserving so much rent to the Grantee
during his life, 370 A Grant of Lands in Exchange, penned by Edmund Plowden
Esquire, 397 A Grant of a Freehold Estate in Land for term of life, ib. The
Grant of a Reversion, 398 The endorsement upon this Deed, 400 A Grant of a
Clerk-ship of a Court, ib. A Grant of a Leet, Park, and free Warren, 401 Of a
Stewardship, 403 Of the Clerk-ship of the Peace by a Custos Rotulorum, 404 Of
an Extent. 405 Of the next Avoider of a Parsonage, 406 Of a Presentation from
the King, 407 Of an Advowson from a ^^ommon Person, ib. Of a Presentation by a
private Person, 408 An Indenture between the Patron and Vicar, ib. Of a
Manumission, 409 Of the Office of a Receiver and Surveyor, 410 Of a Keeper of a
Park, ib. Of an Auditor-ship, 411 Of a Bayliwick, 412 Of a Deputation or
under-Stewardship, ib. Of a Ward within age, 413 Of an Advowson of a Parsonage
in Fee, ib. Of a Donation of a free Chapel, 414 Of an Annuity given to a
Servant for promotion in Marriage, ib. Of a chief Rent, Homage and Service, 415
Of an Annuity for Council not to be charged upon the person of the Grantor, ib.
Of an Annuity to the use of a woman, to begin after the death of the Grantor,
ib. Of a Reversion, 416 Of an Annuity, with condition, that the wife shall
claim no Dower, ib.

Joyntures,
AN Indenture for a woman's Jointure, containing Covenants for gift of money,
Apparel and Marriage Dinner, 372 A woman's Jointure in Land, where if any of
the Land be evicted from the woman, Use is raised to her in other Land during
her life, 373 A woman's Jointure of Land in London, passed by way of Recovery,
418

Leases.
A Lease of Woods, with diverse good Covenants, 422 A Lease of Herbage and
Pawnage of Wood-grounds, the Woods being formerly granted, 425 A Lease of
Copyhold Land, with recital of the Lords License Admittend. 427 A Lease to
one during the life of himself, his wife, and their Child unborn, or another
to be nominated in stead thereof, with provision that the Husband shall leave
his wife his Land, if he dye before her, 429 A Lease in Reversion after the
expiration, surrender, or forfeiture of another former Lease, 431 A Lease of a
House in London, where part (...) the Rent is taken up by way of Fine, and
where the House having been the Lessors place of occupying his Trade in, the
Lessee is bound to gather in certain the Lessors Debts, 433 A very good Lease
of a Brewhouse and brewing Vessels, with very good Covenants, and a Covenant to
stand to award if any controversy rise between the parties, upon any matter in
the Lease, 436 A Lease of a House in the Country in Reversion, with Covenant to
pay Herriots, 441 A Lease of a Garden for 1000. years, with Covenant to convey
over the Fee-simple of the Premises to the Lessee or his Heirs if they require
it, 463 A Lease of a Windmill, 468 A Lease of a House in London by a man and
his wife who have two parts thereof in the wives right during her life, and by
the Son of the woman who has the third part thereof in Fee, and the Reversion
of the other two parts after the woman's decease, 479 A Lease made to the intent
the Lessee with the Rents and profits of the Land shall pay the Lessors Debts,
483 A Lease of a House in the Country for life, with Covenant by the Tenant to
pay Herriots, bear charges in time of War, and do other services, which for
the Premises formerly had been accustomed, 485 A Lease of Freehold Land for
lives, also a Letter of Attorney to surrender Copyhold Land for the same
lives, and to deliver possession, 489 The Letter of Attorney depending upon the
former Indenture, 491 A Lease of a House by Tenant in tail well passed, 499 A
Lease by a Master and Fellows of a College, 503 An Indenture whereby the Lessor
demiseth another Tenant, if the Lessee be evicted of the first, 505 A Covenant
for further assurance, 507 A Lease for 100. years in Reversion after a life,
508 Of a Hundred Court or Leet by the Queen, 509 A Lease made for indemnity of
Sureties, 511 A Lease in Reversion after two lives, 512 A Lease with many
Reservations besides the Rent, 513 A Lease made in consideration of the
surrender of a former Lease, 514 A Lease of a Moss Room, 514 A Lease of Tithes
belonging to a Free school, 516 Of a Rectory Impropriate, 517 Of a Parsonage
for term of life, 518 And for non-paymeat a clause for Re-entry, 519 Of a
Manor for years, 520 A Covenant of the Leassor for the quiet enjoyment and
discharge of all former Encumbrances, 522 A Covenant by the Lessor for further
assurance, ib. A Lease of a Manor, with a Covenant that the Land only by
Distress, and not the person of the Lessee shall be liable to the Rent
reserved, 523 A short Lease of Lands for a term, the Rent to be paid after the
Lessors decease to his Heir in tail, ib. A Lease of a House in London, 524 A
Lease of Lands revokable upon payment of a sum of money to a Daughter, 526 A
Re-demise of a Message, 529 A Covenant that the Lessor may come into the
Premises to view the Reparations. Et ut antea, 530

Letters of Attorney.
A very good President of a general Letter of Attorney, drawn and penned by
Council, as well concerning the disposition of Lands as ^oods, 472 A Letter of
Attorney for a Wood-sale, with allowance for the Attorneys pains, 476 A Letter
of Attorney to receive the profits of a Parsonage, 477 A Letter of Attorney to
surrender Copyhold Land for lives, and to deliver possession, 491 To sue for a
Debt due by a Bill of Exchange, to the Attorneys own use, with a Covenant that
the Debt is undischarged, 531 To deliver a Deed, 532 From several Executors
and Administrators to sue, under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs of Hundreds, or for
Goods etc. wrongfully taken, by color of their Office, 533 To receive the
Rents of a Manor, and for non-payment to re-enter, 534 To enter into Land for
non-payment of a Rent reserved upon a lease, ib. To receive the profits of
Lands extended, 536 To surrender Copyhold Land, 537 Another of the same, ib.
To make entry into Lands, 538 To sue for Lands, 539 To receive money, 540 For
collecting Debts, 542 To receive Writings and seal a Counter-part of a Deed,
ib. To take possession of Lands upon a Liberate, 543 See more Warrants, 661
etc.

Letters of Substitution.
A Letter of Substitution, 478 A Letter of Substitution to sue for money, 541

Mortgages.
A Good Mortgage, 445 A Release upon a Mortgage forfeited, and a further day
given, 450 Of a Demise of a Message etc. ib. A good Mortgage by Deed enrolled,
and Defeazance thereupon with a clause if the money be not paid according to the
Proviso, that the Mortgagee paying a further sum shall have the land
est^blished, 455 A good Mortgage by way of lease for 500. years, 459 A Lease of
Land for 500. years, for assurance of payment of a sum of money, with
Covenants for Attornment of the Tenants of the Premises, and for the assuring
of land to the Lessee and his Heirs for ever, and request it if breach of
payment be made etc. A Lease devised to avoid Bargain, livery and enrolling
etc. 466 A Lease of a Rectory and Parsonage for 300. years conditional for
payment of money, containing very good Covenants, amongst which one to convey
the fee in case of breach of payment, if the Mortgagee will, 486 A Mortgage of
Land to two in Common, 492 A Mortgage of Land to save harmless of certain Bails
and Surety-ships, 495 A Mortgage of one piece of Land to make assurance of
another piece of Land by a day, and a Covenant that if the Land Mortgaged be
redeemed, and after sold, the Vendee shall have the preferment to buy it before
another, 545 A very good Mortgage of a grand Lease, and of the Rent of an under
Lease thereunto made, with Covenants to transfer the benefit of a Bond and
Covenants, and a Covenant that the Mortgagor shall deliver the possession of
the Premises Mortgaged, if he fail in payment, 548 A Mortgage of a grand
Lease, with the Rent reserved upon an under Lease thereunto made, also an
Assignment of the Covenants and Bond made by the under Lessee, 551 A Mortgage
of a Reversion of land in London passed by way of Recovery, the same Reversion
being in the Mortgagor, and the Heirs of his body, and the Recovery being
brought also against the Tenant for life, a woman and her Husband, 554 A very
good Mortgage of land, with a Revocation of Uses thereof declared in a former
Indenture, where also it is provided, that if the money be paid accordingly,
then the lands to be to the Uses contained in the said former Indenture, 557

Partition.
AN Indenture tripartite for division of land holden by lease into four parts
by lots with very good Covenants, 561 A partition between two Brothers, to whom
lands are jointly given by their Fathers Will, 564 An Indenture of Partition
betwixt Coheirs, 568 Of Partition betwixt three Joynt-tenants, 572 An
Indenture of Partition Quadri-partite, 576 Another Partition between Coheirs
of Houses, 578 A division of Land between the Owners thereof in Fee-simple, with
good Covenants, 580

Partnership.
A Partner-ship between two of several Trades, where each several parties
industry used in his several Trade, the gain is to re-dound to both parties
benefits, 582 A Partner-ship where one alone is bound to follow the Trade, 586
A Partner-ship be^ween Merchants Adventurers, 588 A Division of Partner-ship
well passed, 590 A Presentation, 595

Provisoes.
POwer to make Leases, 596 A Proviso to grant any part of Lands for Wives
Jointure, preferment of Children, or Leases for years or lives, 597 A Proviso
for liberty to the Son and Heir to make Joyntures, grant Annuities, and assign
Lands for raising Daughters Portions, and that the Son shall not impeach any
act done by the Father, 597 That the Heir may make all Leases, so that the same
may not impair any Estate made by the Father, 598 For liberty to make Leases,
with some difference from the former, 599 A Proviso of Revocation in the same
Deed, 600 A Proviso to make void a Lease for nonperformance of Covenants. [See
more Title Covenants,] 601

Releases.
A Lease for a year, whereon to ground a Release, 602 The Release, ib. A Release
of title to Land, 605 An Acquittance upon Indenture of Mortgage, with a Release
of all Covenants in the same, and of the Mortgagees claim in the Land
Mortgaged, 606 A Release in Land by one Joynt-tenant to another, 607 A Release
by one Executor to another of the Debts due by the Testator at his decease, 608
Of title to Lands, ib. Upon a Mortgage, 610 From a man to his Ward, ib. A
Release of Errors, 611 Another Release by Executors, ib. Of a Jointure and
Dower, 612 Of Lands and Actions, 613 For receipt of Writings, ib. An
Acquittance made by an Attorney, 614 Another release of Errors, ib. A release
of Errors in a Fine, 615 A general release touching Evidences and Writings,
ib. A general release by Executors, 616 Of Tithe Lead Oar, 617 A release with
Warranty, 618 By a Substitute to an Attorney, ib. For a Legacy. 619 For a Debt,
ib. A Release made by mediation of Friends to certain Lands, and to certain
Rent, 620 A Release by him that suffered a Recovery in Land to the Recoverer
after the Recovery passed, 622

Revocations.
OF Uses in former Indentures mentioned, according to the power thereby given,
623 A Declaration of Uses upon the Revocation above written, 625 Another Deed
of Revocation, ib. A Clause of Revocation, 626 A Proviso for Revocation of
part, ib.

Surrenders.
OF Tenants for life, to the end a Recovery may be had to make Lands in
Fee-simple, with a Reversion of their Estates, 628 Another short Deed of
Surrender, 629 A Surrender of a Ioynture upon condition, 630 A Surrender by
Tenant for life to him in Reversion or Remainder, to the intent to have a
Recovery to pass, 631 A surrender of a Lease, 632 A form of a Surrender, 633 A
surrender of Copyhold Land conditional, ib.

Trusts.
TRust for the maintenance of wife and Children, 635 To sell Land to pay Debts
and Legacies, 637 A Declaration of a Trust concerning Conveyances taken in
other men's names, 638 An Assignment to Feoffees in Trust, ib.

Uses.
AN Indenture to declare the use of a Fine and Recovery levied and suffered,
642 To declare the Uses of a Fine and Recovery levied and suffered 643 An
Indenture to lead the use of a Fine levied, 644 To declare the use of a Fine
levied, ^b. Uses. 645

Warrants.
A Warrant of Attorney to suffer a Recovery both by the Tenant and the Vouchee,
661 A Letter of Attorney to surrender Copyhold Lands, 662 A Warrant or Letter
of Attorney to deliver Possession and Seisin, ib. A Warrant or Letter of
Attorney to receive possession, 663 A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment
in the upper Bench, ib. A Warrant to confess a Judgment, ib. A Warrant to
acknowledge satisfaction, 664

Wills.
A Citizens Will with devise of Lands, 649 A Devise depending on an Indenture
to convey lands and Rent to the use of a College, 653 A Note touching the
disposition of Lands to a Corporation: as the same be not within the Statute of
Mortmain, 655 A Citizens Will, 659 A Will.

FINIS:

