SEVERAL GROUNDS, REASONS, ARGUMENTS, AND PROPOSITIONS, Offered to the Kings
Most Excellent MAJESTY, For the Improvement of His Revenue in the First Fruits,
and Tenths: Annexed to the Petition of James, Earl of North-hampton, Leicester,
Viscount Hereford, Sir William Farmer, Baronet, George Carew, Esquire and the rest
of the Petitioners for a Patent of the First Fruits and Tenths, for the Term of
one and thirty Years, at the yearly Rent of Threescore Thousand Pounds.
THAT Whereas in the 26th. Year of King Henry the Eight, The Lords Spiritual,
Temporal, and Commons Assembled in Parliament, with His Royal Assent, did
Ordain, and Enact, That the King's Highness, His Heirs, and Successors, Kings
of this Realm, should have and enjoy for ever, the First Fruits, and Profits
for one year, of every Person, and Persons, which should be Nominated, Elected,
Presented, Note, The Current Money of England much infeebled since those Times.
or by any other Ways, or Means appointed, to have any Archbishopric,
Bishopric, Deanery, Prebendary, Parsonage, Vicarage, or other Dignity, or
Spiritual Promotion whatsoever within this Realm, of what Name, Nature, or
Quality soever they be, or to whose Patronages, or Gifts soever they belong,
the First Fruits, Revenues, or Profits, for one year of every such Dignity,
Benefice, or Spiritual Promotion, whereunto any such Person or Persons, shall
be Nominated, Presented, Elected, or Appointed; And that every such Person or
Persons, before any Actual and Real Possession, or meddling with the Profits of
any such DIgnity, Benefice, Office, or Promotion Spiritual, should satisfy,
content, and pay, or agree to pay to the Kings Use, at reasonable Days and
Times, upon good Sureties, the first Fruits and Profits for one whole year, to
the Kings Treasury. And it was Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Lord Chancellor of England, and Master of the Rolls, for the Time being, and
from time to time, at their Will and Pleasure, should name and depute by
Commission, or Commissions, under the great Seal, fit Persons to examine and
search for the just and true Values of the first Fruits, and Profits, by all
ways and means that they can, and to compound and agree for the Rate of the
said first Fruits and Profits, and to limit days of Payment upon good Security,
which should be in the Nature of a Statute Staple.

AND Whereas it was Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall yearly
have, take, enjoy, and receive, united, and knit to the Imperial Crown for
ever, one yearly Rent or Pension, amounting to the Tenth Part of all the
Revenues, Rents, Farms, Tithes, Offerings, Emoluments, and of all other
Profits, as well called Spiritual, as Temporal, now appertaining, See the
several Presidents and Commissions with Returns of full values in Queen
Elizabeth's Time.
or belonging, or hereafter that shall belong to any Archbishop, or Bishop,
Dean, Prebend, Parson, Vicar, or other Benefice, Spiritual Dignity, or
Promotion whatsoever, within any Diocese of England or Wales, and that the said
yearly Pension, Tenth, or Annual Rent, shall be yearly paid to the Kings
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, Kings of this Realm for ever, which was
confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, in 32 Hen. 8. and 34 H. 8. and 37 H.
8. and 2 Edw. 6. and 7 Edw. 6. and the 1 Eliz. And it was also further Enacted
and Ordained by the said Authorities, That the said yearly Rent, Pension, or
Tenth Part, shall be Taxed, Rated, Levied, Received, and Paid to the Kings Use,
in Manner and Form following, that is to say; The Lord Chancellor of England,
for the time being, shall have Power and Authority to direct into every Diocese
in England, and Wales, several Commissions in the Kings Name, under His Great
Seal, to such Person or Persons, as the Kings Highness shall name and appoint,
Commanding, or Authorizing the Commissioners, or Three of them at least, to
Examine, Search, and Enquire, by all the Ways and Means that they can, by their
Discretions of, and for the true, just, and whole entire yearly Values, of all
the Mannours, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Offerings, Emoluments, and
Hereditaments, and all other Profits whatsoever, as well Spiritual as Temporal,
appertaining to any such Dignity, or Spiritual Promotions as aforesaid,
ordinary Deductions to be defalked out of the same. And that the several
Bishops should be charged with the Collection of the said First Fruits and
Tenths, in their several and respective Diocesses. And that upon the Bishops
Certificate any Incumbent, refusing to pay his Tenths, shall be discharged of
his Living.

BY the Grave Advice, and Consultations of all Estates in so many Parliaments,
the first Fruits and Tenths were granted and confirmed to the Crown of England,
for the better Maintenance, and Support of the Royal Estate. Felix nullo que ut
esse modo populus, cujus gubernandi potestas non penes Regem sit divitem.
And if the People are since multiplied, whereby there is a further increase of
Rents and Tithes, and a greater Value upon all Commodities, the Crown Revenue
should be Improved toward the King's innumerable Charges for the Government,
and well-being of those People, and holding a Correspondence with all Foreign
Princes, for their Trade and commerce. As lately the Spanish Trade was restored
at the King's Charge.

KIngs, and Queens of England, gave most of the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments belonging to these Ecclestastical Dignities and Promotions, and
have also Erected diverse Foundations, Colleges, and Houses of Learning, and
given Large Inheritances, and Endowments thereunto, whereby most of the Clergy
have their Educations, and are made fit for these Dignities, and other
Ministerial Offices in the Church, without any great Charge to their Families,
or Relations, therefore good Reason the First Fruits and Tenths of all their
Dignities and Benefices, should be paid to the King, whom they hold of, as
Patron Paramount, and as Supreme Head of the Church, and Defender of the Faith
of England.

THe Statutes, and established Laws of the Land, are made for the full Payment,
and whole entire First Fruits and Tenths, wherein the Clergy themselves had
their Votes in Parliaments. And it it is as great Injustice for Felicia illa
olim tempora, in quibus majus subditorum animis insedit utilitatis Regiae
studium, quam rerum suarum curae fa^
the Clergy to withold any part of the Kings Dues, as others to deny them any
Part of their Predial, Personal, or Mixed Tithes, the Subject in general
suffers, wherein the Kings Revenue is abated, which of Right belongs to the
Crown. Every private person may, as often as he pleases, improve his own
Revenue, when occasion serves.

THe Meanest Subject is allowed the Benefit of the Law, and the King does him
Justice, and Maintains his Property, according to the Common and positive Laws
of the Land. The King may expect the same* Benefit of the Laws, and require His
own Rights, and Revenues, by those Rules of Justice, which all men are bound to
observe and obey.

Three Objections raised against Payment, of First Fruits and Tenths, Answered
by the Petitioners.
THat the First Fruits and Tenths, is an Innovation obtruded upon the Clergy of
late Times*

To this they answer, That the First Fruits and Tenths, were paid in the Saxons
Time, as appears by Bedes Ecclesiastical History, and have so contiued ever
since in England, to this very day, and that those Payments or Tributes, As
King James was to the Church of Scotland.
Bid calls Vectigal, which signifies a Badg of Subordination of the Clergy to
the supreme Civil Magistrate, and where they have cast off this Tribute, the
Civil Magistrate has been subordinate to the Authority of the Church.

THat the First Fruits and Tenths, are of a Popish Institution.

Answ. It may be satisfactory ^^ough, that this Tribute of First Fruits and
Tenths, have been paid to all Kings and Queens of England, since the
Reformation in Henry the Eighth' s Time, without any Repeal of any of the said
Statutes: but in the Time of ^opery, (viz.) in the 2. and 3. of Philip and
Marie, The Act for paying of First Fruits and Tenths was repealed, but
confirmed again in the very first year of Queen Elizabeth's Reformation of
Religion Vide Lord Burley's Speech to Queen Elizabeth.
from Popery, by the Statute of the 1. Eliz. chap. 4. With a Recital and
Ratification of all former Statute^, that confirmed the same to the Crown, and
have continued in Force ever since: So that if the Tithes be Jure Divino,
payable to the Clergy for their Administration of the Word and Sacraments to
the People, the First Fruits and Tenths Jure Politico are payable to the King,
their Sovereign Lord, for His Administration of Justice, and maintaining the
Rights, Privileges, and Liberties, both of Church and State.

THat the Clergy of all Orders and Degrees, have lately suffered, and
therefore ought not to be raised in their first Fruits and Tenths.

Answ. That the King has suffered more, and His Revenue much diminished by the
late detestable and irreligious War, which has been fomented, and encouraged
by many thousands of the Clergy, now confirmed in their Livings by Act of
Parliament, and the Commons of England would more willingly pay their Tithes,
if they were sensible the First Fruits, and full Tenths were to be paid to the
King, as they lately expressed in their desires upon the like Occasion of
improving that part of the Kings Revenue. ^elode se est, quisquis de jure
regali demit.


THe Incumbents have, and do daily take Advantages for their Tithes, of new
Tillage, and other Improvements of Land, which ought to be proportionably
answered to the King. The Bishops, and all other Persons in Spiritual Dignities
and Promotions, may raise a full Tenth Part to be paid by their Tenants, who
offers now to advance so much besides the old reserved Rents, and also to
repair the Ruins of their Cathedral Churches.

Six Proposals to the King.
1. THat the said Petitioners will discharge the said Debt of fifty thousand
pounds due from the Crown, as mentioned in their Petition, and give good
Security for the payment of sixty thousand pounds yearly Rent unto His Majesty,
The present yearly Revenue not fifteen thousand pounds, all Charges deducted.
His Heirs or Successors, Kings of England, during the said Term of one and
thirty years, without any Defalkation, other charges, or reprisal whatsoever.

2. THat the Petitioners will not take any First Fruits or Tenths, of such
Benefice or Living, which is appropriated to the Cure of Souls, that upon due
Examination and Enquiry, shall not be indifferently found and returned at the
full yearly Value of thirty pounds upon the Survey.

3. THat no Hospital, College, or Schole shall pay any First Fruits or Tents.

4. THat the Bishop shall not be troubled with the care or charge of Collection
of First Fruits or Tenths, within his Diocese: but be wholly busied in the
other spiritual Affairs of the Church, and Cure of Souls. See Seldom upon Tyhes
of the Eastern Countries.


5. THat all Ministers who were settled in Livings, before the 29th. of May la^
1660. and have already compounded for their first Fruits, shall be discharged
accordingly.

6. THat the Petitioners will prepare a Bill That the said Patent for one and
thirty years may be confi^med by Parliament, (with His Majestyes Concurrence)
to the Petitioners, containing such Covenants* Clauses* Vide Sir Henry
Yelverton's advice to King James.
Provisoes, Conditions, and Agreements, as the Attorney General, and the rest
of His Majesty's Council, Learned in the Law shall reasonably Advice and
direct, whereby all legal Power and Authority may be granted and confirmed to
the Petitioners, to Tax, Levy, and Receive the said first-Fr^its and Tenths,
in as large and ample a manner, as by the said Laws and Statutes, the same were
granted to the Kings and Queens of England, as aforesaid.

Three Proposals offered to the Clergy.
1. THat upon the Nomination, Appointment, Election, or Presentation of a^^
Spiritual person, into the said Dignities, Benefices, or Promotions, and before
they enter into the Actual possession thereof, they shall be bound in a
Recognizance, in the Nature of a Statute Staple, with two sufficient Sureties
to pay the first Fruits, according to the full value, as shall be returned upon
a Survey, payable within four years, after such Nomination, Election,
presentation, or Entrance, at eight several payments, by equal portions ^very
six Months, and that one years Tenths of every such Dignity, Benefice, or
promotion, shall be deducted out of the said First Fruits.

2. THat whereas by the Liberty and Disorder of the late depraved Times, the
Clergy were not held in such Reverence and Esteem by the Common People, as the
Dignity of their Calling requires. And they have been forced to commence
several Actions for their Tithes, and by reason of Contentio^s and distempered
Spirits, the Preaching of the Word of God, has been unprofitable to the
people, that have taken aprejudice against the Ministry. Vide Doctor John
Gerson in his Treatise called Regulae Morales.
Therefore a short Bill shall be prepared by Counsel, and offered to the
Parliam^nt, that an Act may be passed for the speedy Recovering of Tithes, and
that the two next Justices of the peace adjacent to the place, may have power
upon Complaint of any Minister, or other person to whom the Tithes do, or shall
belong, to issue their Warrants yo distrain the Goods and Chattels of any
person or persons refussing to pay their Tithes to whom they shall become due
and payable as aforesaid. That Love and Unity may be preserved between the
Ministers and their Congregations.

3. THat it shall be proposed to His Majesty, That forthwith Conmissions may be
issued out in His Majesty's Name throughout England and Wales, to examine and
find out the full Values of all Dignities, Benefices, Parsonages Necessary
that an Assistant be to the Secretaries of State by reason of their many other
^eighty affairs.
and other Spiritual Promotions aforesaid to return the Surveys ther^of, with
the Names of the Patrons, and present Incumbents, (and in the mean time to
suspend all proceedings in the First Fruits Office) And that His Majesty would
be pleased to appoint Thomas Coleman to be Secretary for Pres^ntations, (of all
such Livings as shall be in His Majesty's Dispose) who is a fit person for that
Employment, and will wholly intend His Majesty's Service therein: To the end,
that His Majesty may be fully informed of the true Value of those Livings, that
well qualified persons may be preferred, answerable to such promotions. And
whereas for the Ease of His Majesty, Several Livings and Promotions were
heretofore in the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keepers Dispose, to be so
continued, notwithstanding any new Return of a greater value. Further Arguments
will be given by the Petitioners* in convenient Time, conducing both to the
Advantage of the King, and the Benefit of the Clergy as occasion requires. All
which is humbly submitted to the Considerations of His Majesty, the Lord
Chancellor, Lord High Treasurer, and Lord Chief Baron, etc.

G. C.
October the 5th. 1660.

