The Complaint of the County of Brecon, against the undue proceedings of the
Sheriff of that County, and false return by him made of Edmond Jones as Knight
for that Shire. With Articles and Exceptions, setting forth the incapacity of
the said Edmond Jones, to sit as Representative in Parliament, he being a
Compounded Delinquent on Record at Goldsmiths-Hall, and therefore not qualified
according to the Articles of the Government, etc.
To the right Honorable the Council of State to his Highness the Lord
Protector, The humble Petition and Certificat of the Gentry, Freeholders, and
Inhabitants of the County of Brecon.
Humbly Showing,
THat according to a Writ issued from his Highness the Lord Protector and his
most honorable Council, for the free Election of two Knights to serve for this
County of Brecon in the next ensuing Parliament to be held for this
Commonwealth of England the third day of September next, and directed to John
Williams High Sheriff of the said County; we did upon Proclamation and Summons,
in obedience to the said Writ assemble our selves in the Castle Green of
Brecon, upon the 12 day of this instant July in all quiet and peaceable manner,
and without any Arms, according to a private Order of Sessions that day
proclaimed for the purpose therein mentioned: And being persons Qualified
according to the Act of The Government of the Commonwealth, were diverse ways
interrupted, menaced, and terrified from giving our Votes according to our
Consciences, and not enjoying a free Election according to his Highness and
his Councils Articles therein provided, Occasioned chiefly by the said Sheriff
(not performing (as we conceive) his duty according to the 13th Article,) his
Under Sheriff, Bailiffs, and Jaylors, and other Agents, (being with diverse
others all armed, contrary to their own Order) who did dragg and hale many of
the Inhabitants to vote for Mr. Edmond Jones, a person incapable of such Trust,
according to the 14th Article being in service against the Parliament, and a
Compounded Delinquent.

And notwithstanding that we being allowed and thought fit to be a number
competent for the Pole, in the behalf of another person capable of the said
Trust, and qualified according to the said Articles, were denied to put in our
just exceptions made against diverse persons, who were in many respects
incapable and disabled of Voting in his behalf, and not qualified according to
the 18th Article: We were therefore constrained, both in respect of our Duty to
God, obedience to his Highness the Lord Protector, his Honorable Council, and
Public good, and interest of our whole County, To declare and pro^e^^
publicly and unanimously against the undue Carriage and illegal Proceedings
of the said High Sheriff, Edmond Jones and their parties interessed therein;
And do hereby make bold to certify your Honor of the said illegal Election of
Edmond Jones, continuing our protestation against (...), and humbly beseeching
your Honors due Examination of their whole proceedings in the said business
before he be approved, being ready to make due proof of the premises,
submitting our selves to your Honors grave judgments for our Redresses herein
in what manner shall seem fittest to your Honors for a new and free Election.

Henry Williams Edward Vaughan Richard Herbert Morgan Jones John Vaughan Thomas
Vaughan Robert Walbeife Thomas Powel Jeffery Jews Roger Vaughan James Watkins
John Prosser, William Powel Philip Williams James Williams Rich: Winter Walter
Winter William Powel William Awbrey Thomas John David Roger Lloyd Llew. Ienkins
Llewes Watkins Henry Parsons Walter Williams Jenkin William.
With hundreds more much aggrieved.

Exceptions against Edmund Jones Esquire setting forth his incapacity of being
entrusted or elected as a Member of Parliament.
1 FIrst, For that he was notoriously disaffected to the late Parliament, for
whom he never did any Service.

2. That he deserted his Chamber in Grays-Inne, and repaired in the time of the
war to Oxford, and did there agitate for the Popish Forces of Ragland and other
Enemies of the Commonwealth, against the Parliament.

3. That he during his abode there, did much further the Irish Rebellions, by
suing out Commissions for diverse of the Irish Rebels, and furthering their
designs.

4. That by that means he came into such favor with the late King and the Earl
of Worcester, that he was nominated Comm^ssioner of Array and Association for
the County of Monmouth, where he did use his uttermost endeavors (being a
Counselor at Law) to draw the said County to yield obedience thereto.

5. That he was Treasurer for the said King in the said County, and received
several vast sums of money, for which there is no account as yet given to the
Commonwealth.

6. That he did press men, and raise horses and arms for the late King and his
Forces against the Parliament, and did thereby much advance the late Kings
service in those parts.

7. That he was a main agent and instrument for the Popish party, and forces
under the E. of Worcester in the Garrison of Ragland, being one in whom he so
much confided, that he did convey the said Earl in a disguise in safety through
the Parliaments-Quarters and Garrisons.

8. That for these and for other his delinquencies, the said Edmond Jones was
voted a delinquent by the Committee of the County of Monmouth, with whom he
compounded at an under value for his personal Estate, and since likewise
compounded at an under value with the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall for his
real Estate, by that means owning his said Guilt, and submitting to the
Parliaments mercy for the said offenses, and therefore not capable (as we
humbly conceive) to be a Member of Parliament, having never been in the service
of the Parliament, nor given any signal testimony of his affection to the
present cause, further than by a Politic compliance with some in power in
those parts when the war was ended, by which means he has avoided an account
for the moneys received by him as Treasurer for the late King and by the favor
of some persons (to advance a particular interest (...) into some places both
of honor and profit to himself, viz. to be ^^torney Genesis of Southwales, which
he obtained by an Order of some of the Council of State, appointed by the last
Paul* who were wholly ignorant of the said Jones high delinquency, which place
the said Edmond Jones does now hold and execute contrary to the several Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament in that behalf made, wherein he has miscarried
himself in many particulars, as will be sufficiently proved, if this honorable
Council think fit to direct a proceeding therein.

THese are to certify whom it may concern, That Edmond Jones of Landsoy in the
County of Monmouth Gent. paid into the Treasury at Goldsmiths Hall the 20 of
March 1646, the sum of Thirty five pounds, three shillings, and four-pence in
part, and the 7 of Feb. 1647 the like sum of Thirty five pounds, three
shillings, and four-pence, being the last mo^ety, and in full of his Seventy
pounds six shillings and eight-pence Fine, imposed upon him as a Fine for his
Delinquency against the Parliament. And for which moneys paid as aforesaid, was
given him two Printed Receipts under the hands of Richard Waring, and Michael
Herring, late Treasurer at Goldsmiths Hall, which at the request of Sir Hen:
Williams is certified this 25. of July 1654. by

l. s. d. 35 03 4 35 03 4 Fine paid, 70 06 8

Michael Herring. Examined by Jo: Bateman.


Exceptions against the undue election of Edmond Jones Esquire as Knight for the
County of Brecon, seting forth the gross partiality of John Williams Esquire higb
Sheriff of the said County, and the imperfect, irregular, and false retorn by
him wittingly and willingly m^de, contrary to the express letter of the
Government of the Comonwealth of England, etc. Published by his Highness the
Lord Protectors special Commandment.
1 FIrst we do aver, and shall be ready to prove and make good, That the said
High Sheriff has born Arms for the late King, and otherwise has aided,
advised, abetted, and assisted in the late war against the Parliament, and in
that respect incapable (as we humbly conceive) to make a retorn of Election of
Members to sit in Parliament.

2. That the said Sheriff out of his desire to promote persons of the like
Principles as himself to the next Parliament, did by all ways and means labor
to preingage diverse of the Gentlemen and Freeholders of the said County to give
their votes for the said Edmond Jones, And for that purpose did procure diverse
of them to subscribe for the said Jones three weeks before the election.

3. That upon the day of election, being the 12 of July instant, the said
Sheriff did show himself most grossly partial on the behalf of the said Jones,
in these particulars following.

In admitting such to vote for the said Jones; who were not quallified, nor
capable to vote, particularly, Mr. Edward Gwyn, who was for a long time a
Captain in Arms for the late King, and as Colonel did lead the Country against
the Parliaments Forces: Watkin Vaughan Esquire who was likewise Colonel for the
said late K^^g: Edward Williams Esquire who as Colonel did lead his divisio^
against the Parliaments Forces, and vigorously acted as Commisioner of Array
for the King: Meredith Jews Esquire who was an active Commissioner of Array for
the late King: Thoma^ Williams Esquire who was Judge Advocate, and in Arms for the
late King: Thomas Vaughan an Officer under Colonel Price for the late King:
John Roberts, Morgan Awbrey, and others listed Soldiers under the said Colonel
Price, Matthew Herbert, Henry Herbert, Richard Vaughan, Richard Jews, David
Phillip, John Jews, and most of the rest of the Electors returned, have under
the command of the said persons, or otherwise aided, advised, assisted and
abetted in the late War against the Parliament, whereby they became incapable
to Vote in election of Members for Parliament (as we humbly conceive) according
to the Government of the Commonwealth of England, etc. and several other Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament, having not been since in the service of the
Parliament, nor given any signal testimony of their good affection thereto.

4. In admitting persons to Vote for the said Jones who had not a competent
estate according to the direction and quallification of the said Government.

5. In putting off and thrusting by such Freeholders as came to the place to
give their Vote for Henry Williams Esquire though quallified to Vote.

6. In hindering the Clerks appointed by Williams party to take notice of and
except against such persons as were not quallified and capable to vote for
Jones.

7. In suffering all that were for Jones to be in Arms, and amongst them the
most notorious in the late Kings party in those parts, and disarming,
threatening and discountenancing such who were for Williams.

8. In permitting if not abetting diverse persons who were armed of Jones his
party to lay violent hands and to hale in to their party diverse of those who
were for Williams, whereby they were forced to Vote for Jones.

9. For the better performance thereof, the said Jones did openly threaten such
who Voted against him, and Ieffery Williams the Deputy Sheriff (whose name is
returned as an Elector) did openly say, that such as would not give their Votes
with Jones should lie by it.

10. William-Watkins (formerly Lieutenant under Major Genesis Harrison) did lay
hold on his Sword, and threatened to draw his Sword against William James, who
was of Williams party, and had only a whip to defend himself, all which was
done by the said William Watkins because the said William James did appear and
Vote on the behalf of Mr. Henry Williams.

11. The High Sheriff himself said, that he was resolved to retorn Jones,
though he were sure to pay the Fine; who made good his Word therein, although
the said Mr. Williams had by far a greater number of voices, of Freeholders and
others qualified and capable to elect Members for Parliament, and himself a
person of known worth and integrity, The said Jones being a Voted and
compounded Delinquent of Record at Habberdashers and Goldsmiths Hall, as by a
true Copy of his Petition, particulars and Fine paid, attested by the Clerks
and Treasurer, hereto annexed, may appear; Whereby the said Edmond Jones is (as
is humbly conceived) incapable to be elected a Member for Parliament, by the
express Articles of the said Government of the Commonwealth of England, and
the several former Acts and Ordinances of Parliament.

12. That the said Sheriff in the Indenture returned by him does not mention
the places of abode of the Electors subscribed thereto, whereby they might be
the better known and distinguished from those that Voated for Henry Williams
Esquire and their delinquency and incapacity more clearly detected and discovered.
The said Sheriff having returned the names of Morgan Jones, William Williams,
Thomas Williams, Thomas Powell, Ienkin Williams, Walter Williams, James Watkins
Gent. and others who Voted for Henry Williams, so that the retorn is imperfect
and erroneous in that particular as is humbly conceived.

13. That the said Sheriff (to make a greater show of appearance of persons of
quality on the behalf of the said Jones, and the better to countenance his said
false retorn) did retorn William Morgan Esquire Edward Gwyn Esquire Walter Vaughan Esquire
Richard Games Esquire as Electors, whereas in truth there are no such persons
within the said County of Brecon.

14. Mr. Edmond Jones came to the Poal and held it in his own hand and said, he
would be even with most of those that Voted against him whatsoever it cost him,
so that all the Inhabitants that Voted not for Jones are unsafe in their
persons and estates, if the said Jones should be admitted a Representative for
the said County.

15. William Morgan voting for Jones laid violent hands on John Powel, and
Llewelin Ienkins Gent. to force them from the place, and hinder them to give
their voices for Henry Williams Esquire for whom they did declare.

16. Edward Williams a person that formerly assisted, advised and abetted in
the late war against the Parliament, and impeached in the charge of the Army as
a Person incapable of trust for the Parliament, and now charged with apparent
disaffection; if not high Treason against his Highness the Lord Protector, was
permitted to stand by the Poal and not only to Vote for Jones, but also to
affront; discourage, and discountenance such as offered to Vote for Mr.
Williams.

17. Howell Llewelin Servant to Col Iefferies who have been both in all the
late wars against the Parliament, was permitted by the Sheriff and his Officers
to dragg several persons to Vote for Jones.

FINIS.

