A COMMISSION FROM The Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, the Lord High
Treasurer, the Lord Bishop of London, and the Dean of St. Paul's.

TO The Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Mr. Justice
Hyde, Mr. Attorney General and others.

Concerning The Arrears of Impropriations, and other Ecclesiastical Livings,
etc.

Granted by his SACRED MAJESTY To the said Lord High Chancellor, Lord High
Treasurer, Lord Bishop of London, and Dean of St. Paul's.

For and toward The Repair of the Cathedral Church of St. PAUL London.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinson, 1662.

A COMMISSION FROM The Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, the Lord High
Treasurer, the Lord Bishop of London, and the Dean of St. Paul's.
TO all whom these presents shall come, The Right Honorable Edward Earl of
Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of England, Thomas Earl of Southhampton Lord
High Treasurer of England, The Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord Bishop
of London, and John Barwick Dr. in Divinity, Dean of the Cathedral Church of
St. Paul in London, send Greeting. Whereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty
that now is by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing
date at Westminster the third day of December last past (reciting as therein is
recited) did give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, Thomas Earl
of Southampton, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, and Dr. John Barwick, all
arrears of rents, sum and sums of money, and profits of all and singular
the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments; and also of all impropriate
Rectories, Vicaridges, Donatives, Portions of Tithes and Gleab Lands, and all
other duties and payments which heretofore belonged to any Archbishop, Bishop,
Dean, Dean and Chapter, Prebend, Canon, Rector, or other Ecclesiastical person
or persons whatsoever: And also all duties, sum and sums of money payable
in lieu of Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, and other Profits and Duties
whatsoever belonging to any of the said Rectories, Vicaridges or Donatives, and
which grew due during the late Distractions, and before the respective
Proprietors thereof were restored, reinvested and settled in the possession of
the same remaining in the hands of any Treasurer, Receiver, Farmer or
Collector, and not pardoned by the late Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion: And all other Tithes impropriate, Oblations,
Obventions, Pensions, Portions of Tithes, appropriate Offerings, Fee-farme
Rents issuing out of Tithes, and other things whatsoever; which in and by a
late pretended Act or Ordinance made in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred forty nine, were vested or settled in, or mentioned, adjudged or deemed
to be in the actual seisin or possession of certain persons thereby appointed,
or mentioned to be appointed Trustees touching the same, which have not been by
them or their order disbursed, disposed, or employed for the maintenance of
Ministers and other uses, according to the said pretended Act or Ordinance, or
any other pretended Act, Order or Ordinance made or pretended to be made in the
years of our Lord, one thousand six hundred and fifty, one thousand six hundred
fifty four, and one thousand six hundred fifty and six, by an Assembly assuming
the power of Parliament, according to the intention of such pretended Act,
Acts, or Ordinances, before the first day of June in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred and sixty, and which are not pardoned by the said Act of
Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, and were any way settled and
vested in his said Majesty; and also all bonds, obligations, and other
securities entered into for the same, or any part thereof, to have, hold and
enjoy the same unto the said Earl of Clarendon, Thomas Earl of Southampton,
Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, and John Barwick, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns without account or other allowance whatsoever. To
the intent nevertheless that the same should and might wholly go and be
applied toward the repairing, adorning and beautifying of the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul in London, according to His Majesty's gracious and pious
intentions in the said Letters Patents expressed, and in such manner as they
the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, Thomas Earl of Southampton, Gilbert Lord
Bishop of London, and John Barwick their Executors, Administrators or Assigns
in their discretions should think most conducing to the better compassing and
effecting of that pious work, thereby impowring them to find out, seize, sue
for, and recover the same by Commission, Inquisition, or any other lawful
means or ways whatsoever, either in the name of his Majesty, or in their own
names; and also to agree and compound for the same, and give Acquittances and
Discharges upon payment thereof; and to send for and require all Papers, Books,
Writings and Evidences relating thereunto, as in and by the said Letters
Patents (amongst diverse other things therein contained) relation being
thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear. Now know ye, that the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, Thomas Earl of Southampton, Gibbert Lord Bishop of
London, and John Barwick, for the more speedy and effectual prosecuting and
effecting the intent of his said Majesty's Grant, and for the advancement and
carrying on of so pious a work, and for other good causes thereunto moving,
have made; nominated, constituted and appointed, and by these presents do
make, nominate, constitute and appoint the Right Honorable Sir Orlando
Bridgeman Knight and Baronet Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, Sir
Robert Hyde Knight, one of the Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas, Sir
Jeoffry Palmer Knight and Baronet, the Kings Majesty's Attorney General, Sir
Phillip Warwick Knight, John Keeling one of the Kings Majesty's Sergeants at
Law, Sir John Cutler Knight and Baronet, Richard Rainsford, and Job Charleton
Sergeants at Law, Thomas Beverly Esquire, Samuel Clark Esquire, James
Ravenscroft Esquire, William Dolben, William Thursby, John Phillips, John
Bathurst, William Wymondesall, Thomas Lee Esquires, Thomas Nevil, John Sharp,
Miles Smyth and Richard Topham Gentlemen, or any three or more of them, for
them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, Thomas Earl of Southampton, Gilbert
Lord Bishop of London, and John Barwick, their Executors and Assigns, and as
their Commissioners to order and manage the said arrears, sum and sums of
money, and premises in and by the said Letters Patents granted as aforesaid,
Giving and Granting unto them, or any three or more of them full power and
authority by virtue of these presents, to ask, demand, seize, collect, and
receive the same arrears, sum and sums of money, and premises aforesaid, and
every or any part or parcel thereof in whose hands or custody, or wheresoever
the same are, shall or may be had or found: and to that end to name, constitute
and appoint such and so many Receivers, Deputies, Officers and Agents, for the
more speedy and effectual doing and performing thereof, as they or any three
or more of them shall think necessary or convenient, and to give and allow them
such Sallaries and allowances for their care and pains, as the said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them in their discretions shall think
fit: And also to commence and prosecute any Action or Suit in Law or Equity
against any person or persons whatsoever that shall deny, neglect, or refuse to
make payment of such of the said moneys and other the premises granted as
aforesaid, as shall appear to be by him or them respectively due or payable,
according to the intent of the Act of Parliament aforesaid, either in his said
Majesty's name or in the name or names of the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
Thomas Earl of Southampton, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, and John Barwick, or
the Survivors or Survivor of them their Executors or Assigns, and to put in
suit all Bonds and Securities made or given, or to be made or given for the
same: And further also to agree and compound with any person or persons
whatsoever for the said arrears, sum and sums of money and premises
aforesaid, or any part or parcel thereof: And to make and give Acquittances,
and other sufficient discharges to all and every person and persons for or upon
payment of all or any part of the said arrears, sum and sums of money, and
premises aforesaid: And likewise to send for, require and keep all Papers,
Writings, Books and Evidences any ways concerning the Premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, or which may be any ways useful or necessary in or about
the having or obtaining thereof, in whose hands or custody the same now are or
shall be; And generally to do, perform and execute all and every other
lawful and necessary Act and Acts, thing and things whatsoever needful and
requisite to be done, for the obtaining, compounding, levying, receiving, or
getting in of the said Arrears, sum and sums of money and premises
aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof. And also to do, perform and
execute all and every the Grants, Powers, Liberties and Authorities in or by
the said recited Letters Patents given or granted, or mentioned to be given or
granted, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes, as the said Edward
Earl of Clarendon, Thomas Earl of Southampton, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London,
and John Barwick, or any of them may, might or could do in their own persons;
hereby ratifying, allowing and confirming all whatsoever the said Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, Sir Robert Hyde, Sir Jeoffry Palmer, Sir Phillip Warwick, John
Keeling, Sir John Cutler, Richard Rainsford, Job Charleton, Thomas Beverley,
Samuel Clarke, James Ravenscroft, William Dolben, William Thursby, John
Phillips, John Bathurst, William VVymondesall, Thomas Lee, Thomas Nevill, John
Sharp, Miles Smyth, and Richard Topham, or any three or more of them shall do
or cause to be done by virtue, or in pursuance of these Presents, or any the
Powers and Authorities hereby given or granted in or about the performance and
execution of the premises. In witness whereof the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, Thomas Earl of Southampton, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, and
Doctor John Barwick have hereunto put their hands and Seals the Eighth day of
January, in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES the Second.

CLARENDON C. THO. SOUTHAMPTON. GILBERT LONDON. JOHN BARWICK.


FINIS.

