A Commonwealth Or* NOTHING: Or, MONARCHY and OLIGARCHY Proved Parallel in
Tyranny.

IN XII. QUERIES, Worthy the Consideration of all public Spirits in this
juncture.

By a Well-wisher to the true security of both Christian and Civil Liberty.

London, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.
June 14.

A Commonwealth Or NOTHING; Or, MONARCHY and OLIGARCHY proved Parallel in
Tyranny.
I. WHether in the Circle of Government, the People have not had hitherto ample
experience of Princely and private Spirits? or where a single Council has the
power of debate and result, whether or no it can be accounted a Commonwealth,
and not an Oligarchy? In this case will our Grandee Officers of the Army,
confederate with some Grandee Ministers of State, give a Government to the
Parliament, People, and Army, as they have made and owned a Commander in chief?

II. Why should the Peoples Representatives expect to perpetuate their power
otherwise then by Rotation? for so may not the Legislative authority sit
continually, though successively? otherwise, will not Intervals convert a
Commonwealth into Monarchy, (the Legislative Authority intermitted) or into
Oligarchy, in case they be Governed by a Council?

III. Whether a Council of State in any Commonwealth, had Executive power,
except in the management of a War, or Treaty with foreign States? How contrary
then are the Armies Proposals (in the course of popular prudence) to a
Commonwealth? nay, how natural* is it for any unlimited power to resolve
according to their own, rather then the Peoples Interest?

IV. Whether for Brutus to expel Kings, and not to promote popular Liberty, was
to lay obligation upon the People (in hatred of Oligarchy) to bring back
Monarchy? but what end or interest can a supreme Council (thus constituted)
have, to destroy it self by setting up Monarchy?

V. Grant civil Liberty, separable from Liberty of conscience, and then show us
(who can) what security we shall have for our civil Liberty? was it not the
pretense of the late Apostate usurper, that he could see no other means but
force and violence to secure the Liberty of conscience? but what encouragement
has liberty of conscience had to trust more unto men then civil Liberty? or
what became of civil Liberty entrusted to any Prince, or Oligarchy? and where
has the free State, or Commonwealth, been ever known, that gave not Liberty of
conscience? in this sense, do they who dare trust men, understand me^? or do
they who will not trust Laws, understand a Commonwealth?

VI. If Rome, Athens, Sparta, Venice, Holland, etc. were not molested with
civil war and sedition, as Germany, France, Spain, England, etc. were* why then
will men call a Commonwealth confusion? what confusion had we in England,
whilst the Norman Line strove for absolute Power, the Barons for Liberty, York
and Lancaster for Royal dignity, Parliaments, People, and Army under the
usurped power of the late perfidious single Person? but how probable is it that
an equal Commonwealth may be received with embraces, seeing a Tyranny came not
only in, but was supported without bloodshed?

VII. If Nimrod first broke the first Government, which was Paternal, by
usurping absolute power to inslave the People by Policy, force, and fraud: if
some Families put themselves under the power of one, as a Prince; others* under
Aristocracy, wherein Noblemen* etc. bare sway, (as in Venice) or Aristocracies
mixed with Democracies, like that of the United Provinces, where the great men
consulting of the affairs of the Commonwealth with the Peoples Deputies, are
Annually chosen; or Oligarchy, which is the Government of a Commonwealth,
consisting of a small number, over powering the People by Policy and force, or
who have Supremacy pu^ upon them by the People: such were the Decemviri, and
Triumviri amongst the Romans* such the 30. Tyrants in Athens. And why then may
not England, Scotland* and Ireland, be not only called, but become a
Commonwealth? 1. By owning the Power to elect their Representatives* allowing
them to sit but one year. 2. For that they tru^t not the Militia in the hands
of one Person, nor the Lawmaking Power in a State Council, are they not also
sparing in making places too specious for profit, power, titular turns, or
duration of time? will now such a constitution be found freer from corruption,
oppression* etc. then these forementioned wherein Persons Gov^r^ing, are
protected from justice or punishment for their arbitrary usurp^^ion^, etc.


VIII. May we not without Intervals of Parliament (by frequent changing of
Officers (civil and military,) in a little time, understand how to preserve our
selves, without the defective continuation of Persons, Councels, Commanders,
Senates? etc. nay, might we not at this very juncture (such qualifications
premised) hope to preserve the Interest of the Commonwealth, though we put the
absolute freedom of Election into the Peoples power? otherwise, may not a
Physician force his Patient for the accomplishment of his cure? does not true
Liberty stand in need sometimes of necessary limitations? or is not just
Liberty consi^^ent with society? and ought we not put our helping hand to
hinder the self-Assassination of one, much more of many? who would not
endeavor to deprive any one of the Liberty of destroying himself? is it any
wickedness to make a People happy against their wills?

IX. Whether the present Parliament (as that public spirited Patriot Sir
Arthur said) (having for these last 5. years been turned to grass) ought not
now (to wipe away all fore-past misprisions) to act like Men and Christians in
all respects, laboring to prevent (for the future) all fore-past usurpa^ions,
in Church, State, and Army, occasioned by plurality in places, exorbitance in
Power, exuberance in Titles, or superfluity in pay?

X. Whether those who have Apostatized from the good Old Cause, Protectors, and
Instrument-makers, or Promoters, etc. such like pursuers of private or Personal
imports, or such who suffered upon a public pursuance, abominating the
usurpations and cruelties of Oliver Cromwell, ought to be first restored, or
preferred in the Army?

XI. Whether those who have formerly not only truckled under a single Person,
(by making or promoting Instruments of Tyranny and servitude) but have still a
Pope in their bellies, or a spite to popular Government, the avowed Enemy to
their Lordly Gradenrs, which how loath they are to lay aside, is now too well
witnessed by their unwillingness to receive their Martial Commissions from the
Peoples Representatives in Parliament, etc. or those who are downright for a
free State, and contented without any restoration or* reparation (as to places
of profit and preferment, to walk in quirpo either in City or Country) are
fittest (both in Council and Army) to consider what kind of settlement is
safest and most suitable to the preservation or promotion of public, popular
freedom?

XII. Whether a perpetual Parliament, a single Person, a coordinate Senate, or
another House, etc. be not alternate Parents, begetting, and begotten; or
however, very near of Kin? And whether the People are obliged not only to
suspect, but also to prevent the power, or promotion, of all such Aspirers? as
whether the Parliament may not by overprudential procedures with such, weaken
both the Hearts and Hands of their best friends? Lastly, whether the
Parliament, the good People of these Nations, with all their honest Officers,
Soldiers, (both in, and yet out of the Army) be not obliged unanimously to
promote the public, in opposition to all private pursuances?

FINIS.

