HENRY, Lord Bishop of London, AND Peter Birch, Doctor of Divinity, Plaintiffs.
The King and Queen's Majesty's, Defendants.
In a Writ of Error in Parliament brought by the Plaintiffs upon a Judgment in
a Quare impedit given for Their Majesty's in the Court of King's Bench by the
Uniform Opinion of the whole Court, for the Presentation to the Rectory of St.
James 's in the Liberty of Westminster, vacant by the Promotion of Dr. Tennison
to the Bishopric of Lincoln.
DR. Thomas Tennison being lawful Vicar of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, one part of the said Parish was by Act Ann. Dom. 1635. 1 Jac. II.
of Parliament erected into a distinct Parish and Rectory, and called by the
Name of the Parish and Rectory of St. James within the Liberty of Westminster;
and Dr. Tennison appointed the first Rector there.

The same Act vests the Patronage in the Bishop of London and his Successors,
and Thomas Lord Jermyn and his Heirs; and then appoints in what Order and
Proportion each of the said Patrons shall present; (viz.) That the First Rector
after the Decease of the said Dr. Tennison, or other next Avoidance, should be
Presented or Collated by the Bishop of London for the time being, and the next
by the Lord Jermyn and his Heirs; the Two next by the Bishop of London and his
Successors, and the next by the Lord Jermyn and his Heirs; and the like
Succession of Two Turns and One Turn, for all times to come.

Dr. Tennison was duly Elected Bishop of Lincoln.

20. Dec. 1691. 22. Dec. 1691. 23. Dec. 1691. 25. Dec. 1691.
Before Dr. Tennison's Consecration, the then Archbishop of Canterbury did
grant a Dispensation to him in due Form of Law, to retain and keep the
Vicaridge of St. Martins, and the Rectory of St. James, together with the
Bishopric of Lincoln, until the First of July, then next following.

This was Confirmed by the King and Queen, by Letters Patent under the Great
Seal of England, (as the Statute of 25. H. 8. requires). After which, viz.

The said Bishop Elect was Consecrated; but by Virtue of the Dispensation, and
according to the Rules of Law, the Living did not become Void at the time of
the Consecration, (as otherwise it would have done); nor did it become Void
until the First of July, 1692. at which time it voided by Cession: In which
case the Crown has an Undoubted Right to supply it by Presentation for that
Turn, to whomsoever the Patronage belongs.

This Cause was several times argued at the Bar, and afterward solemnly at the
Bench, and Judgment given by the whole Court for Their Majesty's.

The Matters which have been and probably may be again stirred against Their
Majesty's Right in this Case, are these, I. Whether the Crown, upon the
Promotion of the Incumbent of a Subject's Living to a Bishopric, has a Right
by Prerogative to Present to that Living for the next Turn? II. If there be
such a Prerogative, yet, Whether the Dispensation and Confirmation in this Case
do not amount to a serving of that Turn? III. Whether this Act of Parliament
has made any Alteration in this Case, to differ it from the Crown's Presenting
upon ordinary Vacancies in other Livings, upon the Promotion of the Incumbents?


The two first of these Points being adjudged with the Crown in the Case of St.
Martins, (which was enjoyed accordingly); and there being no difference as to
these Points between St. Martins and St. James, the Third Point rising upon the
Act of Parliament was principally and indeed only intended to be considered in
the Case of St. James's; but some of the now Plaintiffs Council stirring the
Two first Points again, the Court of King's Bench took them also into
Consideration, and gave Judgment upon all Three for Their Majesty's; which was
done by the Uniform Opinion of the whole Court with great Clearness.

First, As to the First Point,

This Prerogative and Right of Presenting by the Crown, upon the Promotion of
the Incumbent of a Subject's Living to a Bishopric, is an Ancient Right
settled and established by diverse solemn Judgments in the Reigns of King Henry
VIII. Queen Elizabeth, King James I. and downwards; and whenever questioned or
doubted, always prevailed; and there is no one Judgment or Judicial Opinion in
the Law Books against it, but many for it. And if so full and particular an
Exercise of that Prerogative does not appear in the Old Books of the Law, as
has done in and from the Reign of King Henry VIII. downwards, it may
reasonably be supposed to be occasioned by the Unlimited Power and Usurpation
which the Popes of Rome assumed to themselves in this Kingdom, in making
Bishops, conferring Titles to Vacant Livings, and the like, not only against
the Prerogative, but even against the Statutes of the Realm. And if any
Inferences have at any time been drawn from any thing said in any old Book in
doubt of such Prerogative, the same have been rectified by settled Judgments in
Courts for many Ages past, in times when the Learning and Integrity of the
Judges admitted of no dispute.

Nor is it any Objection against this Right of the Crown, that it has not been
put in Execution in some cases anciently where the Crown had another Title, by
reason of Wardship, or of the Temporalities of a Bishopric being in the King's
hands; for besides what is said before as to the Pope's Claims and Usurpations,
the Crown, without prejudice to the Prerogative, might make use of that other
Title not Claimed by the Pope, upon which to bring Quare Impedits (wherein one
single Title must be relied on) rather than to make use of that which the Pope
then Challenged and Usurped, it being improper for the King to set up his own
Prerogative against himself, when he had another Title in him by way of
Interest.

And it seems a strange attempt after so many Ages, and such settled Judicial
Determinations, to question that point of Prerogative, whereunto (till this
Case) an entire submission has been made, and many Eminent Clergymen of the
Church of England have enjoyed, and some now do hold Livings under the Title of
that Prerogative; and it appears by some Books of Presentations to Livings, in
and since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, still extant (the former being lost or
destroyed) that the Crown has presented several hundreds of times upon such
Promotions, and Enjoyment were had accordingly.

II. As to the second Point about the Dispensation; that can in no sort be any
Objection to the Right of the Crown; for this Dispensation being granted to the
Incumbent to retain his Living, is not in Judgment of Law any Commenda, but
coming before the Consecration was lawful and effectual; and the now Plaintiffs
by their Pleadings in the Cause, have owned and admitted it to be so; and then
thereby the Avoidance was Suspended, and no Vacancy happened by the
Consecration, nor till the Dispensation expired, which was the First of July
1692. So that to affirm this Dispensation, or Confirmation, did Serve or
Execute the King's turn, is to say the King used his turn before he had it, or
filled a Vacancy before it was, and that not by his own, but by the Act or
Instrument of the Archbishop; the Confirmation (which is the King's Act) being
barely a Formality required by the Statute Hen. 8. to the Dispensation of the
Archbishop.

III. As to the Third Point upon the Act of Parliament, there have been Two
things Objected by the now Plaintiffs Council.

1. That St. James is a new Rectory created by Act of Parliament, and that Dr.
Tennison came not into it by Presentation, but Donation; and that the
Prerogative Operates only upon Presentative Livings. 2. That by the express
words of the Act it is provided, That the First Rector, after the Decease of
Dr. Tennison, or next Avoidance, shall be Presented or Collated by the Bishop
of London.
As to the First; There is no doubt but that St. James is by the Act made a
Presentative Rectory, participating of the nature of other Presentative
Livings, and Dr. Tennison was continued in his former Cure, though under
another name: And there is no reason in Law to make it a Donative, or otherwise
than of the nature of a Presentative Living in Dr. Tennison, nor for a
distinction between old and new Rectories; but the Right of the Prerogative
being founded upon the Promotion of the Incumbent that holds equally both in
old and new Rectories where such Promotion happens to be, and when this new
Rectory voided by Promotion, then, and not till then, the Crown's Prerogative
to Present arose, as much as it would or could have done in the Case of an old
Presentative Living.

As to the Second, there can be no reason to think the Act intended to take
away the Prerogative of the Crown, which generally speaking, is not bound,
unless specially named: But the end of this Act was to Erect a New Parish and
Rectory, and to make them of the same nature with other Parishes and Rectories,
and to settle the Rights of each as between the Patrons and Parishioners, but
in no sort to meddle with, much less to take away the Rights of the Crown; nor
was there any need of a saving of the King's Right which arose by the Act by
making the Rectory presentative.

And it is not of any weight to say the express words are for the Bishop's
Presenting; the Intent of the Act is satisfied by settling the Ordinary Course
of Presentations, without Excluding the Prerogative, and the Bishop must take
his Right subject to the Rules of Law, one part of which is the Prerogative;
and it has been resolved that the Grantee of the next Presentation must give
way to the Prerogative, tho he lose his Turn by it: And if this Act should be
taken Literally, then there would be no Right to present by Lapse, nor
Presentation by the Crown, in case of any Forfeiture, or of the Temporalities,
being in the King's hands, which would be absurd to maintain; and such a
literal Construction is against the Rules and Reason of Law, and many Judicial
Determinations in the like Cases.

Wherefore it is prayed the Judgment may be affirmed.


