A COMMISSION FOR The due and effectual Assessing and Leavying of the fourth
part of the yearly value of Lands, and of the yearly increase or profit of
Stocks, and other Personal Estate in the Respective Precincts in IRELAND; for,
and toward the Pay of the ARMY.
IRELAND.
By the Commissioners of the Commonwealth of England for the Affairs of
Ireland.
WHereas, In and by one Act of Parliament, (Entitled An Act for the speedy and
effectual Satisfaction of the Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, etc.) It is
(amongst other things) enacted, That all Inhabitants, Owners, Occupiers and
Tenants of Lands in Ireland, shall from and after the 24. of June next 1654. be
charged to pay for the said Lands and Stock thereon, toward any public
charge, no more than one fourth part (both for the Landlord and Tenant) of the
true and full yearly value and profit of their respective Lands and Stock
thereon; as by the said Act more at large appears. To the end therefore that
the said Branch of the said Act may be duly put in execution, the Commissioners
of the Revenue in every respective Precinct in Ireland, or any three or more of
them within every Precinct respectively, are hereby authorized and required, to
Tax, Assess and Levy upon all and every the Inhabitants, Owners, Occupiers and
Tenants of Houses, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Fishings, and other Heredi^aments;
and upon all and every Fraternity, Guild, Corporation, Bodies-Politick or
Corporate, having or holding any Houses, Lands, Tiths, Wears, Fishings, or
other Hereditaments; or any Rents, Annuities, or profits out of Lands, Tiths,
Wears, Fishings, or other Hereditaments within their respective Precincts,
the full fourth part of the true and yearly value of all and singular the said
Houses, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Fishings and other Hereditaments within the
said Precincts respectively, according to the best improved Rate the same now
is or may be let by the Landlord at the Rack without Stock thereupon. And
likewise, the full fourth part of the yearly increase or profit of the Cattle,
Seed-corn, and other Stock, and personal Estate belonging to or employed by
all and every the Inhabitants, Owners, Occupiers and Tennants of Lands, within
the said Precincts respectively, as Stock upon the said Lands; And also the
full fourth part of the yearly increase or profit of all Stocks of money and
goods employed by all and every person and persons within the said Precincts
respectively in the way of Merchandise or trade; or in any other way whereby
increase or profit does accrue to the Owner: The said increase or profit of
Stock and personal Estate to be computed according to the Rate of eight pounds
for every hundred pounds, that the same shall be valued to be worth according
to the best and most improved Rates; the fourth part whereof (That is to say,
Forty shillings for every Hundred pounds in Stock) is to be assessed and levied
as aforesaid, and so rateably for greater and lesser Stocks.

And for the more due and effectual assessing and levying of the said fourth
part, according to the Tenor of the said recited Act, The said Commissioners of
Revenue in every respective Precinct, are hereby authorized and required to
issue out their warrants, to any two or more of the most able and faithful men
in every Barony, Division or Allotment within each Precinct, thereby requiring
them, forthwith to value all and every the Houses, Lands, Tenements, tithes,
Fishings, and other Hereditaments within their respective Baronies, Divisions
or Alotments, according to the best improved yearly value the same now is or
may be let by the Landlord, at the Rack without Stock thereupon: And likewise
to value all Cattle, Seed-corn, and other Stock and personal Estate, yielding
increase or profit, belonging to or employed by all and every the said Owners,
Occupiers and Tennants of Lands, and other Inhabitants within their respective
Baronies, Divisions or Allotments. And to cause the said yearly Value of the
respective Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Fishings, and other Hereditaments in every
respective persons holding, possession or occupation within their respective
Baronies, Divisions or Allotments; together with the true value of the Cattle,
Seed-corn, money, goods, and other Stock, and personal Estate yielding
increase or profit, belonging to or employed by the said persons respectively;
to be fairly written in a Parchment Roll or Book; Setting down at every man's
name, the name and quantity of the Lands, Tenements, tithes, Fishings, and
other Hereditaments he holds or occupies; together with the name of the
Owner or Proprietor thereof; and the true yearly Value of the same, according
to the said best improved Rates: and in another distinct Column, the true
yearly value of every particular persons Stock according to the said best
improved Rates. And the said Rolls or Books being prepared as aforesaid, to
return the same attested under their Hands unto the said Commissioners of
Revenue respectively, before the six and twenty day of June next ensuing. And
the said Commissioners of Revenue in every respective Precinct are required to
return unto the Commissioners of the Commonwealth, before the tenth day of
July next, Duplicates of the Rolls or Books (hereby appointed to be returned
unto them, and to be perfected by them as aforesaid) of the true yearly Value
of the Lands, Stock, and other personal Estate of every person within their
respective Precinct.

And for the better discovery of the true value of the said Lands and Stock as
abovesaid, the said Commissioners of Revenue are by their said Warrants to
authorize the said persons (whom, they shall appoint to value the same as
aforesaid) to send for such persons as they shall think fit within their
respective Baronies Divisions or Allotments; and to examine them touching the
premises; and to use all other good ways and means for the discovery of the
same; letting all persons concerned within their respective Baronies, Divisions
or Allotments know, That if any person shall conceal the Number, quantity or
kind of any part of his Estate, to the end the same may be freed or exempted
from the Assessment or Duty aforesaid, The said Estate so concealed shall be
seized to the use of the Commonwealth; which the Commissioners of Revenue in
their respective Precincts, are hereby authorized to do; and to cause the same
to be appraised, and sold in open Market, to such person or persons as shall
give most for the same; and to cause the money for which the same shall be sold
as aforesaid, to be paid in to the public Treasury of the Precinct, wherein
the said Estate shall be so seized. And in all cases where the Commissioners of
Revenue, or any of them, shall suspect that the Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Goods
or Stock (so returned unto them as aforesaid) are by the said Returns
undervalued; they or any three, or more of them, are hereby authorized and
required, to make further inquiry of the true improved Value of such Lands,
Tenements, Tithes, goods and Stock, so undervalued; and by all good ways and
means to inform themselves of the true value of the same: And to that end, to
send for persons, and (if they see cause) to examine them upon Oath, in all
matters wherein such persons are not concerned, for the better discovery of the
Truth of the premises; and thereupon to enlarge and increase the said Value to
so much as they shall (by view, Enquiry or Examination, as aforesaid) find the
same to be worth, more then what they were presented at by the said Returns;
And to cause the said Returns to be altered in those perticulars, and made
agreeable to the said increased Value. And the said Returns being made and
perfected as aforesaid, The said Commissioners of Revenue respectively, or any
three or more of them, are hereby authorized and required to Tax and assess the
fourth part of the true yearly value of all Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Fishings,
and other Hereditaments without Stock thereupon; and of all Cattle, Seed-corne,
money, goods and other Stock and personal Estate yielding increase or profit
within their respective Precincts, according to the Values set down in the
said Returns, and according to the Rates above specified: That is to say, for
every hundred pounds by the year in Lands, Tenements, tithes, Fishings, and
other Hereditaments five and twenty pounds; and for every hundred pounds in
Stock, money, or other personal Estate yielding profit or increase, forty
shillings And so rateably for greater and lesser proportions of Land and Stock,
which Tax and Assesse of the fourth part of the value of Lands, and of the
fourth part of the increase or profit of Stock, and other personal Estate, is
to be in liew of all other Assessments, Contributions, and other public
charge of that nature, for and in consideration of the said Lands and Stock,
for one whole year commencing the six and twentieth day of June next ensuing,
(At which time the present Assessments determine) and ending the six and
twentieth day of June, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1655. And the
said fourth part of the value of Land and increase of Stock, being taxed and
assessed by the respective Commissioners of Revenue as aforesaid, they, or any
three or more of them, are hereby required to cause the same to be Estreated,
or fairly writ in a Parchment Roll, or paper Book, in several Estreates,
Rolls or Books; That is to say, one Estreat for each Barony, Division or
Allotment, wherein is to be comprised the Names, and Sirnames of every person
who is chargable to pay the said Tax or Assess, within such Barony, Limit, or
Division: and the Sum thar every such person is to pay for the whole year, and
how much thereof for Lands, and how much for Stock; and what every such person
is to pay thereof quarterly. And the said Estreates, Rolls or Books, being
prepared as aforesaid, and signed by the said Commissioners of the Revenue, and
likewise entered in a Book, to remain with them as a Record; They, the said
Commissioners of the Revenue, or any three or more of them, are hereby
authorized and required, forthwith to nominate, appoint and authorize (by
warrants under their Hands and Seals; and written at the end of every such
Estreate, Roll or Book) two or more able and fit persons within every Barony,
Limit or Division, to Collect and Leavy the said Tax and Assess for the said
year, ending the six and twentieth of June 1655. and to pay in the same to the
Treasurer of the public Revenue within every respective Precinct. And upon
neglect or refusal of payment of the said Tax or Assess, (after demand thereof
made) to distrain for the same; And the distress so taken to drive, lead and
carry away; and the same to detain and keep for the space of six days; and in
case with in that time the Tax be not paid, Then the said Collectors are to be
empowered by special Order in writing from the said Commissioners of Revenue, or
any two or more of them, to make Sale of the said distress in open Market, to
such person or persons as will give most for the same; and out of the proceed
thereof, to pay and discharge the said Tax or Assess, due upon such person so
distrained upon; together with such reasonable compensation for the taking and
keeping of the said distress, as the Commissioners of the Revenue, or any two
or more of them shall (by writing under their hands) award; rendering the
overplus (if any be) to the Owner.

And whereas the Monthly Assessments, are from and after the six and twentieth
day of June next, to determine, whereby the Monthly pay of the Forces of the
Army will be retarded, and thereby the said Forces will be necessitated to take
free-quarters upon the Country (if some timely course be not taken to prevent
the same) It is therefore hereby Ordered, That the said Commissioners of
Revenue, or any three or more of them in their respective Precincts, do (in and
by their said Warrants, to be issued as aforesaid for the Collecting of the
said Tax) require the speedy Leavying and Collecting of one Quarter part of the
said Tax or Assess; and to cause the same to be paid to the Treasurer of the
Public Revenue within every Respective Precinct, before the first day of
August next ensueing, toward the pay and maintenance of the said Forces.

And in case any person or persons shall refuse to execute such Warrants,
Commissions or orders, as shall be directed unto him or them, for the ends and
purposes aforesaid; or shall be found unfaithful or negligent in the
performance of his or their duty in the premises: The said Commissioners of
Revenue, or any three or more of them, are hereby empowered and authorized
(upon certain knowledge of such refusal, neglect or misdemeanor, by examination
of persons or otherwise) to set upon every such offender, for every time they
shall so offend, such fine and fines as they shall think fit and proportionable
to the offense, not exceeding the sum of Five pounds for any one offense; and
to cause the said fines to be leavyed upon the goods and other estate of such
offenders respectively, and to be paid to the Treasurer of the Public Revenue
of the Precinct where the offense is committed, for the use of the
Commonwealth; And likewise to punish such offenders by imprisonment of their
persons, there to remain for such time as they shall judge convenient without
Bail: Provided, the time of their imprisonment for any one offense exceed not
eight and twenty days. And the said Commissioners of Revenue or any three or
more of them within their Precincts, are hereby further authorized to examine,
hear and determine all differences and complaints, which shall happen between
Land Lord and Tenant, or between any other persons, touching the proportioning
the said Tax or Assess, in such way as shall be most agreeable to Justice. For
which end they are to take notice, that the Landlord is to pay the full fourth
part of the whole Rent, Annuity, or other Provenue reserved upon or out of any
Lands, Tyths, or other Hereditaments: and where Lands are of more value than
the Rent, Annuitie, or Provenue reserved for or out of the same, the Landlord
is to allow to the Tenant out of the said Rent, Annuity, or other Provenue, one
fourth part thereof toward the said Tax, and no more: And the Tenant is to pay
for the said yearly value of the Land above the Rent, Annuity, or other
Provenue reserved as aforesaid; except in case where the Tenant has taken any
Lands since the beginning of the late Rebellion, at a certain Rent to be paid
his Landlord, over and above all Assessments and other public Charges payable
out of the said Lands, whereby the Tenant, by covenant or promise is engaged to
pay all Taxes and other public charge for or in respect of the said Lands; in
which case the Landlord is to have the benefit of his bargain, and to receive
his Rent entirely; and the Tenant is to pay the said whole Tax, according to
his Agreement.

And whereas it has been the practice of many of the Irish Inhabitants to
remove themselves, their Families and Stocks out of one Precinct in to another
to avoid the payment of such public charge, as of right they ought to pay, and
thereby the public Revenue has been much diminished: It is hereby further
Ordered and Declared, That where any Inhabitant shall (after that his Stock is
valued as aforesaid) remove his said Stock out of the Precinct where the same
shall be so valued and returned, as is herein before directed; such person and
persons so removing his and their Stocks out of the Precinct where the same
shall be first valued as aforesaid, without special license in writing first
had and obtained from the Commissioners of Revenue of the Precinct (out of
which such person is to remove) or any three or more of them, shall
nevertheless pay for his said Stock in the Precinct wherein the same was valued
as aforesaid: And shall also be subject and liable to pay the full proportion
for his said Stock in the Precinct into which such person shall remove. And the
Commissioners of Revenue in every respective Precinct, are to cause the same to
be leavyed accordingly: And the Inhabitants of every respective Town, Vill, or
Parish where such person resides are to give timely notice to the Commissioners
of Revenue of the Precinct, of such removal of Stocks our of the Town, Vill, or
Parish, wherein the persons so removing do reside, upon pain of being liable to
pay such proportion of Assessments as shall fall upon such Stocks as shall be
so removed without license, and thereby the public Revenue of the Precinct
diminished. And all Officers of the Army, and all other Officers and Ministers
of Justice, and all other persons whatsoever, are to be ayding and assisting
unto the said Commissioners of Revenue within their respective Precincts, and
their subordinate Ministers, in the due execution of the power and trust hereby
committed unto them, as often as they shall receive Warrants from the said
Commissioners of Revenue in that behalf.

DUBLIN, the 15. day of May 1654. Charles Fleetwood. Miles Corbet. Jo: Jones.

ORdered by the said Commissioners, That this Commission be forthwith Printed
and Published.

Signed by order, etc. THO: HERBERT. Secr.

DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1654.


