A Compendious NARRATION OF THE Most Examplar LIFE OF THE Right Honorable and
Most Virtuous Lady Mary, Late Countess of Shrewsbury.

Faithfully Collected out of the Writings of a most Learned and Worthy Person
who attended her many Years:

By a Gentleman, who by reason of his long acquaintance and much conversation
with her can testify the truth of all that is here related.

Printed in the Year, 1677.

Her Birth and younger years.
IT was in the year of our Lord 1599. on the 4th of October, that this our
Island, and particularly the City of Westminster, was honored by the birth of
this Lady truly Noble by all Titles. It was in the house of her great Uncle by
the half-bloud Sr. Thomas Parry Chancellor of the Duchy, that she first began
her course of mortality, which she so holily past over; and it fell out to be
in a room which had been formerly a Chapel dedicated to God in honor of the
most blessed Virgin Mary his Mother, and on the Feast of the glorious Patriark
St. Francis; a proper time and place for the birth of a person so much addicted
to pass her time in the house of God, and so true an Imitatresse of the
virtues of that great Queen of Heaven, and that humble Saint. And as this happy
creature (whose life I am now exposing to public view) was far from giving
trouble to others throughout the whole course of her life, so also did she give
none to my Lady her mother in her very birth, who though she had suffered hard
labors of all the rest of her children, and of some of them dangerous; yet in
bringing her into the world, seemed as it were exempt by particular
dispensation from that common curse laid by God upon the whole sex: Her descent
was very Noble on all sides; her father was Sir Francis Fortescu of Salden
Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, a Gentleman of a very ancient
knightly Family, he being an heir of Sr. John Fortescu of the Privy Council to
Queen Elizabeth and King James, and descended lineally through a race of noble
Ancestors (many of whom had served their Princes in eminent charges both
Military and Civil, and were allied by their marriages to several of the
Nobility;) in the 15th generation from Sr. Richard Fortescu Knight, who came
into England with the Norman conquest. Her Mother the Lady Grace Fortescu, as
eminent for her virtue as her birth, was of the most illustrious Family of the
Manors, Earls of Rutland and Lord Roos, she being grandchild to Thomas Niece
unto Henry, and Aunt to John, all Earls of that place.

To this advantage of blood God had added that of so amiable, and sweet a
disposition, and of so solid and lively wit and judgment, that she was grateful
to all persons, and very capable of any knowledge, which her sex is wont to
possess: this she made appear, in her perfect and easy learning even of those
ornamental qualities, which took up the least of her thoughts, and in which
(according to the fashion of other Ladies of condition in those times) she was
in her younger years brought up; Though after her being married (out of her
great modesty, and almost continual application of her self to employments of a
higher strain) she never, but in just and unavoidable occasions spent any time
in things of that nature.

But it is not my business here to play the Herald, and to blazon her
extraction, or to dwell upon those inferior transitory advantages of flesh and
blood; my aim is to paint out the ornaments of her mind, and to show how near
she was allied by her virtues to those Princes of heaven, the constant
attendants on the Throne of God. Of those great virtues, which were so
eminently practiced by her in her riper age, she gave many auspicious
prognostics even from her infancy, her love thereof and inclination to all
actions of piety growing up in her with her years, and even preventing them. No
child could be more exactly dutiful to her parents, in compliance with whom she
applied her self with that zealous diligence and success to the gaining of a
perfect knowledge and understanding of all the mysteries and articles of her
faith and duties of a Christian, as also of the grounds of all the Ceremonies
used in the Holy Church, that she was capable in her very childhood of
declaring and explaining them to others, and even then gave so great a
testimony of so unusual a maturity of judgment both in her comportment, and
all her actions, that she was thought fit, and actually had leave of judicious
and learned Ghostly Fathers to receive the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar,
before she was yet arrived to ten years of age. And finally, she grew to that
degree of Christian perfection even before she could write young woman, that
she had an ardent desire to give over the world, as soon in a manner as she was
entered into it, and dedicate her self to God by embracing a religious life for
love of him. But her parents neither giving way rashly to those desires of
hers, nor daring expressly to oppose them, in regard of their great piety,
caused the case to be consulted with Learned Religious men! And upon the
casting up of all circumstances, wherein her delicacy of constitution, and
continyency in point of health had a great part, they advised her to satisfy
her self with leading a virtuous life in the way of a secular calling:
whereupon she knowing that obedience (in some cases) is better then sacrifice,
and weighing this truth in her wise heart, that no body (since he is a party)
is fit to be a Judge in his own ways, applied her self to walk as perfectly as
she could in that state, to which her parents, both spiritual and temporal,
advised her: And in consequence to these counsels and advise, she was bestowed
by her friends in Marriage at the age of 16. upon that Noble Person John
Tallbot then Esquire, and afterward Earl of Shrewsbury, Nephew and Heyr to
that most Saintlike and Learned Lord, George Earl of Shrewsbury, who resolving
to live wholly to God even in the world (as to all men's admiration he did)
disposed his Nephew in Marriage to this Lady, and settled his whole Estate upon
them and theirs. And in that condition she lived most happily and holily (as
will hereafter appear) above nineteen years.

The manner how she daily and constantly spent her whole time after she was
married.
WHen once this Lady was settled in the state of Marriage, she did so order and
frame the course of her life; that living here upon earth, her conversation
might be truly said to be in heaven: Of this not only all her days, but even
hours and moments were convincing testimonies. As soon as she rose in the
morning, which was Winter and Summer at an early hour, before she thought of
her dress (the first and chief business of worldly Ladies) or spent any the
least time in that or any employment or discourse whatsoever, whereunto the
duty of her calling did not precisely oblige her, she prostrated her self on
her knees, and in that devout posture passed a full half hour with profound
silence of the tongue, but with vehement affection of the heart, in offering to
God that grateful Incense of devout prayer, accompanied with acts of an ardent
love of his divine Majesty, of a most sensible gratitude for all benefits, and
an entire resignation of her self, and all her concerns unto his disposal, and
likewise with a most hearty and zealous oblation of all her actions, thoughts,
and words to his honor and Glory; and for the Petitioning part of her
devotion, it aimed not at temporal blessings, but only at the obtaining of his
grace to avoid sin; and rather then to incur the guilt of any that was mortal,
she most constantly and earnestly supplicated him to be deprived of all worldly
advantages, and pleasures whatsoever, and even of what is most dear to all
mankind, life it self; which with all sincerity of heart she professed her
self much readier to loose, then his grace and favor, whereof sin was only
capable to dispossess her.

After this time of recollection, and a short space spent in her dress, wherein
she never studied in the least degree either pomp or vanity, but kept her self
within the compass of a modest decency, she repaired to her Oratory, only used
for divine service, and there passed the far greatest part of the remaining
time till dinner (which was usually about Noon) in prayer and such other
exercises of piety as suited with that place. The Afternoon was no less piously
spent then the morning, for rarely did she employ her self less then six hours
during those two seasons in those holy actions in that place just
beforementioned, which was dedicated to Gods service. Her going abroad to take
the air, (which sometimes she used to do, out of her accustomed hours of
devotion, which were regular and constant, in order to her own and childrens
health) never interrupted these her pious employments; for even all that time,
as far as a civil compliance with others (which she never violated) would allow
of, was totally spent in them. Neither was her time of working, wherein she
employed her self most, (except in her devotions) any distraction to her
continued exercises of piety, since that employment was usually ever
accompanied with the reading of some spiritual book in order to her daily
advancement in virtue.

But neither prayer nor any other employment occasioned her omission of that
great duty which lay upon her in looking after the government of the Family
which my Lord by reason of her great prudence committed wholly to her care. For
she frequently visited all the Offices of the house, both to see good orders
kept, and to enquire what was wanting in any kind: In her timely supplying
whereof, as she was most Conscientiously wary in avoiding all wastful expenses,
so was she truly generous and noble, in not suffering the meanest of the
servants to want any thing, that was usually allowed to any one who served in a
most plentiful house; And I am sure I may say by experience and knowledge, that
this charge of hers was managed with so singular a conduct, that during her
life, my Lords constant hospitality and plentiful way of housekeeping, as also
the number and quality of his attendants, corresponded to the full to the
greatness of his quality; And all this within the compass of his Estate and
Fortune, and according to the rules of a most orderly Christianlike discipline.
And of this generous hospitality the poor were constantly in great numbers (I
may say multitudes) most ample partakers.

Her time after supper before her going to rest was as religiously spent as the
rest of the day; For she always was employed about an hour after her retirement
to her chamber (which was ever at an orderly hour) in the examination of her
conscience, and such devotions, and other acts of piety as she had used at her
first up-rising, and so closed the day in the same religious manner as she had
begun it; And this time of recollection passed so sweetly with her, that she
would hardly be brought to believe that it lasted above a quarter of an hour,
but when it was performed, she made it her business, by avoiding all
unnecessary distracting discourses, to keep her heart fixed all night upon him,
with whom she had been then so devoutly parlying.

And she was so indefatigably constant in these her daily devotions, that when
she was hindered, (either by journeys, visiting, or receiving the visits of
Friends, or any other just occasion,) from performing them at her accustomed
orderly seasons, she would rather deny her self time to take that corporal
sustenance, and rob those hours from her rest, which her tender constitution
required, then ever willingly be guilty of any least omission of any part of
them. Even her childbeds and times of greatest weakness were never any bars or
lets to her continual devout employments in such manner as her condition would
permit. She began the first pains of her labor, with a most humble and
penitent confession of her sins, and as soon as possible, after her delivery,
she caused the Hymn of those eminent Saints and Doctors St. Ambrose and St.
Augustine called te Deum to be said by her, she answering alternatively every
other verse; to the end that to Almighty God might be rendered most humble
thanks for her safety, and that his mercy might be implored to take that child
into his particular care from whom she had received that blessing, esteemed one
of the greatest of a Matrimonial state. And that she might not be totally
debarred from partaking personally of all the Churches devotions during her
lying in, she caused the Litany to be said every evening in her chamber, and
spent much of the day in glorifying God, partly by vocal, and partly by
jaculatory prayers and aspirations, and all those holy exercises that were
consistent with her strength and ability. And though she could not at that time
till she were Churched be present at the divine service (a devotion never
omitted by her at other times) nor receive the most Blessed Sacrament, yet did
she not fail daily, even during the time of her being confined to her bed, to
spend that whole time when that service was celebrated (which she took care to
have signified to her) in prayer, with the same preparation, devotion, and
application of her thoughts to those high Mysteries there commemorated, as if
she had been actually present at it, and endeavoring to do it at least in a
spiritual manner by disposing her self thereunto in the same way, as if she had
been really to receive the effect of her longing, according to her constant
custom at all times, when she went not to this holy Communion; whereunto she
rarely or never omitted (the months of her childbed only excepted) to have
recourse twice at least, if not thrice every week; And her soul did so truly
relish the deliciousness of this divine Banquet, that she would even have
daily feasted her self therewith, had not her great humility induced her to
comply with those guides of hers in spiritual matters, who judged it not fit
for those of a secular calling, since even Religious Persons of that sex, and
of the other, Priests only excepted, are very rarely allowed that privilege.
Neither did she ever approach this Sacrament without an extraordinary devotion,
having first, according to St. Paul's advise, proved her self by a most strict
examen of her conscience, and also a most penitent and humble confession, as
the abundance of tears, usually shed by her, when she frequented that
Sacrament, might sufficiently testify, and which often issued from her eyes in
plenty when she discoursed of her own imperfections; and she did even like and
there David water her bed with tears when her (I may truly say) too tender
conscience accused her of an thing that seemed to her to carry the appearance
of a sin, though it really were not such. And though all the chiefest part of
her days were (as hat^ been sufficiently testified) spent i^ prayer and other
pious and devout employments, yet were those of Communion passed over
altogether (in (...) manner) in such exercises; she usualy then (as much as
possible) totall^ retiring and withdrawing her se^^ from all worldly business
and conversation. And her posture in her prayers was for the most part so much
upon her knees, that at her death, the^ were found as hard as any board, o^
(like to what was said of St. James the Apostle) to have more resemblanc^ with
the skin of a Camel, then wit^ that of a Lady tenderly brought up, a^ she was,
and had a most pure skin and delicate constitution.

Her lively Faith and great Charity.
AMongst her other daily devotions she never omitted to offer particular thanks
to God for that great and singular benefit of her having been bred up in the
Catholic Faith, which she knew to be the foundation of justice and sanctity,
and without which she knew it was impossible to please God, and that it was
only to be obtained by his gift; And therefore her soul was always full of
gratitude for that great blessing, and she was frequent in giving devout
testimonies of it. And so zealous was she in the professiof this only true
faith, that when she heard of any that suffered death, imprisonment, loss of
temporals, or any other vexation for that cause, she following the counsel of
St. Peter, would glorify God in them, and with a pious affection and emulation
lament her own cause, for that she had nev^ yet been thought worthy to suffer
an^ thing for confessing Christ before men, who has so graciously prom^ sed to
confess such before his Father (...) heaven.

Neither was this lively faith of he^ unaccompanied with a truly ferve^ Charity
which as it is the Queen (...) all virtues, and so necessary the without it no
other could be grate^ in the sight of God, and Faith it se^ were dead, so was
it the study of the Noble Lady to excel therein.

And though her great desire of d^ dicating her self to the service of A^
mighty God in the course of a relig^ ous life, and (that not being thoug^ fit
for her by her parents and di^^ ctours) her endeavors to turn a se^lar life
into a monastical, by her continual spending her time in exerci^^ of piety, and
so many hours daily prayer, as has been already relate^ be most convincing and
undenia^ testimonies of her most ardent love his divine Majesty which is the
prime and chief branch of this greatest (if we may believe St. Paul) of the
Theo^ogical virtues; yet for a farther evidence how straightly that pure soul
of ^ers was linked to him with that golden chain of charity, she never stained
that white Stole of Innocence, which she received in Baptism by the committing
of any one mortal sin, either in thought, word, or deed, ^hroughout the whole
course of her ^ife; and by consequence never lost ^is grace and favor during
all that ^ime; And though all those who were ^cquainted with her will find no
difficulty to believe this as a most real truth, (so very faint-like were her
^ctions and conversation) yet is it so credibly attested by one who had the
^ost reason of any to know the inward state of her soul, (as having had ^he
guiding thereof for many years, and having during that time been made more then
once partaker of all ^he passages of her life wherein her conscience was
concerned) that it cannot be brought in doubt by any reasonable person
whatsoever. And her aversion was so great from offending God, that though a
most tenderhearted mother, she would frequently of fer up her children to his
divine Majesty, humbly and earnestly supplicaring him rather to take them out
of the world, then ever to permit them to stain their souls with any morta^
sin; so much did she prefer his honor before the inclinations of flesh and
blood, and the fulfilling of hi^ holy Law above all the contents and comforts,
which worldly people s^ much dote upon. Nor did her arden^ love of God appear
only in her avoiding of mortal sin, and her sollicitud^ that others should do
the same, bu^ also in her vehement desire of rendering her self eminent in the
practis^ of all manner of virtues, merely t^ please him; and the vehemence
(...) these desires would transport her to (...) frequent lamenting of her own
negligence and tepidity, and expressing ^er sense thereof to to her spiritual
^irectour, whose assistance, and ad^ise she would crave in order to a to^al
refraining from offending God, e^^en by any the least imperfection, and ^ow at
length she might attain to that height of virtue that might in^ble her to be,
and continue wholly ^is.

For his sake and for love of him ^he honored all the saints because they were
his faithful servants, and in the ^rst place the Virgin Mary his most ^lessed
Mother, because she before all others was the most grateful to him. ^he did not
honor them as Gods but ^s attendants upon his throne, and ^ho through the
special assistance of ^is grace have attained the beatifical ^ision for all
eternity; for if it be ^ot only lawful but laudable, nay even of obligation,
and therefore plea^ing to God, to honor and reverence ^any here upon earth,
who by their ^inful lives may have incurred his high displeasure, much more
grateful must it be to him who is wonderful in his Saints, to honor the^ whom
he has honored, with man king them co heirs with Christ, an^ who now are
subject no more t^ the fraylties of humane nature, co^ tinually glorifying him
in that heavenly Jerusalem whereinto nothing defiled with the least spot can
eve^ enter. And when she read their live and actions, and saw therein how the
had forsaken the world, and trample upon the delights thereof, and ded^ cated
themselves totally to the servi^ of his divine Majesty, she would b^ as it were
inflamed with a desire (...) imitating them, and expressing he love to God, in
as high and perfe^^ a manner as they did, and wou^ grow unsatisfyed with her
self for n^ having followed the inclinations sh^^ had in her tender age of
entering in^^ a religious state, till she was secure by those, that guided her
conscienc^ that her obedience to her parents i^ the choice of her course of
life was more acceptable to God, (considering how maturely and piously they had
weighed all circumstances) then a compliance with her own desires, though they
seemed to sway her to that which carried an appearance of greater perfection.
To the end therefore that she might serve him with as much perfection, and in
the exactest manner that was consistent with her calling, and to prevent her
love to him from proving cool in the least measure, she often and with great
favor renewed her good purposes, of all her daily pious exercises and
employments, and especially against great and solemn Feasts, when his greatest
mercies and benefits were celebrated by the Church; and she would be then
particularly sollicitous to crave the advice of her spiritual Directour, what
acts of penance or other devotions she should use, whereby to solemnize those
holy times, in the most agreeable manner to his divine Majesty, to the end she
might gain increase of his grace, whom she with all constant gratitude owned to
be so large-hearted in bestowing his favors upon all such, as begged them
devoutly, and prepared themselves worthily to receive them.

In fine, so great was the love which this most pious Lady bore to her Lord and
God, that it put her upon making purposes of fasts, and other austere and
laborious acts of virtue, that far exceeded her strength and ability; and so
little indulgent was she to her self, out of her desire to perform any thing,
though never so hard, that she thought tended to his honor, on whom her love
was only bent, that she was willing to look upon all those purposes as
obligations in conscience, till she was assured by those who were her guides in
spiritual matters, that they were not such; but that she was rather tied from
doing any thing that might be prejudicial to her health, wherein the good of
many were concerned!

And though the same love of God prompted her to obey her spiritual Directors
for his sake, who for hers and all of us was obedient to the death of the
cross, yet had the memory of those sufferings of his, such an influence upon
her heart, that she was desirous to imitate him as much as she might, and carry
her cross after him according to his divine invitation, as far as her weak
strength would permit; and therefore would come as near to the observation of
any penitential purposes, as she was in any manner permitted; so that where
fasting was denied as to the matter of the quality of her meat, she endeavored
to supply it by moderating the quantity thereof, and the abstaining from all
kind of delicacies in her diet; and the like she did in all other purposes
that tended to mortification. But in all others not judged (by reason of
inconsistency with health and ability) unfit, she was most zealously constant
in the performance of them, and particularly in her recourse unto the holy
Sacraments, at certain times, when any special favor of God to her self, or
this Nation in particular, or the Catholic Church in general, invited her
grateful heart to express a resentment of his mercies.

Her Charity to her Neighbor.
FRom her most ardent love of Almighty God, and her constant desire of
expressing it, proceeded her so eminent practice of that most agreeable virtue
to him, (I mean) her so very exemplar Charity to her neighbors, which mounted
to so great an height, that she was never satiated with imparting all both
spiritual and temporal comforts, that were possibly to be offorded by. And to
descend to those particulars, which may convince this truth, she was never
seen, or known to refuse an alms, when it was asked, neither was ever the
necessity of any person represented to her, to the removal of which she did not
contribute with a most cheerful and bountiful hand; And it was a matter of
complaint, and grief to her, whenever any of her domestical servants, as
sometimes it happened, concealed the requests of any necessitous persons,
although relieved by themselves; and she was so zealously fearful of losing any
occasion of feeding and clothing Jesus Christ in his little ones, that to
prevent it, she always lodged moneys in the hands of her Porter, and others,
for relief of the poor, over and above that plentiful alms which was constantly
given at the gates. And besides these accidental expressions of her great
charity which were nevertheless very frequent, and as it were daily, she had
diverse persons, her constant Pentioners, whom she wholly maintained, and
though sometimes by reason of her change of dwelling, they were far absent from
her person, yet they were never so from her thoughts, for she was as
sollicitously careful to see them provided for in all kinds, as if she had
been expressly obliged to do it under pain of sin, and she descended so far as
with the labor of her own hands to make many necessaries for their clothing,
the which she also frequently did for many of her poorer servants, over and
above their comperent usual allowances: she was so exact an observer of the
laws of true Christian charity, that she was never willing to hear those who
demanded an alms for Gods sake suspected for counterfeits, for she was as
tender in preserving their good names, as she was in relieving their
necessities, and therefore as much as possible hindered the strict examination
of things o^ that nature. And although some times some were discovered and
proved to be such, yet upon consideration that the true motive of Alms was not
to whom, but for whose sake it was given; she would not dismiss them without
being made partakers of her charity: for she would urge, that most probably
their great want was the true cause why they dissembled lameness, blindness,
and such like infirmities, and that therefore to take away such a temptation
their necessities were to be relieved. And my Lord her husband was very
complying with her in this compassionate relieving of others necessities, and
particularly when he was a winner at horse-races or other Divertisements, he
most cheerfully, upon her suggestion and request (which she never failed to
make him) employed no small part of his winnings upon these charitable offices.

Neither was her charity only expressed in relieving the pecuniary wants of the
poor, but also in an extraordinary diligence to contribute to the cure and ease
of the sick; To promote which pious work, she provided her self yearly, at fit
seasons, of all those medicinal things, which are usually applied to the relief
of corporal infirmities; and she was no less carefu^ in providing, then liberal
in bestowing them, whenever necessity required: and so great was her
charitable compassion of sick persons, tha^ she not only afforded them
bountiful remedies for their diseases, but eve^ charged those servants about
her ow^ person not to fail of giving them a^^ necessary attendance; and to
encourage them in so good an action by example, she did frequently visit the
meanest of her own domestics, an^ others; even when the loathsomness^ of the
disease, and rooms where the^ lodged, were capable to divert thos^ who were
indulgent, in pleasing their senses, from coming near them; a^^ did both
minister remedies and other assistances with her own hands, an^ spend much time
in praying by the^ bed-sides, and endeavoring to giv^ them all spiritual
comforts that she was capable of affording them.

Neither was her compassionat^ sense of the sufferance of prisoners les^ ^hen
that which she showed to have of the wants and infirmities of others, for she
was highly charita^le in the relief of all those (although mere strangers) whom
she ^eard to endure that great calamity of restraint of liberty.

All her promises made even in her ^oung and tender age that tended to ^he
relieving of others necessities, or ^night be conducing to their advan^ages
either spiritual, or corporal, though not made with that delibe^ation that
might oblige her (under ^in) to performance, were as religi^usly observed as
vows, and even so ^xactly (if not scrupulously) that ^he was hardly ever
satisfied to have sufficiently complied with those no^way-obliging promises,
without the ^udgment, and authority of her ^piritual Directour; and she would
^requently regret her own too dull ^mitation of that famous patriarch of
Alexandria, John surnamed the Almes-giver for his great liberality in acts of
charity.

If then Alms be of so great force and virtue, as to cleanse and purif^ the
soul, which no Christian ca^ doubt of that gives credit to hol^ Scripture,
where it is said, Give Alme^ and all things be clean unto you, Luk^ 11.41. and
as water quenches fire^ so does Alms extinguish sin; and (...) the merciful
shall find mercy, Man 5.7. and he that gives but one dr^^ of water for the
love of God shall n^ lose his reward: Mar. 40.10.4^ How pure must her soul be,
who bowels were so full of compassion^ and whose hands were ever open (...) the
poor; and what accumulated r^wards shall she receive from t^^ bounty of God,
who was so mero^ful, and bountiful to his poor, (...) cheerfully clothing,
feeding, and v^siting them, or rather him in the^ For it may be truly said fo
this Lady, what Job declared of himself, that she denied not to the poor what
they desired, nor made the widows eyes expect, nor did she eat her bread
a^one, but made the poor partakers with ^her. This therefore being so great a
truth, and so known by all that knew her, there will remain no wonder, if when
she was taken out of this world, and translated to a better, there to enjoy the
reward of those great virtues, which the mercy of God had plentifully infused
in^o her happy soul. The poor people ^n all places where she had lived, but
especially in Worcestershire, where ^y reason of her longer abode, she ^ad met
with more occasions of ^xercising her Charity, did general^y lament their loss
with all possi^le expressions of sorrow, as con^eiving themselves by her death
de^rived of a most indulgent Mother; which part she truly acted to the life
amongst all, whose necessities obliged them to have recourse to her assistance.

But her charity was not only exercised in relieving the corporal distresses of
others, but flew an higher pitch, and made it self appear in a most ardent zeal
of assisting the spiriall wants and remedying the maladies of the soul: Her
ever constant, and (as it may be truly called) inflamed desire of reclaiming
all persons from sin, whom she knew it concerned, and procuring them all those
helps from others, which her sex rendered her incapable to afford them in her
own person, were undeniable arguments how extraordinary he^ zeal was of gaining
souls to God.

Of this truth many of her actions of this kind might be particularized, were
it not too unnecessarily to swell this Relation with endeavoring to make that
appear, whereof all that knew her were sufficiently convinced: Howsoever, it it
will not be impertinent to touch briefly upon one of these her Acts of charity,
in regard Almighty God did give such a signal evidence, how grateful it was in
his divine eyes, by a most wonderful, if not miraculous preservation of her
from a strange and dangerous accident which followed immediately after the
performance of this good work. For having been to visit a Noble Gentleman her
near Kinsman, whom she knew to have failed contrary to his judgment, by humane
frailty, and to have led a life too conformable to such a failing, and having
(which was the sole end of her visit) with earnest pious admonitions, and
fervent prayers powered forth to God by his bedside (to which his infirm
condition had confined him) proved successful in her endeavors, and wrought so
good an effect, that he became a most perfect penitent, by reconciling himself
to God, and so made a most happy end; having (I say) done this most charitable
work, in her Return to her own House, in a certain steep descent, near an high
unfenced bridge of stone, her coach-horses grew so unruly, that one of them
kicked down the coachman from off his box, and ran violently to the bridge,
and running in their full carrier over it, the coach fell suddenly into the
River; and so high was the bridge, that it turned twice round in the falling,
and at length lighted directly upon the wheels in the River, and in such a part
of it as was shallow, though very near the deepest part, which was capable to
have overwhelmed it, had it been many yards higher then it was. In the fall the
foremost horses broke their tackling, and escaped the precipitation, but of the
two wheel-horses, both of which, fell with the coach, the one, (and he who did
the main mischief by kicking down the coachman) broke his neck and was killed,
the other fell with the coach without the least hurt. All those who knew this
place, and particularly those who attended her, and were eyewitnesses of the
accident, and saw how free from all harm their Lady and her Wayting-Gentlewoman
(which was all the company she then had with her in the coach) remained after
it, would not call this so total a preservation by any other Name, then that of
a Miraculous deliverance; and certainly it can admit of no other
interpretation, but of a malicious attempt of the Devil against her, for having
got a soul out of his power (of which he had been too long possessed) and a
most particular tract of the divine Providence, in rendering his malice
ineffectual. For God was only in her thoughts when she was falling (as she
confessed to one who had power to ask her) she being then actually employed in
making acts of love to his divine Majesty to render thanks to whom for his so
highly merciful a preservation from this so great disaster, was the first thing
she did after her return home, before she spoke to any one whomsoever; she
repairing immediately to her Oratory to this most Christian-like Exercise, and
there reciting with great Devotion that pious Hymn (called Te Deum) composed by
those great Saints and Doctors of the Church St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine,
and used by all the faithful in solemn Thanksgivings to God for his blessings
and manifold mercies: these her high acts of charity so universally extended,
render it needless to relate how incessant the care was that she took in the
instruction of her children in all the mysteries and duties of Christian
Religion, which she would personally perform her self, as soon as they came to
those years that rendered them capable thereof. Even as soon as they began to
make any show of speaking, she was sollicitous, that before any other word,
they might learn to pronounce the holy, and divine name of Jesus, to which all
knees bow, whether in Heaven or Earth, or elsewhere, and that their prayers
might be the first discourses that they might use, that so they might begin in
the first place to speak to God, to whom the first and chief honor is due; and
in their Nurses arms, when they were at any time brought home, her first caress
was, to sign them with the sign of the Cross, and immediately to carry them
to her Oratory, to offer them to his divine Majesty and beg blessings for them.
And as their age increased, she did not fail to encourage them, no less by word
then example, to the exercise of all virtues, and particularly to a liberal,
and compassionate relief of the poor, which Christ does so expressly own as done
to himself. Neither was she wanting to act the part of a Mother in this kind
toward the meanest of her servants, to whose being catechized, and taught all
Christian duties, she with constant zeal contributed even personally, when need
required, and of whose exact performance of all those Obligations to which
either the laws of God or of his spouse the holy Catholic Church, tie her
children; she was so piously sollicitous, that they wanted neither frequent
admonitions to encourage them to good, nor such reprehensions as were requisite
to alter them from all evil. And all things relating to the discharge of their
domestical employments were by her most Christian-like providence so ordered,
as that they might not prove any hindrance to their attending to the service of
God, or rendering him all due honor, by being present at divine service, and
all other holy exercises, at times appointed, by that authority which he has
left here on earth, assisted by his holy spirit, to guide and govern the
spiritual kingdom of humane souls.

Seeing therefore it has been made appear so evidently, how high and even
supererrogatory a charity she showed both in relieving the corporal
necessities, and also in contributing so efficatiously to the spiritual
advantages of others, It cannot certainly enter easily into the suspicion of
any rational person, but that she was equally careful not to do any one the
least imaginable Injury; I am sure it would be injurious to her for any person
to harbor such a doubt in his breast. For how sensibly tender her conscience
was in all that concerned the reputation of others, there are as many witnesses
as persons, that knew her, who all with one mouth, avow that she was never
heard to speak any the least word, that might tend to the diminution of the
credit of any one whatsoever, nor ever to use any deriding expression or
reproach even in the reprehension of the meanest of her servants; But on the
contrary side, her tongue was ever ready (how wary soever she was in avoiding
much discourse) to defend the reputation, and excuse the faults of others
against those many who are too apt both to misrepresent, and misconster the
actions of their neighbors, and too uncharitably to rip up the memory of their
failings; And all her reprehensions even for the greatest faults were according
to Christ's counsel, privately given, for the concealment of their
imperfections, and were seasoned with so much sweetness, that her anger was not
only innocent but virtuous; And in composing all differences (which sometimes
happen in such numerous Families as hers) between her servants, she was a very
Angel of peace, and was exactly careful, that even those of the best quality
that attended her, might do right to the very meanest without all partiality.

Her Other Virtues.
WHen good principles are laid, the consequences are generally ever clear: so
that it seems a kind of demonstration, that so lively a faith, and so exemplar
a Charity as her soul was adorned with, must necessarily be accompanied with
all other virtues; so fervent a lover of God could not but take delight in the
practice of all that which is agreeable in his sight. Howsoever I will
endeavor briefly to show how eminent she was in all kinds: And to begin with
that rarely to be found perfection in the feminine sex of this latter age
(modesty); she excelled therein in so high a degree, that her conversation and
comportment, might seem commendable ever in a veiled votary, much more in one
of a secular calling; nothing ever appeared in her habit or dress, that might
not merit a praise from the most scrupulous observer of the rules of that
virtue: And so careful was she that none under her charge might offend therein,
that she permitted not her children to read any books, without an assurance
from her spiritual guides, that there was nothing in them contradictory to
faith, or destructive to modesty, much less did she allow them either to haunt
any company, or use any divertisement that might in the least degree endanger
the violation of that so much praised virtue by all pious persons, and
particularly commended by St. Peter the holy Apostle in these words, that the
chaste conversation of Christian Ladies was to be in fear, and their trimming
not to be outward, as consisting in the curling of their hayr, 1 Pet. 3.4.
adorning themselves with curious and costly clothes, but in the inwardness of
heart, which is hidden, and the incorruptibility of a quick and modest spirit,
which indeed is highly rich in the sight of God.

Neither was her humility less celebrated by all that knew then her Modesty;
For she not only made appear this high virtue, truly high because so eminently
practiced by the highest of all Creatures, the Mother of God, in avoiding as
much as possibly her condition would permit, all things either of oftentation
or pomp, whether it were in apparel, or any other real vanity, and in treating
all persons of what rank soever with all imaginable sweetness and affability,
though without any indiscreet diminution of that dignity in which God had
placed her, and which no Lady knew better how to comply with then her self, but
in that quintessence of this divine virtue, humbleness of heart, which still
moved her to undervalue her self, and to express to her ghostly Directour, so
much affliction of mind, for her want of worth to merit those many blessings
God had bestowed on her, both spiritual and temporal, upon account (as she
would frequently urge even with abundance of tears) of her many sins and
imperfections, insomuch that he was forced for her comfort to use many
persuasive discourses and reasons, (which her life and practice rendered
abundantly convincing) that she looked upon her few imperfections with
magnifying glasses (for no great sins ever stained her pure soul) and not
through Optics, which made a true discovery of them.

But as this true humility of hers would not permit her to take any notice of
her own virtues, but kept her heart still fixed on the consideration of her own
unworthiness: (And so great did her own (small) faults appear in her own sight,
that the very reflection on any the least imperfection filled her eyes with
tears, and her heart with sorrow) so on the other side, no body was an higher
magnifyer and esteemer of the virtues of others; and principally when they
shined in persons of High degree, and would often bewail her self for not
imitating such patterns, and particularly she honored, and frequently
celebrated in her Discourse that remarkable example of great Ladies for piety,
who truly trampled upon the pride and vanity of this world, the Countess of
Arundel (of the Lord D'Acres Family by birth;) betwixt whom, and her self there
had passed many Testimonies of mutual kindness. And also that most excellent
Lord, the immediate Predecessor and Uncle of her Husband; George Earl of
Shrewsbury, of whose great perfections she was many years an eyewitness: upon
whose death she forthwith repaired to her ghostly Father, not with a heart
filled with joy, according to the usual strain of worldly Ladies, for the
honor that was thereby descended to her, but full of a deep sense of her own
unworthiness to succeed so Saintlike a person in so eminent a degree, and
therefore earnestly begged the assistance of his prayers, that she might not
soil that honor by her sins, but in some small measure (at least) imitate so
good a president.

Neither was she less eminent in that high virtue preferable before sacrifice
(Obedience,) in imitation of our Blessed Savior and divine Master, who for us
was made obedient to the death of the cross, and who (though above all laws)
was for our sakes content to subject himself to humane Ordinations. And she did
not only practice this virtue in so high a manner (as has been already
related) in never having been guilty of any mortal breach of his holy
Commandments, but also by a most exact submission to all the Pastors and
Prelates of his holy Catholic Church, to whom he has committed the cure of
souls, and those particularly, to whom by virtue of that authority she had
committed the regulation of her own conscience, and spiritual concerns, with
whom she frequently consulted about those matters, and never failed in a strict
observance of their advises and directions.

And as to the duty of her own calling, and most punctual compliance with the
obedience due from a wife to a husband, I may affirm, without being
contradicted by any one that knew her (and her own constant family exceeded 60.
persons) that the fault would lie at the men's door if all marriages were not
happy, if all wifes did but imitate her example: For as she was most prudent in
offering in an humble manner such advises upon just occasion, as she judged
conducing to my Lord her husbands advantage, so did she ever with all
cheerfulness submit to his determination. And if he were at any time indisposed
in health, she not only expressed the tenderness of a most affectionate wife,
in her sense of his infirmity, and her sollicitous providing of all remedies
for his recovery, but ever performed all the duties of a servant in his
attendance; All which he has with much gratitude frequently acknowledged,
affirming, that during the speace of above nineteen years wherein she lived his
wife, she never gave him the least cause of disgust; but that he received much
constant content from her agreeable and complasant conversation; and much
benefit from her frequent, prudent, and pious counsels; and most of all from
her exemplar practices: And I am sure no person whatsoever, whether domestic,
or other, whether of the same Religion or a different, had any difficulty to
believe him; For so high was the esteem of her virtues amongst all, that every
ones mouth was full of her praises; And one Noble person (though of a different
Religion) who made a condoling Visit to my Lord after her death, speaking in
the general language, used by all, when she was the Theme of the discourse,
said to him, that he had no just cause to grieve for one who lived like a Saint
upon earth, and now shined like an Angel in heaven.

Her last sickness and Death.
AS her whole life was spent totally (in a manner) in successive acts of piety,
and devotion, so did it please Almighty God in recompense of her virtue, to
grant her a most happy, and Christianlike conclusion of it. Her very last
employments, before she was consined to her dying Chamber and bed, was a whole
night (to wit, that of Christmasse) spent, according to her custom, in acts of
devotion, she then joining like a dutiful child with her holy Mother the
Catholic Church, in celebrating the birth of the Savior of the world, and
having then with her wonted pious preparation received the holy Eucharist.

Immediately after so many hours spent in such exercises, going to retire to
her rest, she found her self seized with a most unusual coldness, and with so
violent an heart sickness, that she concluded it to be mortal; yet nevertheless
as she had all her life showed her self in a most exemplar manner a truly
loving wife, so would she now give dying Testimonies of it; For neither would
she quit my Lords chamber and Bed (which she conceived her self about to quit
for good and all) nor yet give him any disturbance in it, but with all patience
suppressed the complaint of her sickness in silence, not permitting any the
least noise to be made, by speech or otherwise, or her bed to be warmed, or any
act of indulgence to be used to her self, that might tend to the disquieting of
him, whom some indisposition had caused to retire sooner; but lay quietly, full
of pains, and as full of acts of confirmity to the divine will, till he awaked;
then imparting to him the dangerous condition wherein she conceived her self,
and with that tenderness that became so truly indulgent, and affectionate a
parent, recommending her children to his favor and care, she desired in
compliance with that obligation which lay upon her, to make use of those means
which God has appointed for the preservation of health, that Physicians might
be sent for, which my Lord being struck to the heart with that sad Good morrow
she had given him, did not fail to do with all diligence, as knowing too well
how much it concerned him to preserve so great a treasure.

And though she had by my Lords care the constant attendance of two or three of
the ablest Doctors then in Oxford (London being at too great a distance) and
that they at the beginning seemed hopeful of her recovery, and failed not in
the application of all those Remedies their Art could suggest; yet it pleased
God to render their endeavors ineffectual; for the violence of her sickness
increased so fast upon her, that according to her own opinion, who by his
Divine permission had taken a righter measure of her own Infirmity then they
had, it proved the means of freeing her within a few days, of all the cares
that attend a transitory life.

Her pains were extreme, seasing her in the most sensible part (the prime seat
of life) her heart, and her patience was equal; for she was never heard to
complain of, or lament her condition; but whenever she was asked concerning
it, her only answer was, as it pleased God; upon whom her heart was wholly
fixed: and in continual applications of her self to him, and in fervent
prayers to implore his mercy and grace, the whole time of her sickness was
spent.

On the last day whereof, being the feast of the Holy Innocents, she received
Extreme Unction with admirable devotion, being so present to her self, as to
answer exactly to the Lytanies, and to reach out her own hands to be anointed.

The next day being the feast of St. Thomas of Canterbury, that famous Martyr
and Champion of the Church, (a day that was ever wont to be spent by her in a
manner totally in devotion) about six of the Clock in the morning, just
precisely at the conclusion of those devout prayers (called the Recommendation
of the soul) used by the Catholic Church in the last Agonies of her children,
did this great Servant of God end this mortal life, giving up her soul to him,
whom she ever loved, served, and obeyed with her whole heart, as has been (I
suppose) sufficiently evidenced by many most remarkable and undeniable
testimonies.

And I think I may without difficulty gain credit, when I shall tell you, how
universal a consort of Lamentation there was in all that Family, at the
approach of her death, when every one was considering how great a loss they
were to undergo; not any but sensibly shared in this affliction, seeing no
children could have a more tender or careful Mother, no servants a more
Indulgent or charitable Mistress, nor no Husband a more affectionate, and
obedient Wife.

After her Death it appeared evidently to those who had the ordering of her
body for burial, that she had not only made a righter judgment of her danger,
then her Physicians, but also of the quality of her Infirmity, which showed it
self by the great evacuation of blood at her mouth, to have been an Imposthume;
she having several times, some years before, intimated that she conceived, that
there was one gathering about, or near her heart, where she felt her greatest
torment.

She lived 36 years, 2 months, and 26 days, and her Corpse were with all
convenient decency carried to Albrington in Shropshire, a Town belonging to the
now Earls of Shrewsbury, and the usual place of Sepulture of that branch of
that family, unto which that Earldome has been descended these four last
generations, and there it was interred in a Church dedicated to God in honor
of St. Thomas of Canterbury, upon whose Feast she died, and laid in the
self-same Vault with that of the late most Learned and holy George Earl of
Shrewsbury, formerly mentioned, whose virtues she did so effectually imitate.

She left behind her 4 Sons and 3 Daughters (having buried 2 Sons during her
life) to wit, the Lord George Tallbot, who died in his youthful age, and
inherited the heroical spirit of his great Name, but left no issue behind
him; Francis the second Son, Earl after his Father, a Gentleman generally
esteemed by all worthy persons, and as much lamented by all such; who has left
issue, Charles the present hopeful Earl, and one other Son, and a Daughter the
picture both in her face and humor of her Father: Edward the third Son killed
in the late Civil Wars in the service of his King at the Battle of York; and
Gilbert the fourth and youngest Son still living.

Her 3 Daughters were the Lady Frances, the Lady Katherine, and the Lady Mary,
all were most praiseworthy for their excellent dispositions and virtuous
comportments; the two first dyed in their young age without issue; the Lady
Mary is still living, and has issue one Son by her first husband (the
grandchild by the Fathers side of Thomas Lord Arundell of Wardour, and Count
Imperial, and by the Mothers of the Lord Viscount Montacute) and both Sons and
Daughters by her second husband the brother and heir apparent of James Lord
Studly and Earl of Castle-haven.

Gods holy Name be blessed for having given her the Grace to lead so holy a
life, and make so happy an end, and may we by his grace and favor through the
mercies of Christ profit by the example of her virtues.

FINIS.

