THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION As well of the several Prisoners that suffered at
TYBURN On Wednesday the 17th of April 1678.

At which time were Executed Joseph Wright, Thomas Bateman, William Baker,
Thomas Davies, William Dukes. James Crouch, and George Dogget.


As also of the Burning of Jane Pratt in Smithfield, for Clipping, Washing,
Filing, and Diminishing the Kings Coin; who was in Newgate about a year ago on
Suspicion of the same Fact.

With an Account of their Behavior in Prison, and last Speeches at the place
of Execution.

This may be Printed.

To. L'Estrange.



London: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Confession and Execution of the several Prisoners Burnt and hanged on
April 17. 1678.
DEath in its own nature is very affrighting to Man, the King of Terrors, much
more when he comes attended with shameful and ignominious Circumstances; when
Persons consider that they have hastened his approach by the Errors of their
Lives, and are justly cut off for their Crimes. Oh! how sad is it, when poor
Souls are themselves the occasion of their being thrust out of this World by
untimely Violence, and yet are not at all fitted or prepared for the next. If
they look down to Earth, there is nothing but Justice and Vengeance ready to
pursue them; and if they look up to Heaven, they cannot but conclude that too
pure a place for such unclean Creatures to enter into, whom the Earth it self
would no longer entertain. Yet so lamentably do the Delusions of Satan, and
Witchcrafts of Sin, blind the eyes of these Malefactors, that they rarely
reflect on these things till it be too late; nor will be warned by the frequent
Examples of their wretched Fellow. Criminals, to leave off their wicked
Courses, till they are precipitated into the same Gulf of Misery.

THe first that we shall give the World an Account of, was one James, otherwise
calling himself Maddum, but as he acknowledged his true name was Joseph Wright.
Under these several Denominations he had committed abundance of villainous
Pranks, and those above the ordinary rank: for it was justified before him in
Court, That he and his Gang had ruined many Families, having stolen above Forty
Horses; and hireing Grounds near London, stockt the same with Fourscore stolen
Sheep at a time, and above Twenty Cattle: and in this manner drove a kind of
Trade for a long time together; upon all which he was looked upon as a person
excluded from Mercy. The particular Crimes of which he was now Convicted, and
for which he suffered, were for stealing a brown Mare out of a Country-mans
Stable, and breaking open an house and taking away four Flitches of Bacon and a
Fowling-piece, which was taken with him.

Thomas Davies was Executed for robbing his

Master of a Watch, and Moneys, to the value of Fifty pounds and upwards.

The next we shall speak of, was one James Crouch a person that had but one
hand, yet that doubled to do Mischief: for he had already been more than once
burnt in that single hand, yet would take no warning; being now Condemned for
that most abominable practice of the Foot pad, Knocking a man down with a piece
of Iron (produced in Court) in Bunhill fields. At the Bar he behaved himself
very insolently; and took too little regard of all the good Christian
Admonition given him afterward by godly Ministers and others that came to
visit him.

George Dogget was Executed upon his Condemnation the last Sessions before
this. His Crime was picking a Watch out of a Gentleman's pocket, and that even
at Church. He had long and notoriously been concerned in Fending, that is, as
those Hellish Linguists understand the Canting word, receiving and putting off
stolen Goods.

Thomas Bateman suffered the same day for breaking an house in Perpool-lane;
having been burnt in the hand before for a Robbery in the Temple. And William
Baker for robbing a Gentleman in Hatton-garden; having likewise been burnt in
the hand in January last.

As for William Dukes, though he were young in yeats, yet had he too much
improved his time in ill practices, having been once before burnt in the hand,
and several times in Newgate.

Jane Pratt also suffered the terrible death of Burning at a Stake in
Smithfiled, for the too frequent, though treasonable, practice of Clipping and
diminishing his Majesty's Coin: The Particulars of her Apprehension and Trial
we have already given you. Upon her Condemnation she begged time of the Court
to prepare her self for death; but 'twas feared, the same was not so much out
of a pious penitent consideration, as a design to gain time for an opportunity
of getting her Pardon.

There were great pains taken, as well by Mr. Ordinary as others, to Convince
these poor Souls of the wickedness of their past Lives, the dangerous condition
they were in, etc. and it is charitably hoped those Admonitions had good effect
on several of them; though it must be acknowledged as a very great
inconvenience, that all Condemned (I mean men) are kept in a Room together,
where one debaucht Atheistical Villain, if he do not wholly divert his Fellow
Convicts from minding the great concerns of their Soul's welfare, yet he may
too much disturb their Meditation. A sad mischief, which would well become the
consideration of Auththority, out of their charitable Compassion toward dying
men, to take notice of and regulate, by appointing each person Condemned a
distinct and separate Cell, or Lodging.

But this obiter -- The carriage of most of these persons after Condemnation,
was outwardly very penitent; one of the men made a large Confession of the
several notorious Exploits he had acted, and those of almost all kinds; as
Burghlaries, Horse stealings, Robberies on the High way both on Horseback and
on Foot, etc. But could not be brought to detect any of his untaken
Confederates. Another pretended to do great things by way of Discovery in that
kind; but at last, being either unable or nowilling to make it appear,
suffered with the rest. It Is no unnecessary or useless Consideration, because
it is but what one of these took notice of in discourse to some Friends, viz. To
observe how these men. who abroad and at liberty were bold enough to invade any
man's Propriety, or set upon his Person; yet with how much Terror (I say) they
appeared at the Bar, their hands tr^mbled whilst they were lift up, their Lips
quaking whilst they Plead Not Guilty.

Their Countenance condemned them before the J^dge, and their fears were ready
to execute them before the Hangman: yet these Judges are but men that must soon
die themselves; that Sentence of Death they can pronounce, is already passed by
Nature upon the most Innocent. The Act of Death is but Momentary; who knows
whether himself shall not die more painfully than any of these Malefactors? But
with what horror shall the guilty Soul stand, O God, before thy dreadful
Tribunal at the last and General Assizes, where there is the presence of an
infinite Majesty to daunt him, a fierce and clamorous Conscience to give in
Evidence against them, Legions of terrible Devils waiting to seize him, a Gulf
of unquenchable Fire ready to receive him! There, I say, where the Glory of the
Judge in no less confounding than the Cruelty of the Tormenter; where the
Sentence is unavoidable and the Execution everlasting! These thoughts should
move us all to hold privy Sessions upon our Souls and Actions, that being
acquitted by our own hearts, we may not be Condemned by this dreadful Majesty.

The woman was Executed first at a Stake for that purpose erected in the Rounds
in Smithfield. She acknowledged she had for a long time been a very ill Liver,
and concerned in these unlawful practices with others, who were before cut off
by Justice, and yet she would take no warning. She made sad moans and
lamentations as she passed, and likewise at the Stake before the Fire was
kindled; but as soon as the same was lighted, the Block was put away, and she
strangled by the Rope; with which and the smoke and flame, her breath was taken
away, and her body soon after burnt to Ashes according to Sentence. Some report
that she declared she died in the Romish Faith; but that is uncertain: for a
Protestant Minister went along by her, and prayed with her at the Stake; with
which she seemed to join very heartily.

FINIS.

