NISSENA, AN EXCELLENT NEW ROMANCE: WRITTEN Originally in ITALIAN BY FRANCESCO
CARMENI; AND Now Englished by an Honorable ANTI-SOCORDIST.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Princes Arms in St PAUL'S Churchyard, 165^.

NISSENA.
THOAS King of Cyprus, being somewhat aged, was much afflicted for that he
wanted one to succeed him in his Kingdom, having utterly lost all hopes
thereof by the death of his wife Almira, daughter to the late King of Macedon,
who died being with child. He thought it unbecoming Kingly Majesty to marry a
Subject, though he wanted not good store of Noble blood, and cried up beauty.
And to ally himself with his neighboring Princes, suited not with his
politic ends; wherefore moved thereunto by his natural inclination, he
resolved to take unto him such a wife, as might acknowledge her being made
partner of the Regal Throne only to the merit of her beauty. Rhodes, a
neighboring Island, though but of a small circuit, was in those days so
famous for handsome women, and did so much abound therein, as young Travelers
flockt thither from far distant Provinces, only to feed their greedy and
curious eyes, with beholding those countenances which multiplied Venus'es on
earth, and out-did the stars in Heaven. Thoas therefore, putting on a strange
resolution, determined to send thither three of the ancientest and wisest
Gentlemen of his Court, with free liberty to bring her unto him whom of all the
Virgins of that Island they should judge to be the fairest, that he might make
her a Companion both of his Bed and Kingdom, to the end that the one might be
blessed with issue, the other with successors. He recommended three qualities
to be by them observed in her whom they were to choose to be his Queen. That she
should be of Noble Birth, Of an excellent Temper, And of a befitting Age. And
for a fourth, he gave them in charge, that she should be rarely handsome, to
witness to the World, that he did not marry merely out of a desire to satisfy
his lust. The Ambassadors departed with two of the most glorious and best rig'd
Galleys which were ever made in the Kings Arsenall, attended on with a number
of Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Servants, answerable to the decency and greatness
of him that sent them. Having had a very prosperous passage, they cast Anchor
not far from the Haven, which on the East is shut in by two strong necks of
land, thrust out by the Island to rest her self upon. The usual friendly
Salute being given by Canon shot, they sent Albericus, one of the Gentlemen,
upon the Peer, with the Royal Ensigns, who made Fermondo the then Prince
understand, That three Ambassadors from Cyprus desired his good leave to come
on shore, and to have audience: He being full of Civility, and a friend to that
Crown, sent forthwith many of his Gentlemen unto the Haven, who went forth in
three stately vessels, to meet and reverently to receive the Ambassadors. When
they were come on land, and being put into rich Coaches, they were waited upon
to the Palace by many of the chiefest of the Rhodian Nobility. They were met at
the stairs head by Fermondo's self; and after multiplied Embraces and
Welcomes, they were brought into the Kings lodging: they were well pleased to
see themselves treated with greater respect and state then they expected, or
could have imagined. Being somewhat weary, by reason of those unavoidable
troubles which are suffered at Sea, were buried in sleep when the Sun was well
advanced from the east; and when they were awakened by the gladsome sound of
Trumpets, and the beating of Drums, which in warlike wise congratulated the
arrival of such conspicuous personages. As soon as they were dressed they were
invited to Audience by the Prince, who very affably meeting them, said, What is
it that is desired by the Ambassadors of King Thoas, whom I so love and
reverence, as I have taken but little rest all the last night, out of my desire
speediy to execute the commands of so worthy a King? With all due reverence,
and as much eloquence as they were Masters of, they delivered their Ambassie,
desiring that his Highness would be pleased that out of all the fairest and
best born Maids of Rhodes, one may be chosen to make happy by her Marriage and
Succession, the Bed and Blood Royal of Cyprus. The Prince gave way unto their
desires, saying with a pleasing countenance, How fortunate are you the Virgins
of Rhodes, for whom your propitious Stars and Thoas his goodness has prepared
so considerable fortunes? Return my acknowledgements unto your King, who
vouchsafes to choose a Companion out of my Subjects, who though I command over
them, am yet his humble servant. Thankful Civilities were paid on all sides,
and in execution of the request, public proclamation was made, That all the
fairest and best born Virgins of Rhodes should withing a certain prefixed time
come to Court, where she who should be judged to be the handsomest, should be
crowned Queen of Cyprus. This was soon noysed over the whole Island, to the
great wonder of every one; and to the particular, alteration of the hearts, not
only of the young Maids, but of their Lovers. There was no so concealed corner
in the breasts of all those Maids, which was not filled with ambition and
womanish vainglory; and the belief which all Lovers have, that the object of
their affection is the only true Idol of beauty, did much torment the young
men, every one of them fearing to lose her whom they thought to be as worthy of
a Crown as she appeared to them to be the Queen of Beauty. Some of the Virgins
more passionatly in love then the rest, would have refused to have appeared at
the time and place appointed, though a Scepter depended thereupon, lest they
might lose their Sweet-hearts, had not their Parents ambitious hopes forced
them to go. The hour and place were appointed, which was to be the fatal
moment and Capitol to the Triumph of that Beauty which should happiliest
encounter the Genius of those Paris'es, who being to be Judges, the older they
were, would be the less passionate in favorably deciding the question whereon
the possession not of an Aple, but of a Crown did depend. 'Twas a Spectacle
indeed worthy to be seen by the whole world, to behold fourscore exceeding
handsome and nobly born virgins within one room, whose pomp, riches, quaintness
of dress and aparrell, added to their prerogatives of Nature, made up so
pleasing a miracle to the eyes of the lookers on, as they doubted whether what
they saw was mortal or heavenly. 'Twas then apparently seen what women's
industry can do in inventing rich and costly apparel, and extravagant
dressings to increase by Art the worth of their native beauties, whilst what
the innocent want of experience in virgins could not do, was by more cunning
women by studied Art effected with all their whole might. Here did some appear
with hair elaboratly wound up in Rings, part whereof was tied up with Ribbons,
part artificially curld, which falling carelessly upon the shoulders, and upon
the cheeks, made them blush to be kissed by so wanton hair. Others barbarously
artificious, the treasures of their hair wholly locked up under a monopolizing
turbant of purest linen, showed forth only some few fine threeds of refined
gold; whence the worth and loveliness of the entire Mass of those hairs, which
were veiled and hid, might be judged. Others on the contrary, prodigal and
ambitious to divulge their Treasure, gave them their natural liberty to be
played on by the winds, who being free dispensers thereof, afforded part of
them to the thicker air, that it might not annoy those which were illuminated
by the Sunbeams. I mention not those Roses of Diamonds, Rubies, and a thousand
other Jewels, which crowned the purity of those foreheads ushering in the
Oriental eyes: Nor yet those great and purest Pearls which they wore at their
ears and about their Alabaster necks, and which wondered to see themselves
outdone in whiteness; for I intend to speak of beauty, not of the accessories
thereof. I cannot notwithstanding pass over in silence the comeliness of their
aparrell, the Silks whereof being taken from Persia, and the several fashions
from the most effeminat Provinces, I know not whether they did receive from, or
bequeath more loveliness to those members which it was their good fortune to
cover. In fine, on what side soever you could look, your eye incountred nothing
but wonders. Faces composed of Lillies and mountain Roses, bosoms of purest
Alabaster, lips of Coral, pearls shaped into teeth, Eyes brighter then the Sun,
milky hands; such and so many were the ravishing graces, and comportments in
this so fair assembly of Virgins, as men's minds confused with amazement, and
thinking it not possible that those could be real truths which seemed to be the
miracles of beauty, they doubted whether the felicity they saw were true, or
but an Illusion.

The Ambassadors who were to make choice, perceived then that it was not so
easy as men believed, to judge of beauty, much less amongst so numerous a
multitude, where the understanding was consounded by comparing one with
another, and where they were to satisfy another liking, and not their own
inclination. To this was added, that their judgments might be abused by their
curious Dresses, which sometimes do not only mend but alter the defects of
nature. They would not have known what to resolve upon, had not one of them
after much cogitation and discourse, desired that the Prince might be
entreated, that all those Virgins might be commanded once more to appear in
competition, but all of them clothed after one and the same manner with
transparent vails, and loose dishevelled hair, to the end that such blemishes
in the other parts of their bodies, covered by their Aparrel, dressings, or
were it but with the artificial painting of their faces, might not traduce
their judgment. This was agreed upon, in so much as some of the Virgins chose
rather to renounce the uncertain fortune of a Crown, then their innate modesty,
by suffering themselves to be seen little less then naked. But though the
number were lessened, and all Artifices forbidden, yet would it not have been
easy to make choice, had not a daughter of the Marquess of Filerno, named
Nissena, by such vivacity as became a Queen, freed the judges of their doubt,
to whom the glory and praise of Beauty did of most due belong. The Virgins
being brought again into the aforesaid place, the Ambassadors hid behind some
Arras, and peeping through certain holes, stood with wonder gazing now upon
one, now upon another of those pillars of snow, when on the sudden Nissena,
advancing somewhat before the rest, with a maidenly blush, said thus; She who
desires to Reign, ought by her actions to make her self appear worthy thereof.
I, my Companions, not less modest then your selves, will not be ashamed to
display unto the Heavens the reallity of those beauties, which they have
pleased to bestow on me: the gaining of a Kingdom is in question, which cannot
be purchased at a less rate, then by suffering our selves to be seen so, as
upon such an occasion we need not to be ashamed of.

No less astonished at the magnanimity of that generous action, then struck
with admiration to behold those naked and unamendable beauties, the Ambassadors
stood awhile in suspense, and afterward ran to reverence her for their Queen,
to whom nothing but the worship of the knee was wanting to make her the true
Image of Venus. She being afterward clad in her accustomed aparrel, and the
fame of so noble an action being spread abroad, Fermondo's self came to
reverence her as a Queen: and the rest of the young maids frustrate of their
coveted fortune, bewailed even with tears, the loss of their vain hopes. One of
them who rasher then the rest, thought her self much the handsomest of them
all, taking it for granted that the Crown of Cyprus was to be the Guiderdon of
her beauty, imagined her self already possessed of the Scepter, insomuch as she
had promised places and preferments to diverse of her kindred and servants,
which as she affirmed, should be conferred upon them by that King, over whom she
already pretended absolute power. She, seeing Nissena preferred before her,
though she died not, fell grievously sick out of mere vexation, and in the heats
of a violent fever which assailed her, fell into raving fits of commanding, and
expecting to be served and obeyed as a Queen: having after some months
recovered her bodily health, she could never recover the health of her mind,
agitated with continual melancholy, which utterly clouding her understanding,
brought her within a few years to her grave, with a fond imagination that she
was the Kings wife, and chief Commandresse of the Crown of Cyprus. Thus does
Ambition and vain glory find always punishment in their own faults. The sorrow
of the other maids was somewhat allayd by rich and precious Jewels, presented
unto them by the Ambassadors, as testimonies of the Kings munificencie.
Public rejoycings were had through the whole Island for Nissena's preferment,
whiles sad Emerino deeply in love with her, was he alone who amidst the common
rejoycings, made trial of more then mortal sufferings: He swounded at the first
news that for her beauties merit, she was exalted to the throne of Cyprus, and
had assuredly died, had not grief supplied the place of his soul, to keep him
alive: the poor disconsolate young man was so much the more unhappy, in that he
saw himself in some sort forced to aplaud her fortune, whose prosperity and
greatness he was bound to wish well unto, though to the prejudice of his own
heart. He was now out of decency bound to change his love into observance, and
yet was it impossible for him who was in love, to force a passage from the one
affection to the other, without the resentments of a thousand deaths. I rejoice
(said he weeping) my adored Nissena to see thee a Queen, but I cannot rejoice,
nor yet without breathing out my Soul, suffer, that thou being exalted to a
Crown, art for ever to deprive me of any more seeing, serving, or observing
thee: and yet my grieved heart must suffer it. O my too fair and too entirely
beloved Nissena! wherefore was not my love less fervent, and you, why were not
you less fair; I should not then be now thus tormented. Could my inauspitious
stars plot a greater misfortune for me? Give a Kingdoms Scepter to the Queen of
my thoughts; to the end that I might for ever be by her abandoned and
forgotten? Ah Emerino, cease lamenting, be of good courage: give way to
Fortune, and be glad that thy beloved has met with honor befitting her merit,
and such as thou thy self art bound to desire for her. Thou ought to have
foreseen that Nature intended her for a Crown: Rejoice and be glad, for if thou
rejoycest not in her happiness, she may justly believe thou did never love
her. But alas! how can I be glad, if in her I have lost all my joy, all my
content? I will afflict my self, yea as long as I live, but so as my mournful
complaints shall never arrive at my Fair ones Ear, nor in any the least manner
disturb her contentment in being become a Queen. Courage, my Heart, let us
seem to rejoice with her: and for that she may perhaps disdain to hear me
speak, I will by Writing acquaint her with my souls affection. Then taking a
Pen, he wrote thus unto her:

DIsdain not, I beseech you, my long in vain adored NISSENA, to abase your Eyes
so far in these your present Greatnesses, as to read this Paper: Peruse this
last time the Characters of your formerly not forlorn EMERINO, who appears
before you not in the posture of a Lover, but of an humble Servant, rejoicing
to see you raised to that sublime degree of Dignity; to which your adorable
Conditions, and my perverse Fortune has raised you: For, my Fortune has been
miserably unfortunate. But may your Glories be daily greater, though they cost
me my Life, if my Sorrows may not suffice; for I will never grieve thereat.
Neither do I now complain for that seconding the destiny and the immenseness
of your Merit, you have forsaken me to bestow your self upon a King: Yet must I
needs be afflicted, to see my self so unexpectedly abandoned by you, who by
your Nuptials in vain long pretended unto by me, are now going to make another
happy. Go notwithstanding accompanied with all imaginable prosperity. May your
Husband love you, the Nobles of your Kingdom reverence you, the People bow
unto you, the Heavens make your Womb fruitful, and fill your Soul with Mirth:
For my part, I shall remain amidst my tormenting Passions, bewayling my being
deprived of all Consolation, save in as far as my Afflictions prove the
Effects of your felicity.

Your most humble Servant, EMERINO.


This Letter caused some compassion in Nissena, yet not such as to be sencibly
afflicted therewith: First, for that there had never been any such
correspondency in love between her and Emerino, as though but in the condition
of a private Lady, might have necessitated her to be his: next, because her
heart was so possessed with content and ambition, as that it was incapable of any
other passion. In fine, great preferments, if they do not totally change, they
do at least very much alter the minds of whosoever they be, much more a woman's
mind who suffers her self easily to be carried away by Pride. After a few days
she went from Rhodes toward Cyprus, much honored by Fermondo, courted by many
Ladies and Cavaliers, and accompanied by her kindred, a Gentleman being before
sent from the Ambassadors to Thoas to acquaint him with their retun, and with
their bringing a Beauty with them which they thought really worthy of him. He
received the tidings with much content, though he had long kept his bed through
much sickness. Causing his Cousin Doralbo to be called unto him (who was
brother to the desceased Almira, and being ill dealt with by nature as being
the third son, could no ways pretend to his Fathers Crown, and therefore
entertained himself there in Thoas his Service) He commanded him to see four
Galleys forthwith put in order, well furnished with Arms, and that accompanied
as became him, he should prepare to go aboard, and in his stead to meet the new
Queen. The Prince did immediately obey the Kings Commands in all points, who
charging him to make all haste he could back, bad him farewell, and the mean
while minded with all possible care his recovery: but being oppressed all the
next night with an unwilling, and unwelcome inward melancholy, he grew much
worse, and was found by the Physicians the next day in a high fit of a fever,
these were the presages which foretold him that some other body was ordaind to
espouse Nissena. Our souls (as I believe) partaking of Divinity, foresees,
though obscurely and by unknown means, as well our prosperous as our fatal
successes, every one having within him a certain beam or sparkle of Prophetical
light, either more or less, according to the several Organs which subserve the
understanding.

Doralboes Galleys being this mean while favored by prosperous winds, and by
a quiet calm, came within two days in ken of the Ambassadors Galleys. Great
expressions of joy were made on all sides; the air was rent in two with the
thunder of Canon, with the musical noise of Trumpet and Drums, which were
answered by the remote eccho's, reverberating applauses to the glory of
Nissena, filled the Navigators hearts with joy* The Vessels being come nearer,
one did put forth from the midst of those of Doralbo's, which at first was
thought to be a small Pinace, and was afterward found to be a large Schalop,
richly trimmed with purest silver, and of such a greatness as it contained
within the Concave bosom thereof a Venus accompanied by Cupid, who in a
smiling and rejoicing manner expressed his extraordinary gladness, by the
frequent clapping and beating of his wings. The sumptuous Engine being come so
near the Gally wherein Nissena was, as that the voice might be heard, the air
was filled with such sweet music, as the winds withholding themselves at such
melody, breathed nothing but such aires as proceeded from the Goddess her
inspired mouth, who made it plainly appear that she had learned the harmony of
the Spears. The words of the ditty said, That the Crown of Cyprus was more due
to Nissena then to Venus, who did as well yield up unto her the Government of
the Kingdom, as she did the prize of Beauty. The two principal Galleys of
either side boarding one another, Doralbo was he who first hasted to prostrate
himself before Nissena, as Queen, he being followed by twelve young Ladies, six
Matrons, and four and twenty Cavaliers, so richly atired as refined Gold was
the least considerable material thereof: great store of footmen and pages in
sumptuous liveries were not wanting, who when they first saw Nissena, fell all
upon their knees at a good distance off, whereunto she corresponded with such
Majesty as she seemed to be born, not assumed to a Scepter. The Prince leading
her by the arm, she past into his Gallie, which being covered on the outside
from the Poop to the fore deck with gold and Crystal, with sails of Purple
silk, and lined within with green Arras intermingled and bordered about with
gold, appeared a stupendous spectacle to the eye. The lighting of Artillery,
and the noise of Canon troubling and deafning the air; which voluminous smoke
and vain glorious noise, proved that praises given to human greatness are
nothing else in reality but wind and smoke. Amongst so many lovely and
admirable objects, there was none more worthy of sight, or which took the eye
more then the fair Nissena, who was the boundeur of all sight, the wonder of
all minds, and caused agitation in all hearts: her decent affability, fitting
vivacity, gracious comportment without affectation, and her majestical aspect
without severity, increased love and reverence toward her in every one. They
came happily within sight of Cyprus, where they were forced to stay at Anchor
half a day and a whole night by reason of a Westerly Wind which blew from land
a little too briskly; at last they entered the Haven early the next morning,
where all those signs of welcome, and both public and private demonstrations
of duty, and rejoicing which are accustomarily used either by way of flattery
or respect, by subjects toward their Sovereigns did abound. Nothing was
vvanting but the presence of the King, who though cured, yet oppressed by
melancholy, could not abandon his bed; the skilfullest Physicians not knovving
whether to attribute the cause to any outvvard or inward disorder. He
affirmed he found his heart oppressed and overcome by extremity of content, it
being incapable of so immense a joy, and thus taking but little nourishment he
rested unquietly in the night season, and in the day time was troubled with
strange distractions of mind; yet variety of solemn sports and public feasts
were not forgotten: wherein it was observed by the vviser sort as a prodigy of
future evils, that a gilded wooden statue of the Kings was unavoidably burnt
to ashes, the manner how or cause why being never able to be learnt. Nissena
considered these inauspicious occurrences, and seeing the serenity of her
fortune thus troubled at the very first beginning, she was highly therewithal
afflicted, yet did she with all the care she could, conceal her inward sorrow
from others. After five days space the face of affairs altered, the King
forgoing his bed, with a pretty competency of health, and perfect cheerfulness,
who visited by his Bride, at the first encounter of her brightest countenance,
was like to die for mere Joy; she appeared handsomer unto him then he could
have conceived her to be, so as quite altered even to his very voice, he met
her and with open arms embraced her, affectionately saying, Welcome my dearest
delight in whom I am to be happy. Good Gods! of whom have the Rhodian Mothers
learnt to bring forth daughters so beautiful? blessed be the hour my dear
Nissena that first brought thee into the world, blessed be those swaddling
clouts wherein thou were bound, those breasts that gave thee suck, but more
blessed be that Fortune which gave thee into my possession: I will be King of
Cyprus, and thou shall be my Queen. Not uttering one word, she answered with
the tongue of bashfulness, which showed her to be no less fair within then
without. The King making her afterward sit down by his side, Pressing hard and
often kissing her hand, asked her diverse questions, to which she answered with
such modesty, as he might easily discern the vivacity of her wit, and the
wisdom of her understanding. Had not the many consultations of the learned
Doctors who tended his cure denied him, he would that night have celeberated
his Marriage with his beloved. Great is the misery of great ones, who can
seldom compass what they most covet, it not being in their will to eat, or take
their delight, according to their own pleasure, but by the good liking of such
as do either flatter them, or such as would seem wise, and who do sometime hate
their contentments. The Physicians ordered that Thoas should keep a spare but
nourishing diet for a good many days, and that he should be kept from hearing
of any news, or from seeing of any thing which might incumber his mind with any
sort of affection or passion. He punctually obeyed them desirous to be soon rid
of their rigor; every hour appearing an age unto him till he should be made
happy in the Embraces of his Nissena.

The Kings recovery of his health, together with the approaching celebration of
his marriage, did so rejoice his subjects, as the whole Kingdom gave public
and private testimony of their gladsomness. Bonfires, and Fireworks by night,
Baales, Tilting, Turneys, Barriers, Theaters, and Scenes were every where had
with much sumptuousness. The Queen being present at the greatest part of them,
was by the judgment of all men still the most praised and most admired object;
which Doralbo did prove and approve of more then any other, who from that
fatal minute that he saw her, taken with her beauty, fell mightily in love
with her, his flames being the more hot and devouring, by how much he kept them
the more concealed; he burnt, and knowing the inconvenience and rashness of his
fire, he had often and in sundry wise endeavored to extinguish, at least to
appease it. His own heart was only conscious thereof, he durst not so much as
sigh, lest being discovered by the winds, they might communicate his ardency to
the ambiating air. If sometimes his looks did in the presence of the beloved
Nissena, betray the secret of his thoughts, by suffering themselves to feed too
greedily upon her reverenced beauty, he had a punishment ready prepared for
them, by making them fall languishing and without life upon the ground: he
durst neither aspire unto, nor hope for correspondency, the one and the other
of them being unlawful and dangerous; he loved, and knew not to what end,
unless it were to suffer under torment. Whilst he consumed away amidst these
painful straits, it happened that waiting one afternoon upon the Queen (on
whom by the Kings command he continually attended) in the little Court of
Statues, so called by reason of the abundance of stately Sculptures wherewith
it was adorned, he stood with her, accompanied with some few Ladies, beholding
the statue of Hercules embracing Anteus, cut out in stone, when they might hear
from the neighboring parts a noise of outcries and weapons; at the same time
came in a groom of the stable with a face as pale as Death, who cried out
aloud, Fly, Fly and save your selves, for a fierce Tygre escaped from the
usual enclosed place wherein he was kept, roaves hereabouts, killing and
destroying as many as he meets withal; save your selves, I say, for he will be
shortly in this Court, and we shall be all unavoidably dead. The Women with
their outcries, the Men with their swords in hand, but all of them affrighted
and confused, ran some one way some another, seeking how to escape the danger
which threatened them so sorely. Only dauntless Doralbo, griping hard his
Sword, and looking upon Nissena whom he might see look pale, holding her hands
out toward him to implore aid; said, Be not afraid Madam, the fiercest Tigers
of Hercania, came they all in a Troop, much less this one, shall not offend
you, whilst you have Doralbo by your side: May my death prove your safeguard,
dear Madam: For how happy shall he be to dye for you once only, who does so
daily? This being said, he went hastily to defend the entrance into the little
Court, where he had not been long, when he might see one come running, who
could scarcely draw his breath; who with much ado told, how the unwary Beast
following the trace of a Mastiffe Dog which he had wounded, was got into a
house, the Windows whereof being well furnished with strong iron Bars, and the
gate well fortified and shut by a Soldier more courageous and wise then
were the rest, was there made a prisoner, having slain only his keeper, and
two of the Warders. At the hearing of this happy news every one took breath,
and a number of armed men coming in, they were by Doralbo dismissed to their
several employments, whilst he, the Ladies, and the other Gentlemen stood
discoursing with the Queen of the danger which they had escaped. Being
vvaited upon to her lodging, she observed how the Prince, taking leave at his
parting from her, fixed a look in her eyes, which though it were but
momentary, and as it were by stealth, seemed as if it said, I for the present
depart from you my adored lights, but I leave all my thoughts deposited with
you. At this instant she called to mind the words which he let fall in the
little Court, then when he exhorted her not to be afraid of the Tiger; and
though at first she understood them only as a complement from a Generous and
Noble Prince, yet remembering that she had heard him say, It should be happy for
him to die for her once only, for whom he died daily: She thought the words
tasted more of affection then complement. Thus from his words and from his
looks she drew two infallible conclusions that he was in love with her; and
though as then she showed no signs of liking, yet was she not scandalized with
his love, every woman being desirous to be beloved, if not out of wantonness,
yet out of ambition; she resolved notwithstanding to curb that in him which she
judged rather to be a motion or custom of youth, then an affection grounded in
so short a time. The King quitt her of these thoughts, who came to rejoice with
her for her having happily escaped the late danger she was in, he had understod
the business from Doralbo, who waiting upon him to the Queens lodgings (he never
omitting any occasion of being where she was) sighed to see himself received
by her with a less pleasing countenance, and more grave manner then accustomed,
he presently called to mind the words which had escaped his mouth through the
force of his affection then when he prepared with hazard of his own life to
save hers from the Tigers imminent fury, judging she might have taken offense
thereat; so as he had no sooner waited upon the King, but that retiring
himself into his Closet, full of passion and grief, he threw himself down
upon a Couch, and fixing his eyes upon the ground, he by many
deep-fetcht-sighes, ushered in these lamentations.

Unfortunate Doralbo! What heinous fault have thou committed? What was this thy
rashness? Why did thou presume so much? Audacious tongue, why did not I
rather pluck thee from out my throat, then suffer thee to say in the presence
of Nissena, That I die daily for her? Alas! the fault was neither thine nor
mine; I did not then think to discover my affection, neither did thou intend
to speak it: 'Twas my heart which without advising with my understanding, did
dictate those words unto thee: it is thou my heart who were the Traitor: I
certainly would never have said it, nor will I ever say it more, I will rather
die a thousand times. He would have lamented longer, had not his excessive
grief by making him almost senseless, hindered him from saying more. So as after
having a long while with much perturbance of mind nourisht his sufferings and
fancies, he called in his servants, and making himself unready, he faigning to
be weary, went to bed. What rest he took that night, let them tell it for me,
who trained up in the School of Love, have real affections, and know what
torments such accidents do cause. He slept but a little, and if sometimes
though but for a very small space he stole a nap, he forthwith seemed to have
Nissena before him, who much incenst, and in a threatening manner reproved his
rashness. As he would have prostrated himself before her feet to ask her
pardon, he awakened, and found himself void of the hopes of asking, much more
of obtaining it. His body and mind were sorely agitated all the night, save
that toward the break of day falling asleep, he dreamed he saw a very handsome
young woman, clothed all in green, who seemed smilingly to say unto him, Awake
from sleep and sorrow dull Doralbo, for Nissena attends thee, pursue to serve
and love with loyalty and constancy; for after the tempests of thy troubles,
thy love shall find a ealm and quiet Haven to rest in. This being said, the
pleasing shadow vanished, and he somewhat eased of his vexatious thoughts, leapt
out of bed, and as soon as he was ready, he hasted to the Queens Antichamber,
where desirous to visit her, and to wish her a good day, he was answered
otherwise then formerly, that he must be pleased to attend a while, till such
time as her women had dressed her head, and put on her Jewels. This was a deadly
wound to the soul of the suspicious Prince, and yet he patiently and obediently
observed her commands, not giving any the least show of disturbance. As he this
mean while walked with her Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Angria, he wondered to
hear himself thus spoken unto by the Baron. What thinks your Highness, Sir, of
the strange accidents which happened the last night? and what strange
accidents, replied Doralbo? I know nothing save only that somewhat wearied I
hasted to bed sooner then usual, and was all night troubled with a thousand
dreams and fantasies. Do you mock me, replied the Baron? and looking Doralbo
in the face, and finding his looks to express rather a desire of information
then any mockery, he pressed him again, saying, Do not you indeed know what
befell the Queen? At these words the Prince could not but seem somewhat
troubled; his blood hastening presently from his heart to his face, so as with
a panting heart he added, I vow unto you upon the word of a Prince, I know
nothing; but I beseech you acquaint me quickly with it. It was not yet two a
clock at night (said the Baton) when one of my Footmen gave me diverse letters
directed to the Queen, which I presently conveyed unto her: much time was not
past, when she, molested in mind, caused her Aunt Eurania to be called unto
her, and presently afterward those two Gentlemen her Cosen-germans, who had
accompanied her from Rhodes, and having given express order, that no one
whosoever should be suffered to come in, she entertained herself a good while
in discourse with them. I was afterward willed that by all means possible I
should acquaint the King, that his humblest servant Nissena, did most earnestly
desire that his Majesty would immediately afford her audience. I was much
astonished at the hearing hereof, but I had nothing to do but to obey.

The King had betane himself to his rest, which notwithstanding he gave command
that the Queen might be permitted to enter whensover she pleased; who
accompanied by her Aunt and her two Cousens, entered the Kings Chamber, and in a
reverent, but very sad manner kneeld down before his Majesty's bed, who had
raised himself up to welcome her, and confounding her words with her tears and
sobs, she thus expressed her inward sorrow; I very well knew since my first
coming from Rhodes, O Thoas, how unworthy I was to be your wife; but I knew
not, nor could I imagine it possible, that a King whose fame is so glorious
throughout the whole world, would go about to abuse a poor silly young Maid,
who though she be not descended from Kings, has yet in her the blood of the no
ignoble house of the Marquess of Falerno, who at all times and upon all
occasions have always preferred their honor before their lives: Such a one was
I born, as I can very well by my death wash away with my blood any the least
shadows of shame which may hitherto have sullied my reputation. When I came to
Cyprus, I came in condition of your Majesty's wife, not of your Concubine, your
self knows it full well, The Kingdoms of Cyprus and of Rhodes knows it: If I
have been strangely deceived, I am no ways guilty of the deceit: I might justly
deserve all manner of punishment, and might be esteemed guilty, if I should
tarry any longer here, whither being come to live as your servant and consort,
I am advertised I must live your whore. Sir! I beg your leave to be gone: suffer
me, O King, to return to that Climat where people are born as innocent as here,
for in case you should not permit me so to do, I shall send my soul somewhither
else.

He who had all this while with a confused and troubled aspect patiently
listened unto her, being able to hold no longer, cried out, What dreams be
these my Queen? who is that has possessed you with these apprehensions,
injurious to my Crown and to your merit? since when is it that you have been my
Concubine, and not my true wife? Listen unto me. If ever I was possessed with
thought any ways the least prejudicial to you, and if I be any ways conscious,
or but consenting in very imagination to what you mention, let the heavens hurl
down thunder upon me, let me be punished by Omnipotency, let the earth swallow
me up, and may hell take me. I, who have always preserved my faith inviolable to
all men, shall I maculate it to your prejudice, who next my Honor, are the
only object for whom I would yield up my Kingdom, shed my blood, and lose my
life? Is it I that must betray you? have not my past actions sufficiently
witnessed to the whole World (and to your self, which troubles me most) the
candor and integrity of my soul? O if I shall ever know who that wretched
villain is, that has plotted these my vexations, my revenge shall make him an
example to all ages. For what remains, be of good comfort my Nissena, for you
shall soon see that you have been deceived in thinking your self deceived by me
who honor you. Or you shall be Queen of Cyprus, or I will lay down the Scepter
thereof. Reach me pen and paper. Then calling in for diverse Noble men and
Gentlemen of the Court, and me amongst the rest, he in their presence
under-writ a blank paper and signing it with his Regal Seal, take this, said
he, my Queen. Write in this whatever ties or agreements you shall think fit to
ratify our marriage; and if I do ever deceive Nissena, be you all witnesses to
the whole world of my infamy, and declare me unworthy either to Reign or live.
At these lively expressions of true affection and candid Loyalty, the Queen for
awhile stood immovable; then weeping for tenderness, she obsequiously took the
Kings hand in hers, and humbly kissing it, said; Pardon me Sir, for I am
betrayed: pardon I beseech you the offense which you might justly take at me
for suffering my self to be too easily persuaded that you were guilty of a
fault which now I see to have been so far from your magnanimous and Princely
heart. This, Sir, was that that betrayed me, and therewithal she gave him a
Letter which she had received in the Packet from Rhodes, the sense whereof was:
That a personage much affectionate to her, compassionating that misfortune
which had carried her from her fathers house, and from her country, to the end
that in her so flourishing age, and endowed with so great beauty and worth she
was likely to be grosely abused and deceived by another barbarous lust, he was
resolved through pity of her misfortunes to adverise her, that Thoas feigning
by specious ways and pretenses to take her to be his wife, nourishing her with
vain hopes, would enjoy her as a whore. That he did the rather acquaint her
with these proceedings, since by doing so he did second the will of Heaven,
which having till then afflicted the King with sickness, showed how it did
abhor his mischievous machinations; but that being now recovered he would not
be long in bereaving her of her virginity. That she should therefore speedily
fly from Cyprus if she would keep that reputation untainted which had for so
many ages made famous the House of Falerno, or if she desired to render her
self glorious for having wisely deluded the lustful ends of a treacherous King.
Thou art the wicked Traitor, who e're thou art, cried Thoas, who possessed with I
know not what Infernal fury, indeavourest to subvert my quiet: but if I may
ever know who thou art, thy head shall justly pay for these thy base and
infamous stratagems. Then observing the Letter to be without a name or date; O,
Nissena, said he, you were too easy in crediting the slightness of a Letter
written by one who was ashamed to own it! if every one would believe such
deceitful Letters, the way would be made too easy for wicked men by their
inventions to undo the World. Their minds are blinded who credit a blind paper
when it contains no Truths which do appear palpable to the sense, or visible to
the eye. I will not notwithstanding for this time chide you: Return unto your
Lodgings comforted, and secure of my Faith. She trembling all over, alleged
many reasons for her too easy belief, at last confessing it to be a fault, she
as a favor, begged either to be punished or pardoned by the King, who
dismissing her with a kiss, sent for two of his privy Counselors and long
discust the matter with them: it was resolved that it was worthy of no small
consideration, since the endeavor tended to the diverting of his Majesty's
Marriage, upon which the succession depending, it consequently insued that some
one or other, out of some important ends, were glad to see the Crown without
issue: though it afterward appeared that they were evidently unwise, who had
in their vast thoughts gone about to hinder Nissena's Marriage, whilst it was
not likely that the King would want other Wives, to whose marriage so many
great Princesses had aspired, and in particular two daughters of the dreaded
King Nicaster of Loria: 'twas thought that some of the chief men of Rhodes in
love with Nissena, might out of an amorous desperation, have endeavored so
vain an enterprise, but whosoever it were, his Majesty was to learn by this
small accident, to have a better eye upon any the least occurrences then he
formerly had had: The manner of the character and the paper being afterward
considered, the first was unkn own to them all, the latter was known by the
mark to be made in Cyprus. I being somewhat severely questioned from whom I had
received those packets which I had caused to be delivered to the Queen,
answered, from one of my footmen, who being suddenly sent for, affirmed that
they were given unto him at the first entrance into the Hall, by one whose
habit spoke him to be a Mariner, and that he said he had received them from the
Master of a Pinnace of Rhodes, who was come the day before into the Haven, with
express command to take order that they might be delivered at the Court. The
Master of the Pinnace being found at his Lodging, he was forthwith imprisoned,
and threatened with the Rack: being mastered by fear, he ansvver'd a thousand
things little to the purpose to what was asked him, so that all that they could
draw from him was, that the Letters which he brought from Rhodes, were given
him at his coming from thence by a kinsman of his who was a servant to the
Family of the Marquess of Falerno. He was notvvithstanding still detained in
prison, till the Kings further pleasure should be known, which was, that he
should suffer torture: Prince Doralbo at the recital hereof suffered inwardly
diverse agitations of mind; and asked many questions of the Baron, that he
might punctually inform himself of every the least particular. It was no wonder
if he appeared passionately curious, whilst an interest was treated of, wherein
his heart was concerned; but he was interrupted by the arrival of one of the
Gentlemen of Thoas his Chamber, who gave order in his Majesty's name, that the
Queen should be informed, that at her best leisure she might go to the Temple
to assist at the Sacrifices which were to precede her marriage. Doralbo taking
his leave of the Baron of Angria, went to the Kings Lodgings, who by reason of
his last nights waking, or perhaps through the agitation of his mind, had a
very sore fit of a Fever, and having done his obeisance to him, the King asked
him how he did, saying, I would not trouble your rest the last night,
understanding that being weary, you had made more haste to bed then usual; but
you must this morning take some pains for me. Be it your care that you command
the Lord president in my name, that he publicly in the Temple Marry Nissena in
my behalf, since it pleases the Gods to deny me the happiness of enjoying her;
and that when he shall have Crowned her Queen, he do in the name of all my
Vassals swear fealty to her, whilst I the mean while wrestle with the fit that
is come upon me. The rest I took (said Doralbo) was in an unluckie hour, since
it hindered me from serving your Majesty, whereat I am much grieved; I wish I
could as well suffer those pains instead of you, which you now undergo, as your
goodness assures me that you will accept of my present readiness to serve you,
in amends for the fault unwillingly committed of not waiting upon your Majesty
the last night. This being said, the Prince went to obey the Kings commands.
Mintanrus, a man of mean birth, of a great understanding, quick at the managing
of Affairs, but proud, and of a strangely turbulent and seditious mind was then
Lord President; to which degree of honor his riches had brought him, by means
whereof he married a great Lady, and wrought himself into a very noble kindred,
and so got into favor and preferment with the King. His wife died when she had
brought him a son named Melaspus, who by reason of his rash and troublesome
conditions, was the scandal of all Nicosia, though his ranting, and his Fathers
Authority made him be feared and reverenced by all men. Mintaurus was one of
those who was displeased at Thoas his resolution of marrying Nissena; so as
hearing himself commanded by the King to marry her in his behalf, and having
Crowned her, to swear Fealty to her in the name of all the people, he could not
forbear giving some testimonies of displeasure; yet not making any reply, he
buckel'd himself to the business, crafty Doralbo was aware of it, but without
more ado went to wait on her, from whose rigid or pleasing countenance he with
a beating and doubtful heart expected the Destiny of his affection. She came
forth, and by her indifferent comportment made him know that he was not more
particularly favored by her then were others, but rather in somewhat a
careless and disdainful manner studied to keep her eyes from incountring with
his; neither did she so often smile upon him as formerly she had done.

Unfortunate Doralbo! with how many Darts was thy soul pierced? He assisted at
the Sacrifices, and forgetting the sacred Altars, he adored that Idol, from
whom instead of favors he expected killing frowns. Nissena being married by
Mintaurus, and crowned Queen, she returned to the Palace, and desired she might
have leave to visit her husband, and to thank him for having raised her to that
degree whereby she was for ever bound to be his Servant and Companion. But he
being in the height of his Fit, was not in a condition to receive any Ambassie
that day; no not so much as visits. The next night he grew better, and took
some rest; so as the next morning he was able to get out of Bed, and to dine
with his Queen, feeding much more greedily with his eyes then with his mouth.
The Court was full of banqueting and contentment: Only Prince Doralbo,,
though he knew it misbecame him not to appear more joyfulll then usual among
these universal rejoycings, could not keep the sad Ensigns of inward
melancholy from appearing in his pale face, which fretted him even to the
heart: his extraordinary sadness being perceived by all, the Queen not many
days after was also aware thereof, to boot that it was commonly whispered
about by the Ladies and Gentlemen. She had compassion on him, and to give him
some comfort, and since the cause of so great a melancholy might not for a long
time be seen into, she began by degrees to be more gracious unto him, sometimes
cheering him with pleasing smiles, sometimes with partial looks, so as
shortly returning to his former vivacity, he became not only cheerful as
before, but was the joy and delight of the whole Court. O the fondness of vain
Lovers, who think themselves made happy by a smile or look, which sometimes is
but casual, and not willingly conferred, and perhaps sometimes not without
fraud; and are again made miserable by another look, which they interpret as
scorn, or ingratitude, which may peradventure be a cunning invitation to spur
them on to be more ardent in their loves. Nissena imparted these favors unto
him so as they were no ways prejudicial to the cand or of her faith which she
had plighted and vowed to Thoas: For from the time she had taken upon her the
yoke of marriage (though it were not yet consummate) not so much as one
misbecomming thought sullied the inward purity of that breast which witnessed
outwardly immaculate innocence. She, I know not whether out of favor to him,
or solicited by her natural genius to read books of Chevalry, desired him to
provide her some fitting for her to read, that she might pass away the tedious
hours of that season which was now hotter then usual, though it was always
very hot under the Climate of Cyprus. He interpreted the honor of this command
as a favor from the prodigal Heavens; and his understanding being enlightened
by blind love, which infuseth subtilty into the most rough hewn minds, much
more into such as are quick and airy; he furnished her with many books, the
leaves whereof he had in some places cunningly turned down, where amorous
affections are by ingenious Writers expressed, whereby he discovered his
passions to her who was their adored occasion. Nissena being quick of
understanding, finding Doralbo's cunning, restored back his books unto him,
folded down in like manner in other leaves, whereby he might understand and
receive such answers, as sometimes excited hope in him, sometimes reproved him
of boldness. The modest Lover was herewithall so fully satisfied, as he
pretended to no other food or reward of his love. The King this mean while
would needs have the Queen (who was now satiated with Feasts, Turnys, and
Tiltings) honor a Theater with her presence, whereon the Marquess of
Martasses, who with great fervency had desired this favor, caused an excellent
Stage Play to be acted. She went thither, having on her a vesture given her
that day by her husband, contrived and woven with Amianto, a precious stone
which is spun like thread; of which, as of other Jewels and Minerals, the Mines
of Cyprus are very fruitful; so as Beams being cast abroad on every side by
the reverberation of lights, which enlightened the Theater, Nissena seemed to be
the Sun of Beauty. Poor Doralbo! How many and how great splendors were thou to
resist, to keep the eyes of thy mind undazeled? The Play took all the Auditory
exceedingly, being represented with stately Sceans and inventions, suitable to
the Marquess his generous mind; but the Prince was chiefly pleased, (because
it made most for his purpose) with the fall of an unfortunate Lover, who
desperately threw himself from the top of a Mountain into the Sea, and to all
appearance seemed to be therein drowned. Nissena was a little moved at this
spectacle, as she witnessed, by saying, Poor wretch! Since thou were only
guilty of too much love, thou did not deserve so miserable a death. Doralbo
let not this occasion slip without making his use of it, being already become
so bold, as he durst reply unto the Queen, Good Gods! How is it possible your
Majesty should commiserate one drowned in the water, and not be any thing at
all concerned in him who is consumed in flames? And who is he (replied she) who
is thus consumed? I see none hereabouts environed with fire. Ah (said the
Prince with a trembling voice) you see him too well, but will not vouchsafe to
look upon him. It Is I that am that wretch, who in love with you, would a
thousand times have breathed forth my Soul, had not my life been miraculously
preserved by your more then humane Image, which is imprinted in my Heart.
Disdain not, O my Goddess, that I adore you; for I know how to do it, without
any blemish to your honor, prejudice to your reputation, or offense to my
Sovereign Lord Thoas, I pretend to nothing else, nor do I ought desire, but
that I may be permitted to adore you whilst I shall live, and that you will
suffer it without disdain; I will do what becomes your greatness, and my
condition; be not you therewithal scandalized, most mighty Queen, if you would
have me live. And here, with a broken sigh, he stopped, expecting his sentence
of life or of death from the mouth of his beloved. She somewhat blushing,
answered, That if the love he talked of were of any other temper then what he
had said, he might do well to leave the vain and rash enterprise of loving
her; but that if it were true that he knew to love like a true Prince, and
Gentleman, in terms circumscribed within the confines of that integrity and
faith, which she intended to preserve immaculate to her husband, she was
pleased with his affection, and that he might rest assured of like
correspondency in her, whilst his thoughts should continue thus modest.

These were the beginnings of that Love which not knowing how to get entrance
into her chaste bosom, went thus by piecemeal insinuating it self insensibly
into her heart. Thou shall shortly see Nissena and be aware that affections
enter our souls as it were by stealth, that they may afterward in process of
time become Tyrants. These discourses might pass freely between them without
being observed or listn'd unto, the Queens chair being placed somewhat high,
and the Prince standing close by her on foot, whose soul was so filled with joy
upon this lucky encounter, as whereas formerly he perished through affliction,
he now was almost killed with content; which was a little lessened in him, by
hearing how that Thoas, who grew daily better in his health, would by
consummation of his marriage, reap Nissena's Virginity; and though the
knowledge of the unjustness of this his disquiet did in a great measure
mitigate his for row, yet did it not keep him from such an agitation of mind as
did imbitter all his contentment. The King who seemd to be on the mending hand,
and almost perfectly recovered, did much solicit the Physicians, that he might
now be permitted freely to embrace his beloved wife within his arms, which they
had promised him to give way unto within four days; in which interim of time he
fell into a dangerous relaps, with very small hope of ever recovering. There
came unto his Majesty likewise at this time, an express dispatch away in haste
from the Consuls of the Town of Siari, informing him, that great part of the
Soldiery of the Commonwealth of Famagosta had in an insolent and barbarous
manner begun to prejudice them, by killing their men and firing their Country,
which caused them to fly unto the wisdom and valor of his Majesty for
succor and reparation to these great evils. That many of their neighbors and
Soldiers drawn out of the adjacent Garrisons, had valiantly opposed the Enemy;
but that 'twas hard for a few men without any Commanders in chief, or good
Warlick Discipline, long to resist a multitude of armed men, provided with all
things fitting to fight. That they had not as yet taken any Walled Towns, but
only two Villages, wherein they had fortified themselves, and went on
destroying the corn which was already almost ripe throughout all those
fruitful fields.

The King was highly afflicted at this news, presaging this to be the preludium
of his death, so as calling together his Council of State that morning, after
they had considered the business, 'twas jointly resolved, that all possible
forces should be presently raised to resist these first insolences; That the
mean while order and consultation should be taken for all Occurrences, and that
the King should in his due time name the Heads and chief Commanders of the
Army, the charge of providing Arms was conferred upon the Count Angebertus of
Monagria, with Orders that the Kings Exchequer being immediately opened, the
Drums should beat up, and people should be taken into pay, who joined to the
other Soldiers that were in Garrison, and such as might be drawn out of the
Galleys, without much weakening the Maritin forces, should be ready to march at
an hours warning: in a short space an Army was raised of 8000 foot and 2500
horse, all of them Soldiers well enough appointed, but little experienced in
Military affairs, for not only the Arms, but the very minds of the whole
Kingdom were as it were rusted over by means of long peace. Prince Doralbo was
by the King declared General. Filarbo, one of Nissena's Cousens, Lieutenant
General, and his Brother Theocastro General of the Horse. Other Commands and
Places were conferred to other Noblemen and Gentlemen according to the Kings
pleasure, who knew very well the worth and abilities of all his Subjects. At
the very instant that Doralbo received the place of General, he began to
exercise his Command, fighting against his own thoughts, which in a rebellious
manner began to mutiny against him. He esteemed that preferment a misery, not
an honor, which by keeping him far from Nissena, divided him from himself: but
knowing that of necessity he was presently to obey, he prepared for departure,
not forgetting to thank the Kings munificence for so great a dignity conferred
upon him, and protesting that to show himself in some sort worthy thereof, he
would upon all occasions be ready to oppose his breast to the enemies Weapons.
Nissena found her self touched with an affection not formerly known unto her:
For though she thought she had loved nothing in the Prince but his worth, she
was then aware that she likewise loved his presence, not being able to imagine
him in the wars, (where he might notwithstanding exercise that valor which she
thought the only object of his soul) without great trouble. The fatal hour
of departing approached, and the Prince was already called upon by the
Trumpets, when taking his leave of Thoas with a mind much confused, he went to
kiss her hand, who could not so much suppress the inward resentments of her
soul, but that they appeared visibly by her often changing countenance. Few
were the words which they spoke to one another; but they vied whose eyes should
speak most. Nissena, (far from her own belief) as she turned her face from the
Prince, saying, God be with you, and be sure you return; was enforced to wipe
the tears from off her eyes, which would have fallen in abundance, had not her
wisdom withheld them. In fine, their griefs were equal. Whilst the Army is
on its march toward Liuri, let us see what it was that made Famagosta, which
had formerly faithfully paid Tribute to the Crown of Cyprus, wage war against
Thoas; and that some particulars may be the better known, let us understand how
the whole Island being subject to Kingly power, this only part was then
governed Aristocratically by the name of a Commonwealth.

The issue of that famous Ptolomy who built those four Cities which were
called Arsinoe, being all dead, nine of the chief Lords of Cyprus divided the
Kingdom amongst them, and for a while ruled by the Title of Petty Kings.
Affroditius, the powerfullest amongst them, occasioned by his death, the
subversion of that divided Empire, whilst dispute arising which of the rest
should succeed to the command of that part of the Crown which was now vacant,
Byamartes, the most valiant, not to say the most rash, endeavored, and did
therein succeed, to get the possession thereof by force of Arms. His natural
desire of enlarging his confines, not being herewithall satisfied, being beyond
measure gallant, and as wise as he needed to be, he took from five of the
others their little Scepters: and the other two fortifying themselves in the
City of Famagosta, seated upon the banks of the Sirian sea, and having
received recruits of Men and Victuals from Soria, made Biamartes despair of
overcomming them by force of Arms: he betook himself to plots and stratagems,
which proved all vain. Retiring from the siege, he still ruminated how he
might make himself master of Famagosta, without which his glory and dominion
seemed to be imperfect and cut short. He advised hereupon so long, as at last
he pitched upon an enterprise, which by how much more dangerous it was, so
much was the event thereof more successful: if out of no other reason,
perhaps because Fortune has alvvayes been observed to be as favorable to
Rashness, as an enemy to Wisdom. He chose twelve of his most valiant and
adventurous Soldiers, and making them be appareld Country-like, some like
simple foot Soldiers, some like mercenary Artificers, and some like Mechanic
Plebcians; He willed them to get into Famagosta under several pretenses, and
to tarry there in expectation of his coming; who soon after having cut short,
and altered the color of his hair and beard, went thither in a flovenly
manner, and Shepheard-like apparel, loaded with greasy Wool. His intension
was to expose himself to all danger, so as he might kill those two petty Kings
who hindered him from entirely possessing that Kingdom, which without that
City seemed to his ambition but a Body that had some joint lopt off. He
imagined that either he or some of his getting into the Courts of those petty
Kings, might possibly come to mingle poison (whereof each of them was well
provided) amidst their meats: or else by night to bring such a of powder into
the lower Vaults of the Palace, as might suffice to blow up the Walls thereof,
wherewithal both to kill and bury his enemies at once. If nothing else should
succeed, he should learn the exact quantity of the people, their plenty or
penury of Ammunition, the condition of their Soldiery, their inward provisions
and fortifications of the City; and finally all such occurrences as might
facilitate unto him the way how to take that City by storm, which he could not
do by stratagem. He determined and performed; but if he went to vanquish, he
was vanquished, though the loss did at the last occasion his Victory. His
feigned condition of a Shepherd getting him access without suspicion into all
places, he made use thereof to pry into all particulars which might conduce to the
execution of his designs. Being one morning invited by his curiosity to see the
inside of a sumptuous Palace (the great men of Cyprus using in those days
freely to permit every one to enter their habitations) he stepped into a garden,
and gazing upon a side of the House which was all made of purest Marble, he
might see a Woman sitting upon a little rise of a Hill drying her wet black
hair at the Sun beams. She sitting a good while still, and seeing one look
fixtly on her in a habit which made her believe him to be some simple Country
Clown, who dazzled with her more then usual beauty, stood greedily gazing on
her, broke forth into a loud laughter, and said unto him, What is it you look so
earnestly upon Companion? Did you never see a woman before? Yes Lady, said he,
I have seen other women, but never any of so exquisite a Beauty. Look thy belly
full upon me then, said she; whilst a Gentlewoman came with an Ivory Comb, to
put her hair in order, Biamartes forgetting what personage he represented, had
almost by speeches and behavior befitting his true condition and mind,
discovered himself to have nothing in him of Clownish, but his apparel. But
knowing how much it imported him to be taken for what he appeared to be, he
began with diverse senseless words and speeches to little purpose, masked over
with simplicity, to move them to laughter, who had delighted a good while to
make themselves merry with him. At last they departed from the little rise of
the Hill, and he went out of the Palace so far in love with this Lady, as he
found it much a harder matter to withstand his own thoughts, then to fight a
numerous Army.

'Twas a wonder that being blinded by love, he could yet see that he could hope
for no success, neither in his martial affairs by the death of his Enemies, nor
yet in his love. Wherefore he wisely resolved to leave Famagosta, where he had
reaped nothing but the loss of his heart, and the having exposed himself to the
evident danger of his life, liberty and renown which he had won at such expense
of valor. He left the City, as did severally those that depended on him;
except one of the craftiest amongst them, who by his command staid to pry into
the proceedings of the petty Kings, and to discover that Ladies condition whose
merit had wrought upon a Kings affection. Byamartes perceived afterward how
rash his enterprise was: but according to the custom of great ones, yea of all
such as have been favored by fortune, he attributed that to the goodness of
his own wit, which was the mere gift of a friendly fortune. He ceased not this
mean while, at a great expense of treasure, and the full extent of his power,
to raise all such men and arms as he could, to assault Famagosta again, which
being impossible to be besieged on that side toward the sea, was not to be
taken but by assault. Though he were busied about so hard an enterprise, yet
could he not forget her who had robbed him of his heart, but thirsted the more
to make himself master of the City. This mean while he whom he had left in
Famagosta, having informed himself touching the Lady, found that she was of a
noble and rich Family, allied to the best houses of the City, though her
husband, as having too great and numerous a retinue was not well looked upon,
but rather held under by those petty Kings who knevv their uncertain Dominion
to be yet but vveakly grounded: which made her be better inclined to Biamartes
his Party, then to theirs. The crafty Officer thought it therefore his best
course to let it come to her knowledge by one of her household servants whom he
had by great sums of gold corrupted, that Biamartes being come into that City
by stealth, and unknown, was fallen mightily in love with her, in so much as he
was sent by him to offer her together with his soul, whatsoever his Crown was
able to do, she being the sole Mistress of his will. Telisbe for so was this
Lady called thought it impossible that a great King should have hazarded
himself within the precincts of an Enemies Wall, and that having such important
affairs of War upon his hands, he could have leisure to think of love; but did
rather imagine that this was a plot of some one or other that was in love with
her, to make trial of her chastity, or else that it was some of Biamartes
stratagems whereby to make himself Master of that City, which was only wanting
to complete his Dominion over all Cyprus. Were it then that she desired to know
whether she were grown so ingenuous or no as to discover the plots of others,
or that eg'd on by the itch of ambition, she would gladly know the certainty,
whether her beauty were such or no, as to have operation in the heart of a
great Prince and valliant Warrler she would be punctually informed by this her
domestic servant, who it was that had prevailed so far with her as to make her
venture upon so rash a business. She wrought so much by entreaties and by
threats, as she learned all she knew out of her: Which was no more but that
dazzled by the brightness of the gold whereof a stranger had been very liberal
unto her, she was induced to deliver such messages, believing she should not
find her easy to consent, but yet ready enough to pardon the folly of a fault
which had got her so much wealth. The Lady seemed to be appeased, and asked her
whether she thought the stranger would be persuaded to speak with her her self
or no, charging her that when he should come to receive his answer, she should
desire him to do so. The good woman promised total obedience, yet was she
afraid and doubtful, least this might be done out of cunning, that her Lady
might come to know him, and so cause him to receive deserved punishment: yet
confirmed by her Ladies redoubled Oaths, who protested to her that it proceeded
only out of a certain itch of curiosity, and knowing her ingenuous and sweet
nature, she resolved to let the stranger know, that her Mistress was not only
ready, but very desirous to speak with him. He likewise made fearful by too
much facility, answered, that whenever it might be so done as he might be
sure to come by no harm, he would be very ready to receive so great an honor:
not that he did believe there could be any abuse used, or traps laid by such a
Lady, but that the favor seemed to him to be too sudden, and too exceeding
great: which answer being by her brought back unto her inquisitive Lady, after
a long consultation had, they resolved (so great a power in Women has
curiosity and ambition) that before he should come to Parley with her, a little
tender child, whom he very well knew to be Telisbes only son, should be
delivered into his custody. By this her so great expression of fidelity, he
inferred safety to himself from all deceit, so as he refused all other security
save what might proceed from her courteous Ingenuity. The manner, and hour of
their interlocution was agreed upon, wherein to Biamartes good luck it was
proved true, that the same Fortune which sparingly withholds her favors from
some, dispenses them prodigally to other some. With efficacy worthy of one who
laid open the amorous passions of a King, the crafty and eloquent Officer
endeavored to persuade Telisbe, that she was more dearly beloved by Biamartes
then any thing that did never so nearly concern his Crown, nay more then his
own soul. She at that instant, were it either out of decency, or that her
ambition and curiosity being already satisfied, some new thoughts came in her
head, answered: Friend! if I had imagined that your discourse should have
tended to these vain expressions of Love, whether they be true or false, I
should as well have refused you audience, as I shall always refuse to make my
heart a receptaecle of any other affections, then what prompted by my Genius
and duty I have dedicated as inviolable and eternal to my Lord and husband. I
was persuaded to give you hearing, out of a belief that Biamartes in love with
somewhat else then my beauty, would by these his pretenses of love, seek to
discover how my house is inclined to these our unjust petty Princes, who
carry themselves unwisely and very violently against all those of my blood. If
he will that I do faithfully assist him in his Victories, I am at his disposal;
for though a woman, I will make all other Princes learn by the example of
these, how to treat their Nobility better: but if his only pretense be to
dishonor me, he does but lose his labor, for a nobly born soul does always
more esteem honor then life. Not without wonder and much joy did the other
hear these expressions, and seeing so large a way opened to undream'd of good
success, he answered: That he was certain, as much as his Master would be
displeased to hear his love repulsed by her, so much would he be pleased to
understand the offer of her adherence to him in the winning of that City; that
he therefore desired her to give him leave to acquaint Byamartes with her
favorable intentions toward him: that then he would return with freer
resolves; assuring her that she should not befriend a Prince who would repay
her with ingratitude. He without further delay, went from Famagosta safely and
easily under a counterfeit habit; commerce being allowed to all men, nor
entrance denied to any on who came in alone, unarmed, and who would go out at
convenient and set hours. He came to Biamartes, who being already Master of the
Field, was levying of more men, and was encamped not above twelve miles from
the Town, to whom having related what he had learned of new, Byamartes
instantly forgot Telisbes beauty; and the poor child Love, wholly composed of
tenderness and swavitie, fled from his heart, and gave place for Mars to enter,
who in a terrible and bloody manner did in a moment usurp the seat. He grew
impatient to see himself wholly Victorious over his Enemies: so as sending back
the Messenger in haste with order to promise Telisbe in his behalf whatsoever
she could desire in recompense; were it even the fee Farm of Famagosta, with
the Title of Government, so as she would devise a means how he might surprise
it. This Messenger at his return found the Lady more rosolv'd to assist
Byamartes now then ever, since concealing his love addresses, she had told her
husband how the King had craftily endeavored to draw from her, to what side
he, as head of a numerous faction, did adhere; and that if he would be pleased
to second that fortune which offered its forelock to him; the means was in
readiness whereby he might take revenge for all his ill usage received from the
petty Princes. He was a little jealous to hear his Wife talk thus, though
afterward wieghing every particularity, having advised with himself, and some
of his nearest friends, he resolved not to let slip so fair an opportunity of
revenge, and of advancing his own greatness and Fortune. Telisbe would speak no
more with Biamartes officer without her husbands being present, and all things
being agreed upon between them, he returned to the Camp instructed in all that
was to be done in execution of the enterprise.

Telisbe desired, and did obtain it, that when Byamartes should have made
himself master of the City, he should give way, that for the future it should
be governed by the Nobles, and by the name of a Commonwealth; but still as
feudatory and tributary to his Majesty in a great sum of money, whose
Vicegerent should in appearance hold the principal place, though his Authority
should not exceed that of the other Senators. For what remained, that the Army
should draw nigh, and should give an assault by night, for that by such helps
as he should meet withal, he should with ease, and without the expense of
blood obtain the Victory. All things were agreed upon, and so successfully
executed, as one of the petty Princes was slain whilst he fought valiantly in
the defense of his Palace by night, and the other flying away by Sea, trusted
his safety with the Winds, passing in a little Bark to the banks of Soria. From
that time till Thoas his reign, Famagosta was peacefully governed in the form
of a Republic; when rebelling against him, he dispatched away Prince Doralbo to
chastise so rash and insolent a commotion. The hidden and wicked Treachery of
one of Thoas his chief Ministers of state, had excited, nay necessitated that
state to the violent resolution of taking up Arms against its Lord and Master.
Who this wicked one was, and to what mischievous ends he complotted these
revolutions, we shall shortly know, together with some other fatal successes.
Let it suffice for the present to know, That an Order from his Majesty
authenticated and sealed by his Kingly Seal, was read in full Senate by the
Kings Vicegerent in Famagosta; that without any reply or intermission of time,
to boot with the ordinary Tribute, four thousand Talents should be by them
disburst toward the occurrent affairs. Those Fathers were astonished to hear
of so unaccustomed and burthensom a demand, there not being moneys enough
neither in the public Exchequers, nor yet in men's private purses, to make up so
great a payment; they desired a prorogation of the Vicegerent, protetesting
howsoever that they were altogether unable to satisfy his Majesty's desires.
They were answered, that they were speedily to resolve, and to take into their
considerations the particulars expressed, and contained in the Order, without
further reply or loss of time.

The poor Senators knew not what to say; in all meetings both public and
private, the Kings indiscretion was the sole subject of discourse, when many of
them received private advertisements by Letters, that Thoas taking a Caprichio
to annull the Republic, had made use of a pretense of exacting a Contribution
from them, which was impossible for them to pay. That if they should make ready
payment of what was demanded, either in part or in whole, he was resolved to
make use thereof to wage war with them at their own expense; That if they did
not execute his Order, he would declare them to be disobedient, and proclaim
them Rebels, and Enemies to the Crown. That the very Inhabitants of Nicosia,
ashamed and scandalized at the apparent injustice, desired that so famous and
ancient a Common wealth should now make some glorious resentment against that
King, who having lost his reason in his love to a base Woman, had already
crowned her Queen, to the end that the people might be governed by a mungrell
succession of an ignoble stock mixed with the Royal Blood. That the only remedy
they had to prevent their imminent ruin, was to put on a noble resolution of
preventing him speedily with Arms. That they would not want assistants and
part-takers even in the very Court it self. Those of Famagosta provoked by so
violent incitements, resolved to prevent Thoas, by setting on his state on the
side of Siuri; and though they were provided but with a few Soldiers, they lead
them into the Field, not ceasing this mean while to raise men with all their
might: And to this purpose they dispatched away Commissaries into Soria, from
the King whereof they promised themselves upon all occasions assistance and
succor.

They soon heard how that Prince Doralbo was marching toward them with a
numerous Army: When the chief Commanders of the Famagostan Troops, who being
dispersed abroad, sack the Country every where, to the terror and loss of the
poor Country people, summoned them all back into the two Towns which were
already taken, and fortifying themselves there with cutting deep Ditches and
Trenches, they waited for the enemy, whilst the Militia of the City was drawn
forth, and Forces were raised in diverse parts, that they might afterward
appear in the field ready to fight. Thoas his Army incampt it self between the
Town of Siuri, and the Castle of Pigadia; and all the neighboring places being
by the provident Prince provided with Garrisons, he sent forth six Troops of
Horse, and ten Companies of Foot, giving them order to use all means possible
whereby they might draw the Enemies out of those Towns wherein they had
fortified themselves. This was not easily to be done; For after a long
resistance made by them of Famagosta, they received succors, so that it
behoved Doralbo's forces to fight, which though they did with little loss of
men, yet lost they much reputation, failing in their first enterprise. True it
is that the Famagostians growing hereupon bold, sallied out with a great many
men, and being too far advanced in pursuit of the Enemies Horse, who did of
purpose leasurely retreat, they found the way shut up as they returned, so as
intercepted in the midst, the greatest part of them were taken prisoners, or
cut in pieces; some of them who had the fortune to escape, withdrawing
themselves into a neighboring Wood.

In Nicosia this mean while the sick King grew daily worse and worse, so as his
Case was thought desperate, so much the rather for that being grown exceeding
weak, the Physic which was prescribed, either wrought not at all, or wrought
contrary effects to the ends it was given. In fine, he must die, and in stead
of going into a nuptial Bed to rejoice within the Arms of his Beloved, he must
be put into a doleful Coffin, and laid in the bosom of Death.

Unfortunate Thoas, I wish at least the Heavens had never suffered thee to have
seen Nissena, thou then would not in departing from this world, have known
the sorrow of parting from her.

Knowing himself near the unavoidable passage of Death, he called in to the
help of his oppressed heart, that native generosity which in his life had never
forsaken him, and with a deep sigh, wherewith he seemed to banish all fear, he
with a cheerful countenance wherein undauntednesse might be discerned,
commanded that Nissena together with all the chief Lords and Barons of the
Court should be sent for to him. The sorrowful Queen being come, she sat her
down by the Kings bed side, and taking between her fairest hands, the fading
and languishing left hand of her dying Husband, she said unto him, Oh Sir, How
do you feel your self? Well, said he, Now that I have all my content by me;
but I must die, I must die, O Nissena, neither do I grieve thereat, for I know
I was born mortal; but only because I am to leave you, and to leave you
before you be wholly mine. At the hearing of words expressed with such tender
affection, tears in abundance began to fall from the eyes of the afflicted
Lady, which at the arrival of the Court Lords, she with much ado detained. The
Lords and Rulers of the Kingdom entered the dismal Chamber with silent
reverence; and many of them being by this time got together, and standing
bareheaded before the Bed, the King commanded them all to sit down. Here, a
melancholy and short Preludium being made by an universal silence to the Kings
discourse, he with a fainting voice having first looked them all in the face,
feebly spoke thus: At last, my Friends, or rather my dear Children, after so
many years wherein I have upheld the Crown of Cyprus, I am come to pay my last
duty to Nature by Death. I die, and die contented, knowing that I have never
upon any occasion been wanting to any one either in justice or in clemency; I
have always loved my subjects more tenderly then my self or mine own Interests;
and I call your selves and heaven to witness whether I had ever any other end,
then to govern like a good Shepherd, ready to shed my sweat, nay my very blood
for the good of my Flock. It may notwithstanding be, that without any consent
of my will, some one may think himself either ill dealt withal through my
rigor, or injured by some innocent fault of mine. If I have done amiss, I have
done it out of ignorance, and for doing it, I first humbly ask pardon of Gods
hands, then at your hands who are here present, and lastly from the meanest and
poorest of my Vassals. It has pleased the Gods, peradventure, because I knew
not how to deserve it, that I die void of succession, or an heir, to whom
leaving that love hereditary which I bear to you, I might assure my self that
for the future you were to be governed with those just ends wherewith I have
always governed you: But my faults have been too great to others, which have
withheld me from having deserved so greatly a desired felicity, and death would
be too welcome to me, if I could die with this content. Yield I beseech you
unto my will, and be therewithal well pleased; and if the Love and Justice
which I have ever indifferently born unto you all, have merited any retribution
from you, I beg a comfort of you able to make me happy before I breath my
last. Grant it unto your King, if you will not that he die, slain rather by
desperation then by sickness. Grant it I desire you, I beseech you, I conjure
you, if for nothing else, for the public prosperity which is to arise from
thence: I would have my Scepter to pass from me to Nissena: I know that as
being the last of my race, I may by the ancient Laws of this Kingdom justly
dispose of; but I will receive that as a gift from your consent, which I might
freely dispose of according to mine own will. Let her afterward choose a
husband, whom I wish may be such a companion to her, both in the Kingdom and in
her bed, as you by her private election may enjoy public tranquillity.
Howsoever, if it had pleased the Gods to bless me with longer life, she must
have been your Queen; she is already Crowned; The Fates have given you her for
your Queen, and the Gods, knowing that she deserves a Kingdom, and that a
Kingdom is but an adequat reward to her deserts. I vow unto you by that sincere
Faith which may be expected from a dying man, she is no less inwardly then
outwardly beautiful. Did I not know her to be so, I would not propound her as a
Head to those my dear Subjects, whose happiness I shall for ever love, even in
my grave. Let the performance of this my pleasure be your charge Mintaurus, who
are my chief President; for methinks I see a willing content in every ones
countenance that Nissena should be their Queen. Mintaurus rising from his seat,
kneeled down and said, If the heavens have ordained (which the Gods forbid)
that your Majesty forgo this life, the Queen shall see how highly her merits
shall be observed by me, and how obsequiously your Majesty's commands shall be
obeyed. They all one after another kneeled down before her, and humbly kissed
the hem of her garment, to which the much grieved Lady answered only in tears
which falling in abundance from her eyes, invited many of the standers by to do
the like. Do not bewail (said the dying King with an almost smiling eye) the
loss of a King, since you make so advantageous a change in so worthy a Queen.
I will carry with me the memory of your goodness my faithful Subjects, into
Elisium; Remember you your Thoas who dies. Here, his voice growing very weak,
he made signs that all should withdraw except Nissena; to whom with words
hardly brought forth for want of breath, he expressed his affections scarcely
understood. I die Nissena; whilst I lived, as soon as I had the happiness to
know you, I made you a free gift of my heart; in death, since I have nothing to
present you withal more worthy of you, I give you the Scepter of Cyprus;
after death, my Soul shall eternally love you. Remember Nis -- and not being
able to pronounce her whole name, he at once lost both his memory and his
voice, which he never recovered again. Help, help, cried the Queen aloud, help
my Lord the King, for he dies; and weeping downright; she fell in a swound upon
the beds side, which seemed a hears loaded with two dead corpse. Physicians and
servants came running in, and women being sent for, the swounding Lady was
carried to her Lodgings, whilst with diverse Balsoms, Cordials, and odoriferous
extractions they endeavored, but in vain, to recall the King to his senses. He
lay languishing all that night, til the break of day, and then breathed out
his soul.

Alas that neither Kings, nor yet Kingdoms are exempt from the darts of death,
and in death greatness and Dignities serve only to make death the more
grievous. Behold that Court which but awhile before abounded in Feasting and
Nuptial Jollities, now become a Theater of sorrow, plentiful only in dolorous
tears, and shall shortly be the Scene of Fatal and Tragical revolutions. The
Queen, when she was come to her self, wondered to find her self not near the bed
of her expiring husband, after whose condition she immediately enquired,
whether he was yet alive or no, or whether he had for ever abandoned her:
Answer was made that he was at rest, and that she should do well to mind her
self, for he wanted for no care nor possible assistance. Early the next morning
papers were found thrown about in diverse parts of the Palace, wherein was
published that the King was dead by slowly working poison; betrayed by some who
plotted yet more execrable assassinations to the universal ruin of the whole
Kingdom. This was whispered up and down the Court til at last it came to
Nissena's ears, who betaking her self to fresh sorrows, would have accompanied
her Husband in death. She past afterward from tears to so impetuous and blind
a desire of revenge, as she seemed out of her wits; threatening the Gallows, Ax,
Fire, ruin and destruction to whosoever had killed Thoas But there was not the
least sign, nor imagination to be had who this wicked one should be. Mintaurus
came in, who under pretense of obviating those scandalous accidents which
might be occasioned by the Queens ill regulated violence, changed and redoubled
the Guard, comforting her in an almost imperious and severe manner. Not long
after his son Melaspus came in to comply with her, and to offer her not only
what he owed unto her as a Subject, and servant, but promising with his sword
and the expense of his blood to do what in him lay, to bring her consolation by
way of revenge. These unusual complements, misbecoming his rough and bestial
nature were observed by Eurania, Nissena's Ant, but not by her, who quite lost
in the passions of grief and revenge, minded nothing but her own fury and
affliction. The Kings Funerals were by Mintaurus orders celebrated with no
extraordinary Pomp, upon whom by reason of his dignity the Government and
interest of the Kingdom depending, he indeavor'd by unusual kindnesses to win
into the good opinion of the great ones, and by liberalitys, never by him
before practiced, to to make the soldiery and the common people his friends: he
notwithstanding made many to be imprisoned, and amongst others one of the late
Kings secretarys, pretending that they were accomplices in the murder of one of
the chief Gentlemen of Nicosia, who was slain some days before. He acquainted
the Queen with all proceedings, whose grief not being yet over, committed all
affairs and expeditions to his charge. This was the only thing which he gaped
after; who desires to strengthen his own authority with the people, and to
weaken the Queens power, hasted apace toward the accomplishing of his vast and
proud designs. Melaspus ceased not to wait often upon Nissena, endeavoring by
his obsequiousness and service to work himself into her good opinion, as being
in love, I know not whether more with her, or with the Kingdom. This his new
way of proceeding was known by all men to be but craft which aimed at the
Crown, and made him more hateful in the eyes of many, then had his detestable
conditions done before. The Court was sufficiently aware to what end Mintaurus
actions tended, as also those of Melaspus, and both Eurania and Nissena
perceived it too, though too late; who finding her Guards to be changed, how
she was attended by none but Mintaurus his friends and kindred, and even
deprived of the company of her most entrusted waiting women, knew she had
almost totally lost her Princely power, or was rather of a Queen become a
servant; whilst every where, and in all things Mintaurus was more obeyed then
she. She desired that a Council of State might be called, but it was deferred
under pretense of his indisposition of health, and of the absence of many of
the chief Lords, who after the Kings death had vvithdravvn themselves not only
from the Court, but from the City. She desired to be informed of many
Occurrences of the Kingdom; more particularly of the War of Famagosta, and
what had succeeded since the Prince Doralbo's expedition: But she could learn
nothing but Ambiguities and falsehoods. In fine she found her self utterly lost,
not having any one left her with whom to advise, and make known her mind
save only Eurania, who amongst the rest of her vexing cares, she acquainted
with her amorous inclination which since the Kings death, did much increase
in her toward Doralbo. Melaspus this mean while, who by his Fathers
persuasions, did often visit Nissena, could no longer hold commerce with those
fair eyes, without becoming in reality her very fervent Lover; and forgetting
his Fathers sordid and avaritious ends, which aimed at the unjust possessing of
the Kingnom, he aspired to nothing else but the possession of Nissena's beauty.
It Is a folly to expose ones self to the flames, with a thought of not remaining
if not burnt, at least thoroughly warmed. Nissena was at all times exceeding
handsome, but being atired in Widovvs aparrel and vails, she appeared to outdo
her self.

It was no wonder therefore if Melaspus, who was wont formerly only to
follow after vvanton and lascivious love, suffered himself at this time to be
taken by that countenance, which though it breathed forth nothing but noble
flames, did notwithstanding ravish with a redoubled violence, he therefore
solicited his father to such resolutions as might give him Nissena in
possession: so as his sons entreaties joined to the conatural goads of Ambition
and Avarice, Mintaurus resolved himself to propound Melaspus to Nissena for
Husband. She blushing, but wisely keeping in the height of her disdain, took
time to give answer, so as the wary wicked fellow perceived she was not much
inclined to such a marriage; And though he feigned, yet inwardly enraged, he
said within himself, Thou shall either marry Melaspus, or have Death for thy
Bridegroom.

The Queen saw her self afterward worse treated then ever, and the ill usage
practiced hitherto by Mintaurus with hidden Art, began to degenerate into
evident neglects. She was no more acquainted, as formerly, with the affairs of
the Kingdom, nor for all that she could do, could she ever get the Council to
meet. She was attended as meanly as might be, only in what concerned,
necessity, not as became her greatness; the number of her Courtiers and
Servants in her waiting rooms being every day decreased, and the number of
Soldiers every day increased. Melaspus only, whose flames grew daily greater,
continued to serve her, though the little correspondency or gratitnde that he
met withal, might have made him see he was not at all respected. The Niece and
Aunt perplexed between these straits, resolved it not only needful for them,
but necessary to acquaint Doralbo by Letters, how barbarously they were treated
by Mintaurus after the Kings death: And this Nissena was the willinger induced
unto, now that she saw the way open unto her to make with honor her affection
known to that gallant Prince, whose love she now esteemed a greater fortune
then the Crown. 'I was hard for them to get the letter safely conveyed unto him;
but wary Eurania sent it by a very trusty Messenger. For what remained they
resolved to show themselves for the future more inclined to the proposition of
Nissena's marriage with Melaspus, whose affection should be fed and nourisht by
her with some seeming content: yet so cunningly, as a sudden change might not
cause suspicion. The sad couple were tossed between the billows of these
anxious thoughts, and Nissena oppressed with unwelcome Melancholy, was more
afflicted then usually, when a young man appeared before her of a noble enough
aspect, though not very richly attired, who having bowed reverently unto her,
spoke to her in this manner, The weight of affairs wherein your Majesty's life
and the possession of this kingdom are concerned, required that I should come
before your presence: and for that I was often denied entrance by the guard, I
who am a Merchants son of this City, have abused the Soldiers, making them
believe that I was sent for by you, with direction to bring you some
Looking-glasses, wherewith the better to color over the Fiction, I have
brought good store with me; and to that purpose, Madam, I will present you with
a Glass, wherein you shall see the wicked practices of others, and the imminent
dangers which hang over you. Be not, I beseech you, offended, that Fortune has
made choice of me your unworthy servant, and most humble subject, as an
instrument to withdraw you from those misfortunes to which you are so much the
more exposed, for that you do the less discern them; as long as my Relation
shall serve to your relief, you need not care who I am. About a month since I
was imprisoned by order from the President Mintaurus, only for being casually
in company in the night season with some such young men as my self; amongst
whom there arose some dispute about love-affairs: and was ready to be set at
liberty when by the unadvised Keeper, a Secretary of my lare Sovereign was
brought into the same prison where I was. He wondered to see me there, the
Jailer having received express command, as the Secretary told me, to put him
into some prison where no body was. The secretary inquiring the misfortune that
had brought me thither, I answered, 'Twas for a business of small concern, and
that I hoped that very day to be set at liberty. He rejoiced with me at my good
fortune, adding, I would it might please the Gods, that according to my
innocence I might likewise be set free; but I fear I shall by the loss of my
life pay for the punishment which is due to the wickedness of other men. I
think it notwithstanding a great good fortune to have met you here, my friend,
for you are to be a means of freeing the fairest and most deserving Queen of
the world from those dangers she is likely to undergo. Know that Mintaurus,
the wickedest of as many men as live, grown insolent by that good fortune which
to boot with making him rich, and having brought him into favor with the King,
has raised him to the degree of chief President, seeing the King without
issue, is become ambitious of the Crown, and endeavors to open a way to his
enjoying it by the most cruel and unjust means that ever was devised by any
Fiend in Hell. When Thoas was resolved to marry Nissena, he saw the groundwork
of his barbarous pretensions began to shake, and therefore caused slow working
poison to be mingled in the Kings meat, which by a lingering sickness has
brought him to his grave. 'Twas he who by a blind letter endeavored to make
Nissena run away, or at least to raise jealousies in her, and make some
misunderstandings between her and the King, fearing lest when Thoas should die,
he might leave the Scepter hereditary to her. He was the wicked one, who
sending false Orders for grievous contributions to the Common wealth of
Famagosta, and using other wicked Art, made them take up arms against the King,
to the end that all the Soldiers being drawn out of Nicosia, his machinations
might be the easilier compassed. He is that wicked one who to complete all his
unjust Acts, will have Nissena to marry his son Melaspus, or else will poison
her, or put her to some more cruel death. And when he shall have made himself
Master of the Kingdom, I am sure the people will be made to weep tears of
blood, they shall be oppressed, not governed; tyrannized over, not ruled: He
finally, lest I might in time smell out his Treacheries, has commanded that I
should be buried in this prison, and would have ere this have put me to death,
had he known that I was aware of his misdeeds. What is to become of me, and of
a many more that are imprisoned with me, is best known to those stars which
sometimes power down greater showers of Misfortune upon the innocent then on
the guilty. When you shall be set at liberty, delay not I beseech you, to
discover all his frauds unto the Queen, desiring her either to fly from the
Tyrants hands, or to incite the people to revenge, and to work his ruin, and
tell her from me that though Mintaurus his friends appear numerous and potent,
he is notwithstanding hated by all the people, and to all such of the Nobility
as are not allied to him. The Soldiers are grown to side with him, by reason
of his profuse liberality toward them; but they are but a few, the Garrisons
being much weakened; and the very Guards of the Galleys and of the Court, by
reason of the expedition against Famagosta.

This is all I can serve her in; as for wisdom and counsel, she is of
herself so well provided, as I hope (and may the Gods make my hopes prove
true) to see her freed from so many imminent dangers, and triumph over the
ruins of her enemy. He was about to have told me how he came to know these
Mintaurus his wickednesses, and had already begun to say somewhat of his
love-affairs, when the Keeper came to invite me to my desired liberty. I came
forth, thinking those benign influences which had whilst I was in prison,
afforded me the most happy occasion of serving your Majesty. And then bowing
low before her feet, he added; Yet I cannot but bewail that fortune which
imbitters all my content, by making me the bringer of such fatal news of
imminent dangers. The young man ceased speaking, and Nissena, who not knowing
what to think, had this mean while changed her countenance 100 times, fetching
a deep sigh, answered thus, I cannot for the present, young man, pay you with
any thing but thanks for what you have told me: If it be the pleasure of the
Gods that I escape these dangers which unjust Mintaurus has plotted against
me, I will be mindful of you, and of the trouble you have undergone to serve
me. I could wish you would let me see you sometimes, lest I may merit the title
of Ungrateful; if I shall fall under his treacheries, do you comiserate my
misfortunes who know my innocence, and be, if not a public yet a private
testimony of his wickedness, whilst I assure you, that in serving me, you have
not sown in the sand; and let this suffice, that if I live I will testify my
acknowledgement otherwise then in words. He took his leave, and she was so
lively impressed with what she had heard, as she was not wanting to herself in
providing for her imminent dangers.

Doralbo had this mean while received the Letter from his beloved Nissena, and
was thereby made at once both happy, and much afflicted. Happy, for that the
sole characters of that fair hand, were able to have recalled him to life
again, had he bin already dead: Afflicted to hear of those wicked demeanors
which the base President had used toward her, whom he reverenced as worthy of
Incense. He was glad that she was succeeded to the Kingdom by Inheritance, and
that being assumed to so high a degree, she would deigne to confide in him, and
give him some little inckling of her correspondencie in affection: but he was
grieved that he was not present to hazard his life in her defense and for her
service. He would have presently been gone, nay he would have flown toward
Nicosia; but he could not do so, because the next day he was to fight the Enemy
in a pitched Field, whereupon the Victory of that War depended, and wherein the
interest and glory of his Queen did consist. Amidst the variety of these
thoughts, he resolved first to try the fortune of the day: and finding his
heart invigored by the graces of his beloved, he thought himself already
Conqueror, and joyd that he should shortly enjoy the triumphs of his Victory
under the gracious arches of those eyes which he adored. That night appeared an
age to him, he got two hours before day out of bed; and by his command the
Trumpets were soon heard in all his quarters, awakening those who were yet
asleep, and inviting them to prepare for the battle. Armed all in black, he
curbed in a horse which under a mantle of snow covered a fiery soul, hasting
sometimes to one place, sometimes to another, to encourage his Soldiers, to
give out Orders to the Commanders, to excite the backward, to suppress the
insolent, and to dispose of all things which might make his Victory the more
easy, in an open plain and spacious field, save only that on the left hand
there stood a little hill; he ordered his Army, giving the right wing to
Filarbo, and the left to Theocastro, he himself kept in the midst at the head
of a choice Troop of commanded horsemen, he foreran all others no less in
valor and courage then with his steed, when he understood by some Scouts who
he had sent before to watch the Enemies proceedings, that the Enemy was come
within a mile and a half, and already the noise of their Trumpets might be
heard, the sound of Drums, the neighing of Warlick horses, and a thick cloud of
dust might be perceived to be raised in the air. In the Famagostan Army, the
unexperience of the Country Soldiers, which were not very many, was supplied
by the practice and valor of many Volunteers who were come thither in great
numbers from the adjacent shores and neighboring Islands, called in by the
renowned name of Agenor of Soria, on whom the place of Generalissimo was by the
Senate conferred at a very profuse charge: He had disposed of his squadrons
according to the Persian manner, in whose Wars he had a long time been trained
up, fighting generously sometimes in the condition of a private Soldier,
sometimes of a powerful Commander. 1500 bow-men on horseback marched before the
body of the Army, and he himself followed immediately after upon a horse whose
bards and crupper were made of Panther skins, lined with purple and interwoven
with gold; he had upon him a Jacket of azure satin, trimmed with long buttons of
great pearl, and his head was odly wound about with Skarfs variously colored,
bestuck with feathers of great esteem and price; he was provided with no other
arms but only a Scimiter hanging at his left side, and a battle ax at his
saddle bow: As Soon as the Armies were come within bow-shot, the Archers like
lightning let fly all their arrows, and dividing themselves instantly into two
wings, they retreated orderly, leaving the rest of their Army open to the
Enemies eye; few that were then wounded did immediately die, but not any one
were his hurt never so small, outlived the space of three days, the heads of
their arrows being all dipped in deadly poison. Doralbo and Agenor were the first
who advanced one toward another, but imitated, and followed by great numbers
of Cavalrie, they could not come to fight hand to hand, being hindered by other
combatants who with like generosity and fortune on both sides, sometimes
charged on, sometimes retreated, sometime drove back their Enemies, who
rallying again, returned to face and fight the adverse party. Many fell down
wounded on both sides, trodden under foot, dying, and buried before they were
dead, by the confused number of horses born to the ground, of broken weapons,
and a multitude of dead bodies: Agenors horse was slain under him, and had he
been less valiant, he had in this very first encounter either bin slain or
taken prisoner by the Nicosians: but he slew so many with his Scimeter, and
threw so many to the ground, as being in time succored by his men, he escaped
the evident danger of losing either his life or liberty. Doralbo received a
slight wound in one of his arms, and doubting least his Soldiers might be
discouraged by seeing him bleed, he cried out aloud; Courage my beloved, for
the Victory leans already to our side, and though I have often endeavored
either to overcome or to die, I have hitherto met with no other harm, save only
so slight a wound, as has hardly drawn three drops of blood from me: Whilst he
was speaking thus, he was advertised by a thundering salute of musket shot,
that Filarbo had given battle on the left side, and that he had had bad fortune
at the very first; for the ranks of his pikemen who defended the musketeers,
being broken by the Enemies lances, he might see them all routed, and little
better then running away. He making a speedy half turn endeavored with many
other horsemen to make resistance, but was necessitated to face about against
some other horse which charged him on the flank, which had he not done, they
were likely not only to have disordered, but to have routed the whole Army; not
at all discouraged herewith, he dispatched away a Serjant Major upon a very
fleet horse, to advertise Theocastro that with what force and fury he possibly
could, he should without delay charge the Enemies forces on his side, if he
would not have the day lost: He obeyed so luckily, as bearing down the first
files at his fierce assault, who were all Country Soldiers, they began by
little and little to retreat, and by and by to run downright away; in so much
that Theocastro with many of his men charged so home as he took the chief
Standard, and meeting with none to withstand him, he came in to the succor of
his brother Filarbo, who afterward valliantly fighting together with him, beat
back the Enemy, many of which ran disorderly away along the neighboring fields.
Doralbo and Agenor had this mean while made interchangeably very great
slaughter, and bravely imitated by their followers they continued fighting, the
Victory not appearing to lean to either side; but upon the arrival of Filarbo
and Theocastro, Agenors horse were forced to save themselves by an orderly and
slow retreat, which could not justly be called running: at last, after having
long endeavored it, the Generals met face to face; and Agenor abandoned by
almost all his men, had at last perished by the number of his assailants, had
not Doralbo defending him with his own hands, cried out, that it belonged to
him alone to grapple with that fierce man. Thou shall not so easily overcome me
said Agenor with the sword as with courtesy; having said so, he made on with
his Scimiter in both hands toward Doralbo, who dexterously evaded that blow
which would have cleft a mountain of Iron: at the same time he let fly a
stockado at the Enemies throat, and wounded him sorely, though not mortally, so
as losing abundance of blood, he had almost fallen down half dead amongst his
own men, but he did not this before he had given Doralbo a large but not a deep
wound in the same left arm whereon he was hurt before. This was the end of this
days action, Agenor being carried to his Tents, and the Prince upon a very
fleet horse to his Quarters.

The Armies being mustered, about 2000 horse and 3600 foot were found wanting
on the Crowns side; and on the Commonwealths side little less then 4000 horse,
and only 2700 foot: So as those who defended the Kingdom, had but small cause
to boast of a Victory purchased with so much blood.

Doralbo's wound being tented and dressed was found to be but slight, and no ways
dangerous: so as he who longed very much to be where his heart already was,
after having given order and express command in what was requisite for the
burial of the dead, for the cure of those that were wounded, and for all other
occurrences which belonged to the Interest of War, which he affectionately
recommended to Filarbo and Theocastro's care, he speedily took his way toward
Nicosia, awaited on only by two Gentlemen, and one page. It Is hard to imagine,
much harder to say how many troubled thoughts he was agitated with in this his
Journey: he found his heart beat within him for joy to think he should so soon
be made happy in the so often wished for sight of his Nissena, from whom he
hoped hereafter for correspondencie in love, if not more ardent, at least more
free and lavvfull; she not being now bound unto any other affections, save to
the grateful matrimonial memory of her dead husband; he hoped and feared:
hope and fear being inseparable from a soul in love. He hoped to make himself
worthy of his beloveds favor by doing some great actions aiming at her
service and relief. But he feared lest she being raised to the Regal Throne,
might despise him, who though born a Prince, had no considerable fortune, save
what he might be made partaker of by her, from whom he could not be induced to
hope for, or to pretend unto any thing more then some little gratitude, in not
being contemned or abhorred. He thought he had already put a period to Mintaurus
his pride, that he had trod him under foot, cut his throat, and offered him as
a victime in sacrifice to his adored Idol. Spur on thy Horse in Gods name,
poor Doralbo, thou shall shortly see to what fatal Spectacles, and sad
misfortunes thy miserable destiny has reserved thee. And thou unhappy one, not
foreseeing thy adverse destiny, hastest to see and hear things and objects
which will make thee suffer a thousand deaths. He was scarcely come within
sight of the City, when he might perceive how much Nicosia was altered for
what concerned him, from what it was when he left it. He was questioned whilst
yet a good way off, by two Sentinels who were armed, and walked carefully upon
a Bulwark, who he was: and not allowing him leisure to reply, they in an
imperious manner added; That he must either presently stay, or else give in his
name, and lay down his Arms at the entrance into the Gate: to the which whilst
he drew near, he was withstood by a number of Soldiers who kept the Guard. And
what, said he in angry manner, is my countenance so much altered? How now you
Rascals; do you not know me? Then clapping spurs to his Horse, he would
force his entry. One of them more rash then the rest, laying hold upon his
Horses bridle, said, Stay Sir, for we are Mintaurus his Soldiers, and have no
respect for you. At which he replied aloud, Did I not disdain to defile my
sword in so base blood, I would teach thee to discourse thus with a Prince.
What is Mintaurus? And since when commands he over such as I am in Nicosia? He
would have said more, but the Captain of the Troop coming in, interposed
himself in such like words: Sir, these may be excused, enter in Gods Name, I
in the mean while will acquaint him whom I ought to do so, with your Highness
arrival. He entered all swollen with anger; nor had he advanced far, when he
might discern such a hushness and melancholy in all the people, as recalling
into his mind Thoas his death, presented nothing but confusion to him, and what
mischief might overhang him and Nissena; insomuch as he found his heart struck
through by an unexpected deep melancholy. Troubled with these thoughts, he came
to the Court Gates, which were likewise guarded by a body of men unknown to him.
He advanced, being not so much respected as before: but he did not much mind
it, his heart leaping within him to think he was so near seeing and discoursing
with his dearly beloved. Being got up the stairs, he went toward the Queens
Lodgings, and entering into the ante-rooms, he found them void and abandoned by
the wonted Guard, and the accustomed frequencie of Courtiers, Cavaliers and
Noble men: being entered a little further in, he might hear a whispering noise
as of some that were talking. Laying his hand upon the door (Oh! go no further
Doralbo, for thou go not knowing it, to meet with worse then death) and
opeing it, he found none but two much afflicted Women, who stood talking with a
page of a misfortune which was befaln. Where is the Quen, said he? has she
changed her lodgings? One of them bursting forth into downright weeping,
answered; Alas Sir, our Queen may well be said to have changed her lodgings,
since she is gone to heaven to enjoy the reward of her innocence, being now
free from the power of the wicked Tyrant. At this sad and unexpected news the
inamored Prince felt a chilness run over his whole body, as is usual in a cold
fit of an ague, and a certain vapor rise from his heart unto his head, which
took his sight from him, and made him for awhile stupid, immovable, and
senceless: He afterward brake forth into a loud cry, and said; Is it true that
Nissena is dead? has the barbarous rascal murderd her? or who is that
barbarous rascal? where is he? tell me where, and how, and when, and who it
was that killed her? The sorrowful woman, mingling sobs and tears with her
words, answered; Two Soldiers commanded so to do by wicked Mintaurus, ripped her
soul from out her bosom with their daggers; the next chamber and her own bed
was the tragical scene of so unjust an act. Oh my heart! how deadly was the
wound; savedg beasts and vipers, not men: but I, I will take revenge, said the
Prince, if I can so long outlive my life's death as to have time to do it; O
that I could as soon by my death recall her to life. Lamenting thus, he turned
his face to the door of the next chamber, and saw the bed and carpets which
were spread about it upon the ground, and the room it self all stained,
besmeared and sprinkled with blood. Oh said he, this is my hearts blood
unworthily drawn from that spotless and innocent body. Did I come hither, O
Nissena, to serve thee, to place thee in thy Throne, to reverence thee, and do
I find nothing of thee but bloody signs? yes, yes, 'twas thus thou meanedst
to point me out the way, that to imitate and follow thee I must die. Be sure my
soul I will follow thee, but I will first revenge thee: I will first have these
stains washed away with that Traitor Mintaurus his heart-bloud: But good gods!
what have these infernal monsters done with my Queens body? perhaps her wounds
were not mortal. Why then wretch that I am, came not I time enough at least to
wash them with my tears, to bind them up with my lips, and then die? 'twill be
time enough though to die when I shall have ripped his heart from out his bosom,
who has slain thee my fair and adored soul. Thus born away by blind fury, he
went in haste from those lodgings, and being resolved either to revenge the
death of his beloved, or else to perish in the enterprise: he went thither
where he thought to have found Mintaurus; but meeting with Melaspus at the
stair head, followed by a great many of the Nobility and Soldiers, he
presently laid his hand upon his sword, crying out, Traitor, the wicked Son of
a greater Traitor, and more wicked Father, thou shall the mean while pay for
what shall afterward be divided between so infamous a Son and cruel a Father.
His voice was thunder, his sword fire, and his arm lightning, wherewith he let
fly at Melaspus his breast; and the wound he gave him being the glory of one
only blow, neither could Melaspus, nor as many as were about him with their
Swords all drawn, save him from it; save only that falling a little side-long,
the wound lighted amongst his ribs, which was intended at his heart; stepping a
little backward, rash and desperate Doralbo would have redoubled his thrust;
but Melaspus having already drawn his sword, and all his followers interposing
themselves, or else opposing the Prince, he could neither hurt any more, nor
yet come near his abhorred enemy. A noise and tumult of weapons and voices was
suddenly heard throughout the whole Palace. Whereupon Mintaurus himself coming
in, charged that the Rebel and Traitor who had traitorously endeavored to kill
his son even within the Court, should be taken and bound, but neither struck
nor wounded. The valiant Prince laid about him like Mars, in defense of his
liberty, and wounded four or five of them; but at last overcome by the numerous
press of rude Soldiers, and his weapons taken from him, he was led, or rather
carried to a moist, narrow, dark Dungeon. Mintaurus not knowing that it was
desperation which had made Doralbo attempt to kill his son, could not imagine
why alone, and armed only with his Sword, he had exposed himself to the so
evident danger of bootlesly losing his life. He thought this was the beginning
of some mine laid for his ruin; and fearing lest he might be ensnared, he
became a watchful Argus to guard that Kingdom, the Crown whereof he intended
for his own head. That he might become formidable to such of the Nobility as
did not adhere unto him, he the next day made the heads of the Baron Timis, and
of the Count Pentaia be struck off in the midst of the marketplace, pretending
that they had backed Doralbo in his attempt against Melaspus. He gave great
sums of money to all the Militia, and changed their Commanders. And that he
might win the peoples love, by whom he saw himself to be but smally esteemed,
and almost hated, he gave order for plenty of victuals, and at his own charges
bated half their prices. He sent for some from their Governments, changing the
Presidents and chief Officers of the Cities and other places: being reverently
and punctually obeyed by all, out of the customary use he had even in Thoas
life, freely and with authority to do so, as President General. His pleasure
was that Melaspus should with due circumspection live in the Kings Palace, and
he himself retired into the Castle, as into a place of the greatest safety, the
possession whereof was of great importance to the preservation of government:
Two things only remained to settle him in the Kingdom as he thought; the one
to disband the Army which was already sent by the late King against the
Commonwealth of Famagosta, or to make himself independent Governor thereof: The
other to secure himself for ever of Doralbo, who was esteemed by the Nobility
of great power in the Army, and much beloved by the people. The first required
well weighed determinations and preponderated execution: The second was to be
establisted in the death of the unfortunate Prince. So sending for the chief
Marshal, he with a frowning countenance strictly commanded him, that taking the
Headsman a long with him, and as few bloud-suckers as he judged necessary for
the execution, not making any the least mention thereof, no not so much as in a
word, he should go that very night about midnight to the Dungeon where Doralbo
was, and that having strangled him, he should cause his head to be cut off, and
bring it secretly into the Castle to him. O how often does the impiety of wicked
men, whilst it thinks to triumph over the fall of the innocent, rest oppressed
by those very ruins which they unjustly threatened others withal.

Nissena having acquainted Eurania with all the traps and treacheries which she
had understood was laid and prepared for them by Mintaurus, she being a Woman
of a great courage, and resolute wit, betook her self quickly to remedy those
evils which threatened not only the loss of the Kingdom, but even the loss
of their lives. Next morning about break of day, whilst two women who lay in
the Queens lodgings were yet asleep, she clothed her self and made Nissena also
cloth her self in Pages apparel; and afterward having horridly besmeared the
Queens sheets, and the chamber floor with blood, which she had formerly
prepared ready, she began to cry out, Ah Traitors! Are Queens thus butchered
and murdered in their own Houses and own Beds? Help, help, Soldiers, Ladies,
unless you be all confederates in the treason. O Traitors! Help, O you good
Gods!

At this noise the Guards hasted into the Chamber, and the women leaping out of
bed, throwing their clothes about them, and almost naked, did the like; whilst
at this very instant Nissena and Eurania hid themselves behind the Arras in the
outward room; and in this confused tumult, escaped away unknown and unseen, not
only out of that Chamber, but out of the Court; and being got out of the City,
went toward the Haven. The Soldiers and women half clad, finding nothing but
great quantity of blood, panting and full of tears, sought every corner of the
lodgings; and struck with amazement, they could not imagine from whence those
doleful cries could proceed, nor whither the murderers were fled, and the
murdered vanished. They spent much time in searching, in contemplating the
bloody sheets and Pavement, and not knowing what to think, nor what to resolve
on: some of them ran to acquaint Mintaurus with it; who, wakened out of a sound
sleep, was confused for a long while, and knew not what to think. Having
discust the matter maturely with himself, he gave out Orders, and sent
Messengers into all parts to make diligent inquiry what kind of people had gone
out of Nicosia early that morning, and could hear of none but of two young
youths who were imagined to be two of the Court Pages, who upon the break of
day were gone on foot toward the Sea side. Having heard this, he made the
guards of the Haven be examined whether any Vessel had weighed anchor that
morning or no, and which way they were bent. He was informed for certain, that
two young youths had at an exorbitant price, hired a Pinace, upon agreement
that without any intermission of time they should be speedily wafted over to
Rhodes. Mintaurus guest at what was true, and would not suffer them to be
pursued, being glad that Nissena by her going from Cyprus, had taken from him
that only impediment which could keep him from freely enjoying the Crown,
unless he should have used some violent courses. The crafty wicked man did
notwithstanding dissemble the business, and seeming to believe that the Queen
was dead, did not only profess and exagerate his innocence, but bewailed her
death, and showed himself ready to revenge it with severity, if he could at
any time know who the offender was, or who were his accomplices, which he with
all diligence sought after in all places. And the better to color over these
his Fictions, the Soldiers who were that night of the Queens Guard, and the two
Waiting-women who lay in her rooms, were by his command imprisoned, and
strictly examined. He very well knew how much it made for the effecting of his
desires, that the people should believe Nissena to be dead, since that he being
known to be free from the fact; as indeed he was, he might with ease purchase
the peoples good will, who are apt to alter their inclinations, and that so
much the more in a case wherein they must either adhere to him, or appear to be
partial to her who was supposed dead. One thought perplexed him, that she being
arrived in Rhodes, might peradventure obtain sufficient aid from Prince
Fermondo to wage war with him, and endeavor to recover the Kingdom: And
though he did not fear his Forces, as far inferior to those of Cyprus, he did
partly fear the wrath of Heaven, which his inward sting of Conscience did
continually threaten him withal.

Nissena and Eurania met with no sinister adventure, neither in their going
from Nicosia, nor when they were gone thence, save only that their journey to
the Sea side being somewhat long, they were so weary, as they were necessitated
to get a Country Fellow to be their Guide, who furnished them with an ill
guided horse, upon the which they rid by course, now one then the other, till
they came to the desired Haven, paying bountifully for their Horse hire; they
hired a Rhodian pinace, conditioning that they should presently put their Oars
into the water, and hoist up their Sails, the vvind being Westwardly, and good
for their intended Navigation. They were forthwith obeyed, giving themselves
out to be the Queens Pages, who for some very important business were to go
for Rhodes. The Sun began already to incline toward the West, and they saw not
as yet any vessel or ship which was parted from the Cyprian shore to pursue
them, when thinking themselves either not minded by the Tyrant, or their
flight not by him discovered, believed they were free from any pursuit of his.
Eurania then calling the Pilot of the Pinace to her, made herself freely known
unto him, telling him that Nissena was the Marquess of Falerno's daughter, and
now by hereditary succession Queen of Cyprus: He prostrated himself before
their feet, resting assured by their aspects, and by their manner of Discourse,
that they had told the truth, and excusing himself for that he had not before
used himself with such obsequiousness toward them as he ought, he said; He
thought it fit (if it might stand with their liking) that they should acquaint
him why they went to Rhodes under those feigned habits, that he might be the
better able to serve them with all fitting respect. Our voyage (said Eurania)
must not be for Rhodes, you must tack about toward the North, and carry us to
the Army, which is encamped near Siuri and Pigadia; for when we shall be come
thither, we hope that Prince Doralbo will by force of Arms place Nissena
again upon the Regal Throne, which she has abandoned for fear of being slain
by cruel Mintaurus. He acknowledged himself much obliged to Fortune, which had
blessed him with so happy an occasion of serving them, and assured them that
unless the winds should betray him, he would bring them before midday to land
in a little Haven very near the Army, all the parts of the Island being very
well known to him.

Doralbo's unexpected and hasty leaving of the Army, made Theocastro and
Filarbo begin to imagine what the urgent occasion might be which had made him
leave them without any respect had so much as to his own health, though
grievously wounded; and not so much as waiting for the next day: They thought
it fit to follow him, persuaded that he had done it out of some interest
wherein the Crown was concerned; so as knowing by report that Nissena was to
succeed in the Kingdom, and desirous to serve their Cosen in what they were
able, they resolved, that one of them staying to take care of the Army, the
other should follow the Prince. Theocastro then departed within a few hours
after Doralbo was gone, and his brother Filarbo undertook to provide for all
things diligently which should be requisite for the Army till his return. The
next night following save one, he might see two whom at first sight he took to
be young youths, enter the Pavillion; but soon finding one of them to be
Eurania, the other Nissena, clothed in man's aparrell, he said unto them, What
is the good or bad Fortune, Ladies, that has brought you hither in these
habits? They drawing him aside, and making all but his Servants and Friends
leave them, they acquainted him with all the troubles which had happened since
the Kings death: and that finally they might escape the danger of losing their
lives, were enforced to fly from Mintaurus his treacheries, and to come thither
to be advised by, and to receive timely help from Doralbo, who being a man of
great authority, and having chief command of the Army, was he alone who was
able to re-establish Nissena, as lawful Queen in the government of the Kingdom,
knowing very well that they might securely build upon him.

Filarbo was sorry that they came so late, whilst the Prince followed by
Theocastro was in unlooked for haste gone toward Nicosia; but he said they
were not notwithstanding to despair of their pretended succor, he being ready
with all the Army over which he commanded with a derivatory power, to be by
them employed as they should be pleased. 'Twas resolved that in the interim
they should be kept concealed from the knowledge of the Army, till they had
resolved what to do: putting on their womanly apparel, Doralbo's Tent was
privately appointed for them, wherein they were to stay attended but by some few
till they should have put on some resolution. When Nissena consulting only with
her own thoughts, began to consider how unfortunately she had in vain come from
Nicosia to the Camp to find out her beloved Doralbo, who amongst her so many
misfortunes was her greatest care. She suffered her self to be so carried away
with a violent love passion, as she could neither eat nor sleep, but fed her
breast and eyes only with sighs and tears. The Prince his absence whose merit
was already engraven in her heart, was not the only thing which made her
lament; she found her self struck through with those accidents, which by
securing her of the fervency of his love, should have rather comforted then
afflicted her.

O how readily (said she within her self) has my Doralbo obeyed my very beck,
that scarcely come from the battle, and wounded too, he has with winged feet
flown to receive my commands. Unhappy me! Let it not please the Gods that he be
come to Nicosia at a time when he may believe my feigned death to be true: but
say it be so: if it shall have so fallen out, I shall at least know with what
resentments of sorrow and compassion he shall have wedded my funerals. I shall
from hence prove his affection; alas, I know well enough without any testimony,
that he loves me as much as a man may love, and I am bound to correspond in
love, with him, and so I do; since whether my fortune be to live a private
woman, or to be re-invested in the Throne of Cyprus, my heart shall never be
capable of any amorous affection save for Doralbo. Do thou prove true to me as
I shall do to thee. How much more would she have lamented, if she had known he
was in prison, condemned to death, and perhaps his head struck off. These were
her mental discourses when she was alone, but when she discoursed either with
Eurania or Filarbo, she talked of nothing else but how she might repossess her
self of the Crown, and if sometimes she endeavored to hear tidings of Doralbo,
it was under pretense that his presence would have helped much to the
compassing of her designs. Eurania, as crafty as a Lady of honest and untoucht
reputation could be, very well understood her Nieces inward passions, and
having pity of her, durst not take any the least notice thereof, fearful lest
she should be offended that others should discern and penitrate into those
affections, which she desired to keep conceald as much as possibly she could.

Many days being spent in vain in expectation of Doralbo's and Theocastro's
return, or of some news from them, and no news being heard, after many
consultations had and argued too and fro, by Nissena, Eugenia, and Filarbo,
they all of them resolved to send Ambassadors to the Senate of Famagosta, to
desire that they would be pleased to give audience to a certain personage who
with two only Companions demanded leave to be admitted into their presence to
treat of peace: and in the mean time they would expect Doralbo's return which
could not be long: This was done; and those grave Senators did both rejoice and
wonder to hear peace propounded by a victorious Enemy, from whom they had
learned at the expense of blood, to fear force, and this they did the rather
for that they could expect but little help from Soria, wherein was raised a
terrible fire of rebellion. Some of them cautiously doubted that some Warlick
stratagem might lie hid under a specious pretense of peace, so as they were
long in consulting how the propounded personages might be brought into the
Senate; at last their answer was; that they would willingly give them a hearing;
on condition notwithstanding that they should enter the City unarmed, and with
their eyes blindfoulded. according to custom.

All this while there was no news of Doralbo's return, whereat Nissena was so
much afflicted, as he must have had a Tigers heart who would not have pitied
her if she had as openly demonstrated her passions, as she kept them concealed.
The day was come, nay the very hour wherein the Commissioners from the Camp
were to be brought to the Senate of Famagosta, and presently it was noised
throughout the whole Army, that Nissena by right of succession Queen of Cyprus
was she who accompanied by Eurania and Filarbo, would by her going into the
Enemies City put an end to the War, and conclude a well settled peace. She
past through the midst of the Army all covered over with a sad black mantle,
but her fair countenance, her white bosom, and her lively eyes shevved a
Majesty so sweetly severe as she made her self at once be both feared and
adored: She past through the Army reverenced and adored as a Goddess: For
wheresoever Mars governs, Venus finds alvvaies obsequious and devout hearts.
The Commissioners were vvaited for by two chief Officers of the Senate at that
gate of the Town which led toward the Camp: where Nissena being come, alighted
out of the Coach, and led underneath the arms by Eurania and Filarbo, the
Officers of Famagosta stood amazed no less at her beauty then at the unusual
novelty of the Ambassy, when they bound her eyes they in a low voice within
themselves complained that they were to rob the people of the pleasing object
of those eyes, which were unworthy to be covered, had it not been pretended
that like sacred things, they were to be hidden underneath a vail. Thus said
these two gray heads, at once both admiring and making themselves merry with
Nissena's more then human beauty: But they stood musing not without suspicion
of some future evil to what end this unusual Treaty of Women might be. Being
admired by the people, she came into the Senate, nor needed this fairest
Oratrice to win their attentions by any artificial Rhetoric, since all the
Senators with their eyes fixed upon her, stood expecting what graceful and
eloquent speech was to proceed from that mouth, which was so rich in treasures.
Some of them, whose hearts were not frozen, though snow lay on their hair, said
with fitting vivacity; How is it possible that she should treat of peace,
whilst at the very first aspect her countenance intimates War? Having made her
requisite reverence, and being sat on a chair which was prepared for her, whilst
Eurania and Filarbo stood retired behind, she spoke thus.

That fire of War, which with barbarous flames has hitherto unduly imbroyl'd
and consumed the felicity of peace even to ashes, which has wasted the fruit
of the fields, exhausted the treasure of Exchequers, and been the death of
those Subjects who have as gloriously as unopportunely shed their blood and
lost their lives, is quenched: The fire of War, I say, most grave and wise
Senators, is quenched: nor do I come hither to invite you to lay down arms, or
to treat of peace, but to pronounce peace already established and concluded
between your Commonwealth, and our Kingdom of Cyprus. Wonder not that I speak
of peace already concluded and established: I very well know that in a Senate
whose wisdom has always been equal to their unwrested and immaculate Justice,
Justice must also equal their impeccable and always constant wisdom. I speak of
that Justice, by which upon so many occurrences, and affairs as well of Peace
as War, you have delated the fame of your glory, not only throughout the whole
circuit of this Island, but also throughout the whole World, which seems now
too narrow a circuit to contain the noise thereof. I speak of that Wisdom, the
least glories whereof are, the preserving of your Liberties unviolated, though
subject to a regal Scepter, and in this Liberty, the so bounding the
provocations of ambition and authority, as all of you being equal Lords and
Commanders, every one strives who shall most willingly submit to another
Government, knowing at once both how to obey and command. By this Justice, and
this Wisdom, I see peace already granted to my proposals, though these virtues
never appeared more eminently amongst you, then in your so generously taken up
Arms of late against this Crown. I say the occasions of raising this War have
been in you no less just, then was your Wisdom. How could you most grave
Fathers, more wisely or more justly show your resentment of a Kings
proceedings, who requiring a Contribution from you impossible for you to
disburse, would enforce you to be disobedient, that he might pretend to a
lavvfull occasion of taking from you your Senatorie Authority, and by
destroying a Commonwealth, which has for so many ages enjoyed an
Aristocraticall Government? Alas! your Justice and your Wisdom could not be
more worthily employed; but neither could your Justice nor your Wisdom be more
unjustly betrayed by an infamous and wicked Minister of State, who falsifying
the Kings Seals, and abusing the authority wherewith he was undeservingly
entrusted, made false reports be spread abroad amongst you, not only by
counterfeit Orders in public Senate, but amongst private men by lying letters,
that the intentions of that best and gracious King aimed at framing pretenses
to raise a war, whereby he might pretend to bereave you not only of the
Name, Privileges, and authority, but even of the essence of a Commonwealth.

This was the Traitor Mintaurus, who raised up to wealth by Fortune, to the
favor of his natural Lord and Master, and to dignities, seeing the King left
without succession, grew so greedily in love with the Scepter, as to arrive at
the managing thereof, he has endeavored and committed the most execrable
villainies which could be wrought, I will not say by Man, but by any Infernal
Fury. He was the wicked poysoner, who not to see his conceived hopes of
reigning thrown to the ground by Thoas his marriage, did by mortiferous poison
cause Death be mingled with his meat; whence in stead of passing to the joys
of a Nuptial Bed, he is fatally and unfortunately past to the horrors of the
grave. This was the sacrilegious cousener, who to disturb the tranquillity of
that marriage which might hinder his arrival at the Goal of his complotted
ends, made her who was destined to be the Kings wife, believe by false
advertisements, that he would make her partner of his bed, not as his lawful
wife, but as his dishonest whore. He is that cruel Paricide, who after having
wickedly and ungratefully bereft him of life from whom he ought to acknowledge
whatsoever he has of greatness, glory, or riches; has not only hindered that
Nissena from peacefully succeeding to the Inheritance, who was by Thoas at his
last expiring breath, with all cordiality left heir to the Kingdom, but has
usurped her authority, laid snares for her life, taken from her her liberty;
and finally, stolen the Crown from her. He is the unworthy Tyrant who now
unjustly sits upon the Regal Throne of Cyprus, having raised himself
thereunto by cruelty, treachery, murder, injustice, and by the downfall of
others. Let that same justice and wisdom then, grave Senators, which moved you
to take up Arms against a King who was always partial to your interests, excite
you to peace with your lawful Queen, and to revenge against that infamous
subverter of the common quiet. This does very well become your justice and
wisdom too heinously offended and abused. You ow this in charity to her
innocence, who by me implores help and succor from you. From you it is that
she may have the Fortune to acknowledge her Kingdom, Liberty and Life, if by
joining our Forces together we shall go to throw down that unworthy one from
the Throne, who has known how to make you appear unwise and unjust, who has
known how to steal a Scepter, and who will know how to tyrannize over his
subjects, and make impiety triumph every where. From you the people shall
acknowledge their happiness, the Queen her Scepter, and the Gods themselves
respects and victims. Let it not be said that Lances be leveld, or Swords
taken in hand either by your or our Soldiers in offense of one another, but
let us jointly and unanimously turn our Arms to the ruin of that wicked
Tyrant, of that enemy to our quiet, of that betrayer of our Liberty, to the
most barbarous, disloyal, and most wicked man of as many as this day live. Let
us run to revenge our Soldiers fallen in the last Battle, and let us offer as a
Sacrifice to their shadows who do require it of us, the damned Deceiver, who
has been the fatal occasion of so much blood and death. Let us go to purchase
unto our selves by a short and eafie war, a long and quiet peace; nay rather
let us go to a glorious and certain triumph. Let us go then you who are as
wise as generous. The untild and unmanur'd grounds oppressed, and as it were
groaning under the Footsteps of fierce Soldiers, under the Iron Hoofs of
warlike Horses, and under the weight of warlike Engines, do with flowery
eloquence entreat it at our hands. Fruitful mothers fearing to see their
children die by the unjust Ax, entreat it at our hands. Brides do entreat us
thereunto, fearing lest they may shortly bewail the loss of their beloved
Consorts either shut up in prison or put to death upon the Gallows. We have the
prayers of young Virgins for this, not sure to keep the flower of their
virginity unviolated under the government of so perverse a Ruler, who will
always foment lust and wickedness. Tender Babes from out their Cradles, with
tears, and mouths new pulled from their mothers breasts, entreat us hereunto,
being sure to have their innocence trampled under foot under the shadow of a
Scepter, which will protect and fauter triumphant faults. And finally, I
Nissena of Rhodes, by inheritance lawful Successor of the Crown of Cyprus, the
which does as justly belong to me, as it has been by Mintaurus unjustly
possessed, it is I who beg this of you. The kingdom of due belongs to me, who wife
to the late Thoas, was by him in his life time crowned Queen, and in his death
confirmed in the Dominion. I, as such a one, do both demand and offer peace;
and being betrayed and oppressed, I fly to you for justice and assistance. Let us
then unite our forces I beseech you, and let us carry the War home to his gates
who has subverted peace. Nor will it be without glory to your renowned valor,
that the Tyrant be by your means punished, and be by you hurld down to his own
blood from his usurped Throne. Let us go, for I invite you to peace, glory,
and victory.

Here she held her peace: Nor was there any one in that great and grave
Assembly, who did not joyfully and humbly offer to expose their own persons to
any the greatest danger which might tend to remit her into her just and lawful
possession of the crown. In the mean time they strove who should first come
with bended knees to show with obsequiousness their duty to her Majesty. They
placed her in the worthiest and most eminent place, whilst they with their hats
off stood on foot; protesting unto her by the mouths of the best spoken men
amongst them, their ancient devotion toward the Crown of Cyprus, and
complaining of that false deceiver, who by abusive fraud had necessitated them
to take up arms against their King, at all other times, and upon all other
occasions respected and honored by them as became them. They thanked her for
the proffered peace, which they willingly accepted of, protesting themselves
much bound unto her for that she was pleased to make use of them to recover her
Kingdom. They offered unto her not only the public moneys, but even the
moneys of their private purses, as much of their Army as was left; and finally,
they acknowledged her, and bowed unto her as their lawful Queen, swearing
eternal and inviolable allegiance to her, Whilst these Welcomes were
exercised there, the Ladies of the City were advertised, that the exceeding
fair Lady, who not long before was come thither under a pretense of Ambassie,
was the Queen Nissena, the merit of whose beauty had raised her to the Crown,
and of whom they had formerly heard. Whereupon they, to pay their due respects
to so great a Princess, and out of curiosity to see whether her beauty did
answer to the fame thereof, putting on their richest Ornaments and best
aparrell, they went in gilded Coaches to the Palace, to serve and reverence
her. The news of the concluded peace was this mean while spread abroad
amongst the people, with which all the Citizens and common people being
overjoyed, did every where applaud the Queens beauty and wisdom. She came
forth attended by the Ladies and Senators, many whereof waited upon her to the
Camp, whilst the common people, that they might also see a beauty which knew
how to merit Kingdoms, by the noise of Trumpets and beating up of Drums, filled
the Heavens with shouts of Jubilee and rejoicing. Before 'twas night, the chief
Commanders of the lately before enemies Army, came to her Pavillion on the
Senats behalf, to receive her commands: offering themselves to march with their
Militia, whithersoever she should command them, she received them in a grave
and courteous manner, sending them back presented with some little Jewels
which she had carried with her when she fled from Nicosia.

This mean while consultation was had how and in what manner they were to
depart, and Nissena thinking she had put the means already in a fair way
whereby she might repossess her self of her Crown, had now nothing to afflict
her self with, but the thought of her Doralbo, of whom hearing no news, she
could little rejoice at any other good success, which either had or could
happen unto her, She could not so much conceal this disquiet of her mind, but
that she gave express command that before the Armies should march toward
Nicosia, two of the most experienced and crafty Soldiers should be sent to
learn some news of the Prince and of Theocastro, and at the same time to find
with what number of Soldiers the City was guarded, and in what condition of
peace and safety Mintaurus and Melaspus were with the people, whether beloved
or hated: whether they behaved themselves as Lords and Kings, or whether but as
Officers of the Kingdom.

When Filarbo and Theocastro as has been said before, saw Doralbo though
wounded go from the Camp toward Nicosia, they thought it fit to follow him,
whereupon not many hours after his departure, Theocastro took the same way. He
came to the City at that fatal instant, when the Prince, desperate out of
Nissena's believed death, having endeavored to kill Melaspus, was committed to
Prison. So as hearing of his being in hold, he thought it good to keep himself
concealed, least he might be thought guilty as complice of the attempted
Homicides, and that he might the better observe what they resolved to do with
the Prince, to the end that he might assist him, and purchase if it were
possible, his safety and liberty, though it should cost him his life. Getting
to this purpose into a friends house on whose fidelity he might rely, he
desired to know what urgent occasion had induced Doralbo to so strange and
unadvised a resolution: and he was informed, that being provoked by his
exceeding anger at the Queens supposed death, he resolved to revenge her, whose
death was afterward found to be false, but that it was true that she was fled
to Rhodes. He lamented his Cousins misfortune, but much more Doralbo's danger,
as being more grievous and more imminent; he being imprisoned, and exposed to
the arbitrarie judgment of an unjust, severe independent, and interressed
Magistrate, from whom in all probability nothing but cruel resentments could
be expected. He resolved therefore that very night to discover what Mintaurus
his intentions were against the imprisoned Prince; and to this purpose he sent
to the Lord Chancellor in the name of one of the chief Lords of the Court, to
know whether sentence were already pronounced against Doralbo or no, as being
already convinced of the Fact, so as all process or examination would prove
superfluous. He could learn nothing from him, but that Mintaurus had sent for
the chief Marshal, and given him some private directions. Theocastro growing
hereby more desirous of information, would go himself, protected by the
darkness of the night, to know of the chief Marshal, who was his familiar
friend, whether Doralbo were in any eminent danger of death or no; This man
lived near the Court, and from his Lodgings (where he his wife, and children
lived)there was a passage through a narrow tarrace to a pair of stairs which
landed in a common little yard, but not much frequented, wherein were the first
gates of the underground Prisons, in the worst and most incommodious whereof,
the unfortunate Prince Doralbo was shut in, whose head by the Tyrants command
was to be struck off. Theocastro tarried till the night was well advanced, and
then himself accompanied by his friend and one servant, went unknown, and as
secretly as could be, to the Marshals habitation, when coming near his gate, he
might hear him chide his wife and daughters aloud, for that having already
supt, they did not haste to make his bed, whereon he might for some two hours
take his rest, what unusual haste is this that you are in, replied one of his
daughters? and why no more then two hours rest? to whom he fetching a deep
sigh replied: Alas that I might rest all night in my bed, but I must ere long
rise, and go with the heads-man and some Soldiers, to take off unfortunate
Prince Doralbo's head; who by a rash, but truly a generous action has this day
deserved to die. Diverse words past afterward betvveen the father, wife and
daughters, which Theocastro did not very perfectly understand, who had heard
sufficient to make him depart angered, and almost besides himself; in so much
as he spoke not a word till he was come to his friends house where he lay.
Theocastro took his friend aside into a chamber, and then with a sad and
melancholy countenance, vented to him his painful passion which oppressed him
for Doralbo's approaching death: and resolved howsoever, he would venture his
life to save him; he propounded unto him a means which might easily succeed, if
he and four other armed men would second his resolutions. He put him in mind
of the Prince his deserts, from whom he might expect to be gratefully requited,
if so be the enterprise should prove successful. He minded him of his
obligation, which as Nissena's Cousin, in whose revenge it was that Doralbo had
done what he did, bound him to whatsoever dangerous attempt. How they should be
rewarded by her, if she should regain her Kingdom; and finally he called unto
his mind the public good in Mintaurus his downfall, whom he was assured he
could infallibly kill: but that all was suddenly to be resolved upon, and to be
put in execution, it being of necessity to be done within a few hours. His
friend being all heart and courage, wholoved no less Doralbo's worth and
valor, then he hated Mintaurus his Tyranny, offered himself ready to do any
thing; and choosing two of his ablest and trusty servants, they provided
themselves all four of excellent Arms, and leaving their own house went toward
the chief Marshals Lodgings. They were not gone a bow-shot forward, when two
Gentlemen that were brethren, but enemies to Mintaurus his faction, knocking at
the gate of a noble Palace, desired help and assistance; they rejoiced to see
themselves assisted not only by them, but by two of their swaggering
companions, who were thought to be the best and most resolute blades of all
Nicosia. They in a short time arrived very hush and quiet at the little yard by
which the way lay to the Marshals Lodgings: nor had they staid there long when
they might hear a noise out of a window, as of the clattering of keys, and of
men who spoke loud enough; These were the Jailor, and the dog-leeches who were
appointed to cut off unfortunate Doralbo's head, who coming in to hasten the
chief Marshal, made ready the prison keys, and it being now somewhat late and a
fitting time, were ready for the tragical execution. As they came out into the
Tarrace, Theocastro and his Companions withdrew themselves aside, and they
having descended the stairs, opened the first gate, and entering in, would have
shut it again, when they might see themselves assaulted by the armed and
resolute Companions, and heard themselves threatened with present death, if they
did not instantly without reply, or so much as breathing, deliver the keys unto
them, and serve them quietly as a guide to the Prison wherein the condemned
Prince was. It was bootless for those Officers to defend themselves, or by
their outcries to call in help, which had they done, they would assuredly have
hastened their threatened death; and 'twas impossible for them to be heard from
that loteranean place, let them have cried never so loud: the first gate being
already secured on the inside by the provident Gentlemen. To fight valliantly
with their swords in hand, was not to be expected from base pusillanimous men,
whose births and souls were as abject as was their profession. Not able to do
otherwise, they resolved to obey: 'twas better for them to expose themselves to
the hazard of a future and uncertain death, then to what was most certain and
present. Theocastro knowing them to be cowardly and base spirited, said unto
them with voice of terror: If you will readily obey our command, I will promise
you both life and reward; if not, you are all dead men. Open those gates there
quickly hoe, and tell me as quickly what unjust act you were commanded to do by
the Tyrant. Sir! said the chief Marshall, with a quivering voice, the heavens
know how contrary it is to my genius to be employed in such like affairs, but
the Fates will have it so. We are servants, and must serve by force, if not by
good will. I humbly and submissively assign over into your protection my life,
and the lives of these men which are now aies safe from Mintaurus his rigor,
if I do not before midnight be over, present him with Doralbo's head. Advance
and let us in, replied Theocastro, thou shall present him with the Princes
head, but in another manner then he expects. Whilst they were thus discoursing
they came to the door which was already open, and which opened into the narrow
moist noisome and dark dungeon, in which with his hands straight tied together
with a cord, the sad and already languishing Prince stood leaning against the
wall; he was not able to endure the torch light, being disaccustomed from
light, wherefore he turned his face from them whilst he thus spoke: How now my
friends, the hour of my death is now come, is it not? yes, yes, draw near
boldly, let the wicked Tyrant glut himself with my blood, for death does no
whit dismaie me, save only that I could not first revenge the death of that
innocent fair one whom none but that barbarous fellow could have the heart so
cruelly to kill. Death is to me most welcome, which will open the same way unto
me through which my soul is already past; miserable Doralbo, how great is thy
misfortune, who being born a Prince, must die by the hands of a hangman: but
patience; come near I say, give me only so much leave as I may pronounce and
often repeat Nissena's name, and then let the fatal blow come; for I desire nor
beg nothing more at your hands but that I may breath forth my soul with that
beloved name in my mouth.

Theocastro appearing then smilingly before him, said, Talk not of Death, Sir,
where your servant Theocastro is; here am I, with these my faithful friends,
ready either to free you out of prison, or nobly to lose our lives together
with you. Now it is that you must recall unto you that generosity and valor which
was born with you. Nissena lives, Sir, and we will all live to his shame and
confusion who has occasioned these troubles: Come out from this noisome hole,
and joyfully follow me. The tears gusht into Doralbo's eyes for joy, when he
heard that Nissena was alive, who weeping almost downright, spoke thus, It
would not much import, my friend, though you should abuse me in promising me my
life and liberty; but your sin would not be small, if you should tell a
falsehood that Nissena lives. Is it true that she is alive? She lives, she
lives, Sir, (replied Theocastro) it is not I that do deceive you, it is you your
self, who believing her to be dead, would unseasonably and precipitously
revenge that death which she did not suffer. She and Eurania to escape
Mintaurus his violence, fled away: and to facilitate and secure their escape,
they cunningly left the bed and floor all besmeared with blood. At these words
Doralbo cheered up, and his hands being untied by one of the Gentlemen that
accompanied Theocastro, he had the chief Marshals weapons given him; who,
together with the rest of his Officers, was forced to lay them down, and to
take an oath that they would do whatsoever stould be commanded them. They
resolved to wrap up somewhat or other, it mattered not what which should be
about the bulk or Bookdome of Doralbo's head, with the which the chief Marshall
going before, might guide them all into the Castle where Mintaurus was, who had
formerly given order unto the Guard, that about that hour they should suffer
any of the Officers of Justice to come in, and stood longingly expecting, to
see in that hated head his sons revenge, and himself in a good part secured of
the Kingdom. They past, not meeting with any interruption, to the chamber
door, wherein the Tyrant lay in Bed, but awake, reading some letters which he
had received from diverse of the Presidents, who acquainted him with affairs
belonging to the Kingdom. The fatal hour, Mintaurus, is arrived, wherein
thou must pass from this life, to give an account to the Eternal Gods, for thy
so many and so execrable misdoings; and thou dreamest of nothing less then
dying. Thus does Heaven punish the wicked, when they do least think on it.
Doralbo entered first with a Dagger drawn in his right hand, and followed by the
rest: he flew toward the bed with so sudden a force, as the Tyrant seeing
himself so unexpectedly set upon by him, whom he conceived to be already
beheaded, he could not for very fear speak so much as one word: save that when
he had received four or five stabs, he cried out, You have overcome, O you
Traitors: and wallowing in his own blood, upon the same Bed wherein he thought
shortly to take quiet rest, he remained a dead, bloody, and horrid Karkass, as
an example to all rash men, who think it lawful to provoke the Divine anger
with reiterated faults, persuading themselves that they shall escape
unpunished. It remained now for the Prince and his companions to secure the
Castle; but it was first resolved that Theocastro should immediately get out of
the City, and make with all speed for Rhodes, where the public report was
that Nissena was gone. At whose desires he might very well hope, that Prince
Fermondo would not refuse two well armed Galleys, fraught with good store of
Soldiers; the which the tyrant being dead, and Doralbo commanding the Castle,
would suffice to reinvest her in her Throne; or if she her self would come
along, she should find many of the Nobility who would side with her, and be
sure to have the adherence of all the common people; so as with those few
people which she should bring with her, she might easily recover the Crown.
Long consultation was had whether the small Garrison which did guard the
Castle, was to be won by threats, or by gold, great store of which was found
in Mintaurus his chests: but the very noise that Prince Doral'o had made
himself master thereof, and had killed the Tyrant, was sufficient to make the
Soldiers come of themselves, and offer their service to him; by whom being
received as became a Prince, and rewarded with good sums of money, they swore
to be faithful to him till death.

Theocastro went forth upon his intended enterprise, and the draw bridge being
hoisted up, and the Percullis let down, Mintaurus his body was hung out upon a
Battlement of the Castle which was most exposed to the view of the City. The
sight of this horrid and unlooked for spectacle the next morning, caused joy in
many, in others fear, and in all men wonder. I am not able to express into what
raging fury Melaspus fell when he heard this fatal accident. All men
discoursed diversely, accordingly as they were particularly addicted or
inclined, how and by whom so great and dangerous a deed could be effected; but
understanding that the prison gates stood open wherein Doralbo was shut up, and
that the chief Marshall, and some other subordinate Officers were missing,
they all of them did partly guess what the matter might be. Foolish Melaspus
supposing himself betrayed, and not knowing by whom, fell into such threatening
and inconsiderate speeches, as did displease many even of his own faction: he
would blow up the Castle, bury his Father under the ruins of the whole
City, make Rivers run with human blood, and kill a great many that were
innocent; so as amongst so many any one might be met vvithall who was guilty
of his Fathers death, or had but the least hand in it. And yet by all these
threats and violences the unwary young man got nothing but the general hatred
both of the Nobility and common people. Many days were not past, when yet to
his further vexation, nay even to the reducing him to despair, he heard news by
a Messenger, who came running, out of breath, that a numerous Army which came
from the East, overspread all the Country, coming toward Nicosia, and that
they could not at that time be above twenty miles off. Enraged and biting his
fingers ends, he in a disdainful manner broke forth into these words, I see
you unjust Heavens, you cannot employ your malign Influences but to my
prejudice, for which if I cannot for the present show any resentment, I will
not howsoever die unrevenged; I will likewise learn to perish gallantly. Let
them come, let my enemies hasten to bereave me of my life, for I am ready to
dye, but I will first make my self a Tomb of their Karkasses. Let them come,
they shall not find me running away, but ready to stand their shock. Thus he
spent two hours, or thereabouts, blaspheming the Gods, and cursing his perverse
stars; but at last his anger breathing a little over, he betook himself to more
peaceful, and less imprudent thoughts, he resolved to withdraw himself from
his present misfortune, hoping to get to Soria, and by his Wealth, Wit, and
Gallantry, to return again to Cyprus, and to regain his fortune by the blood
and ruin of his enemies. Having heaped up as much gold, and as many jewels as
he could, he went with some of his faithfullest and dearest friends, toward
the Haven, where having hired an English Man of War, he lancht immediately into
the Deep, where fortune appeared yet more adverse unto him. His Vessel was not
well got into the Issican Gulf, when it must suffer it self to be disposed of
at the pleasure of an impetuous wind, which blowing from the North, made the
ship take a clean contrary Road from what it was bound for. They sunk their
Anchors to stay the violence of their course; but their greatest Cable being
burst in two by a violent gust of wind, they were tossed too and fro for three
nights and two days by the storm; which after having hurld them every where
about those Seas, left them at last becalmed with their ship all torn, a day
and a halfes sail from Cyprus to the Eastward.

By how much Melaspus misfortune was in plowing up the Seas, so much the more
successful was Theocastro's voyage in a light Pinnace toward Rhodes; whether
being come, he heard that that very day Nissena's funerals were celebrated, the
being bewailed for dead by her friends, and by the whole Island. Of which the
better to assure himself, he went directly to the Temple of Pallas, where in
doleful pomp this sad solemnity was to be celebrated. He was astonished, and
wept at this unexpected accident; but his grief and astonishment lasted not
long: For meeting with a Gentleman who was much his friend, and who embracing
him, welcomed his return to Rhodes. Theocastro being impatient, asked him how
and when Nissena died? You are better able to acquaint us with the manner and
time thereof, replied his friend; for forasmuch as I believe you are now come
from Cyprus, and ought to know all the circumstances of the death of the
unfortunately betrayed Nissena. How, said Theocastro, did she not die here at
Rhodes, whither she fled to save her self from the deceits and treachery of
the Tyrant Mintaurus? She is so far from being dead in Rhodes, replied the
other as she has notbin seen here; but we received certain and public
advertisement, that by direction from the forementioned Tyrant, she was
barbarously wounded and slain, as she lay in bed. So, so, the Gods be praised,
said Theocastro, Nissena is not dead, though her funerals be celebrated here. I
came three days since from Nicosia, where the common report is that she is
here, and I am come hither to bring her good news, and it may be to carry her
back with me to take possession of the Kingdom. But for Gods sake, before the
truth of this be publicly known, let us see the sad solemnity celebrated, at
the which we may assist the less sorrowfully, in that we know it is done for
one that is alive: and therefore rather to be laughed at then lamented.

They went to the Temple, which being built by skillful artificers in a no very
large square figure, gloried in white Marble, though then all covered over with
black Velvet, all imbroidered over and richly wrought with gold and silver, and
at fitting distances Imperial Crowns dashed to pieces; broken Scepters, and huge
Pearl shaped unto tears, to the end that at so fatal a spectacle the very walls
might seem to weep. From the highest Tribunal, shaped in a perfect round, and
all veiled over with black, diverse Cupidons hung upon undiscernable threads of
brass, weeping, and in several postures with torches lighted in their hands,
seemed as if they flew in the air. Underneath another lesser Tribunal just
opposite to the chief Porch, an altar was raised trampled on by a statue of
Pallas, which clothed in mourning mantles, having on her breast a black
breastplate, and on her head a helmet of like hue, held a lance in her right
hand, and in her left a buckler or shield, wherein was cut agastly Gorgons
head, and which as the Funeral lasted, vomited forth artificial fires from its
gaping mouth, and ill looking eyes: in the midst of the Temple there stood a
square half pace, of a well proportioned height, adorned with handsome
cornishes, and other artificial pieces of Architecture, the materials whereof
seemed to be of purest touchstone, and from the eyes and mouths of certain
antic faces which lay thereon, great store of perfumed flames gusht out. Over
the half pace stood a Ballaster, on whose uppermost Cornish sweet smelling
insence fumed forth from odd fashioned races, hung at equal distance; from
thence the three Graces made of purest Alabaster, served for pedestals to a
capacious Fountain, the more miraculous and lovely for that instead of water,
it in diverse places ran in rivolets of fire. In midst of this pile stood a
naked Cupid weeping, and having his eyes bound up, and which was upheld with an
Atlas curiously cut out in red Marble, from whose quiver burst out continual
torrents of flames to supply the Urne which stood beneath with combustible
materials. Thus with great demonstrations of public sorrow, did Prince
Fermondo and all the people of Rhodes bewail the death of that Nissena, whose
beauty if it had given her a Kingdom, it had (as was given out in that Island)
by an unworthy change, bereft her of life.

I mention not the quality of the Sacrifices, and other ceremonies which are
commonly used in those Temples upon such like occasions, because our ages have
not been acquainted therewithal. The two Gentlemen did both admire and laugh
at this noble Funeral Pomp, which by how much more stately it was, was so much
the more vain, and worthy to be laughed at, because her sad cold ashes were
therein celebrated, who was never better pleased, nor more content then at that
hour. The Funerals being ended Theocastro went to see his friends and kindred,
whom he acquainted with the falsehood of Nissena's reported death, and told them
that instead of bewailing her as dead, he hoped they would shortly solemnize
her assumption to the Kingdom; wherein she would be the more glorious and
happy by her arriving thereat through the midst of a thousand treasons and
treacheries in vain plotted against her by Mintaurus. He told them all that had
happened, and then going to kiss Prince Fermondo's hands, he moved both wonder
and mirth in him, by witnessing that Nissena was alive, for the recovery of
whose Kingdom he desired him to assist her only with two well armed Galleys;
for which he might afterward at all times and upon all occasions, expect the
like requital from the Queen, who would in a great part acknowledge the
recovery of her Crown from his succor. Nissena shall acknowledge no obligation
to me, said gracious Fermondo, since the justice of her cause, and her own
merit would have prompted me to greater things then this, to which I am bound
as I am a Prince and a Gentleman. If two Galleys will not suffice you take
four. My care shall be to give order for them, and let it be your care to make
speedy use thereof, lest she may suffer in her interest by delay. Be
prosperous in your journey, salute her in my name, and entreat her to make use
of me to the utmost of my power. Theocastro returned all due thanks, and took
his leave, thinking suddenly to go from Rhodes; though he staid a many days,
being detained by tempestuous weather. This mean while he was desired to take
Emerino for Captain of one of the Galleys, he who was once so far in love with
Nissena; but his flames of affection being extinguished in the tears of
desperation, he had changed his love affections into the like of Friendship, or
rather of obsequiousness, desiring to go to Cyprus for no other reason, but
only that he might glory that he had not at all erred in the choice of his
love, by bequeathing his heart to a beauty, who deserved the government of
Venus her kingdom. The storms being over, they put from the haven in a serene
calm, but the second day after their departure, they met with contrary winds
and foul weather, a calm ensuing not long after, they might see a ship not far
off, which lying at Anchor, was by the provident Mariners mended in what she
had suffered by the last storms: they turned a little out of their way to
satisfy their curiosity in knowing to whom she did belong, and from whence she
came, and this they did the rather for that they might perhaps, learn from
those that were within her some tidings of the affairs of Cyprus: So as they
steered their course thitherward, and cheering up their Gallie-slaves with
excellent wines, they encouraged them to row apace: as soon as the two Galleys
were come within Cannon-shot, they were in an unusual and barbarous manner shot
at by four piece of Cannon; so as instead of getting information, they were
enforced to prepare for fight. Theocastro's Gallie received an unluckie shot
with two bullets beneath the Poop, which giving large entrance unto the water,
made them strike sail, and ship their Oars, to keep out the sea which
fraudulently stole in and was ready to swallow up the Gallie. This mean while
Emerino's Gallie boarded the Enemy, and after a dangerous fight behaved her
self so gallantly, as with great slaughter of the Enemy, she got a bloody
victory; there was one Gentleman in the Enemies ship, who fighting valliantly,
had drawn much blood from the Rhodians, and in a bold and barbarous manner,
would never yield; so as they were forced to load him with Irons, and by force
to drag him out of the ship, whence together with him they took great store of
treasure, and brought it and him into their Gallie, leaving the ship without
any sails to the pleasure of the winds and water: the other rent Gallie being
in some sort mended, Theocastro came in to succor his companion; but met with
no other occasion save only to rejoice with him for his victory: They showed
him their booty, and amongst other prisoners, to his great wonder and
astonishment, he found the Gentleman loaded with Irons to be Melaspus, over
whom Fortune would have thought she should not have sufficiently insulted, had
she not after so many miseries brought him into the hands of his Enemies.
Theocastre was as glad of this desired Prey, as was Melaspus grieved and almost
mad to see himself in his power: whilst Emerino understanding who he was,
thanked his destiny for having delivered up Nissena's chiefest enemy into his
power, to whom he thought he could not present a more acceptable gift. They
forthwith hoisted their sails, and gave such way with their Oars as showed
their great desire to come suddenly to shore at Cyprus; they sailed so swiftly
befriended by a Westerly wind, and the Gallie slaves plying their Oars, as
within the space of five hours, they began to discover the tops of the
promontaries which are in the west part of Cyprus: nay they did already
discover the top of high Olympus, which being almost in the midst of the
Island, seems to join the earth and stars together.

Nissena was already parted with the two Armies from the parts about Famagosta
some days since, marching toward Nicosia. The Commonwealths horse led the Van,
those of the Crown followed them, and after these came she, backed by two Troops
of choice Gentlemen, and carried in a chair, having all the Foot for her
rearward: Agenor. and Filarbo never parted from her side, entertaining her
sometimes with pleasant, sometimes with grave, and sometimes with sad discourse.
Of which later sort their communing was when they spoke of Doralbo's danger,
whose name though she were glad to hear of, yet was she troubled to think some
misfortune might have befaln him.

They made not much have in their march, for though Pioners went before them to
make the ways more easy for passage, they endeavored to march so, as they
might do least prejudice to the Country: and the Queen was delighted to be
with the Armies, who therefore did not march faster, or further then seated with
her convenience. At last they encamped themselves within 7 miles of Nicosia,
and were preparing to make nearer approches with part of the Army, and if it
should be thought sitting to storm the City walls, when the 2 Soldiers who
were formerly sent to enquire after Doralbo, and to learn how affairs went in
Nicosia, came and desired that they might be admitted into the Queens presence,
who did not only give them audience willingly, but when they were brought to
her, did with some anxiety and impatience solicit them to say quickly what they
had of good or bad to tell her. It was superfluous (said they) that your
Majesty should come attended with such Forces thither, where you are expected
with such devotion by Prince Doralbo, by the Nobility, and by all the people,
who look for you, we would say as for a Goddess, did we not think we should
offend your modesty, which will be contented that we shall say as a Queen by
them reverenced and beloved. You are come with an intention of fighting, and
your fight is turned to triumph. Here they acquainted her at large with all
that had befaln Doralbo, who had been in extreme danger of losing his life in
revenging her believed death: but that being delivered by Theocastro, he had
slain the Tyrant; and that afterward hearing of Melaspus his being fled, he
was come out of the Castle with the general applause both of the Nobility and
common people; and that he already had in her name made himself absolute Master
of the City, on which the secure dominion of all the rest of the Kingdom did
depend. That having heard of her coming by some strangers, he was already on
his way to come and meet her, and to receive her after so many troubles, into
the absolute possession of that Crown, which was due unto her by her so many
deserts, and for so many other reasons.

Nissena was mightily pleased with this news; but the hearing that her beloved
Doralbo had run hazard of his life, only in her revenge, caused so great a
passion of heart in her, as though it were the effect of joy, had yet somewhat
mixed with it of sorrowful and bitter; passions which she wisely concealed.
Having rewarded the Soldiers with a rich chain of Massy gold, they were
dismissed, and she immediately (her impetuous-love passion ceasing a little) gave
Order that all the Commanders and chief men of the City should follow her, for
she would go toward Niccsia. The Sun hasted toward the West, to leave the
World in darkness, and Doralbo accompanied with above an hundred Gentlemen,
spur^d on his Horse toward that Sun which brought unto him a rise of joy,
and whose bright beams he hoped to enjoy in spite of the approaching night.
Nissena when she heard a far off the noise of Trumpets, which advertised her of
her Warriers approach, she felt her heart not only beat, but flutter so within
her breast, as she thought she had been near death, and that those were the
last beatings of her soul which would open the passage to get out of her body.
When Doralbo heard from a-far off, the thunder of those Drums which preceded
the lightning of that countenance with which his adored Nissena came to assault
him; he much to his amazement fell a trembling, even then when he found
himself more then ever inflamed with unquenchable heat. At last these two
souls in love, who had long since incountred each other in their affections,
met one another now with their eyes: Nor did the noise of a thousand musket
shot, of a hundred Trumpets, and of as many other War Instruments, mixed with
the neighing and trampling of horses, and common shouts of joy, hinder them
from hearing one another say with their looks, and strive who should best
express themselves therein; Well met dear eyes so long desired: I now do more
then ever feel the fire of love. Thus they said in a language understood by
none but themselves.

Doralbo leapt from horsback, and had not she hindered him, was ready to fall
down prostrate before Nissena, to whom with a trembling voice he said: Your
Majesty is at last returned to Nicosia to receive that Crown, which will be
proud of the honor of incircling your Temples: you are come to receive some
shadow of that reward which is due to the Immensitie of your merit. I have not
bin wanting for whatlies in my power, to sacrifice my life to the Deity of
your greatness: but the Gods have pleased to preserve me that upon some other
occasion I may be ready to lose it: I shall do it at all times, O my Queen,
for your service, for whose sake death would have been and shall ever be welcome
to me. He would have proceeded, but was thus by her interrupted. Sir, I know
how great my obligations are to you; the Crown of Cyprus would be but a weak
return of Gratitude for what you have done for me. Let it suffice I am not
ungrateful. Doralbo would have replied, but struck through with a pleasing
smile and affable look from her, his answer was turned into a sigh, which though
it were cut short off, made the enamored Queen fully understand that she was
the Shrine that he adored. She afterward applied her self to receive
obsequious applications from the other Gentlemen, who with reverence bowed unto
her, to whom she answered with such a Majestical Grace, as all of them blamed
Fortune, which had so long kept her from that sublime degree which her so many
perefctions did deserve. All the Ladies of Nicofia came to her clothed in
black, as a Livery which they wore to the memory of the deceased King, and to
their Queens Widowhood, to whom humbly bowing themselves, they found in her an
affable but not abject correspondency; such as showed Majesty, but not pride:
whence that reverentiall love began in them, with which Nissena was ever after
respected and beloved by all her Subjects of whatsoever condition. Before they
could get to Nicosia, darkness had canopied over the whole Orizon, so as the
great abundance of lighted Torches and Bonsires did in an instant so inlighten
the darkness of the night, as it had no reason to envy the brightest day; and
yet all these flames and heats appeared to Doralbo but obscure horrors in
respect of those beams which darted from Nissena's eyes. She came unto the
Palace amidst the noise of Warl^ck Instruments, and the shouts and acclamations
of the rejoicing people; and calling to mind how she had not long before fled
from thence abandoned by all, and how she now returned reverenced and cried up,
nay as it were, adored, she could not but admire the strauge fickleness of
Fortune.

She would not forbear giving of audience, and receiving congratulations from
the numerous inundation of Ladies, Lords, Tituladoes, and personages of all
condition, til she was insufferably weary; but at last she was enforced to
betake her self to her rest. She gave order that Eurania, Doralbo, Agenor of
Soria and Filarbo should sup in private with her: the chief Commanders of the
Army having their Lodgings appointed out to them in the Court, and being
treated with such sumptuositie as belonged unto them. The Armies were
entertained in the field with such abundance of rich Wines, of which Cyprus is
very plentiful, and with such variety of Viands, as the Soldiers spent the
whole night almost in their cups and eating. The Queen was ready to sit down
with the others at the Table when she was informed that two Gentlemen of
Rhodes desired audience: bring them in, said she, I shall soon dispatch them
Theocastro and Emerino entered together with the miserable Melaspus loaded with
Irons, who prostrating themselves before her, presented Melaspus to her as a
slave. All were amazed at this so unexpected a sight; but Doralbo, I know not
whether out of disdain or pity, a color coming into his face, broke forth
into these words: The Heavens at last leave no guilty persons unpunished. Who
would ever have imagined most gracious Queen, that this fellow should at this
time be brought hither in this condition, perfectly to complete your Majesty's
happiness and safety? These, said she, are miracles which divine Justice knows
only how to bring about: Let him be led unto the Castle, and let him be well
treated there, I bequeath him to you Prince Doralbo; appointing you to be his
Judge; but upon this condition, that you absolve him of being partaker of his
fathers wickedness. Go and be of good comfort Melaspus, said Doralbo, you have
already begun to taste of the Queens clemency. Theocastre and Emerino, having
recounted their adventures, sat down likewise at the Table with Nissena, who
had leisure enough at a long and gladsome supper, to let Doralbo know by her
most modest favors, that she loved him better then her self.

Four whole days were past over by these two Lovers, neither of them daring to
discover their affections, unless by their looks, and by letting some little
words escape which equivocally noted their inward heat of heart; in which
Nissena busied her self only in dispensing her rewards and favors, and in
winning not only the love, but the Idolatry of her Subjects. Nissena thought it
unbefitting her to speak her love to Doralbo, and though she knew she was in
regard of her prioritie bound to begin first in the declaration thereof, and
was sometimes resolved to do so, her innate modesty would not suffer her so to
do, or else her very affection hindered her: it being impossible for one who
truly loves, to say he loves. Doralbo who did not believe he merited Nissena's
service, much less her love, would rather have chosen to die, then to make his
affection known unto her by discovery of his flames: Who am I, (said he within
himself) or what am I, that I should pretend love unto so beautiful a Queen?
It Is true, I am born a Prince: I have served her to the evident neglect of my
life, and I love her more dearly then mine own soul. But what is all this? She
merits greater things: Should I discover my love, and she not correspond with
me therein, what would become of me? is it not safer to say nothing, to serve,
observe, and nourish still my hopes, then to receive my death from her scorn, or
from her flat denial? if she be pleased to Crown our love with reward, she will
not want ways and means how to do it. Thus did both she and he in vain lament;
which crafty Eurania perceiving, and compassionating their too abstenious
ravings, she invited them one day after dinner into a Closset to see certain
Pictures, wherein were drawn to the life the affections between Venus and
Adonis, and hence she took an occasion freely to say unto them; this is the way
of love my Children; I know Nissena and Doralbo, that you burn in love each
with other in unquenchable fires, and strive who should love one another best;
why do you then thus id'ly consume your selves away, cold in the midst of
flames? Say Nissena, I take thee Doralbo for my husband. Say you Doralbo, I
take thee Nissena for my wife: so so, embrace each other; Matrimonial love is
no shame to the world, nor fault committed against heaven. The two Lovers, with
a blushing countenance and ill assured look, confirmed her sayings, and grew so
bold, as at one and the same instant they ran so greedily to interchange a
kiss, as their souls had almost flown through excess of joy from out their
enamored breasts.

Here ended the sorrws, and began the joys of Nissena and Doralbo, who reigned
prosperously, and loved each other faithfully all their life.

FINIS.

