CONSIDERATIONS Upon the late transactions and proceedings of the ARMY, In
reference to the DISSOLUTION of the PARLIAMENT:
It Is evident to unbiassed men, that the Parliament had a design to break and
spoil the good interest of the Army (which has been as the bulwark of the
Cause of God and his People) and to form it up to an interest to serve the
wills and lusts of their Masters, endeavoring to put many into commands who
are persons of loose and profligate principles, and of a mercenary spirit,
voting of the Commander in chief, a person of most approved godliness,
tenderness to all the People of God, and fidelity to the Cause he has been
engaged in, casting out several eminent and faithful Commanders, who have been
as Pillars in the Army, being such who had specially engaged against the common
Enemy in the late insurrection, falling upon them at their return (taking
occasion from a modest Petition) with great animosity and severity, when the
Prisoners they took in Arms against them were all let alone.

2. It Is easily observed, that they were under the same spirit and designs as
they were before their first interruption, which was to perpetuate themselves,
there not appearing upon them a spirit to do any thing effectually for
promoting the good work of God, and Reformation in the Nation, according to
their professions and engagements.

3. This Parliament was specially to be considered as the Trustees of the good
and well-affected people of the Nation, (having been deserted and opposed in
Arms by others) to assert the good interest of the Nation and the people of God
therein, who called forth the said good people to stand by them with their
lives in their hands in the asserting their own interest, upon which call, the
Army upon principles of conscience, and not as the servants of men, offered
themselves, and this Army in special manner was modelld by the Parliament for
those good ends, and have been eminently owned by the Lord in their
undertakings in the three Nations, and the hearts of the people of the Lord
have been knit to them, (unless such who turned back to the Royal Interest)
and have still an adherency to them, looking upon them as entrusted with this
Cause they have been honored of God in; Now when the Parliament shall be found
going about to pervert their trust (so committed to them by the good people) to
the ruin of the good interest of the Army, and with that, the cause that has
been contended for, as is the judgment of most of the sober-minded people upon
their late actings, It is then justifiable in the Army, yea duty and
faithfulness, to withstand them as they have done, and are justified in the
consciences of their friends in so doing; It being a received Maxim (and that
with such as are no very good friends to the Army) as suitable to all ends of
Government, that when a Community of people shall commit a trust to a few of
themselves (which is the present case) upon ends declared and professed by
both, that such a Community may revoke that trust, by calling off their
Trustees, when they shall go about to make void those ends for which they
themselves have professed to be entrusted, (and yet not be found under any undue
resistance of Powers) that trust being not irrevocable by any law of God,
Nature, or Nations.

4. When the Officers of the Army called this Parliament to sit again, after
their long interruption (or rather former dissolution, for so indeed it was,
upon a righteous account, though now some of late in Print condemn the former
General of the Army in so doing, when themselves incessantly pressed him to it,
as is notoriously known) the said Officers did it, as conceiving it the best
expedient to cast off the Government of a single person, which they found and
acknowledge to have been a snare to them; but in so doing, the Officers
proposals were as a Compact and Covenant, on their part with them, in behalf of
themselves and the good people that owned them; and several eminent members of
the House before their sitting, being treated with by some of the Army,
promised an amicable closure with them on those grounds, which were also so
accepted after their sitting, which in their late actings they have even wholly
cast off; but the Officers of the Army thereby peremptorily obliged themselves
to consist to the same with a full and fixed resolution, (as to the substance
of them) as they should be found subservient to the promoting of the Cause of
God.

5. That many of the good People, who any ways assented to the late calling
together of the Parliament, professed in their applications to the Council of
Officers of the Army, that they looked upon their calling together as a meet
expedient to serve the present exigency, and they sailing the expectations of
most sober people, they are equally satisfied with their removal.

6. That this very Parliament at their first dissolution, declared in one of
their papers, That it was justifiable for the Army to keep out the major part
of the House, when they were designing to give back the cause into the hands of
the King at the Isle of Wight Treaty, when there would have been nothing left
but a Paper to secure it; And if justifiable so to deal with a major part,
there is the same reason of dealing so with those that remained, if they shall
be found (though in another way) doing the same thing, which is clearly our
present case.

Upon all which it will appear there was a true and real necessity, upon
righteous principles, leading the faithful Officers of the Army to what they
have done, professing it the great grief of their Souls, that they should be
necessitated to such an extremity, and hope it shall not be judged fickleness,
lightness, or inconstancy, that they are put upon such overturnings in which
they have been of late engaged, but rather a consistency to an unwearied
pursuit of that Good Cause of the Lord Jesus Christ, which out of all these
confusions and shakings, will arise in its own beauty and glory in the best
season of the Lord; and the said Officers hope, if the Lord will take pleasure
in them, to make it appear, that their Hearts are still toward the exaltation
of the said Cause, to the refreshment of the Hearts of all good people;
professing also they have no other interest but wherein the people of God are
equally concerned, and are begging a share in their prayers to the Father of
Lights for them.

By one that is no Member of the Army.

LONDON, Printed for Isaac Pridmore.


