CONSIDERATIONS ON THE BILL Depending, for Preventing Occasional Conformity,
Humbly Offered by the People called Quakers.
IN the latter part of the Preamble of this Bill, it is declared, that the Act
passed in the First Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary,
Entitled, An Act for Exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Dissenting
from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws, ought
Inviolably to be Observed. Which Noble Declaration, would give us Ground to
hope that nothing is designed in this Bill, to Infringe the said Act of
Exemption; yet in the Beginning of the Preamble and following Clauses of it, we
have, as we humbly conceive, Reason to think the Liberty, given by the said
Act, is made liable to a Doubtful Sense, if not Infringed.

First, The Term [Truly] in the Preamble, not being Limited in its acceptance,
may be so construed, as to interfer with the Design of the Act for Exemption,
which is therein declared to be to Unite the Queen's Protestant Subjects, in
Interest and Affection; which good End, that Parliament did hope Effectually to
obtain, by giving some Ease to Scrupulous Consciences in the Exercise of
Religion, as therein appears, without leaving it to any Subordinate Magistrate,
to determine what is, or is not Truly Scrupulous.

Secondly, It seemed meet to that Parliament, not to distinguish the Religious
Assemblies, or Meetings of Protestant Dissenters, with the Term of
Conventicles, as in this Bill, under which Term, by some former Laws, we have
severely suffered.

Thirdly, To make any Person in Office, an Offender, and to forfeit his Office
or Turst, with a Penalty, only for Resorting to, or being Present at any such
Assembly as aforesaid, when the Occasion may be on the account of a Funeral,
etc. we conceive, if Enacted, will not only infringe the Toleration, but render
Illegal the Common Offices of Love and Humanity betwixt Friends and Relations,
and not only to those, who do Occasionally Conform, but also to Constant
Conformist^^

Fourthly, That Act allows sundry Offices to be served by Deputy; this Bill
makes no such Provision, except for Offices of Inheritance.

Fifthly, As we are Freemen of Corporations, and Members of Companies, by the
Terms of Admission, we are bound to do in our Course the several Duties
thereof; which by this Bill, we are not only rendered incapable of, but also
subject to Fines and Penalties for not doing them.

Sixthly, The Words Scandalous and Irreligious Practices, used in this Bill,
being in the Plural, seems to conclude the Resorting to, or being Present at
the Religious Meetings of Protestant Dissenters, equally offensive with an
Occasional receiving of the Sacrament, only for a Place of Profit, or Turst in
the Government, which we hope is not intended; for that would carry an
unmerited Reflection on Religious Assemblies, and is, as we conceive, not
agreeable with the Act for Exemption.

Seventhly, we have never sought after any Place of Profit or Trust in the
Government, and therefore pray that the Conscientious Liberty, which we
thankfully Enjoy, and was granted by that Act, may be kept entire.

Lastly, As it is our Christian Principle to suffer for Conscience, so the same
makes us plead for the Liberty of it, to all whose Morals and Obedience to the
Government cannot Justly be questioned; and we conceive, restraining from
Proving all things, 1 These. 5.21.
in order to hold fast that which may be most conducing to future Happiness
(the Chief End of RELIGION) is opposite to the Apostle's Advice; And where such
Restraint is, we cannot think the Toleration secure.


