THE MEMORY OF That Faithful Servant of the Lord Thomas Carleton, Revived.

BEING A COLLECTION Of several of his VVritings in the ensuing Volume as a
Testimony of his Zeal for promoting the blessed Truth and Establishing of
Friends therein. Also some TESTIMONIES Concerning his Faithfulness and
Perseverance in the Way of the Lord, unto the Finishing of his Course here with
joy, which was the 18th day of the Ninth Month, 1684.


The Memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10.7.

The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance, Psalm. 112.9.

Printed in the Year, 1694.

The Testimony of Thomas Trafford, concerning his Friend and Brother, in the
Truth, Thomas Carleton.
THere is a Testimony in my Heart at this time, to bear for dear Thomas
Carleton, Notwithstanding it is long since he was Removed from us, as to the
outward, yet his Memorial lives with me, and in the Revivings of it; can do no
less then say something of the Experience and Knowledge I had of him.

My first acquaintance with him was by the Spirit of Truth in a Meeting, for as
soon as I saw his Face, as he was coming into the Meeting, I felt my heart
united, or knit to him, as Jonathan's was to David; and it was sealed to me,
That he had a Testimony to bear for the Lord's Truth, in the Assemblies of his
People, which was Confirmed to me that Meeting: For after some time sitting in
the Meeting, there came an Exercise upon his Spirit, and he stood up in great
Fear and Dread, which was his usual manner when he was so Exercised under the
powerful Word of Life; not being a Man forward in entering upon that service,
but rather backward, until necessitated thereunto by the constraining Power of
God.

And while he was delivering his Testimony, I had dear unity with him, and my
Soul was refreshed by his Ministry, although he was but short, and my love
reached so to him, that I could not be satisfied until I went to see him at
his Lodging; after which time we grew into a more near acquaintance one with
another, both inwardly and outwardly, so that we became near and dear one unto
another, and thereby came to have a true sense and knowledge of one another
Mind^ and Spirits; and truly my heart and spirit is broken at this time, in the
remembrance of that sweet and brotherly love, that continued between us to the
last; for he was a true Yoke Fellow in the Labor of the Gospel, for the good
and welfare of the Church; and I must needs say, I have found the want of him
(with some others who were true sensible Members in the Body or Church of
Christ,) whom the Lord has been pleased to remove from us, and take to
himself, which I must be content with, resting in the Faith that he can and
will raise up others in his time to supply their places.

And although this my Friend and Brother, was a Man attended with many
Infirmities of Body, which disabled him from Traveling much abroad, yet I can
say he was seldom, if ever, without a Concern, Care, or Exercise upon his
Spirit, that all things might be well in the Church, and that those who were
Convinced of the Truth, might live answerable to what they did profess, and was
many a time Constrained to bear Testimony in a holy Zeal against such as were
dry Formilist Professors of it, and did not come up into a Living Experimental
Exercise of the power of Truth, and such who walked loose in their
Conversations; as will appear by the following Epistles that he Writ; and God
who tempers the Body as he Sees meet, had endued him with a large and clear
understanding, both in Divine Spiritual things, and also Natural Parts, beyond
many; which did very much adorn him, and so much the more, in that he did not
think so of himself, but would appear as simple as any, which bespoke him to be
one of Christ's Followers, who had Learned to be Meek and Lowly in heart.

I Write what I know, and it is not to attribute any thing to Man, but to
acknowledge the great Work of God, in and for Man, who as Vessels in his Hand
he has honored; therefore we who have been made partakers of their Work and
Service, can do no less. And indeed all his Parts and Gifts were Sanctified
unto him, for he was a Man of of a sweet temper, mild in Controverting things,
and could govern his Spirit with gravity, either with such as did oppose Truth
and contend against it, or at other times in Church Discipline, or with unruly
Spirits, that he might have to do with.

Oh the Remembrance of him, makes the loss of him more to be Lamented! But
having this answer returned and sealed unto me, that our loss is his gain
therefore am Contented in the will of the Lord; and notwithstanding his Parts
did exceed many, yet he was ready to prefer others before himself, which was an
Ornament to him, and did very much become his Holy Profession, he was a Man
that Loved the Truth, and all such that lived in it, and he was of a tender
Spirit, desiring nothing more then the Unity of the Brethren, and to hear of
the Prosperity of Truth, and Peace in the Church.

So that I have cause to believe he is one of that Number to whom it is said,
Blessed are the Dead which Die in the Lord, from henceforth, y^^ said the
Spirit that they may rest from ^^e^^ Labors, and their Works do follow them.

Written this 15th day of the 6. Month 1693. At Wicklow by one that loves the
Brethren. Thomas Trafford*

THE TESTIMONY OF GEORGE ROOKE Concerning Thomas Carleton.
THis I have to say concerning this our dear Friend, and Brother in the Truth,
that is removed from us by Death, (according to God's appointment for all Men
once to Die) he was a Man that was tender of Gods glory in his Day, and
labored for the promotion of his Truth; into the service of which the Lord was
pleased to Call him when he was but young in years, and made known unto him the
riches of the Mystery which had been hid from Ages past, even Christ Revealed
within the sure Hope of Eternal Glory; by which he was preserved both sure and
steadfast in his Testimony-bearing for God, wherever the Lord was pleased to
Order him; whether it was in a Prisonhouse, or at Liberty, he was not
unwilling to submit to his Will, even to do and suffer, whereby he might honor
and glorify his Maker in his day and generation.

And he had not long been Convinced of the blessed Truth, till Lewis West the
Priest of the Parish where he lived, began to persecute him, because for
Conscience Sake he could not pay Tithes, and cast him into Prison at Carlisle
in Cumberland, for at Little-Salkeld in that County, was the place of his abode
then, though some years after his Enlargement, he removed himself and family
into this Nation of Ireland.

But mark, he being put in Prison was kept Prisoner several years, by reason of
the hard-hearted cruelty, of the Priest that sought for his Goods more then for
the good of his Soul as plainly appears by those his unchristian-like Actions;
even like those of old that would cry Peace, Peace while People put into their
Mouths, but when for Conscience Sake they could not do it, then those false
Teachers prepared War against them; and thus he that is born after the flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the spirit from one Generation to another:
But after this his so long Imprisonment, it pleased God to make way for his
deliverance out of those Bonds, by the Death of the said Priest his persecuter,
who on a journey, broke his Leg, whereof he Died, without ever Returning home,
but his Wise fulfilling her Husband's Cruelty, would not condescend to his
Enlargement which was in her power to do, but constrained him to go to London
being above Two hundred Miles, which he Traveled on Foot, and so obtained his
full Liberty by a Habias Corpus, the Lord having endued him with Christian
patience all this time, to undergo what he permitted his persecutor to Inflict
upon him.

And after this it was some time my lot to travel with him in the service of
Truth, in whose Company I had great satisfaction, for he did not only Preach in
Word and Doctrine, but in Life and Conversation also, and so was A rightly
qualified Minister of the Gospel; and was a serviceable Member in the Church of
Christ, both for the Propagating of Truth, and a Support to Friends where he
Lived and Traveled; the Lord having endued him with a good Understanding,
which did so sanctify his Natural acquirements, that he was thereby qualified
to answer his Call into the Ministry, which he delivered in Meekness, according
to his Deportment in his Conversation, which which was Mild and Courteous,
little in his own Eye, or in outward show or appearance; Yet would not turn his
back off an Enemy to Truth, in Truth's defense; and he was qualfi'd for Truth's
service in his open and plain Testimony, which was both sweet and lively to the
Comforting the Faithful, stirring up the Careless, and reaching the Witness in
those who were unacquainted with the Way of Righteousness.

For indeed his Labor in the Work of the Gospel was refreshing to the
honest-hearted, who as a faithful Steward over the manifold Grace's of God (a
measure of which was committed to his Charge) did ^ruly Labor in the Service
thereof, not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but with a
ready Mind; neither as being Lord over God's Heretage, but being an Ensample
unto the Flock; for which I doubt not, he has his Reward at the Hand of the
great Shepherd, even a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

And now I shall speak a little of his manner of Life toward his latter End,
for as he had been an Innocent carriag'd Man, and a lover of Truth and
Righteousness from a Child, so it pleased God to preserve him all along even to
his Life's end; although attended many times with great Weakness of Body, by
reason of some Distempers occasioned partly by the aforesaid Imprisonment,
which he underwent for his Testimony's sake, which God had given him to bear
against the Antichristian Ministry of the Age; Yet that saying was fulfilled
in him, as in the Apostles time, although the Outward Man perished, and grew
weaker and weaker, the Inward Man was renewed day by day; for these light
afflictions which last but for a moment, work in us a far more Exceeding and
Eternal weight of Glory; while we look not at those things that are seen, but
at the things that are not seen, for the things that are seen are Temporal, but
the things that are not seen are Eternal: So we need not fear any of these
things that we may suffer for a good Cause; if the Devil be permitted to cast
some into Prison, and we may have Tribulation for a time, yet the promise is to
those that are Faithful unto Death, they shall receive a Crown of Life; So
although many be the Trials and Exercises of the Righteous, yet the Lord in his
own appointed time, can and will deliver out of them all; and although for a
time the Back be given to the smiter, yet the Rod of the Wicked shall not
always be upon the Backs of the Righteous, but God will Rescue them out of
their hands, that they shall not be a prey to them any longer.

But too few Consider when Righteous and Good Men are taken away, that it is
God's Pleasure and Goodness to them, to take them from the Evil to come, as he
has done our dear Friend of whom I am writing* And though he be removed from
us, yet the remembrance of his innocent Life, does remain with us, and although
it be our loss, yet it is his gain.

In that Eternal Joy and Rest
Where his Soul's for ever blessed.
And when he was upon his Death-bead, he was sweetly preserved in a sense of
that Life that flowed from the Fountain of pure Refreshment, which made him to
utter many savoury Expressions, even to the Edifying of those that stood by
him: some of which that could be remembered are here inserted: For when I with
some other Friends went to see him, we had a Meeting at his House at Ballany
Carrick in the County of Wicklow, on the first day of the Week, before he
departed this Life, being the 16th day of the Ninth Month 1684. where he sat up
in the Meeting all the time, and we had a Heavenly season, and the Lord's
refreshing Presence was with us, which he having a sense of, did often express
his great Joy and Satisfaction therein, and in the enjoyment of Friends
company; and said he could wish (if it were the Will of God) that he might be
taken away when we were there; So I with some other Friends stayed all Night,
and lodged in the Chamber where he lay, and he was very quiet, and patiently
bore his Affliction.

The next Morning one of his servants coming to him, asked him how he did, his
answer was to her, naming her by her Name; thou have had much trouble in
attending of me, but now the time is short that I have to stay; for he was not
unsensible that the time of his Dissolution drew near; his servant being
reached with his words, began to weep, he said I know there will be Mourning
for me, but (blessed be God) it is not as those that have no hope; for he knew
that hope which was grounded upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles
Jesus Christ being the Chief Cornerstone, the same that all the Faithful did
bear Witness too in former Ages:

And so that day was chiefly spent in preparing for the time of his Change, in
setting his House in Order, and settling his outward Concerns; and when he came
to Sign his Will, his Hand shoke by reason of weakness of Body; He looking up
with a cheerful Countenance, said, O, is it so! that I who have written so
much, can scarce now write my Name, well, it must be so, and the Will of the
Lord be done, I am content; and thus was his precious time spent, in giving and
resigning himself up unto the Will of the Lord, saying, come Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit: And so about the sixth hour at Night, as he was in a slumber fell
into a Fit or Trance, Jonathan Nicholson, his Brother in Law being with him in
Bed, heard him say as he fell into a fit, Farewell, Farewell, Farewell, three
times, as if he had been waiting for the time of his change, but in about half
an hour he again revived, and came to his perfect senses as before: Three of
his Children being brought to him, he called to them by their Names, saying,
dear Babes, I am glad to see you, expressing it with much joy and gladness,
advising them to live in the fear of God, and to be good Children, and to keep
amongst Friends; and said I have not much Gold and Silver to leave you, but I
hope the blessing of the Lord will attend you; and so Kissing and Embracing
them he took leave of them; his dear Wife coming to him weeping, he said to
her, Weep not, thy care and tenderness has been much over me; and often seemed
to lament and pity his dear Wife, that had been a true Help-meet unto him from
the time of their first coming together unto that day, in his Exercises and
Weakness, which were not a few.

And so after he had taken his leave of those about him, he fell into another
fit, and in less then half an hour was taken away with little or no pain, being
the 18th Day of the aforesaid ninth Month 1684.

This is to be noted, that he often in his Life time, when in great pain and
affliction by reason of the Distemper of his Body, did desire the Lord to
mitigate his pain upon his Deathbed, and not take him away in those Tortering
fits; which the Lord in great Mercy did Answer; for he did say that he was not
Sick, and felt little pain, but a great weakness and decay of outward strength;
yet still was well Preserved in a sweet Frame of Spirit, to the great
Satisfaction and Comfort of those that were with him at his last End.

Thus they are blessed that Die in the Lord, from henceforth they rest from
their Labors, and their Works follow them; where the voice of the oppressor is
no more heard, the Wicked cease from Troubling, and the weary are at Rest.

George Rooke.

The TESTIMONY OF ANTHONY SHARP.
DEar Thomas Carleton, was a True, and Sound, Meek, and Faithful Friend, that
Loved the Blessed Truth, and Faithful Brethren, and was so much in the self
denial, and a Lover of the Brethren, that he Preferred them before himself.

And having the marks of a True Desciple, was a good Example, and left a good
Savor behind him; and I am satisfied he is at Rest.

Anthony Sharp.

The Captives COMPLAINT, OR THE Prisoners PLEA; Against the Burthensom and
Contentious Title of TITHES. With a True Relation of the Prisoners Spiritual
Progress, and Travel toward the New and Heavenly Jerusalem. Together, with the
sad and grievous Sufferings he sustained by a Persecuting and Covetous High
Priest, in Cumberland, for his Gospel Testimony against Tithes, Here is also
laid down several Grounds, and Reasons against the Propriety and Payment of
Tithes in this Evangelical Day, and Dispensation. As also several Papers and
Queries sent to the Priest, which to this Day remains Unanswered.


All which is now referred to the view, judgment and understanding of every
Conscientious impartial Reader, of what Profession soever; wherein the Prisoner
does recommend himself, his Sufferings, and the empty, groundless Cause
thereof, to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God, as was the Practice of
the Apostles and Saints of old in the primitive Times. 2 Cor. 4.2. Reprinted
in the Year, 1604

The Captives Complaint, or the Prisoners Plea, etc.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the incomprehensible wise God (who made Heaven
and Earth, and all that is therein) to create Man, and set him apart for his
own Service, Worship and Glory, as the most competent Creature, whereby to
advance his glorious, dreadful Name over all his Creatures upon the Earth, over
whom He gave Man dominion; and for the better Ruling and Governing His
Creatures, and Worshipping and Glorifying Himself, (the Author and Creator of
all) He has endued Man with Reason and Understanding, and infused into him a
Principle of his own Life, and stamped, or set His own Image in him, thereby to
beautify His creature Man, giving him dominion, power, and liberty, over all
that He had made, both the Fruits of the Earth, and every Creature moving
thereon; the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Air, and every Creature
moving therein; save only of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, he was not
to Eat: Now the Serpent being more subtle, then all the Beasts of the field did
insinuate it self into the affections of the Woman, and having got room in the
weaker Vessel, did induce both the Man and the Woman through feigned smooth
words, (and not by direct opposition, mark that) into disobedience to the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, whose Image they then lost, by the Serpents
Transformation; who raised the discontented, aspiring, self-seeking Principle,
that desired to be equal with God, which they soon received, and obeyed;
thereby losing the happy, blessed, and good estate in which he was placed, and
thereby fell into the knowledge of Evil, and naked miserable estate with God,
being Transformed into the image of the Serpent, was captivated in the Curse,
and so came to be driven out of the Garden of Eden, (in which he was placed)
and to be fenced out from the Tree of Life, and from the Presence of the Lord
in that State for ever.

And because the Serpent had done this, the Lord cursed it above all Cattle,
and every Beast of the Field, and put enmity between its seed and the Seed of
the Woman, saying, The Woman's Seed shall break its Head, and it should Bruise
his Heel; so the Enmity being placed between the Seeds, the warfare was begun,
which ever since has continued through the Generations of Mankind; and hence
the striving between the Twins in the Womb comes to be known; and the Elected
and Reprobated Seed is known; and the Seed of the Bond woman, and the Seed of
the Freewoman is known; and the Fleshly Birth persecuting that which is born
of the Spirit is known; and the Promise of the Lord to the Seed of the Woman is
known and fulfilled in those that witness the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven
to be come; and the Seed of the Covenant is known to such, in which all the
Nations of the Earth is blessed; and blessed and happy are they that are
apprehended, and overcomes in this Seed, for they shall again come to eat of
the Tree of Life, that is in the midst of the Paradise of God, and their names
shall be written in the Book of the Life of the Lamb, from henceforth and for
ever.

It being my aim and intent at this time to present unto public view, and to
the manifested Light, and Judgment of all pious and sober Men, not only my
descent, state and condition from my Childhood, but rather my estate and
condition in Spirit, in all the gentle leadings, drawing, and carryings on of
my Soul, by the Lord, from the day of the dispensation of the tender Mercy and
Love of God, (by his light dispensed and made known in me) unto this present
day of my Sufferings for his Name and Gospel; and also to give a Relation of
the ground and cause of my S^fferings, the Person by whom and the manner how,
with a breviate of my Testimony, and Judgment in the matters of this Treatise,
in as much brevity as possible, whereby to clear my Conscience (and answer the
witness in others) in the sight of God.

AS for my descent (to speak after the manner of Men) I sprang of mean (though
honest) Parents according to the Flesh, my Father being a Husbandman in the
County of Cumberland, I (according to his pleasure) was educated sometimes at
School, sometime with Herding, and tending of Sheep, or Cattle, sometime with
the Plow, Cart or Threshing Instrument, or other lawful Labors, according to
the manner of that part of the County in which I lived; yet such was the love
and tender mercy of the Lord, (who always had respect unto the meek and lowly
in heart, and dwells with the the contrite and humble in Spirit, and shows
kindness and mercy to them of low degree) that he was pleased to visit me with
his everlasting Love, which often presented unto me my state and manner of
Life, and by the same Love and Light he made known unto me, that his Way and
Worship was a purer, holier Way, and cleaner Life, then yet I had attained
unto, and withal gave me to see the evils, and miserable effects of that state
and condition in which I lived according to the Fashions, Customs, Ways and
Worships of the formal World, which secret drawings I felt time after time as a
small still Voice inwardly calling for Righteousness, and Holiness of Life, and
as it were, saying, This is the Way, walk in it, Read your own States, for thus
I was induced to seek after the Lord, and to make further enq^iry into the Way
of God; (out of which I perceived my self) and then not knowing where the Lord
was to be found, nor that it was he that stirred, and drew by his Love in me; I
gave my self to Reading and searching of the Scriptures, which was then
Preached (by the Man made Ministers, and also generally believed by the People
they taught) to be the Word of God, and the alon^ way to the Kingdom, and to
the knowledge of God, his Way, and Worship; and believing their Doctrines, I
did with much diligence and zeal press after the knowledge of the Scriptures,
giving up my self to Hear Sermons, learn Catechisms, and the like, after the
manner and general Practice Taught by the then Preachers, sometime more Strickt
then the rest, whose comeliness seemed to Transcend the precedent Generation of
Priests, and their way of Worship; yet it pleased the Lord not only inwardly to
break my rest in spirit, but also outwardly to afflict me with Bodily
afflictions, for I was afflicted from my youth up, and from my Childhood the
rod of Correction was upon me inwardly and outwardly; inwardly known to my self
alone, and outwardly apparent to most, or all that knew me after the flesh;
some concluding I was in a Consumption, some in one Disease, some in another;
and then by the advice and will of my Father (according to the flesh) I sought
to (and proved) many Doctors and Physicians, for the restoration of the health
of my Body; but they (like the Priests) were all Physicians of no value, for
none did remove the cause, nor take away the effect, which still remained with
me and upon me, as a motive spur, or whip, to drive me forward to get an
interest in the Lord, who through the riches of his Love did spiritually apply
my Bodily afflictions for the Health and Salvation of my Soul, inwardly drawing
my affections and desires after Him, still presenting to my view, and raising
in my unerstanding a way more Holy, and Pure, and more agreeable to his Will,
then the way I was in, drawing me from one degree of Grace to another, and from
one Dispensation to another, according to his good Pleasure and W^ll; then I
began to affect those (that separated from the formal Worships, and pub^ick
People) who s^emed to be a People of more reformed lives, and judgments, and of
more circumspect Conversations, and chused rather to settle and join with those
called Independants, who at that day were beautiful and glorious to that
glimmering Twilight estate that I was in, they being then pretty tender and
low; I often adjudged my self inferior, unworthy, and undeserving the
Fellowship and Society of such a People; yet still I pressed forward desiring
to attain unto that state which was before me, (which by the eye of Faith I
saw) and to apprehend that for which I was apprehended in the Love of God; yet
was I often tossed in my self, like restless waves in a troubled Sea; not
feeling peace nor stability with the Lord, I often besought the Lord in secret,
in the brokenness, and contrition of spirit, to clear my understanding and
judgment, and make me to know his own Living Way, Truth and People; Sects and
Opinions then abounding, one saying, this is the way, an^t^er saying that is
the way; one saying, lo, Christ is in this, or here; another saying He is in
that, or there; thus every Denomination and Judgment construing, wresting, and
interpreting the Scriptures to their sundry Tenants, and forcing meanings from
them to answer their Principles, and to maintain every of their interpretations
as authentic Truths; in all which I was as one without Foundation, tossed with
every of their windy Doctrines; i^ st^ll rested with me, Man was created for
Gods glory; I being ever and anon judged and condemned in my self for Sin and
Disobedience, for the Law was come, by which is the knowledge of Sin; and the
Commandment being come, Sin revived, and I died, and having as it were wrought
Death in me by that which was good, then S^n by the Commandment became
exceeding Sinful, and then was I driven to seek for Peace night and day, early
and late, in public and private Fastings, or Feastings, or Family Devotions,
whatsoever running from one House to another, and from one Town to another,
from one Assembly and Worship to another, even as it were from Sea to Sea,
seeking the Word of the Lord, as Amos said, Amos 8.12. in all their Sabboths,
Lectures, Humiliations or Thank givings, diligently observing every Ordinance
(so called) in which the Minister said God was to be found, and all to obtain
Peace with my Maker, but it, as it were, fled from me, and was not to be found
amongst them; and and then this cry was great in me, O, that I knew the Truth!
Oh, that I knew the True and Living Way to the Kingdom of God! O, that I could
feel that Testimony of Spirit which they so much spoke of, bearing witness with
my Spirit, that I was in the Sonship! though I felt and knew, I was in the way
according to their Judgment, and had the signal tokens of a Christian, as they
produced from that spiritual progress and operation the Saints and Servants of
God went through in Ages past, which was as Way-marks, set up by Patriarchs,
the Prophets and Children of Israel in their Travel to Canaan, and by the
Apostles, and Servants of our Lord Jesus Christ in their Spiritual Travel to
the Heavenly Canaan, through the Regeneration and New Birth.

But being as I said before, often deeply humbled before the Lord, and tendered
and broken in my Spirit, distressed in my Soul, afflicted in my Body, day and
night panting and breathing after the Lord, as the Heart pants after the water
Brooks, being many times deprived of my natural rest and sustenance, mine eyes
preventing the night Watches, as David said, watering my Bed with my Tears,
being almost overwhelmed in the Floods, multitudes of Afflictions compassing me
about, Wars and Commotions on every side, Famine and Pestilence, and
Earthquakes, fearful Sights, and great Signs appearing from Heaven, these were
the beginning of Sorrows, and Days of great Tribulation; then did the sign of
the coming of the Son of Man appear in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and
great Glory, whose appearance was as the Lightning, that appeared from the
East, and shined unto the West; by which it pleased the Father to manifest the
way of Life, and to reveal his Son in me, and by his Light that gives the
Knowledge of the glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. He was
pleased to give me a glimpse of that heavenly Land, and of the Way to the
Kingdom of God, which I saw to be in and through the Light of Christ Jesus,
which Lights every Man that comes into the World, as it was then Preached
and testified by the Servants of the Lord, a measure of which I felt in my
self, which told me all that ever I did, secretly condemning every work in me,
with every word and action that was against, or contrary to the mind and will
of the Father, and also justifying every good word and work that was according
to his Will; Thus the Lord having opened my understanding, and given me in
measure a feeling of himself, I was forced to conclude (as the woman of Samaria
did) that this was the Christ, this was the Way, this was the Truth, as by
daily experience I found by the operation of the Light in my own heart,
compared with the Testimony that the Saints and Servants of God had given in
Ages past, and thus in the mouths of two or three Witnesses this Testimony was
established and confirmed in me, but how to receive and give obedience I knew
not, the Enemy often raising Doubts and Fears in me, often dissuading me from
embracing the Light, with much questioning whether it were the Truth yea or
nay: Then as soon as the Seed, the Man-child appeared, the Dragon appeared also
ready to Devour the Man-child; then the Read-Sea was as it were, before, and
Pharoh and his Host behind, and fear fell on every side; then appeared Father
against Son, and Son against Father, one Nation against another, and still the
greatest Enemies were in mine own House; and then was I in great distress; then
was the Days of great Tribulation, perceiving the Way strait and narrow, being
to forsake Father or Mother, House or Lands, Friends and Relations, and all old
acquaintances, and cast down all Crowns, Dignities, Wisdom, Riches, or what
other Enjoyments whatsoever, and deny my self; and become a Fool, and a
Reproach, a Scorn, a Byword, and a Hissing to the Men of the World, and take
up the Cross daily, and follow the Lord through great Tribulation, through the
Red Sea, through the Wilderness, yea, even through Death it self; then was I
ready to faint, and to say with them, This was a hard saying, who can bear it;
then the Dragon cast out Floods after the Manchild, but God prepared a place in
the Wilderness, and the Child was preserved; then was the warfare great between
the Flesh and the Spirit, the Law in my Members waring against the Law in my
Mind; doing that which I allowed not, and leaving undone that which I allowed;
with my mind I served the Law of God, but with my Flesh the Law of Sin; the
Spirit indeed was willing to Drink that bitter Cup, but the Flesh was weak;
then when I would have done good, Evil being present, prevented me; then I
became as one destitude of all succor, comfort and support, not knowing
whither to fly, or how to escape from the dreadful wrath of God that was then
impending over me if I disobeyed; then was I forced in the fullness of time, not
only to stand still and see the Salvation of God, but also to resign my self
into his Blessed Will and sweetly to Drink that bitter Cup that was given me to
D^i^k, allowing that the Will of the Lord, and not my will should be done,
being willing to undergo any thing, so the Lord be glorified, and my Soul might
rest in Peace, being that for which I had long traveled in spirit, having been
often as it were at the P^ts brink, and as it were at the mouth of the Furnace,
having Drunk deep of the Cup of Judgment, and of Indignation, and of the Wrath
of the Lord for Sin, and for Iniquity, often traveling as with my Hands upon
my loins pained, and crying outin my Soul, as a Woman in Travel, that longs
for the appointed hour of her Deliverance, often in that state blessing the
Lord for the Ministration of condemnation, which at that Day was glorious to
me, often doubting, and fearing in my self least the Lord should cease striving
with me, and have left me, and given me up to a reprobate Mind, and to
heardness of Heart, being often ready to Despair of obtaining the promised
Land, that was before me, considering the many lets, impediments, obstructions,
hazards, dangers, which like Mountains of opposition appeared as high as the
top of Carmel. And thus being assaulted by the Enemy, reasoning in my self, I
was at a point what to do; to turn back to Egypt, the Land of Darkness, or
House of Bondage again, I durst not, knowing the Light in me, the Pillar of
fire that appeared for my Guide, and Lead^r; led me Canaan ward, and knowing
the Terrors and Judgments of the Lord, that had not only passed upon me, but
was still impending over me for sin and disobedience, because I offered not up
freely, nor sacrificed freely, nor did not for sake all freely, but like
Ananias and Saphira, (though I had parted with much yet) would have kept a part
back; and if the Lord had cut me off, as they were, I must have justified the
justice of the Lord in my Soul and Conscience which daily witnessed against me,
as it were sealing and confirming this Testimony to me, and in me, that I
should never find Peace nor Reconsiliation with the Lord, until I gave
obedience to the Light, and came into society with the Children of Light, (
viz. the People by the World called Quakers) and came to the Worship that stood
in Spirit, contrary to all the Ways, Worships and Services of the World, set
up in the wills and limitations of Men, which I saw to be only Formal and
Traditional, and no less then Idolatry, as they then stood in the Will Worship,
being prescribed, and set forth at the Wills and Pleasures of Men, and
established by the then present Powers, Government and Authority; as by the
Independent Church Faith, the Presbyterian Directory, the Episcopals
Common Prayer Book, and such like, may more fully Testify, none being to
question, or object against any thing that was, or is believed by their several
Churches and Assemblies, or prescribed in their Rules or Canons, Directories,
or Service-Books (though never so much dissatisfied in Conscience) without
undergoing the Censures, or Abjudications of their particular Societies, and
Churches, so called: But they that are come to the Light and Liberty of the
Sons of God, and to live and walk in the Spirit, and by the Spirit they know
the Anointing which abides in them, which is truth, and no lie, which Teaches
them in all things to follow the Lamb only, whithersoever he goes, and the
leadings of his Spirit, and not the formal trash and traditional precepts of
Men; and so they are ceased from Man, and his teachings, knowing the Lord is
come to Teach his People himself; whereof I being persuaded in my own heart,
and this Testimony aforesaid standing in me, (viz.) that I should never know
Peace with God in my Soul, until I obeyed and followed the Light (which I
daily felt striving in me, and with me in my Meditations and Communications
with my own Heart, secretly condemning me for my disobedience and works of
darkness) I was (in the fullness of time) constrained to yield, and resign my
self into the Will and Lap of the Lord, as Esther did, either to Live or
Perish; resolving as I said before, freely to drink that Cup, which had so long
appeared bitter, but was then made sweet and wholesome, as the Waters of Jericho,
being seasoned with that power that makes every bitter thing sweet, and hard
things easy; then was the Arm of the Lord made bare, and stretched forth for
my deliverance, and his strength was perfected in weakness, being brought into
subjection, and made willing to bear his Cross, then his Yoke was made easy,
and his Burden became Light; then he that sat in Darkness saw great Light, and
he that dwelt in the Land of the shadow of Death, upon him did the Light
shine; in that Day did he cause the Deaf to hear, the Blind to see out of
obscurity, the Lame to walk, the Dumb to speak, and the Tongue of the stammerer
to speak plainly; even then when mine Ears hearkened to the Word that was near,
in the mouth and heart, the righteousness of Faith which the Apostle Preached,
Romans 108. Even then when I cast away my Jewels, Ornaments, Images, etc.
Menstruous clothes, Isa. 30.21, 22. and my own Righteousness, Faith, and best
Performances, which was but as filthy rags, in comparison of the excellency of
that Glory revealed in and through the Son of righteousness which arose with
healing in his Wings, then did he give rain unto his Seed, even the former and
the latter in his Season, and upon every Mountain and Hill made he Rivers and
Streams to run; then was the light of the Moon as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun was sevenfold, even in that Day when he bound up the breach of
his Servant, and healed the stroke of his wounded; he opened the Prison doors
also, and set the Captive at liberty, and let the Oppressed go free; then he
made the Lame to leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the Dumb to sing for joy;
the crooked paths did he make straight, and the rough ways plain and smooth; he
brought down the mighty from their Seats, and exalted them of low degree; then
he filled the Hungry with good things, and the Rich he sent empty away; then
did joy spring forth as the Mornning, and gladness did arise as the Sun, even
then when Peace did run down like a River, and Salvation as a mighty Stream;
then was the time of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, even then when
the Bridegroom came out of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; then
was the Marriage Supper of the Lamb at hand; then was the Day of joy and
gladness, when sorrow and sighing fled away; then was the Day of mine
espousing, when my Maker became my Husband, Hosea 2.19, 20, 23. and the
Bridegroom and Bishop of my Soul; when I was betrothed unto the Lord, then was
the Marriage in Cana of Galilee known, John 2. which was the only Marriage
Christ and his Disciples were called to, where all the Water in the Vessels was
turned into Wine, which makes glad the heart of Man, and comfort the
Living, Psalm. 104.15. Eccles. 10.19. such did Israel of old Drink in the Land
of Promise, Deuteronomy. 32.14. here was the first, and beginning of Miracles that
Jesus wrought, showing forth his Glory; it was here also he Healed the Rulers
Son which was ready to Die, his second Miracle wrought in Galilee, John 4.50,
54. here also was his first appearance to his Disciples after he was risen from
the Grave, Matt. 28.7.10.16, 17. here also was his first appearance, and
working of Wonders in me, and to me, which when I saw I believed, as his
Disciples and the Galileans did, John 2.11. and 4.45. then he whipped out the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and overthrew the Tables of the
Money Changers; then I knew the Tabernacle of the Lord, was with Men, and that
he was come to Teach his People Himself, and great was the Peace of His
Children, as Isaiah said, chap. 54.13. then did I witness the Covenant changed,
the Law changed, the Priesthood changed, the Offerings, Oblations, Sacrifices
and Ordinances changed, the Service and the Worship changed, and all the
Shadows, Types, and Figures abolished, which was but a Shadow of good Things to
come, Hebr. 10.1. and the Tabernacle and Sanctuary changed, Heb. 10.20. and the
Vail removed, and the New and Living Way to be Revealed (which he has prepared
for us) through the Vail, that is to say his Flesh; for even to this Day, while
Moses, and the Old Testament and the Law is read, the same Vail remains over,
and untaken away, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15. as is evident, and clearly seen to he the
very State and Condition of the Ministers and People of England, to whom the
Way of Life (of Regeneration of Light, of Righteousness, of Peace, of having
their Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and of witnessing Redemption
and Remission of sins) is hid, and to them the covering is not yet taken away;
for the Vail is over their Hearts, and what they see and know of God is but by
the seeing or hearing of the outward Eye or Ear, as Job said, chap. 42.5.
knowing nothing but what they know Naturally, in a literal historical,
notional, external Sense, and in these Things they foyl and corrupt themselves,
never owning or obeying the Light that leads out of Darkness, and Discovers all
the works thereof, which makes all things manifest, and gives the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ (which till then is Veiled)
through which we draw nigh unto God, and makes bold to enter into the inner
Sanctuary, even the holy Place, being purified through his Blood, having our
Consciences purged from dead works, Hebr. 9.14. which is not yet made manifest,
where the Tabernacle is standing, Hebr. 9.8. neither do they know the Power
which through his death has rent the Vail; but we that are come to believe in
the Light, and to witness the New Covenant which God promised to his People,
Jer. 31.31.23, etc. Romans 11.27. Hebr. 8.8.10, etc. Hebr. 10.16, 17. they whose
Hearts are turned to the Lord know the Vail taken away, accordto his promise, 2
Cor, 3.16, 17, 18. and we all with open face behold the glory of the Lord, and
are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord; now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is Liberty. Now being born of the same Seed, and not another, and regenerated
by the same Life and Power, and because we have the same Spirit of Faith which
the Apostles and Servants of the Lord had, as it is written, 2 Cor. 4.13. Psalm
116.10. I believed, therefore have I spoken, we also have Believed, and
therefore speak; now we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. and having
this hope and trust we use great boldness and plainness of speech, and are not
ashamed of that worthy Name, by which we have been called, nor of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God unto all those that Believe; and
this Mystery (viz. Christ in us the hope of Glory, Col. 1.26, 27) hid from Ages
and Generations) has he opened and revealed in us, blessed, honored and
glorified by the sweet and precious Name and Love of our God for ever, that
has opened the mysteries of his Kingdom, and has revealed them unto Babes,
Sucklings, and to the little and lowly in Spirit, and yet has hid them from
the Wise and Prudent of the Earth, this is the Lords doing, and is mavelous
in our Eyes, blessed, yea everlastingly blessed be his holy Living, eternal
Name, Love, Life and Power, who alone is worthy of all Glory, Rule, and
Dominion for evermore.

And having this Testimony, and for this Testimonies sake, and for our love and
faithfulness thereunto, we suffer, and are brought into bonds by the chief
Priests and Rulers of this Generation; for as it was in the Apostles days, so
it is now, They that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution;
and as Christ said, In the World you shall have tribulation, but in me you
shall have Peace; and if you love Me the world will hate you; and even so
persecuted they the Prophets that went before us: this persecuting spirit
(getting a place and room in the Woman, as I said before) broke forth in Cain,
the third Person in the Earth, and he slew Abel his only Brother, and here the
Enmity between the Seeds appeared (which I mentioned in the beginning) and this
envious Persecuting spirit has had a place and descent through all the
Generations of Mankind to this very Day, as the Scriptures are full, how they
that served and feared the Lord did suffer Persecutions, Afflictions,
Tribulations, Reproaches, spoiling of Goods, Buffettings, Imprisonments, yea,
even to the Death, and all for following the Lord in the Regeneration, and for
serving and obeying Him in heart and spirit, and for departing and separating
themselves from the Ways, Worships, Customs, Traditions, and beggarly rudiments
of the World; and as they persecuted the Prophets and Apostles of Christ that
went before us, even so do they persecute us, and yet they will profess they
know God, but their Works deny Him; for I was no sooner turned from Darkness to
Light; nor from Satan's Power to God; nor from sin to righteousness; nor from
the lusts and pleasures of the Flesh to serve the Living God; nor no sooner
come to deny my self, and take up the Cross of Christ, and follow him, through
Tribulations, Reproachings, Revilings, Mockings, Fastings, Temptings, or what
other Sufferings soever, or through Death it self unto Life; yea, no sooner I
say was I given up to follow him, but persecution arose for the Gospel sake,
notwithstanding my long Travel and Pilgrimage in the Wilderness, (neither
considering the Faintings, the Hungrings, the Thirstings, the Jeopardies,
Perils, the many desperate Dangers, the dark Disconsolate days, the long and
wearisom Nights my poor Soul sustained, with many a sigh and heavy groan; with
many a doleful lamentation, with much brokenness of Heart, and contrition of
Spirit when Rivers as it were run down from mine Eyes, when my Heart failed me
for fear in the day of my spiritual progress, from Egyt to Canaan) I say never
considering the afflictions I bad gone through the enmity in Gods enemies
without arose against me, to repoach, revile, and persecute me, and (as I said
before, having withdrawn and separated my self from them, with their Way and
Worship) I was hated, envied and threatened by them, but especially by one of
Englands chief Priests, named Lewis West, a Man whose Life and Gonversation
does more fully declare him to all that knows him; part whereof I may set down
in this following Treatise, and shall leave it to the view, judgment and
consideration of all sober juditious Men, that knows any thing of the Way and
Worship of God; but especially to those my Neighbors and Countrymen that has
known both him and me according to the flesh; (though he be a Man in esteem,
honor and repute amongst Men, and the Children of this World, and has
attained to his several Titles and degrees of Honor and Preferment, being
reckoned one of their chief and learned orthodox Divines; being (as his Wife
once said to me) contemning me as ^udatious, and for my puerility and
illiteratness, far inferior to argue, or dispute matters of Conscience with
him) brought up at his Book and School from his Childhood; and I being but a
Child, as she said, and indeed sprung of mean Parentage and low Degree,
according to the flesh; and in my minority Educated a little at School but the
most part about Husbandry, Tilling, or Hearding, or the like, bring an
inferior weak Child in comparison of Thousands; but what I now am is by the
Grace and sweet Love of God, for which I have cause to bless and magnify his
Name for ever) and let such I say as has known both him and me, and not only
such, but all that have any feeling or sense of the Way and Work of God judge
of us, and between us, in every thing, either before or hereafter inserted or
recited; being for my own part, (according to the principle of Light and Truth
I profess) willing to recommend my self to every Man's Conscience in the sight
of God, and also to give a reason to any Man that shall in Truth and Soberness,
demand a reason of me of the Faith and Hope that is in me (according to the
manifestation of the Grace of God received.)

Now I say, the said L. W. was no sooner settled in his place, and I set to
follow the Lord, but he began to menace and threaten me, together with other
Professors, to bring us under Conformity; and by and by showed his austerity,
by which he made many Professors (and others inclining to Reformation) bow and
conform, who came in by degrees, and yielded Conformity at one time or other,
in one thing or other, which strengthened his Lordly spirit in severity, (who
should have been Minister and Servant to all) thereupon persuading himself,
that a little more rigor, a little more severity, one twist more in the rod, one
cord more in the whip would subject all his Parishioners, and make them Conform;
sometimes he would have drawn me with soft words, pretending great kindness to
me, or any of my Mothers Children, etc. for our Parents sake, the smalness
whereof may appear by and by; for he having no occasion at all against me, save
touching the Law of my God, (being that which was matter of Conscience and
weight to me) yet it seems occasion must be had, and small ones must be taken
where great ones are not; and therefore he took it against me, because for
Conscience sake, I could not pay him Tithes.

A thing never challenged nor paid (for ought I know) by any Gospel Minister,
nor any other under a Gospel Dispensation, what ever any Man may pretend; so he
that flattereth, and smootheth deceitfully, crying Peace, Peace to the Wicked,
because I cannot now run with them to their excess, nor cannot return to their
vomi^ again, but especially because I could not put into his mouth, as Micah
said, Mic. 3.5. he now forthwith prepares open War against me; and thus he
begins for my first years denial of Tithes to him, he presents me to the Jury,
at a Temporal Court, held at his own House in the manner of little Salkeld by
the Dean and Chapter (so called) of Carlisle, he himself being one of the Lords
of the Court; so being called by the Jury, I told them that for Conscience sake
I could pay him none, often saying to them that that Court had nothing to do to
determine matters of that nature, the Ecclesiastical Courts being provided for
that purpose, unto whom such things more properly belonged, yet the Jurors
slighted me and said I was a fool, it was better for me to have them determined
there, etc. So being willing to do the Priest a pleasure, they proceeded to
cast it for him, and gave a Precept against me of One pound one shilling, or
there abouts, for which the Prebends Bailiffs took a Cow from me wo^^h Three
pound three shillings, or upwards, I having but one other; the Priest called me
to him, required me to pay him, I said no, I could pay him none; then he
beckned to one of his Fellows another Prebend, being then present, to reason
and expostulate with me, endeavoring to persuade me to pay him, and in our
dispute he pleaded the Civil Law; a third Priest standing by, by way of
Interlocution, Promptingly said to the Ear of the other, Jure Divino, Sir, Jure
Divino, to whom I answered, either of you prove Tithes Jure Divino, here before
all this People, and I will pay them, which thing they stayed not to do; for
immediately the aforesaid L. W. taking one of them by the arm, drew them away,
and they all three went to an Alehouse, leaving me to the Court, with whom I
reasoned a while, clearing my Conscience, (which I valued more worth then a
Cow) and then left them: The Jury meeting at other times, I still warned them
not to meddle with it, being it appertained to another Court; nevertheless they
proceeded as above; but mark what befell about the very time the Jury delivered
in their Verdict, the Foreman had a Barn burned by a sudden hand from the
Lord, as was believed, amounting to a considerable damage; which thing I often
pondered in my spirit, though few looked on it otherwise then a common
accident. This being done, from that time forward he proceeded to take my
Tithes in kind, as they fell due, etc. his Collectors taking Hay and Corn at
their pleasure, sometime going in at the wrong end of the Dale, contrary to the
order of Tything, so taking the best of the Grain; other sometimes taking three
or four Stooks, or a Cart load together off at one end; and if I carried away
any untythed, they were sure to please themselves in the next Dale of mine
where they came: Thus they continued, not shaming to bear and dr^g away by
force what they could apprehend; [mark] even as the Priests ( viz. Eli's Sons)
and their Servants did in Israel of old, who were Sons of Belial, and with
their flesh-hooks dragged out of the Pan, Pot, or Caldron either boiled or raw;
and if any denied to give them, they took it away by force, read 1 Samuel 2. from
verse 12 to 17. but mark their end, for the Lord was grieved with them, and
said, he would cut them off that there should not be an old Man left in El's
house, and verse the 35, 36. I will raise up a Priest says the Lord, that
shall do according to all that is in mine heart; and it shall come to pass that
every one that is left in thine house (speaking to Eli) shall come crouching to
him for pieces of Silver, and morsels of Bread: Mark the end of these Priests
(Sons of Belial) who served themselves with the fat, and kept Servants as vile
as themselves, who violently pulled and reaved away by force from the People,
even as the tything polluted Priests and their Servants does now in our days;
are they not pulling, rending and reaving throughout this Nation of England, so
barbarously and inhumanely, that they have made their name to sti^k, and they
are become contemptible and base before all People, read Mal. 2. to verse 9 and
will not their end be like those Sons of Belial: and also what becomes of the
Posterity of many of the Priests that are gone? are they not already in many
p^ces crouching for pieces of silver, and morsels of bread, yea, even to such
as their Fathers persecuted? search and see if it be not so. But to proceed;
this not answering his desire and end, more mischief resting in his heart
against me, he cited me to the Bishops Court but for what I know little, save
that he himself said, for all manner of Tithes since he became Incumbent in
that place, (notwithstanding what was done as aforesaid) his Libel I never got,
they commonly being Scrools of Lies; so the Court proceeded to Excomunication,
whereupon he procured a Writ, called Excommunicate Capiendo, and thereby cast
me into Prison about the latter end of the seventh Month 1663. where I have
continued these four years, during all which time he never did so much as give
me a visit in my Prisonhouse, nor never labored to convince me, or regain me
either by exhortation, information or instruction, etc. as is provided and
enjoyed in the Articles to be enquired of in their Visitation; read Article the
10th, concerning Ministers duty to Popish Recusants, and other Sectaries; nay,
he would never so much as allow me a fair sober Discourse to reason the case or
matter in difference; but when I have met with him, (having sometime gone to
his house) is soon as ever my judgment differed from his, or that I either
opposed, or questioned any thing he said, or held out, forthwith he broke into
passion and fury, sometime buffetting me with his fist, (as he has often done
both to his own hearers and others) other times calling me rogue and rascal,
with such like vilifying terms, in great fury Threatening he would humble me,
etc.

But still all this not answering his ambitious spirit, and covetous ends, he
yet devises more mischief, and presently he casts about to compass my little
parcel of Land, (as Ahab did Naboth's) yea, worse then Ahab, for he never
proffered me the rate in money, 1 Kings 21.1, 2. etc. I read Ahab being sad and
dejected because of Naboth's answer, Jezebel his Wife could soon cure that
malady saying to Ahab, what, art not thou King? Arise and be merry, and I Will
give thee the Vineyard; so he soon devised a way to kill and take possession,
etc.

And indeed whether L. W's Wife has not been a deviser and abetter against me,
it is questioned by some, but I leave it to the Lord and themselves: and he
goes on in Law until the Sheriff returned I could not be found; (although I
was in his Custody, and that the Priest L. W. knew well enough) upon which
false return a Writ of Outlawry came forth against me, and then they knew where
to find me; for thereupon the Sheriff's Clark gave another Mittimus to the
Jailer for me. And until that time I never had the least notice neither from
him, or any one of the Kings Officers (save only that his Wife did once say I
laid for contempt, and that her Husband would take another course for his
Tithes, etc.) and the Jayler keeping me more strict then my Fellows, I required
a reason of him, he said he had received another Mittimus for me; I asked him
for what cause, he said he knew not but it was at L W's. Suit; I desired a
sight of it if he pleased, he said yes, if I would give him thirty pence; I
said, it were but reasonable that I knew upon what account I was so dealt with;
but no account could I have until I bought a Copy thereof of the Sheriffs
Clark, yet being (as a Child) very ignorant in matters of Law, (having never
been concerned in matters of Law, nor never had occasion at any Court with any
person whatsoever, save this with him) I let it go on in singleness of heart,
resolving to leave the issue to the Lord, knowing he was all-sufficient, and
choosing rather patiently to suffer, then to involve my self into such dubious
unseen troubles, and vast expenses, as of the Law does produce, especially
being so incapable of things of that nature; and thus it continued in suspense
(I still waiting to see the effect) until about a year after he stirred again,
and sought through smooth words subtly to have enticed some of my Relations,
to have given him a Composition for me, telling them one while Ten pounds,
another while Twelve or Sixteen pounds would do it, pretending to show them all
the favor imaginable, if they would do any thing; and when his blandilocutions
could not prevail, then he sought to terrify them with threats, saying, he had
a Writ ready, and the Sheriff would come and take possession, and all I had
would be Confiscated to the King, etc. also the People and Neighbors adjacent,
with great exclamation pressing them to compound; saying it was pity it should
be forfeit, which put them to a point, not knowing what to do, some of them
gave me an account once and again with tears, and great grief and vexation, I
(as often before) desired, and also discharged them not to meddle in it; it was
my own, and I knew not that it could go for a better Testimony; I had nothing
but what I had received of the Lord, the loss was like to be solely mine; so
let him and me alone, for what he could inflict I was to bear, and that he
could go no further then the Lord permitted, and what he intended for evil the
Lord turned to good, and I hoped to be preserved and provided for; upon which
they were dissuaded, and would not be induced by him: So by the aforesaid Writ
he called a Jury, and by compulsions summoned my Brother, and others that
farmed my Land, to give an estimate of the Annual value of it, and also what
Goods and Chattels I was possessed of about two years before ( viz. the time
when he began that Suit) intending to make all Confiscate from that day
forward; so the Jurors gave in their Survey at Six pound per annum, etc. in the
year 1666 Then after he had done all this, what through the Exclamation of my
Relations and Neighbors, for the satisfying of them, and what through the
advice of others my Friends) I procured a Reversal, resolving to join Suit, and
try with him; (and never more I did, neither to this day, nor before, in
matters of Law proceedings in my own defense) and how the Lord prevented or
confounded him in his proceeding I know not, but to this day his expectation
has perished, and it is between three or four years since he begun; and indeed
I can truly say, it was freely offered, and not it only, but Liberty and Life
also (if it had been required) into the Will of the Lord, feeling and enjoying
his Peace and Presence I am satisfied, and can say, it is enough, and in the
uprightness of my Heart, I desire I may honor him with life, liberty and
substance while this Tabernacle of clay is undemolished, for he alone is worthy
of all Glory and Thanksgiving from me for evermore; For he brings to naught the
understanding of the Prudent, and turns the wisdom of the Wise men backward,
and confounds, the Wisest Ahithophels, so that their vain hope perishes, and
their Expectation is cut off.

Now all this he has wickedly done against me, and that for no just cause as
in the sight of the Lord, nor no cause pretended, save some small Tithes, as
Hens, Easter-Reckonings, etc. which was no doubt very inconsiderate in
comparison of what he has done; for I have been much persuaded that when he
begun with me, he could no way reckon Five shillings, for his Collectors took
in kind that which was most material, as Corn and Hay, as I have before
related; and for Wool, and Lamb, I had none, and for other Goods I had but a
few; it may be a Cow or two, but seldom, if ever three, which things could
amount to no great value, suppose it were for two or three years; an account
whereof I have often required of him, I have also written to him for an
account; also my Relations have desired an account of him, but to this day none
could I have from him; also I have written to him, that we might fairly and
soberly Discourse of the Title of Tithes profering if I were convinced that
they were Lawful, to pay them without all that to do, and withal warned him
^o cease from his wicked proceedings, being persw^ded they should not go
unpunished by the Lord; a true Transcription whereof hereafter follows, as they
were sent him in several Papers, at several times, which I have inserted for
the Readers better satisfaction.

LEwis. I am informed there is a design in thy Heart to deprive me of mine
inheritance left me by my Father, Is this the fruit of thy Ministry? and in
this do thou do as thou would be don unto? Has Satan filled thine heart,
and rooted Covetousness so deep in thee? Take heed to thy ways, search and see
what spirit thou art of, and what spirit it is that suggesteth this in thee:
enter into consideration with thy self, and commune with thy own heart, whether
thou would be done unto so, yea, or nay; or whether it be thy place to covet
thy Neighbors Goods, or Inheritance? methinks thou should not be ignorant
what became of that Woman Jesabel, for coveting Naboth's Vinyard, and what the
reward of Covetuousness is, the Scriptures are full; observe the words of the
Wise Man, that said, lay not in wait. O wicked Man, against the dwelling of the
Righteous, spoil not his resting place; enter not into the Fields of the
Fatherless etc. and whatsoever is written, is written for our Learning; thou
have often repeated that Command that says Covet not thy Neighbors Goods, nor
any thing that is thy Neighbors; and is thy heart now going after thy
Covetousness? Weigh these things with thy practice; Why should thou destroy
thy own Soul? thou that hold Scripture for thy Rule, will it justify thee
in this thing? Or where have thou any such Rule in it amongst all the
Conversations of the Saints? And do not think but thou must be brought before
the Tribunal of God, there to give an account of all thy deeds done in thy
Body, and there thy person will have no more respect then mine, (though now it
may) all thy Pomp, thy Dignity and Riches will stand thee in no stead, neither
justify thee in his sight, who has said, The wicked shall not go unpunished;
thou have deprived me of my just Liberty already, and if that cannot content or
satisfy thee, surely no more will mine Estate; for the more thou obeyest that
envious and covetous spirit, the more it will draw thee on, until thy Soul be
shut up in the Grave, out of which there is no redemption. So I desire thee,
have respect to thy Souls everlasting health, for these, and such like as thou
art often found in, are not the fruits of a Gospel Minister, for Christ and his
Apostles never taught any such Doctrine; and truly, whilst thou art of this
spirit and conversation, thy Ministry will not profit to wards God, nor thou
can never turn many unto Righteousness (its true, thou may make some
Proselytes, but I think few Converts) it appears thou came not to seek nor
gather us but ours, so that thy end is thy own, and therefore accursed; so
unless thou repent thou shall certainly bear the indignation of the Almighty,
for little or nothing have thou Ministered unto me either in Doctrine or
Practice but that which savours of Death, and such Ministration deserves no
maintenance: So I desire thee, as one that respects thy Souls everlasting
welfare, and in love thereunto I send this unto thee, and not in any respect to
my own interest, as the Lord whom I serve knows, in whose presence I am, but
that thou may cease to bring so deep guilt and weight upon thy Soul, but
rather repent of thy wicked purposes, and seek unto the Lord,, if peradventure
the thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee; for according to outward
appearance one would think thine Estate were sufficient to satisfy thee, that
thou should not reap where thou sowedst not and covet my penny that have so
many pounds; remember the Parable of Nathan to David.

But thou may object and say, there is a reason, thou have a proper right and
due unto it; To this I answer, (as I have formerly done) if thou or any of thy
Function will appoint the time and place where I, or some other of my
Companions in bonds may meet with you, and according to Scripture, sound
Doctrine, and the Spirit of Truth, convince me or us that such things is just
and due, and properly belong to your Ministration, or that Christ and his
Apostles did ordain constitute or allow any such Ministry or Maintenance after
he had offered himself a perfect Sacrifice, having thereby abolished all Types,
and the Law that made nothing perfect: I say, if thou, or any of you can, or
will convince me or us of the lawfulness of paying Tithes, we should neither
suffer Imprisonment, loss of Estate or Goods, nor the Execution of any Law to
pass upon us for denial of Tithes, but rather pay them as conscientiously as
any one whatsoever: And this were but the place and duty of your Function, and
indeed if it were not matter of conscience to me, I could not have suffered
such detriment, loss and imprisonment in the patience and content as I have
done by thee, and I am yet resolved to suffer more before I offend Gods Witness
in my Conscience.

And further I demand of thee what the sum or value is that thou claimest of
me, being reckoned up together, for I have been deprived of my just Liberty a
full year and upwards, which is a penalty beyond my offense, or any pretense of
offense that thou have showed me; So that I think thou needed not a proceeded
to have damnified me any further: So seeing thou yet intendest to add weight
and oppression to the afflicted and oppressed, little enough, if thou give me a
true account of my supposed transgression, which I expect thou will forthwith
do by this Bearer, either in word or writing, without any further deferring;
for sure thou have not gone about to impose all this upon me that thou have
done, and yet intends to do by adding affliction to my bonds, but thou can
and will give a reason in every particular wherefore; which I expect of thee
without any further evasion, or otherwise I may conclude thou can not: So
that I say again in tender love to thy Souls eternal Peace, do I desire thee to
ponder well these things, and receive the Advice of thy Friend herein, for I
know there is a Witness in thy Conscience that will receive me, from which thou
can not flee, nor hide thy self Day nor Night, to it I appeal; and know thou,
that its not that I am weary of Sufferings, or am so married to the World that
I cannot part with it; for though the Devil may have power to Dispossess me of
an External Inheritance, as he has had power to cast into Prison; yet will I
wait upon the Lord, knowing he is able to subdue Satan under his Feet, and thou
could have had no power against me if it had not been given thee; so if thou
willt not be advised for thy good, do what thou have power to do, as for me I
have so much Faith as to Trust in the God of Jacob, and Patience to endure all
these things, knowing the Captain of my Salvation was made perfect through
Sufferings, who will be Glorified in the Sufferings of his Saints, whom my Soul
honors and glorifies above all: So be Exhorted and Warned in time, lest this
stand as a Witness against thee in the Day of the Lord's Indignation, for this
was in my heart from the Lord to warn thee of, so I shall be clear of thy Blood.

Carlisle, the place of my outward restraint, and inward peace, the 14th of the
9th Month, 1664. By one that desires from my heart the welfare of thee and
thine, and to be found in the exercise of love to Enemies. Tho. Carleton.


This second I sent to him after I was Outlawed.

L. West,
HEar and understand, let thy patience show forth it self a little to hear,
read and receive home this herein inserted directed to thee; how long will it
be ere thou cease to add oppression to the oppressed? Wherefore have thou
Outlawed me, when in Prison? Had thou no way to accomplish thy design, and
obtain thy covetous desire and end, but by Treachery and Deceit, and by
stealing Law against the Innocent? Oh, how eager has thy desire been after the
dwellings of the Righteous, and that without any just cause; for which thou
have often refused to give a reason or show the cause! Thou know on the day
of my Commitment I asked thee what thou could demand, before many Witnesses;
also I writ to thee for an account, and my Relations desired an account of
thee, but none yet would, (or rather could) thou truly and justly give: Oh!
be ashamed, be ashamed, and blush that ever thou should profess a Priests
Function, and deal so Treacherously as thou have done: was thy cause so evil,
and thy plea so bad, that thou must steal Law to obtain thy greedy desire? Is
thy love (so much professed) to my Fathers Children at an end? and is envy,
wrath, and malice crept in instead thereof? Oh! the Heathen shall condemn thee
for this; yea, the Earth shall open her mouth, and the very Beasts of the
Field, and Fouls of the Air shall abhor and be astonished to hear and see thy
proceedings herein: The Tribe of the Priesthood will be ashamed of thee, and
all such Sons of Levi; well did Jacob say, Instruments of Cruelty was in their
hands; yea, I may say Cruelty in the highest degree, pride, tyranny and
oppression is their way and path; well speak the Prophets, that which is now
come to pass, yea, seen and felt, Micha 3.5, 11. Ezekiel. 13.18, 19, 22. and chap.
22.25, 26, etc. Isa. 56.11. Oh, the oppression of the Priesthood of England,
the Earth can scarce bear them; and among them all can thou produce a
president for Covetousness, Cruelty and Oppression? surely thou know not
what spirit thou art of; but thy fruits will discover thee by and by; if a Man
should tell of thy dealings to thy Function (how thou have beat me with the
fist of Wickedness; persecuted with all thy might; sworn, or caused to swear,
deceitfully; and how illegally thou have done, and that for filthy lucre sake,
to obtain the gain of oppression) would they tolerate thee, and not be
ashamed? Oh, blush to hear of thy corrupt Conversation! thy own hand shall
witness against thee, and thine own heart shall condemn thee for these things;
thou have not only dealt Treacherously with me, but with the Kings Officers
also, by causing them to return, I could not be found, when thou had me in
Prison, and they had me in Custody; surely thy Master will deceive thee, and
thy nakedness, treachery and deceit is, and will be laid open, and made more
public then thy Proclamation was, that I might either render my Body or be
Outlawed, which thing was done in obscurity and deceit; but I must be more
public and plain with thee, it may be to rip up thy skirts, that thy nakedness
may appear, thy filth and putrefaction, though as a chief Priest, yet one of
the Whores Children; for the light manifests thee so to be, and all thy crooked
deceitful serpentine paths; and by the Children of Light thou art seen, and
shall be made apparent to them that is yet under the yoke of oppression; thy
Name shall rot, and the memorial of thy Seed shall stink in thy Generations to
come; a Testimony I have to bear against the workers of Iniquity, and for that
end the Lord has called me forth, and brought me not only to believe, but also
to suffer for his Name, which Name I have as a Rock, a Shield, and Helmet of
Salvation in this day of great Trial; and in the Strength of the Lord am I
resolved to hold forth my Testimony, valuing all with it as dross and dung, and
does believe, that through it I shall undergo all, and be able to make War in
Righteousness and by his Power shall tread upon the neck of the Scorpion and
Adder, and on the crown of the head of thee, and all the Oppressors of the
Lords Seed, who at this day is made objects of your Cruelty; yea by the Power
of the Living God we both do, and shall tread you as chaff in the Streets: So
take heed how thou proceedest least Gods witness in thy own heart break thy
rest; for the first Priest that imprisoned for Tithes in Cumberland, was made a
spectacie of his wrath, and he is the same God to day, and can save; so take
heed betime least the judgments of God fall heavy upon thee, and labor not to
incur the wrath and displeasure of the Almighty upon thy Soul; for thy deceit,
violence, spoiling, and persecuting is and will be a token of perdition, when
my innocent suffering is and will be a token of Salvation, and that in Christ
Jesus. So be warned I advise thee once more, and repent and amend speedily,
lest the plagues and arrows of the Almighty fall heavy upon thee; for this I am
bold to tell thee in the Name of the Lord, that the Lords wrath is kindled
against such, which will not cease nor quench till the workers of Iniquity be
cut off, that have added affliction to the afflicted, and usurpingly exercised
lordship over the Heritage of God; for your treachery, deceit and folly has
and is appearing to all Men, and Gods controversy against you is begun; for
your end is destruction, whose God is your gain, and your belly, whose mind is
on earthly things; yea, the Stone of your Wall, and the Beam of your Timber,
the very materials of Babel's Building shall cry out against the Builders, and
the Stone you have rejected is become Head; ( viz. Christ Jesus the Light) and
if thy patience can read it, and apply it, so do, if not, how willt thou bear
and answer the Lord when these things fall upon thee.

Carlisle the 13th of the 3d Month, 1665. From a Sufferer for Truth and
Righteousness. Tho. Carleton.


These Queries following I propounded to him, occasioned by some Discourse
between us, about their Sacrament and Conformity, which he seemed to charge
upon me as the sole cause of my imprisonment; having the like confounded
Architectors of Babel, either lost the original cause, else finding the
weakness and inconsideratness of it, was ashamed, and so let it fall: For I
said to him that I never thought Nonconformity to their Church and Sacrament
had been the cause, but rather Tithes, as my Mittimus signified; he answered,
no, no, it was it, and nothing but it, (meaning Nonconformity.)

L. West,
PErceiving thou blamest me for want of Conformity to the Church Ordinances and
Sacraments, as if that were the sole cause of my imprisonment, and thou
pretending to be a Minister in the Church, and to the Church, give me a full
and positive answer to these following Queries, according to Scripture, sound
Doctrine, and the spirit of Truth, that so my judgment may be rightly informed,
and if I have been erroneous and schismatical, I am willing to reform when I am
thereof convinced.

1. What is the qualification of a Minister of Christ; what is his Gifts and
Endowments; and how, and from whom are they obtained?

2. How is a Minister of Christ to be called and sent, what is their
Ordination; or whether thy Call, Ordination or Ministry be from him; to whom
wast thou sent, and to what end; or whether there be not some that run unsent,
and never profit the People? according to Jer. 23.32.

3. What do thou Minister from in thy self, or what do thou Minister to in
the People, or wherein does thy gift and ministration con^^^t?

4. What is the Gifts and Parts of a Minister of Christ, what is the gifts and
parts of a Minister of Antichrist, or how do they differ one from another?

5. Whether is a Minister to be Servant to, and in the Church, or to exercise
lordship over the Church and Heritage, etc. as the manner of the Gentiles is?

6. Whether is covetousness, pride, wrath, malice, envy, swearing, lying,
drunkenness, fornication, oppression, robbery, theft, idle and corrupt
communication, and such like, of the Spirit of Christ or Antichrist?

7. Whether they that do such things do believe in God, and have Faith in Jesus
Christ, or can be either a Minister or Member in his Church and Body, having
not obtained Remission, Redemption, and Salvation from those things?

8. What is the Church of Christ, or how many Churches is there, whereof does
it consit, whereon does it stand, where, and by whom is the Foundation thereof
laid, and how is it preserved Holy and without Spot, or whether is it subject
to corruption and change yea or nay?

9. What are the Ordinances of the Church, what are the Precepts, Rules and
Canons therein to be observed; and to whom does the Rule and Government thereof
belong?

10. Whether does these Ordinances of the Church belong unto all Men, or
whether is all Men under the Rule and Government thereof, or what is the
qualification of those that have a right therein, and the privilege of those
that are Governed thereby?

11. How many Ordinances are in the Church, when and by whom are they
instituted, to what end, and for what time?

12. What is Baptism, who is the Baptiser, with what, and to what are Men
Babtized?

13. How many Baptisms are there, and how do they differ one from another?

14. How are they Baptized that are Baptized into the death of Christ, and are
Buried with him in Baptism; or how is the Baptizing with Fire and the Holy
Ghost?

15. Whether does dipping and sprinkling in water ( England's present Church
Form in Baptism) make one a Member of Christ, or whether is any unclean thing a
Member of Christ, yea, or nay?

16. Whether they that were Baptized, (and ingrafted as a Member in the Church)
if they perform what was therein promised, (viz) forsake the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the flesh, and believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith and keep Gods
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same, whether they must not be
excomunicated, and cast out of your Church, and into Prison, and suffer loss
both in body and estate, yea, or nay, according to John 16.2.

17. What was those Ordinances and Traditions that Paul forbad the Collossians
to touch, taste, or handle, which (though commanded by Men) was to perish with
using, which Ordinances Christ blotted out, and nailed to his Cross, as being
against such as he had quickened and raised by his Spirit.

18. What was those Meats and Drinks, those Holy Days, New Mons, and
Sabbothdayes, which was but shadows of good things to come: or is not the
Churches yet under those Ordinances, Traditions and Shadows, and knows not the
Light of the glorious Gospel revealed which Christ commanded to believe in?

19. What was the Philosophy, Traditions and Rudiments of the World which had
like to have spoiled some, and which those that were dead with Christ were not
to be subject to; but if Pope and Turk should have power to set up their
Traditions and Rudiments, would you not be subject, and Preach them up for
Doctrine?

20. What is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper which thou would have me
receive; how is it distributed and received, or what is the qualifications of
the worthy Receivers, and if I Eat and Drink the thing signified (viz.) the
Body and Blood Spiritually, and so difist from the Sign, must I not be cast out
of your Church, and into Prison?

21. What is his Body of Christ, and what is the Blood, whether is his Body
Spiritual or Carnal, or how is the Lords Body to be discerned?

22. Whether is the Body one, or how many Bodies has He, or how do they Eat
and Drink his Blood that Eternal Life abides in?

23. How did they eat the same Spiritual Meat and Drink, the same Spiritual
Drink, which were Baptized under Moses; for they drank of that Rock which
followed them, and that Rock was Christ?

24. What is the difference between the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils,
and the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils?

25. Whether are they worthy Receivers purified from their Sins, and sanctified
through His Blood, seeing His Body was broken, and His Blood shed for the
remission of sins?

26. Whether they that are yet in their Sins do not eat and drink their own
condemdemnation, not discerning the Lords Body?

27. Who is the Head of your Church and Body, (or who is King, Priest and
Prophet) whether Christ, King, Pope, or Bishop; or how many Heads is there?

12 Month, 1667. Send thy Answer to me at my Prisonhouse in Carlisle.

T. C.




Another sent after, about the 4th Month, 1667.

L. W.
I Having all along a desire to be edified in the True Way and Worship of the
Living God, and an inclination from my childhood, to follow after that which is
good, righteous, and unreprovable in the sight of the Lord, and to keep my
Conscience undefiled, and my judgment clear and uncorrupted, as the Lord God of
Heaven knows, from whom nothing can be hid: and seeing the ground of the
Controversy between thee and me is matters of Faith or Worship, and so matters
of Conscience to me, and such as I cannot easily renounce, nor dare not turn
from, unless my judgment were otherwise persuaded; I therefore sent some
Propositions to thee, to that effect, an answer whereof I expected from thee
before this time which thing I thought but requisite, and very consistant with
thy Office and Profession, being that which the Ministers of Christ was always
ready to do, being willing to render a reason of their Faith and Hope to any
that should demand it; and also to exhort, inform, and instruct in the Doctrine
and Principles of Truth, with all meekness, gentleness and long-suffering;
which thing if thou refuse to do, let me know upon what grounds, for I have not
straightened thee for time, but thou might have done it with deliberation; so I
desire a sober answer of thee of all and every particular propounded, or else a
reason why thou will not, and it may suffice for the present.

T. C.


Now having as briefly as possible given a True and Impartial Relation of all
the differences, states and proceedings on both sides that is of most
importance and concernment, and the ground and cause of all, as things has
passed and been carried on between us, plainly and honestly, so far as I know,
and do remember; I shall leave all, both his and mine, causes and proceedings,
with all that has been done, to the witness of God in all Hearts and
Consciences, that gives a true sense and understanding of the nature and
property of every word and work; and accordingly let the sober, moderate and
unbyassed Reader or Hearer judge of us, and between us, and especially such as
have known us both after the flesh, and the Lives and Conversations of us both
among them (ziz.) the Parishioners of Addingam, and others in the Towns and
Parishes adjacent, amongst whom we have lived, and with whom we have had to do,
many of them being privy to the most part of those things, and so may the
better bear witness to the Truth or Falsehood of them, being (as I have said
elsewhere) willing to recommend my self to every Man's Conscience in the sight
of God; and as I own and acknowledge the Light for my Leader, Guide and
Salvation, so I am willing that all my deeds should be brought to the Light,
and that which I do or have done that is not justifiable in the Light let it be
condemned by Light, and I ashamed, and this is to do as I would be done unto;
also these my Papers that I have sent to him, they are now made public, and so
are no longer his and mine only, but other Men's to judge and consider of.

In my first I desire (as I would often have willingly embraced) that he, or
any other of his Function and Profession would give me or us a sober moderate
visit or meeting, at their own time and place, allowing us person for person,
that there we might dispute the differences in Religion between them and us, in
a sober moderate spirit, which to us is of great price; and if in the Spirit of
meekness he or they could convince us, that we are schismatical and erroneous,
etc. (as they have frequently affirmed, and preached behind our backs) whether
in denying of Tithes, or in any other thing whatsoever; I can say it for my
self, and believe it for many others, that if in our Consciences we were
convinced thereof, we would reform our Judgments, and pay Tithes, and submit in
any other thing whatsoever, as really and conscientiously as any People in the
Nation, without either suing at Courts, spoiling of goods, excommunications,
cominations, imprisonments, or the execution of any Law whatsoever; and if this
be not very equal and reasonable, let all sober People judge, and whether it be
not the part and place of Men professing that Function, and to be Ministers of
Christ, and Overseers in the Church, that Spiritual Men might War and overcome
with Spiritual Weapons, and by the Armor of Light, and the Power and
Demonstration of the Spirit of Christ Jesus? that as the said L. W. has often
Preached, it may be known, to whom the Lord has given the Urim and the
Thummim; but these they use but in words only, but instead of dealing so with
us, they will turn us over to a Consistory, Spiritu^l or Ecclesiastical Court, (so
called) which, as I may truly say is as Carnal and Earthly a corrupt Court at
this day, as any in the World I know of, and to the Secular Powers, and Civil
Magistrate, etc. and when we are brought before them, and answers to what is
Charged against us, pleading matters of Conscience, the Doctrine of Christ or
His Apostles, or the privilege of the Church in a Gospel Dispensation; then
they cry hold your peace, we have no thing to do with that, Dispute it with
your Ministers, you shall not Preach here, etc. And all we can get of their
Ministers is, Rogue and Rascal, Erroneous and Schismatical Fellow, or Audacious
Saucy youth, I Will humble you, we'll take a Course with such Refractary Fanatic
as you are ere long, etc. So having the Sword by their thigh, and the Law by
their side, thus are we preyed upon by every one of them; and if any one do
plead himself free by their Law, then (as some of them has said) they know
what to do, they have another ba^t to catch us with, which they know will hold,
and that is, tender us an Oath, and because we will not swear like themselves,
then either fine or imprison, or banish, etc. and having got us into Prisons
for Tithes, or such things, there they let us lie as dead Men out of mind,
never owning nor regarding us in any thing from year to year, unless to envy
and straiten our Liberty, etc. by stirring up and provoking the Goalers against
us, who being willing to do the Priests and Magistrates a favor, has often
shown their severity to the hazard of the lives of the Innocent in their
Custody, (whom they have called sometime their sheep) and yet preyed upon us,
not allowing us the Liberty they allowed to Fellons and Murderers, etc. yet
still the Lord was with us, and wonderfully preserved us to his praise, when
Men rose up against us to have swallowed us up with open mouth, blessed be His
Name for evermore.

And also whether it were not requisite that he gave me a true and particular
account of every of his demands and claims whatsoever, or of any other
difference (if any had been) betwixt us, before he had thus far proceeded to
have damnified me, having done what in him lay, to deprive me of all, save only
my life, which I have yet for a prey? And also whether it had not been his
place and duty, pretending to be a Teacher and Instructor of others^ a M^nister
and Pastor, or Elder in the Church, being reputed a Learned Orthodoxical
Divine? (and sometime professing himself my spiritual Father) but such measure
a^ I have had from him are no spiritual instructions to me I say, if so,
whether he ought not to have answered my Queries, and also my other Papers sent
to him; (which he never would do to this day) thereby to have informed and
cleared my judgment and understanding, being things appertaining to Faith and
Religion, and the Profession and Worship of Christianity, and so matters of
Conscience to me, let all sober wise Men judge?

Also I shall appeal unto all sober and conscientious Men and Women, and refer
my self to the witness of God, and the illuminated understanding in all,
whether ever any of the Holy Men of God did so with any person in the Church,
or out of the Church, Believer or Infidel, as he has done with me, yea, or
nay; or whether ever you read of any of the Apostles or Ministers of Christ in
Ages past, that denied to give a Reason of their Faith and Hope in Christ
Jesus; and to Instruct, Exhort, Inform, Teach, Reprove, Rebuke, etc. as he has
done? or whether you read of any Ministers of Christ that sued at Law for the
maintenance of their Bellies, spoiled and Persecuted, Excomunicated out of
their Church into Prison, sought Men's Liberty, Heritage and Estate, and yet can
show no fair nor just cause, as he has done, yea, or nay? Whether ever any
Ministers of Christ did swear, lie, and beat with the fist of wickedness, as he
has done, yea, or nay? or whether ever any Ministers of Christ, was so
inclined to drunkenness, and to frequent Alehouses, that they needed to be
restrained by a Fine, as his wife has done with him, yea or nay? All which,
(with several such like deeds, which I shall now omit) I need not go far to
prove, being his own practice does notoriously evidence, and testify the same,
sufficiently known to many that knows both him and me and by what is before
related.

Now considering the many Disputes, Contentions, Strifes, suing at Law,
spoiling of goods, casting into Prisons, and the great unparalleled sufferings
that have been occasioned in this Nation in these late years about Tithes, and
the great objections and exclamations made against us for denying them, (about
which I have a share, being deeply concerned and involved therein) together,
for the quietness and peace of my spirit, upon which this thing has long
rested, ^xcites me to cast in my mite, and lay down my reasons and grounds
whereupon I have denied them, and suffered for the non-payment thereof? tho
weakest and unfitest of many thousands for such a work? yet, according to what
I have received, and am persuaded of, I shall lay down in truth and simplicity;
and that chiefly for the satisfaction of such as desire to be satisfied, and
for the stopping the many objections and maledictions of others made in secret
behind my back by some of my Neighbors, especially the people called
Independants in that part, who most of any has condemned me for suffering so
much for such small trivial matters, as they say, being as it seems a small
scruple in their Consciences, and such a more as they can easily swallow now;
though in the beginning rise and growth of their Religion, their Judgment was
wholly against Tithes in a Gospel day; yea, some of them preaching in great
zeal against them, Condemning the Institution of them, saying, They were clear
contrary to the maintenance of a Gospel Ministry? and yet when they saw that
Tithes were like to be the only wages, maintenance and reward of their
preaching; (being generally established by the Laws and Cannons of England for
that end) rather then they would want that sweet morsel, and goodly Garment,
and the Fleshly ease that came thereby, and suffer any thing for the denying of
the same, they could soon (through their Christian Prudence or Policy) cure
that Malady; and for the better digestion of that Diet, make to themselves a
stomach Pill, or two, to Cure that Crudity; and so rather Suppress, Extirpat,
Hide or let fall one of their Principles, then either want that delightsome
livelihood, or beloved Benefice, or yet either suffer any thing either in
Liberty or Estate for the holding that Principle throughout.

So for the Considerations aforesaid, I shall endeavor to answer the general
Objections Principly made against me and my Brethren in this case, and what I
hold and believe concerning them.

1st Objection, is, Abraham's Returning from Chedarlaomer from Rescuing his
Nephew Lot, Melchisedeck met him, and blessed him, and blessed the Lord in his
behalf, and brought forth Bread and Wine and set before him, etc. and to him
Abraham gave a Tenth of the spoils, Genesis 14.18 Heb. 7.4.

Answer, To this I say, I never find it a president or rule for me; suppose he
gave a Tenth, it was a voluntary gift, he was neither commanded by God, nor
compelled by Man, and if he had not given, I think he had not sinned, and that
which he did give was but a Tenth of the Spoils, taken at the Victory, and so
no rule for me, being no Soldier at any such Slaughter, and so not partaker of
any such Spoils; so if it be binding to any, (as I think to none) it is to
Soldiers, and not to Plowmen: and what if he in gratification of his Love) in
meeting him, and setting Bread and Wine before him) had given him one half of
the Spoils, this had been no binding Rule to Posterity.

2d. Objection, is, Jacob's Vow when he went to Padan-aram: If God said he,
will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me Bread
to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers House in
Peace; then shall the Lord be my God and this stone my Pillow, which I have set
for a Pillar* shall be Gods House; and of all that thou give me, I will
surely give a Tenth unto thee, Genesis 28.20.

Answer, Here Jacob being gone from his Fathers House; for, its said, he
lighted on a certain place (it seems between Beersheba and Haran, I suppose it
was either in the Fields, or Desert) on the South side of Luz, Joshua 18.13.
however I suppose Jacob was in a desolate disconsolate condition, Genesis 35.3.
for, it is said, he took of the stones of the place, and laid them for his
Pillow, and lay down to sleep, Genesis 28.11. Now the Lord appeared to him, (in a
Vision) as He has often done to his Servants in such disconsolate conditions
which makes His appearance more Glorious saying, I am the Lord God of Abraham,
and of Isaac thy Father, the Land whereon thou lie, to thee will I give it,
and to thy seed after thee; and thy seed shall be as the dust of the Earth, and
shall spread to the East, West, North and South; and in thy seed shall all the
Families of the Earth he blessed: And behold, I am with thee, and will keep
thee in all places, and will bring thee again into this Land, I will not leave
thee until I have done as I have spoken. And he awaked, and said, surely the
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not; and he was afraid, saying, how
dreadful is this place, it is none other but the House of God, this is the
Gate of Heaven, etc. [mark] the Lords appearance in an hour of great distress
is very comfortable, and also fearful; this is true fear indeed, here is fear
mixed with love; here Jacob lays hold forth with upon the Love and Promise of
the Lord, and said, If the Lord will do so, etc. then shall He be my God, and
this stone my pillow, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be Gods House,
and of all that he gives me, I will surely give a Tenth unto him. [mark] I
say, Jacob being possessed with fear, and overcome with love, he vows and
promises unto the Lord again; this was a voluntary act in Jacob, he obliged
himself to the Lord after the Lord had promised to bless him, and he performed
his promise; for after twenty years he purged his House of Idols, and built an
Altar unto the Lord at Bethel, Genesis 35.6. which he called Elbeth-el, (viz.) The
God of Bethel: But who did he give his Tenth unto, or when did he give it, that
is yet disputable? but suppose it had been to the Priesthood, (which some hold
was annexed to the firstborn of Families) what, will that argue for me to do
so? Jacob vowed but for himself, not for his posterity after him, and it was
voluntary, (being filled with the Lords appearance in a day of distress) Genesis
35.3. and not commanded by God, neither compelled by Man, and so not binding to
any save Jacob alone; only this may be observed, if any one have vowed as Jacob
did, let such perform also: also, it was but once in Abraham, and once in
Jacob, and that in cases extraordinary; and who, or what is he that can plead
for annual payment of Tithes of every of a Man's increase from these two places;
what, suppose I being in distress (as I have often been, and few of Gods
Servants are exempted) should vow a vow unto the Lord, that if he will preserve
me this one time, or deliver me from this great danger, etc. then will I give
him one half of all that I enjoy, or have received of him; would this my vow
(being performed) be binding to my Children, and their Children after them from
Generation to Generation for ever.

Object, 3. Now in Exodus 23.19. it is said, The first of the First Fruits of
the Land thou shall bring into the House of the Lord thy God. This is the first
express command, but here is no certain dividual part expressed, only the first
of the First Fruits, Exodus 34.26.

Again, Levit. 23.10. Moses instituting the Feast of First fruits; When ye come
(says he) into the Land which I will give you, ye shall bring a sheaf of the
First Fruits of your Harvest unto the Priest, and he shall shake it before the
Lord, verse 14. This shall be a Law for ever in your Generations.

Again, that which is more express is Levit. 27.30.32, 33. All the Tithe of the
Land, both of the seed of the Ground, and of the Trees is the Lords; and every
tithe of Bullock and Sheep, and all that goes under the rod, the Tenth shall
be holy unto the Lord; this is a more positive command then any before.

Again, Numb. 15.20. it is said, Ye shall offer a Cake of the first of your
Dough for an Heave Offering; as the Heave Offering of the Barn ye shall lift it
up, and give it to the Lord in your Generations.

Again, Moses being the Son of a Levite, Exodus 2.1, 2. Aaron was his Brother,
Chap. 4.14. the Lord bid Moses separate Aaron and his Sons for the Priests
Office, Exodus 28.1. and appoints him to make them holy Garments, The Ephod and
the curious Girdle, etc. and Aaron was to wear the Breast Plate of Judgment
upon his Heart, and upon it the names of the Children of Israel; and in the
Breast Plate of Judgment, Moses was to put the Urim and the Thummim, which he
was to bear upon his Heart when he went in before the Lord, etc. Exodus 28.
throughout.

So the Priesthood being settled to Aaron and his Sons, as a Statute, and an
Ordinance for ever, throughout their Generations, he was to take unto him his
Brethren the Tribe of Levi, the Family of his Father they were to be joined
with him, and to minister unto him, and were to take the Charge of the
Sanctuary of the Tabernacle, and of the Altar; only he and his sons was to
execute the Priests Office in all things, Numb. 18.2. to verse 7. then all the
Heave-offerings, and the holy things that the Children of Israel offered to the
Lord, was to be Aarons and his Sons for ever, by a perpetual Covenant of Salt,
as in verse 19.

And Aaron and his Sons was to have no Inheritance in the Land, neither any
part among the Children of Israel; for the Lord was their part and inheritance
for ever, Deuteronomy. 18.1, 2. And to the Children of Levi, the Lord gave the Tenth
in Israel, for their inheritance, and for their service in the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, and they were to have no Inheritance among the Children of
Israel, Numb. 18.20, 21, 23, 24. for the Tithe which the Children of Israel
offered was to be the Levites Inheritance, and out of them they were to extract
a Tenth, which they were to offer as an Heave Offering unto the Lord, which was
to be given unto Aaron and his Sons, verse, 26.28. only when they were come
into the Land of Canaan, Joshua by the appointment of Moses set forth Forty
eight Cities, with their Suburbs, which the Children of Israel gave of their
Inheritance at the Command of the Lord, Joshua 21.1, 2. etc.

Then again, I read Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. beside the Tithe they were to bring year
by year unto the Lord, at the end of every three years they were to bring forth
all the Tithe of their Increase, and lay it up within their Gates, and thither
should the Levites come (because they had no Inheritance among them) and the
Strangers, the Fatherless and the Widows, and should Eat and be filled, that
the Lord might bless Israel in all the works of their hands, Deuteronomy. 26.12, 13,
etc.

Again, Deuteronomy. 18.3, 4. They which offer Sacrifice, whether Bullock or Sheep,
shall give unto the Priests the right shoulder, and the two Cheeks, and the
Maw; and the First Fruits of the Corn, the Wine and Oil, and the first of the
Fleece of the sheep, etc.

Then again, Nehemiah when he came he saw the House of God was forsaken, and
the Portion of the Levites had not been given, but every one was fled to his
own Land, he reproved the Rulers, and set the Levites in their places, and
caused all Judah to bring their Tithe of Corn, and Wine, and Oil into the
Treasuries, etc. and appointed the Wards of the Priests, and of the Levites
every one in his Office, Nehem. 13.10, 11, 12, 30, etc.

Also King Hezekiah appointed the Courses of the Priests and Levites by their
turns, every Man according to his Office; (hence it is said Zacharias was of
the Course of Abia, and executed the Priests Office before God as his turn
came, Luke 1.5.8.) and commanded the People to bring in part for the Priests
and Levites, that they might be Encouraged in the Law of the Lord; So the
Children of Israel brought in abundance of First Fruits, Corn, Wine, Oil and
Honey, and of the increase of the Field, and the Tithes of Bullocks, Sheep, and
of the holy and consecrated things; the Tithe of all things in abundance: yea,
so much, as they eat and were satisfied, and there was many heaps laid up in
store; and Hezekiah commanded them to build Chambers, and in them they laid up
all their Tithe and their First Fruits, and their dedicated things, and set
Overseers over them, to whom they committed the charg of them, who distributed
with fidelity to their Brethren great and small by course, 2 Chronicles. 31.2, 4, 5,
6. to verse. 14. etc. And in Nehemiah 10. they were all sworn, and sealed to
fidelity both Priests and Levites, Porters, Singers, Nethinims, and all the
Children of Israel to keep the Law, and the Ordinances of it, and to bring in
all the Firstfruits, the Tithe, and the dedicated things, Corn, Wine and Oil,
etc. into the Chambers and Treasures, etc.

Then, Ezekiel setting forth the glory of the Temple, and measuring it with the
measuring Reed, he shows who shall be admitted to the service of the Temple,
and who not; he also divided the Land into four Portions, one for the Priests,
one for the Levites, one for the House of Israel, and one for the Princes,
Ezekiel 44. and chapters 45, 46. also he sets forth the Offerings, of the
Princes, and their Ordinances, as Meat Offerings, Drink Offerings,
Burnt-offerings, Sin-offersings, Trespass-offerings, and Peace Offerings, etc.
also the Sacrifices of their New Mons, their Sabbaths and solemn Feasts, etc.

Also Amos coming to cry against the Idolatry in Jeroboam's time, and against
the Princes and Prophets of Bethel, he calls their Princes Kine, they oppressed
the Poor and destroyed the needy, and multiplied Transgresssion in Gilgal, and
said, bring and let us Drink, etc. and yet they would go to Bethel, and bring
their Sacrifices in the Morning, and their Tithes after three years; they could
offer Thanksgiving, and proclaim Free-Offerings, and this they liked then, (as
the Priests of our Age loves Free-offerings, and give ye now) so they might
live in their sins, but the Lord swore by his Holiness, he would take them away
with Thorns, and their Posterity with Fish-hooks, and he gave them cleanness of
Teeth, and scarceness of Bread; He withheld the Rain in its season, and he
sent Blasting, and Mildew and Pestilence, and Sword amongst them.

Then again, the Prophet Malachi cries out against the Priests, how they
despised the Name of the Lord; they said the Table of the Lord was not to be
regarded; and said, it was polluted, and snuffed at it; when as it was they
that polluted it, by offering unclean Bread, the Blind, the Lame, the Torn and
the Sick for Sacrifice. Mal. 1, 6, 7, 8. Go offer it to your Princes says the
Lord, and see if they will accept it from you; you have fed your selves, and
served your selves, and not the Lord: For who among you, says he, will shut a
door, or kindle a fire on mine Altar for naught, verse 10. Cursed be the
Deceiver that has in his Flock a Male, and sacrifices a corrupt thing. And
chap. 2. O ye Priests (says Malachi) this Commandment is for you ye have broke
the Covenant of Levi, even my Covenant of Life and Peace; ye have been partial
in the Law; if you will not hear and consider to give glory to my Name, I will
corrupt your seed, and cast dung upon you faces, and will curse your Blessings,
chap. 2.2.4, 5, etc. for the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his mouth, etc. but ye are gone out of the way, ye have
broken Covenant, and caused many to fall, etc. And in chap. 3. he says, Behold
the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; but who may abide the
day of his coming, for he sits to try and fine as silver; yea, he will fine
and purify the Sons of Levi: [mark] it is the Sons of Levi, that they may
bring Offerings of Righteousness; and he will come near (them) to Judgment, and
will be a swift witness against the Adulterer, false swearer, and those that
keep back the Hirelings wages, that vex the Widow and the Fatherles, and
oppress the Poor and Stranger, and fear not me says the Lord; for from the
days of your Fathers (says he) ye are gone away from mine Ordinances and have
not kept them Will a Man rob God, (says he) yet ye have robbed me in Tyths,
and Offerings, ye are cursed with a Curse: Bring all the Tithe into the
storehouse, that there may be meat in my House, and prove me therewith; and
see if I will not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing,
etc. But your words have been stout against me, says the Lord; ye have said,
It is in vain to serve God; and what profit is there in keeping his
Commandments and in walking humbly before him? And therefore ye count the proud
happy; and sets up them that work wickedness; and those that tempt God are
delivered.

Now the next place which some account as formidable as all the rest is, Luke
11.42. Christ's own words, saying: Woe unto you Pharisees, ye Tithe Mint and Rue,
and all manner of Herbs, and neglect and pass over Judgment, and the love of
God; these things ye ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone.
These are the main grounds (being under the Law of the first Covenant) upon
which the Ordinations, Titles, Claims and Propriety of Tithes do, or ever did
arise or spring; and upon which all the Disputes, Acts Decrees, Laws, and
Trials at Law, Differences and Sufferings, of what kind soever, do originally
arise and descend, by which the reader may observe the rise and institution of
Tithes, and the end thereof, and the observation of them from Moses, or the
Levitical Law downwards till Christ the end of the Law for Righteousness sake,
to all them that believe, Romans 10.4.

I shall now proceed to give my Reasons whereupon I deny the Payment of Tithes.

First, The Reader may take notice of the Institution of Tithes and by whom,
Here is Moses the Servant and Prophet of the Lord, who was faithful in all his
House, and was a Witness through Faith of those things which should afterward
come to pass, Hebr. 3.3, 4. this was he whom the Lord chused and sent into Egyt
for a Prophet, Prince and Deliverer to the Children of Israel, Exodus 3.10. Acts
7.34, 35. and having brought them to Mount Sinai, the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Tell the Children of Israel, You have seen what I did to the Egyptians,
and how I carried you on Eagles Wings, and brought you to me: Now if you will
hear my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be my chief Treasure
above all People, though all the Earth be mine, and ye shall be to me a Kingdom
of Priests, and an holy Nation, Then Moses proposed to them what the Lord had
said to him: and the People answered unanimously, All that the Lord has
Commanded we will do: and Moses reported their words unto the Lord, Exodus 19.3,
4. etc. So the Lord calling Moses and Aaron only up into the Mount said, I am
the Lord thy God that have brought thee out of Egypt etc. Thou shall have no
other Gods besides me? and he delivered to them his Precepts and his Law by the
dispensation of Angels, Exodus 20. etc. Also he commanded them not to make unto
themselves gods of silver or gold, verse 23. Then he commanded Moses to make an
Altar of Earth or Stone, whereon to offer the burnt-offerings and
peace offerings, etc. And see says he, that a Tool be not lifted up upon it,
verse 24.25. Then he delivered to him the Temporal or Civil Laws, Exodus chap.
21, 22, 23. etc. So Moses wrote all the Laws, and erected them an Altar under
the Mount and Twelve pillars, according to the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and
sent of the Children of Israel; who offered Burnt-offerings, Beaves and
Peace Offerings, etc. and with half of the Blood he sprinkled the Altar, and
the rest he put in Basins: And he read the Laws, and all the words of the Lord
to the People; who said, All that the Lord has said we will do and be
obedient: So Moses sprinkled all the People with the Blood; and said, Behold
the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you touching all these
things, Chap. 24. Then the Lord called Moses up into the Mount, saying I will
give thee Tables of Stone and a Law, and Commandments which I have written,
that thou may Teach them to the People: And Moses took his Minister Joshua,
and went up; and Moses was in the Mount forty Days and forty Nights; and God
spoke unto Moses to speak unto the Children of Israel that they should offer
unto the Lord an offering of Gold, Silver, Brass, Purple, Scarlet, and fine
Linen, Oil and Spices, and precious Stones, etc. And that they should make the
Lord a Sanctuary, that he might dwell amongst them; and that it should be
according to the express Pattern showed to him: and also that he should make an
Ark, in which the Testimonies of the Covenant should be placed; describing the
fashion of the Tabernacle, and the Order, Place and Fashion of all the
appurtenances thereunto belonging; every thing was to be made, placed and
erected according to the express Pattern sh^wn to him in the Mount, chapters.
25, 26. Mark what I say, Moses having read the Law, and the Book of the
Covenant in the audience of the People, they said, All that the Lord has said
will we do, and be obedient, chap. 24.7, 8. Then he took the Blood of the
Covenant, having with the one half sprinkled the Altar, with the other half he
sprinkled the People, and the Covenant was confirmed; for almost all things
were by the Law purged with blood; and without shedding of Blood is no
Remission, Hebr. 9.22. [mark] here is the establishment of the first Covenant,
which stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances,
which was imposed until the time of Reformation, Hebr. 9.9, 10. [mark here
again] which was but a Figure for the time then present, and could never make
the Comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience: But Christ being
come an High Priest of good things to come, [mark] by a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle, that is not made with hands, nor not of this building. I
say also, Christ Jesus being come (who was the end of the Law for Righteousness
sake, to all that believe, and the Substance of all Shadows, Antitypes and
Figures) he has brought in a more excellent Ministry, being a Mediator of a
better Covenant, established upon better Promises; wherefore, coming into the
World, he says, Sacrifices, Offerings and Burnt-Offerings for sin, thou
would not, (which are offered by the Law) but a Body thou have prepared, (as
it is written) Lo I come to do thy Will O God; by the which Will, we are
sanctified, says the Apostle; [mark] He takes away the first, that he might
establish the Second; Now if the First Covenant had been faultless, there
should no place have been for the Second, but finding fault with them under the
First Covenant; (and why? because it was not possible that the blood of Bulls
and Goats should take away sins; for in those Sacrifices there was (yea, and
is) a remembrance of sins every year; so that the Comers thereunto is not made
perfect so finding fault with them, he says, Behold the days come, that I will
make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah, not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers when I took them by
the hand, and led them out of Egypt; (for because they abode not in my
Covenant, I regarded them not says the Lord) But this is the Covenant that I
will make with them after those days, I will put my Law in their Hearts, and
write it in their inward parts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my
People, Jer. 31.33. Ez^k. 37.26. etc. Hebr. 8.8, 9, 10. and 10.16. They shall
not need to Teach every Man his Neighbor, or every Man his Brother, saying
Know the Lord for they shall all know me, even from the least to the greatest
of them; and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more: [mark]
Their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more; here suffer me to
enlarge a little by the way: Now where Remission of sin is, there needs no more
Offering for sin; and for this end was Christ made manifest to take away all
sin, and in him was no sin; howbeit the Children of Darkness, who are strangers
to the Covenant of Promise, being never yet come to the Light, nor to the
Second Covenant, the New and Living Way; they I say, that have not received
this, they say there is no Redemption from under sin; there is none say they,
can be set free from iniquity while on this side the grave; there is not an
upright Man upon the Earth say they, that does good, and sins not; there is
none Righteous, no not one: a strange Doctrine in a Gospel Day: this Generation
used to bless the Name of the Lord for this glorious Day, and Golden Age, and
time (said some) wherein his Gospel was so purely Taught and Preached; [mark
this confusion] is the Gospel purely Taught them when they are yet in their
sins; but it may be they have not received the Gospel in Power and Purity, but
in name and word only, for the Gospel is the Power of God, Romans 1.16. or Christ
Jesus the Light of the World the Power of God and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor.
1.24. who was manifested to take away sin; but these will pretend to be Gospel
Men and Christians, who say none can be purified from sin, and thereby
frustrate the end of the Lord and make void his coming, who came to save his
People from their sins, and he is able to save to the utmost them that come
unto God by him: but may it not be said, they come not unto God by him, and
they enter not in at the Door, but climbs up some other way that holds sin for
Term of Life, which the Devil is Author and Lord of, then whose Servants are
they, let wise Men judge; a smookey Tenent, a Principle of Darkness assended
out of the Bottomless Pit; sure no Christians, what ere they may profess: What,
has Christ suffered in vain? What, has the shedding of his Blood no more
effect? What, is he not able perfectly to save those to come unto God by him?
Is he not able to save his People from their sins? Is he not able to redeem
from death? Is his Hand shortened? Or his Power weakened? Is he not the same he
was in the Apostles days? Is not his power the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever? [mark] Was he not given for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth? Was he
not sent to redeem those that were under the Law? Was he not sent to save his
People from their sins? Was he not ordained a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the Glory of the People of Israel? Yea, a Light to lighten those that sit
in Darkness and the Regions of the shadow of Death, and to guide their feet in
the Way of Peace: Was he not manifested to take away our sins? and was not his
Blood shed for the Remission of sins? the Apostle said, yes: and if it be not
so that our sins be done away, nor we not sanctified, purified and cleansed
through his Blood, nor do not witness Remission nor forgiveness through his
Sufferings and Death, and our Consciences purged from dead works, and our sins
done away in him: I say, if none have this benefit by him, then is our Faith
vain, and we are still in our sins, and both the Apostles and we are found
false Witnesses of him, but neither they nor we are false Witnesses, for we
know, (and they knew before us) That Life and Salvation is manifested, and we
have seen it, and that which we have seen and heard we do declare, that ye
might have Fellowship with us [mark] that ye might also obtain Remission and
Redemption with us. And this indeed is the Message that we have heard of him,
and received from him, and declare unto you, that God is Light, and in him is
no Darkness at all, and if we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie: But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then
have we fellowship with him, and one with another, and the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses from all Sin, etc. (mark) ye Sons and Daughters of Darkness,
that say none can be cleansed from all Sin; but no marvel if Infidels say so,
that never owns the Light, that never came to the Blood of Sprinkling, that
never came to the Blood (the Life) of the Covenant that cleanses and purifieth
from all sin, but are stumbling and groping in darkness immagining in their
dark minds that all is like themselves, and these will profess they know God
but they are Liars, (1 John 2.4.) for they neither keep nor believe that any
can keep his Commandments; but they seeing but in part, believes that a Man can
but be in part purified, and in part sanctified, but not throughout: Now I
would ask them one Question, wherefore none can be sanctified throughout? Is
not that which sanctifies in part able to sanctify throughout? Is not the
Blood of Christ able and sufficient to cleanse and purify from all sin? Was he
not able perfectly to save those that come unto God by him? Yes surely he was,
else he had been an imperfect Sacrifice; but the cause is, either they will not
come to him for Life and Salvation (or else when they do come, they abide not
with him, nor continue not in obedience, to press forward to the high Calling
that is in Christ Jesus; they sit down short of the prize; they go not on unto
perfection, they faint, and are weary before the work be completed and
finished, like foolish Builders, and then content themselves in their own vain
immaginations, and pleads inability, weakness and failing, which (say they) is
insident to all Men, thinking all like themselves; but they measuring all by
themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, (viz.) with their own
immaginations, are not wise, as said the Apostle; but John said, As many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe in his Name, John 1.12. and if Sons, then Heirs, and Joynt-heirs
with Christ; now Heirs does inherit, but no unclean thing does inherit;
therefore Sons and Heirs must needs be sanctified throughout, and must needs be
born again of the Holy clean Seed that inherits; and the Apostle said, Ye are
the Offspring of God, and the Offspring of God must needs be Holy; for as the
Root is, so are the Branches; and as the Tree is, so is the Fruit. But I shall
return to my former Subject again (viz.) the Second Covenant, the Light or Law
written in the Heart, which we have received, and therefore are not looking up
to the Mount that might not be touched, and that burned with Fire, nor at
Blackness, and Darkness, and Tempests, nor at Figurative and Shadowy things,
Hebr. 10.1. and 12.18, 22. etc. but we are come to Mount-Sion, the City of the
Living God, to the New and Heavenly Jerusalem, etc. and to Jesus the Mediator
of the New Covenant, and to the unchangeable Priesthood, that endures for
ever, for the Law makes Men Highpriests that have infirmities, that
continues not by reason of Death, but the word of the Oath which was since the
Law, makes the Son High Priest, who is Consecrated for ever, and therefore he
is the surety of a better Testament, and such a High Priest becomes us, and
such a one have we need of, who is holy, harmless, undefiled separate from
Sinners: Yea, this was his Work, I say still, and the end of his coming to
separate and sav^ his People from their sins, and this is Christ Jesus an
High Priest of our Profession, a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedeck, who is worthy of more Glory then Moses, inasmuch as he that
builds the House is worthy of more Glory then the House, now Christ is a Son
over his own House, which House are we, if we hold fast our confidence and hope
to the end, wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost those that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them; but this they
still doubt of, and cannot believe; who are yet wading in the frothy unstable
Waters, and stumbling in the dark, being tossed with every windy vanishing
Doctrine, and is not come to the breakings of the Day, to the Light, the Son I
mean; for its the Sun and Light that makes Day, and makes all things manifest,
Ephesians. 5.13. John 12.36. I say they cannot believe that Doctrine, that any
should be saved to the uttermost; and no marvel, for they are Strangers to the
Covenant of Promise, the Light and to the virtues and effects of the Light,
which until I received and obeyed, I was as doubtful as they, and did object
against it as incredible; but I was of them the Apostle foresaw, that spoke
evil of things they knew not; for I had not then known nor tried the Light,
though it was in me, yet I loved darkness rather; even so do they now, who
spakes against Light, and the sufficiency of it, they speak evil of that they
know not, etc. in that thing they corrupt themselves.

But to proceed, I say Christ Jesus is come, the New and Living Way, who is
King, Priest and Prophet; so the Covenant is changed, the Priesthood is
changed; so there must of necessity be a change of the Law also, and then
Tithes and Oblations must needs cease, Hebr. 7.12. For verily they that were of
the Sons of Levi, who received the Office of the Priesthood had a Commandment
to take Tithes of the People; but it is evident, that after the similitude of
Melchisedeck there arises another Priesthood who is made not by the Law of a
carnal Commandment, as the Sons of Levi and Aaron was, nor Consecrated by a
carnal nominal Bishop, (as Priests are now) but he was made and ordained by the
Power of an endless Life; and this is no other then the Son of God, who is
Consecrated for evermore; and says the Apostle (with this assertion) There is
verily a disanulling of the Commandment going before, because of the weakness
and unprofitableness thereof: (mark) here is a disanulling of the Commandment,
what Commandment? The Law of the carnal Commandment by which the Priests (the
offspring of Levi) received their Office, and the Commandment by which they
took Tithes of the People, read Hebr. 7. throughout; so the Priesthood being no
more of Levi, nor the Sons of Aaron, then there is no more Law, nor no more
Tithes after the First Covenant; for the New Covenant is established, the New
and Living Way is made known, and the unchangeable Priesthood being brought in,
the First Covenant and Priesthood must needs give place, the Law must needs be
abrogated, and the Commandment disanulled, and the first Tabernacle and
Sanctuary must needs be turned out, and then all the Rites and Ceremonies, and
all the Appurtenances and Ordinances of that Priesthood, Tabernacle and
Sanctuary must needs be turned out also; then no more room for Tithes, (being
an Appurtenance or Ordinance of that Covenant) when Christ the Spiritual,
Eternal, and Unchangeable High Priest is come, (and we say he is) a greater and
more perfect Tabernacle; for the First that stood in meats and drinks, and
diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances, was but imposed until the time of
Reformation, being Figures for the time then present, [mark] and but shadows of
good things to come, Hebr, 9.10. and 10.1. and 8.5. Now, when does the time of
Reformation enter, that you may shake off the first Priesthood, Tabernacle and
Ordinances? Is it not now high time for People to amend, repent and reform? Is
it not time for Men to work out their Salvation? Is it not time to make their
calling and election sure? Is it not time to turn from Darkness to Light, and
from Satan's power to God? Is it not time to seek the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteosness thereof? If so, then is not the time of Reformation come? Is not
the Spiritual appearance of the Son of God come? Is not the Comforter that
leads into all Truth come? Is not the sound of the Everlasting Gospel come? Is
not the time in which the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit
and Truth come? Is not the Light that was given for Salvation to the ends of
the Earth come? Is not the Light that gives the knowledge of the Glory of God
come? Is not he that convinces the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment come? Is not he that is the Way, Truth and Life come? Is not he that
saves his People from their Sins come? And is it not now a time of Reformation?
Is it not now time to die unto Sin, and awake unto Righteousness? Is it not
time to put on the New Man, which renews into the Image of God, and brings into
Righteousness and Holiness? else in vain has the many and large Professions of
England been; and to what purpose has it carried the name so long of a holy
and reformed Nation, if the time of Reformation be not come? Indeed there is
little more amongst many of the Tolerated Churches in England but Profession
only; amongst all the Lo here is, and Lo there is; amongst all the many
Divisions, Denominations, Sects and Separations; amongst all the Gatherings,
Societies or Assembles, how few has the Womb of Reformation really brought
forth? and how many has proved Abortives? yea, how many is Strangled ^'ch
Womb? Oh! he wist well what he said, who said, Strait is the Gate, and narrow
is the Way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it: yea, may I
say, few there be that seek after it, and therefore must needs be few that find
it. Oh! who can but lament, yea, mourn and sorrow in secret to see the present
sad and miserable Estate of England, who was formerly accounted as a Nursery of
Christianity and Godliness; and how is it now grown over with Weeds, Briers and
Thistles? Oh, who does not see how wickedness is established, and sin
increases as a flood; how the Workers of Iniquity are set up and the proud
called happy? Oh, how does Idolatry grow and flourish, and all manner of
abomination abound? yea, they work wickedness greedily, making haste to do
evil, and are skillful to transgress; yea, they improve both wits, life, time
and estates in the lusts and pleasures o'th Flesh; they commit lewdness with
heart and hand, their feet run to evil, and they are not at all ashamed,
neither do they blush; they sport themselves with their abominations, and the
fear of God is not before their eyes. Oh, the unparalleled abominations that
swims in England is undeclarable! Oh, how does the vessels of the Whore flote
upon her Waters! surely, surely, the just God will be avenged on her, and will
recompense her for all her abominations, and notorious evils; he will bring
down the pride of her stout hearted, and humble the heady High-mindedness of
her High ones, and lay low the lofty looks of her Lordly leaders, and severly
punish the pride of her Princes; Yea, his anger is already kindled, and his
wrath shall balance her wickedness, and who shall withstand his Power, or who
can divert his Decree: in that day the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
him, for neither Rock nor Mountain shall save them, they will find no cover from
the Storm, nor no hiding place from the Tempest, though they now flatter
themselves with their own imaginations, and heal themselves with smooth words,
and fortify themselves with the arm of Flesh, sitting like a Queen that shall
see no sorrow, making merry over the Witness which lies slain in their Streets;
yea, they hate to be reformed; The Judges judge for Reward, the Prophets divine
for Money, the Priests preach for Hire, and hare rule by their means, and the
People love to have it so.

I remember Malachi complaining, cried out, O ye Priests this Commandment is
for you, and if you will not hear, neither lay it to heart, I will bring a
Curse upon you, and I will Curse your Blessings; for ye have departed out of
the Way, ye have caused many to stumble; therefore have I made you contemptible
and base before all the People, Mal. 2.1, 2, 8, 9. And is not this the State of
the Priesthood of England, who is ready enough to cry, Bring ye all the Tithes
into the Store House, ( viz. into their Kitchins, Purse and Pocket) and pay
them (say they) duly, and truly, liberally, and with a cheerful Heart for God
loves a cheerful giver; and then say they, God will remove his Judgments from
amongst you, and those (let them be as vile as they will) that will pay them
liberally (and that with the better) and is ready to put into their mouths, and
labor, and give it to them; to such they will cry Peace, peace, and say such a
one is a very honest Man, and they will befriend him in any matter of
concernment before Magistrates, etc. but he that cease to put into their
mouths, (let him be as honest as he will) against him they prepare War, and
cry, Bring ye all the Tithes, etc. when as it was they that Malichi complained
of, that robbed God in Tithes and Offerings, Mal. 2.1. and 1.6. it was they
that despised his Name; it was they that offered polluted Bread, and the blind,
and lame and sick for Sacrifice, etc. Who amongst you, says he, will shut a
door for naught, or will kindle a fire on mine Altar for naught, verse 10, and
are they not so now, who amongst them will shut a Door for naught? which of
them has any thing to Preach, if the People have nothing to give? nay, they
cannot rely of the Peoples gift, but they must know what Revenew belongs unto
the Incombent, or Minister of that place, and how it does arise; and it must be
confirmed to them either by the Bishop, Magistrates, or Donators, etc. thus
they Bargain, yea, they are as expert Merchants as ever Babylon bred, observing
their time for Trading; and when they have enjoyed a Benefit Ten, Twenty or
Thirty years, if another fall vacant of a greater Revenue, Stipend or Value,
then they bestir themselves, with all diligence, by writing, running, riding,
etc. (yea, some will not let to ride Post to and again) to the Donators,
Bishops, or such as can empower and invest them in such a place; and having
obtained it, then they will be gone; there say they, a Man may live
comfortably, this is a poor sorry mean place having this or the other
inconvenience: And thus they show themselves unto all; for it appears their
Comfort is Fleshly ease, and their End is great Benefices, and their gain is
filthy lucre, their god (they chiefly serve) is their Belly, and what will be
their reward? hence they fulfill the old proverb, No penny, No pater Noster; nay
not so much as a Homily, or Farwell Sermon; Benefit taken away they are struck
dumb.

And they are so far short of the Priests in Malachi's days, that they will
kindle no fire at all; they will keep no Storehouse at all, neither for the
poor Widow, Fatherless, Orphant or Stranger; (these must beg in the Country)
Tithes is confirmed to us, say they, for our maintenance and livelihood by the
Law of God and Man, that so we may be less cumbred in the World, and may devote
and give up our selves more to the Service and Worship of God, and attend the
Church: And thus they claim Tithes to be theirs, and yet (as I said before)
they will keep no Storehouse to maintain the Poor out of, as they did under
the Law; nor they will kindle no fire on the Altar, neither will they Sacrifice or
Offer any thing unto the Lord out of their Tithes and First Fruits; they will
neither Sacrifice Bull nor Goat, Lamb nor Dove, neither Cake nor fine Flower,
nor Bread leavened nor unleavened, neither Meat offering nor Drink Offering,
Sin-offering, Peace Offering nor Trepass Offering, nor any manner of Oblation
according to the Levitical Law, and yet they must have Tithes paid them as they
were then; all that Law say they, is abolished since Christ came in the Flesh,
save that sweet morsel of Tithes which is so pleasant to their pallat, like
Achan's wedge of Gold, and Babylonish Garment, Josh. 7.21. which they covet as
much as he did, and would save alive, as Saul did the King of the Amalekites,
and the best of the spoil as Sheep, Oxen and Fatlings, etc. 1. Sam. 15.9. even
so they would have Tithes kept up above all the rest of the Ordinances,
Ceremonies and Services of the first Tabernacle, and that shadowy Dispensation,
Tithes is the sweetest of all, many of the rest would be trouble and cost to
them, and diminish their Revenue: So these they confess to be abolished, and
why not Tithes say I? Of what institution was Tithes? Or for what term more
then the rest? that they must not be abolished with the rest? I know no cause
but the reasons aforesaid crept in amongst their Ancestor, or Mother the Church
of Rome in the Night of Apostasy.

Then again, there is that in Luke 11.42. where Christ said, Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, etc. from which they infer that Christ allowed the
payment of Tithes, under the Gospel; indeed so say I that Christ there allowed
the payment of Tithes, (the Scribes and Pharisees being as under the Law) but
not under the Gospel, its true he condems them for the neglect of weightier
matters, as Judgment, etc. may not I accordingly condem both Priest and People
now; he said they Strained at a Gnat, and swallowed a Camel; may not I say so
now to them that makes so much ado about Tithes, and neglects things of greater
weight, as departing from Iniquity as Swearing, Lying, Coveting, Stealing,
Oppressing, Defrauding, Cozening, Drinking, Cheating, Adultery, Fornication,
and many more things of greater weight, walking in disobedience to what God
has manifested by his Light in their Consciences; doing that which they ought
not, and leaving undone what they ought, they are (at best) but like the
Pharisees, Sticking at the outside things, as Tithes, Ordinances of the Church,
so called, Conformity, and the like Traditions required by Men, but never show
so much zeal and diligence to keep their Consciences clear, and to observe what
is required of them by the Lord; they will pretend a great zeal for the Church
and Government, etc. but when appears so much zeal for God? and the keeping of
his Commandments, and of loving him with all their Heart. But to come more
positively to the point of his allowing of Tithes in this place, I say, I grant
it for they were then under the Law, and the Law was but a fulfilling, For he
came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, which he did observe in the
days of his Flesh, until he had offered up himself a perfect and everlasting
Sacrifice, then he said, It is finished; then came in the Second Covenant, and
took place of the First, (it being disanulled) the Second was Established when
his Blood was shed, by which Salvation was obtained, For without shedding of
Blood there is no Remission: So may not we as justly Condemn then the Tything
Priests, and other fiery Zelots in our Age, who is so Exact for their Tithes,
as if Salvation depended in that particular, and is very negligent in seeking
after Righteousness, Piety and Reformation of Life; but contrarily, if any seek
after God, or the knowledge of his Way and Truth, then they cry out of such
with open mouth, as Fanatic, Schismatics, Seducers, Erroneous persons, who
seek to be Wiser then their Forefathers; What is become of them, say they, that
the Way and Worship that served them cannot serve you, but you must have a new
Way of your own, contrary to Church and State? I now remember some of the same
Spirit said to the Apostles, They were setters up of strange Gods, bringers in
of new Doctrine, turners of the World upside down; away with them they Taught
the People against the Law and the Customs of the Place and People, they were
not worthy to live; so that I see by experience, They that live after the Flesh
persecute those that live after the Spirit in every Age; but I shall not here
insist, but as I have said before (to that of Luke) he spoke to them that was
yet under the Judaical Laws, (but so am not I) and was a fulfilling them, as
appears elsewhere by his saying to John about Baptism, Suffer it to be so now,
for so it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness; so he was but a completing
that Dispensation; but when he came to suffer, and was lifted up upon the
Cross, he said, Its finished; then he put an end to all the Ordinances of the
First Tabernacle, and brought in the Second, the unchangeable Priesthood, which
stands for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck. Thus much for Tithes as they
were due under the Law, and no where else; and as they were an Ordinance
amongst the Jews only in the Land of Canaan, and no People else; for its said,
He gave his Statutes and his Judgments to Israel, to every Nation he did not
so; but I am no Jew, therefore not under that Law, but rather of the Stock of
the Gentiles, (as is believed) and Tything among the Gentiles I never yet read
of; and Christ the end of the Law for Righteousness sake (and the Heart and
Life of what the Law figured out) being come, neither Jews nor Gentiles ought
to be any longer under Shadows and Figures, etc.

But again, when their claiming of Tithes by virtue of the Mosaical Laws is
overturned, and will not hold plea Jure Divino, (as they say) then they betake
them to another that is, Jure humano, or The Civil Laws of this Nation, by
which Laws say they, Tithes is established and settled to them (say the Priests)
by virtue of their Place and Office as a most competent Livelihood for them and
their Families: In answer whereunto I say, that the radix and grand Original
property of this Title and Claim did and does still arise from the Mosaical or
Levitical Law, (which is disanulled and done away in Christ, as is before
proved) and hence they are accounted a Spiritual propriety, and therefore a
(pretended) Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Law and Court is kept and appointed (by
Episcopal Authority, within their several jurisdictions, distinct from their
Civil Laws) only for the trial and recovery of Tithes, and such other matters
as they account Spiritual; and this Levitical Institution is the sole Basis and
Foundation upon which their Civil Law depends, and the Foundation being taken
away the Structure or Building falls; so that being disanull'd in Christ, the
Civil Law has no more power, so that the Title of Tithes is lost. Now again,
every Law is or ought to be grounded upon Equity, and sound Reason, and
Righteousness, and for some conscientious and pious honest end and purpose, as
the Preamble to all Laws do hold forth, which is the Key that opens the
mystery, ground, intent and end of every Law and Statute whatsoever; so that of
Henry the 8th about Tithes, does not institute, enact or ordain, settle or
impose them as a Temporal Civil Injunction, but they are there called Spiritual
gifts belonging to holy Church, and because many does deny the payment, etc. so
this Act does but enjoin the payment of them, as a supposed due and right
formerly belonging to holy Church; and therefore does but (at the utmost)
repair, strengthen and preserve that which was like to decay, but does not set
up any new structure, property or title; so the reasons of this Law being taken
away (which is, that they are a supposed due) this Act is nulled.

These before mentioned being the only main Grounds and Reasons whereupon
Tithes are claimed and paid, which I hope is satisfactorily answered; indeed,
some more frivilous Objections are made; (as, what will not many say to save
themselves when they are in an exigent? yea, brawl, menace, perhaps beat with
wicked fist, revile or scoff, and it may be set an Officer on one, and hale him
before a Magistrate, etc.) I say many more they make to little purpose, as that
in Luke 18. where the Pharisee paid Tithes of all he possessed, which has
little in it, unless they would be condemned (with him) as a Pharisee with
their outside holiness: others say, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the Corn; I say so too; if they be Oxen let them be unmuzled,
and live of what they tread out, which is so little that they never durst rely
upon it yet, but they are more idle then such Oxen, etc. this is like their
plowing in hope, and sowing in hope, which for the most part fails before they
either plow or sow; for in which of the Priests did ever the hope endure until
he reaped the Fruit of his plowing or sowing? but rather first he must know
what Stipend there is, what Tithes or Gleab-lands, or other Revenue belongs to
the Incombent, and how it does arise; this you may say is too true: Again say
they, He that gathers a Flock let him eat of the milk of the Flock; (indeed so
say I) but they either get no flock gathered, or else their Flock is barren,
and gives no milk, or otherwise the milk they give does not satisfy, which
makes them pull, tug and draw so hard for milk, meat and maintenance from
others pertaining to another Flock which they never gathered, as daily
experience teaches to their shame, and to the shame of all that are gathered
by them: Again, (say they) If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a
great matter if we reap your carnal things? I say its no great matter, but
rather the part and duty of a Christian; but to whom have they sown Spirituals?
I am sure not to me, for L. W. has Ministered nothing to me, but that which is
Earthly, and savours of Death, (as I have elsewhere said) which deserves not my
Carnals, nor any other maintenance from me, not that I am strait-handed, or so
knit and joined to the things the Lord has endued me with, but I can
destribute them freely to such as sow Spirituals, and Ministers freely from the
mouth of the Lord, or to any other in necessity; but L. W. (as is well known)
has no such necessity, for all his eager pursuit after my Carnals these Three
or Four Years last past; but he has coveted an evil covetousness, to set his
nest on high, but thereby has not delivered his Soul from the power of evil,
but has consulted confusion to his shame.

So Still I say the grand Title stood in the Mosaical Institutions, all which
pointed at Christ, and Christ being come, they fall flat, and to them a period
is set; for its Evident for some hundreds of years after Christ, there was
neither Claim nor payment of Tithes, nor no settling or confining of Ministers
to such and such Parishes or Places, but they that received freely, preached
freely, and went from one Country to another, and from one People to another,
as they were drawn by the Spirit of the Lord; and in those days there was no
settled nor forced maintenance belonged unto them, but they who received
Spirituals, and were brought into the Faith and Fellowship of the Saints they
administered of their Temporals freely without any injunction, (as many has
done in England these late years) and the Lord having opened the Hearts of many
(as Lydia) they called them into their House, being open, to distribute to
their Necessities; so that they that set forth without money or scrip, etc.
wanted nothing: yea, I believe many of the Lords Ministers and Servants (called
Quakers) has Traveled (in these late years) many Hundred of miles, from one
People and Nation to another, having been persecuted, and beat, and haled to
Prison, and out of Prison, here and there amongst a strange Nation and People
which they knew not, who when they set forth could not assure themselves of one
Nights lodgings, or one meals Meat, and yet they were in every place
sufficiently provided for, and had no want, they only cast their care upon the
Lord, and lived upon the Gospel, being Preachers of it, and by the Faith of the
Son of God, as did the primitive Christians in the Apostles days, and some
Hundred of years after, until the power of Christianity was lost, and the
Apostasy crept in, and then they fell into Forms and Immitations, Rome being
the leading Church settled Bishops, Vicars and Priests, and erected Monasteries,
Abbeys and Religious Houses, and placed them there, and brought in the old
Rites and Customs of the Jews again, (under a color of Zeal and Piety)
persuading the People to give gifts to pious uses; so enjoining them to one
thing after another, until their Traditions were received as Canonical, and
amongst the rest brought in this of Tithes again, which for a long time was
paid at the Owners pleasure, either to the Poor, or to the aforesaid
Monasteries and Religious Houses for pretended Spiritual uses; and when they
saw that the greater part distributed their Tithes to the Poor, Pope Alexander
the third did restrain the Peoples freedoms, Anno 1180. And Pope Gregory
ordained that Tithes should not be distributed to the Poor, but to the Mother
Church, Anno 1274. And Pope Pius the Fourth ordained the payment of Tithes upon
penalty of Excomunication by a Council at Trent, about the year 1560. And thus
they crept in again, (as they fell from the Power of Godliness) then they began
to build again that which was before destroyed, and so brought in these old
Ordinances again, in immitation of the Mosaical Law, and so came to force and
compel a maintenance (for a Priesthood and Ministry which was not of Levi's
Linnage) which was never used nor known amongst the Christians in the purity of
the Gospel; but being little acquainted or read in the State of the Church as
it did descend from the Primitive times downwards to this Day, I shall be more
sparing in things thereunto pertaining, and for the further satisfaction
therein, (and how Rome, and other Churches, fell from their Primitive purity,
and how they brought in Tithes and the Relics of Judaism again) and every
external extant Ordinance or Tradition now allowed and established throughout
all Europe) I refer the Reader to A. Pearson's Book, called, The great Case of
Tything, and also to Francis Howgil's Books, the one called, The Glory of the
True Church Discovered in its Purity, where he proves Tithes no Gospel
Ordinance; the other called, The Great Case of Tything once more Revived etc.
where the State of the Church in the Primitive times, and downward from year to
year, and the bringing in of all the Romish Stuff, and Superstitious Trash is
sufficiently treated of, and may be satisfactory to any sober Reader that
desires to be instructed.

Now it appears clear, that that Law by which Tithes was payable and due under
the First Covenant was only Established among the Jews, (as I said before) and
that in the Land of Canaan, being a peculiar People, to whom he gave his Laws
and his Statutes for ever, as its said, Psalm. 147.19. and its believed we are
not of the Jews Genealogy, neither of the Offspring of any of the Tribes of
Israel according to the Flesh; and therefore (if Tithes were yet an Ordinance
in force) as to the contrary is sufficiently proved ought not to be paid by us
by virtue of that Law and Covenant, we being of the Gentiles Stock by Nature,
(is authentical) and so has nothing to do with the Ordinances of Israel
according to the Flesh, who was the natural Branches unto whom pertained the
Law, and the Covenant, and the Oracles of God, and they fell through unbelief,
and by their fall we came to be ingrafted, and we stand by Faith, which is the
Gift of God, a Mystery held in a pure Conscience, and not by the Observation of
the Ordinances of the Jews, and the First Covenant: So let the blind Priests
and Doctors lay their hands upon their mouths, and be ashamed of their gross
absurdity, and stupid Senses being mudled and jumbled in obscurity with their
many Arts and Sciences, multiplicity of Tongues, and divided Languages, one
pleading one thing, and another pleading another, until they become like Froth
upon the Waters, which while not touched appears material and substantial, but
if once handled wastes and vanishes away; so does their windy deformed
Doctrine, and typical Tenants, who has long Preached and talked of a Covenant
of Grace, which is still a Mystery, or as a Book Sealed to them while they are
studdying and musing in their Greek and Latin Libraries, not at all perceiving
the Vail, or the Wall of Partition that stands between them and the Covenant of
Grace unbroken down and removed.

One other Objection is in my mind, which is this, speaking of Melchisedeck who
received the Tenth of the Spoils from Abraham, its said, Levi, who received
Tithes paid Tithes in Abraham; and further he says, Here men that die receive
Tithes; but there he received them of whom it is Witnessed that he lives; now
what objection can be made from these words, Here Men that die receive Tithes,
but there, etc? the words has Relation to two times or places, or as here or
there? as here in this time, and there in that time; for the Law being 430
Years after Abraham, or after the Promise was made to Abraham, Galat. 3.17.
must needs be nearer to the Apostle, or to the days of the Apostle, then the
day that Abraham gave the Tenth of the spoil to Melchisedeck, by so many years;
so that he might well say here when he spoke of the Sons of Levi, and there
when he spoke of Melchisedeck; but if any say it has Relation to the very Age
and Day when the Apostle spoke it, (which is disputable) yet I may say now as
he said then, Here Men that die receive Tithes, (yea such as are dead while
they live) and not only receive Tithes, but persecute, imprison, and in a
manner rob for Tithes such as does not give contrary to Law or Custom, but I
allow not such: I may say here Ministers in England Swear, Lie, Covet, Oppress
and Persecute exceedingly for Tithes, and yet pretend to be Gospel Ministers;
but I say again, I allow not such neither believe they are Gospel Ministers; so
this makes little (in my judgment) for Tithes under the Gospel: Then again,
There he received Tithes (viz. Melchisedeck) of whom it is witnessed that he
lives; and Christ is said to be a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedeck; Now if any infer from hence that Tithes or First Fruits belongs
to Christ, as being, or coming in Melchisedeck's Order; I say, rather it has
reference to his immutability and unchangeableness, then taking of Tithes; for
its said, He was without descent, without beginning or end of days; and if it
related to Tithes; first, I say to that, it was but the Tenths of the Spoils,
and not of all his Estate and Increase, clean and unclean, as they are now
claimed: And secondly, I hope you will grant Christ a Spiritual Priest, and
therefore if any will give, it must be the Firstfruits and Tenths of things
Spiritual, and not Carnal, else there is no agreement nor coherence; For
Sacrifice and Offerings he would not, for he being Spiritual accepts nothing
but what is Spiritual, and proceeds from the measure of his own Spirit and
Truth in every one; and herein let as many offer and give unto the Lord as
will, and as much, and as often as they will, I allow of it, if it be a
Spiritual Offering indeed.

Thus much in Defense of my Innocent Sufferings, being thus far convinced in my
Judgment, and persuaded in my Heart and Conscience, I dare not allow nor yield
to any thing so noxious to my Conscience, and contrary to the Gospel
Dispensation and the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, being (as is
before proved) in the first place Figurative, imposed for the time then
present, until the time of Reformation: Secondly, being only an Ordinance among
the Jews, and such as were under the Law, and not to the Gentiles, nor such as
are under the Gospel. Thirdly, being claimed as Spiritual by Divine
Institution, when as the extent and scope of the Institution is finished and
ended, and is therefore now no more Spiritual then the rest of the nine parts.
And lastly, being generally Dedicated, Paid and Received for the use and
maintenance of an Antichristian, dark Man-made Ministry, who only seeks ours,
and not us; for which the Wisest and Learned of them can neither produce
Precept nor President from Christ, or any other his Apostles, Ministers and
Servants in the Prim^tive purity of the Church, being an old Ordinance of Moses
renovated in the Romish Apostasy, and Traditionally dispersed by Papistical
Authority over all the Europian Nations, as does fully and largely appear in
those pithy and ponderous works of the before recited Authors A. P. and F. H.
this Title of Tithes having such a pleasant delightsom relish, it has been
still retained amongst all the Reformed Rulers in Church and State, who has so
largely professed to cast off the Papistical Yoke.

Now I shall proceed to say something to those my Neighbors and Parishioners,
amongst whom I have had my conversation in times past, and a society when I
wrought the will of the Flesh, who have known my manner of Life from a Child; I
say to such, what have I done? what have I thought? what have I acted or spoken
that has deserved any such measure as I have received from L. W? or what evil
have I done? or what occasion have I given to any Man's person, good name or
estate at any time? especially since I associated amongst the People called
Quakers, let him, you, or any of you, or any other Person come forth, that can
justly charge any thing against me, wherein I have damnified any one the value
of a penny, and have denied to give satisfaction, or have offered violence to
any ones Dog, and I shall willingly (upon due proof) make acknowledgement and
satisfaction to the utmost of my power; for blessed be the Lord my
Righteousness and Redeemer, there is no thing upon my Conscience and Spirit,
but what is between the Lord and my own Soul in matter of my Testimony; yea,
everlastingly magnified be the Righteous Lord my preserver, to whose praise I
desire to speak it, that though L. W. and many others have sought occasion, and
have waited for my halting or falling, they have not yet seen it, nor got no
occasion against me (save about the Law and Worship of my God, or the holding
forth my Testimony and Exercise of my Conscience toward him, for which I have
been reviled, mocked and reproached amongst you; yea, the Children in the
Streets have played upon me with their Tongues; this I speak to their (or their
Parents) shame, but was as joy and rejoicing to my Soul, being for
Righteousness sake, the Blessing of the Lord was with me, and mine Enemies knew
it not, nor they that dwelt in Darkness saw it not.

This further I have to propound to you, whether ye can allow of it? or that it
would be justifiable in the Law of Equity and true Judgment, that my Servant
should Sue you at Law, make spoil, and carry away your goods, and cast your
persons into Prison, and after all seek to make your Estates forfeit and
confiscate, and all for the wages and recompense of the Service he has done
for me? which of you would approve of such work; or of me in keeping such a
Servant? would you not rather say to me, if I have hired a Servant and employed
him, pay him and maintain him also; why does he trouble you? What have you to
do to pay him for my work, seeing he is my Servant? Is not this the case
between me and you? Is not L. W. your Minister, and also your Servant? And by
what Law or Reason ought I to pay him for doing your service? Has either you
or he a President in all the Scriptures of any such unequal deeds? Did ye ever
Read of any of the Churches, or Servants of God in Ages past that used such
things? I trow not; If I had distributed voluntarily it had been one thing, but
being sued and compelled thereunto, therefore I complain; may not I say to you,
why do you hire more servants then you can pay? Or why do you keep more then
you are able to maintain? Else, why am I thus persecuted for his maintenance?
May not I speak this to your shame? being so many (as I may say) for one
Servant, you are either hard Masters, and very penurious and strait-handed to
your Servants, or else your Servants are very lavish, proud profane and
prodigal, and has much maintaining: Did ever any Minister of ours (called a
Quaker) come among you to sue and cast into Prison for their maintenance and
livelihood? or what would you say if they should? I believe you would condemn
both us and them; and indeed we should be greatly ashamed, if they should; for
my part, I had rather Administer to the last mite, then any such cause of
aspertion should be given against us, and also testify against them as no
Ministers of Christ that Preaches for any such ends; if they be Gospel
Ministers, let their Gospel maintain them, or let them labor with their hands;
though many have said, we are a disorderly and unmannerly People; but I affirm
we have better orders and manners amongst us then you have; for your Servants
are become your Masters, and Lords it over you, and both in that, and many
other things, disorder and confusion is come over you, as they that built Babel
of old.

I remember well what Malachi says, complaining of the Priests, Mal. 2.2, 3,
etc. to verse 9. I will send a Curse upon you, I Will Curse your Blessings; yea,
I have Cursed them already: Behold, I Will corrupt your Seed, and spread dung
upon your Faces, and ye shall know that I have sent this Commandment unto you,
that my Covenant might be with Levi, my Covenant was with him of Life and
Peace, the Law of Truth was in his mouth; for the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge; but ye are departed out of the Way, ye have caused many to stumble
at the Law; ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, (says he) therefore have I
made you contemptible and base before all the People. [mark, now] Is not this
the case and condition of the present Priesthood and Clergy of England, those
neutralists, that are neither Ministers of the Law nor Gospel? has not the
Lord made them contemptible and base before all the People; yea, where shall a
Man come and have any Discourse about them, but the most part, if not all, does
generally conclude they are Covetous, vile, proud and profane Persons,
Oppressors, Drunkards, Men-pleasers, Time-servers, Turn-coats, Heady and
High-minded, lovers of Pleasures and filthy lucre more then of God, having a
Form of Godliness, but denying the Power; but their folly shall be, (and is)
made manifest, it shall proceed no further, said the Apostle.

May not I say the Merchants of this last Age has exceeded all that ever went
before them, they can trade on those days called their Sabboths, or
Lords-dayes, and prohibit all others from either trading or laboring in their
lawful and honest vocations (but if they will Play, Drink, Revel, Swear, and be
Profane, there they may have liberty enough) on those Days? Also, whether any
have need of their Merchandice or not, or will come and Trade with them or not,
or will take any of their Commodities from them or not; yet they have a Law,
and by that Law compel them to pay, and that even their own Rates what they
demand; and if any refuse, then they will menace and thunder out their
Comminations, and Excomunications, and some they will cast in Prison, it may be
till Death, and yet cloak themselves over with the name of Gospel Ministers,
and plead innocence, and say its the Law that requires it, and binds Men to be
subject to Ecclesiastical Canons and Censures; now, wherein does their
innocence appear, unless in putting a white Coat above a black one, a Popish
dress; and if the Figure be true, they are but outside Pharisees, appearing
white and clean without, and that in Apparel only: Yea, I may say they are as
wise expert Mariners (in that Babilonish Wisdom) as ever Trafficked or Sailed
upon the Waters of the Great Whore, they can Sail with any Wind that blows
within the Circuit of Babylons Coasts; but that Prophecy comes to be fulfilled
upon them, Evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse deceiving, and being
deceived, etc. But blessed be the Lord the Day is dawned that declares them,
and the Light that makes them manifest, with their all Abominations, and the
Son is appeared that will disperse them as the Morning mist, so that their
skirts shall be uncovered, and their nakedness shall be laid open, and their
visage shall be no more Veiled, for the Judgment of the Great Whore is come and
coming, wherein all her Merchants shall weep and mourn, because no Man buyeth
their Merchandice any more.

So this Mite of my Testimony I have cast in, being but a Mite indeed in
comparison of the many weighty, praiseworthy works, given forth by many of the
dear and faithful Servants of God upon this very Subject in this very Age, from
the breakings forth of the Glorious Light in them revealed and made known; And
for the clearing my Conscience in the sight of the Lord, I refer this to
public view, and give this Testimony to my Countrymen and Acquaintance, or any
others that yet see not the difference between us and the Priests in this very
point; and partly for satisfying or silencing of others, especially the People
of the Independants, or Congregational Church at Melmerby, (so called) who
though (as I have said before) they once made the non payment of Tithes an
Article of their Judgment; yet have of late (since I became a sufferer for
them) whisperingly or clandestinely condemned me in secret more then many (if
not all) others that have less profession, and seem more profane, rendering me
fool^sh and unwise to suffer so much, and so long for such a trivial, external,
tempory matter, as they call it; but to me it was and is no sm^ll matter being
to the Contrary persuaded in my Conscience, and knowing by good experience, and
assured Testimonies, that I must stand or fall by obedience or disobedience to
the manifestation of the Lords precious Gift and Light in my own Soul and
Conscience; I therefore value not the Judgment of any Man, or People, (being
from the Light, the Line of True Judgment, and Rule of Life to me) and to be
accounted a Fool is no new nor strange thing, for a Fool I am to their Wisdom,
as was the good and precious Servants of God in Ages past, For the Wisdom of
God is foolishness with Men; and casting things upon me behind my back, becomes
them not, it were more Christianly for them to Admonish, or Instruct me face to
face, and to give me their Advice and Reasons in matters of this nature, which
if I found to be more weighty, sound, and agreeable to the Witness of God in my
Conscience, I should be very ready, willing and glad to receive them, and be
informed by them; I am neither so far remote, nor so much a stranger to them,
(though my Principle may) but this way they choose not, but makes War and fights
as Men that beat the Air hiddenly, or a far off, slighting and contemning my
Principle, and me for its sake, above most of People, as though I had been
Poisonous and Infectious where I came, prohibiting some of their Society, (and
Members so called) to have any Fellowship or Converse with me, or to receive
either Books or Papers from me, or come where I was; and one of their leading
Teachers ( G. Nicholson by Name) denied to make good their own Principles and
Tenants, held forth in their own Defense against us; and also to make good
several contumelious aspertions cast upon us (in my Hearing) by him and others;
and also denied to give an account of his Faith and Hope in Christ Jesus,
saying, It was in vain, etc. with several such like matters which I shall now
omit; and yet these People will be Slighting and Villifying us in secret;
indeed we have much more cause to have disesteemed them and their Principles,
having more knowledge of both them and it, when we were amongst them, then ever
they had of us or ours; and in villifying our Principles, they speak evil of
things they understand not, being a Treasure whose worth and value they never
knew, the mystery whereof is hid and sealed from that state and nature they
live in; we have known theirs, but they never knew ours; yea, for my own part I
can truly say in the Light and Presence of the Lord, that I had more love and
affection in my Heart for those people, then any other Profession that was from
the Light; yea, many a time I could have mourned in secret, and been willing to
have undergone great hardship that they might have been won and gained to the
Lord; yea, I could as it were, have plucked them out of the fire many a time;
other times my spirit has been weighed and burdened, yea, filled with
indignation against some of them that were Elders, Teachers and Leaders that
caused the rest to Err, who like the Pharisees of old, have Shut the Kingdom of
God, as it were; but I am sure they have drawn backward and hindered the work of
the Lord, both in themselves and others; for they would neither enter
themselves, nor suffer those that would, but have made War against the Light in
themselves and others; and I testify they are Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, Christ Jesus the Light, the New and Living Way, who is the Light of
the World, John 8.12. Who is in the World, and the World knows him not, and
lights every Man that comes into the World, John 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, unto
whom John came to bear Witness, and yet how few will believe? how few does
receive John's Testimony, though he was sent from God to bear Witness of the
Light? and all hold John as a Prophet; also, how few do receive Christ's own
Exhortation, who said, While you have the Light believe in the Light, that you
may be Children of the Light, John 12.36. no marvel if they receive not ours?
may it not well be said unto them, Behold ye Dispisers and wonder, I will work
a Work in your day, which though a Man declare it unto you, yet will you in no
wise believe, Acts 13.41. [mark] ye Despisers that Despise the Light,
accounting it as a thing of naught, (calling it Natural, or Diabolical, or an
unholy thing) esteeming it too mean a Meat for your stuffed up Stomachs, and
cannot yet be digested by you; what better Testimony would you have? Would you
have one arise from the Dead? here is John a Man sent from God, and here is
Christ Jesus which rose from the Dead, which Death could not bold; also we have
the Testimony of the Spirit of Truth, and having received this Testimony, we
have the Witness in our selves, and can set to our Seals that God is True, John
3.35, and that there is no other way to the Father, but by Christ Jesus the
Light, which is the Life and Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, though many set
it at naught, and will not stoop to so small a thing, yet all the Powers of
Darkness cannot comprehend it, it will break through them all to your
condemnation that are disobedient; and for proof thereof I appeal to every of
your Consciences in the sight of God, and let the Light therein, which abides
in you, which is Truth and no Lie, John 2.27. let it declare for me whether any
of you can hide you from it; If you take the Wings of the Morning (as David
said) and fly into the uttermost parts of the Earth, it will find you out; do
what you will it will declare the nature of your deeds; when you do evil at
home or abroad, never so secretly, when no man sees, it will condemn you, and
when you do well it will justify, and you will feel peace and joy in that
Work; it will tell you all that ever you did, as the Woman of Samaria said, Is
not this the Christ, come and see; then they came and saw and believed also,
not because of her words, but by what they heard from him themselves, saying,
they knew indeed that this is the very Christ, John 4.42. So be entreated (as a
Man would entreat his Friend whom he loves) to come with the Samaritans, and
see wether it be not so as we have said; she was but one, and that a Woman, yet
they came forth with her to see if it was he, and it was he, and they believed;
but we are many Witnesses, and Testify what we have heard, and seen, and
handled of him: So once more (I say) be entreated to come and see; not to come
forth after us, and follow us, as he said, Luke 17.21, 23. but to turn in your
minds (I mean) to the Light of Christ Jesus in your own Hearts, for the Kingdom
of Heaven is within you, and there hearken to him that is the Light of the
World; (mark, the World is set in Man's Heart, Eccles. 3.11.) and when you have
heard and obeyed, (for that is believing indeed) I question not but you will be
ready to say with the Samaritans, That ye know that he is indeed the very
Christ. So put not off by delays, but while the Lord calls do you answer, and
while he seeks be you gathered, Prove. 1.24.26. yea, while the Light and Love of
God is with you believe in it, receive it, and walk in it; for Darkness comes
when no Man shall walk or work, John 22, 35, 36. And the Light of the wicked
shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall be quenched, Job. 18.5, 6.
Then shall his Wrath and Fury increase, which will torment the Conscience for
ever, where they shall feel the Worm that dies not, and the Fire that never
goes out; then Sorrow, Mourning and bitter Lamentation shall fall upon them;
then may they cry to the Mountains fall on us, and to the Hills to cover us;
even they (I mean) that slighteth their day of Visitation, and hate to be
reformed; For behold the Days come that shall burn as an Oven, wherein all the
proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble; the Day that comes shall
burn them up, and shall leave them neither Root nor Branch; but to them that
fear my Name, says the Lord, shall the Son of Righteousness arise with healing
in his Wings, and they shall go forth and grow as Calves in the stall; and they
shall tread down the Wicked; yea, the Wicked shall be as Ashes under the soles
of their feet, in that Day when I shall do this says the Lord; he that can
believe it, let him.

This is my Testimony given forth in the same Love wherewith the Lord my God
has loved me, not desiring to Eat my Morsel alone, nor yet to conceal the
loving kindness of the Lord, (which is held forth freely unto all) of which I
am made a partaker, according to the measure of that Grace and Love received in
Christ Jesus, who would not that any should perish, but that all Men might come
to the knowledge of the Truth and be saved; who was the First Fruits of
Righteousness, leaving us an Example to follow his steps: So desiring that all
might come to partake of the same Grace with us, and walk in the same Light
with us, where there is no occasion of Stumbling; and come to drink of the same
Living Water with us, which whosoever drinks thereof shall never thirst
again, but is satisfied for ever, this none knows save they that drink thereof,
and they are but a few.

Having for the Reasons aforesaid, committed this to public view, its now
other Men's (as well as mine) to judge of, and no doubt may be by some opposed,
as well as by others approved; I therefore desire the discreet Reader (having
soberly and piously pondred this short Treatise, in the fear of the Lord (not
rashly to asperse either me or it behind my back, thereby to make my Principle
or Testimony odious in the Eyes of such as are weak and unstable in Judgment,
but rather (having any thing to object against the Truth of any particular
herein) to make known their Objections to me, either by word or writing, and I
shall be very willing to be Christianly informed, or else to give a Christian
information, and sober Reply for their satisfaction, and for the clearing and
vindicating of every particular herein, according to that Talent of knowledge
that is given me to improve; and this I hope will be easily granted by such as
is willing to do unto me as they would have me (or others) to do unto them,
which is according to both Law and Prophets.

Given forth about the 6th Month, 1667. Tho. Carleton.

THE END.
To the CALLED OF GOD, And true Professors of the LIGHT and SPIRIT of Jesus
Christ, in these Northern Nations.

To the Called of GOD, etc.
OH, my well-beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, in that Spiritual Heavenly
Relation, that stands in the power of an endless Life, do I tenderly Greet you
all, and in the sensible Feeling thereof, do I at this time with much
tenderness and fear, communicate these following Exhortations unto you.

Upon the Second day of the Tenth Month at Even, after I was returned from
waiting upon, and serving the Lord, amongst the assembly of his People, as my
body I lay down upon my Bed, expecting to take its natural rest, my Soul also
was inclined to take its sweet repose in God, and in my contemplation, the care
of the Churches, and the concerns of the Flock of God, came weightily upon me,
so that my natural Sleep was wiped away from mine Eyes, and in my Meditation
with my God, these things following rose fresh in me, and the delivering of
them to you, came greatly upon me, so that I felt a real necessity upon my Soul
to arise and write: And a cry run through me, and the Mourning of my Spirit,
and the Lamentation of my Soul was very great, for the division of Reuben, oh
for the division of Reuben there was great searchings of Heart, oh many a Sigh,
oh many a Groan, oh, many a Lamentation is made by many a tender Heart, and
many a broken Spirit, for the division of Reuben, which at this Day were great
and many, so that it came upon me in the Dread and Fear of the Eternal God, to
Warn all the Churches, all the Called of God, all the Professors of his Name,
High, and Low, Rich and Poor, Man and Woman, to beware of Divsion, even the
Division of Reuben the Firstborn, therefore take heed, take heed all you that
were Firstborn, or First begotten to God, who were as the First Fruits of the
Spirit in this last Age, and Dispensation; Oh let all be Advised I humbly
entreat you, and in the Counsel of God, do I hereby Warn you all, to beware and
avoid Division, for that House that is Divided in it self, and against it self
cannot stand, oh let me advise and warn you (in the tenderness and brokenness
of my mourning Soul) as Joseph did his Brethren of old, see that you fall not
out by the way, oh feel, feel the melting compassionate Spirit of Joseph whose
Bowels broke toward his Brethren, and he wept upon their Neck, oh that
innocent Spirit of Joseph, he sought no Revenge when they were fallen into his
Hand, and there sheaves came bowing to his sheave; and the eleven stars did
obeisance unto him, he was not lifted up, nor exalted with Pride, though Lord
of all Egypt, as he said but was full of Compassion and wept over them when
they were smitten and terrified with Guilt, only innocent Benjamin wept upon
his Neck: Oh see his care to his Brethren, fall not out by the way; And as our
faithful Father Abraham said to his Nephew Lot, let there be no strife between
us for we are Brethren, and the Canaanite and the Perizite they dwell in the
Land, they will see it and behold it, and this will agravate the Sin and the
Lord will greatly be dishonored by it. Oh see the Care and Peaceable Spirit of
faithful Abraham, how he sought to preserve Peace and Love, and even as it were
submitted to his Nephew Lot, the whole Land is before thee, take thy choice,
and let not us strive for we are Brethren, so here was no superiority nor
exalted Spirit in Abraham; but he works by Love, Oh my dear Friends be you all
warned and take heed of Division; for we are now upon our Travel, and upon our
Return out of Egypt as Joseph's Brethren were, and the Lord has given us
Favor in the sight of Pharoah's Princes, and has given a large supply to the
Souls of us, and our families who was sorely afflicted with Famine yet in all
this there is no cause of Division, let no ones Heart be exalted or lifted up
because of Gods Love to them; We are now Returning to the premised Land the
Land of Rest and Peace, Therefore let us return in Peace, and dwell in Love
together, for Love is of God, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God; and
this Love thinks no Evil its no maintainer of Strife, nor no begetter of
Division, And take the Advice of the Apostle, mark them that cause Division,
and avoid them, and from whence comes War and Strife, and from whence comes all
Division, do they not rise from fleshly self-seeking Lusts that War against the
Soul; And is not the accuser of the Brethren concerned, would not he accuse us
one to another, and set us at variance one with another, and provoke to sell,
and betray one another into the hands of the Medianites, to be Bondslaves in
Egypt again.

And what is the matter the accuser works upon, is it some party colored Coat
the Father is pleased to bestow upon one more then another, or upon some dream
of Exaltation, or being Prefered one above another, or is it about some Trifle,
Jangling, or questions of Words, thus the Enemy labored of old and wrought
Division, and thus he would Work now if he be not watched against, Oh therefore
all take heed, and labor to keep near the Lord every Man for himself, and
every Woman for her self; labor to keep out that Spirit that would provoke to
strife, and to contention, oh let it enter into none, nor (being entered) keep
possession in any for where Strife is there is Confusion and every Evil work,
so if any thing would arise at any time that tends to Strief, or would rend,
and make Division; in the Bowels of the love of God; I desire all to watch
against it, shut it out, crush that Cockatrice timely; kindle no such fire, nor
blow up that Flame with words, but in the meek spirit of Jesus quench it, and
rather give place to wrath, for a soft mild answer turns it away; always
remembering the words of the Apostle, Why do you not rather suffer wrong, and
suffer your selves to be defrauded, and set them to judge that are least in the
Church, that a speedy end may be put to it: And as Christ himself said, he that
would be Chief let him become Servant, and as I have washed your Feet, even so
wash you one another Feet: Here was a blessed Example of Humility laid down,
and the lording of the Gentiles reproved. And truly Friends, they that stand
single in the light and counsel of God, whose Eye is impartial may clearly See,
and distinguish in all matters of Debate and Controversy, what spirit Rules,
for if the Lambs spirit be there, there is Innocence, there is Tenderness,
there is Humility, there is broken Heartedness, that spirit that is from above
is Gentle, Meek, and Lowly, easy to be entreated; it is not stubborn, proud
nor self willed, it hates not Reproof as Fools, but it loves the Reprover as a
wise Man; so they that are of this spirit they are of Abraham's Seed, and of
Abraham's Faith, let there be no strife between us for we are Brethren, they
will readily comply, and follow after Peace, knowing that the Lords Honor, and
the Honor of his Truth is concerned; so let the fruits of the Lambs spirit
appear in all, let the Lambs nature come up, and rule in all, that the Lamb and
his followers may have the Victory; so shut out all Pride, all Stubbornness,
all Ambition, all self Exaltation, and Worldly glory, let that spirit and
nature, bow down at the Footstool of the Lamb, and come bending unto him as
Joseph's Brethren to Joseph; Oh how then would his Bowels break, and weep over
its neck, as Joseph over his Brethren, and the Father over his prodigal, oh how
willing is he to receive such, and love them freely; therefore all keep near
the Lord and wait to feel universal Love in the universal Spirit of Jesus, that
it may fill all, possess all, and mutually flow through all, that your first
love may be strengthened, even the love of your espousals, whereby you were
first espoused to God, and united one unto another, this will renew you again,
oh the comeliness, and the beauty of this first love, how precious and sweet it
was; many of us may yet remember, how it drew our Souls to God, and one unto
another, oh what a Heavenly harmony, what a Heavenly oneness this love, this
first love did beget, how it wrought all into concord, and unity as one Body,
one Heart and one Spirit, to hold the same Testimony and speak the same Thing,
in the one pure Language, out of the many Languages, and out of all Division
the root and spring of it; oh the amiableness of that first love, the love that
thinks no evil, how precious and sweet a thing it is to behold, and to see
Brethren dwell together in it, it truly preaches for God, and is one infallible
sign of a Disciple of Jesus Christ as by himself laid down, by this shall all
Men know that you are my Disciples because ye love one another, for love is of
God: So if any have turned aside, if any one be hurt, if any one be wounded,
here is their balm, retire to their Primitive purity, to their first Zeal, to
their first fervent desire, to their first love and tenderness, that which is
stronger then Death which many waters cannot quench, nor floods wash away; Oh
that all would be stirred up to wait upon the Lord, to feel the renewings of
it, that in tenderness of Spirit we may serve one another, and provoke one
another to love and good works, and in that dwell together, and watch against
Division and the author and maintainers of it, and the God of Peace and Love
will be with us, and he will delight to dwell amongst us, and he will cause his
that abide in his Love to revive as the Corn and to blossom as the Rose, and
their comeliness will appear again as the morning Sun upon the Mountains; so
every particular retire, retire to your first Love, to your first Integrity to
your first Zeal for God, let not that be lost as the Church of Ephesus did;
least the Lord the Just and Righteous God, remove the Candlestick out of its
place; so all do your first Works, and keep your first Testimonies unviolated,
in Doctrine, Life and Practice, for this Preaches much for God.

And truly Friends this is a searching Day, though a Day of outward ease, yet a
Day of inward trouble to many, a sifting trying Day, the Day of Satan's
transformings, who goes subtly about to deceive, and with his Tail would
sweep down a third part of the Stars and cause them to fall to the Earth;
therefore my dear Friends keep low and humble before the Lord, within the
Sanctuary of God, and lay timely hold upon the horns of the Altar thereof, for
the Day of sifting is begun, and the Day of winnowing is at hand, wherein our
God will sift the Nations, and winnow the People, he will fan them, yea he will
fan them, and thoroughly purge them, he will take away the chaff from the wheat,
and purge away the dross from the silver in his refining Fire, and who shall
stand when he appears, who shall dwell with devouring Fire, or who shall dwell
with everlasting Burnings, only he that walks Righteously, and speaks
Uprightly, who abhoreth the gain of oppression, and shuts his eyes from
seeing Evil.

And truly Friends our God is come and coming to execute Justice and Judgment
in the Earth, I have seen it, yea in the Light of Jesus, I have beheld the Lord
for several years past, how he has been searching out the Sins of the Daughter
of his People; and bringing to Light the hidden things of dishonesty, yea how
has the Lord sought out the hidden things of Esau; so there is nothing covered
but he can reveal it, nor nothing hid that he does not know, his Eye sees all,
and his Ear hears all, his Justice he will Execute upon the head of the
Transgressor, and he will wound the hairy scalp of the Head of the Evil doer,
whether professor or profane, let none think to escape, Wealth nor Wisdom he
will not regard, neither Mountains nor Hills can preserve or cover any of the
Workers of In quity in this searching Day; the Righteous God of Heaven will not
be bribed, he will not be mocked nor dissembled with, though profane Men
Johanan like, may dissemble with one another, and may for a time appear like
Pharisees Tombs with a fair smooth polished Face in the sight of Men, and may
subtly cover their Sin, and keep their deeds of deceit and darkness hid from
the Eye of Man for a time, and like a painted Harlot wipe their mouth, as
though they had done no Evil, flattering themselves with their own crafty Wit,
making lies and falsehood their refuge, yet the Just and Righteous God, who
judges Righteously he will find out such, he will discover their skirts, and
uncover all their nakedness to their shame and utter confusion:

Therefore all take heed of maintaining any thing hiddenly, in the dread of the
Lord God I warn you; but mind the Light of Jesus, and the leadings of it in
your own Hearts, and live in that, walk with God in that as Enoch did of old;
and then you need not fear the Trial of the Day, though your Deeds be revealed
upon the House top, your nakedness will not become your shame, you will need no
deceitful coverings nor aprons of Fig Leaves, so to the Witness all retire, it
will dissemble with none, it will truly discover your present estate and
condition before God and the nature and property of every thing you undertake,
I know the experience of it, not a foot can turn aside out of the narrow way of
Life, but (being waited in) it will certainly discover; the worth and
preciousness of it, let no one ever despise; Oh my dear Friends embrace it take
heed of riding over or trampling on its reproofs, or of thinking to smother and
quench it in your selves, no no, its mouth can never be stoped, nor its
judgment ever perverted, it will be as Ten thousand Witnesses, it will one Day
be too hard for all that now rejects it, And will put the World the Flesh and
the Devil to silence.

So let none be puffed up with any thing, trust not to Egypts help nor to the
Worlds wisdom, for they will be as a broken Reed, but all keep low, and mind
the narrow Way that leads unto Life, the self denying way, it is but a few
that find it, yea peradventure but a few of that few that professes to walk in
it; The broad way the way of the World lies very near on every hand, it is soon
stepped into, if once ones Eye be turned aside, then it appears delightful,
and has a show of Beauty in it, but it leads to the chambers of Death.

And my Friends those things I laid before you in my former Epistle, I hope I
need not here reiterate or make repetition of, but as I was enjoined by the
Lord to deliver them unto you; so I would have all Male and Female, to ponder
them in your Hearts that all may be clear, and I clear of all, And Friends keep
your Hearts clear of the spirit of this World, of all the Ways, Fashions,
Pleasures and Alurements thereof; shake your selves from them, live loose to
them, for things may be Lawful to them, and by their Law, that may not be
Lawful to us by our Law. The Law of the spirit, here is our rule, so take heed
of measuring by their Rule, for our Rule being spiritual, exceeds all their
carnal Rules; and our Righteousness must exceed theirs also, so all minding the
Rule, and minding the Line, none needs go out of their Way, for it exceeds all
the Lines and Rules of Man's making, so come to the just measure, the measure of
Truth, for unjust measures are abomination in the sight of God.

And all shake your selves from all the Whorish Babilonish brats, from all her
Customs, from all her Ways and Worships, partake not of them, come away come
away, hasten hasten out from among them, bid adieu to all her Glories and
escape for your lives as Lot did out of Sodom, before Gods destroying Angel go
forth, for his Wrath is kindling and his Fury is coming up into his Face, and
who shall stand before him; Oh therefore come, come away, linger not, hasten,
hasten, to little Zoar the City of our Refuge, which God has appointed for us,
come give up, give up all, in pure obedience follow the Lamb, even the Lamb of
God that takes away the sin, and finisheth Transgression, and breaks the bonds
of Death, oh give up, leave all and come away, and wait to feel the Blood of
sprinkling, the Blood of the Lamb to sprinkle the posts of your Doors that the
destroying Angel may not enter, but may pass over you as he passed over his
Israel of old; for I know it from the Lord and can declare it unto you, that
God has a Remnant at this Day, (as he had in that) that are in Covenant with
him; And those are they that has obeyed Truth in their inward parts; and has
kept their Garments unspotted of the World, and has walked with God in the
simplicity of their Hearts, they are his, he has Chosen them out of the World,
he has called them by his Name, and espoused them to himself, and whosever
touches them touches the apple of his Eye, God will take care of them and will
be their munitioned Rock, he will pass by them and spare them as a Man spares
his only Son that serves him; oh therefore retire, retire to the Lowly, Meek,
and self-denying Spirit of Jesus, live in the possession of it, so shall you be
Heirs of Life and Glory in and through Christ Jesus, and Citizens of the New
and Heavenly Jerusalem, whose Walls is salvation and Gate^ praise, and though
fear may surprise the hypocrite, and astonishment cease upon the Disobedient
and Rebellious, yet you shall ^^and as Mount Zion, that cannot be moved, the
Lord God Almighty will strengthen your stakes, so that not a stake of Jerusalem
can be removed, nor a Cord of Zion ever ^e broken, the Mouth of the Lord has
said it. Oh therefore all sink down, sink down to the pure Principle of God in
the inward Man, the just Man's path, the shining Light of Jesus Christ, oh let
that Guide all, and Order all, and then may we say with David, thy Word o Lord
is a Light unto my feet and a Lanthorn unto my paths indeed, and so in the
Light feel the Love, the first Love renewed, and strengthened again, oh
strengthen, strengthen that little that yet remains, that it may grow warmer
and warmer, and not colder and colder; for where iniquity abounds there Love
grows cold, and undoubtedly in such the Life declines; therefore feel universal
Love to grow, to fill, to run through all, for Love works no ill to his
Neighbor, it is the fulfilling of the Law as faith the Apostle; so if any one
Male or Female have declined, have walked disorderly, have turned aside from
the holy Commandment, from the Footsteps of the flock of God, from the holy
Order of the holy Life, and Gospel of Jesus Christ, it stops the Current of
Love both in themselves and others, oh let such return, return, repent and
amend, and bow to the Righteous Judgment of him to whom all Judgment is
committed, and at the Footstool of Jesus truly humbled, in true Tenderness and
Contrition of Spirit, wait to feel the Current and Streams of Love from God the
Father, to flow in, and heal again, and to restore again, that so the heavenly
sap, virtue and universal love may be felt to spring, run and ascend again
through every member or branch, that love and good will in all may grow and
increase, and the contrary nature may decline, and that root in which enmity,
self-love, pride and contention, stands, may be daily subdued and slain, that
all may bow to the Cross and be subject to the Power, the heavenly Power of
God, oh feel it, feel it, in your Souls to live, oh let none resist it in
themselves, nor in others, for whoever resists the Power resists the Ordinance
of God, so prise it, prise it my dear Friends, retain the sense and savor of
it in your selves; let not that be lost in any high nor low, rich or poor, old
nor young, there is a living Beauty and Comeliness in it still, it is beyond all
professions or prescribed Forms, or imitations of Man's making, there can no
form nor likness be made of it, so the nature and work of the Power being
possessed and lived in, it will preserve all in Love, Unity and Peace and
Heavenly fellowship, and spiritual oneness, out of all jars, strifes, discords
or divisions; And the God of Peace and Love will be with us, and delight to do
us good, and will undoubtedly cherish and maintain his own heavenly Birth and
righteous Seed, which by the over shadowings of his heavenly eternal Power he
has begotten, and raised in all his regenerated ones.

So to the pure gift of God, I Recommend you all my dear Friends Brethren and
Sisters, that in it we may all hold the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience,
even that Faith that gives Victory and Dominion over the World, and all that
nature, that in it we may live, and by it all may be preserved, unto the end,
That so the Lord God Almighty his Living Holy Name, and Eternal Truth may be
Feared, Served, Honored and Obeyed over all, by and through all, for He alone
is worthy, yea Everlasting worthy, God blessed for ever and evermore,

Says the Soul and Spirit of him who is the Lords and yours in the Unity of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus. T. C.

A General EPISTLE: CONTAINING Wholesome Admonition and Advice to Friends in
IRELAND, and elsewhere.
By Thomas Carleton.
DEar and well beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters who are in some Measure
gathered by the Arm of God's Power, and have known the blessed Appearance of
Life and Salvation, to you is the Salutation of my unfeigned Love, and in the
Fellowship of God's Everlasting Light do I tenderly greet you all; and for the
clearing of my Spirit, of that which for some time has been upon me, do I
communicate these Lines, in the true Simplicity of my Heart, dearly desiring
all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, To keep low and near the Lord, and wait to
feel God's living Power in your Hearts, unto which we were turned or exhorted
from the Beginning; for, in the Light of the Lord, I see there is a Necessity
for it: For, unless the Sense of God's living Power be felt, Profession is
vain, and Meetings are not made profitable; for the Mysteries of Life and
Salvation, and of true Christianity, consist not only in any Profession, Name
or Notion, of this or that Principle, Article or Creed, formed or received in
the Minds of Men or Women, but in a living Enjoyment and Possession of the
Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Author and Finisher of the living saving
Faith. So my dear Friends, all wait to feel the Operation of that Power in
every Heart and Soul, to subdue all to God, and to work all into submission and
real obedience to the heavenly Will and Mind of Christ Jesus, who is come a
Light into the World, that all men through him might believe; hear is the
unchangeable standing Rule, which every one is to measure themselves by; and he
or she that is measured or squared by this, are as polished Stones for God's
spiritual House; and he or she that is not squared by this, are not fit to be
Members of God's Building: so all having the Measuring line in your hearts, let
Judgment be laid to it, and so try all things, words, works, behaviors, and
the Intent of all, and from what ground and spirit it does proceed: and this
unchangeable everlasting Rule all keep to it, and Build by it, so shall you be
justified with it in the Day of Trial; so all things done by this unchangeable
unerring Rule (the Law of the Spirit of Life) this keeps clean and pure, and
sets free of all Mud and Confusion, Sin and Iniquity, and things that bring
death and darkness over the Soul and understanding, and so cloud the Testimony:
So let every man and woman (by this standing Rule) examine themselves, and so
let them eat, speak or act, as the Lord shall persuade them; and wherein any
one doubts, and is not clear in what he or she undertaketh, let such forbear,
and wait in quietness till the Lord clear their way: So all take heed, and keep
to the Rule; for in the Lord's Light we see Light, and have Clearness, and
Freedom, and Peace? but going from the Light, without Rule, without Guide the
Vail comes over, Darkness gathers in, Confusion and Trouble, then Peace comes
to be lost. So you that have known in any measure the work of Regeneration, and
of the New Birth, through the working of God's Spirit and power in your Hearts,
by which some unclean spirits have been cast out, keep to the Power still, and
beware of letting in the unclean spirit again, for if you do, the latter-end
will be worse then the beginning. And lean not to the World's Wisdom, beware of
that spirit I advise all; for by that wisdom God is not known; and if once the
Sense and enjoyment of God be lost, then man and woman is in a woeful state,
without God in the World; so keep out of the world's spirit I entreat you all,
and live as Fools to it, and all its ways, fashions and customs, for in the
light of the Lord I see a great Snare there at this day and too many that make
Profession of Truth are like to be split upon that Rock. So dear Friends, live
loose to the world, and all the glories of it, and seek to be wise in that
which is not of this world, that you may be loved of God; and so dwell in that
which can bear the revilings and reproaches of this world, and the
contradiction of sinners, as our Lord Jesus Christ has left us an Example: So
beware of looking back to Egypt's Glory again. to see any heauty or comeliness
in that dark Land, for, from the Lord I see a Temptation attending God's
spiritual Israel in this day, as surely as ever it attended Israel after the
Flesh, and many are too prone to desire the pleasures of Egypt again ( though
the best of them be bondage, as many to their Sorrow have found) yea, too many
there be that cannot bear trials and reproaches, and the way of the Cross and
self-denial, but think it long, and wearisom, and hard, as they did in the
days of old, and so are too ready to murmur and repine, and lust in their
hearts after this World 's glory again, and join to its fashions and customs
again, and so set up Idols again, as they did whose Carcases fell in tho
wilderness, with whom the Lord was displeased: So beware of letting in that
spirit of destrust, unbelief and rebellion against God, and his pure Witness in
your Consciences, and beware of building that which was once destroyed, or
licking up that which was once vomited, or entertaining of that which was once
cast out, or owning that which was once denied, either in words, in works, in
behavior, in apparel, in doctrine or faith: has Truth in you condemned for
all idle, vain profane, wicked, unfound and unfavoury words, and brought you
into a Form of needful, true and sound words? keep to it still: has Truth
condemned all idle, proud, profane, wicked and ungodly Actions, and all empty,
airy, foolish, wanton, lustful, proud, self-willed and Men-pleasing behaviors,
and brought you into moderation, gravity, plainness, reallity and Truth in Life
and Conversation? keep to it still: has Truth condemned for decking and
adorning the Body with vain, superfluous, proud, needless, worldly, eye-taking
Toys in Apparel, and led you into plain, profitable, decent, needful things?
keep to it still: and fashion not your selves like unto the World, nor learn
any of their manners, nor of the breeding of that Egyptian-Spirit, which keeps
the Seed in bondage, and oppressed the just in the particular and in the
general; so from the Lord I advise you all, and warn you all that are Parents,
to watch over your Children, and bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord, and beware you breed them not up in the World's manners nor customs,
nor in pride, lightness and vanity, nor in things that puff up and lead away
their minds from under the Cross of Christ Jesus, but rather breed them up in
Humility, Lowliness and Self-denial, and in the Fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of true Wisdom and gate of Virtue; and so endeavor to train them up
in the right Way to Life, and lay a good Foundation in them while they are
young, and then both you and they may expect a blessing from the Lord which is
better then all. So away with all Manners and Breeding, and Education that is
out of the Fear of God; for you your selves know, the first Nature in it self
is too inclinable to be taken with the Manners and Customs of the
Egyptian-Spirit, and to take pleasure and conceit it self, and be puffed up
with, and in those things that lead from God, without nursing and encouraging
thereunto; so keep all Low in Meekness and Self-denial, that God's Fear may be
timely planted in their Hearts, and the Principles of Life and Peace, they may
be instructed in, as you your selves have learned them of the Lord, that so the
loving kindness and gentle dealings of God toward us, we may tell of them to
our Children, and they to another Generation; so all learning the way of the
Cross and Self-denial, that Will that is carnal and earthly will be mortified
and slain, and the Spirit of the World and the Customs thereof will be
Crucified to you all, and you all unto it, and then, how can they that are
Crucified to the World live any longer therein? and so Spiritual Men and
Spiritual Women, Sons and Daughters of the incorruptible Seed, begotten again
by the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and so dead to the World's Spirit,
Ways, Customs. Manners, Traditions, Ordinances and Worships, all in the Fall
and Degeneration from God, and every one Living up to this, being guided by
God's Wisdom, keep their Testimony clear and unviolated in the sight of God and
Men.

So stand true Witnesses for God and be Faithful or full of Faith in the Lord;
believe in Him, love Him above all, and trust Him with all, Wife and Children,
Estate and Life; and take heed of giving Offense, or of causing Truth to suffer
in its Esteem; for God has glorified it, and will glorify it; and Woe from the
Lord is to them that cause Truth to be Evil spoken off, that brings a blot upon
their Testimony, and so marreth the Visage and Countenance of Truth in the
particular, or in the general.

And dear Friends stand living. Witnesser for God's Truth, and be not cowardly,
but valiant, as Soldiers of Christ Jesus, and stand up against all the Works
and Workers of Iniquity, against all Hirelings and false Shepherds, against the
grand Oppression of Tithes, with the abolished Ceremonies and Ordinances of the
first Covenant, and Jews outwardly, which Antichrist and the Deceivers that are
gone into the World (having lost the Power) would innovate and set up again
among the Gentiles and Jews inward, contrary to the Institution of God; and
stand up against all Swearing, and that which leads to Swearing, and against
Lying or Stealing, and against Fighting or Killing (since our Kingdom is not of
this World) and against Fornication, Adultery, Whoredom, Lasciviousness,
Luxury, and all manner of Uncleanness, the sins of this World, which are so
vile they are scarce fit to be spoken of, or named amongst the Saints; so as
becomes Warriors for God, and the everlasting Gospel of Christ Jesus, stand
clear of them all, and against them all, and then there will be no need of
shifts and excuses, and crooked Reasons in the fallen wisdom, to hide or cover
any one with.

And my dear Friends, let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay, and keep to the
form of sound words in all your Communications, Bargains and Dealings one with
another, and also with them that are without, that so you may honor the Lord,
and honor his Truth, and convince all with whom you have to do, that Truth and
Righteousness lives in you, and you live in it; this is the glory of all
Profession. And be not forward and rash in Words and Promises; for some there
are, yea, too many, that make Profession of Truth and true Religion, and yet
know not a bridle for the Tongue, and the Apostle said, such Men's Religion was
vain; yea, and too many there are, that are hasty to promise, and flow to
perform, and then shuffle to excuse themselves (as Eve did) where no Excuse can
properly bear in the Truth; so beware of it, I desire you all, for this was one
express Token the Apostle laid down of the falling away; therefore be slow to
promise, but careful, quick and forward to perform, when promised, and that
keeps Truth clear, and answers the Expectations of all, and Preaches to all
with whom we have to do, and hereby the Saints reached God's Witness in one
another in the beginning, so keep to it still, and every one speak the Truth
from his Heart without Dissimulation, and learn not the slighty words and
cunning evasions of the deceitful Spirits of this World, which darken
knowledge, thereby to drive Bargains, to accomplish self ends and covetous
designs; for such things (though never so fairly glossed) are inconsistent with
the innocence and naked simplicity of our Gospel, neither is Truth honored by
such deceitful coverings: so all Friends, keep clear of such things, and be
plain-hearted with all Men; for no coverings will hide or avail in this bright
lightsome Day, but that of God's Eternal Spirit, which will stand over all, and
Darkness cannot comprehend it; but going from the Light and Spirit of God, into
the fallen deceitful wisdom, then the World comprehends and sounds, and bottoms
all such, and so Truth suffers in the particular, and in the general; so the
Law of the Spirit of Life, which we profess, is beyond all Laws, and a Rule
beyond all Rules, and reaches further to the ordering and guiding of all those
that are resolved and given up to it, in Obedience, then all Laws, Precepts,
Canons or Injuctions that are outward whatsoever; so the Righteosness that is
God's, which Christ Jesus is the Author of, is beyond all, and exceeds all the
Righteousness of other Professions, Scribes or Pharisees; whereby its plain
every Righteosness does not enter, nor is accepted of God, but only that which
exceeds the Scribes and Pharisees, which Christ works in all his by the
Operation of his eternal Spirit. So my dear Friends, wait to feel it, and the
effectual Works of it brought forth in you all, which to feel is more then
words, that your Faith may stand in it, and in a living Enjoyment of it; for
that Man or Woman that does not feel it, and the efficacy and virtue of it,
they bring from a strange Vine, which Christ Jesus will not own; and all take
heed, and keep low in God's Fear. And you my Friends that are Rich in this
World, or have much of the Creation of God, do you watch and take heed; for
there is a Snare, and that none of the least, which attends that state also;
and if the Lord has increased your store, set not your Hearts upon them, nor
trust to them; for he that trusts to his Riches, shall fall, for as one said,
They are not for ever, but sometime make themselves Wings, and fly away: so be
not lifted up with them, but eye the Lord, and possess as though you possessed
not, and labor to be Rich toward God, and Rich in good Works; and remember
poor afflicted Joseph, and be ready to do good, and to communicate, as said the
Apostle, and keep your Hearts single and loose to those things, and so in God's
Wisdom you will see your Way and Service, and the End and Use of all. And all
you Young Men and Women, that are single and unmarryed, you have an Opportunity
to serve the Lord? do you keep low, and beware of being entangled or brought in
Bondage by youthful Lusts; for thereby many have lost a good condition with
God, and brought themselves to Sorrow and Woe, both in this Life and that which
is to come: And above all, take heed of joining Affinity with strange Nations,
and such as know not God* nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; for
this was forbidden Israel after the flesh, Deuteronomy. 7.3.4. and for their
Disobedience herein, God's anger was kindled against them, and they were
carried away captive many; years which made Ezra, the Servant of the Lord, rent
his Garments, and pluck his Hair off his Head and Beard, and mourn before the
Lord, till he and the Elders of Israel resolved to put away their Strange
Wives, Ez 9, 10. chap. And Esau by marrying the Daughters of Heth, so grieved
his Father and Mother, that Rebecca complained, she was weary of her Life, Genesis
27.46. And Paul advised, not to be unequally yoked together, Believers with
Unbelievers, knowing there could be no Union between Light and Darkness, nor
the Temple of God and Idols, etc. so keep your Hearts single to God, and wait
in God's Wisdom to overcome the Wicked One in your own particulars, and seek to
be married to the Lord first, and joined to the Lord by his eternal Spirit,
which brings into Unity, and keeps Chastity in Mind and Spirit unto him: and
observe the Advice of the Apostle, who said, The Unmarried cared for the things
of the Lord, how he or she might please the Lord; but the married for the
things of this World, how he or she might please Wife or Husband: So all be
watchful, and mind your Places and Callings in Christ Jesus: but if any one (in
the Fear and Wisdom of God) do see it their way to marry, let such seek God's
Counsel, and be not hasty, but wait in it, that he or she may enjoy a Wife or a
Husband in the Peace and Love of God, and to be joined one by his eternal
Spirit, and then Meet helps and a Blessing one to another, and then the
Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled; so all keep clean, and live up
to God in all things, in all States and Conditions, in your Places and Callings
whereunto God has called you, that the Lord may take pleasure to do you good,
and to multiply his Blessings upon you, that the Issues of Life and Peace may
abound, and run through all, and rest upon all your Hearts and Souls as the dew
of Hermon. And the God of Peace and Love preserve us all in his Peace and Love,
and carry us through all by the Arm of his Eternal Power, and guide us all in
his heavenly Wisdom, to the Praise, Glory and Renown of his Everlasting Name,
who is God alone, blessed forever and for evermore.

Written the 13th. of the 7th Month 1676. Your Friend and Brother in the
Obedience of Truth, Tho. Carleton.

FINIS.

