CONSIDERATIONS Relating to the African BILL.
Humbly Submitted to the Honorable House of Commons.
THE Preamble of the Bill asserts Four Things: First, That the African Trade is
beneficial to this Kingdom and the Plantations. Secondly, That Forts and
Castles are necessary for support of that Trade. Thirdly, That those Forts and
Castles have hitherto been maintained by the present African Company. Fourthly,
That it is most reasonable all the King's Subjects trading to Africa, should
contribute toward maintaining those necessary Forts and Castles.


This Preamble being by the Committee postpon'd; the First Clause of the Bill
comes to be considered. -- And by this Clause,

First, It is enacted, That the Royal African Company shall maintain the Forts
and Castles they now have, or hereafter shall purchase or erect for the general
Benefit of that Trade. And by the

Second Clause, It is farther enacted, That all his Majesty's Subjects trading
to Africa, shall pay the Company (...) per Cent. toward support of that
necessary Charge, etc.

Object. It has been objected out of the House (and it is probable in the
Committee may be said), That this Clause by a side-wind does confirm the
Company's Charter, wherein are several Privileges granted (said to be) against
Law.

Answ. With submission, this Clause can only confirm the Incorporation-Part of
the Charter, which constitutes them a Company: And though some other parts of
that Charter may not be justifiable, yet I presume scarce any Lawyer will say
that the King could not make them a Company. -- But a Proviso at the last may
salve that Objection, if it has any force: For therein it may be provided,
That nothing in this Bill shall be construed to confirm any part of that
Charter which is against Law; but as to those they shall remain as though this
Act had never been made, etc.

In this first Clause it will be considered, Whether Forts and Castles are
necessary, etc.

In the Opinion of a former Sessions, Forts and Castles were thought necessary;
and that they are in Fact so, appears upon several Accounts.

First, Because those Parts are divided into several Petty-Kingdoms, generally
at War amongst themselves, and with whom no security can be had, but what Force
maintains: And should we not have Forts and Castles to defend our Effects that
lie there for a Market, and such as we buy, and lie ready for our Ships, they
would be seized by the very Natives themselves, or by some Europeans with whom
we may have War, and who have Forts and Castles upon those Coasts.

Secondly, They are necessary for the Defense of those Kings that are our
Allies there, whom from time to time we supply with all things necessary for
their Wars, and so preserve them from their Enemies, and secure them our
Friends. -- And it is observable, that all Nations, trading to those Parts, do
maintain Forts and Castles and the African Company have been at no less than
450000 l. in the Purchase and Defense of those Forts and Castles, and other
Europeans at a proportional Charge in theirs: Now nothing less than Distraction
must possess us and our Neighbors, to be at such vast Expense to maintain what
was not necessary to be done.

If Forts and Castles are necessary, then the next thing that seems to be
considered, is, Whether a Regulated Company with a Joint Stock (as the African
Company will be, if this Bill passes,) with a Liberty to all others to Trade
upon as easy Terms as the Company it self, or a Regulated Company without a
Joint Stock, will carry on this Trade to the best Advantage of England and the
Plantations.

That a Regulated Company with a Stock, and Liberty to all others to Trade upon
equal Charge, will best secure and carry on the Trade, seems plain for several
Reasons.

First, The Company being obliged to employ their Stock in Trade will be
consequently bound in War as well as Peace, to maintain those Forts and Castles
for security of their Effects -- whereas in time of War a Company without a
Stock might decline their Trade, and so those Forts and Castles would become a
Prey, either to the Natives themselves, or (which is most probable) to our
Enemies, who now have, and will still maintain their Forts and Castles; and
then the Trade, with our Forts and Castles, will be either lost to us, or
carried on as Tributaries to those Europeans into whose hands those Defenses
shall fall -- This most plainly appears by that instance between the Dutch and
Porteguese -- for when Portugal had those Forts and Castles there the Dutch now
have, Holland paid the other Tribute for Liberty to Trade: but as soon as the
Dutch became Masters of the Forts and Castles, the Tables were turned, and
Portugal paid that Tribute to the Dutch, which they before received from them.
-- Secondly, The Plantations will be certainly served with Negroes in War as
well as Peace, and cannot be imposed upon in Price, whilst themselves as well as
others may fetch them if they shall think it proper to Trade. Thirdly,
Gentlemen, Widows, Orphans, or others, not bred to Trade, may in this Stock
employ their Moneys, both to their own and Nations advantage, whereas in a
Company without a Stock this can t be done. Fourthly, The African Company by
this Bill may be obliged to make Entries of all their Exports, and to keep a
true account of all their Charge in relation to those ^orts and Castles, and
allow incidents necessary for the general support of this Trade, and as often
as shall be thought necessary to give this Account upon Oath; so that if too
high a Duty be imposed, in the next Sessions it may be lessened, or if too
little, then raised in a due proportion, so that the Company may lose if less
than is necessary be laid, but they can be no Gainers whilst they are thus
accountable and subject to the Regulations of the very next Sessions of
Parliament, etc. Other Reasons may be given, but I do humbly conceive these
sufficient.
Obj. Whereas it is objected by some, That a Joynt-Stock is prejudicial to
Trade, and therefore this Company with a Joynt-Stock deserves no Encouragement.

Answ. There is nothing can be said against a Joynt-Stock in a Regulated
Company, with a liberty to all others to Trade upon equal Terms with the
Company (as this will be, if the Bill pass) but what holds as strong against a
large Copartnership: And it is reasonably believed, that some of the chief
Merchants that now oppose this Bill, would (in case this Bill be rejected)
enter in that Copartnership, and then will endeavor to impose that Egyptian
Bondage (upon Trade) which they pretend to fear from the Company upon passing
this Bill: And there would be some danger from such a Copartnership, but there
can be none from the Company under this Bill: For should the Company after this
Bill, oppress their Fellow Subjects (then in Conscience as well as Law entitled
to an equal liberty in the Trade,) they would deservedly incur the just
Indignation of the next Parliament, who would not only deprive them of any
Power to repeat the same, but in probability, of their very Being, and dissolve
their Charter: So that nothing less than Self-preservation (the greatest
Obligation possible) binds them to a civil Treatment toward their Fellow
Subjects. As for the former Carriage of the Company, whilst they thought the
Powers of their Charter Legal, that cannot reasonably be feared under this Bill,
when they know that others as well as themselves, are legally entitled to that
Trade. But a large Copartnership will receive no such Prejudice from being
dissolved, as a Dissolution would prove to the Company: And therefore though
the Trade may be damnified by such a Copartnership, there can be no danger from
the Company, for the Reason beforementioned.

As for the Cambia Trade, which by the Bill is proposed to be secured to the
Company; if this Honorable House shall think fit to open that to all others,
it is hoped such a separate Duty shall be laid, as may be proportionable to the
Charge of the Building the Forts and Castles, and the Annual support of the
Trade -- The Fort will cost the Company 20000 l. and the Annual Expense not
less than 6000 l. and the Trade thither was never for above 10000 l. per Annum

Ever since the Parliament Voted that it was the undoubted Right of all the
Subjects of England to Trade to Foreign Parts -- none of those Free Traders
have ever brought to the Parliament a Bill to settle this Trade, but still
opposed what was offered by the Company for settling the same.

The reason whereof is plain, because those Free Traders (as they truly call
themselves, having never contributed to what was necessary for the general
support of the Trade) had just cause to believe that under such a Regulation,
whatsoever it should be, they must Pay toward what by the Parliament should be
thought necessary for the general Interest of that Trade -- whereas if they
could continue that heavy load upon the African Company only by opposing this
Bill, they should then enjoy their Trade without that Expense -- So that these
Free Traders have for about Nine years last past since they have had a Liberty
to Trade, continued no less burden upon the Company than 25000 l. per Ann.
communibus Annis, during this War, but would never touch this weight with one
of their Fingers, though themselves received great Profit thereby, and be
equally protected in their Factories and Effects, with what belongs to the
Company it self.

But it is now humbly hoped, this Honorable house will put those Free Traders
and the Company, for the future, upon a just Balance, by giving countenance to
this Bill, which (with all submission) can give no advantage to the Company
above other Traders, whilst their own Effects will be liable to the same charge
with other Men's -- And a general good ought to be supported by all that have
benefit thereby, (viz.) Those Forts and Castles, so necessary for the common
Advantage of this Trade, the support whereof has lain too heavy upon the
present Company, who do therefore by this Bill humbly apply themselves to this
Honorable House for their Relief in the Premises

CONSIDERATIONS Relating to the AFRICAN BILL.


