CONSIDERATIONS UPON the Present State of the UNITED NETHERLANDS, Composed by a
Lover of his Country, For the encouragement of his Countrymen, in this
troublesome time.

Exactly translated out of Nether-dutch into English, By a most cordial Lover
of both the Nations.



Printed in the Year 1672.

CONSIDERATIONS UPON the present State of the UNITED NETHERLANDS.
WHosoever will take a narrow inspection into the beginnings of the State of
the United Netherlands, and attentively observe the Histories thereof,
considering by what means the Structure of the said State is risen from the
lowness of its original to it is present height, must needs acknowledge, that
the Divine Providence, which is not always evident before the Worlds eyes,
(though it move all things by secret wheels and engines) has so clearly
sparkled forth in the building up and heightening of this State, that they may
upon good grounds averr, that God Almighty has been apparently and manifestly
the Builder of this praiseworthy Commonwealth.

It is now just an 100. years.
Age ago, since that, when the Land, through the unhappy Government of that
time, was fallen into a lamentable confusion, William Earl Vander Mark, Lord
of Lume, Admiral of the Fleet of the Prince of Orange, being, through a hard
and sharp order of the Queen of England refusing to permit his abode, or the
supply of his Mariners with necessaries in her Lands, enforced to leav
England, was, beyond his design, through a contrary vvind, but indeed a vvind
of Gods direction, brought before the Bril, which he took in without much
trouble, not with intention to hold the place, but only to plunder it, and
leav it again: Nevertheless being informed of the convenient situation and
importance of that City, He brought it into a posture of defense, and kept it
for his Principals and Commanders. And on this wise is the first Stone of this
excellent Building laid, or rather cast by accident, in regard of the outward
instruments, but in truth through the direction of the highest Master Builder,
in whose Almighty hands men are often as blind work-tools of his wonderful
determinations.

It is not my intention here to make a relation of the progress of our affairs,
and in what manner our Ancestors have wrestled through the mischiefs and
misfortunes, and mounted up to the height of the prosperity, which we at
present through the goodness of God enjoy: but my design is only in this short
discourse to persuade my worthy Country men to trust, that that God who has
raised us up from a low condition to such a State, as has now for a great
while procured through its welfare so much envy, as it did before compassion
through it is misery, will graciously preserve the work of his Almighty hand:
whereupon, after the example of our Ancestors, we do in this season jointly
propose two things which are never to be separated: That is, a perfect
resignment and yielding ourselvs up to the Divine providence; and an undaunted
mind, and valiant courageous resolution, for the performance of so much in this
troublesome time for our preservation, as our Ancestors have don for their
first deliverance. And I desire my Countrymen, that in comparing and likening
our present encumbrances, with the perplexity of our Ancestors, and the
dangers which have been in our days, they would look back into the Histories,
from the first times of our Ancestors, and into their own knowledge of things
since that time, which to this day we have retained in our memory.

In the Histories they shall find, that the affairs of our Ancestors were
reduced in their first rise to such inconvenience, that the consideration
thereof prevailed upon the greatest Man of that time, who had with an
indissoluble bond linked in his own welfare with the lot of these Lands, to
give that hopeless counsel of breaking open the Banks and Damms, to cause the
Land to sink into an irrecoverable lake, and casting themselves on the mere
mercy of God with the small remainder of a ruined Fortune to seek out some
other Lands beyond Sea, where they might either live more happyly, or die less
miserably. We shall pass by, how often that the Commonwealth, after it was by
the hand of God freed out of that desperate estate, has shak'd and trembled,
both through fear of an enemy from Without, and of confusion from within. The
Histories will tell us, that not alone the State of the United Provinces, but
all the Netherlands, who where engaged to each other, though not in so strict a
bond as those called The United, were sufficiently reduced to the utmost
extremity by the unfaithfulness of the Duke of Anjou Brother of the King of
France: and that afterward The United Provinces were got into a heavy
confusion, and in a posture wholly deprived of defense through the artifices
and ambitious designs of the Earl of Leicester sent hither for our defense by
the Queen of England. We shall also in silence pass over the time in which many
of ourselvs have lived, when the whole Land was through a sudden surprise upon
the Veluwe, and the taking in of Amersfoort, so alarmed, as Rome was, when they
saw Hannibal before the Gates.

And for so much as is within our own memory, we have yet a fresh remembrance
of the War with the Protector Cromwell, wherein we were by a certain fatality,
and an interest without our interest entangled, in a time when the Land through
want of ships and Canon, was brought into a perplexity, of which we cannot
think without alteration of mind.

We are now through Gods grace wrestled through those difficulties, and
innumerable more, and had wished by a long-during Peace, which is the true and
harmless Interest of our peace-loving Commonwealth, to taste the fruits of our
sorrowful labor; but it has otherwise pleased God, who by his righteous and
ever to be adored Judgments nearly approaching us, makes us to see, that we
now stand need of his protection so much as ever, seeing we find ourselvs at
present put upon the necessity of resisting the utmost violence of the greatest
power of Europe, and that with a force, which indeed is contemptible in
comparison of that of our enemies, by which ne'retheless we despair not of
being able to subsist; for that we trust that God will look upon the justness
of our innocent cause with the eyes of his Righteousness, and on our sins and
weaknesses with the eyes of his Compassion. And in truth, if ever the sword
were drawn for the necessary preservation and blameless defense of our worthy
Country, it is so at this time, wherein the mighty Potentates of the World
seem to have concluded the ruin of our United Netherland in the council of the
powers of darkness, in which they have engaged with them all those who regard
Christian blood no more than the blood of Sheep and Goats; and who delight
their eyes with the laying wast of Lands and Cities as they use to do at a
Stage Play, where themselves are at once both Actours and beholders.

And for as much as the fundamental knowledge of the righteousness of our
cause, as well as the dreadful intention of our Enemies, may so much the more
forcibly animate the inhabitants of our Country, as the inward persuasion, and
the conviction of a wellinformed mind yields more courage than the loossness of
an ignorant or doubting Soul, it will not be unusefull, to the end that those
of our Countrymen who live without encumbering themselves with the public
affairs, and therefore it is likely live not the unhappilyer, may have a little
knowledge of what for some former years hithero has passed between these
States and other States, to give them information of the justice of our
d^fensive Arms.

The King of France begun before May in the Year 1667. while we were yet
engaged in the War with England, strongly to drive on his pretenses to a
considerable part of the Spanish Netherlands, devolved (as he maintained) upon
his Wife, the Queen of France, being a Daughter, and the only surviving Child
by the first Marriage of Philip the fourth, with Queen Isabella: causing a
certain Treatise by his command compiled in the French and Latin Tongues for
the justification of the said pretended right of devolution, to be given over
by the Lord Ambassadourd' Estrades to the States General, as also by his
Ministers to many other Courts in Europe: against which by printed Treatises
also on the behalf of the King of Spain was shown before all the World that the
right of devolution had no place in reference to Soveraignties.

Furthermore that when the Queen entered upon her marriage with the King of
France, she having in the most effectual terms, and with the seals of most
solemn oaths, for her, and her Heyrs, renounced all that whatever she at any
time could or might pretend, by virtue of inheritance of succession, upon any
State or Lands from the King of Spain her Lord and Father (which renunciation
was confirmed by the King of France himself by an oath upon the Cross and Holy
Gospel) with that fidelity and righteousness, which ought in an especial
manner splendidly to appear in illustrious persons, it could not be
conjectured, that such pretenses against Word and Oath should be brought forth,
and for want of true reasons (as they said) upheld by the sword.

Mean while the King of France most forcibly driving on his written and printed
Deductions with the strength of his Weapons, which from elder times have been
the most efficacious arguments of Princes and Monarchs, falls with a
considerable Army into the Spanish Netherlands, and daunting the courage of the
people with the terror of his name and might, in a short time carries the most
important Cities of Flanders, and that (as he would make the Queen of Spain
beleev) without breaking the Pirenean peace.

The States of the United Netherlands, whose great interest is the
tranquillity and Peace of Christendom (happy Interest of a Christian State!)
not being willing to determine whether the foresaid pretenses were grounded on
right and reason, or that they must be looked upon as the specious pretexts of a
Conqueror, have from the inclination of a peace-loving mind, and the
apprehension of a dangerous neighborhood, used all possible endeavors to
unite the high contending parties by way of accord and transferring their
ca^es, and by that means to extinguish the flame of War, which they feared
would consume the Lands and Cities which laid near them, and singe those that
were at a distance and laid further off.

And in this affair have the States General been so far successful, that
the King of France, apprehending that through a jealousy grounded in the
neighboring Princes and Potentates, they might cross, and happily frustrate his
designs, presented, that He should in reference to his pretenses hold himself
contented with the Cities and places, which He had now during the Campaign or
expedition of his army in the Year 1667. gained and possessed from the King of
Spain; or, in exchange of them, at the choice of Spain, with the Dukedom of
Luxemburgh, or in place of that, with the French Compte viz Burgundy, together
with Kamerick, Kambresis, Doway, Air, St. Omer, Bergen St. Winox, Furne, and
Linck, with their dependencies.

Nevertheless, for as much as the Kingdoms and States herein interessed could
not, in regard of the altering and changeable will, which, in Princes and
Potentates especially, is moved upon the least appearance of Success, be
assured, whether the King of France would continue in making the foresaid
proffers, or that Spain would incline, by the accepting of the same, and so by
the choosing of one or both the alternative members included in the foresaid
presentation, to make peace, the Kings of Great Britain, and of Sweden, and the
States General made a contract together, which, from the number of the parties
originally contracting, is commonly called the triple league or alliance,
whereby they bound each other to work out the peace between France and Spain
upon the forementioned presentation, and by the said peace to ensure the rest
and tranquillity of Christendom: promising to each other for the faster
establishment of the foresaid league, That between themselves there should
always be and abide a sincere peace and correspondence for the promoting with
all their heart and in all faithfullness the profit, utility and dignity of
each other, and to do their best to keep of all that might be opposite against
the same; and in case it should come to pass that this their friendly
undertaking should be in a contrary sense and ill interpreted, and it should
fall out that an untimely revenge or war by one of the contesting parties, or
any one of their side, should be acted upon any one of these confoederates,
that in such case they should faithfully assist one another.

This is the substance of the so called Triple League: Et hinc illae lachrymae;
an alliance which France has lookd upon as a bridle to the greatness of his
desires, and which the unbyassed part of Christendom beheld as the onelyest
preserver of the Peace and rest of Europe: an alliance whereby we in pursuit of
our intention have stirred up the love of all peaceable-minded people, and
beyond our intention the undeserved choler of a mighty Prince, who at present
eyes us, his old allies and confoederates, as the chiefest objects of and
persons designed to receiv his hatred and disdain: but an alliance whereby we
shall procure the alliance of the Prince of Peace, who has promised to the
peacemakers the peaceble possession of what he has affoarded them here on
earth, through which alliance being mightily supported we may esteem as a small
matter the loss of the Alliance of the King of Great Britain, who was the
principal counselor and directer of the foresaid Triple Alliance, who in
stead of affoarding us the assistance promised in the said league, for the
which only we are threatened, falls himself upon us, that through the
advanceing of a War he may not only free himself from performing to us the
limited succor, which by the force of the defensive Alliance, and the
unlimited assistance, which in pursuance of the aforesaid Triple league he is
obliged to do, but moreover with the help of a Prince mightyer than himself may
overpower and tread us under foot.

We shall not measure out the injustice of these dealings according to their
merits, not only for that we desire to contain our selves within the bounds of
moderation and modesty, but also because we deem that evill-speaking is a
wrong way of requiting evill-doing, and a defense which will not secure us from
the sword of our enemy.

This how ever the truth enforces us to say, that there can no example of a
breach of trust be brought out of any histories, that can parallel the example
of the forementioned illustrious King in this case. We have with him and by his
persuasion and the King of Sweden made the abovesaid Triple Alliance, whereby
we have promised each other to help to bear off all the mischiefs which
thereupon might fall upon us: and making a difficulty of engageing ourselvs to
Sweden, in regard of the subsidies, without an assured indemnitie on the side
of Spain, we yet upon the instances of the King of Great Britain, stepping
over all scruples, concluded the Triple league.

Now the King of England knows in his heart, though he dissembleth and clokes
that knowledge by his words, that we are threatened for the T^iple Alliance with
a danger which he ought to help to defend us from: And all the world knows that
all that France pretends besides the foresaid league is but a disguise of the
right cause of his anger, which he has by his Ministers clearly discovered to
all Courts. No man that has with due observation read the Contract between
France and this State, can be ignorant of this, that we might as freely forbid
the bringing in of French Wine and Brandewine, as the King of France might
surcharge and overburden our wares, as the prohibitions of those are extended
and stretched out (and so indeed the said prohibitions are) the same obliging
our inhabitants, as well as the French: so that the inaequality alone being
forbidden by the foresaid contract, the contractors in regard of the foresaid
extension, have preserved their natural freedom: And considering this, every
one can easyly apprehend, that as the impositions and prohibitions of the
foresaid extended things were not done against the forementioned contract; so
there do really cross it, not only the gratifications done by the King of
France to the Northern Company, whereby with a subtilty and artifice, the
foresaid Contract in respect of the aequall burthening, is eluded, but also and
especially the prohi^^tion ordered by the King, in reference to our
inhabitants, against the bringing in and carrying out of any wares in and out
of his Kingdom.

And indeed the threatenings that France made against us before the conclusion
of the foresaid Triple Alliance, With no other design than to smother it in the
birth, suffer us not to be ignorant of the true subject of the indignation of
the King of France.

And if it were so that the King of England should be unacquainted (Which yet
he is not) with the right cause of the displeasure of the King of France, he
nevertheless knows that by virtue of the defensive Treaty made with this State
in the Year 1668. he is bound, when the States General shall be attacqued by
any Prince or State, upon whatsoever pretense it may be, to furnish them with
forty Ships of War, six thousand footmen, and four hundred horsemen, upon
promise of refusing to accept any thing of charges for performing the said
assistance, three years after the ending of the War. The King of England now
well knowing, that he should, in case of an hostile onset, be summoned by the
States General to perform the said Treaty, and accordingly the promised relief,
has in a wonderful manner undertaken to free himself from the band of the
foresaid Alliance, so ordering the matter, that when France should fall upon
us, He should not stand in a state of confoederation and alliance with us
(which is by the foresaid Treaty praesupposed) but in a state of War, which
for that very reason he has advanced and hastened, imagining with himself that
he thereby had found out two great things, to wit, to dissolv the Sinews of the
foresaid obligation, and withal by conjunction with the redoubted and terrible
might of France utterly to rout us out. Honest and honorable designs indeed of
a Christian Prince, of a defender of the Faith, of a man who having been
disciplined by the correcting hand of God Almighty, might have been taught not
to wrong a man as himself, nor to trouble the world! to break his Alliance,
before the time of performing it be come, and of a confoederate to make himself
an enemy, that he might not be bound as a friend, to take hold of an occasion
to ruin his former allies, upon the rubbish-heap of their ruin to set up the
structure of an unbounded Dominion, to offer up the blood of his subjects upon
ambitious designs, and to stir up tumults in the world; he that can reconcile
all this with the duty of a Christian and Evangelicall Prince, must have
another Gospel, than that of meekness and Peace.

And that our inhabitants and the unbyassed World may clearly see, that the
War, which the King of Great Britain at present makes upon us, arises from
no other cause but the abovementioned inclination, it may be serviceable, that
we discover the mind of the King out of his own Manifesto, which consists of
nothing else but an unto ward dissembling of a wicked design.

We shall for some reasons dispense with our thoughts about the introduction to
the said manifesto, not spending many words upon that, which contains nothing
but the Kings boasting of his peace-loving mind, and scrupulous conscience: of
which because he calls the world to witness, we shall leav the judgment
thereof to the impartial world, believing that there shall not be one found
among that innumerable number of unbyassed witnesses, who having knowledge of
the affairs of the world, shall not acknowledge that the King of England is one
of those peaceable men, who calls that Peace when they lay all wast, and so
desire the World that they may have no body to contend with, but to live in
outward Peace without any enemy, if they could but otherwise live in Peace who
have their own conscience for their Enemy, so that the little World, that is
themselves, becomes too straight for them.

Neither shall we at this time rip up what passed before the War of the Year
1665, and who gave the occasion of and begun the same: for that it is
sufficiently known to all the World, that the subject of that War was on the
King of Englands side as unrighteous, as it is beginning was in a way of piracy,
without any other denunciation of it, than what was don by the Canon. We shall
also not speak of the successes of that War, over which the King of England so
highly vaunts on his side, but concerning that we shall only say, that we
should have matter enough to give thanks to God Almighty for, if the conclusion
of the present War should not be unhappyer for us, then was the end of that in
the time aforesaid.

Proceeding then to the examination of the substance of the Declaration itself
(if there can be any substance in sensible untruths, evil-minded surmisings,
and gross impertinencies,) we shall briefly run over all the points over which
the King of Great Britain shows, or at least feigns his discontents; and for
the satisfaction not only of our inhabitants, and all unbyassed persons, but
of those of his own nation also, we shall demonstrate that the foresaid
pretended reasons have not been the moving cause of this War, but only
pretexts and ill cemented covers of an intention which is older than the
invention of the pretended motives, which are no causes, but contraryly are
effects and products of the design of making war upon us.

First the King complains, to wit feignedly, as we have formerly said, that the
States General by force of one of the Articles of the Breda's treaty (as he
holds it forth),, being obliged to send Commissioners to London, there to
regulate the trading in East India, should so far have failed therein, that
they could not, by a three years urgency of his Ambassador, be prevailed upon,
to acquit themselves of their word and promise given on that behalf, and
further to give the King satisfaction for the injury which those of his nation
in East India should have suffered from ours. Whereunto we shall not otherwise
answer than shortly thus, That we most exceedingly wonder, that the pennner of
the manifesto, who doubtless is no small perswader of the War, should set
forth a Declaration, which must come under the eyes of all the World, having
not once beforehand taken the pains to look over the treaty, in which there is
not found one article that obliges the States General to send Commissioners to
London for the end aforesaid; but an article indeed there is, viz the third of
the appendix of the said treaty, mentioning the commerce and navigation,
whereby it is set down that the King of England and the States General should
with all speed by Commissioners on both sides form an expedient for regulating
the navigation and Commerce, and that mean while and by provision they should
be ruled by that which was agreed on by the King of France and the States
General on that behalf; the Maritin treaty between the King of England and this
State being principally since that concluded in the Year 1669.

Hence now can the World see, haw far the desire of War, an affection of all
other the most irregular, the most inhuman, the most accursed, darkeneth and
destroys the understanding: but praised be God Almighty, who through his
All-wise direction confounds and ashameth the wickedness, and clearly
discovers, that the Authors of this War are inspired and blown up by the
Spirit of him, who is a Liar, and a Murderer of mankind from the beginning.

That which is said of the wrong, that the English nation should have suffered
by ours in the East Indies, is of the same nature, that is, untrue and
Calumnious; and should there also be made a specifical and particular
expression of the said unjust things, as they call them, 't would make the
dictatour of the manifesto ashamed, who makes his complaint in General terms,
to deceiv the World, which the English Courtiers (I speak of those who are
councillors of the War) judge to be as sottish, as themselves are both sottish
and wicked.

Touching the work of Syrinam (Which is the second pretended grievance in the
foresaid declaration) 't is in the first place very remarkable on that behalf,
that the said work concerns the King wholly not at all, but is only taken up
by him to stretch out a matter of quarrel: which that the Reader may so much
the aptlier apprehend, be pleased this to know, that the foresaid Colonie of
Syrinam having been in March in the Year 1667. overmasterd by one Abraham
Crijnsen of Zeeland with the Weapons of the State, and in this manner by a
certain capitulation brought under the subjection of the same, was by the
English in the month of May next following retaken; but that it was by virtue
of the 6th. article of the treaty of Breda, requiring that all Lands, Cities,
strong holds and Colonies taken by one of the contesting parties from another
during the War, and retaken after the 10/20 of May 1667. should be restored to
the first taker, again put into the power of the State.

After the said restitution, complaint was made by the King of England, that
the effect of the capitulation made with the forenamed Crijnsen was not made
good to the inhabitants of Syrinam, for that the in-dwellers of the said
Colonie (as they gave it out) were denied permission to depart with their
persons and transportable effects otherwhere.

Now what right was the King of England ever born to, to capacitate him with
any reason to further the accomplishment of the capitulation, made with the
inhabitants of the said Colonie, who by the right of the War are become
subjects of the State?

What does the foresaid Capitulation concern the King of England more than the
King of Spain? Do the inhabitants of Syrinam even after the conquest of the
said place by virtue of the capitulation continue subjects of the King of
England? Has any man ever heard, that by a capitulation, the jus imperii, and
the old right of the first Lord is continued over those who are conquered by
Weapons, only because they capitulate and make conditions upon their giving
over? it is certainly notorious and beyond all controversy that conquering is
a lawful title, which alters the places and goods from the owner, and the
subjects from the Sovereign; which right is especially established by the 3d.
article of the Breda's Treaty, whereby it is agreed, that each party should
with an absolute right of lordship, propriety, and possession continue to hold
all the Lands, Islands, Cities, Colonies, and other places by them taken in and
mastered during the War.

It Is indeed true that through the capitulation the right of the absolute
disposition of the conqueror is circumscribed; but no ^ound reason can be
brought that the jurisdiction of the former lord should thereby be preserved
over the capitulating subjects: Is ^t ever com'd, into the thoughts of the King
of Spain, that the inhabitants of Mastricht, the Bosch, and Breda, who with
their Cities by the right of Arms were renderd upon capitulation to the States
General, should by that capitulation continue to be his subjects? Or pretends
the King of England the right aforesaid in reference to those of English
Colonies because of the nation and their birth, as if for that they did remain
his Subjects after their being conquered? Who will say that the birth and
language can produce such effects, contradicting the received and by all people
acknowledged effects of the War, whereby the conquered is subjected to the
conqueror without consideration of birth or language?

Are then the inhabitants of Syrinam, notwithstanding the foresaid
capitulation, become subjects of the State, and has the King of England by the
right of the War lost his imperium dominion over them, so that after the
conquering of them they remain no more his subjects and his people, (as he
terms them in the foresaid Declaration) whence has he the right of complaining
that we have not permitted the inhabitants of Syrinam as his subjects to obtain
the effect of the forenamed capitulation? Is it not beyond dispute and all
imagination that the foresaid inhabitants should thereupon have addressed
themselves to this State, and not to the King of England, as to their lawful
Sovereign? that not meriting any consideration on the contrary, which has
formerly by or on the behalf of the King of England been objected against the
substance of what has been before produced in the case of Syrinam, and is
again not obscurely stirred up in the foresaid Manifesto, to wit, that the
words, in such sort as they had possessed the same on the 10/20 of May,
standing in the end of the 3d. article of the Treaty at Breda, should limit the
power of the States General in favor of the King, and for the preservation of
his old dominion over the inhabitants of Syrinam: observing the connection and
the true sense of the forementioned article, it is easy to apprehend, that the
foresaid words, in such sort, do not limit the dominion over that which is
taken, but only the further extending of the possession: so that the meaning
was not by those words to express, that each party should continue to hold what
they possessed no otherwise than with such a limitation of dominion, as they
had got it by capitulation, but only that the right of the conqueror should
not be extended wider, that is over no more Land, than was in his occupation
the 10/20 of May; besides that, if yet from those words, there should be any
reflection upon the limitation of the dominion, and that upon the foresaid
capitulation (of Which we say absolutely no) it cannot at the highest be
otherwise construed, then that the thing by which the imperium ruledom of the
conqueror should be snubbed, must be left in his keeping, and that for those
who should have acquired any right by the said limitation, that is for the
inhabitants who made the capitulation, and in no wise for their old Lord.

Though this defense Was indeed of that force, that the King of England might
thereby be taken off, yet have the States General further, out of a singular
esteem of his said Majesty, in whose friendship they always accounted themselves
highly interessed, debated with the Lord Ambassador Temple upon the execution
of the 15 and 19 Articles of the foresaid capitulation, touching the point of
the departure of the inhabitants of the said Colonie with their goods, and in
consequence thereof, by an express missive enjoined the Commander of the
forementioned Colonie fully to execute that which was agreed upon, without ever
having countermanded that command (as in the foresaid Declaration is
calumniously said) by any secret orders; which also has never hitherto been
don in the case of Pouleron.

We could here in particulars show the faithfullness performed by the Commander
in the effectual execution of the said charge in Syrinam, and withal the
perverseness of the Commissioners of the King of England about those cases; but
we shall (that we may not be too long in this short discourse) with the Readers
permission, dispense therewith, and delay the giving satisfaction in the
curiosity thereof till the contra-manifesto of the State shall come abroad,
which undoutedly will contain a circumstantiall declaration of this case, with
documents and demonstrations adjoined.

The King proceeds from complaining of the work of Syrinam to a complaint
touching pretended affronts, and small things, which he gives out to have
suffered from the State, both in making and showing (as he says) of Pictures,
Medalls, and pillars, and also in refusing to strike the Flagge: declaring that
the first alone, to wit, the making and showing of some Pictures and Medalls,
were a sufficient cause of his displeasure, and of the resentment of all his
subjects, that is in a word, of the War. God preserve the World from such
Christian Princes who for a Picture, and a Medall will not stick to bring
Christendom into uproars, and to shed so much innocent blood! and I pray for
what Pictures, and What sort of medalls? for a Picture made for the honor of a
Burgermaster, or Alderman of a City, Who out of a generous mind hazarding
himself for his Country, acquired the honor of an heroical and virtuous
exploit; and for a Medall, wherein the War is pourtrayed with the annexion of
a Pious Wish, that that Beast (viz the War) might be far from all Kingdoms.

Is it then so offensove in the time of Peace to make a token of remembrance of
a successful action in a foregoing War? which was therefore the happyer
because it was crowned with peace. Are there not in all Lands and Cities
pourtraitures of victories, and painted Tables of triumphant atchievments? Are
there not in our land many memorials of renowned conquests? Of prosperous
field-battels, and very successful beleaguerings? Are not all such badges of
honor pricks and spurrs to generous actions? What noble-minded Prince can
attract to himself an occasion of War, from that which every one so easyly
passes by? We can well permit that the King cause such a Picture to be made of
the burning of our unarmed merchant-Ships in the Fly and of the Houses of the
poor Fishers on the Schelling for the renown of those who projected that
illustrious design, and an everlasting honor of them who effected it.

That which is said of columns and pillars is either falsy feigned by the
inditer of the Manifesto, or at least lightly taken up; for that such pillars
are nowhere save in the forging of his brains, or in the gazets of the English
court.

In reference to the right of the Flagge, in the first place it is to be
observed, that out of the foresaid Declaration it appears and that not
obscurely that the King by the same understands the dominion over the Sea: For
that speaking of the ancientness of the foresaid right, he therewith adds, that
it is an unthankful insolency, that we will contend with him about the
Dominium lordship of the Sea: Whence it is clearly evident, that the right of
the Flagge, and the dominion of the Sea, are indeed words of a different sound,
but, according to the Kings meaning of one and the same signification: So that
it is from thence now easy to apprehend, that the difference between the King
of England, and this State, about the abovesaid pretended right of the Flagge,
(which by those of that Nation is made a concernment of the most important
ground of quarrel, in which the glory of the people should be interessed) is
not a controversy about the salutation and striking of the Flagge, and
therefore no quaestion touching the right understanding of the 19th. article of
the Breda's treaty, but only a contest about the dominion of the Sea, which
the State attributes only to God Almighty, and the King to himself, though
happily per Dei gratiam, by the Grace of God by which also the most absolute
Princes govern their Lands and Kingdoms: And in conformity to the foresaid
meaning, has the Ambassador Dowing, by a memorial delivered over, in the name
of the King, desired of the State a round and clear acknowledgement of the
foresaid pretended dominion of the Sea.

Now may every one of our inhabitants, and the impartial World certainly see,
that it is not the denying to strike the Flagge in pursuance of the
forementioned Treaty (which is by the State done to the full, as will be shown
in what follows) but only a refusing of the foresaid acknowledgement, that is
the subject of the complaints of the King of England; and it may also easyly be
apprehended that the same acknowledgement is urged upon the State in this time,
not out of a conviction of the right of the pretended business, bu^ only out
of a formed design to make war upon us; which design could not be brought to
execution otherwise than by the demanding impossible satisfaction: for which
cause also the Ambassador Downing propounded to the State nothing else, but
only the forementioned acknowledgement, fearing that if he had proposed other
cases, he might touching them have obtained satisfaction for his King, who he
well knew would not be satisfied. Well do all the subjects of this State, whose
only subsistence is commerce, and consequently the freedom of the Sea, know of
what importance the foresaid so much urged acknowledgement is: I beleev not
that th^re shall be found one single Fisher in our Country, let him be as
simple as one can imagine, but he will apprehend the interest of his very being
to be herein included, and cannot but understand that those people would fetch
the forementioned acknowledgment out of the throat, and thereupon cause the
effects of the pretended dominion to follow, or bind up their throats, which is
one and the same case; really that there is no other difference between both,
than is the difference between a hasty, and a lingering, but indeed a certain
death; for that upon the foresaid acknowledgement, there were at the highest no
other to be expected of the favor of the King of England, than the wish and
choice of a speedy end, or of a consuming sickness, which is worse than a hasty
death.

And although the King of Englands pretended jurisdiction extends not further
than over the British Sea, yet is it notorious that the limits of the said Sea
are by the King so wide stretched out, that there would not be left to us the
least part for a passage out of our Land, which should not be subjected to the
King, in respect of his praetended Lordship according to his own sentiment, it
being observable that the King of England does not only hold the Channel for
the British Sea, but also the North Sea, and a very great part of the Ocean: So
that we should not be able to use the Sea without our Land, otherwise than upon
the mercy of the King of England, of which we could less assure ourselvs than
we can now be secured upon his Faith and word.

We shall not at present enter upon the confutation of the foresaid pretense of
the dominium maris dominion of the Sea, not only because that would be too
long for a short treatise, but also and especially for that it cannot be
accounted needful to refute that, which all the World holds to be irregular
except the King of England, who will so little be convinced with arguments, as
he Will be satisfied with reasonable praesentation; we shall only say, that it
is untrue, and can never be made evident, that we have ever fished in the Sea
with a License or Permission from the Father of the King of England, and that
(as is said in the foresaid Manifesto) upon a tribute. We do well acknowledge
that in the Year 1636. some Ships of War of the King of England fell upon our
defenseless Hering-boats, and that by mere violence they forced some money from
them, to which they gave the name of imposition-money; but we diso^n that from
thence any right can be drawn: not only because force can make no right no not
by the continuance of it, but also for that the foresaid violent exaction was
not continued: since that upon complaint made in England of the foresaid
exorbitance, the same has not been any more committed since that time.

We shall then, with permission of the benevolent Reader, passing over to the
business of the Flagge so as it is regulated by the 19th. article of the
Breda's treaty (which article must be decisive in this controversy) briefly
show, that there was nothing done by the Lord van Gent in the so much talked of
encounter against the foresaid treaty; and moreover that what has been by the
State without and beyond the obligation of the same treaty presented to the
King of England, is a yielding so abundantly convincing, that we should not
fear to abide the judgment of the English Nation itself thereupon, as
promising ourselvs so much from the discretion of the said Nation, that they
seeing that the State has in point of their honor given abundant
satisfaction, will with us detest and abominate the demand of the
acknowledgement of the dominium maris dominion of the sea, proceeding out of a
desire of war.

It is well known, and beyond dispute among all sorts of Nations, that the
salutation which is given on the Sea, whether by the Canon, the striking of the
Flagge, or letting down a certain sail, must not be accepted for a mark of
subjection, but only for an outward token of respect, civility, and courtesy,
which is thereupon answered with a contra-salutation of the like civility: And
for so much as relates to the salute or first greeting, of which only we shall
here speak, it is generally so received, that, since commonly they who give the
first salutation, acknowledge themselves in rank and worthynes to be inferior
to those whom they meet, though they be not subjected to them, the ships of
Commonwealths meeting upon the Sea the Ships of War of crowned Heads, must
give the first salute with one or other token of outward respect. Which respect
(like as all other courtesy) although it should come from a free-willingness,
and an unconstrained will of those who show it, yet have we often seen it come
to pass, that the stronger on the Sea have constrained the weaker to the
tendering of that honor, and that also sometimes the necessity, and the form
thereof, is constituted by a contract.

So is it then concerning that also agreed between the King of England and this
State by the 19th. article of the Breda's Treaty, in conformity with former
Contracts, made both with the present King, and with the Protector Cromwell,
that the Ships and Seafaring vessels of the United Provinces, so well those of
War, and such as are raised for defense against the might of the Enemy, as
others, which shall come to meet any Ship of War of the King of Great Britain
in the British Sea, shall strike the Flagge on the top of the mast, and let
fall the Mars-sail, in the same manner as has at any time formerly been usual.

That the right sense of this Article may be well apprehended, the Reader may
please to observe, that the same originally proceeded from the Treaty made
between this State and the Protector Cromwell in the Year 1654. and that the
same was not at that time concluded in such terms, but upon a heavy debate upon
some words Sintve singula sive in classibus, whet^er they be single Ships or
ranked in a Fleet.
, which the Protector Cromwell would have to be there with joined, not only
thereby to oblige single Ships but the whole Fleets of the State unto the
foresaid salutation, in case of meeting any Ship of war of England: which
words afterward upon the earnest instances of the Ministers of this State were
left out of the foresaid article; and so must the 19th. article be taken out of
the 10th. article of the Treaty of the Year 1662. which 10th. article was
granted on the Kings side from the 13th. article of the Year 1654. not to be so
understood, that a whole Fleet of the State should by virtue of the foresaid
Treaty be bound to give that salute for one Ship of England: but the article
aforesaid must be taken for a Regulation, according to which the single ships
and seafaring vessels of the State must deport themselves in regard of the
salutings toward the English Ships of War.

Now for to apply the foresaid article according to it is true meaning to the
insisted on case of the Lord van Gent, this is

First remarkable that the Yacht of the King of England (being supposed that in
respect of its mounted guns it might pass for a Ship of War, which we will not
dispute) not having met one single Ship or seafaring vessel of the State, but
being sailed into a fleet, then lying at anchor, doubtless with an evil design
for to seek matter of quarrel, the King can have no foundation whereon to
maintain that the Lord van Gent was bound to strike by virtue of the foresaid
article.

The second thing is aequally considerable, that the foresaid article speaking
of a meeting, is not applicable to the making of a quarrel upon a formed design
by the requiring civility and respect, upon the uncivillest manner in the world.

And lastly it is sufficiently ly known that the foresaid occasion passed in
the North Sea, not far from our coast; being aequally evident, that the North
Sea is not the British Sea: not only for that the same is in all Sea-charts or
maps, even those of the English themselves, distinguished from the other, but
also and that especially (which is in this case an invincible argument) for
that they are in the 17th. article of the foresaid Breda's Treaty distinguished
from each other; where it is expressly said that the Ships, and Merchandises
which within the time of Twelv days after the Peace, are taken in the British
Sea, and in the North Sea, shall abide in the propriety of the conqueror:
whence then certainly it clearly appears, that according to the King of England
his own sense, the North Sea is truly not the British Sea, and vice versa so
reciprocally: but that the North-Sea is made the British-Sea, and consequently
distinct cases are confounded, when men are inclined to embroil and trouble the
world.

And although hereby the States General had right to abide by the 19th.
article of the foresaid treaty, according to the foresaid genuine
interpretation, yet have they over and above declared to the King of Great
Britain, that upon the foundation of a solid friendship, and being assured of
the real, and upright performance of the fifth article of the Triple alliance,
in case the excessive armature of France should come to fall upon this State,
they would willingly cause even their whole Fleet, as they come to meet any
Ship or Ships of War, carrying the Standart, or the Pavilion of his Majesty,
to strike the Flagge, and let the Top-sail fall, for an exuberant proof of the
respect, and honor which they upon all occasions will openly show to so trusty
a friend, and so great a Monarch; saving, that from thence no occasion may be
taken now, nor hereafter, neither thereby any the least introduction may be
given for hindering, or in any part incommodating the inhabitants and subjects
of these United Netherlands Provinces in the free use of the Sea. Which
declaration the King of England takes ill, because that by the same he should
be bound to the upright performance of the Triple Alliance, that is, to take
heed to his honor and word, together with the assurance of doing no prejudice
in regard of the free use of the Sea; being an infallible argument, that the
King of England is as little inclined to let us have the free use of the Sea,
as to perform his word.

Here have you, worthy Countrymen, a short confutation of a Declaration, which
refutes and shames itself, and by the Bell-mans noise as that of Drums and
Trumpets, not only upon the open places and streets of London, before the ears
of the Nation, but before all the World cries out a design of War; which will
be as dreadful in it is execution, as it is unrighteous in its undertaking, and
has without doubt in it is contrivance no other end than the limits of a
boundless ambition, of an endeless coveting, and of an unappeasable wrath. We
see the fire of War kindled about our coasts and borders, a fire whose flame
will consume the Christian World, if God disappoint not the undertaking of our
enemies, and extinguish not the flame in its rising up. All Lands and people
(except happily the Barbarians of Africa) may well shake and tremble, and from
henceforth with terror behold devastion coming upon their Lands and Cities, if
the troublers of the World be as prosperous in their proceedings as they are
wicked in their design.

Let every one look himself in the glass of our example, and well think, that
if we be unhappy, his turn shall be to be unhappy also.

And you subjects of the King of England, to whom we are bound by the bond of
Christian Love, and a higher than an earthly interest, pour out your tears over
the distress that threatens us, and the misery which draws nigh to you. We wage
no War with the Nation, but with your King, and his Courtiers, who have valued
your blood at six Millions, a sorry price of the blood, for which our and your
Savior has shed his dearest Blood: We sigh over our common miserys, and from
henceforward dread, when we consider what may be the success of an enterprise,
which goes further than to the destruction of our temporal welfare. Your King,
a defender of the Christian Faith, has made peace with the Turk that he may
make war upon Christians, and to have his hands free against those, who hold
the Prince of Peace for their Savior and Messiah: Pour out your Prayers to
God, that his Goodness would either change the Heart of your King, or
disappoint his undertaking; and let us jointly pray for the prosperity of our
common cause, which we judge to be the cause of God.

We doubt not but God will graciously hear our Prayers, and by his Divine power
show that he is our common Father, unto which hope we are born up by the
fore-tokens of his Divine goodness, who has not been pleased that the Ships,
which were commanded home from the coasts of Barbary, after a scandalous Peace
with the unchristian for the plaguing of the Christians, should have their
share in the last robbery of our Merchantmen who could not imagine that they
should meet the rovers of Tunis and Algiers in the Channel.

And although the World might not be apt to be moved, as indeed the greatest
part is not, either through a fearful affrightedness, or through a deep sleep,
yet must not we for all that be insensible in this troublesome time.

We dwell in a Land, a little but a blessed part of the World, a Land full of
plenty, overpoured with the ful^ness of God Love, a true Canaan, and a Land of
Promise. And in this so worthy a Country we enjoy above the abundance for our
body, so much for our Soul, the immortal part, as we could desire of God, to
wit the food of his word, whereby we refed to a never-failing life, of which we
may here in our Country enjoy the fore-tast with so much ground of
contentment, as a Man can desire, who seeks not a Heaven here upon the earth.

The freedom, that unvaluable good, the reward of the labor of an Age, the
recompense of much Bloodshed, do we enjoy under our free government, an Enemy
of tyranny and tyrants, in such perfect quietness, and satisfaction of our
Soul, that we cannot without the movings of our affections think upon the
greatness of our happiness.

Happy people, if we rightly understand our welfare, and seriously bethink how
unhappy we should be if we were bereaved of all these advantages and benefits.
Our Country has hitherto been a refuge, and a Harbor for all banished and
miserable ones; and as God has richly poured out the treasures of his goodness
upon our inhabitants, so have they, of their abundance, bountifully dealt out
to those whose part and lot was unfortunate in the World: but, worthy
Fellow-Citizens, where would be our Harbor if we were banished? Where should
be our abode if we must forgo our Country? Where should we find our
subsistence, and the freedom of our mind? Dear God how unhappy should we be if
we were unhappy! The serious meditating on all this, must double our zeal for
the preservation of our welfare, what say I double? yea make it so great as our
misery would be great, by the overturning of our happy state.

Two things must help us, Confidence and trusting upon God, and Vigilance:
Vigilate Deo confidentes, Watch trusting in God.

The confidence on God must be upheld by the amendment of our lives, for that
God hears not sinners.

And truly we must confess that we have deserved the wrath of God, because we
have neglected his grace, a mercy which he has not shown in so high a measure
of love to any nation that ever the Sun shone on. We must all with sighs
acknowledge, that the luxury, the pomp, the grandour of the World, and all what
ever the abundance and plenty brings sliding in with it, when the fear of God,
and the apprehension of the slipperyness of wordly prosperity bridle not the
souls, have provoked the indignation of God, and the jealousy of our
Neighbors.

In respect of our manners we are gone at least ten Ages from the first time of
our ancestors, if we go on accordingly then are we near the end.

Let us turn betimes, and reduce all again to our first beginnings, to wit, to
the frugalitie and lowliness of our forefathers, virtues which are the more
acceptable to God when they proceed from the motions of a Christian Soul in the
midst of abundance and plenty: ^et not the wind of prosperity make our minds
swell, but let us always think of the uncertainty of outward happiness, lighter
and unsteadyer than the wind, and with such thoughts arm our Souls against the
overturning of the affairs of the World.

Let us further to our Confidence join Watchfullness; and since God works not
here on Earth without means, use the means which his goodness has given for
our defense, with a certain expectation that he will help us if we trust in
him, and set all a work, which may in reason be expected of those who have so
much to lose.

Our money and goods, which we ow to the Blessing of God and the Welfare of our
Country must we plentifully bestow to the preservation of the same, and for
the present root out of our hearts the niggardlyness, which is the weakness of
our nation, and a fault in our temperament; let us come forth to help the
present necessity of our Land, with these thoughts, that what we give thereto,
is spent for securing of the rest, which can in no part of the World be so
secured as in this our Land, where every one has the peaceable and assured
possession of his honest part. The Rulers must go before the subjects in this
case and give double out of a double obligation.

The Union must further bind our Souls to a joint-defence of our honest cause;
faction which unluckyly parts and divides affections, must be banished.
Concordia res parvae crescunt, Where Concord is things grow from small
beginnings. Union makes strength. The subject of the division is out of our
Land, and at present we fee as the Head of our Army a descendant from that
great William that great instrument of our precious liberty* We expect from him
all that we can in reason from one of the posterity of such an illustrious Man,
and we trust that he shall not only fulfill our expectation, but even exceed
it, and make account of no kinship with the Kings of France and England to the
prejudice of the State: the first proofs of his courage will double the
affection toward his person, and the evidence of his upright inclination for
our State shall give to them who have otherwise judged and spoken, a generous
and honorable occasion of self-contradiction. Here is matter of glory for him,
and an assured means for eternizing his name, and for being known to poste^ity
by the glorious Title of Preserver of our Liberty, as his Great-Grand-Father
deserved to have the name of the Founder of our welfare.

Against the Manifesto or the Declaration of the King of France, which is com'd
to my hand, since these considerations were fully composed, I shall say nothing
else, but that it is from thence visible, that the War of the forementioned
Illustrious King, proceeds not from any thing else, save a formed design, for
to stretch out the bounds of his command so far, as is his ambition extended;
but that we hope that God Almighty by the same arm, by which he has hitherto
preserved us, will frustrate the undertaking of the King.

THE END.

