CONSIDERATIONS Humbly Offered To the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, BY THE
Planters, and Others, trading to our British Plantations, in Relation to the
African Company's Petition, now before this Honorable HOUSE.
THAT it being of so great Importance to this Nation to encourage and support
the Plantations, it will be of absolute Necessity to have them plentifully
supplied with Negroes, by whose Labor all the Commodities of those Countries
are produced; which Production is all clear Gains to this Nation, and better
than the Mines of Gold and Silver are to the Spaniards; which can never be
thoroughly done otherwise, than by a free open Trade, without being confined to
the narrow Compass of a few People, in a small Joint Stock.

There is not a Negro but produces as much Commodity, either Sugar, Indigo,
Tobacco, etc. as will load one Tun of Shipping; the Increase of which Produce
will also largely increase the Consumption of the Woollen, and other British
Manufactures, and augment the Revenues of the Crown.

A great Quantity of the Product of our Plantation-Commodities will enable the
British Merchants to make large Exportations to foreign Markets, and put them
into a Capacity to under-sell all other Nations, that vie with us in the same
Commodities; which will not only discourage their Plantations, but greatly
encourage our own.

Since the African Company do set forth in their Petition, That by their Charge
in maintaining their Forts and Castles, in securing that Trade on the Coast of
Africa, the Western Plantations have been furnished with Negroes; we the
Planters do say, That we have paid a Duty of 10 per Cent. for the same, and
that had it not been more for the Separate Traders than the African Company,
since the opening of the said Trade by the late Act of Parliament, the
Plantations had been but poorly served; for by Experience, we have found much
greater Numbers of Negroes brought to our Plantations, than ever were during
the time of the said African Company's having that Trade in their own Hands,
exclusive of all others.

Therefore since the Plantations have received a more visible Advantage from
the African Trade, by having greater Quantities of Negroes brought among them
by the Separate Traders, since the said Trade has been laid open, than ever
were before: And as the Product of our Islands are largely increased thereby,
we are humbly of Opinion, that the Interest of the Plantations is of infinitely
greater Concern to be preserved, than any Company with a Joint Stock can
pretend to.

Wherefore we hope, That the Honorable House of Commons will free us from the
heavy Burden of the Duty of 10 per Cent. which we conceive must be advanced on
the Price of Negroes; and that the said African Trade may be continued free and
open to all People that desire to trade thither, under such Regulations as the
Trade to Turkey, or as shall be thought fit.

CONSIDERATIONS Humbly offered by the Planters, and Others, trading to our
British Plantations, In Relation to the AFRICAN Company's PETITION.


