THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Five Prisoners that suffered at TYBURN On
Wednesday the 23d of January 1677/8.

At which time were Executed William King, Henry Claiton, and William Hare, For
several Robberies on the Highway. Robert Motly, -- For Burglary and Felony. AND
Benj. Smith, For Treason, Clipping the Kings Coin.


WITH Their Behavior in Newgate, and the substance of two Sermons Preached to
them the Sunday before their Death.

This may be Printed.

To. L'Estrange.



London* Printed for D. M. 1677.

The Confession and Execution of the Prisoners that suffered at Tyburn on
Wednesday the 23d of Jan. 1677/8.
'TWas observed by the Court this last Sessions, that it has rarely been known
so many should be convicted of Crimes deserving Death out of so small a
Calendar, or when the number of Prisoners has been so few; there being no less
than Thirteen persons (seven men and six women) that received sentence of Death
for their r^spective Capital Offenses. But of the women, two after Judgment
pleaded their Bellies in respit of Execution, and by a Jury of Matrons were
found Quick with Child. Another condemned for murdering her Bastard-Infant,
died in Goal the next day after Sentence; It being supposed that by going
abroad immediately after her Delivery upon the unnatural design of exposing
her Child (as she did) in the streets, she might catch Cold* which, together
with the dejection of her Spirits, might hasten her End, and prevent an
Ignominious by an untimely death.

Others, by the mercy of Authority, were Reprieved in hopes of future Amendment
of their Lives; but Five this day were carried to the fatal place of Execution,
of whom two were the Highway-men taken at Whetstone, and the rest
beforementioned in the Title Page. That is to say,

William King and Henry Claiton for a robbery on the Road done in Berk-shire;
but the things being taken about them, rendered them liable to be tried for the
Felony in Middlesex, and appearing to the Court to be a Robbery in another
County, excluded them from Clergy. The Goods they took were only two Silver
Powder-Boxes, etc. of no great value; but it was well known, they had been
notoriously concerned in such Villainies, near twenty Robberies lying upon them,
and violent suspicions of some Murders.

The next was William Hare, for a like Robbery on the Highway, only he
followed the mischievous Trade on Foot; and indeed these generally are more
cruel and dangerous than the other: He was Indicted the Ses^^ons before for a
Crime of the same nature, but got off.

Robert Motly had been often in Newgate, and Mercy showed him; Once transported
on a Pardon, but returned, before the time in the Condition thereof specified
was expired, whereby he forfeited his Life; yet not content, takes the old
course, and being now taken in a Burglary, was cut off as an incorrigible
Offender.

Benjamin Smith had for some time been a person of ill Life, and of late had
taken upon him to be a Solicitor for naughty people; he was now Convicted for
Clipping of Money.

To fit them for this great and terrible Change, great pains and care was taken
by several Ministers, and particularly by that sober Divine whose office it
more peculiarly is; who on the Sunday before their Execution, preached two very
Pathetical and Christian Sermons to them. To go about to repeat them here, were
to wrong that Gentleman whose affectionate and powerful Eloquence cannot,
without losing much of its force and beauty, be expressed in any words but his
own: But the purport and substance was to this effect.

Taking for his Text in the forenoon, that suitable Portion of Scripture, Psalm
90 verse. 11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear,
so is thy wrath. From thence he showed, That all unregenerate men, and in their
natural state, lay under the wrath of God, and obnoxious to all the dreadful
Curses pronounced in the Holy Scriptures, both in relation to their bodies and
souls: Which Divine wrath, though in it self so terrible and weighty, that it
is as well Inexpressible as Intolerable, he endeavored to shadow forth by
certain apt Comparisons and Arguments a minore ad majus. If the wrath of a King
be as the roaring of a Lion, which makes all tremble that hear it, who shall be
able to withstand the displeasure of the King of kings? If God's withdrawing
the Light of his Countenance, and visiting his Saints with Chastizements in
Love, be so insupportable to their spirits, with what Horrors and
Astonishments must the Wicked be confounded, when he makes bare his Arm to take
Vengeance upon them for their long continued and often repeated Transgressions?
He further told them, That the Extremity of this Wrath, was when God, for a
punishment of sin, gave persons up to sin without Remorse: That hardness of
heart with blindness of mind, was the greatest Plague could be i^fl^cted upon
poor creatures. Since not only their days, but their hours, now were numbered,
being but a few minutes on this side Eternal Destruction, he advised them
seriously and suddenly, with all their might, to set upon this great and most
important business of working out their salvation with fear and trembling: not
to flatter themselves with delusive hopes of longer Life, nor murder their
Souls by pretending to die with a Roman Courage: For alas, who could contend
with Omnipotence? or what Resolution can abide Everlasting Burnings? David as
valiant as any, yet under a sense of his sins, thought it no effeminacy of
spirit to water his couch with his tears. The true Penitent is the only H^ro,
who subdues Principalities and Powers, and yet lays him low in the presence of
his offended M^ker; whose breath abaseth the mightiest Conquerours, and
sweepeth away the Proud and Obstinate with sudden and Everlasting Destruction:
Therefore he p^ssron^tely charged them, as they would avoid the dreadful wrath
of God, the fierceness of which he had in some part represented to them, That
they would every one, with broken hearts and bended knees, confess their sins
and give Glory to God; and loathing themselves and their past actions, fly to
the Throne of Grace and the Blood of the Lamb, for Mercy and Pardon. For having
first searched their ulcerated hearts, like a prudent Soul-Physician, he in the
afternoon began to pour in the Balm of Gilead* quitting Mount Sinai for Mount
Sion; and leading them from the terrors of the Law to the glad tidings of the
Gospel, even to the Blessed Jesus, who deli^ers us from wrath to come* (...)
p^aying his infinite Love and Mercy to penitent sinners, and pressing them
forthwith to kiss the Son with a kiss of Homage and Obedience, of Love and
Loyalty, lest his wrath be kindled, and they perish everlastingly etc.

During the Sermons, and other acts of Devotion, the Condemned Prisoners in
general behaved themselves with extraordinary Sobriety and Attention, the Tears
oftentimes in abundance gushing forth. Nor was their Deportment less becoming
afterward, desiring the Prayers earnestly of such as came to visit them. The
Highway-men confessed several Robberies by them committed, but refused to
discover any of their Companions. And the most resolute was an old Malefactor
in Burglaries, Felonies, etc. who before at the Bar, when he received Sentence,
being told by the Court, that he must not expect any Pardon, surlily answered,
Why, I do not ask you for any, do I? This person appeared the most unconcerned,
and stupidly insensible of his condition, refusing to answer any questions
relating to his spiritual State, or enter into any serious Conversation. The
rest were much more mollified, and at the place of Execution acknowledged, that
they died justly; begging pardon first of God, and next of all persons whom
they had wronged: Professing that Sloth, Pride, Lust, and Ill Company had been
the sole occasioners of their ignominious end. And therefore defired all to
take Warning and Example by them: And to live honestly, industriously and
uprightly in the several lawful Trades or Professions, wherein Providence has
placed them: The neglecting and abandoning of which, for a loose extravagant
course of Life, they declared was the original Cause of their Ruin.

FINIS.

