THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Three Prisoners suffering at TYBURN On
Wednesday the 17th of October, 1677.

At which time suffered John S. William Fletcher, and Rob. Perkins.

TOGETHER With their Behavior, and several remarkable Discourses had with one
of the Highway-men in Newgate after his Condemnation.

Published for a Warning-piece to all others to avoid the lewd Courses which
brought these poor men to this Ignominious End.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for D. M. 1677.

The Confession and Execution of the Prisoners dying at Tyburn.
AT the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer for London, and Gaole-delivery of Newgate
begun at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, October. 10. and ending on the 12 of the
same Month, there were in all (as by a Printed Narrative you may already have
heard) Five persons, who being Convicted on fair Trials ( per Patriam) of
several capital Crimes, received Sentence of Death: But Two of them, whose
Crime was stealing of two horses, appearing to be objects of mercy, as having
never been concerned in any such offenses before, and seeming now extremely
penitent for the same, obtained a Gracious Reprieve. The other Three were this
present Wednesday, October. 17. carried to the place of execution, and by a
shameful death surrendered their unhappie lives as Victims duly forfeited to
the Justice of the Law.

These were all three old notorious offenders; two of them (taken in
Gardiners-lane, Westminster) had long followed the Padd, as they call it, that
is, Robbed upon the Highway: The other had made it his trade to break open
houses, and pilfer away peoples Goods, being burnt in the hand but two Sessions
ago: So that if such Malefactors should have longer been endured, honest
Subjects would not be able either to sleep securely in their Dwellings, or
travel abroad with safety on their lawful occasions; but both within doors and
without, been liable to the spoils and outrages of these barbarous Savages.

To assist these poor wretches for the good of their Souls after the time of
their Condemnation, the Sheriffs not only manifested their pious Charity in
sending them able Divines to instruct them, and especially Mr. Ordinary, who
very laboriously discharges his weighty office on such occasions, but likewise
several godly Ministers of their own accord, in Christian-compassion to their
perishing condition, were pleased to visit them. Who laid before them the
miserable state they were in; That now their days we numbered, nay their very
hours and minutes which they had to live in this world; and yet these few
minutes were all the time and opportunity they had to provide for eternity.
That they were doomed by Justice to a certain death; and though 'twas vain for
them to flatter themselves with hopes of longer life in this world, yet there
was means left, by a speedy, through, sincere and hearty repentance of their
sins, and fleeing to Christ for mercy and forgiveness, to secure themselves, by
virtue of his merits and righteousness, of a most happy and everlasting life in
the world to come. That to such vile and sinful wretches as they had been, it
was unspeakable mercy that they had yet a little space left, wherein to make
peace with their God: for they might have gone on still in riot and wickedness,
and been suddenly snatched away in the very acts of their impiety etc. These and
many other pressing exhortations, together with severe threatenings to affright
them and sweet promises to allure them, taken from the Word of God, were made
use of, to bring them to a due sense of their sins, and to cry mightily to God
for salvation. But the deaf adder refuses the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely All this good seed could take no root, or produce very little
visible fruit on the stony ground of two of these Prisoners obdurate hearts;
they not seeming (to outward appearance at least) to take that due and sensible
notice of this most important counsel, as might be expected from persons in
their condition* But the Spirit blows where it lists. The third seemed much
affected with this pious advice, and was very earnest and frequent in bewailing
his sins, and condemning himself bitterly for having so wickedly misspent his
precious time heretoforr. He acknowledged to some, that he had several years
been a Thief, but not till of late upon the Highway: that at first his
Conscience would after every fact severely check him; but since custom of
sinning taking away the sense, he had run on from one degree of wi^kedness to a
greater without control. He was very frequent in Prayer, wherein he has been
heard to express himself to this effect.

Most dreadful and glorious God, though thou hate all the workers of
iniquity, yet through the Mediation of thy blessed Son, with pity behold me a
miserable sinner. Had I lived according to thy Commandments, or submitted to
the Gospel of thy Son, I might approach thee with the confidence of a child:
but I have been a Rebel against thee from my youth up, forgetting the God that
made me, and the Savior that redeemed me, quenchign and grieving the holy
Spirit, and slighting the endless Glory which thou have prepared for me. Oh the
precious time which I have lost, which all the world cannot call back; the
wonderful love which I unthankfully rejected! How have I lived in continual
acts of all kind of Profaneness, all kind of Debauchery, Whoring, Swearing,
Drunkenness, and especially Theft, which now has brought me to this woeful,
forlorn, condemned case wherein I am a shame to my friends, and a burden to my
self; and thou, O God, art my Terror, who shouldct be my only Hope and
Comfort. Lord, thou know my secret sins, which yet are unknown to men, and
all their Aggravations. Mine iniquities, Lord, have found me out; my fears and
sorrows overwhelm me: a shameful death expects me in this world, and endless
torments are ready to receive me in the other. But, Lord! thy Goodness is equal
to thy Greatness, thy Mercy over all thy works. Good God, be merciful therefore
unto me, the vilest of sinners: save me for thy abundant mercy, for the merit
of thy Son, and for the promise of forgiveness which thou have made through
him; for in these alone is all my trust. Thou who did patiently endure me
when I despised thee, Oh do not refuse me now I seek unto thee, and in the dust
implore thy mercy. Lord, I ask not for longer life in this world, but for life
eternal; not for liberty to sin again, but for deliverance from this sinning
nature, and that body of death which overwhelms me. To this purpose Lord give
me thy grace to improve these few minutes, and prepare me for death and
Judgment; that when I leave this world with shame, I may be received into
glory, and yield my departing soul with joy into the faithful hands of my
Redeemer. Amen.

He behaved himself very penitently in the Cart, Prayed a considerable time by
himself privately at the place of Execution; desired all people to take warning
by him to avoid Idleness and Ill Company, which brought him to this Ignominious
End. The other joined in the public Prayers, but said very little that could
be heard. But all of them together suffered very patiently, and with submissive
acknowledgements of the Justice of the Sentence.

FINIS.

