A LETTER FROM THE King of SPAIN Written to the POPE of ROME.
Licensed, September 29. 1690.

Most Holy Father;
WE have by the Hands of your Nuncio, the Patriarch of the Indies, received a
Letter, whereby your Holiness recommends to us a General Peace, and especially
that of Italy: And although we have at the Expense of Provinces, States and
Dominions, (which were sufficient to make them great Kingdoms) many times with
joy facilitated the public Quiet; yet we cannot at this time refrain our
selves, to tell your Holiness, That seeing the King of France does in no ways
keep either Peace or Truce, and having broken his Treaties with all the Princes
of Europe, they are obliged to join themselves for their Natural Security, and
thereupon have sought the Necessary Means of War, to secure themselves.

He has made War upon the Emperor without Cause or Reason, having at the same
time raised a Rebellion in Hungary against your Prince, and that he might
uphold the said Rebellion, has brought the Turk into Christendom, has kindled
a Fire even in Austria, by which the innermost Provinces of the Empire have
been set on Flames. Christendom trembled at the formidable Siege of Vienna,
which City, though manfully defended and preserved by a Miracle, yet the
Damages, Devastations, Ruins and Horrors that were the Consequences of it, are
unspeakable, and without number. An infinite number of Families carried into
Slavery, which lost at once their Souls and Liberty, can sufficiently attest
this. The Images have been profaned, and the Rivers died with the Blood of the
Innocents. But to pass over in silence this sorrow, lest the Calamities that
befell Christendom should raise another sorrow in the tender Heart of your
Holiness, because they were caused by a Prince that styles himself, Most
Christian.

The unjust War in the Palatinate, with such horrible Burnings as was never
practiced by the most barbarous Nations, must be in fresh Memory with your
Holiness, seeing the miserable sighs of the Subjects overwhelmed by the Troops
of France, are continually in our ears. Your Holiness cannot be ignorant of the
violent Spoils committed on the three Electoral Princes of the Empire, viz. of
Mentz, Cologne, and Trier; and even your Holiness could not deliver from this
Tyranny the City and State of Avignon, it being an old Patrimony of the Holy
Sea. What has he lest undone, against all respect, both by the Clergy in
France, and his Ministers at Rome, by Threatenings, and other Actions, to show
his little regard to your Holiness; but seeing your Holiness knows this too
well, it is needless, but just to remark it.

What Prince, what State, and what Republic is there, which has not these
last Years felt the Ambition of France? Let Genoa speak, which was almost
consumed by his Bombs; let the Duke of Savoy tell it, whom he would at last
have trampled upon, as well as all Italy, and brought under a vile Yoke of
Slavery; and seeing what has been said, cannot be denied, how can we, Most
Holy Father, treat of an Accommodation, before the Power of him be humbled,
whom neither Religion, Justice, Faith, nor Oath can restrain: By all which, as
well as our Treaties, we find our selves bound in no wise to part from our
Allies, and Confederates; and standing fast in this Resolution, we must
represent this only to your Holiness, That the only means to obtain Peace, is
to continue the War; and that Italy may be freed and brought to its former
tranquillity, the League must be completed, and by the Care of your Holiness,
procured with all the Princes, and Christendom at last secured against the
Violences of its Common Enemy, and the Emperor afforded the help that your
Predecessor of pious Memory, accorded him: We hope for this from the great
Justice of your Holiness, and that you will hereunto give your assent, upon the
knowledge of Truth, and the strength of our Arguments, and pour out upon us
your Holy Blessing. Our Lord keep, etc.

Printed after the Copy of Jacob Scheltus. 1690.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Folly of Priest Craft, a Comedy. The Secret History of the Duchess of
Portsmouth, in which an Account is given of the Intreagues of the Court, during
her Ministry, and of the Death of King Charles the Second. Both Printed for
Richard Baldwin.
Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1690.


