THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Five Prisoners that suffered at TYBURN On
Wednesday the 19th of December. 1677. VIZ. Margaret Riggs, alias Grover, William
Longman, John Ruddocke, Henry Pain, and Elizabeth Hewet.


WITH An Account of their penitent Behavior after their Condemnation, and
substance of their last Speeches at the place of Execution.

Published for a Warning-piece to all others to avoid the lewd Courses which
brought them to this Ignominious End.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for D. M. 1677.

The last Speeches, Confession, and Execution of the Prisoners, December 19.
1677.
DEath in its own nature is very affrighting to Man, the King of Terrors, much
more when he comes attended with shameful and ignominious Circumstances; when
Persons consider that they have hastened his approach by the Errors of their
lives, and are justly cut off for their Crimes. Oh! how sad is it, when poor
Souls are themselves the occasion of their being thrust out of this world by
untimely Violence, and yet are not at all fitted or prepared for the next. If
they look down to Earth, there is nothing but Justice and Vengeance ready to
pursue them; and if they look up to Heaven, they cannot but conclude that too
pure a place for such unclean Creatures to enter into, whom the Earth it self
would no longer entertain. Yet so lamentably do the Delusions of Satan, and
Witchcrafts of Sin blind the eyes of these Malefactors, that they rarely
reflect on these things till it be too late; nor will be warned by the frequent
Examples of their wretched Fellow-Criminals, to leave off their wicked Courses,
till they are precipitated into the same Gulf of Misery.

Of this, the Five Persons that this day suffered were deplorable instances.
After their Condemnation many charitable Divines went to visit them, besides
the most diligent and careful endeavors of Mr. Ordinary, who, well knowing the
weight of his Office, takes care on all occasions to discharge a good
Conscience therein, by using all means to make them sensible of their sad
Condition, and prepare them for their terrible Change.

The poor Souls appeared as ignorant and unacquainted with the Principles of
Christian Religion, except only some bare empty notional words, as Heathens.
True it is, they professed themselves Christians, and that they hoped to be saved
by the Mercies of God; but the odious nature of Sin, the necessity of a
Savior, the terms of a New Covenant, the nature of Repentance, Faith, and
other Evangelical Graces, they were wholly strangers to: But by the pains of
these Ministers, God was pleased to give them a taste of these precious and
most important Truths, though it is feared, by their careless insensible
Carriage, some of them still were more solicitous to get a Reprieve than to get
Grace, and minded more to save their Lives for a few moments, than their Souls
to eternity. So hard it is when Persons have gone on all their lives, hardening
their hearts in wickedness, to be mollified on a sudden, though summoned to
Repentance by a present and unavoidable Death.

One of these persons was heretofore Condemned, and now justly brought to
suffer.

Another about two years since was Convicted and received Sentence of Death,
but obtaining a Reprieve, after long lying in Newgate, obtained his Liberty by
the General Pardon; but was now brought in for stealing a parcel of Swords.

Another was by trade a Sawyer, and had lived near Islington: he had formerly
been burnt in the hand, and several times in Goal; and having lately followed
the Foot-Pad, was Condemned for a Robbery on the Highway.

Mrs. Riggs was notoriously infamous; several of her Children had been
executed, and she a year or two ago transported for stealing Silks; but
returning before her time, was now again Convicted of stealing, and called to
her former Judgment. She caused her Coffin to be made and brought into the
Prison to her; and we wish that she had provided for her Soul as well as for
her Carcass.

The other woman was Convicted about a year and a half since, and upon the
General Pardon gave Bail to transport her self within such a time; but never
did it, but fell to her old wicked Courses, in which being now taken, she was
Condemned.

There was another woman received Sentence to be Burnt; but she alleging her
self to be quick with Child, which a Jury of Matrons likewise affirmed, that
the Innocent Babe might not perish with the Guilty Mother, Execution for the
present is suspendid.

The day before their Execution four Ministers were to visit them, and bestowed
much pious pains both in Exhortation and Prayer with them, pressing them to
Repent, and Confess their Sins, and give Glory to God. To whom one of them was
so hardy ('it is said) as to declare, That she never in her life, that she could
remember, ever felt any Convictions or Checks of Conscience for her wickedness,
but now desired a longer space, promising amendment, etc. But they desired her
not to flatter her self with any such hopes, but rather instantly to set upon
the Work with all her might, and improve those few minutes she had allowed her,
rather than vainly to expect longer time, and mis-spend the present.

Mrs. Riggs Confessed she had been a notorious sinner all her days, and that she
had been an occasion of bringing many poor wretches to untimely Ends, for which
she expressed much sorrow; but said, for her own part she did confess she
deserved to die, and had long looked for it, and desired the Ministers to pray
for her.

In the Cart they behaved themselves very penitently, weeping and wringing
their hands, as likewise at the place of Execution; but said little, save
only, Desiring all people to take Example by them, and to remember this, That
if they themselves had took warning when others of their Acquaintance, under
the same Circumstances, with their dying breath heartily advised them to it,
they might have prevented this shameful untimely Death which now they were to
suffer. And so after Prayers and religious Offices usual on such occasions,
surrendered their Souls to the Mercies of God, and their Bodies to Execution.

FINIS.

